,         -^    *  O    N  0  ^        \^ 


a  0^ 


"%%^ 


X 


- 

^  r 

•^c 

x^^-. 

o 

^. 


'  '/.    *c 


.0' 


^#  :{ 


.^^-^^ 


^<^'^- 

A  ./*. 


A)'       , 


>*^ 


,s.     -7 . 


\^ 


A^' 


'^, 


^^ 


'^• 


A  -<i 


N'^ 


'/      ^^ 


^^  V^^ 


o  0' 


^^ 


^. 


e^  ■^'^.  ' 


\  ..^    '    "    t: 


CO 


O  •/   O    n     V    ■*  ^'^' 


,^~^      't. 


■  ■^- 


.0  0, 


,<x^ 


V    -^Cp..^ 


A^' 


^     .^> 


^^  A 


o  0 


C^" 


1^  ■><■  » 


■^^    A' 


0C> 


0' 


\^  -^ 


Digitized  by  tine  Internet  Arciiive 
in  2010  witii  funding  from 
Tine  Library  of  Congress 


http://www.arcliive.org/details/liistoryofcampaigOOandr 


■Eu;«l  '^ty.lHBitt'aie. 


AlAJOR  (;ENEf{AL  K.R.S.GANBY 


HISTOEY 


OF   THE 


CAMPAIGN  OF  MOBILE: 


INCLUDING  THE   COOPEEATIVE  OPEEATIONS 


OP 


GEN.  WILSOJST'S  CAVALRY  IN  ALABAMA. 


BY  -^  / 


BREVET  MAJOR-GENERAL  C.  C:  ANDREWS, 

LATE  COMMANDING  THE  SECOND  DITISION,  THIRTEENTH  AKMY  CORPS,   U.   S.  VOLS. 


WITH   MAPS   AND    ILLUSTRATIONS. 


NEW    YORK: 

D.    VAN    NOSTRAND,    192    BROADWAY. 
LONDON :  TEUBNEE   &  CO. 


6/ 


18Gt. 


V 


A  ^1 


Kutored  aocordiug  to  Act  of  Cougress,  iu  tho  year  1SC6, 

By    p.    van    NOSTKANP, 

Tn  tho  Clork's  ofRce  of  tUo  District  Oourt  of  tUo  I'nUod  States,  for  tho  Southern  Pisti-iot  of 

New  York. 


CONTENTS. 


{Fo7-  more  particular  reference  to  Contents,  see  Index.) 


CHAPTER  I. 


MOBILE.  PAGR. 

Military  Importanco  of  Mobile — Its  Fortifications — By  whom  Consti-uctctl — Gou.  Jolmstou's  Opin- 
ion of  tho  Fortifications — Harbor  Defences — Foris  Gaiues  and  Jlorgan — Confederate  Navy. ...      9 

CHAPTER  II. 
EARLIER    OPERATIONS  AGAINST  MOBILE. 

Bombardment,  Siege,  and  Capture  of  Forts  Morgan  and  Gaines — Land  Forces  engaged — Heroic 
Conduct  of  Farragut — Brilliant  Achievements  of  tho  Navy — Fall  of  Fort  Powell — Limited  Qar- 
risonof  Mobile 13 

CHAPTER  in. 

CONCENTRATION,   ORfiANIZ.VTION,    AND  EQUIPMENT  OF  THE  ARMY. 

Giuby's  Movable  Forces — Brigade  of  Reserve  Corps  sent  to  Barrancas — Camp  at  Barrancas — 
Organization  of  Thirteentli  Corps — Sixteenth  Corps  moves  down  the  Mississippi — Canby's 
Orders  to  perfect  Organization — Forces  collected  at  Fort  Gaines 21 

CHAPTER  IV. 

PLAN  OF  OPERATIONS. 

Mobile  to  bo  flanked  by  Movement  from  Exstorn  Shore — Railroad  Communications  with  Mont- 
gomery  to  be  destroyed — Column  to  move  out  from  Pensacola 31 

CHAPTER  V. 

THIRTEENTH  AND  SIXTEENTH  CORPS  MOVE  TO  DANLET'S  ON  FISH  RIVER. 
DiiBcult  March  of  tho  Thirteenth  Corps— Demonstration  on  Western  Shore  of  Mobils  B;iy— Attack 
on  tho  Wagon  Train— Movement  of  the  Sisteouth  Corps  on  Transports 33 


4  ,  CONTENTS. 

CHAPTER  VI. 

THREE  DAYS  AT  FISH  EIVER. 

FAGB. 

Drill — Skirmish — Scenes  in  Camp — Forward  Movement— Plans  and  Activity  of  ttie  Confederates — 
Experience  of  their  froops — Order  of  Battle — Confederates  Retire  into  their  WorKs — ^Thirteenth 
Corps  on  D'Olieve's  Creek — Sixteenth  Corps  at  C.  Sibley's — Skirmish 38 


CHAPTER  Vn. 
SPANISH  FOKT — ITS  INTESTMENT. 

Description  of  the  Ground — Attack  on  Federal  Pickets— Sixteenth  Corps  turns  Back  on  Spanish 
*Port — Skirmish  at  Minette  Bridge— Thirteenth  and  Sixteenth  Corps  in  Line  of  Battle — Spirited 
Action — Confederates  driven  Behind  their  Works — Canhy 's  Headquarters  at  Wilson's 48 


CHAPTER  VIII. 
SIEGE  OF  SPANISH  FORT— SECOND  DAY, 

Garrison  of  Spanish  Fort — "  Shooting  to  Kill" — Operations  in  the  Sixteenth  Corps'  Front — In 
Thirteenth  Corps'  Front — Attack  on  Capt.  Noble's  Working  Party — Operations  of  the  Navy — 
Sinking  of  the  Milwaukee — Spirited  Conduct  of  her  Crew 60 


CHAPTER  IX. 
SIEGE  OF  SPANISH  FORT— THIRD  DAY. 

Operations  of  Navy — Sinking  of  the  Osage — Position  of  the  Confederate  Artillery — Batteries  Huger 
ind  Tracy — their  Armament — OperaticTns  along  the  Line — Capt.  Myers'  Adventure  on  Skirmish- 
Line — Progress  of  the  Trenches — Casualties  light 69 


CHAPTER  X. 

SIEGE  OF  SPANISH  FORT— FOURTH  DAY. 

Progress  of  the  Siege — ^Withdrawal  of  Veatch's  Division — Change  of  Garrison  Troops— Their  Casu- 
alties     78 

CHAPTER  XI. 
SIEGE  OF  SPANISH  FORT— FIFTH  DAY. 

Sunken  Battery  constructed  by  Besiegers  on  Shore  of  Bay  Minette — ^Thirty-Pounders   of  Fu-st 
•     Indiana  Heavy  Artillery  in  Position — The  New  York  Light  Batteries — Gallant  Exploit  of  Some 
of  the  Ninety -Fourth  Illinois  Men — Sortie  and  Ca^jture  of  Detachment  of  the  Seventh  Vermont 
— What  the  Prisoners  saw  in  Spanish  Fort — Supper  with  the  f  ommander  of  the  Garrison 81 


CONTENTS.  6 

CHAPTER  Xn. 

SIEGE  OF  SPANISH  FOKT— SIXTH  DAY. 

PAGB. 

Feeling  in  Mobile — The  Garrisou's  Economy  of  Ammunition — Holtzclaw's  Brigade — It  relieves 
the  Alabama  Reserves — Operation  of  the  Besiegers— Expert  Practice  of  Grayson's  'Battery^ 
Brilliant  Shots  by  Seventh  Massachusetts  Light  Guns — Sinking  of  the  Kodolph ■.    88 

CHAPTER  XIII. 

.OPERATIONS  OF  STEELE'S  COLUMN  FROM  PENSACOLA  BAY. 

Composition  of  his  Forces — Second  Division  marches  to  Pensacola — Condition  of  Pensacola— Con- 
federate Scouts  around— Repairing  Wharves— Difficult  March  of  Steele's  Column— Exaggerated 
Idea  of  his  Forces — Arrival  at  Pine  Barren — Construction  of  Bridge — Crossing  of  the  Pine 
Barren 95 


CHAPTER  XIV. 

CONTINUATION  0F_  STEELE'S  MARCH. 

Expectations  of  a  Fight — Combat  of  Pringle's  Creek — Gen.  Clanton  severely  wounded — ^Victory  of 
Lucas'  Cavalry — Pursuit  to  the  Escambia — Entry  of  Pollard — Spurling's  Cavalry  Operations— 
Spurling  "  a  Live  Yankee" — His  Capture  of  a  Stalf  Officer — Steele  turns  toward  Blakely — Bad 
Roads — Corduroying — Scarcity  of  Rations— Capture  of  an  Outpost — Veatch's  Movement  with 
Supplies 107 


CHAPTER  XV. 

INVESTMENT  AND  SIEGE  OF"  BLAKELY. 

Description  of  Blakely — Its  Garrison — Investment  of  Blakely — Bivouac  of  the  Colored  Division — ^Its 
Engagement — Good  Behavior  of — Casualties  in — ^The  Second  Division  moves  early  from  Hall's 
— ^Takes  Position  before  Blakely — Engagement  of  Skirmishers — ^Rifle-Pits  commenced 121 

CHAPTER  XVI. 

SIEGE  OF  SPANISH  FORT— SEVENTH  AND  EIGHTH  DAYS. 

Eiigagement  of  Artillery — Sweeping  for  Torpedoes  by  the  Squadron — Incident  showing  the  Soldiers' 
Magnanimity — Toil  of  the  Besiegers — Their  Bomb-Proofs 130 


CHAPTER  XVII. 

SIEGE  OF  SPANISH  FORT— NINTH  DAY. 

Progress  of  the  Trenches — Notice  of  the  Batteries — General  Bombardment — Enthusiasm  among 
Besiegers 136 


•  , 


6  ■  CONTENTS. 

CHAPTER  XVin. 

SIEGE  OF  SPANISH  FORT — TENTH,   ELEVEKTH,  AND  T\VELFTH  DATS. 

PAGB. 

Firing  a-t  Night — Footway  to  Conway's  Bayou — ^News  of  Fall  of  Selma— Enterprise  of  a  Lieu- 
tenant— ^Engagement  of  the  Octorara — Strength  of  the  Garrison — ^The  Hospital ' 141 

CHAPTER  XIX. 

SIEGE  OF  SPANISH  FOKT — THIRTEENTH  AND  LAST  DAT. 

Consultation  about  Evacuation — State  of  the  Siege — Grand  Bombardment — Assault  in  Carr's 
Front — Gallant  Conduct  of  the  Eighth  Iowa — ^Lodgment  effepted^Secret  Withdrawal  of  the 
Garrison— The  Retreat — Occupation  of  Spanish  Fort  by  Besiegers 148 

CHAPTER  XX. 

OBSERVATIONS  ON  THE  SIEGE  OF  SPANISH  FORT. 

Beauregard's  Opinion — Object  nf  Spanish  Fort — Importance  of  its  Reduction — ^Propriety  of  Assault — 
The  Garrison  Commander — Instance  of  Neglect  by  Garrison — Their  Activity — Importance  of 
Ehfllading  Fire  and  Secure  Approaches 163 

CHAPTER  XXI. 

SIEGE  OF  BLAKELT  CONTINUED— SECOND,  THIRD,   AND  FOURTH  DATS. 

Nature  of  the  Ground  between  Combatants — Operations  in  Hawkins'  FYont — ^In  Second  Divisioa — 
Position  of  Veatch's  and  Garrard's  Divisions — First  Gun  of  Besiegers  in  Position — Observa- 
tions by  Lieut. -Col.  Whittlesey — Two  more  of  Second  Connecticut  Ten -Pounders  open — Change 
of  Position  by  Rinaker's  Brigade — Condition  of  the  Garrison 168 

CHAPTER  X5II. 

SIEGE  OF  BLAKELT— FIFTH,   SIXTH,  AND  SEVENTH  DATS. 

Sortie — ^Advance  of  Line  on  the  Left— ^Conduct  of  Maj.  Hutchinson — Action  before  Day — ^Engage- 
ment of  the  Fifteenth  Massachusetts  Battery — Operations  of  the  Cavalry — Operations  of  the 
Garrison — Communications  between  the  Skirmishers — Second  Divisicin  ordered  in  Readiness 
to  March — Engagement  of  First  Indiana  Thirty-Pounders  with  Gunboats 1T8 

CHAPTER  XXin. 

SIEGE  OF  BLAKELT— EIGHTH  AND  LAST  DAT. 

Reinforcement  of  Besiegers'  Artillery — Stage  of  the  Works — Suspicion  that  the  Garrison  was 
evacuating — Feelings  of  tho  Garrison — ^Preliminary  Advance  by  Colored  Troops — The  Assault 
— Description  of  the  Assault  in  Each  Division — The  Works  of  Blakely  triumphantly  carried — 
Capture  of  Three  Thousand  Prisoners 189 


CONTENTS.  7 

CHAPTER  XXIV. 

OBSERVATIONS  ON  THE  SIEGE  AND  ASSAULT  OF  BLAKELY. 

PAOB. 

Immediate  Effect  of  the  Fall  of  Blakoly — Conduct  of  the  Garrison — ^Marshes — Favorable  Tinie 
for  Assault — Work  Done  by  Besiegers 223 

CHAPTER  XXV. 

KEDUCTION  OF  FOKTS  HUGER  AND  TRACT. 

Splendid  Firing  of  the  Octorara — Engagement  of  Foust's  Light  Battery,  and  Sixth  Michigan  Heavy 
Artillery  with  the  Forts — ^The  Forts  hastily  evacuated — Gen.  A.  J.  Smith's  Preparations  for 
Assault 227 

CHAPTER  XXVI. 

ADVENTURES  AND  INCIDENTS. 

Gen.  Bailey's  Trip  to  Spanish  Fort — Incidents  of  the  Siege — Humor  of  Confederate  Soldiers 233 

CHAPTER  5XVII. 

FURTHER  OPERATIONS  OF  LUCAS'  CAVALRY. 

March  to  Claiborne — Combat  of  Mount  Pleasant , 239 

CHAPTER  XX\ail. 

OPERATIONS  OF  WILSON'S  CAVALRY  IN  ALABAMA. 

Condition  of  Confederates  in  Central  Alabama — Organization  of  Wilson's  Cavalry  at  Gravelly 
Springs — ^Preparations  for  a  Movement — Routes  of  the  Three  Divisions — CroKton's  Brigade 
Detached  at  Ely  ton — Skirmish  near  Montevallo — Capture  of  Despatches  at  Randolph — Battle 
of  Ebenezer  Church 242 

CHAPTER  XXIX. 

CAVALRY  OPERATIONS  CONTINUED— BATTLE  OF  SELMA 

Description  of  the  Defences  of  Selma — Rattle  of  Selma — ^Victorious  Assault  by  Dismounted  Cavalry 
— Plans  of  the  Confederates — ^Destruction  of  Property — Gen.  Wilson  moves  to  Montgomery. . .  252 

CHAPTER  XXX. 

OPERATIONS  OF  CROXTON'S  BRIGADE. 

Skirmish  at  Trion — Capture  of  Tuscaloosa — Combat  at  Pleasant  Ridge — Gallant  Conduct  of  Second 
Michigan  Cavalry — Hard  Marching — Swimming  Rivers — Skirmish  near  Jacksonville — White 
Flag  on  the  Bank  of  the  Chattahoochee — Observations : 260 


ILLUSTRATIONS, 


[The  drawings  of  the  battle-fields  were  made  a  little  upward  of  a  year  after  the  battles  took  place.] 

PAGE. 

1.  General  Map  op  the  Campaign 9 

2.  Map  op  the  Siege  op  Spanish  Fort 48 

3.  BoMB-PEOOFS — ^Inside  Besiegers'  First  Parallel    (Sixteenth    Corps 

Front 135 

4.  Spanish  Fort — View  prom  Works  op  Thirteenth  Corps — Showing 

"  McDermett" 148 

5.  Sketch  Showing  the  Works  of  Gen.  E.  A.  Carr's  Division 151 

6.  Blakely — Yiew  from  Centre  of  Second  Division — Showing  Confed- 

erate Redoubt  No.  4 173 

7.  Map  of  the  Siege  op  Blakely 190 

8.  Blakely — ^View  in  Front  op  Hawkins'  Division 193 

9.  Blakely — ^View  prom  the  Right  of  Garrard's  Division 213 

10.  Map  op  Selma 252 


Gene lal  Map  of  the  Caiupaigii 


MOBILE 


Sn^tyH-ClMuu  KysVipX 


HISTOEY 


OF   THE 


CAMPAIGN  OF  MOBILE. 


CHAPTER  I. 

•MOBILE— ITS  FORTIFICATIONS. 

Mobile,  at  the  commencement  of  the  war,  contained  a 
population  of  thirty  thousand.  It  is  situated  on  low  ground, 
at  the  mouth  of  Mobile  river — formed  by  the  Alabama  and 
Tombigbee — and  at  the  head  and  western  shore  of  the  bay 
bearing  the  same  name. 

Having  communication  the  year  round,  by  rivers  as  "well  as 
by  railroads,  into  the  heart  of  Alabama  and  Mississippi,  it  was 
regarded  as  one  of  the  keys  of  the  Confederacy. 

Socially,  pohtically,  and  commercially,  except  that  its  com- 
merce was  smaller,  it  resembled  New  Orleans ;  and  between 
the  cities  there  was  considerable  cordiality.  The  liberalizing 
influence  of  commerce  had  tended  to  foster  a  fraternal  and 
national  spirit,  and  it  was  among  the  last  Southern  cities  to 
renounce  the  Union.  Douglas  had  been  welcomed  there  with 
enthusiasm  in  1860,  and  received  a  large  vote  in  the  presi- 
dential election. 

After  the  passage  of  the  ordinance  of  secession,  it  was 
deemed  essential  that  the  orator  Yancey  should  visit  Mobile 


10  CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE. 

to  reconcile  the  people  to  tlie  new  government.  He  urged, 
among  other  things,  that,  under  the  Confederacy,  their  com- 
merce would  take  more  ample  wings ;  and  that  the  only  dan- 
ger to  be  dreaded  would  be  the  excess  of  wealth  and  luxury 
which  would  follow. 

But  once  committed  to  the  confederate  cause,  the  people 
were  active  and  zealous  in  contributing  to  its  success.  They 
cheerfully  rendered  military  service,  and  gave  the  labor  of  their 
slaves  in  constructing  defensive  works.  These  being  carried 
on  with  skill  and  industry,  grew  more  formidable  every  year. 
They  tended  to  avert  attack,  and  gave  the  city  the  distinction 
of  being  the  last  important  place  in  the  Confederacy  which  was 
captured. 

Once,  only,  did  the  people  murmur.  West  of  the  city,  on 
rising  ground,  was  a  fine  forest  of  oak  and  evergreen.  Drives 
through  it  afforded  pleasant  refuge  from  the  tropic  heat  of  the 
town  ;  and  thither  excursions  were  made  in  the  long  summer 
for  relaxation.  The  engineer  decided  that  this  forest  must  be 
cut  down,  and  it  was  done.  But  the  citizens  made  indignant 
complaints  on  account  of  it. 

FortifiGaiions  of  Mohile.^-Gen.  Joseph  E.  Johnston  pronounced 
Mobile  to  be  the  best-fortified  place  in  the  Confederacy.  The 
first  continuous  line  of  earthworks  around  the  city  was  made 
in  1862,  under  Capt.  Lieurner,  about  three  miles  out  from  the 
business  streets,  and  comprised  fifteen  redoubts.  This  hne  was, 
for  the  most  part,  upon  ground  about  one  hundred  feet  higher 
than  the  city. 

After  the  fall  of  Yicksburgh,  the  apprehension  of  an  attack 
stimulated  the  defensive  operations,  and  the  year  1863  wit- 
nessed the  completion,  by  Gen.  Leadbetter,  of  a  second  line  of 
works,  built  nearer  the  city,  and  in  fact  passing  through  the 
suburbs.  It  included  sixteen  enclosed  and  strong  forts.  This 
rendered  the  defences  so  formidable  that  it  was  estimated  a 


CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE.  U 

garrison  of  ten  tlionsand  effective  troops  could  hold  the  city 
ninety  days  against  a  besieging  army  of  forty  thousand. 

Another  and  still  stronger  line  of  works  was  constructed  in 
1864,  about  lialfAvay  between  the  other  two.  This  line,  built  by 
Lieut.-Col.  V.  Sheliha,  included  nineteen  heavy  bastioned  forts 
and  eight  redoubts.  The  parapets  of  these  forts  were  fi-om 
twenty  to  thu'ty  feet  thick,  the  ditches  about  twenty  feet  deep, 
and  tliirty  feet  or  thereabouts  in  width. 

Harbor  Fortifications. — Nor  were  the  works  ordinary  which 
had  been  prepared  to  resist  an  attack  by  water.  Just  below  the 
city  were  ten  batteries  to  sweep  the  channel.  Two  of  these  were 
floating.  Long  rows  of  piles  had  been  driven  to  obstruct  the 
channel ;  and  though  an  opening  was  here  and  there  left 
through  which  vessels  might  cautiously  pass,  yet  they  would 
almost  have  to  hug  the  muzzles  of  heavy  guns  which  at  every 
such  outlet  threatened  destruction.  Such  were  the  obstacles  on 
the  Spanish  river  channel,  the  usual  route. 

On  the  eastern  shore  of  the  bay  vessels  could  pass  up  the 
Appalachee  river  and  come  round  through  the  Tensas,  arriving 
in  front  of  Mobile,  clear  of  the  obstructions  before  mentioned. 
But  to  close  this  route  Batteries  Huger  and  Tracy  had  been 
built  on  low  ground  close  to  the  river,  and  piles  had  also  been 
driven  across  the  channel ;  and  in  different  parts  of  the  bay 
many  torpedoes  had  been  planted. 

But  the  principal  barrier  against  attack  by  water,  up  to  the 
summer  of  1864,  had  been  Forts  Morgan  and  Gaines.  These 
imposing  walled  forts  stood  at  the  entrance  of  the  bay,  four 
miles  apart,  and  afforded  protection  to  blockade-runners.  They 
had  been  built  by  the  United  States,  but  were  seized  and  taken 
possession  of  by  the  confederates  as  early  as  January,  1861. 

Fort  Gaines  was  built  in  star-fashion,  mounting  tliirty  guns, 
and  garrisoned  by  nine  hundred  men.  Fort  Morgan  was  built 
on  a  grander  scale,  armed  with  sixty  powerful  guns,  and  had  a 


12  CAMPAIGN     OF    MOBILE. 

water  battery  in  its  front.  Besides  these  was  Fort  Powell,  near 
Cedar  point,  built  to  command  Grant's  pass — an  inconsiderable 
and  incomplete  work,  and  mounting  only  eight  guns.  In  the 
channel  in  front  of  Fort  Morgan,  and  not  more  than  a  mile  dis- 
tant from  it,  four  hundi'ed  torpedoes  had  been  planted.  But  the 
current  there  is  strong,  and  only  one  of  them  was  ever  known  to 
cause  any  damage. 

Thus  was  Mobile  hemmed  about  with  grim  preparations 
against  an  adversary.  And  besides  these  fortifications,-  there 
was  no  inconsiderable  confederate  navy  lurking  in  the  harbor. 
The  ram  Tennessee,  that  afterward  made  a  frightful  dash  at  the 
Hartford,  and  the  gunboats  Gaines,  Morgan,  Selma,  and  other 
vessels,  had  by  their  menacing  attitude  created  some  apprehen- 
sion of  an  attempt  to  raise  the  blockade ;  and  the  federal  gov- 
ernment felt  the  necessity  of  Farragut's  presence  there.  He  was 
therefore  ordered  to  resume  command  of  the  western  gulf  squad- 
ron, which  he  did;  and  arrived  off  Mobile- on  the  18th  of  Jan- 
uary, 1864. 


CHAPTER    II. 

EARLIER    OPERATIONS    AGAINST    MOBILE. 

Assuming  tliat  the  Red  river  expedition  would  be  successful, 
Grant,  on  the  31st  of  March,  1864,  in  a  despatch  to  Banks, 
expressed  the  opinion  that  after  reserving  a  force  sufficient  to 
guard  the  Mississippi  river  he  (Banks)  would  have  left,  accord- 
ing to  the  last  returns,  a  force  of  over  thirty  thousand  effective 
men  with  which  to  move  against  Mobile  ;  to  which  he  expected 
to  add  five  thousand  men  from  IMissouri.  "If,  however,"  he 
continued,  "you  think  the  force  here  stated  too  small  to  hold 
the  territory  regarded  as  necessary  to  hold  possession  of,  I 
would  say  concentrate  at  least  twenty-five  thousand  men  of  your 
present  command  for  operations  against  Mobile,  with  these  and 
such  other  additions  as  I  can  give  you  from  elsewhere  lose  no 
time  in  making  a  demonstration,  to  be  followed  by  an  attack  on 
MobHe." 

The  reverses  along  the  Bed  river  prevented  these  instructions 
from  being  carried  into  effect.  Gen.  Canby  assumed  command 
of  the  mihtaiy  division  of  West  Mississippi  on  the  11th  of  May. 
He  brought  with  him  instructions  to  carry  out,  if  possible,  the 
contemplated  movement  against  Mobile.  But  the  recent  suc- 
cess of  the  confederates  west  of  the  Mississippi  iacreased  their 
spmt  so  much  that  they  at  once  assumed  the  aggressive.  Kirby 
Smith's  combined  forces  did  not  fall  much  short  of  sixty  thou- 
sand men.  He  threatened  several  points  on  the  Mississippi  and 
the  whole  line  of  the  Arkansas.  It  was  necessary,  therefore,  to 
postpone  the  contemplated  operations  against  Mobile,  all.  the 


14:  CAMPAIGN     OP     MOBILE. 

movable  forces  being  required  to  guard  the  Mississippi.  It  had 
been  contemplated  also  to  renew  operations  on  Red  river,  but 
Canby  became  satisfied  that  the  troops  could  be  used  to  better 
advantage  east  of  the  Mississippi.  He  was  also  called  on  to 
send  six  thousand  men  of  the  Nineteenth  corps  by  sea  from  New 
Orleans  to  Washington  when  the  latter  place  was  threatened, 
and  the  movement  being  executed  with  promptitude  and  secresy 
they  reached  there  at  a  most  opportune  moment.   • 

But  although  the  federal  army  was  yet  unable  to  assail 
Mobile,  that  place,  was  destined  to  receive  a  tremendous  blow 
from  the  navy,  in  the  reduction  of  those  frowning  citadels  that 
guarded  the  bay  and  harbor.  Farragut's  heroic  and  magnifi- 
cent naval  engagement  with  Forts  Morgan  and  Gaines  and  the 
confederate  monitors,  on  the  6th  of  August,  1864,  is  a  familiar 
and  memorable  event,  and  some  mention  of  it  should  here  be 
made  including  the  operations  of  the  land  forces.  On  that  day, 
Fort  Powell  was  blown  up  and  evacuated ;  on  the  8th,  Fort 
Gaines  surrendered  with  its  garrison,  and  on  the  23d,  the  federal 
ensign  was  once  more  hoisted  over  Fort  Morgan. 

Bombardment  and  Siege  of  Forts  Morgan  and  Gaines. — At 
eleven  o'clock  of  the  night  of  August  2,  Gen.  Gordon  Granger 
arrived  off  Santa  Rosa  Island,  with  fifteen  hundred  effective 
men,  consisting  of  the  Seventy-seventh  Illinois,  Thirty-fourth 
Iowa,  Ninety-sixth  Ohio,  Third  Maryland  dismounted  cavalry, 
and  Cobb's  colored  regiment  of  engineers,  the  whole  under 
the  immediate  command  of  Brig.-Gen.  McGinnis.  After  Granger 
had  consulted  with  Admiral  Fairragut,  the  troops,  on  the  3d, 
moved  up  to  Dauphine  island,  and  effected  a  landing  before 
dark.  They  immediately  moved  forward  toward  a  clearing  in 
the  woods,  ten  miles  distant.  By  dark  a  heavy  rain  set  in. 
The  gunboats  shelled  the  woods,  and,  amidst  the  thick  dark- 
ness and  thunder-storm,  the  march  was  slow.  Three  times 
the  skirmish  line  got  in  rear  of  the  main  column.     Finally,  at 


CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE.  15 

midnight,  weaiy  and  drenclied  to  the  skin,  the  column  halted 
and  sank  down  on  the  sand  to  await  morning.  Then  myriads 
of  mosquitoes  commenced  their  attack ;  but  the  men,  being 
literally  exhausted  by  such  a  march,  feU.  asleep.  In  the  morn- 
ing the  march  was  resumed ;  the  confederate  skirmishers  were 
soon  met,  but  made  little  resistance,  and  at  ten,  A.  M.,  the 
column  came  in  sight,  and  within  two  miles  of  Fort  Gaiues. 
At  the  edge  of  the  woods  a  Hne  was  formed,  and  reserve  breast- 
works constructed  of  fallen  trees.  On  the  4th,  the  skirmishers 
were  within  half  a  mile  of  the  fort,  and  intrenchments  were 
commenced.  The  guns  from  Fort  Gaines  did  some  shelling, 
and  the  skirmish  fire  on  both  sides  was  lively,  but  the  casual- 
ties were  light. 

The  morning  of  the  5th  was  clear  and  cloudless.  The  con- 
federate guns  opened  briskly  at  sunrise.  It  was  the  morning 
Farragut  had  promised  his  gallant  seamen  and  marines,  "they 
should  breakfast  in  Mobile  bay." 

At  six  o'clock,  the  fleet  of  some  fourteen  splendid  vessels, 
with  slow  and  stately  pace,  steamed  toward  Fort  Morgan. 
Farragut,  as  is  well  known,  had  taken  post  in  the  main  rigging 
of  the  flagship,  Hartford.  The  Tecumseh,  beiug  in  the  lead, 
fired  the  first  shot.  Ten  minutes  afterward,  both  forts  opened 
on  the  fleet.  About  the  same  time  the  Tecumseh  struck  a  tor- 
pedo, and  the  gallant  Craven  and  his  devoted  crew — about  one 
hundred  and  twenty  souls — found  a  watery  grave.  A  moment- 
ary shudder  pierced  the  breast  of  every  beholder.  Ten  were 
rescued  by  the  bravery  of  Acting  Ensign  H.  C  Nields  and 
boat's  crew  from  the  Metacomet,  within  six  hundred  yards  of 
the  fort,  under  a  galling  fire.  Every  gun  that  could  be  brought 
to  bear  from  the  ships  was  constantly  served.  In  the  begin- 
ning, Fort  Morgan  itself  seemed  a  wall  of  fire,  but  in  a  few 
moments  was  obscured  by  smoke.  As  the  Tecumseh  sank,  the 
flagship   rushed  forward  and  took  the  lead.     The   shock,   the 


16  CAMPAIGN     OF    MOBILE. 

dread  clamor,  of  that  cannonading — its  sharp  concussion  and 
loudly  reverberating  roar,  defy  description.  Amid  the  tempest 
of  battle,  Farragut,  from  his  elevated  position,  calmly  surveyed 
the  whole  scene.  One  hour  of  intense  excitement — one  hour  of 
straining  toil  at  the  guns — and  the  fleet  passed  the  fort  and 
entered  the  bay.  Then  the  confederate  navy — the  ram  Ten- 
nessee, the  Morgan,  Gaines,  and  Selma — opened  fire.  The 
Metacomet  gave  chase  to  the  Sehna,  and  in  an  hour  captured 
her  and  her  crew  of  ninety  oiiicers  and  men.  The  Morgan 
escaped  up  the  bay ;  the  Gaines,  disabled,  sought  shelter  linder 
the  gTins  of  Fort  Morgan.  The  u'on  ram  Tennessee,  like  a 
monstrous  thing  of  life,  stood  up  with  thi-eatening  aspect  for 
the  Hartford.  Seeing  this,  Farragut  signalled  the  monitors, 
and  wooden  vessels  best  adapted,  to  attack  her,  not  only  with 
thek  gams,  but  bows  on  at  full  speed.  For  two  hoiu-s  the  strug- 
gle was  desperate  and  fearful.  The  ironclads  grappled  fiercely 
with  then-  huge  antagonist,  and  the  wooden  vessels,  with  ro- 
mantic valor,  bore  down  on  her  invulnerable  sides.  Finally, 
the  Manhattan,  with  a  XY-inch  shot,  penetrated  her  armor, 
and  a  shot  fi'om  a  monitor  in  her  steering  apparatus  rendered 
her  helpless.  The  white  flag  appeared,  and  twenty  officers  and 
one  hundi'ed  and  seventy  men  were  suiTendered.  Her  loss 
was  eight  or  ten  killed  and  wounded,  her  admh'al,  Buchanan, 
being  seriously  wounded.  The  loss  in  the  federal  navy  that 
morning  was  fifty-two  killed  and  one  hundred  and  seventy 
wounded. 

The  fleet  now  washed  up  their  bloody  decks  and  rested. 
Meantime  the  siege  of  Fort  Gaines  continued.  On  the  6th, 
the  laud  forces  mounted  two  thh-ty-pounder  Parrotts  and  four 
twelve-pounder  rifles,  and  prepared  works  for  more  guns. 
About  five,  P.  :m;.,  one  of  the  monitors  steamed  ii])  and  dropped 
several  shells  into  the  fort.  Apprehending  what  might  follow, 
the  commander  of  the  garrison,  Col.  Anderson,  inqnu'ed  of  Ad- 


CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE.  17 

mii'al  Farragnt  on  what  terms  lie  would  receive  tlie  surrender 
of  the  fort. 

The  7th  was  occupied  in  arranging  terms  and  making  out 
rolls  of  men  to  be  surrendered. 

At  nine,  A.  M.,  of  the  8th,  Foi-t  Gaines  was  unconditionally 
surrendered,  and  large  quantities  of  ammunition  and  supplies 
were  tui-ned  over  in  good  condition.  The  confederate  loss  in 
killed  and  wounded  had  not  exceeded  ten,  and  the  federal  land 
forces  lost  only  two  killed.  Among  the  latter  was  Corporal 
Grey,  of  the  Thirty-fourth  Iowa. 

The  prisoners — nine  hundred — were  immediately  embarked 
for  New  Orleans,  and  the  besiegers  regaled  themselves  with 
the  best  meal  they  had  had  since  arriving  on  Dauphine  island — 
corn-dodgers,  fiied  bacon,  and  coffee. 

Siege  of  Fort  Ilorgan. — On  the  9th,  at  dayhght.  Granger's 
command,  now  reinforced  by  the  Twentieth  Wisconsin,  Thirty- 
eighth  Iowa,  and  Ninety-fourth  Illinois,  embarked  for  Navy 
cove,  foiu'  miles  down  the  peninsula  from  Fort  Morgan,  on  the 
bay  side,  with  a  view  to  besiege  that  fort.  The  commander  of 
Fort  Morgan  then  caused  the  gunboat  Gaines  to  be  burned, 
and  also  the  hospital  and  other  buildings  outside  of  the  fort. 
After  landing,  the  troops  moved  forward,  and  that  night  lay 
on  their  arms  two  miles  from  the  fort. 

On  the  10th,  they  advanced,  and  the  Thu'ty-fourth  Iowa, 
being  on  the  sldi-mish  line,  got  within  six  hundred  yards  of 
the  fort  without  drawing  fire,  the  garrison  keeping  quiet  and 
expecting  an  assault.  Shght  advances  were  made  each  night, 
and  intrenchments  dug  in  the  sand,  till  the  skirmishers  were 
within  two  hundi-ed  yards  of  the  fort.  Occasionally  a  monitor 
would  steam  up,  and  throw  one-hundred  and  two-hundred- 
pound  shells  into  the  fort,  but  the  replies  fi'om  the  latter 
seemed  ineffective  against  their  iron  sides ;  though,  in  the  arma- 

2 


18  CAMPAIGN     OP     MOBILE. 

ment  of  the  fort,  were  several  Armstrong  and  Whitney  guns, 
and  one  Whitworth. 

A  siege-train  having  previously  arrived,  under  Gen.  Richard 
Arnold,  by  the  21st,  the  land  forces  had  twenty-five  cannon 
and  sixteen  mortars  in  position.  The  mortars  were  behind  a 
heavy  parapet  four  hundred  yards  from  the  fort,  and  manned 
by  men  of  the  Thirty-eighth  Iowa.  The  gmns  were  in  redoubts, 
and  manned  by  companies  of  the  First  Indiana  heavy  artillery 
and  a  detachment  of  sailors  from  the  fleet,  the  naval  battery 
being  commanded  by  Lieut.  Tyson,  of  the  Hartford.  The  troops 
were  subjected  to  severe  toil  in  constructing  works  in  the  sand  ; 
and  were  day  and  night  exposed  to  a  searching  fire  from  the 
fort. 

The  Bombardment. — At  daylight  on  the  22d,  a  gun  from  a 
monitor  gave  the  signal  for  a  general  bombardment.  At  nine, 
A.  M,,  the  whole  fleet  was  in  fine  of  battle  and  the  firing  con- 
tinued with  unabated  fury.  From  seven  to  nine,  p.  m.,  it  was 
slow  and  irregular ;  but  at  haK  past  nine,  P.  ir.,  a  fire  was  dis- 
covered breaking  out  in  the  fort,  and  the  firing  was  then  in- 
tensely renewed  to  prevent  extinguishment.  Six  or  eight  mortar 
shells  could  be  counted  in  the  air  at  once ;  and  every  shot  ap- 
peared to  take  effect.  Nor  in  the  midst  of  this  destructive 
shower  was  the  garrison  moved  by  any  weak  fears.  When  the 
fire  broke  out  they  exposed  themselves  to  extinguish  it,  and 
threw  ninety  thousand  pounds  of  powder  into  the  cisterns. 
Between  forty  and  fifty  had  been  killed  or  wounded.  One 
man  had  been  blown  eighty  feet  into  the  air  by  the  explosion 
of  a  shell.  The  interior  of  the  fort  had  become  a  mass  of 
smouldering  ruins ;  there  was  not  a  space  five  feet  square 
which  had  not  been  defaced  by  shell.  Many  of  the  guns  had 
been  shattered  into  pieces  by  solid  shot  and  shells. 

The  garrison  did  not  reply  to  the  fleet  during  the  bombard- 
ment.    They  attempted,  however,  to  use  some  of  their  guns  on 


CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE.  19. 

the  land  batteries  but  were  prevented  by  sharpsliooters.  Their 
0"WTi  sharpshooters  were  somewhat  troublesome  to  the  besiegers; 
but  the  latter  during  the  operations  had  only  five  men  wounded. 

The  firing  continued  at  intervals  all  night,  and  at  six,  a.  m,,  on 
the  23d,  a  white  flag  appeared  on  the  parapet  of  the  fort,  and 
the  garrison  was  formally  surrendered  at  half  past  two,  P.  M. 

The  Twentieth  Wisconsin  and  Thirty-fourth  Iowa  were  desig- 
nated on  the  part  of  the  land  forces  to  receive  the  suiTender. 
When  the  prisoners  had  been  marched  out  and  the  confederate 
flag  was  taken  down,  the  confederate  general,  Page,  was  affected 
to  tears.  But  good  humor  and  mirth  prevailed  among  the  men. 
The  besiegers  had  used  mules  in  hauling  up  theu'  guns.  The 
confederate  pickets,  seeing  this  and  giving  the  animals  credit  for 
longer  ears  than  they  really  had,  had  been  free  in  expressions  of 
derision  at  such  a  battery.  And  now  the  besiegers  were  return- 
ing the  raillery. 

Such  is  an  epitome  of  the  operations  which  contributed  un- 
common renown  to  the  naval  history  of  the  republic.  The  land 
forces  engaged  were  j)roud  and  joyous  in  having  a  small  share 
in  so  much  glory. 

The  federal  fleet  now  having  control  of  Mobile  bay  put  a  stop 
to  blockade-running.  It  was  given  out  and  generally  beheved 
that  Mobile  could  be  taken  at  pleasure.  But  it  was  hardly  so, 
nor  was  any  further  movement  made.  The  confederates  hasten- 
ed to  strengthen  their  defences  nearer  the  city,  and  built  the 
works  known  as  Sj)anish  fort  on  the  eastern  shore. 

The  bay  having  been  strewn  with  torpedoes  Farragut  com- 
menced the  process  of  removing  them,  and  on  the  13th  of  Sep- 
tember reported  that  twenty-one  had  been  taken  up. 

A  demonstration  was  made  against  Mobile  the  following 
December  by  a  small  column  of  infantry  under  Gen.  Granger, 
moving  from  Pascagoula.  It  reached  Grand  bay  twenty-two 
miles  from  the  city,  and  then  returned.     At  the  same  time  a 


20  CAMPAIGN     OP     MOBILE. 

coliirmi  of  cayaliy  under  Gen.  Davidson,  fi-om  Baton  Rouge, 
struck,  but  did  not  cross,  tlie  Pascagoula  river ;  and  another 
column  of  cavahy  under  Gen.  Grierson  was  nioying  southeaster- 
ly from  Memphis. 

If  the  condition  of  affairs  in  Mobile  had  been  known  to  the 
federal  commander  at  the  time  Fort  Powell  was  evacuated, 
August  5th,  he  could  then  have  cheaply  captiu'ed  the  place. 
There  were  then  no  troops  in  nor  immediately  about  the  city — 
the  artillery  even  having  been  called  away  to  oppose  Gen.  A.  J. 
Smith's  column  then  advancing  from  Memphis.  And  after  the 
fight  with  him  at  Harrisbui"gh  the  same  troops  were  ordered  to 
West  Point,  Georgia,  to  support  Gen.  Hood,  so  that  the  federal 
forces,  if  moved  through  Grant's  pass  in  Kght-di'aught  steamers, 
thence  up  Dog  river  to  Dog  river  factory,  and  there  disem- 
barked, could  have  marched  into  the  city  with  scarcely  any 
resistance — demonstrations  beiag  made  at  the  same  time  by  the 
fleet  upon  the  batteries  in  fi'ont  of  the  city.^  But  it  would,  of 
course,  have  been  necessary  to  reinforce  Gen.  Granger's  small 
command  to  at  least  eight  thousand  men  to  enable  him  to  hold 
the  city  successfully  for  a  great  length  of  time.  In  twenty  days 
Gen.  Mamy  had  collected  such  a  garrison  of  confederate  ti"oops 
as  would  have  required  the  federals  to  resort  to  the  slow  2:)rocess 
of  a  siege. 

1  Geu.  D.  H.  Maiirv's  Report,  Mobile  Times,  Mar.  11, 1866. 


CHAPTER    III. 

CONCENTRATION,  ORGANIZATION,  AND  EQUIPAIBNT  OF  THE  ARMY. 

A  CAMPAIGN  and  its  plan  being  determined  on,  there  needs  to 
be  on  the  part  of  the  leader  a  foresight  which  includes  every- 
thing, and  a  care  that  never  sleeps,  to  secure  for  the  army  the 
proper  supply  of  material,  the  best  equipment,  the  utmost  effi- 
ciency ;  so  that  it  can  at  any  moment  take  advantage  of  its  suc- 
cess, or  if  it  meet  with  reverses  that  it  shall  not  be  overcome. 

That  operations  should  be  undertaken  against  Mobile  was 
decided  early  in  January,  1865  ;  but  the  plan  was  not  arranged 
till  some  time  afterward. 

The  troops  designated  for  the  campaign  had  to  be  moved  by 
water  from  posts  above  New  Orleans  to  the  vicinity  of  Mobile 
bay — some  point  on  which  would  be  the  base  ;  and  as  the  trans- 
portation required  sea  and  gulf  vessels,  whose  number  and  capa- 
city were  less  than  river  transports,  this  preliminary  movement 
required  considerable  time. 

Canby's  movable  forces  had  lately  been  organized  into  bri- 
gades of  the  "  Reserve  Corps  of  the  Military  Division  of  the  West 
Mississippi,"  comprising  about  ten  thousand  effectives.  They 
had  formed  a  part  of  the  Thirteenth  corps  at  Yicksburgh,  and 
more  recently  had  belonged  to  the  Nineteenth  corps.  One 
brigade  was  at  Devall's  Bluff,  Arkansas,  and  the  remamder 
were  stationed  along  the  Mississippi  from  Memphis  down. 
Early  in  January  they  were  concentrated  at  Kenner,  ten  miles 
above  New  Orleans,  and  Major-Gen.  E.  Steele  was  assigned  to 
their  command,  with  instructions  to  have  them  fitted  for  a  cam- 


22  CAMPAIGN     OP     MOBILE. 

paign.  They  were  troops  wliicli  liad  been  well  tried  on  many 
occasions,  and  were  in  all  respects  such  as  any  commander 
would  be  proud  of.  Here  they  remained  about  three  weeks; 
Their  camp  lay  outside  of  the  levee,  stretched  along  for  four 
mUes,  and  the  ground  was  actually  lower  than  the  surface  of  the 
river.  The  weather  was  hke  September  along  the  St.  Lawrence, 
but  there  was  considerable  rain,  and  the  ground  being  much  of 
the  time  wet  and  muddy  the  men  could  hardly  be  comfortable. 
Nevertheless,  in  pursuance  of  Gen.  Steele's  orders,  some  time 
was  spent  each  day,  when  the  weather  admitted,  in  drill — prin- 
cipally in  the  manual  of  arms. 

What  the  campaign  was  to  be,  whether  against  Mobile  or  into 
Texas,  was  not  yet  kiiown  even  by  Gen.  Steele.  But  a  portion 
of  the  troops  being  ordered  to  Barrancas,  Florida,  it  appeared 
the  former  must  be  the  objective  point. 

About  the  23d  of  January,  Gen.  Canby  received  information 
leading  to  a  suspicion  that  an  attempt  would  be  made  by  the 
confederates  to  regain  possession  of  Barrancas  or  some  other 
point  thereabouts  on  the  gulf. 

On  the  afternoon  of  that  day  a  despatch  was  received  at  Ken- 
ner  for  the  commander  of  the  Third  brigade  of  the  reserve  to 
report  immediately  in  person  at  the  headquarters  of  the  military 
division,  New  Orleans  ;  and  complying  therewith  before  dark,  he 
received  written  instructions  to  proceed  with  the  detachment  of 
his  brigade  then  at  Kenner  to  East  Pascagoula,  and  was  enjoined 
to  use  despatch.  Transportation  was  not  then  entirely  ready. 
Yet  the  next  day  the  regiments  had  all  embarked  with  their 
equipage.  The  Twenty-fourth  Indiana  proceeded  on  the  Corin- 
thian round  through  the  mouth  of  the  river  and  the  gulf. 

By  dusk  the  Thirty-fourth  Iowa,  and  One  Hundred  and  Four- 
teenth Ohio,  had  landed  at  New  Orleans ;  whence  they  pro- 
ceeded by  rail  to  Lake  Pontchartrain  in  detachments — ^tlie  cars 
being  insufficient  to  take  an  entire  regiment.     Arriving  there  in 


CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE.  23 

the  middle  of  a  dark  and  windy  niglit,  they  rapidly  moved  their 
stores  and  teams  over  the  long  wharf — which  in  many  places 
was  so  rotten  that  some  of  the  animals  broke  through — took  their 
wagons  to  pieces  and  loaded  them  and  the  equipage  on  steam- 
ers, making  the  fourth  time  their  luggage  had  been  handl'ed  in 
twenty-four  hours.  At  daylight,  the  26th,  they  reported  to  Gen. 
Granger,  at  East  Pascagoula,  and  were  by  him  ordered  to  Bar- 
rancas, in  accordance  with  previous  instructions  from  Gen.  Canby. 
They  arrived  at  Barrancas  at  daylight,  the  27th,  and  debarked 
and  went  into  camp.  The  remainder  of  the  brigade  arrived  on 
the  1st  of  Febmary  ;  and  it  was  there  in  camp  six  weeks. 

It  may  interest  the  reader  to  know  how  troops  spend  such  a 
period  of  time  immediately  preceding  a  campaign.  But  first  let 
us  take  a  view  of  their  surroimdings  ;  likewise  of  their  camp. 

The  natural  appearance  of  that  part  of  the  country  is  unat- 
tractive. BaiTancas  is  a  narrow  and  sandy  peninsula,  a  third 
part  covered  mth  pine  ojDenings,  with  here  and  there  clusters  of 
live  oaks.  Along  the  shore  the  sand  is  white,  and  on  a  raw  day 
creates  the  illusion  of  snow. 

The  fort  which  gives  the  place  its  name  was  originally  built  by 
the  Spaniards,  about  two  centuries  ago,  and  with  Fort  Pickens, 
which  is  opposite,  helps  to  guard  the  entrance  into  the  splendid 
harbor  of  Pensacola.  On  the  southeastern  side  of  the  peninsula 
are  the  ruins  of  the  Pensacola  navy-yard  ;  and  surrounding  that 
are  the  villages  of  Woolsey  and  Warrington.  From  the  land- 
ing at  Barrancas  the  ground  rises  slightly  for  a  mile,  and  then 
declines  to  a  bayou  on  the  north  side.  On  the  higher  ground 
was  located  the  camp  of  the  brigade.  Its  front  was  along  the 
edge  of  the  pine  wood,  and  near  was  a  small  clear  stream. 

The  Camp  at  Barrancas. — The  brigade  was  camped  in  the 
following  order  from  right  to  left,  the  regiments  having  taken 
position  as  they  happened  to  arrive,  rather  than  according  to 
rank :  The  Twenty-foui'th  Indiana  (veteran),  consolidated  with 


24  CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE. 

the  Sixty-seventli,  Col.  W.  T.  Spicely ;  the  Thirty-fourth  Iowa, 
consohdated  with  the  Thirty-eighth,  Col.  G.  W.  Clark;  the 
One  Hundred  and  Fourteenth  Ohio,  consolidated  with  the  One 
Hundred  and  Twentieth,  Col.  J.  H.  KeUy ;  the  Eighty-tliird 
Ohio,  consolidated  with  the  Forty-eighth  (veteran),  Col.  F.  W. 
Moore;  the  Sixty-ninth  Indiana,  Lieut.-Col.  O.  Perry;  and  the 
Ninety-seventh  lUinois,  Lieut.-Col.  V.  Vifquain.  Some  time 
afterward,  the  Seventy-sixth  Illinois,  Col.  S.  F.  Busey,  arrived, 
and,  being  attached  to  the  brigade,  took  position  on  the  left. 

It  is  a  saying  among  the  volunteers,  that  the  more  pleasant 
their  camp  is  made,  the  sooner  will  they  be  caUed  upon  to 
leave  it.  However  much  or  httle  this  thought  influenced  these 
regiments,  they  certailily,  in  a  very  few  days,  made  a  beautiful 
and  attractive  camp.  It  was  laid  out  with  five  streets  to  a  regi- 
ment, with  tents  for  two  companies  on  a  street,  the  companies 
facing.  Small  evergreen  trees  were  cut  and  hauled  to  the 
camp,  and  set  in  rows  on  each  side  of  every  street,  and  in  front 
of  every  tent.  Handsome  arbors  were  made,  and  artificial 
groves  before  the  officers'  tents ;  and  especially  around  the  hos- 
pital tents,  which,  however,  were  but  few  in  number  and  had 
but  few  inmates.  Walks  were  neatly  arranged,  having  their 
margins  adorned  with  shrubbery,  handsome  shells,  and  devices 
moulded  from  the  white  sand.  Guns,  mortars,  shields,  cannon- 
balls,  and  other  warlike  implements  were  ingeniously  carved  in 
this  sand,  with,  here  and  there,  a  felicitous  motto  or  inscription. 
Its  cleanliness  corresponded  with  the  taste  and  industry  dis- 
played in  ornamenting  it. 

These  soldiers  were  some  of  the  best  yoimg  men  of  the  West, 
and  had  the  characteristics  of  proud  and  gallant  men,  as  one 
could  plainly  see  who  noticed  them  off  duty  in  their  famUiar  and 
joyous  groups  around  the  camp.  The  plates  on  their  accoutre- 
ments were  kept  brightly  polished,  and  their  muskets  and 
accoutrements  always  neat.     Two  hours  in  the  forenoon  they 


CAMTAIGN     OF     MOBILE.  25 

spent  in  company  drill,  devoting  considerable  attention  to  tlie 
manual  of  arms  and  to  target  practice  ;  and  two  hours  of  the 
afternoon  were  devoted  to  brigade  drill.  The  ground  on  which 
these  drills  took  place  was  a  mile  north  of  Fort  Barrancas.  The 
field  officers  met  evenings  in  the  school  of  the  brigade  ;  and  the 
exercises  of  the  brigade  in  the  field  were  eminently  successful. 
As  these  battahons  moved  with  so  much  precision  and  beauty, 
closed  in  mass,  or  rapidly  deployed,  or  advanced  in  line  of  battle 
in  double-quick  on  the  charge,  theu'  bayonets  ghttering  and 
their  alignment  grandly  preserved,  no  observer  could  doubt — 
remembering  they  had  been  through  many  battles — that  these 
were  rehersals  for  no  common  event. 

As  transportation  could  be  furnished,  the  greater  portion  of 
the  other  brigades  of  the  Reserve  corps  moved  fi'om  Kenner 
to  Fort  Gaines.  On  the  18th  of  February,  the  Reserve  corps, 
with  the  addition  of  seven  regiments,  namel}^,  the  Twenty-ninth 
and  Thirty-third  Iowa,  Fiftieth  Indiana,  Twenty-seventh,  Twen- 
ty-eighth, and  Thii'ty-fif  bh  Wisconsin,  and  Seventy-serenth  Ohio, 
which  had  been  sent  do\\Ti  from  the  department  of  Arkansas ; 
and  several  light  batteries,  were  organized  as  the  Tliirteenth 
corps,  comprising  three  divisions,  and  Major-Gen.  Gordon 
Granger  assigned  to  its  command. 

The  Sixteenth  army  corps,  commanded  by  Major-Gen.  A.  J. 
Smith,  having  taken  a  prominent  part  in  the  two  days'  battle 
of  Nashville,  and  in  the  j)ursuit  of  Hood's  army,  was,  early  in 
February,  at  Eastport,  Mississippi.  The  roads  rendering  it 
impracticable  for  a  further  movement  south  with  heavy  trains, 
orders  were  sent  by  Grant  to  have  this  corps  move  round  and 
report  to  Canby.  Accordingly,  on  the  5th  and  6th  of  February, 
a  fleet  of  forty-three  river  steamboats  and  seven  tow-boats  with 
barges,  appeared  at  Eastport,  and  taking  aboard  the  Sixteenth 
corps  and  five  thousand  of  Wilson's  cavaky,  with  horses,  on 
the  7tli,  moved  down  the  Tennessee  to  the  Ohio,  thence  into 


26  CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE. 

the  Mississippi.  In  eight  days  it  arrived  at  Yicksburgh,  wlaere, 
in  pursuance  of  orders,  tlie  cavalry  disembarked.  But  an  un- 
fortunate blunder  in  transmitting  a  telegraphic  despatcli,  caused 
the  Sixteenth  corps  also  to  land  and  go  into  camp.  But  Gen. 
Smith,  having  orders  in  his  pocket  for  his  corps  to  move  to 
New  Orleans,  hastened  down  the  river  to  the  nearest  telegraphic 
station,  and,  communicating  with  Gen.  Canby,  had  the  matter 
corrected,  and  returned  to  Vicksburgh  for  his  corps.  Four 
days  were  thus  lost.  Ee-embarking,  the  Sixteenth  corps 
reached  the  suburbs  of  New  Orleans  on  the  21st,  having 
moved  thirteen  hundred  and  thirty-five  miles  in  eleven  days 
of  actual  travel.  It  then  remained  some  days  on  the  low, 
wet  ground,  a  few  -of  the  regiments  occupying  Jackson's 
battle-field.  By  the  7th  of  March  it  had  arrived  at  Fort 
Gaines. 

About  the  same  time,  Hawkins'  colored  division,  five  thou- 
sand five  hundred  strong,  arrived  at  Barrancas.  Ten  days 
later,  Lucas'  brigade  of  cavalry  arrived  at  the  same  place,  and 
the  column  forming  there  had  been  placed  under  the  command 
of  Gen.  Steele. 

The  siege-train  was  being  organized  at  Fort  Gaines,  and 
consisted  of  the  seven  batteries  of  the  Fhst  Indiana,  and  "A" 
and  "K"  of  the  Sixth  Michigan  (heavy)  artillery,  and  Mack's 
Eighteenth  New  York. 

The  main  army  was  now  encamped  on  Dauphine  island,  in 
the  vicinity  of  Fort  Gaines,  under  shelter-tents. 

Inspections  were  frequent,  to  the  end  that  deficiencies  in 
clothing  and  equipments  might  be  supplied  and  all  surplus 
articles  be  dispensed  with.  The  troops  received  new  cloth- 
ing, to  make  their  supply  complete. 

Canby's  orders  to  perfect  the  organization,  equipment,  and 
mobility  of  the  army,  were  most  thorough,  and  may  be  studied 


CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE.  27 

with  profit  by  tliose  wLo  shall  hereafter  undertake  campaigns ; 
by  all,  indeed,  who  follow  the  profession  of  arms.^ 

1  HEADQUARTERS, 
GENERAL  ORDERS,  |  Military  Division  of  West  Mississippi, 

No.  15.  f  New  Orleans,  La.,  February  5t?i,  1865. 

1.  The  following  extracts  "from  General  Orders,  No.  4,  series  of  1864,  from 
these  headquarters,  relating  to  troops  in  the  field,  and  to  reserve  forces  held 
in  readiness  for  field  service,  are  hereby  republished  for  careful  consideration 
and  for  strict  observance  in  spirit  and  in  letter  : 

".AH  details  from  these  trooj^s,  for  extra  or  special  service  at  posts,-  depots, 
or  hospitals,  will  at  once  be  relieved,  and  the  men  sent  to  their  regiments  and 
companies,  their  places  being  supplied,  as  far  as  practicable,  by  hired  men  or 
non-efifectives.  The  number  of  clerks,  orderlies,  &c.,  will  be  reduced  whenever 
it  is  practicable.  .....  .^. 

"  Recruits  and  convalescents  for  organizations  that  are  in  the  field,  or  desig- 
nated for  field  service,  will  be  forwarded  as  rapidly  as  possible.  Efficiency 
and  mobility  will  be  seciu'ed  by  rejecting  everything  not  essential  to  these 
conditions.  The  clothing  issued  will  be  limited  to  the  suit  the  soldier  wears,  a 
change  of  underclothing,  and  an  extra  pair  of  shoes.  Coats  will  not  be  issued 
when  blouses  can  be  supplied,  and  the  articles  to  be  carried  in  the  trains  will 
be  limited  to  such  quantities  as  may  be  necessary  to  meet  i^robable  accidental 
losses.  Camp  equipage  Avill,  in  like  manner,  be  reduced  to  the  lowest  possible 
limit.  Shelter-tents,  only,  will  be  issued  to  the  troops  of  this  command.  All 
cumbrous  articles  of  mess  equipage,  regimental  and  company  desks,  will  be  left 
behind ;  and  the  records,  papers,  &c.,  absolutely  necessary  in  the  field,  will  be 
packed  in  the  lightest  and  most  compact  form.  The  equipment  of  officers  will 
correspond  to  that  of  the  men,  and  everything  in  excess  of  the  established 
allowance  will  be  rejected  by  the  inspectors. 

"  No  person,  not  in  the  military  service  of  the  United  States,  will  be  allowed 
to  accompany  any  force  operating  in  the  field. 

"  Subsistence  for  troops  in  campaign  will  be  limited  to  the  essential  articles 
of  bread  and  meat,  and  a  reduced  allowance  of  the  small  rations.  When  they 
can  be  provided,  bacon  and  hard  bread  will  be  taken  in  preference  to  their 
equivalents,  and  the  resources  of  the  country,  in  which  the  troops  are  to  ope- 
rate, must  be  considered  in  determining  the  quantity  of  supplies  to  be  taken. 
The  number  of  rations  to  be  carried  in  the  haversacks  will  be  determined  by 
circumstances,  but  the  troops  will  habitually  have  on  hand  three  days'  cooked 
rations,  so  as  to  be  in  readiness  to  move  at  any  moment. 

"  The  land  transportation  in  every  command  wiU  be  put  in  perfect  order, 
and  commanders  will  make  their  preparations  in  accordance  with  the  condition 
above  stated." 

2.  The  detail  of  orderlies  for  the  headquarters  of  the  several  commands  in 


28  CAMPAIGN     OF    MOBILE. 

Transportation. — The  allowance  of  transportation  on  tlie  cam- 
paign was :  For  the  general  headquarters,  and  for  the  head- 
quarters of  each  army  corps,  three  wagons ;  lor  the  headquarters 
of  each  division,  two  wagons ;  for  the  headquarters  of  each  bri- 
gade, one  wagon ;  for  each  regiment  of  two  hundred  and  fifty 
men,  or  less,  one  wagon ;  for  each  additional  two  hundred  and 
fifty  men  or  fraction  of  that  number  (not  less  than  fifty),  one 
wagon ;  for  each  battery,  one  wagon ;  for  each  company  of 
pioneers,  for  its  tools,  one  wagon  J 

Quarters. — Officers  as  well  as  men  were  restricted  to  shelter 
tents ;  but  for  office  purposes  three  wall  tents  were  allowed 
to  the  headquarters  of  the  army;  two  to  army  corps,  and 
one  to  division  or  "btrigade  headquarters,  and  one  common 
(wedge)  tent  to  each  regiment  or  battery. 

Hospital. — Hospital  tents  were  allowed  at  the  rate  of  one 
tent  for  each  six  hundred  men,  to  be  used  only  in  division 
hospital  organizations. 

Ambulances  were  allowed  at  the  rate  of  one  to  each  four  hun- 
dred men,  one  to   each  battery,  two  to  the  headquarters  of 


this  division,  will  be  limited  to  the  absolute  necessities,  and  will  not,  except 
under  extraordinary  circumstances,  exceed  : 

For  an  infantry  brigade,  three  mounted  and  four  foot  orderlies. 
For  an  infantry  division,  four  mounted  and  five  foot  orderlies. 
For  a  cavalry  brigade,  five  mounted  orderlies. 
For  a  cavalry  division,  seven  mounted  orderhes. 

The  efficiency  of  companies  will  not  be  impaired  by  the  detail  of  non-com- 
missioned officers  as  clerks,  orderlies,  or  on  other  special  service,  nor  will  they 
be  detached  from  their  companies  unless  the  strength  of  the  detachment,  with 
which  they  are  to  serve,  is  such  as  to  warrant  it. 
By  order  of  Maj.-Gen.  E.  R.  S.  Canby. 

0.  T.  Cheistensen, 
Official.  Ldeid.-Col,  Assistant  Adjutant-General 

1  "  All  officers  are  enjoined  to  bear  in  mind,  that  every  man,  or  animal, 
or  pound  of  baggage,  beyond  what  is  essential  for  efficiency,  that  has  to 
be  fed,  transported,  or  guarded,  is  an  embarrassment  that  must  be  avoid- 
ed."—6?eneraZ  Order  No.  22,  Feh.  22, 1865. 


CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE.  29 

the  army  and  of  army  corps ;  and  to  eacli  division  train  of 
ambulances,  tliree  army  wagons  were  allowed  for  transporta- 
tion of  hospital  tents  and  mess-cliests. 

Clotliing  was  limited  to  tlie  suit  the  soldier  wore,  a  change 
of  underclothing,  and  an  extra  j)air  of  shoes.  But  each  man 
had  a  blanket,  and  some  also,  perhaps  most,  took  along  their 
overcoats.  The  extra  articles  of  clothing  were  carried  by  the 
soldier  in  his  knapsack. 

Rations  were  limited  to  the  essential  articles  of  meat  (three 
quarters  of  a  pound  of  salt  meat  to  a  man  per  day),  bread, 
coffee,  sugar,  and  salt,  and  one  fourth  rations  of  soap. 

Ammunition  was  required  to  be  kept  on  hand  in  each  bat- 
talion using  small  arms,  in  the  proportion  of  one  hundred 
rounds  per  man ;  each  man  to  carry  forty  rounds  in  his 
cartridge-box ;  and  each  company  commander  always  to  hold 
in  his  possession,  and  transport  in  the  company  wagon  the 
remaining  sixty  rounds  per  man ;  but  in  case  it  could  not 
be  so  transported  the  men  carried  twenty  rounds  of  it  in 
their  knapsacks.  An  additional  one  hundred  rounds  per  man 
was  carried  in  each  division  ammunition  supply  train,  under 
charge  of  the  acting  ordance  officer.  Each  battery  carried 
as  near  two  hundred  complete  rounds  of  assorted  ammunition 
per  gun  as  the  capacity  of  the  caissons  would  admit.  And 
another  one  hundred  rounds  per  gun  was  carried  in  the 
division  train. 

JEquipment. — Each  mfantry  soldier  was  armed  with  the  rifled 
musket  and  common  bayonet;  one  pick,  spade,  and  axe,  were 
also  carried  to  each  twelve  men. 

Pioneers. — In  each  division  a  pioneer  company  was  organized, 
by  the  selection  of  officers  and  men  having  aptitude  for  the  duty, 
and  who  were  well  supplied  with  spades,  shovels,  axes,  picks, 
saws,  and  carpenters'  tools. 


30  CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE. 

General  orders  No.  20,  from  headquarters  of  the  commandmg 
general,  provided  for  division  and  brigade  staff  as  follows  : 

"  II.  The  chief  quartermaster,  commissary,  engineer,  ord- 
nance, and  medical  officers  at  these  headquarters,  will  assign  an 
officer  of  their  departments  to  each  of  the  infantry  divisions  and 
cavalry  brigades  that  are  not  already  provided.  Division  com- 
manders will  appoint  the  inspectors  and  provost-marshals,  sub- 
ject to  the  approval  of  the  corps  commanders,  and  wUl  nominate, 
for  approval,  the  mustering  officers  for  their  divisions.  The 
same  rule,  except  in  the  case  of  mustering  officers,  wiU  apply  to 
infantry  brigades  when  detached  from  their  divisions 

"  IV.  The  staff  of  division  and  brigade  commanders  will  be 
limited  to  the  officers  indicated  in  paragraph  II.,  and  to  their 
assistant  adjutant-general  and  personal  aids  ;  and  no  other  staff 
or  acting  staff  officers  wUl  be  allowed,  except  upon  the  special 
recommendation  of  the  corps  commanders." 

Orders  were  issued  carefully  defining  the  duties  of  the  pro- 
vost-marshal, and  also  prescribing  a  system  of  foraging.  So  it 
was  prescribed  as  a  rule,  that  every  regiment,  on  reaching  its 
position,  should  at  once,  without  waiting  for  orders,  cover  its 
front  by  such  temporary  works  as  might  be  necessary.  Nor  was 
the  duty  to  be  intermitted  on  account  of  the  supposed  distance 
of  the  enemy  ;  and  superior  commanders  were  to  be  responsible 
that  their  flanks,  and  the  intervals  between  adjacent  commands, 
were  ia  like  manner  covered.  ^  Officers  were  reminded  that  the 
spade  and  the  pick  are  useful  adjuncts  to  the  musket  and  the 
rifle. 

1  General  Field  Order  No.  1,  Mai'cli  7, 1865. 


CHAPTER    lY. 

THE    PLAN    OF    OPERATIONS 

The  fortifications  around  Mobile  were  so  strong  tliat  a  direct 
movement  on  the  place,  from  the  -western  shore,  would  have 
encountered  unequal  resistance,  and  involved  a  protracted  siege. 
It  was  therefore  determined  to  flank  them.  The  base  would  be 
fixed  on  the  eastern  shore ;  and  the  main  army  moving  up  on 
that  shore,  with  the  aid  of  the  navy,  would  carry  the  forts  on 
the  islands  and  main  land,  and  then  approach  Mobile  by  the 
Tensas  river  or  one  of  the  channels  coming  in  above. 

On  this  plan  a  large  portion  of  the  troops  and  the  supplies 
could  be  moved  by  water  into  Fish  river,  affording  a  secure 
base  within  twenty  miles  of   Spanish  fort. 

In  the  meantime,  to  destroy  communication  by  railroad 
between  Mobile  and  Montgomery,  and  to  prevent  reinforce- 
ments coming  from  the  latter  point  to  Mobile,  or  the  garrison 
from  escaping,  a  column  of  twelve  thousand  was  to  move  out 
from  Pensacola  north.  By  moving  as  far  as  Pollard  it  would 
also  create  the  behef  that  it  was  aiming  at  Montgomery,  and 
tend  to  distract  and  deceive  the  confederates. 

In  case  the  main  army  should  reduce  the  eastern  shore 
defences  sooner  than  was  expected,  then  the  column  from 
Pensacola  could  be  ordered  on  to  Montgomery — though  this 
Was  not  contemplated  ;  but  if  the  operations  were  protracted, 
it  would  move  round  and  form  a  junction  with  the  main  army. 

So,  if  the  reduction  of  those  works  demanded  a  very  long 
time,  then   the   forces  would  pass   them,  move   on  to   Mont- 


32  CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE. 

gomery — wHcb.  was  really  tlie  objective  point — cleaving  Mobile 
to  fall  in  due  time  by  these  indirect  operations. 

It  is  to  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  difficulty  in  bringing  up 
supplies  by  land,  tended  to  retard  a  column  moving  far  into 
the  interior  more  than  any  armed  resistance  that  could  be 
expected. 

While  these  operations  should  be  progressing  a  large  column 
of  cavalry  was  to  move  down  from  North  Alabama  to  divert 
the  attention  of  Forrest  and  the  bulk  of  the  confederate  cavalry, 
then  hoverirg  about  Central  Alabama  and  Mississippi. 

Some  smaller  cavahy  expeditions  were  projected,  the  achieve- 
ments of  which  will  be  noticed. 


CHAPTER    Y. 

THIRTEENTH   AND    SIXTEENTH    CORPS    MOVE    TO    DANLEY'S,    ON 

FISH    RIVER. 

The  movement  was  commenced  by  tlie  Thirteentli  corps, 
March.  17th.  Benton's  division,  numbering  six  thousand,  pre- 
ceded by  Bertram's  brigade  of  the  Second  division — which 
during  the  campaign  continued  detached  from  its  division — 
marched  at  haK-past  five  from  Fort  Morgan,  along  the  penin_ 
sida  nuie  miles,  and  went  into  camp  in  an  open  pine  forest. 
On  the  18th,  they  marched  thirteen  miles  on  a  good  road  over 
a  natural  shell  bank,  and  camped  at  three,  p.  m.,  on  Baj^ou 
portage.  On  the  19th,  the  unreliable  and  swampy  character 
of  the  ground  disclosed  itself,  the  firm  appearing  surface  prov- 
ing, when  wet,  to  be  a  mere  crust,  under  which  was  a  bottom- 
less quicksand.  Through  this  crust  the  wagons  sank  to  the 
hubs.  The  head  of  the  column  passing  round  Bon  Secour's 
bay,  moved  only  a  few  miles,  and  the  rear-guard  got  only  a 
mile  and  a  half.  Large  details  were  set  at  work  corduroying 
the  worst  places.  On  the  20th,  starting  at  nine,  A.  m.,  they 
moved  slowly,  the  rain  falling  in  torrents,  and  the  corduroy 
afloat,  and  made  four  miles  by  night.  Yeatch's  division  hav- 
ing crossecj  fi"om  Fort  Gaines  to  Navy  cove,  the  17th,  had  now 
closed  up  on  the  Third  division,  and  halted  two  days  to  let 
the  latter  division  get  in  advance,  but  was  obliged,  meantime, 
to  keep  heavy  details  at  work  on  the  roads. 

At  six,  the  morning  of  the  21st,  the  rain  still  pouring,  Ben- 
ton's division  moved  on  ;  but  the  train  could  not  even  get  out 

3 


34  CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE. 

of  park.  Every  team  seeking  an  untried  path  soon  got  mired, 
and  wagons  were  seen  in  all  directions  sunk  down  to  the  hubs. 
The  poor  animals,  in  their  struggles  to  haul  the  teams,  half 
buried  themselves.  In  this  dilemma,  long  ropes  were  made  fast 
to  the  teams,  and  the  soldiers,  with  cheerfulness  and  alacrity, 
hauled  both  animals  and  wagons  out  of  the  mire  with  a  rush ; 
and  it  was  only  their  speed  that  saved  each  team  from  again 
sinking  at  every  rod.  The  same  laborious  efforts  were  applied 
to  the  field  artillery.  The  corps  and  division  commanders  were 
present,  wading  about  in  the  mud  to  their  knees,  and  the  latter 
himseK  lending  a  hand  at  the  ropes.  In  hauhng  the  Twenty- 
sixth  Nev/  York  battery  through  a  bad  place,  w^here  the  newly- 
made  corduroy  had  been  washed  away,  the  men  moved  some 
distance  in  mud  and  water  waist  deep.  These  labors  were 
being  watched  by  confederate  scouts.  Only  about  two  miles 
were  made  that  day.  The  division  went  into  camp  at  three,  p.  M., 
and  made  some  fortifications  on  their  right.  The  bay  was  o}ily 
three  miles  distant  on  the  left.  Yet  only  two  miles  off  in  that 
direction  two  hundred  and  fifty  confederate  cavalry  camped  the 
same  night ;  and  before  dark,  hoping  to  capture  a  few  foragers 
or  stragglers,  had  driven  up  some  cattle  in  sight  of  the  camp 
of  the  Thirteenth  corps ;  yet  without  avail,  as  the  orders  about 
foraging  were  well  enforced. 

Bertram's  brigade  having  pushed  on  with  great  energy,  and 
done  its  share  of  bridge-building  and  corduroymg,  yet  enjoying 
the  privilege  of  the  advance  all  the  way,  reached  Fish  river  the 
same  afternoon  (21st)  with  Foust's  battery  and  the  wagons. 
The  scouts  attached  to  the  brigade — thirty  men  of  the  Fourth 
"Wisconsin  cavalry,  under  Lieut.  Knowles,  had  a  small  skirmish 
during  the  day.  The  same  afternoon,  Capt.  J.  J.  Smith's  com- 
pany of  pontoniers  had,  in  three  hours,  taken  the  boats  from 
raft  and  laid  a  bridge,  three  hundred  and  twenty  feet  in  length, 
over  Fish  river.     Bertram's  brigade  crossed  over  on  this  the 


CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE.  35 

next  morning,  and  went  into  camp  near  the  Sixteenth  corps,  and 
intrenched  and  felled  trees  in  their  fi'ont. 

The  22d  opened  fair.  Late  in  the  day  this  part  of  the  column 
marched  on  through  a  pine  forest,  and  in  the  evening,  having 
gone  five  miles,  went  into  camp  on  high  ground  ;  the  rear  of  the 
division  came  up  by  the  light  of  the  burning  pitch  trees. 

The  23d,  Benton  moved  on  over  a  fair  road,  though  hilly,  six 
miles,  to  the  north  fork  of  Fish  river,  crossed  it  on  a  pontoon, 
and  went  into  camp  on  the  light  of  the  Sixteenth  corps,  the 
bands  j)laying,  "Oh,  ain't  you  glad  you're  out  of  the  wilderness." 
So  -wTL-etched  had  been  the  road  the  train  was  not  all  up  for  three 
or  four  days ;  but  Col.  Mackay,  of  the  Thirty-third  Iowa,  suc- 
ceeded in  getting  a  section  of  twenty  wagons  in  that  night. 

Veatch's  division,  having  resumed  the  march  on  the  22d,  en- 
countered similar  difficulties  and  performed  similar  toils  to  those 
that  retarded  the  advance. 

The  afternoon  of  the  24:th,  when  within  a  few  miles  of  Dan- 
ley's,  the  column,  not  being  well  closed  up,  was  boldly  attacked 
by  a  small  party  of  confederate  scouts,  and  some  men  and  ani- 
mals captui'ed,  in  the  following  manner  : 

Attack  on  the  Train. — On  the  morning  of  the  24th,  Lieut.  Sib- 
ley, of  the  Fifteenth  confederate  cavahy,  acting  as  scout  for 
Gen.  Lidell,  left  Greenwood  with  eight  men,  and  passing  round 
Polecat  creek,  came  in  sight  of  the  First  division,  two  miles 
above  MagnoHa,  by  the  middle  of  the  afternoon.  The  small 
party  halted  and  watched  for  stragglers.  Soon  they  saw  five 
men  by  themselves,  who  appeared  to  be  resting ;  and  cautiously 
moving  toward  them  till  mthin  a  few  yards,  then  spurring  their 
horses  into  a  keen  gallop,  and  raising  a  yell,  they  charged  and 
captui'ed  them.  The  men  were  surprised  and  made  no  resistance. 
They  belonged  to  the  First  brigade,  the  commander  of  which 
was  sitting  not  far  off.  Two  of  the  men  were  from  the  Twenty- 
'ninth  Wisconsin,  one  being  a  drummer.     Disarming  the  prison- 


36  CAMPAIGN     OP     MOBILE. 

ers,  and  leaving  tliree  men  only  to  guard  them,  Lieut.  Sibley, 
with  the  balance  of  bis  men,  in  baK  an  bour  charged  on  the 
train,  a  few  hundred  yards  below,  and  captured  a  few  wagoners 
and  ten  mules,  and  was  prevented  from  further  mischief  by  the 
Ninety-ninth  Illinois  coming  up.  He  then  returned  with  all  his 
prisoners  to  Greenwood,  and  from  there  despatched  to  Gen. 
LideU,  at  Blakely,  that  he  learned  from  the  prisoners  that  Gen. 
A.  J.  Smith  had  a  command  on  the  Western  shore  to  operate 
against  Mobile — an  error  which,  whether  fabricated  or  not  by 
the  prisoners,  helped  to  compensate  for  their  capture. 

This  gaUant  feat  of  Lieut.  Sibley  created  some  excitement  in 
the  column.  Men  were  hurried  up  from  the  rear,  and  some 
came  back  from  the  front  to  the  scene  of  the  affair. 

The  division  crossed  Fish  river  the  same  evening,  and  went 
into  camp  with  the  rest  of  the  corps. 

Demonstration  on  the  Western  Shore. — ^While  the  main  army 
was  moving  up  the  east  shore,  a  demonstration  was  also  made 
on  the  west  shore,  to  create  the  impression  that  the  principal 
movement  was  there  to  be  made.  At  noon,  on  the  18th,  Col. 
J.  B.  Moore,  with  his  brigade — First  of  Third  division.  Six- 
teenth corps — consisting  of  the  Thirty-third  Wisconsin,  Ninety- 
fifth  and  Seventy-second  Illinois,  and  Forty-fom^th  Missouri — 
seventeen  hundred  effective — and  two  Bodman  g-uns  of  the 
First  Indiana  light  battery,  embarked  for  Cedar  point.  Arriv- 
ing there,  the  pier  was  found  nearly  destroyed,  and  the  men 
landed  by  passing  in  single  file  over  a  slight  trestle-work.  The 
confederates  occupied  the  point  in  small  force,  which  was  driven 
back  two  miles,  without  any  trouble,  by  the  Seventy-second 
Hinois,  Lieut.-Col.  Stockton  commanding.  The  artillery  was 
landed  by  means  of  a  temporary  raft  made  with  boats ;  and 
commencing  repairs  on  the  pier  at  daylight  the  next  morning, 
the  horses  were  got  on  shore  by  tei.,  and  at  two,  P.  M.,  Moore 
moved  forward,  and  at  ^Alabama  point,  two  miles  up  the  bay, 


CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE.  37 

met  the  confederate  outposts,  consisting  of  two  mounted  com- 
panies, wliicli  fell  back  with  shght  resistance,  the  Ninety-fifth 
Illinois,  Col.  Blanding,  being  in  the  advance  and  pui'suing  them. 
At  fi:Ve,  P.  M.,  Moore  went  into  camp,  and  that  night  and  the 
next  morning  had  the  calls  repeated  three  or  four  times,  to 
impress  the  enemy  with  the  magnitude  of  his  forces.  At  eight 
o'clock  the  next  morning  (20th),  he  advanced  to  Fowle  river, 
where  he  met  some  resistance,  the  confederates  having  set  the 
bridge  on  fire  and  taken  position  on  the  opposite  side ;  but  he 
brought  up  his  two  guns  and  threw  over  some  skirmishers 
without  difficulty.  Here  he  halted,  not  having  orders  to  go 
further,  and  was  gratified  to  learn  that  his  force  had  been  re- 
ported in  Mobile,  at  from  four  thousand  to  six  thousand.  In 
this  vicinity,  and  at  different  points  on  the  road,  some  torpedoes 
were  found,  which  were  narrowly  escaped ;  and  what  was  more 
singular,  respectable  American  inhabitants  were  found  who  had 
never  seen  the  United  States  flag,  and  desked  Colonel  Moore 
to  show  it  to  them,  which  he  did.  On  the  22d,  he  received 
orders  to  embark  for  Fish  river,  and  on  the  23d,  rejoined  his 
division. 

31ovement  of  the  Sixteenth  Corps. — The  Sixteenth  corps  moved 
on  transports  from  Fort  Gaines  to  Danley's  ferry  landing,  on 
north  bank  of  Fish  river  ;  and  the  boats  having  to  make  two 
trips,  the  movement  occupied  the  20th,  21st,  and  22d.  Carr  was 
ordered,  with  the  boats  carrying  his  division,  to  stand  boldly  up 
the  bay,  as  if  intending  to  land  on  the  main  shore,  and  then  fall 
back  and  enter  Fish  river,  which  was  done. 

Fish  river  is  a  dark,  narrow,  and  crooked  stream,  and  such 
boats  as  the  Tarrascon  and  Starlight  seemed  to  fill  it  to  its 
banks.  The  latter,  some  distance  from  its  mouth,  swell  into 
moderate  bluffs,  which  Avere  covered  with  a  generous  growth  of 
cypress,  magnoha,  and  pine,  and  fringed  with  a  variety  of 
flowers  and  shrubs.     Occasionally  a  house  was  passed,  the  poor 


38  CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE. 

inmates  of  wliicli,  haviag  but  a  feeble  conception  of  tlie  troops, 
habitually  bung  out  a  wbite  flag.  A  bald  eagle,  from  the  crest 
of  a  lofty  pine,  screamed  out  a  welcome  to  tbe  youthful  vete- 
rans who  tbickly  covered  the  decks ;  and  they,  remembering 
from  their  school-books  how  the  ancient  heroes  received  such 
an  omen,  accepted  this  as  a  favorable  augury,  and  shouted  out 
their  usual  cheers. 


11 


CHAPTER   YI. 

THREE  DAYS  AT  FISH  RIVER. 

The  Sixteenth  corps  remained  in  camp  at  Fish  river  for  the 
Thii'teenth  coi-jds  to  come  up  by  land,  and  for  supplies,  trans- 
portation, and  some  of  the  heavy  guns,  to  come  up  by  water. 

Fish  river,  at  Danley's  ferry,  is  eighty  yards  wide  and  the  cur- 
rent sluggish.  The  north  bank  is  moderately  high,  the  soil 
sandy,  and  covered  with  an  open  pine  forest.  Near  by  were  the 
ruins  of  a  mill,  and  four  or  five  humble  dwellings. 

Gen.  Carr  continued  the  brigade  drills  in  his  division  which  he 
had  commenced  at  Fort  Gaines,  soon  after  assuming  its  com- 
mand, and  constantly  improved  its  disciphne  and  efficiency. 
And,  in  subsequent  marches,  no  division  of  the  corps  was  so 
poorly  supplied  as  that  with  chickens  and  pigs  ;  nor  did  any 
division  have  higher  reputation  for  gallantry. 

All  this  while  the  confederate  Gen.  Lidell,  commanding  the 
eastern  division  district  of  the  gulf,  had  his  scouts  actively 
employed,  endeavoring  to  learn  Canby's  strength  and  move- 
ments,^ 


^  The  following  despatches,  as  to  movements  before  Spanish  fort,  are  copied 
from  Gen.  LideU's  Letter  and  Despatch  Book  : 

Capt.  Lewis  [A.  A.  A.  G.),  to  Capt.  Morgan,  commanding  cavalry  at  Montrose  : 
"  Hd.  Qrs.  East.  Div.  JDist.  Gulf,  Blakeiy,  March  20, 1865,  2:15  p.  m.— Don't  let 
the  enemy  come  up  the  eastern  shore,  or  from  Fish  river,  without  timely  notify- 
ing these  headquarters.  Watch  closeh',  and  don't  allow  yourself  to  be  surjirised. 
Give  timely  notice  to  Maj.  Kimball,  comd'g  the  infantry  near  Hollywood." 

Same  to  Lieut.-Gol.  Brown,  commanding  at  Spanish  Fort :  "  March  20, 5  p.  m. 
— Scrutinize  most  closely  all  persons  to  wham  you  give  passes,  and  pass  no 


40  CAMPAIGN     OP     MOBILE. 

The  23d,  tlie  confederate  cavalry  came  up  at  daylight  and  felt 
the  pickets  on  McArthur's  front.  Two  hours  afterward  thej  ad- 
vanced a  line  of  skirmishers  afoot,  in  which  skirmish  a  man  of 
the  Eighth  Wisconsin  was  seriously  wounded,  and  two  others 
slightly  wounded.  The  confederates  lost  one  killed  and  two 
wounded.  But  the  firing  was  more  general  and  protracted 
along  the  Hne  than  the  event  justified. 

The  navy  having  kept  pace  with  the  army,  on  the  24th, 
some  of  its  guns  shelled  the  woods  from  the  bay. 

woman  without  you  know  well  who  they  are.     There  is  a  Mrs. ,who,  it 

is  said,  is  a  spy  for  the  enemy,  and  whom  it  is  said  has  recently  obtained 
passes  from  Spanish  fort." 

Gen.  Lidell  to  Col.  Garner,  Chief  of  Staff,  Mobile :  "  BlaTcely,  Mar.  20.  .  .  .  At 
last  accounts,  since  dark.  Col.  Spence  was  at  Whitby's  bridge,  on  Fish  river, 
trying  to  make  discoveries  through  his  scouts  in  various  directions,  as  to  the 
locality  of  the  enemy." 

"  This  afternoon,  from  two  o'clock  to  dark,  fifteen  gunboats  have  been  shell- 
ing the  eastern  shore,  from  Ptock  creek  to  the  village,  about  six  miles.  No 
damage  done  except  to  houses Spanish  fort  is  in  a  less  state  of  prepara- 
tion now  than  this  place,  and  I  desire  to  put  all  the  work  on  it  I  can."  .... 

Gen.  Lidell  to  Col.  Spence,  commanding  cavalry,  Montrose:  "Mar.  21,  8:45 
p.  M. — Can  you  not  possibly  capture  some  of  the  enemy's  pickets,  to  find  out  the 
force  they  have  ?  If  you  cannot,  make  your  preparations  to  drive  them  in  to- 
morrow at  daylight,  to  see  what  they  have." 

Gen.  Lidell  to  Col.  Garner:  '■^  March  22,  11 1^  a.  m. — Col.  Spence  reports 
(8,  A.  M.)  that  he  failed  to  capture  the  enemj^'s  pickets  at  Danley's  mill  last 
night,  as  chain  pickets  were  too  close  to  the  main  body.  Discovered  only 
infantry  as  yet.  No  force  has  landed  on  bay  shore."  .... 
.  Same  to  Same:  "  March  22. — Despatch  just  received  from  Lieut.  Sibley,  that 
a  prisoner,  captured  on  East  Prong  of  Fish  river,  states  he  belongs  to  Ninety- 
first  Illinois  regiment,  Thirteenth  army  corps,  Gen.  Granger  commanding,  com- 
prising 9,000  (nine  thousand)  men.  Three  regiments  were  in  the  advance  at 
Danley's  mill — three  regiments  near  Magnolia,  as  yet  but  fifteen  pieces  of  ar- 
tillery with  them — balance  coming.  Assisted  in  loading  the  wagons,  and  heard 
Commissary  say  that  he  had  issued  rations  for  nine  thousand  men." 

Lidell  to  Maury :  "  March  23,  8  :  45  a.  m. — Every  man  sent  to  the  enemy's 
lines  has  either  been  imable  to  get  admission,  or,  if  admitted,  has  not  returned 
to  report." 

Cajjt.  Leivis  to  Capt.  Bush  Jones,  commanding  infantry,  near  Hollywood : 
"  March  23,  4 :  50  p.  m. — Col.  Spence  reports,  that  the  men  you  sent  hun  re- 
fused to  advance  upon  the  enemy,  and  the  general  directs  that  you  furnish  him 
better  men." 


CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE.  41 

At  this  time  some  disappointment  was  being  felt  in  the 
camp  for  the  hxck  of  mails. 

Such  of  the  soldiers  as  were  disposed  assembled  in  rehgioiis 
meetings  when  cu-cumstances  j^ermitted.  One  pleasant  even- 
ning,  in  Gilbert's  brigade  (Garrard's  division,  Sixteenth  corps), 
a  thousand  men  were  assembled,  and  the  woods  being  ht  up 
by  fires  of  pine-knots,  the  soldiers  poured  forth  their  fervent 
prayers  and  joined  their  voices  in  sacred  hymns.  Nor  will 
those  who  remember  such  heroes  as  Havelock  deny  that 
piety  is  a  help  to  valor. 

On  the  25th,  Canby  moved  forward  with  both  corps  and 
some  of  the  heavy  artiUerj?-;  the  men  carrying  four  days' 
rations  in  haversacks.  The  Thirtieth  Missouri  was  left  to 
guard  the  pontoon  bridge.  The  Sixteenth  corps  marched  at 
eight,  A.  M.  Hubbard's  brigade  of  McArtliur's  division  being 
in  the  advance.  The  Thirteenth  corps  was  under  Avay  by 
one,  P.  M. 

McArthur's  division  had  got  but  a  short  distance  when 
a  small  force  of  the  confederates  was  met,  which  was 
steadily  pressed  back  by  four  companies  of  the  Ninth  Min- 
nesota deployed  as  skii-mishers.  There  was  more  or  less 
skii-mishing  during  the  day,  but  the  column  was  not  retarded. 
Col.  Marshall,  commanding  Third  brigade.  First  di^asion.  Six- 
teenth coi*ps,  was  wounded  in  the  back  of  his  neck  by  the 
ball  of  a  sharpshooter,  but  stopped  only  long  enough  to  have 
the  wound  dressed.  The  Sixteenth  corps  camped  at  Deer 
Park,  having  marched  twelve  mUes.  The  Thirteenth  coi-ps 
encamped  in  the  same  neighborhood.  And  the  troops  in- 
trenched in  compUance  with  the  general  order. 

Bertram's  brigade  of  Second  division,  Thirteenth  corps,  had 
had  moved  on  the  left  road  to  Montrose.  At  this  place,  which 
is  a  pleasant  summer  resort,  the  inhabitants  were  all  con- 
federates, and   some  of  their   cavahy  had  been  there   during 


42  CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE. 

the  day.  One  of  tlie  ladies  in  a  defiant  manner  told  a  regi- 
mental commander  he  would  find  his  match  on  the  morrow — 
that  Sherman  had  lately  been  defeated  with  great  loss,  and 
that  victory  had  now  turned  in  their  favor ;  a  fair  specimen 
of  stories  which  were  ever  being  reported  and  did  much  to 
keep  up  the  spirits  of  the  confederates. 

The  next  day,  26th,  Bertram's  brigade  moved  to  D'Olieve's 
creek  over  a  hilly  road,  the  confederate  cavalry  hanging  along 
their  front  all  the  way.  The  bridge  over  the  creek  had  been 
destroyed,  and  both  banks  at  the  ford  were  thickly  planted 
with  torpedoes,  and  in  attempting  to  cross,  the  explosions 
fatally  wounded  three  men  and  killed  four  horses ;  fifty  torpe- 
does were  there  taken  up  the  next  day.  Being  now  in  the 
vicinity  of  Spanish  fort,  the  brigade  camped  on  the  creek ; 
Benton's  division  of  the  Thirteenth  corps  being  in  sight  on 
the  right.  There  were  indications  of  the  presence  of  confed- 
erate infantry,  a  few  of  whom  were  captured  by  Bertram's 
brigade.  During  the  day  its  scouts  had  captured  a  confed- 
erate telegraph  station  with  the  latest  despatches. 

Granger,  with  Veatch's  and  Benton's  divisions — the  former 
in  the  advance — after  getting  two  miles  from  Deer  Pa,rk, 
turned  to  the  left  on  a  road  running  northwesterly,  and  struck 
D'Olieve's  creek  about  noon  a  mile  to  the  right  of  Bertram. 
The  banks  were  here  high  and  somewhat  steep,  but  the  stream 
was  not  wide,  and  a  bridge  was  soon  made,  over  which  the 
column  passed.  Ascending  the  hill  on  the  north  bank,  the 
column  soon  moved  down  its  opposite  side,  where  was  another 
stream,  which  was  bridged  and  crossed ;  and  after  rising  the 
high  ground  beyond,  both  divisions  went  into  camp,  Veatch's 
in  front  and  in  Hne  of  battle.  The  train  and  rear-guard  were 
not  all  in  till  nine  in  the  evening. 

The  Twenty-first  Iowa,  Lieut.-Col.  Van  Anda  commanding, 
had  been  in  the  advance  all  day ;    and  the  skirmishers  from 


CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE.  43 

that  regiment,  imder  Maj.  Boardman,  with  those  from  the 
Ninetj-ninth  Tlh'nois,  Col.  A.  C.  Matthews,  had  been  warmly 
engaged  at  dift'erent  times.  Granger  rode  along  the  line  at 
dusk,  and  thinking  the  pickets  not  far  enough  out,  ordered  an 
advance.  The  skirmishers  with  theu'  reserves  then  moved  for- 
ward half  a  mile  up  a  gradual  rise  in  the  pine  timber ;  and 
the  leaves  and  underbrush  having  been  fired  by  the  confed- 
erates, the  hght  gave  the  latter  a  full  view  of  what  was  com- 
ing ;  whereupon  they  rose  up,  gave  a  heavy  volley  of  musketry, 
but  soon  fell  back.  The  fire  was  promptly  returned,  and  Gran- 
ger, being  in  the  advance,  narrowly  escaped ;  for  it  was  dark, 
and  he  was  a  few  moments  between  the  fire  of  his  own 
reserves  and  that  of  the  confederates.  In  the  Twenty-first 
Iowa,  Private  Allen  was  killed,  and  three  men  were  wounded. 
In  the  Ninety-ninth  Illinois,  Private  Eobinson  was  killed.  At 
midnight  both  regiments  were  reheved  by  the  Forty-seventh 
Indiana,  and  One  Hundred  and  Sixty-first  New  York. 

Leaving  Spanish  fort  three  miles  on  its  left,  the  Sixteenth 
corps  marched  on  a  direct  route  to  C.  Sibley's  mill.  Gan'ard's 
division  had  the  advance,  and  at  the  head  of  the  column,  the 
Tenth  Kansas,  Lieut.-Col.  HOls,  and  four  companies  of  the 
Sixth  Minnesota,  under  Major  H.  S.  Bailey,  were  deployed  as 
skirmishers.  Sharp  firing  commenced  as  soon  as  the  head  of 
the  column  had  moved  a  mile,  and  continued  all  the  way. 
there  being  a  detention  of  two  hours.  But  no  serious  resistance 
was  met  till  the  bridge  at  Sibley's  mill  was  reached,  which  was 
finally  crossed,  and  the  corps  went  into  camp  on  high  ground, 
a  mUe  north  of  Bayou  Minette,  on  which  Sibley's  mill  is 
situated,  the  distance  marched  being  ten  miles.  Of  the  con- 
federates who  were  killed,  three  were  buried  near  the  bridge,, 
and  there  were  some  wounded.  The  Sixth  Mhmesota  lost  twc 
men  captured,  and  the  Tenth  Kansas  two  wounded.  The  sec- 
ond Tennessee  (federal)  cavahy  had  two  men  wounded. 


44  CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE. 

.  Plans  and  Position  of  the  Confederates. — At  this  time  the 
confederate  department  commander  was  Lieut.-Gen.  Eicliard 
Taylor,  headquarters  at  Meredian,  Mississippi ;  Maj.-Gen.  D. 
H.  Maury  was  in  command  of  the  district  of  the  gulf,  with 
headquarters  at  Mobile. 

The  garrison  of  Mobile,  including  troops  on  eastern  shore, 
numbered  about  nine  thousand.^  There  were,  on  the  27th  of 
March,  also  upward  of  a  thousand  blacks  subject  to  the  orders 
of  the  engineer.  Lieut.-Gen.  Taylor  telegraphed  Lee  that  he 
was  ready  to  receive  any  attack  that  might  be  made  there.^ 
Maury's  command  also  embraced  the  garrisons  on  the  eastern 
shore,  where  the  senior  officer  was  Brig.-Gen.  Lidell.  The 
latter's  headquarters  had  been  at  a  cottage  on  the  Blakely  road, 
about  a  mile  outside  of  the  fortifications  at  Blakely,  his  troops 
being  camped  on  the  high  ground  in  an  open  pine  forest  a  Kttle 
further  to  the  front.  These  forces  comprised  French's  division, 
then  commanded  by  Brig.-Gen.  Cockrell,  including  the  brigades 
of  Col.  Gates  and  Col.  Barry ;  the  brigades  of  Brig, -Gens.  J.  T. 
Holtzclaw  and  E.  L.  Gibson ;  Ector's  Texas  brigade,  then  com- 
manded by  Col.  Andrews,  and  Gen.  Thomas'  Alabama  re- 
serves— the  whole  effective  infantry  numbering  about  six  thou- 
sand. There  were  also  three  hundred  cavalry,  and  inside  the 
works  several  batteries.  All  of  these  troops,  except  the  reserves, 
and  perhaps  the  cavaby,   were  veterans    from  Hood's   army. 


1  Lieut.-Gen.  Taylor  to  Maury:  "  iliarc7^  24, 1865. — Should  the  enemy  give 
Mobile  the  '  go  by,'  and  march  on  Selma  or  Montgomery,  it  may  become 
necessary  suddenly  to  throw  six  or  seven  thousand  infantry  up  the  river  from 
Mobile,  to  assist  the  cavahy." 

2  Taylor  to  Lee :  "  March  27. — Enemy  has  thrown  his  large  force  to  eastern 
side  of  Mobile  bay,  leaving  nothing  on  west  side.  I  am  ready  to  receive  any 
attack  he  may  make  at  Mobile." 

Taylor  to  Maury :  "  March  25. — ^If  Steele  is  marching  to  Montgomery,  you 
ought,  by  concentrating,  be  able  to  whip  the  force  approaching  the  Spanish 
fort." 


CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE.  45 

Holtzclaw's  brigade  was  still  farther  to  tlie  front,  on  outpost 
duty  at  O.  Sibley's  mill  (four  miles  noi-tli  of  C,  Siblej^'s),  where 
were  some  breastworks  and  a  few  light  guns.  In  the  road  were 
a  number  of  torpedoes. 

On  the  23d,  while  Col.  Spence  with  cavalry  was  scouting 
toward  Fish  river,  an  infantry  suppoii;  under  Col.  Bush  Jones 
of  Alabama,  was  at  Hollywood.  On  the  24th,  Gen,  Gibson  with 
a  column  of  infantry  and  artillery  had  moved  down  to  the 
"village,"  eight  miles  below  Spanish  fort,  and  there  halted. 
The  same  evening,  Bertram's  brigade  having  pushed  forward 
resolutely  to  Montrose,  three  miles  from  the  A'illage,  and 
Canby's  other  columns  being  on  the  move,  Gibson  faced 
about  and  took  position  on  the  hill  north  of  D'Olieve's  creek, 
and  there  remained  on  the  25th.  Gen.  Cockrell  with  his 
division  was  now  (the  25th)  posted  four  miles  northeast  of 
Gibson  at  Alexis  spring,  being  three  miles  south  of  C.  Sib- 
ley's mill.  Capt.  Tutt  was  ordered  to  withdraw  from  Green- 
wood to  Sibley's  mill  and  scout  on  the  road  to  Durant's.  Col. 
Spence  was  skii-mishing  in  front  of  Bertram's  brigade  which 
he  took  for  a  division,'  and  was  instructed  by  Lidell,  if  pressed 
across  D'OKeve's  creek,  to  return  by  Alexis  spring  and  the 
Sibley  road.  That  forenoon  Lidell  was  at  Spanish  fort;  and 
thinking  that  Granger's  corps  only  was  approaching,  and 
judging  from  the  bad  roads  that  the  divisions  would  be  sepa- 
rated, had  concluded  to  offer  battle  the  next  morning  on  the 
north  bank  of  D'OKeve's  creek,  where  the  ground  is  high  and 
hilly;  and  this  was  approved  by  the  generals  under  him. 
Gibson  with  two  brigades  was  to  form  on  the  right,  Cock- 
rell with  three    brigades    on    the   left,   and    Holtzclaw  being 

1  Qen.  Lilell  to  Col.  Spenve,  "commanding  near  village ;"  " BlaJcehf,  March 
25. — I  will  be  iit  D'Olieve's  ford  early  to-morrow,  say  by  seven  o'clock.  Can 
you  ascertain  how  far  this  division  is  in  advance  of  the  main  body  of  the  army  ? 
Can  we  attack  it  before  support  can  come  to  it  ?" 


46  CAMPAIGN     OF    MOBILE. 

held  in  the  rear  would,  as  soon  as  the  engagement  com- 
menced, move  round  and  strike  the  federals  on  their  right 
flank.  And  they  estimated  that  their  effective  force  of  in- 
fantry would  be  about  six  thousand. 

Gibson  already  occupied  the  proposed  line,  having,  the  after- 
noon of  the  25th,  three  thousand  in  hne  of  battle.  That 
evening,  LideU  learned  that  the  Sixteenth  corps  was  also 
advancing  with  the  Thirteenth,  and  so  fast  that  he  feared  he 
would  not  be  able  to  get  the  rest  of  his  forces  concentrated 
in  season.  He  appeared  to  have  been  active  day  and  night 
ehciting  information  and  making  the  best  possible  use  of  his 
troops.^  The  next  morning,  finding  his  position  was  being 
flanked  by  the   Sixteenth  corps,  the  proposed  offer  of  battle 

1   Capt.  Lewis  to  Gen.  HoUzclaw  :  "  Blalcely,  March  26. — The  Brig.-G-en.  com- 
manding directs  that  you  push  forward  your  work  as  much  as  possible  in  cut- 
ting down  the  timber  in  front  of  your  position.  .....  The  enemy  are  in  force 

on  the  D'Olieve  and  Blakely  road,  in  front  of  Spanish  fort,  and  their  fleet  mass- 
ing off  Hollywood  and  Montrose.  Please  send  at  once  what  information  you 
get  from  your  scouts." 

Lidell  to  Gibson :  "  March  26. — Some  of  our  cavalry  are  cut  off  between 
Spanish  fort  and  Bay  Minette.  The  enemy  are  advancing  by  Sibley's  mills  ;  if 
they  come  by  you  keep  them  at  Spanish  fort." 

Lidell  to  Maury :  "  Blakely,  March  25,  9:20  p.  m. — Our  views  fully  coincide  ; 
unless  able  to  concentrate,  shall  not  risk  engagement  in  detail.  Will  return  to 
front  by  seven  a.  m.  to-morrow,  and  soon  afterwards  hope  to  meet  you  at  Span- 
ish fort ;  please  not  to  fail  to  come.  Enemy's  advance  division,  live  to  six 
thousand,  headed  by  five  hundred  cavalry — ^no  ordnance  or  ambulance  wagons. 
Gen.  Gibson's  scouts  saw  enemy's  column,  and  captured  the  prisoner  (drafts- 
man) sent  over.  A  map  in  his  possession  embraced  the  eastern  shore  only  to 
Blakely — showing  the  design  of  enemy  to  get  possession  of  this  side." 

Lidell  to  Maury:  "  Hd.  Qrs.,  near  {0.)  Sibley's,  March  26, 12:30  p.  m.— Tour 
despatch  received  while  engaged  placing  troops  in  position  at  this  place.  The 
enemy  is  at  Cyrus  Sibley's  miU,  and  halted  just  now.  He  made  too  wide  a  cir- 
cuit for  me  to  concentrate  the  command  on  him.  Gen.  Gibson  was  at  D'Olieve 
creek,  and  another  column  was  reported  moving  in  that  direction.  I  have  not 
heard  from  Gen.  Gibson  since  reaching  this  point.  C.  Sibley's  miU  is  four  miles 
distant." 

Same  to  Gibson:  "  3Iarch  26  {Sibley's). — Enemy  stopped  four  miles  from  this 
point.     What  is  in  your  front  ?" 


CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE.  47 

outside  of  the  works  was  abandoned.  The  troops  that  be- 
longed at  Blakelj  were  ordered  to  retne  in  that  direction. 
Cocki'ell  withdi'ew  over  the  Bay  Minette  bridge,  burned  it, 
and  passing  round  near  Blakely,  moved  out  on  the  Sibley 
road  to  watch  the  Sixteenth  corps.  Gibson  was  ordered  to 
fall  back  into  Spanish  fort ;  but  to  develop  the  attacking 
army  before  doing  so ;  which  we  shall  see  was  in  a  gallant 
manner  done. 


CHAPTER    Til. 

SPAXISH  FORT— ITS  EsTESTMEXT. 

The  line  of  field  fortifications  known  as  Sx^anisli  fort  is  on  tlie 
bay  sliore,  seven  miles  due  east  of  Mobile.  The  trayeller  leay- 
ing  the  Montgomeiy  raihoad,  and  proceeding  by  steamer  from 
Tensas  to  Mobile,  in  a  few  minutes  comes  in  sight  of  Blakelv. 
Passing  on,  he  Trill,  in  half  an  hour,  discern  off  to  his  left,  and 
beyond  some  low,  marshy  islands,  a  dealing,  on  the  wooded 
shore,  and  a  high,  red  bluff.  This  latter  is  the  site  of  Spanish 
fort. 

Old  Spanish  fort  is  a  bastioned  work,  nearly  enclosed,  and 
built  on  a  bluff  whose  shape  projects  abruptly  to  the  water.  Its 
parapet,  on  the  bay  side,  was  partly  natural,  being  made  by 
excavating  the  earth  from  the  side  of  the  bluff,  and  was  thirty 
feet  in  thickness.  The  fort  was  armed  with  YH-iiich  colum- 
biads  and  thirty-pounder  Parrotts — the  latter  made  at  Selma — 
and  was  designated  as  No.  1.  Extending  around  that,  ia 
a  semicircle,  was  a  continuous  line  of  breastworks  and  re- 
doubts. The  right  of  this  line  commenced  four  hundred  yards 
down  the  shore,  on  the  highest  and  most  prominent  bluff,  up- 
ward of  one  hinidi'ed  feet  above  the  water,  with  a  strong, 
enclosed  fort,  called  McDermett  (No.  2),  and  armed  with  ten 
heavy  guns.  The  slope  of  the  bluff,  toward  the  bay,  is  precipi- 
tous, and  from  its  base  to  the  water  is  a  marsh  two  hundred 
yards  wide,  on  which  the  timber  had  been  felled.  To  the  north 
and  left  the  descent  was  gradual,  along  which  extended  a  line  of 
lifle-pits,  crossmg  a  ravine  and  stream  of  water,  and  then  up  the 


CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE.  49 

slope  of  another  bluff,  on  wbicli  was  a  strong  batteiy,  designated 
as  No.  3.  From  there  the  line  of  works  continued  six  hundred 
yards  in  a  northerly  direction,  and  then  tui-ned  towaixl  the  bay, 
striking  the  marsh  on  Bay  Minette  at  a  point  about  a  mile 
above  old  Spanish  fort.  This  outer  line  of  works  was  upward  of 
two  miles  in  length,  and  the  batteries  were  all  on  high  and  com- 
manding ground.  The  surface  was  covered  with  open  pine 
timber,  but  in  front  of  the  outer  line  of  works  the  trees  were 
felled  for  a  few  hundred  yards.  Every  ravine  had  borne  a 
hea^-y  gTOwth  of  hard  wood,  which,  having  been  slashed,  made, 
■^\Tith  the  underbrush  and  vines,  an  almost  impassable  obstruc- 
tion. The  ditch  in  front  of  the  breastworks  was  five  feet  deep 
and  eight  feet  wide,  but  in  front  of  Fort  McDermett  it  was 
deeper  and  wider.  In  fi'ont  of  the  batteries  were,  also,  detached 
rifle-pits,  for  shai'pshooters ;  and  along  the  enth'e  fi'ont  was  a 
line  of  abatis  fifteen  feet  wide.  On  the  extreme  left  the  works 
were  unfinished. 

Toward  the  interior  the  surface  continued  undulating  and 
wooded ;  but  no  spot  was  so  commanding  as  the  bare  crest  of 
McDermett. 

The  reader  vnR  bear  in  mind  that  these  fortifications  were 
made  to  cover  and  protect  the  island  batteries  Huger  and  Tracy, 
which  were  three  thousand  yards  distant. 

Attach  on  the  Federal  Picl^eis. — At  daylight,  on  the  morning 
of  the  27th,  a  detachment  of  four  hundred  confederate  infantry, 
imder  command  of  Col.  Eichard  Lindsay,  carefully  moved  down 
within  musket-range  of  Veatch's  picket,  fired  a  volley,  and, 
"«-ith  a  yell,  charged  between  the  flanks  of  the  Forty-seventh 
Indiana  and  One  Hundred  and  Sixt3'-first  New  York.  The 
right  of  the  latter  regiment  was  driven  back  in  some  confu- 
sion towards  the  main,  line,  but  shortly  regained  its  position. 
The  confederates  got  near  enough  to  see  the  strong  fi'ont  of 
Veatch's  division,  which  was  quickly  in  line  behind  theii'  newly- 

4 


50  CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE. 

made  breastworks,  but  were  soon  compelled  to  retire.  Tlie 
firing  was  brisk  for  a  few  minutes,  and  tlie  confederates  lost 
one  officer  and  several  men  wounded,  ^  Tlie  loss  of  the  Forty- 
seventh  Indiana  was  three  men  wounded. 

Investment  of  Spanish  Fort. — Gen.  Carr  learned,  late  on  the 
evening  of  the  26th,  that  the  Sixteenth  corps  would,  turn  back 
in  the  morning  against  Spanish  fort ;  and  knowing  it  would 
be  his  turn  in  the  advance,  he  gave  the  requisite  instructions 
to  his  brigade  commanders.  The  morning  of  the  27th  came 
with  a  prospect  of  heavy  rain,  which  to  veteran  soldiers  was 
some  sign  of  a  battle.  The  men  had  taken  their  accustomed 
breakfast,  of  hard-bread,  coffee,  and  a  shce  of  bacon,  toasted 
on  a  stick — as  Achilles  cooked  the  fat  chine  at  the  feast  for 
the  heroes.  The  usual  hum  of  talk  and  speculation  was  heard 
around  the  exphing  fires  of  then*  bivouac.  By  the  men  in 
the  ranks  all  plans  of  strategy  are  freely  canvassed ;  and  up 
to  this  morning  they  had  expected  to  move  on  to  the  Alabama 
]iver.  Soon  was  heard  the  spirited  roll  on  the  drum  to  "fall 
in,"  greeted  by  that  habitual  and  never-to-be-forgotten  shout 
or  cheer  of  the  men.  Then  the  cartridge-box,  with  its  "  forty 
rounds"  is  buckled  on ;  the  blanket  is  twisted  up  and  thrown 
around  the  shoulders  ;  the  intrenching  tools  are  picked  up  ; 
the  muskets  taken  ;  each  company  is  formed,  the  roll  called, 
and  at  the  time  fixed,  whether  in  ten  or  fifteen  minutes,  the 
regiments  are  in  hne. 

Leaving  Garrard's  division  at  Sibley's  mill.  Smith  put  the 
First  and  Thhd  divisions  of  his  corps  in  motion.  Carr's  (Third) 
division  had  the  advance,  with  Geddes'  (Thhd)  brigade  ui  ad- 


1  Gibson  to  Lidell :  "  Spanish  Fort,  Marcli  27,  7:35  a.  m. — Droye  in  the 
enemy's  skirmisliers  at  daylight,  capturing  guns,  knapsacks,  and  blankets. 
They  ran  back  to  their  log  works,  and  appeared  in  a  strong  and  extended  line 
of  battle.  We  had  several  men  wounded.  Several  launches  discovered  sound- 
ing in  the  cove  below.     The  guns  will  drive  them  aAvay." 


II 


CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE.  51 

vance  of  tlie  division  ;  and  at  the  Lead  of  tlie  column  was  the 
Eightj-first  Illinois,  numbering  three  hundi-ed,  five  companies 
of  which,  under  Col.  A.  W.  Rogers,  were  deployed  as  sldr- 
oiishers,  with  the  other  five  companies,  under  Capt.  S.  L.  Camp- 
bell, in  reserve.  In  these  woods  were  numerous  trails  which 
had  been  made  in  hauling  lumber  to  the  neighboring  mills, 
and  the  guns  being  silent  at  Spanish  fort,  the  column  had  to 
find  its  way  as  best  it  could. 

SJdrmish  at  Minette  Bridge. — Carr  had  gone  four  miles,  and 
his  advance,  the  Eighty-first  Illinois,  had  just  passed  the  brow 
of  the  hill  overlooking  Minette  bayou,  where  the  day  before  the 
bridge  had  been  burned,  when  suddenly  a  volley  came  from  a 
confederate  regiment,  concealed  in  the  bushes,  four  hundred 
yards  distant,  on  the  opposite  side.  This  was  the  Twenty-first 
Alabama,  Lieut.-Col.  James  M.  Williams,  having  two  hundred 
and  twenty-five  men.  Gen.  Smith  narrowly  escaped,  and  some 
shots  took  effect  in  the  Eighty-first.  Col.  Rogers  returned  the 
fire  smartly,  and  was  ordered  by  General  Smith  to  remain 
there  with  his  regiment  and  hold  that  position. 

The  One  Hundred  and  Twenty-fourth  Elinois,  Col.  John  H. 
Howe  commanding,  then  took  the  advance,  with  five  of  his 
companies  deployed  as  skirmishers. 

When  within  about  a  mile  of  Spanish  fort,  Gen.  Smith 
caused  both  divisions  to  deploy  in  line  of  battle,  and  it  was  his 
purpose,  of  course,  to  have  his  movements  concealed  from  the 
enemy. 

Carr's  division,  on  the  right,  had  formed  in  two  lines ;  the 
first  consisting  of  the  Third  (Geddes')  brigade,  the  One  Hun- 
dred and  Eighth  Illinois  on  the  right,  the  Eighth  Iowa  on  the 
left,  the  One  Himdred  and  Twenty-fourth  Illinois  deployed  as 
skirmishers  in  front.  The  second  line,  consisting  of  the  First 
(Moore's)  and  the  Second  (Ward's)  brigades;  Moore's  having 
the  Thirty-third  Wisconsin   on  the  right,  the  Seventy-second 


52  CAMPAIGN     OP     MOBILE. 

Illinois  in  the  centre,  the  Ninety-fifth  niinois  on  the  left,  and 
the  Forty-fourth  Missouri  in  reserve ;  and  Ward's,  having  the 
Fourteenth  Wisconsin  on  the  right,  the  Forty-ninth  Missouri 
in  the  centre,  the  Fortieth  Missouri  on  the  left.  The  latter 
brigade  had  wheeled  into  line  on  the  double-quick,  and  had 
been  a  few  minutes  in  position,  when  the  corps  commander 
rode  along  with  a  stern  countenance.  At  sight  of  their  "chief," 
the  men  of  the  Forty-ninth  Missouri  gave  a  cheer  which  could 
be  heard  in  the  confederate  lines.  Thus  foiled  ia  his  efforts  to 
conceal  the  position,  he  rebuked  the  men  in  a  few  hasty  words. 
In  half  a  minute  a  shell  from  the  confederate  works  came 
screeching  through  the  trees,  and  dropped  close  to  the  men 
who  had  cheered.  It  did  not  burst  as  it  fell,  and  the  men  gave 
back  a  little.  Seeing  this,  Smith  cried  out  to  them  :  "  Stand  up 
to  it !     Tou  had  no  business  cheering." 

Carr's  centre  and  the  light  batteries  approached  by  the 
Blakely  road.  Sharp  skirmishing  commenced  about  ten,  A.  M., 
when  within  a  mile  of  Spanish  fort.  The  confederate  sharp- 
shooters were  in  advance  of  their  rifle-pits,  using  the  hills  and 
trees  for  cover. 

At  this  hour,  McArthur's  division  was  in.  line  on  the  left  of 
Carr ;  and  connecting  with  the  left  of  tlie  Sixteenth  corps, 
Granger  had  come  up  with  the  Thirteenth  corps ;  so  that  the 
investment  was  nearly  complete.  The  troops  advanced  with 
alacrity,  their  banners  all  unfurled.  Their  line  was  three  miles 
in  length,  and  presented  a  splendid  appearance  moving  through 
the  open  woods.  Sharp  skirmishing  was  constant  along  the 
whole  front.  The  confederates,  apprehending  an  assault,  also 
kept  up  a  vehement  shelling  with  their  heavy  and  light  gims. 
And  there  was  aU  the  clamor  and  stir  of  battle. 

The  confederates  had  the  advantage  of  being  on  the  defensive, 
and  being  concealed,  while  the  federals  had  the  disadvantage  of 
exposure,  in  pressing  forward  against  the  fire  of  sharpshooters. 


CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE.  63 

and  over  the  obstacles  on  tlie  ground  ;  but,  at  tlie  same  time, 
tliej  bad  the  moral  advantage  there  is  in  the  prestige  and  mo- 
mentum of  constantly  gaining  gi'ound. 

Up  to  noon  no  federal  artillery  had  opened,  but  the  light  bat- 
teries of  each  division  -were  near  by  in  the  hollows.  A  httle 
after  noon,  Carr  caused  the  Fourteenth  Indiana  light  battery, 
Capt.  F.  W.  Morse,  to  open  from  a  ridge  about  eight  hundred 
yards  fi'om  Eed  fort,  and  near  the  position  after^vard  occu- 
pied by  the  naval  battery.  Capt.  Morse's  fii-e  "^as  rephed  to 
with  spirit  dui'ing  the  afternoon,  and  many  shots  fell  close,  but 
no  injury  was  sustained.  Soon  afterward,  the  Fh-st  Indiana 
light  battery,  Capt.  L.  Jacoby,  opened  from  a  prominent  posi- 
tion, a  little  to  the  left  and  front  of  the  Fourteenth.  Both  bat- 
teries were  supported  by  Moore's  brigade. 

It  was  now  toward  the  middle  of  the  afternoon.  The  rain 
was  coming  down  in  a  steady  pour,  and  the  fierceness  of  the 
artniery  fii'e  had  abated. 

Carr,  expecting  to  be  ordered  to  assault,  and  feeHng  confident 
the  works  could  be  carried  in  his  front,  exerted  himself  to  keep 
his  lines  compact. 

The  One  Hundred  and  Twenty-fourth  Illinois  had  pressed  on 
fearlessly,  gaining  distance  of  half  a  mile  in  advance  of  its  bri- 
gade, when  the  confederate  skirmishers  were  met  and,  after  a 
warm  contest,  driven  precipitously  into  their  works.  Five  of 
that  regiment  fell,  including  its  adjutant,  Lieut.  W.  E.  Smith, 
and  the  color-sergeant.  On  the  extreme  right  was  the  One 
Hundred  and  Eighth  niinois,  Col.  Charles  Turner,  which  sus- 
tained a  loss  of  six.  Its  skii'mishers  were  commanded  by  Capt. 
W.  M.  Bullock,  a  daring  and  efiicient  officer,  who  fell,  vrith  his 
thigh  badly  shattered  by  a  musket-ball ;  but  he  refused  to  allow 
any  of  the  men  to  expose  themselves  in  helping  him  away,  and 
dr-agged  liimself  to  the  rear.  The  Eighth  Iowa,  distinguished 
for  disciphne  and  gallantry,  Lieut.-Col.  Bell  commanding,  was 


54  CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE. 

next  on  tlie  left,  and  had  tliii'teen  men  wounded  by  musketry, 
and  of  tliis  number  six  were  non-commissioned  officers. 

Next  on  the  left,  in  Moore's  brigade,  was  the  Thirty-thhd 
Wisconsin,  which  sustained  a  loss  of  six  wounded,  including 
Maj.  George  R.  Franli:.  The  loss  in  the  Seventy-second  Illi- 
nois was  two,  and  in  the  Ninety-iifth  Ilhnois  four.  In  Ward's 
brigade  there  was  a  loss  of  one  man  in  each  regiment.  So  that 
the  whole  casualties  in  Carr's  division  were  thii'ty-nine.  The 
confederates  in  his  front  had  been  driven  into  their  main  works, 
and  his  line  was  established  six  hundred  yards  on  an  average 
therefi-om.     The  ensuing  night  the  division  busily  intrenched. 

The  advance  along  the  left  had  conformed  to  the  right  and 
with  nearly  similar  re'sults. 

3IcArtlmr's  Division,  Sixteenth  Corps. — McArthur's  division 
came  squarely  up  opposite  the  Eed  fort,  and  began  to  encounter 
a  stubborn  resistance  from  the  confederates  at  ten  in  the  morn- 
ing, nearly  a  mile  from  that  work.  The  ground  was  weU  con- 
tested ;  but  before  noon  the  confederates  had  been  pressed  back 
behind  their  main  works ;  the  main  line  of  the  division  had  got 
within  about  twelve  hundred  yards  of  those  works ;  a  halt  was 
ordered  and  the  men  made  to  lie  down.  Meantime,  the  skirmish- 
ers of  the  division  had  pushed  their  way  some  hundreds  of  yards 
farther.  In  the  First  (McMillen's)  brigade  on  the  right  the  casu- 
alties were  one  iii  the  Thu-ty-thii-d  ULinois,  three  in  the  Tenth 
Minnesota,  two  in  the  Twenty-sixth  Indiana,  and  one  in  the  Sev- 
enty-second Ohio.  The  Second  (Hubbard's)  brigade  was  in  the 
centre,  and  suffered  the  most.  The  Eighth  Wisconsin  (Lieut.- 
Col.  W.  B.  Britton),  on  the  right  had  three  killed  and  twenty- 
seven  wounded.  In  the  Eleventh  Missouri  (Col.  E.  Bowyer),  the 
casualties  were  twelve  ;  Ninth  Minnesota  (Col.  J.  H.  Marsh), 
two;  Fifth  Miimesota  (Lieut. -CoL  W.  B.  Gere),  six;  Forty- 
seventh  minois  (Lieut.-Col.  Bonham),  two,  including  Capt. 
Ryan.     The   Third   (Marshall's)  brigade  was   on  the  left,   the 


CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE.  55 

Thirty-third  Missouri  (CoL  W.  H.  Heath)  being  on  the  right. 
Next  was  the  Thirty-fifth  Iowa  (Lieut.-Col.  W.  B,  Keeler),  which 
lost  two ;  then  the  Twelfth  Iowa  (Maj.  Samuel  G.  Knee),  which 
lost  five  wounded,  and  on  the  extreme  left  was  the  Seventh  Min- 
nesota (Lieut.-Col.  Geo.  Bradley).  In  this  regiment  Lieut.  Fol- 
som  was  sHghtly  wounded  by  a  piece  of  shell  from  one  of  the 
gvms  of  the  di^dsion,  and  Private  McFadden  was  killed  while 
lying  on  the  gTound  skirmishing.  The  right  of  the  Thirteenth 
corps  over-lapj)ed  three  regiments  of  Marshall's  brigade,  and  at 
dusk  they  were  ployed  in  column  of  regiments  in  the  rear,  leav- 
ing him  only  the  front  of  one  regiment.  His  skirmishers  had 
eagerly  pushed  then-  way  into  the  fallen  trees  and  brush  in  the 
advance,  and  Corporal  Fry  of  the  Twelfth  Iowa  had  got  so  far 
that  he  was  taken  for  a  confederate  and  received  a  severe  woimd 
in  the  foot,  from  some  one  in  the  rear. 

The  Second  Iowa  battery  (Capt.  J.  R.  Reed),  with  four  twelve- 
pounder  Napoleons  opened  fire  on  Red  fort,  one  thousand  yards 
distant ;  and  the  Third  Indiana  battery  of  Rodman  gims  (Capt. 
T.  J.  Ginn),  from  a  prominent  point  on  the  left. 

In  the  Thirteenth  coiys,  Yeatch's  division  having  bivouacked 
in  the  front,  had  been  workhig  most  of  the  night  intrench- 
ing, had  been  in  line  of  battle  at  three  in  the  morning,  and 
the  men  were  not  feeling  very  fresh  when  they  moved  out 
at  seven.  But  they  were  ready  for  a  fight,  and  the  behef 
prevailed  that  they  were  going  to  take  Spanish  fort  by  assault. 
Yeatch  deployed  when  he  had  proceeded  a  mile  with  Slack's 
brigade  on  the  right,  the  Third  brigade,  Lieut.-Col.  Kinsey 
commanding,  on  the  left,  and  Dennis'  in  reserve. 

Benton's  division,  moving  at  nine,  came  up  on  the  right 
in  three  columns  of  regiments  deployed,  connecting  with  the 
Sixteenth  corps. 

Bertram's  brigade  of  Second  division  was  sent  round  to 
the  right  of    the   Thirteenth  corps,  but  was  soon    afterward 


56  CAMPAIGN     OF    MOBILE. 

ordered  back,  and  taking  the  road  round  by  Wadswortli's 
returned  to  its  former  position,  and  then  closed  up  on  the 
left. 

In  the  Third  brigade  (Benton's  division),  commanded  by  Col. 
Conrad  Krez  of  the  Twenty-seventh  Wisconsin,  the  Seventy- 
seventh  Ohio  had  been  detailed  to  guard  the  train  and  had 
moved  to  the  rear,  so  that  the  brigade  front  consisted  of  the 
Twenty-seventh  Wisconsin  and  the  Thirty-third  Iowa,  with 
the  Twenty-eighth  Wisconsin  in  reserve.  These  regiments 
were  at  first  employed  to  support  the  Twenty-sixth  New  York 
battery,  and  afterward  formed  on  the  right  of  the  corps ;  but 
met  Avith  no  loss  during  the  day. 

Day's  brigade  of  Benton's  di^dsion,  being  in  the  centre, 
came  up  opposite  old  Spanish  fort,  the  guns  of  which  had 
good  range  through  a  large  ravine.  The  Ninety-first  Illinois 
was  in  the  advance  of  that  brigade  with  skirmishers  deployed, 
and  subjected  the  confederates  to  some  loss  in  forcing  them 
back  over  the  fallen  trees  to  their  breastworks.  When  the 
hne  halted,  about  nine  hundred  yards  from  those  works,  a 
portion  of  the  skirmish  line  was  relieved  by  Capt.  Dutton's 
company  of  the  Seventh  Vermont  wiio  had  four  men  sHghtly 
wounded ;  and  there  was  one  other  wounded  in  the  same 
regiment.  During  the  afternoon,  Grier's  brigade  furnished  a 
detail  to  construct  temporary  works  for  the  Twenty-first  New 
York  battery,  which  had  taken  position  on  a  prominent  spur 
near  the  right  of  that  brigade.  At  dark,  the  Ninety-first  Illinois 
and  Twenty-ninth  Iowa  began  intrenching,  a  Httle  in  advance 
of  the  line  occupied  during  the  day,  and  the  Fiftieth  Indiana 
and  Seventh  Vermont  took  position  two  hundred  yards  in 
the  rear. 

Col.  D.  P.  Grier's  brigade  of  the  same  division,  after  deploy- 
ing, threw  out  the  Ninety-sixth  Ohio,  Lieut.-Col.  Brown,  as 
skirmishers,  and  moving  on,  opposite  Fort  McDermett,  passed 


CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE.  57 

tbrongli  the  riglit  of  Yeatcli's  division  where  the  men  were 
intrenching  and  soon  saw  the  confederate  skirmishers  approach- 
ing over  the  brow  of  a  hill  in  advance ;  but  meeting  a  well- 
directed  fii'e  from  the  Ninety-sixth  Ohio  they  hastily  retreated 
to  their  works  responding  with  only  a  few  shots.  The  Ninety- 
sixth  then  pushed  forward  about  a  hundred  yards  farther.  This 
opened  the  way  for  the  Seventh  Massachusetts  light  battery, 
Capt.  Storer,  to  come  up  on  a  rise  of  ground  seven  hundi-ed 
a,nd  fifty  yards  from  McDermett,  and  in  rear  of  which  Grier's 
brigade  constructed  a  cover.  The  Seventh  Massachusetts  bat- 
tery was  engaged  for  three  hours. 

All  along  the  hne  the  regimental  colors  were  planted  in  the 
ground,  and  afforded  a  mark  for  the  confederate  gams. 

In  the  Twenty-ninth  Wisconsin,  Slack's  brigade  of  Yeatch's 
di^dsion,  the  private  Joel  Norton,  acting  as  color  bearer,  was 
killed  by  a  piece  of  shell,  and  a  skirmisher  of  that  regiment 
was  wounded.  Veatch's  whole  loss  during  the  day  was  two 
killed  and  sixteen  wounded. 

On  the  extreme  left,  and  next  to  the  bay,  was  Bertram's 
brigade,  squarely  in  fi'ont  of  Fort  McDermett,  and  the  approach 
was  difficult,  on  accoimt  of  the  obstnictions  of  slashings.  The 
Nineteenth  Iowa,  Lieut.-Col.  John  Bruce  commanding,  was  in 
the  advance.  T\"ith  skirmishers  deployed,  that  regiment  crossed 
an  open  field  and  coming  into  clear  range  of  the  guns  of  Mc- 
Dermett, pushed  forward  stiU  farther  into  the  fallen  trees,  but 
was  greeted  "^dth  a  severe  fire  of  artillery.  The  Nineteenth 
Iowa  then  hastily  threw  up  some  logs  and  earth  for  protection. 
Foust's  battery  (F,  First  Missouri)  of  steel  guns,  came  up 
meantime,  and  soon,  with  its  skilful  fire,  silenced  the  guns  in 
McDermett.  Several  of  the  Nineteenth  had  been  severely 
wounded  and  there  was  now  some  pause  in  filing  on  tliis 
part  of  the  line.  Meantime,  the  other  regiments  of  the  brigade, 
Twentieth  Wisconsin,  Twenty-third  Iowa,  and  Ninety-fourth  Eli- 


58  CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE. 

nois,  came  up,  and  Granger  also  came  on  the  ground.  Another 
aidvance  was  soon  ordered.  The  Twentieth  "Wisconsin,  Lieut.- 
CoL  Starr,  had  formed  on  the  right  of  the  Nineteenth  Iowa, 
and  both  regiments  pushed  forward  over  the  slashed  trees,  but 
could  not  move  fast.  The  confederates  from  the  fort,  and  their 
advanced  rifle-pits,  were  on  the  watch,  and  when  they  had  gained 
about  two  hundred  yards  opened  fiercely  on  them  with  mus- 
ketry and  artillery.  To  this  fire  they  replied  with  spirit,  and 
Foust's  unerring  guns  in  the  rear  were  doing  execution  at  every 
shot.  In  close  musketry  range  of  McDermett,  both  regiments 
began  to  construct  rifle-pits,  and  pickets  were  posted  on  the 
farther  side  of  a  ravine  which  extended  on  the  right  nearly  up 
to  the  road ;  their  post  being  close  to  rifle-pits  from  which  the 
confederates  had  been  driven.  In  the  Nineteenth  Iowa,  Cor- 
porals Geo.  Major  and  Wm.  Holhday,  and  Private  Montgomery, 
were  killed,  and  Corporal  Fish  of  the  color  guard,  and  Corporals 
Loyle  and  Smith,  and  ten  privates,  were  wounded.  Capt.  Stone 
of  the  Twentieth  Wisconsin,  a  gallant  ofl&cer  and  gentleman,  was 
mortally  wounded. 

Ey  dusk,  the  general  Hne  of  the  Thirteenth  corps  was  estab- 
Hshed  from  eight  hundred  to  one  thousand  yards  from  the 
main  works  of  the  confederates,  and  after  dark  large  details 
were  set  at  work  intrenching ;  and  along  the  whole  line  the 
spade,  the  pick,  and  the  axe,  were  busily  employed. 

During  the  day.  Granger  with  a  staff-officer  rode  along  the 
line  of  skirmishers,  attracting  a  fire  which  struck  down  the 
orderly  bearing  the  corps  colors. 

The  number  of  killed  and  wounded  in  the  Sixteenth  corps 
were  ninety-one ;  in  the  Thirteenth  something  less.  According 
to  the  report  telegraphed  to  Mobile,  the  confederates  sustained 
a  loss  of  only  nine  killed  and  thirty  wounded.  The  garrison 
had  been  expecting  an  assault,  and  were  saving  the  most  of 
their  fire  for  such  an  emergency.     At  four  in  the  afternoon,  Gen. 


CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE.  59 

Gibson  reported :  "  Enemy  seem  to  be  attacking  here  in  earnest, 
and  has  opened  on  every  part  of  the  hne,  with  musketry  and 
Hght  artillery."^  Canby,  however,  did  not  intend  to  assaiilt 
bhndly  ;  nor  wonkl  there  have  been  much  gained  in  ]3oiut  of 
time,  for  the  army  woukl  have  had  to  wait  a  few  days  for  sup- 
pHes  before  moving  farther.  He  accompanied  the  troops  in 
the  movement  and  estabhshed  his  headquarters  on  the  main 
road,  near  "Wilson's,  two  miles  from  Spanish  fort. 

1  Gibson  to  Lidell :  "  March  21, 5:30  p.  m. — We  require  more  tools.  Will  send 
off  horses  and  mules  by  first  boat  to-night.  Enemy  has  established  himself  in 
heavy  force  from  the  extreme  left  to  the  right,  has  heavy  batteries  along  his 
whole  line.     The  works  are  not  complete  on  the  left." 


CHAPTER    YIII, 

SIEGE  OF  SPANISH  FORT— SECOND  DAT. 

March  28. — The  garrison  of  Spanisli  fort  comprised  about 
four  thousand.  Col.  Patton  had  command  of  the  artillery  which 
was  also  armed  with  rifle  muskets,  and  did  duty  in  the  pits ; 
Gibson's  brigade  was  in  the  centre ;  and  the  Alabama  reserves — 
principally  youths,  under  General  Thomas,  were  on  the  left. 
And  there  were  batteries  under  skilful  artillerists  distributed 
at  the  forts  on  the  entire  line. 

The  garrison  now  saw  they  were  to  be  regularly  besieged  by 
a  large  force,  but  were  determined  to  hold  out  as  long  as  they 
could  without  imreasonable  sacrifice,  and  were  inspired  with 
the  pride  and  satisfaction  of  holding  at  bay  a  powerful  and 
finely-equipped  army. 

In  the  morning  the  pubHc  animals  were  shipped  off,  and 
reney/ed  efforts  made  for  additional  tools.  On  the  extreme 
left  the  defences  were  not  finished,  and  these  had  been 
worked  upon  through  the  night,  and  were  being  continued. 
On  that  part  of  the  line,  on  the  preceding  day,  a  party 
of  blacks  had  been  at  work  behind  the  skirmishers  felling 
trees  for  an  abatis  in  front  of  the  main  works ;  but  ran 
in  before  the  skirmishers,  and  having  got  too  '*'  demoralized" 
to  be  useful  in  the   garrison,   were   sent  to  Fort   Huger. 

The  work  went  on  actively  in  completing  platforms  for  the 
guns,  making  revetments  for  the  breastworks  and  embrasures, 
and  bomb-proof  quarters  for  officers  and  men.  These  latter 
were  along  close  to  the  main  works.    But  more  of  this  neces- 


CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE.  61 

sary  "work  could  have  been  done  if  tliere  had  been  a  larger 
supply  of  tools.  ^ 

The  besiegers,  as  well  as  the  garrison,  were  experienced  in 
sucli  operations,  and  then'  practice  on  the  late  march  had 
given  them  fresh  facihty  in  constructing  earthworks.  The  red 
lines  of  earth — which  wiU  there  remain  for  years  to  come — 
began  to  appear  astonishingly  quick  ;  and  they  were,  indeed, 
needed  as  a  barrier  against  the  subtle  Minie-balls  of  the 
garrison  sharpshooters,  who,  to  use  a  phrase  that  was  soon 
current  along  the  line,  "  shot  to  kill." 

In  the  rear,  the  pioneer  companies  of  each  division,  with 
details,  were  making  gabions  and  fascines,  levying  heavily  on 
the  forest  for  its  withes  and  poles.  The  abundance  of  pine-trees, 
many  of  which  had  been  felled  to  imjDede  them,  largely  assisted 
the  men  in  making  then  bomb-proof  quarters,  and  the  revet- 
ments for  batteries. 

There  had  been  occasional  shots  during  the  night ;  but  when 
day  broke,  the  crack  of  the  musket  grew  vehement,  and  the  ar- 
tillery opened  with  spirit  on  both  sides.     The  garrison,  the  day 

1  Gibson  to  Liclell:  "  March  28. — The  enemy  attempted  to  advance  his  lines 
at  sunset,  but  was  wholly  unsuccessful.  He  is  persistent  in  his  attempt  to  gain 
all  the  groimd  he  can,  and  fails  at  every  point.  I  am  compelled  to  extend  my 
Unes  on  the  left.  I  lost  five  (5)  men  killed  and  thirty-four  (34)  wounded  to-day. 
I  atti-ibute  the  loss  to  the  want  of  tools  to  throw  up  skirmish-pits  and  traverses. 
I  have  an  immense  deal  of  digging  to  do,  as  the  enemy  are  erecting  heavy 
batteries  on  the  right  and  left,  which  enfilade  the  lines.  Three  (3)  of  his  gun- 
boats ran  on  the  bar,  fired  at  the  fort  about  simset ;  all  but  one  retired  after  a 
few  rounds.  We  all  think  that  the  one  that  remained  was  smik.  I  cannot  say 
certainly,  but  I  think  so." 

Liclell  to  Col.  Garner  {Chief  of  Staff) :  "  BlaMy,  3Icn-ch  28 Gen, 

Gibson  telegraphs  that  his  force  cannot  be  reduced,  and  should  only  be  relieved. 
Enemy  pressing  him  in  heavy  force  at  all  points.  His  casualties  are  less  than 
yesterday.  I  despatched  him,  boat  would  be  sent  for  reserves  to-night.  He 
reports  present  strength  at  three  thousand  foiir  hundred.  I  send  two  Yankee 
prisoners,  who  belong  to  Gilbert's  division,  at  Sibley's  mill.  There  are  not 
enough  boats  here  for  the  work  they  have  to  do,  and  they  never  have  enough 
wood.     Please  send  me  more  at  once." 


62  CAXPAIGS    OF    MOBILE. 

and  Tiighf  preceding.  Lad  made  an  opemag  in  the  timber  to  the 
shore  of  Minette  bay,  to  aSbrd  an  enSlading  range  on  the  li^t 
flflTiV  of  the  Sixteenth  corps,  from  the  hearr  gnns  of  Fort  Hnger. 
situated  on  the  maish  twenty-fire  hraidred  yards  distant  on  the 
left  and  rear  of  the  garrison.  The  fire  from  these  gnns  ap- 
peared effectire  at  first,  but  one  of  the  shot  haring  struck 
inside  the  garrison,  it  was  ordered  to  cease. 

Sixteenth.  Corps. — ^The  Fourteenth  Tndiana  (Horse's)  light  bat- 
tery— Carr's  dirision — had.  on  the  erening  of  the  27th,  advanced 
to  a  prominent  and  exposed  position,  where  a  mortar  battery  of 
the  First  TndiaTia  heaTT  artillery  afteaward  came  in,  five  hun- 
dred and  fifty  yards  from  Bed  fort.  The  Fourteenth,  aided  by 
details  of  infentry.  Lad  worked  all  night  throwing  up  works ;  but 
the  earth  on  that  ridge  was  rery  hard,  and  by  morning  only  a 
few  logs  were  rolled  together  with  scarcely  enough  earth  to 
cover  theuL  In  pursuance  of  orders,  however,  Capt  Morse 
opened  fire  at  daylight,  and  was  speedily  answered  by  PhiHips 
Tennessee  and  Lxmisden's  Alabama  light  batteries,  in  his  front, 
which  concentrated  their  jfire  on  him.  Morse  continued  firing 
tin  ten  o'clock,  when  he  ceased,  so  as  to  give  the  pioneers  oppor- 
tunity to  strengthen  the  work,  and  while  this  was  in  progress 
the  work  was  penetrated  by  a  shell,  which  exploded,  kiTliTig  one 
man  and  fatally  wounding  another.  The  other  light  guns  on 
the  left,  in  the  front  of  both  corps,  were  also  engaged,  but  much 
exposed ;  yet  batteri^  for  them  were  in  progress. 

In  the  morning,  an  examination  of  the  gronnd  off  from  Carr's 
right,  and  along  the  eastern  shore  of  Minette  bay,  showed  that 
a  battery  conld  be  placed  on  the  bluff  that  would  have  a  plung- 
ing fire  on  Huger.  A  "Whitworth  and  a  steel  rifle  were  put  in 
position  there,  which  drew  the  fire  that  had  been  renewed  of 
Huger  from  the  right  flank  of  the  Sixteenth  corps,  and  also 
moved  farther  up  the  river  a  confederate  gunboat,  which  had 
also  been  hurling  at  A.  J.  Smith's  command  large  and  demoral- 
izing projectiles. 


CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE.  63 

Tlie  nature  of  tlie  ground  was  sucli  tliat  on  the  extreme  right 
of  Smith's  corps  the  One  Hundred  and  Eighth  Illinois — Geddes' 
brigade  of  Carr's  di^dsion — was  able  to  commence  a  parallel  on 
a  ridge  two  hundred  yards  distant  from  the  confederate  works  ; 
and  which,  when  finished,  bent  round  to  within  one  hundred  and 
twenty  yards  of  the  confederate  works.  Toward  the  left  the 
distance  widened,  the  parallel  commenced  by  the  Eighth  Iowa 
and  One  Hundred  and  Twenty-fourth  Illinois  being  a  Httle  over 
three  hundred  yards  distant.  Next  in  Moore's  brigade  the  first 
line  was  three  hundred  and  fifty  yards  distant,  and  in  Ward's 
brigade  five  hundred.  By  daylight  Moore's  brigade  had  its  first 
parallel  opened,  and  some  cover  thrown  up  for  the  skirmish  line 
one  hundred  and  fifty  yards  in  advance.  The  loss  during  the 
day  in  Geddes'  brigade  was  two  wounded  in  the  One  Hundred 
and  Eighth  Illinois  ;  two — one  dangerously — in  the  One  Hundred 
and  Twenty-fourth  lUinois ;  in  the  Eighth  Iowa,  David  Sterrett, 
Company  K,  was  killed,  and  Mandres,  Company  I,  and  Herz- 
berger,  Company  G,  wounded.  In  Moore's  brigade,  four  were 
wounded  in  the  Thirty-thu-d  "Wisconsia,  one  in  the  Seventy-sec- 
ond Illinois,  and  foiir — one  dangerously — ia  the  Ninety-fifth 
Illinois.  In  Ward's  brigade,  four — one  dangerously — were 
wounded  in  the  Fourteenth  Wisconsin,  five — two  dangerously — 
in  the  Fortieth  Missouri.  Also,  among  the  wounded  was  Lieut. 
Joseph  H.  Mitchell,  Company  A,  Forty-ninth  Missouri. 

The  preceding  night,  in  the  front  of  the  Fortieth  Missouri  two 
colored  men  deserted  from  the  garrison,  and  coming  toward  the 
picket  of  the  Fortieth,  were  ordered  to  halt.  One  got  frightened 
and  ran,  but  the  sentinel  quickly  fired,  and  he  fell.  The  other 
came  safely  in,  and  the  woundod  one  was  sent  to  the  hospital. 

In  McArthur's  division  the  casualties  were  :  in  McMUlen's  bri- 
gade, two  wounded  in  the  Thirty-third  lUinois ;  in  Hubbard's 
brigade,  one  wounded  in  the  Ninth  Minnesota ;  in  Marshall's 
brigade,  two  wounded  in  the  Thirty-third  Missouri,  one  in  the 


64  CAMPAIGN     OP     MOBILE. 

Twelfth  Iowa,  and  Corporal  Dreauler  of  tlie  Seventh  Minnesota. 
Company  D,  Capt.  Norman  Buck,  of  the  latter  regiment  was  on 
the  skirmish  line,  and  occupied  ground  three  hundred  and  fifty- 
yards  from  the  confederate  works. 

The  Thirteentli  Corps. — In  Krez's  brigade,  Benton's  division, 
four  companies  from  different  regiments,  under  Captain  James 
Gunn,  Twenty-seventh  Wisconsin,  were  sent  out  in  dayhght  to 
relieve  sku'mishers  of  the  Second  (Day's)  brigade  who  were  in 
Krez's  front.  These  companies  had  to  cross  a  ravine  containing 
a  labyrinth  of  slashings,  and  which  was  commanded  by  the  guns 
of  McDermett  and  the  sharpshooters  posted  in  its  front.  But 
heedless  of  danger  they  made  their  way  to  the  front  as  fast  as 
possible,  which  could  not  be  rapid  even  for  sure-footed  and 
athletic  men ;  drove  some  of  the  confederate  skirmishers  out  of 
their  pits,  and  pushed  on  to  within  two  hundred  yards  or 
thereabouts,  of  the  confederate  battery  No.  3 ;  but  losing 
heavily.  The  detail  from  the  Thirty-third  Iowa  had  eight 
wounded,  one  mortally,  and  four  dangerously;  and  among  the 
wounded  from  that  regiment  were  Capts.  William  S.  Parmlee 
and  George  E.  Ledyard."  The  Twenty-eighth  Wisconsin  lost 
one  killed.  Private  Samuel  D.  Hogg,  Company  B,  and  six 
wounded,  and  the  Twenty-seventh  Wisconsin  four  wounded. 
So  dangerous  was  it  to  retire  or  advance  there  in  the  daytime 
that  some  who  were  to  be  relieved  preferred  to  remain  in  their 
pits  in  the  front. 

In  Day's  (Second)  brigade.  Company  D,  Capt.  Geo.  E.  Croft, 
Seventh  Yermont,  had  been  on  the  skirmish  line  during  the 
night  and  having  pushed  forward  pretty  close  to  the  confederate 
works,  was  able  to  bring  back  valuable  information  concemiug 
them.  The  skirmish  line  in  front  of  Day's  brigade  was  on  the 
rise  of  ground  before  Battery  No.  3,  before  mentioned,  and  so 
exposed  to  a  rakiug  fire  of  light  guns  that  the  men  were  in 
constant  peril ;  for  they  were  not  yet  well  covered  by  works, 


CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE.  QS 

and  had  to  seek  shelter  behind  logs  to  some  extent,  rendering 
their  line  ii'regular. 

At  three  in  the  morning,  the  Twenty-ninth  Iowa — a  regiment 
of  splendid  material  and  discipline  to  match — was  reheved  in 
the  front,  where  it  had  been  digging  all  night,  by  the  Fiftieth 
Indiana — a  regiment  of  the  same  distinguished  merit,  withdi'ew 
a  few  hundred  yards  to  the  rear,  but  not  out  of  range,  "  and 
got  something  to  eat,  the  first  fornearly  thirty-six  houi-s,"  and 
then  soon  returned  and  resumed  the  labors  of  the  trenches, 

Grier's  (First)  brigade  was  at  work  in  the  position  taken  the 
preceding  evening. 

In  Veatch's  division  next  on  the  left,  Dennis'  (Second)  brigade 
was  in  the  front,  the  skirmishers  being  engaged  with  but  little 
intermission,  and  the  fatigue  parties  exposed  to  considerable 
shelling. 

Atlach  on  Captain  Noble's  Worhing  Party. — At  dusk,  Capt. 
J.  L.  Noble,  of  the  Twenty-first  Iowa,  Slack's  brigade,  with  one 
hundred  men  of  the  Twenty-first  armed,  and  a  detail  of  three 
hundred  men  from  other  regiments  without  arms,  a  strange 
oversight,  went  to  the  front  to  work  on  a  battery.  The  detail 
crawled  along  cautiously  to  the  place  designated,  and  com- 
menced Work.  Capt.  Noble  put  out  pickets  in  his  fi'ont  with 
instructions  to  report  to  him  every  five  minutes.  Soon  the 
garrison  sharpshooters  heard  the  noise  of  the  tools  and  com- 
menced an  unpleasant  fire.  The  party  kept  at  their  work,  and 
it  seems  that  some  of  the  detail  had  stuck  theii-  guns  with 
the  bayonets  on  into  the  ground.  About  midnight,  in  the 
midst  of  a  heavy  rainstorm,  they  were  surprised  and  attacked, 
the  confederates  having  approached  slyly  to  within  a  very  few 
yards  of  the  work  before  being  discovered.  It  was  even  doubt- 
ful for  a  few  moments  which  side  would  get  possession  of  the 
guns  that  were  stuck  in  the  ground.  For  a  few  minutes  the 
combat  was  hand  to  hand.     Capt.  Noble  caUed  upon  his  men 

5 


66  CAMPAIGN     OP     MOBILE. 

to  stand  by  him,  wliicli  tliey  did,  with  spirit,  and  kept  their 
assailants  out  of  the  work.  Many  of  the  unarmed  men  ran 
back  to  camp,  and  some  reported  that  Capt.  Koble  and  his  little 
band  were  captured.  But  Capt.  Noble  said  they  were  mistaken, 
though  he  admitted  that  "at  different  times  the  rebs.  were 
apparently  standing  guard  over  him."  In  about  an  hour  Gen. 
Slack  came  out  with  his  brigade  to  his  relief,  and  the  tide  of 
the  combat  speedily  turned.  Capt.  Noble  had  one  man  killed 
and  five  wounded,  and  a  ball  came  so  near  himseK  as  to  burn 
his  hair.  He  afterward  learned  from  a  confederate  sergeant 
that  the  regiment  that  made  the  attack  lost  seven  killed  and 
fourteen  wounded. 

The  attack  was  general  on  the  skirmishers  of  Grranger's  left 
at  the  same  time,  but  no  ground  was  anywhere  lost. 

In  Bertram's  brigade,  the  Nineteenth  Iowa  was  relieved  in 
the  morning  by  the  Ninety-fourth  Illinois,  Col.  John  McNulta, 
which  continued  the  work  in  the  rifle-pits,  and  also  sent  three 
companies,  under  Capt.  McFarland,  to  the  front  to  support  the 
Twenty-third  Iowa. 

Operations  of  the  Navy. — The  fleet,  under  Acting  Rear-Ad- 
miral H.  K.  Thatcher,  having  several  of  the  vessels  that  had 
gained  renown  under  Farragut  at  Fort  Morgan,  had  kept  pace 
with  the  army  up  to  the  26th.  But  Canby  was  disappointed 
in  the  expectation,  that  it  might  move  up  close  to  Spanish  fort 
and  complete  the  investment  on  the  water  side.  Could  this 
have  been  done  the  hours  of  Spanish  fort  would  have  been 
brief.  But  the  shallow  water  on  Blakely  bar,  the  elaborate 
obstructions,  and  the  torpedoes,  prevented. 

Tlie  confederates  first  caught  sight  of  a  portion  of  the  fleet 
about  five  o'clock  on  the  afternoon  of  the  26th,  when  it  was 
off  the  mouth  of  D'Olieve's  creek. 

On  the  28th,  the  fleet  was  lying  off  Howard's  wharf.  The 
pendant  of  the  senior  officer  was  flying  from  the  Stockdale. 


CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE.  67 

At  midday  the  Octorara,  Lieut.-Com.  W.  W.  Low,  and  the 
river  ironclad  monitors,  Milwaukie,  Lieut.-Com.  J.  H.  Gillis, 
the  Kickapoo,  Lieut.-Com.  Jones,  the  Winnebago,  Lieut.-Com. 
Kii"kland,  and  the  Chickasaw,  got  under  weigh  from  the  anchor- 
age of  the  squadron  and  steamed  for  the  bar  of  Blakely  river. 
The  ironclads  passed  successfully  over  the  bar.  But  the  Oc- 
torara took  the  ground  on  the  ridge  of  the  bar  in  eight  feet  of 
water.  The  tide  had  commenced  falling ;  and  at  three  o'clock, 
a  tube  having  burst  in  her  starboard  boiler,  further  efforts  to 
force  her  over  ceased  for  the  day.  And,  though  she  ulti- 
mately gained  distinction,  it  seemed  necessary  that  she  should 
yield  to  that  fate  which  rules  in  war,  and  often  interposes  a 
trivial  accident  to  prevent  unmixed  success.  The  Winnebago 
and  Milwaukie  had  Ead's  turrets,  admitting  of  an  elevation 
to  the  guns  of  twenty  degrees,  and  were  permitted  to  advance. 
A  trial  shell  was  fired  from  the  Winnebago  when  she  was  at 
the  first  rest,  which  showed  she  was  much  beyond  the  range 
of  her  guns  from  Sj)anish  fort. 

Shiking  of  the  Milivauhie. — Both  steamers  continued  up  the 
Blakely  river,  to  within  about  a  mile  and  a  half  of  Fort  McDer- 
mett,  and,  with  their  Xl-inch  guns,  threw  some  shells  at  a 
transport,  supposed  to  be  carrying  suppHes  to  the  garrison,  and 
compelled  her  to  move  up  the  river.  Some  shots  were  directed 
at  Spanish  fort,  which  were  thought  by  the  besiegers  to  have 
done  good  execution  ;  and  when  the  first  shell  came  screeching 
up  the  bay,  there  was  immense  cheering  all  along  their  line. 
They  then  returned  to  anchor.  The  Milwaukie,  dropping  with 
the  current,  her  bow  headed  up  stream,  had  got  -wdtliin  two 
hundred  yards  of  the  Kickapoo,  then  at  anchor,  and  was  where 
boats  had  previously  swept  for  torpedoes,  and  where  it  was  sup- 
posed there  could  be  no  danger  from  them.  Just  then  a  shock 
was  felt  on  board,  and  it  was  known  at  once  that  a  torpedo  had 
exploded  on  her  port  side,  abaft  the  after  turret,  and  about  forty 


68  CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE. 

feet  from  the  stern.  The  first  object  of  the  commander,  after 
realizing  the  impossibility  of  saving  the  vessel,  was  to  save  the 
crew,  which  was  happily  done.  There  was  some  confusion  at 
first,  for  the  hatches  were  closed,  and  but  thi-ee  were  provided 
with  levers  to  open  them  from  below  ;  but  a  single  command  re- 
stored order,  and  all  came  on  deck  in  a  quiet,  orderly  manner. 
The  stem  sank  in  about  three  minutes,  but  the  forward  com- 
partments did  not  fill  for  nearly  an  hour  afterward,  giving  the 
crew  an  opportunity  of  saving  most  of  their  effects.  Lieut.- 
Com.  GiUis  saw  every  man  off  the  vessel,  and  sent  them  to  the 
Kickapoo.  He  then  reported  to  the  flagship,  and  obtained  per- 
mission to  proceed  to  Pensacola,  to  get  divers  and  a  steam- 
pump  to  aid  in  fetching  up  his  guus.^  Col.  McNulta's  men,  of 
the  Ninety-fourth  Illinois,  up  in  front  of  McDermett,  looked  on 
the  Milwaukie  from  the  rifle-pits,  after  the  accident,  and  said 
that  her  flag  was  still  waving,  and  that  her  men,  standing  in 
water,  were  firing  effective  shots  from  her  turret -guns.  And  the 
officers  of  the  garrison  strained  their  eyes  to  see  whether  she 
had  sunk  or  not.  - 


1  Lieut.  Gillis'  Report,  March  30, 1865. 

2  "  Skirmislimg  and  artillery  lire  open  lively  on  both  sides  as  soon  as  light 
enough  for  good  practice.  Battery  Huger  opens  on  the  enemy's  right  with 
good  effect,  but  is  stopped  on  account  of  an  accidental  shot  having  fallen  in 
oiu:  lines. 

"  Fire  on  both  sides  abates  toward  midday.  Opens  again,  very  lively,  about 
three,  p.  m.  The  enemy's  line  is  well  established  along  our  entire  front,  and, 
as  usual,  the  work  seems  to  progress  very  rapidly  at  all  points ;  oui's,  but 
moderately.  Two  monitors  open  fire  on  Spanish  fort  about  five,  p.  m.,  but  their 
shots  fall  a  Httle  short.  They  are  answered  by  Spanish  fort,  and  one  suddenly 
ceases.  Heavy  fighting  on  our  left  toward  dark.  The  enemy  attempted  to  ad- 
vance his  pickets  without  success.  Large  fleet  lying  off  Blakely  bar." — Diary 
of  a  Gonfederate  Officer. 


CHAPTER    IX. 

SIEGE  OF  SPANISH  FORT— THIRD  DAT. 

March  29 — Operations  of  the  Navy. — Those  wlio  merely  con- 
sider tlae  brilliant  results  of  military  or  naval  operations  know 
little  of  tlie  tugging  toil  whicli  generally  attends  their  achieve- 
ment. An  example  of  this  toil  was  seen  in  the  experience  of 
the  fleet. 

The  Octorara  (as  also  the  Metacomet)  was  a  side-wheel 
steam-gunboat  of  the  style  familiarly  called  "  double-ender," 
having  bow  and  stern  constructed  ahke,  of  draught  of  from 
eight  to  ten  feet  of  water,  and  fore-and-aft  schooner-rigged. 
She  carried  two  IX-inch  guns,  two  thirty-two-pounders,  and 
four  twenty-four-pounder  howitzers,  as  broadside,  and  one  one- 
hundred-pounder  Parrott  rifle,  and  one  IX-inch  smooth-bore  as 
pivots  ;  with  gun  crews  for  the  larger  guns  of  seventeen  men 
each.  Her  disabled  boiler  had  been  repaired,  and  she  had 
been  considerably  lightened  by  shifting  sand-bags,  shot,  and 
shell,  and  four  heavy  guns — weighing  each  nine  thousand  six 
hundred  pounds — on  board  tugs — the  gaff  of  a  tug  being  used 
as  a  derrick.  And  at  noon,  the  29th,  with  the  assistance  of  two 
tugs,  she  passed  over  the  Blakely  bar,  and  anchored  inside. 
The  same  evening  the  hundred-pounder  Parrott  was  taken  on 
board  and  mounted,  and  some  shot  and  sheU.  received  from  the 
tugs.     But  she  did  not  open  fire  till  the  next  day. 

Heavy  details  from  the  squadron  in  boats  had  been  industri- 
ously sweeping  the  channel  with  chains  for  torpedoes,  and 
many  had  been  brought  up. 


70  CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE. 

SinJdng  of  the  Osage. — At  two,  p.  m.,  of  the  29tli,  the  ironclad 
Osage,  Lieut.-Com.  Wm.  M.  Gamble,  was  lying  at  anchor  inside 
of  Blakely  bar  in  company  with  four  other  vessels.  A  strong 
breeze  was  blowing  from  the  eastward,  and  the  Winnebago  had 
dragged  close  alongside.  To  avoid  collision  the  Osage  weighed 
anchor,  moved  off  to  a  safe  distance  on  her  starboard  i30W,  was 
stopped  by  her  commander  in  two  fathoms  water,  and  hands 
ordered  ready  to  let  go  the  anchor.  Almost  immediately  a 
torpedo  exploded  under  the  bow,  and  the  Osage  commenced 
fiUing  and  sinking  rapidly.  But  search  below  for  the  killed  and 
wounded  was  speedily  made  by  executive  officer  Garrison  with 
some  men,  and  two  killed  and  five  wounded  were  passed  up. 
Five  were  killed  and  twelve  wounded.  The  Osage  almost  imme- 
diately filled.  Her  position  had  been  thoroughly  dragged  by 
boats ;  and  it  was  supposed  the  torpedo  which  struck  her  was 
drifting. 

Position  of  the  Confederate  Artillery. — Twenty-one  batteries 
had  been  sent  down  from  Hood's  (or  Johnston's)  army  to  help 
defend  Mobile.  Some  of  these  had  lost,  and  some  had  worn 
out  their  guns  and  material  in  resisting  Sherman.  Many  of  the 
companies  had  served  from  the  commencement  of  the  war,  and 
had  left  dead  comrades  on  more  than  a  dozen  great  battle-fields, 
and  now  they  were  in  conflict  again  with  men,  whom,  in  more 
hopeful  days,  they  had  met  at  Shiloh  and  Yicksburgh. 

Of  these  organizations  the  principal  one  was  the  Twenty- 
second  regiment  Louisiana  artillery,  commanded  by  Col.  Isaac 
Patton,  a  native  of  Yirginia,  and  a  graduate  of  West  Poiut.  He 
had  command  of  the  artillery  at  Spanish  fort  and  Forts  Huger 
and  Tracy,  and  the  latter  forts  were  garrisoned  mainly  by  com- 
panies from  his  regiment. 

Forts  Huger  and  Tracy  were  a  thousand  yards  apart,  built  on 
the  marsh,  with  piles  driven  for  foundation ;  were  from  one  to  two 
miles  above  Spanish  fort,  and  about  the  same  distance  from  the 


CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE.  71 

main  shore.  As  lias  been  before  remarked,  tliey  were  designed 
to  command  Blakely  river ;  and  it  was  an  opinion  expressed  by 
Beam-egard  tliat  they  should  be  made  self-sustaining,  and  that 
no  garrisons  should  be  maintained  on  the  main  shore.  Fort 
Huger  was  a  work  with  four  bastions,  but  open  at  the  north  end, 
was  garrisoned  by  companies  B  and  K  of  the  Twenty-second 
Louisiana  and  Company  C,  First  Mississippi  Hght  artillery, 
Capt.  Collins — total,  two  hundred  effective,  and  commanded  by 
Maj.  Washington  Marks,  of  the  Twenty-second  Louisiana.  It 
was  armed  with  eleven  guns ;  namely,  one  "VXEI-inch  double- 
banded  gun  in  the  northeast  bastion,  one  VIx%-inch  Brooks 
rifle,  and  one  X-inch  mortar  on  east  face ;  one  VH-inch  rifle  at 
southeast  bastion ;  one  X-inch  double-banded  smooth-bore  on 
south  face ;  one  Yll-inch  rifle  on  southwest  bastion ;  one 
Yl/y-inch  Brooks  rifle  on  west  face  ;  two  twelve-pounder  howit- 
zers. Ju  the  centre  was  a  bomb-proof,  twenty-five  feet  high,  on 
which  were  mounted  on  pintels  two  splendid  X-inch  colum- 
biads,  smooth-bore,  having,  of  course,  a  wide  range. 

Fort  Tracy  was  an  enclosed  bastioned  work,  garrisoned  by 
Comjjanies  I,  H,  and  G,  of  the  Twenty-second  Louisiana — one 
hundred  and  twenty  men,  under  the  immediate  command  of 
Capt.  A.  A.  Patsmier,  Company  I  of  that  regiment,  and  armed 
with  five  TTI-inch  rifle  guns. 

It  was  supposed  these  forts  would  be  assaulted  by  men  landed 
from  boats  and  launches,  and  the  garrisons  were  exercising  much 
vigilance  to  be  ready  to  repulse  them. 

Old  Spanish  fort,  sometimes  denominated  the  Water-battery, 
was  garrisoned  by  Companies  A,  D,  and  F,  of  the  Twenty- 
second  Louisiana,  and  well  armed  with  Yll-inch  columbiads 
and  thirty-pounder  PaiTotts — five  in  all. 

Fort  McDermett  was  under  the  immediate  command  of  Capt. 
Samuel  Barnes,  Company  C,  Twenty-second  Louisiana,  and  the 
artillery  was  manned  by  his  own  and  Owen's  Arkansas  battery — 


72  CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE. 

effective  of  botli  companies,  ninety-one ;  but  it  was  reinforced 
on  the  following  day  by  Massenbery's  Georgia  light  artillery, 
one  Imndred  and  ten  effective.  It  had,  at  first,  fifteen  guns ;  six 
six-pounder  smooth-bore  ;  two  twenty -four-pounder  howitzers ; 
six  cohorn  mortars ;  and  one  Yl^-inch  Brooks  rifle,  mounted 
on  centre-pintel,  and  having  a  range  of  three  quarters  of  the  cir- 
cle of  the  besiegers'  works. 

Its  south  bastion  was  a  lunette  of  strong  profile,  a  command 
of  twenty-five  degrees  over  ridge  and  road  approaching  it,  a 
regular  covered  way  with  four  embrasures,  a  carefuUy-con- 
structed  abatis  and  chevaux-de-frise,  and  many  torpedoes  made 
with  twelve-pounder  shell.  With  the  exception  of  old  Spanish 
fort,  which,  from  its  position,  was  unassailable,  this  south  bas- 
tion was  decidedly  the  strongest  and  most  carefully  fortified 
fort  of  the  garrison  works. 

Captain  C.  H.  Slocum  had  command  of  the  other  batteries 
on  the  left.  His  quarters  were  at  the  redoubt  No.  3,  where  was 
also  his  company — the  fifth  of  the  Washington  artillery — ninety 
effective,  composed  of  the  best  class  of  young  men  of  New  Or- 
leans. During  the  war  Slocum 's  battery  had  marched  six 
thousand  miles.  This  redoubt  (No.  3)  was  armed  with  eight 
pieces  :  one  Ylll-inch  columbiad,  two  Napoleons,  one  Ill-inch 
rifle,  and  four  cohorn  mortars. 

At  Eedoubt  No,  4  was  PhiUips'  Tennessee  battery,  sixty  effec- 
tive, with  two  Napoleons,  one  twelve-pounder  howitzer,  and  two 
cohorn  mortars.  Next,  on  the  left  of  Eedoubt  No.  5,  was  Lums- 
den's  Tuscaloosa  (Alabama)  battery,  with  four  six-pounders, 
and  three  cohorn  mortars. 

The  whole  number  of  gtms,  including  mortars,  in  all  the 
works,  the  first  days  of  the  siege,  was  fifty-seven. 

Operations  along  the  Lines. — The  firing  on  both  sides  this  day 
seems  to  have  increased  in  severity.  It  made  Gen.  A.  J.  Smith 
move  his  headquarters  a  little  to  the  rear.     The  garrison  ex- 


CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE.  73 

pendecl  not  less  tlian  tliirty-six  thousand  rounds  of  musket  am- 
munition, and  its  ot^ti  loss  was  reported  to  be  thirty  killed,  and 
one  hundred  and  nineteen  wounded.  ^  It  now  commenced  the 
use  of  steel  screens  in  the  embrasures. 

On  the  left  of  the  besiegers  Bertram's  brigade  had  advanced 
some  distance  farther  than  the  division  on  the  right,  leaving  its 
right  flank  exposed.  At  seven  in  the  afternoon,  seven  companies 
of  the  Twenty-ninth  Illinois  (third  brigade  of  Veatch's  divis- 
ion), under  Maj.  E.  P.  Curtis,  went  out  to  the  front  to  open  a 
line  of  works  connecting  with  Bertram's  right.  They  had  but 
fairly  begun  digging  when  a  superior  number  of  the  garrison 
made  a  sally  on  them,  under  cover  of  the  darkness,  rushing 
boldly  and  impetuously  up  to  the  trenches  as  if  sure  of  success. 
A  similar  attack  was  made  at  the  same  time  in  Bertram's  ad- 
vance, but  the  working  parties  repulsed  the  attack,  and  resumed 
their  work.  About  the  same  time  the  Eighth  Illinois,  Dennis' 
brigade,  had  one  man  killed  and  three  wounded  while  working 
on  a  battery. 

Adventure  on  tJie  SMrmish  Line. — In  Day's  brigade,  Benton's 
division,  Capt.  L.  K.  Myers,  Twenty-ninth  Iowa,  had  the  pre- 
ceding evening  been  detailed  as  brigade  officer  of  the  day  in 
the  trenches.  He  had  four  companies,  and  was  required  to  ad- 
vance and  dig  rifle-pits  within  one  hundred  yards  of  the  con- 
federate works — then  occupied  by  Gibson's  Louisiana  brigade, 
Col.  Campbell  commanding;  the  men  halving  one  day's  rations 
and  one  hundred  rounds  of  ammunition  each.  Soon  after 
nightfall,  with  Lieut.  Stocker  and  six  or  seven  men,  he  went 

■^  Gnpt.  Lewis  to  Col.  Garner :  "  Blakely,  Mar.  29. — G-en.  Gibson  reports  the 
following  casualties  :  thirty  killed,  one  hundred  and  nineteen  wounded." 

A  soldier  of  the  Sixty-second  Alabama  (Col.  Huger's  regiment),  writing  from 
Spanish  fort,  March  29,  to  the  Mobile  Register,  says  :  "  Fortnnatelj'^  we  are  so 
situated  our  casualties  are  but  few."  He  states  that  in  his  regiment  up  to 
date  one  commissioned  officer  and  foiir  men  had  been  killed,  and  twenty-four 
wounded. 


74  CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE. 

forward  to  ascertain  how  close  lie  was  to  tlie  confederate  works, 
and  was  fired  on  by  one  of  tlieir  sentinels  when  within  five  or 
six  steps  from  him.  Capt.  Mjers  and  party  dropped  down,  and 
quite  a  nnmber  of  shots  were  fired  over  them.  He  whispered 
orders  for  each  man  to  crawl  back  singly,  and  then  crawled  back 
himself.  Each  one  was  heard  and  fired  at  while  thus  retreating, 
but  none  hit. 

Capt.  Myers'  detail  was  at  work  through  the  night  digging 
their  line  of  rifle-pits,  only  fifty  yards  distant  fi-om  the  advance 
rifle-pits  of  the  confederates  and  were  being  fired  on  by  the 
latter,  continually.  The  captain  had  repeatedly  j^assed  along 
the  line  of  his  four  companies  during  the  night,  and  toward 
morning,  thinking  they  were  safely  intrenched,  had  started  back 
to  the  main  line  of  the  brigade  to  report  his  situation,  when  he 
met  a  Heutenant  of  his  own  regiment  with  seven  men  bringing 
out  ammunition  for  a  company  (C),  that  had  come  with  less  than 
the  requhed  supply.  The  men  bringing  it  had  carelessly  been 
sent  without  arms.  He  turned  back  to  conduct  them  to  the  line 
and  came  to  a  pit — for  the  pits  were  detached — ^next  to  the  one 
where  the  ammunition  was  to  go,  and  a  "  sentinel"  pointed  him 
the  way.  In  passing  along  the  line  at  night  he  had  been  gTuded 
by  a  lone  tree  standing  where  Company  C  was  stationed  ;  but 
approaching  from  the  front  it  was  hid,  being  between  him  and 
the  high  ground  in  front,  and  there  being  another  tree  more  to 
the  right,  he  followed  that  and  came  out  unexpectedly  on  the 
confederate  lines.     His  adventure  was  told  as  follows  : 

"  I  had  ordered  the  heutenant  and  seven  men  to  keep  in 
single  file,  behind  me,  and  make  but  Kttle  noise  in  passing 
through  the  brush  and  fallen  timber.  As  I  approached  I  said  : 
*  Boys,  I  am  coming  back  again.'  A  voice  answered,  '  Come 
on.'  A  few  stejos  more  brought  me  face  to  face  with  a  reb.  in 
gray,  with  sword  at  his  side,  and  at  his  left  about  twelve  men 
(butternut  clothing)  with  arms  at  a  ready.    As  I  halted,  my  men 


CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE.  75 

closed  up  to  my  riglit,  placing  us  all  witliin  tliree  or  four  steps 
of  the  rebs.  We  all  saw  at  once  wliere  we  were.  I  was  wearing 
a  red  sasli,  belt,  and  revolver ;  and  my  men  all  unarmed.  The 
rebel  officer  looked  me  close  in  the  face,  and  said :  '  Do  you 
know  where  you  are — do  you  belong  to  us  ?'  I  answered  '  Of 
course  we  belong  to  you,  ain't  you  confederate  soldiers  ?'  He 
answered  '  Yes.' 

"  I  asked,  '  What  regitoent  ?' 

"He  answered,  'Forty-second.' 
•  "  I  said,  '  We  are  bringing  out  ammunition,  and  wish  to  pass 
down  the  line  with  it,  if  you  will  direct  us  the  way  to  the  nest 
post.' 

""He  asked,  'What  regiment?'  but  I  began  to  ask  several 
other  questions  and  each  time  set  in  before  he  finished,  by 
making  remarks  such  as,  '  We  heard  so  much  firing  during  the 
night,  thought  you  might  be  scarce  Of  ammunition — were  sent 
out  with  a  supply,  wish  to  pass  down  the  hue  if  you  will  direct 
us  to  the  nest  post.'  He  said,  '  We  will  show  you  the  way,  it  is 
not  far ;'  and  turning  to  his  men,  said,  '  Boys,  all  of  you,  come 
along.'  I  said,  '  Yery  well,'  and  turning  to  my  men  said,  '  Come 
on,  boys.' 

"  I  had  feared  that  some  of  my  boys  would  run  and  the 
rest  of  us  be  fired  on,  but  they  all  stood  quiet,  trusting  me 
to  manage  affairs.  I  knew  the  reb.  knew  what  we  were,  and 
was  afraid  to  order  us  to  surrender ;  perhaps  wanted  to  first 
double  his  force  at  the  nest  post.  I  wanted  to  get  on  the 
move,  and  give  the  word  to  my  men  to  run.  We  had  only 
gone  a  few  steps  when  one  of  the  rebs.  nest  the  officer  said, 
'  Hold  on,  these  are  not  our  men !'  I  said,  '  You  are  certainly 
mistaken ;'  and  while  trying  to  satisfy  him,  the  officer  became 
too  much  alarmed  to  stand  it  any  longer.  He  sang  out,  '  Ee- 
treat,'  turned  and  ran,  and  his  men  broke  and  ran ;  most  of 
them  discharging  thek  guns  at  me  before  running.     The  balls 


76  CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE. 

passed  close  on  both  sides  of  me.  I  called  out,  '  Fire  on  tliem, 
bojs,  fire  on  them !'  Did  this  to  hurry  them  in  their  retreat. 
I  also  drew  my  revolver  and  fired  four  shots.  By  this  time 
my  men  had  got  started  back.  I  turned  to  follow  them,  and 
was  about  to  run  on  to  their  (confederate)  advance  sentinel, 
who  was  squatting  down  in  the  brush,  and  raised  and  fired, 
when  I  was  within  two  or  three  feet  of  the  muzzle  of  his  gun, 
hit  me  in  the  right  hip,  the  ball  hitting  the  bone,  glancing 
round,  and  coming  out  about  five  inches  from  where  it  went 
in.  I  fell  beside  him,  and  as  he  turned  to  run,  I  gave  him  the 
two  remaining  shots  from  my  revolver ;  he  fell  within  a  few 
steps  of  me  and  lay  quiet.  I  lay  there  a  few  minutes,  and 
the  rebs.,.  from  their  breastworks  some  fifty  yards  distant,  poured 
a  heavy  fire  into  the  brush.  I  could  see  day  breaking  fast,  and 
knew  they  could  soon  see  me.  So  I  began  to  crawl  off.  Could 
not  stand  on  my  wounded  leg.  Soon  came  to  one  of  my  boys, 
who  had  been  with  me  and  was  lost  in  the  brush.  While  he 
and  I  were  cautiously  making  ourselves  known  to  each  other, 
two  of  our  Company  C  boys,  in  their  rifle-pits,  raised  their 
guns  to  fire  at  me,  but  their  lieutenant  (Stocker,  one  of  my 
messmates)  knew  my  voice,  and  told  them  not  to  fire.  They 
then  called  me  by  name,  '  Capt.  Myers,'  and  the  rebs.,  following 
up  behind  me,  called,  '  Come  this  way,  Capt.  Myers,  come  right 
this  way.'  Lieut.  Stocker  ordered  a  few  shots  fired  at  them, 
which  stopped  their  hallooing,  and  I  came  into  the  rifle-pits 
with  Lieut.  Stocker,  related  my  adventure,  examined  my  wound, 
and  was  assisted  back  to  my  regiment. 

"  The  man  of  my  squad  who  carried  the  box  of  one  thousand 
cartridges,  threw  it  down  before  retreating,  and  the  rebs.,  next 
day,  were  afraid  to  touch  it,  and  would  call  out  to  our  men 
in  the  rifle-pits  to  come  and  get  that  infernal-machine.  When 
the  fort  was  taken,  my  colonel  sent  and  got  the  box.  The  rebs. 
would  also  call  out,  '  How  is  Capt.  Myers  ?'    Our  men  would 


CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE.  77 

reply,  '  He  is  not  dangerous,'  and  then  inquire  about  the  officer 
who  ran  from  unarmed  men." 

/Sixteenth  Corps. — In  McArthur's  division,  Marshall's  brigade 
continued  to  furnish  large  details  on  a  battery  for  the  Tliird 
Indiana  light  guns,  and  that  brigade  and  Hubbard's  had  begun 
an  approach  from  then'  main  line.  The  casualties  were  hght, 
not  exceeding  one  or  two  in  each  regiment. 

In  Carr's  division  approaches  were  being  dug,  to  connect 
Moore's  first  and  second  line — the  Ninety-fifth  Illinois,  Col. 
Blanding,  being  at  work  on  the  left,  and  the  Thirty-third  Wis- 
conshi  upon  the  one  on  the  right.  All  the  works  were  progress- 
ing fast.  The  sharpshooters  were  able  to  silence  the  guns  in 
their  front,  and  the  casualties  of  the  division  were  light.  ^ 

1  *  Wednesday,  March  29. — Operations  commenced  very  lively  on  both 
sides.  Casualties  on  om.-s  severer  than  heretofore.  I  made  a  careful  inspection 
of  both  lines.  Estimate  the  enemy's  line  of  circumvaUation  at  one  thousand  to 
twelve  hundred  yards  distant — his  skirmishers  vary  from  two  hundred  and  fifty 
to  three  hundred  yards  distant.  Eight  batteries  established  against  us  ;  but 
oui"  artillery  stiU  seems  to  be  superior,  and  generally  silences  theirs  whenever 
we  try  to  do  so.  Our  line  as  yet  umujured.  The  monitor  that  engaged  Span- 
ish fort  yesterday  seems  to  be  sunk  on  Blakely  bar.  Commenced  to  use  steel- 
wrought  iron  screens  in  our  embrasures,  for  protecting  artillerists,  and  find 
them  of  general  service.  The  usual  work  of  repairs,  and  making  splinter- 
proofs,  traverses,  and  passage-ways,  carried  on  ;  also,  work  on  treadway  pushed 
ahead.  A  lively  skirmish  takes  place  on  our  right,  about  midnight,  resulting 
from  some  false  alarm  on  one  side  or  the  other." — Diary  of  a  Gonfed&i-ate 
Officer. 


CHAPTER    X. 

SIEGE  OF  SPANISH  FORT— FOURTH  DAT. 

March  30. — The  fourtli  day  was  devoted  chiefly  to  work  in  the 
trenches  on  the  part  of  the  besiegers.  The  pits  had  been  dug 
hastily,  and  were  narrow ;  in  many  places  the  sides  were  not 
well  sloped  but  abrupt,  so  that  a  heavy  storm  would  crumble 
them  in.  Orders  were  given  to  have  them  rectified,  and  widened 
to  six  feet.  This  was  undertaken,  but  retarded  for  want  of 
tools.  The  heavy  siege  guns  were  now  on  their  way  up  the  bay, 
and  several  batteries  were  also  commenced  for  ijhem.  Foust's 
light  battery  of  steel  guns,  on  the  extreme  left,  had  done  excel- 
lent service ;  and  his  ammunition  being  exhausted — ^but  not  his 
zeal — ^he  withdrew,  and  gave  place  to  four  Ill-inch  rifle-guns,  , 
of  Storer's  Seventh  Massachusetts,  which  were  moved  from  the 
right  of  Yeatch's  division — the  section  of  twelve-pounders  of  the 
latter  battery,  under  Lieut.  Benson,  remaining  in  their  original 
position. 

Four  light  guns,  of  Trull's  Fourth  Massachusetts  battery, 
were  on  Yeatch's  left,  and  only  four  hundred  and  fifty  yards 
from  Fort  McDermett — so  near,  indeed,  that  the  men  could  hear 
the  music  of  a  brass  band  inside  that  fort.  These  guns  were 
doing  some  good  service.  The  other  section  of  the  battery, 
under  Lieut.  Briggs,  had  been  sent  to  the  extreme  left,  to  fire  on 
the  garrison's  transports  coming  to  the  wharf. 

Up  to  this  time  the  besiegers  had  in  use  nine  light  bat- 
teries. 

During  this  day  a  shell  from  Fort  McDermett  exploded  in 


CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE.  79 

the  camp  of  tlie  Twenty-ninth  Illinois,  killing  four  men  and 
wounding  nine  others,  all  of  Company  A. 

At  three  in  the  afternoon  Yeatch's  division  was  withdrawn  in 
order  to  proceed  with  a  supply  train  to  meet  Gen.  Steele ;  and 
his  front  was  occupied  by  Marshall's  brigade  of  the  Sixteenth 
corps.  The  whole  loss  in  Veatch's  division  had  been  nine 
killed  and  forty-one  wounded. 

In  Day's  brigade,  Benton's  division,  the  Twenty-ninth  Iowa 
was  detached  to  the  rear  on  picket  duty. 

In  Carr's  division  a  part  of  Moore's  brigade  front  was  severe- 
ly enfiladed  by  gims  off  to  his  right,  and  which  he  could  not 
reach ;  probably  Lumsden's  Tuscaloosa  battery.  The  part  of 
Moore's  front  which  was  most  exposed  to  this  fire  was  occupied 
by  two  companies  of  the  Thirty-third  Wisconsin  :  Company  C, 
Capt.  WiUiam  "Were,  Company  K,  Capt.  A.  H.  Fitch.  These 
officers,  with  their  companies,  without  flinching,  held  their 
position  under  a  raking  fire.  The  regiment  had  eleven  wound- 
ed, six  severely.  But  the  guns  that  inflicted  this  injury  were 
afterward  sUenced  by  a  Eodman  gun  of  the  First  Indiana  Hght 
battery  which,  at  night,  was  placed  in  a  masked  position  in 
front  of  the  first  parallel  of  Moore's  brigade. 

The  casualties  in  the  tw^  divisions  during  the  •  day  were  five 
killed  and  twenty-six  wounded. 

On  the  extreme  left  the  Louisianians,  at  about  one  in  the 
morning,  made  another  attack  on  Bertram's  brigade  front  then 
occupied  by  the  Ninety-fourth  Illinois,  Col.  McNulta.  The 
Nineteenth  Iowa  came  up  promptly  to  the  assistance  of  the 
Ninety-fourth,  and  the  saUy  party  was  driven  back  before  ap- 
proaching nearer  than  fifty  yards,  leaving  nine  dead  which 
were  buried  by  the  Ninety-fourth.  The  loss  of  the  Nineteenth 
and  Ninety-fourth  was  three  wounded. 

TJie  Navy. — ^During  the  afternoon  the  Octorara  opened  with 
effect  with  her  one  hundred-pounder  Parrott  on  Spanish  fort, 
at  a  distance  of  five  thousand  seven  hundred  yards. 


80  CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE. 

The  Garrison. — The  commanding  officer  of  the  district, 
Maj.-Gen.  D.  H.  Maurj,  visited  the  garrison,  examined  the 
Hnes  and  conckided  to  reheve  Thomas'  reserves  with  Holtz- 
claw's  Alabama  brigade,  i  In  the  evening  Lidell  sent  two 
regiments  of  Cockrell's  division  to  O.  Sibley's  to  reheve  Holtz- 
claw.  The  latter  called  in  his  pickets,  and  about  midnight 
his  brigade  was  wending  its  way  over  Saluda  hiU  and  down 
the  Pensacola  road  to  Blakely  landing,  where  it  embarked  on 
the  steamers  Mary  and  Ked  Gauntlet  for  Spanish  fort. 

The  casualties  a,t  Spanish  fort,  on  the  30th,  were  reported  to 
be  six  kiUed  and  forty  wounded.  But  it  is  probable  the  lists 
of  casualties  could  not  always  be  accurate.  Once  the  Nine- 
teenth Iowa,  on  the  extreme  left  of  the  besiegers,  in  extending 
their  approach,  dug  into  a  confederate  rifle  pit  where  they  found 
two  or  three  confederates  who  had  fallen  at  their  posts  some 
time  previously,  and  been  left  unburied  by  their  comrades. 
The  garrison  during  the  day  advanced  the  work  on  the  tread- 
way  over  the  marsh  to  Fort  Huger.- 

1  Lidell  to  G^ibson :  ''Blakel^/,  March  30. — Gen.  Maury  has  again  ordered  me 
to  relieve  the  reserve  brigade.  I  send  Holtzclaw's  brigade  to  relieve  them, 
and  you  must  have  the  reserves  ready  to  be  placed  on  the  boat  as  soon  as 
Holtzclaw  arrive's.     This  must  be  done  undei*  cover  of  darkness  without  fail." 

2  "  TJmrsday,  March  30. — Enemy  very  quiet  all  day.  But  one  piece  of  artil- 
lery fired  along  the  entire  hue,  and  but  little  sharpshooting.  The  line  is  visited 
and  examined  by  the  major-general  commanding.  A  monitor  opens  in  the  even- 
ing on  our  hospital  boat.  Picket  lines  of  two  forces  not  more  than  fifty  paces 
apart  in  several  places.  Our  treadway  to  Huger  nearly  finished.  Enemy  opens 
a  Parrott  battery  across  Bay  Minette  on  Batteries  Huger  and  Tracy,  and  on 
boats  attempting  to  land  at  those  points,  thus  stopping  our  steamboat  commu- 
nication with  these  points  to-day." — Diary  of  a  Confederate  Officer. 


'      CHAPTER    XI. 

SIEGE  OF  SPANISH  FORT— FIFTH  DAT. 

March.  31. — Details  from  Carr's  division  had  constructed  a 
sunken  battery  on  the  sliore  of  Bay  Minette  near  the  Whit- 
wortli  and  the  steel  gun  abeady  in  position.  Eight  thirty- 
pounder  Parrotts,  of  Battery  H,  First  Indiana  heavy  artiUery, 
Capt.  W.  P.  Wimmer,  and  Battery  K,  Oapt.  Cox,  had  been 
placed  there  the  night  before,  and  in  the  morning  opened  on 
some  u'onclads  and  transports  which  were  lying  with  steam  up 
near  Forts  Huger  and  Tracy.  Two  side-wheelers  and  a  trans- 
port were  in  a  few  minutes  compelled  to  move  up  stream  ;  but 
the  fourth  vessel  was  of  the  turtle-back  description,  and  though 
repeatedly  hit  by  solid  shot  remained  under  fire  until  evening. 
About  one,  p.  M.,  a  transport  attempted  to  pass  down  to  the  fort, 
but  was  driven  back.  The  forts  were  continually  signalling,  and 
twdce  in  the  following  night  a  transport  attempted  to  run  down 
to  them,  but  was  driven  back  each  time.  Fort  Huger  answered 
the  fire  of  these  thirty-pounders  briskly,  but  they  sustained  no 
injuiy. 

Capt.  W.  H.  Blankenship,  of  the  Fn-st  Indiana  heavy  artillery, 
with  his  battery  (B),  eight  YIH-inch  mortars,  had  arrived  at 
Stark's  wharf  the  night  of  the  28th,  and,  by  working  aU  night  in 
the  heavy  rain,  got  his  battery  on  the  top  of  the  hill.  The  29th, 
he  moved  out  near  Gen.  A.  J.  Smith's  headquarters.  The  30th, 
the  battery  was  divided,  forty  men  and  four  mortars,  under 
Lieut.  Baper,  being  sent  to  the  extreme  left ;  with  fifty  men  and 
the  other  four  mortars  he  proceeded  to  Carr's  division ;  and  at 

6 


82  CAMPAIGN     OF    MOBILE. 

three,  A.  M.,  of  the  31st,  had  the  mortars  in  position  on  a  knoll  in 
rear  of  the  left  of  Geddes'  brigade  (Battery  No.  18\  nine  hun- 
dred jai'ds  fi-oni  Eed  fort,  bnt  only  six  hnndi-ed  from  the  main 
works  of  the  garrison  in  his  immediate  fifont.  He  commenced 
firing  at  eight  o'clock,  and  fired  tliii'ty-eight  roimds. 

In  Granger's  fi-ont,  Capt.  Bongh  (Battery  C,  Fii-st  Indiana) 
got  his  "\T;iI-inch  ho-^itzers  in  position  on  the  brow  of  a  hill 
eight  luiuih'od  yards  fi'om  McDermett,  and  delivered  an  accu- 
rate fii*e.  There  was  a  brisk  engagement  of  the  batteries  on 
both  sides  all  along  the  line, 

Morse's  Fourteenth  Imliana  light  battery,  at  Carr's  left, 
tlioiigh  its  works  had  been  strengthened,  was  much  annoyed 
by  Sloeum's  columbiad,  from  which  shells  (weighing  over  fifty 
pounds')  had  been  coming  with  tlieii"  dismal  flutter  and  with 
ilisagreeable  precision.  About  ten,  A.  M.,  one  of  these  shells 
struck  a  limber  of  the  Foiu'teenth  battery,  and,  igniting  the 
contents  (eighty  pounds  of  powder\,  blew  it  in  pieces,  killing 
one  man,  seriously  wounding  two,  and  slightly  wounding  several 
others.  During  the  day,  another  man  of  the  battery  was  dan- 
gerously woimded  by  a  Minie-ball. 

The  First  and  Thii'd  Indiana  and  Second  Iowa  Hght  batteries 
were  also  actively  engaged  in  the  Sixteenth  corps'  front,  and 
suffering  but  little. 

In  the  Thii-teenth  coi-ps,  the  chief  engineer.  Col.  PaKi'ey — son 
of  the  historian — designated  the  siege  gTms  to  be  put  in  posi- 
tion, with  orders  that  twelve  large  rifle  guns  shoiild  be  placed 
to  give  a  reverse  and  enfilade  fire  on  the  left  of  the  garrison's 
line,  in  fi-ont  of  the  Sixteenth  corps.  Capt.  Tan  Lieuw  and 
Capt.  Morton,  of  the  Ninety-seventli  United  States  colored  in- 
fantry, were  assigned  to  duty  with  the  corps  as  assistant-engi- 
neei-s.  The  Seventh  Vermont  veteran  infantry  and  the  Thii-ty- 
fifth  Wisconsin  infantry,  of  Benton's  division,  were  assigned  to 
special  duty  on  siege-works,  were  divided  into  fom-  rehefs,  to 


CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE.  83 

work  eiglit  hours  each  in  succession  ;  and  the  two  officers 
named  above,  with  Capt.  H.  G.  Palfrey,  Ninety-eighth  United 
States  colored  infantry,  with  the  assistant-engineer  of  the  di- 
vision, in  whose  front  the  work  lay,  formed  a  roster,  one  being 
on  duty  with  each  detail  in  succession. 

On  the  right  of  the  Tliirteenth  corps,  the  Twenty-first  and 
Twenty-sixth  New  York  light  batteries  maintained  the  battle 
against  large  projectiles  well,  and  were  the  theme  of  praise 
among  the  infantry  regiments  around  them.  In  the  Twenty- 
first,  Privates  John  Wilson  and  John  Daley  had  been  killed,  and 
Private  George  A.  White  wounded — the  first  casualty  on  the 
27th,  the  two  last  on  the  29th.  On  Granger's  left,  the  four  light 
guns  of  Trull's  Fourth  Massachusetts  battery  were  withdrawn, 
to  give  place  to  Mack's  (Black-horse  battery)  eighteen-pounders. 
In  Bertram's  front,  two  of  the  Vlll-inch  (sixty-four-pounders) 
mortars  of  Battery  B,  First  Indiana  heavy  artillery,  opened  on 
Fort  McDermett.i 

A  Gallant  Exploit. — The  hulk  of  a  steamboat,  used  as  quar- 
ters at  Fort  Huger,  having  been  cut  loose  to  give  range  to 
guns,  floated  down  and  lodged  diagonally  opposite  McDermett, 
and  about  five  hundred  yards  distant.  In  a  few  minutes  Lieut. 
Ridnour,  acting  aide-de-camp,  with  Sergeant  Charles  Ashby, 
Company  G,  and  Privates  Wm.  H.  Morgan  and  A.  C.  Spreadan, 
of  Company  A,  Louis  Eoy,  Company  B,  and  Eobert  Pratt, 
Company  C,  of  the  Ninety-fourth  Illinois,  paddled  out  in  a 
small  skiff  to  examine  it.  Some  of  the  squadron,  at  first  sus- 
pectmg  them  to  be  from  the  garrison,  commenced  shelling  them, 
but,  by  signals,  were  soon  made  to  cease.     The  garrison  then 


1  Gen.  Lldell  to  Col.  Garner :  "  Blakely,  March  31. — Gen.  Gibson  reports  the 
enemy  have  erected  a  battery  of  heavy  guns  in  front  of  Battery  McDermett 
(No.  2).  Have  fired  a  sixty-four-pounder.  Artillery  oflBcers  report  a  Parrott 
battery  in  front  of  No.  2.  Opened  also  thirteen  guns  on  Battery  No.  4,  and 
fired  cohorn  mortars  on  the  left." 


84  CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE. 

opened  fire  on  tliem  from  all  the  guns  bearing  in  tliat  direction, 
and  with  musketry.  But  tliey  made  their  way  through  the 
shower  of  shot  and  shells  to  the  object  of  their  trip,  coolly 
boarded  and  examiaed  it,  returned  to  their  skiff  and  paddled 
themselves  back,  but  now  under  cover  of  the  fii-e  from  the 
squadron.  None  of  them  was  harmed,  though  their  skiff  was 
hit  a  number  of  times.  And  as  they  came  back  they  were 
greeted  by  the  loud  cheers  of  thousands  of  their  comrades, 
who  stood  watching  them  from  the  bluff.  The  garrison  also 
beheld  and  admired  their  gallantry. 

Sortie  and  Capture  of  Skirmishers. — On  the  night  of  the  30th, 
Capt.  E.  B.  Stearns,  Company  K,  Seventh  Vermont,  with  a  part 
of  his  company,  had  reheved  Capt.  Parker's  company  on  the 
skirmish  line  ia  front  of  the  confederate  battery  No.  3.  There 
was  a  Httle  firing  during  the  night,  and  Capt.  Stearns  advanced 
his  line  about  twenty-five  yards,  and  dug  new  pits — though 
there  was  only  one  spade  found  by  the  detail — which  brought 
him  in  advance  of  the  brigade  line  of  skirmishers.  He 
was  within  one  hundi"ed  and  fifty  yards  of  the  works  of 
the  garrison,  and  the  musket  fire  by  his  men  was  exceed- 
ingly troublesome  to  their  gunners.  Soon  after  noon  a 
shot  from  that  vicinity  had  instantly  killed  Col.  Wm.  E. 
Burnett,  of  Texas,  confederate  chief  of  artillery,  and  a 
valuable  officer.  He  had  for  a  moment  taken  a  rifle  in 
his  hand,  and  was  in  the  act  of  aiming  it  from  behind  the 
breastworks  through  a  wooden  embrasure.  Capt.  Barnes  in 
Battery  McDermett  had  been  giving  considerable  attention  to 
these  skirmishers,  and  they  were  also  subject  to  a  fire  from  Bed 
fort.  Beginning  early  in  the  morning  Barnes  shelled  the  line 
with  a  sisi-pounder  and  a  twenty-foui-pounder  howitzer  for 
three  or  four  houi's,  and  made  some  of  the  men  on  Stearns' 
left  fall  back  into  the  ravine.  There  was  now  a  lull,  and  the 
skirmishers  popped  out  their  heads  and  did  some  firing  them- 


CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE.  85 

selves,  for  thej  were  fair  marksmen,  and  had  plenty  of  pluck. 
Barnes  then  brought  out  two  six-pounders  from  McDermett, 
placed  them  on  the  hill-top,  and  again  fiercely  shelled  Capt. 
Steams'  position.  The  latter  concluded  it  would  be  best  to  fall 
back  a  short  distance  as  soon  as  it  became  dark,  and  sent  Cor- 
poral Crothers  to  regimental  headquarters  for  instructions.  He 
also  sent  word  that  he  expected  to  be  assaulted  before  dark, 
asked  that  the  guns  over  at  McDermett  be  silenced,  and  the 
works  of  the  garrison  in  his  front  be  sheUed,  so  that  he  could 
fall  back  under  cover  of  the  fire.  The  severe  fire  which  Capt, 
Stearns  was  exposed  to  had  already  attracted  the  attention  of 
Col.  Holbrook,  the  commanding  officer  of  his  regiment. 

Arrangements  were  made  in  the  garrison  for  a  sortie.  Capt. 
Clement  Watson  of  Gen.  Gibson's  staff  volunteered  to  lead  it. 
The  rest  of  the  party  was  to  consist  of  Lieut.  A.  C.  Newton, 
Company  E,  Fourth  Louisiana  battalion,  and  thirty  men,  fifteen 
of  whom  were  picked. 

At  two  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  preparatory  to  the  sortie,  the 
garrison  caused  the  slashings  and  brush  on  the  right  of  Capt. 
Stearns  to  be  fired,  and  the  smoke  blew  over  and  in  front  of 
him. 

Having  stood  the  terrific  shelling,  he  was  now  most  appre- 
hensive of  being  burned  or  smoked  out,  for  there  were  several 
trees  near  him,  and  the  wind  was  sending  the  fire  in  his  direc- 
tion. He  gave  the  order  for  his  men  to  faU  back  singly.  But 
a  hundred  bullets  came  flying  at  the  first  man  who  started,  and 
Capt.  Steams  immediately  countermanded  the  order.  During 
the  severe  shelling  a  few  of  his  men  had  retreated  from  their 
rifle-pits,  one  of  whom.  Private  Stoors,  was  wounded.  Just  be- 
fore sunset  the  fire  had  extended  along  his  rear  and  on  his  left, 
making  so  dense  a  smoke  as  to  entirely  seclude  him.  But  the 
guns  of  the  garrison  were  still  bearing  on  him  and  now  opened 
in  a  terrific  manner.     Li  less  than  ten  minutes  fifteen  shells 


86  CAMPAIGN     OP     MOBILE. 

were  exploded  inside,  and  directly  over  tlie  single  pit  in  whicli 
Capt.  Stearns  and  ten  of  his  men  were  stationed.  Still  ex- 
pecting an  assault  lie  ordered  liis  men  to  fix  bayonets. 

It  was  now  sunset.  The  cannonading  ceased.  The  same 
instant  Capt.  Watson  and  party  were  over  the  garrison  works, 
and,  concealed  by  the  smoke,  vigorously  rushed  upon  their  ex- 
pected prisoners.  Capt.  Stearns  gave  the  command  to  fire, 
which  was  obeyed  by  a  majority  of  his  men.  The  next  moment 
every  man  had  a  musket  at  his  head,  with  a  summons  to  surren- 
der. The  demand  was  compHed  with.  Capt.  Stearns  and 
twenty  of  his  men  were  captured.  Without  parley  and  without 
delay,  their  captors  received  their  arms  and  hurried  them  away 
into  the  garrison.  None  of  the  sortie  party  stopped  to  occupy 
the  pits.^  The  prisoners  were  rapidly  taken  a  roundabout  way 
to  a  position  near  the  water,  which  appeared  to  be  sheltered 
from  the  fire  of  the  besiegers  by  artificial  ravines.  But  no  curi- 
osity now  inspired  them  to  notice  the  interior  of  the  garrison. 
They  were  confident  their  gallant  comrades  left  behind  would, 
before  many  days,  have  full  possession  of  everything  around 
them ;  and  the  regret  that  they  could  not  be  present  to  partici- 
pate in  the  enthusiasm  of  victory,  increased  that  distress  of 
mind  which  is  ever  experienced  by  the  patriotic  prisoner. 
The  prospect  before  them  was  dreary. 

Capt.  Steams  was  soon  notified  that  he  was  to  have  an  inter- 
view with  the  general  commanding  the  garrison^  and  was 
accordingly  conducted  down  into  a  ravine  some  sixty  or  seventy 
feet  deep,  and  about  thirty  yards  wide  at  the   opening.     The 

1  Gen.  Udell  to  Col.  Garner  {Chief  of  Staff)  :  "  Blahely,  March  31.— Gen.  Gib- 
son has  just  telegraphed  me  the  following :  '  Capt.  Clement  S.  Watson,  of  my 
staff,  and  A.  C.  Newton,  Co.  E,  Fom-th  Louisiana  battalion,  led  a  sortie  at  sun- 
set, and  drove  the  enemy  from  his  advance  on  battery  3,  killed  a  large  number, 
and  captm-ed  one  captain  and  twenty-one  enlisted  men.  These  brave  comrades 
deserve  the  thanks,  and  have  entitled  themselves  to  the  admiration,  of  this 
army.' " 


CAMPAIGN     OP     MOBILE.  87 

ravine  was  triangular,  witli  its  base  facing  nortli.  In  tlie  apex 
were  two  wall  tents,  into  one  of  wMcli  lie  was  taken  and  in- 
troduced to  Gen.  Gibson,  'ibere  were  present  Capt.  Watson 
and  the  lieutenant  wlio  accompanied  liim.  The  general  invited 
Capt.  Stearns  to  partake  of  his  supper — a  frugal  repast,  con- 
sisting of  cold  fowl,  cold  water,  with  tin  table  furniture.  This  in- 
vitation was  accepted.  It  was  a  compliment  which  would  have 
been  paid  onlj  to  a  gallant  officer.  The  garrison  had  the  best 
opportunity  to  judge  of  the  courage  and  fortitude  of  their  pris- 
oners, and  the  general  was  generous  in  acknowledging  the 
tenacity  and  courage  with  which,  under  a  most  severe  fire, 
they  held  to  their  position ;  and  the  intelligence  and  address 
of  both  the  captors  and  prisoners  seems  to  have  excited  mutual 
respect. 

After  Capt.  Stearns'  interview  with  the  general,  and  he  had 
withdrawn  from  his  tent,  he  had  some  conversation  with  j)ersons 
of  lower  rank,  fi'om  whom  he  learned  that  they  had  "  lost  heart" 
in  the  success  of  the  Confederacy.^ 

The  casualties  of  the  garrison  on  the  31st  were  reported  to  be 
six  killed  and  twenty-six  wounded. 

1  "  Headquarters  Fobces,  Spanish  Fort, 
"  March  31, 1865. 
"  The  commanding  officer  desires  to  make  known  to  tlie  troops  his  admirar 
tion  of  their  unsurpassed  valor  and  endurance,  and  his  entire  confidence  in 
their  ability  to  defend  this  outpost  of  the  defences  of  Mobile. 

"  Thousands  of  your  countrymen  with  anxious  hearts  turn  toward  you. 
"  Continue  to  prove  yourselves  worthy  of  their  confidence,  and  of  the  cause 
which  it  is  your  privilege  to  defend. 

"  Resolve  to  do  your  whole  duty,  every  hour  of  each  coming  day,  and  with 
the  blessing  of  Heaven  we  shall  continue  to  achieve  those  successes  which  so 
far  have  crowned  your  eflforts. 

"Randall  Lee  Gibson, 

"  Brigadier  Qeneral." 
"  Heavy  firing  aroimd  Spanish  fort  all  day.     Col.  Burnett,  chief  of  artillery 
to  the  mojor-general  commanding,  killed.    Picket  line  of  the  enemy  in  front  of 
our  line  on  right  centre  dislodged  and  twenty-one  prisoners  captured  with  no 


CHAPTEE    XII. 

SIEGE  OF  SPANISH  FORT— SIXTH  DAT. 

There  was  a  feeling  of  despondency  in  Mobile,  but  it  was  not 
mucli  shown.  Some  meetings  were  held  to  create  a  martial 
feelmg  among  tlie  citizens  ;  the  few  ablebodied  men  who  re- 
mained in  the  city  were  armed,  did  occasional  duty  as  patrols 
or  guards,  and  were  expected  if  a  crisis  required  to  go  into  the 
trenches.  Orders  were  pubhshed  for  the  removal  of  the  slaves 
out  of  the  city.  The  people  cooked  and  sent  over  provisions  to 
the  garrison,  bestowed  every  attention  upon  the  wounded,  and 
manifested  a  devotion  well  calculated  tO)  keep  up  the  resolution 
of  their  defenders.  The  daily  newspapers  were  prohibited  from 
publishiag  details  of  the  operations  and  casualties,  and  confined 
what  they  pubhshed  to  general  statements.  "  The  enemy," 
they  confessed  "is  strong,  reliant,  and  ingenious."  Yet  they 
claimed  that  their  defensive  works  were  iasurmountable.  "  But 
better,"  they  argued,  "than  aU  these  safeguards  is  the  valor  of 
our  soldiers." 

Owing  to  restrictions  on  the  press  only  a  few  of  the  many 
letters  written  from  the  garrison  were  pubhshed.  One  corre- 
spondent said  that  his  shoulder  was  lame  from  shooting — that 
he  "  he  shot  under  a  log  which  the  boys  called  '  skull  crackers.'  " 
Another   soldier  correspondent,  in  not  so  good  humor,  wrote 

loss  on  our  side.  A  very  large  work  commenced  in  front  of  our  left.  No 
material  advance  since  yesterday  in  the  enemy's  approaches.  Enemy  opens 
upon  my  engineer  force  on  the  marsh,  and  causes  temporary  discontinuance  of 
work  on  tread  way," — Diary  of  a  Gonftdefrale  Officer. 


CAMPAiaN     OP     MOBILE.  89 

tliat  there  was  an  immense  fleet  in  tlie  bay;  tliat  tlie  vessels 
contained  the  families  of  the  Yankee  officers  impatient  to  oc- 
cupy the  fine  houses  in  Mobile,  and  appropriate  to  themselves 
the  furniture  and  costly  wares. 

The  Garrison  {April  1). — la  compliance  with  special  orders 
coffee  and  sugar  were  issued  for  the  benefit  of  the  wounded. 
It  appears  that  the  ordinary  army  rations  issued  to  the  garri- 
son were  meal  and  a  poor  article  of  bacon. 

The  brigade  of  Brig.-Gen.  J.  T,  Holtzclaw,  having  reheved 
the  Alabama  reserves,  was  now  in  position  on  the  left  centre 
of  the  garrison. 

This  brigade  had  seen  much  hard  fighting  during  the  war ; 
and  its  last  important  battle  had  been  Nashville. 

It  was  composed  of  the  following  organizations,  aU  of  Ala- 
bama troops :  Fifty-eighth  and  Thirty-second,  consoHdated ; 
the  Thirty-sixth,  Col.  T.  H.  Hemden ;  the  Eighteenth,  Col.  P. 
F.  Hunley — Holtzclaw's  old  regiment,  which  had  helped  to 
capture  the  Eighth  Iowa  at  Shiloh ;  the  Twenty-first,  Col.  J. 
Williams,  which  had  been  badly  cut  up  at  Shiloh,  then  sent  to 
Mobile,  where  it  afterward  remained;  and  the  Thirty-eighth, 
commanded  by  Capt.  Bussy,  the  colonel  and  major  being  pris- 
oners. 

The  brigade  was  so  posted  that  its  right,  consisting  of  the 
Thirty-eighth,  came  opposite  the  (garrison)  battery  No.  3, 
bringing  it  opposite  the  right  of  Benton's  division.  Next,  on 
the  left,  were  the  Twenty-first  and  Eighteenth,  reaching  to 
Battery  No.  4  (Bed  fort),  then  the  Fifty-eighth  and  Thirty- 
sixth  extending  to  the  sand-bag  battery;  the  four  last  being 
opposite  McArthur's  division.  Next  came  Ector's  Texas  bri- 
gade. But  Ector  had  lost  a  leg  at  Atlanta  and  had  not  yet 
resumed  command.  Its  right  was  a  North  CaroHna  regiment, 
Col.  Coleman ;  and  next  were .  posted  the  consohdated  regi- 
ments, about  four,  fronting   Carr's   division.     They  had  feeen 


90  CAMPAIGN     OP     MOBILE. 

captured  as  cavalry  at  Arkansas  post,  and  for  eighteen  'months 
had  served  as  infantry.  Col.  Andrews  of  Texas  now  command- 
ed the  brigade ;  Col.  Bush  Jones  of  the  Fifty-eighth  Alabama 
commanded  Holtzclaw's  brigade,  and '  Holtzclaw  commanded 
both  brigades,  comprising  the  left  wing  of  the  garrison. 

The  garrison  did  not  as  yet  feel  much  pressed,  but  was 
obhged  to  work  industriously.  Orders  were  now  issued  to 
economize  ammunition,  and  immediate  leave  of  absence  for 
twenty-four  hours  was  promised  each  man  who  would  pro- 
cure twenty-five  pounds  of  lead.  This  caused  many  hun- 
dred pounds  of  the  besiegers  bullets  to  be  picked  up. 

On  the  right,  in  McDermett,  Capt.  Barnes  received  from 
Mobile,  two  twenty-pounder  Parrotts,  and  one  Ylll-inch 
mortar.  The  latter  was  put  in  position  one  hundred  yards 
inside  the  fort,  on  the  interior  slope  of  the  hill.  These  in- 
creased the  whole  number   of  his   pieces  to   eighteen. 

To  reinforce  the  garrison  at  Blakely,  it  was  proposed  to 
withdraw  Ector's  brigade  from  Spanish  fort.  But,  on  the 
urgent  recommendation  of  Gibson  and  Holtzclaw,  it  was 
allowed  to  remain.^ 

The  casualties  of  the  garrison  for  this  day  were  reported 
to  be  four  killed  and  seventeen  wounded.^ 

1  Lidell  to  Gfihson :  "  April  1. — Gen.  Maury  has  ordered  me  to  send  no  more 
men  to  Spanisli  fort,  and  to  withdraw  Ector's  brigade.  I  do  not  know  his  ob- 
ject. Our  lines  are  two  thousand  yards  long,  and  I  have  not  enough  men  here, 
by  one  thousand,  to  man  our  fortifications,  and  Steele's  corps  is  reported  to  be 
larger  than  both  corps  in  front  of  your  works." 

Lidell  to  Maury  :  "  April  1. — The  following  despatch  just  received  from 
Gen.  Gibson :  '  In  the  opinion  of  Gen.  HoltzclaAv  and  myself,  the  withdrawal 
of  Ector's  brigade  renders  Spanish  fort  untenable,  with  the  small  force,  left 
against  the  large  force,  now  pressing  at  every  point.  While  this  [is]  mj  candid 
conviction,  I  will  continue  heartily  and  with  renewed  eflbrts  to  do  my  utmost 
to  hold  this  place.'  Signed, '  E.  L.  Gibson,  Brig.-Gen.'  Please  decide  this  mat- 
ter at  once  ;  the  boats  have  gone  to  Spanish  fort." 

2  "  I  made  a  careful  examination  of  the  lines  at  Spanish  fort  to-day.  Our 
works  show  signs  of  injury  on  our  right,  but  no  damage,  as  yet,  done  to  our 


CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE.  91 

Operations  of  the  Besiegers. — The  captain  of  tlie  steamer  Mary 
had  reported  to  Gen.  Lidell,  at  Blakely,  the  efiectiveness  of  the 
fchirty-poimders  (Fii'st  Indiana)  on  the  shore  of  Bay  Minette ; 
whereupon  that  indefatigable  officer  went  out  and  selected  a 
good  position,  on  the  north  bank  of  the  Minette  bayou,  for  a 
Ught  battery,  which  would  give  Wimmer  and  Cox  a  reverse  and 
raking  fire.  In  the  night,  two  ten-pounder  rifles,  of  Grayson's 
battery,  moved  out  from  Blakely  and  occupied  the  position, 
which  was  only  about  one  thousand  yards  from  the  battery  on 
Bay  Minette  shore.  Scarcely  any  work  was  done,  for  it  was  un- 
necessary, as  the  position  was  masked  by  the  woods ;  and,  as 
Steele  was  approaching  from  the  north,  it  was  evident  the 
guns  could  not  remain  there  long.  Grayson  opened  at  daylight 
with  the  two  rifled  guns,  and  with  decided  effect.  His  firing 
was  not  wholly  unexpected  to  Capt,  Wimmer,  for  he  had  heard 
the  noise  of  work  in  that  direction  the  preceding  night.  Gray- 
son kept  up  a  constant  and  accurate  fire,  raking  the  Bay  Mi- 
nette battery  from  right  to  left,  "Wimmer  had  no  protection 
on  his  right,  and  his  magazine  was  exposed.  Nor  was  he 
able  to  return  Grayson's  fire.  He  immediately  commenced 
throwing  up  works  to  protect  his  magazine,  his  subordinate 
officers  and  men  working  with  great  intrej)idity  and  zeal.  All 
this  while  a  heavy  fire  was  going  on  between  his  guns  and 
Fort  Huger  and  the  gunboat  Morgan.  At  half-past  four,  p.  m., 
he  had   constructed  works  to  effectively  secure  his  magazine, 


left.  No  signs  of  regular  sapping  on  the  part  of  the  enemy,  as  yet ;  his  ap- 
proaches having  been  made  up  to  this  time  by  his  skirmishers  advancing  them- 
selves at  night,  and  protecting  themselves  by  irregular  pits.  Their  proximity 
is  such,  in  front  of  our  salients,  that  I  determine  to  try  some  countermines,  and 
order  preparation  made  to  that  end.  Enemy  opens  several  mortars  on  Spanish 
fort.  Capt.  Grayson's  battery  of  Parrotts,  and  the  confederate  steamer  Mor- 
gan, open  fire  on  Bay  Minette  batteries.  Enemy  appears  in  front  of  Blakely, 
and  captures  about  one  hundred  men  of  the  Forty-sixth  Mississippi  regiment 
by  a  dash  on  our  outpost.", — Diary  of  a  Gonfed&rale  Officer. 


92  CAMPAIGN     or     MOBILE. 

and  also  got  one  giui  in  position  to  ansTver  Grayson.  Bnt 
tibie  latter  had,  hj  tliis  hour,  been  called  back  with  his  guns 
inside  the  works  at  Blakelj.  It  had  been  a  furious  day  for 
Wimmer  and  Cox's  batteries,  yet  they  had  bnt  thi-ee  men 
injured. 

Oapt.  Blaukeuship  commenced  work  with  his  "\  ili-inch  and 
X-iuch  mortars  (left,  of  Geddes'  brigade,  Carr's  diyision),  at 
half-past  seyen  o'clock,  a.  m. — lired  fifteen  rounds,  and  receiyed 
orders  to  cease  firing.  At  noon  he  opened  again,  and  threw 
forty-seven  shells  into  Eed  fort,  out  of  fifty-one  fii'ed,  dis- 
moimting  a  gim  and  killing  two  men.  Late  in  the  eyening, 
he  threw  twenty-nine  raore  shells  inside  the  gaiTison  works. 

Hendiick's  Battery  L,  First  Indiana,  haying  arriyed  the 
preyious  eyening,  two  of  his  thii-ty-pounder  Parrott^,  imder 
immediate  command  of  Lieut.  Parker,  opened  a  dii'ect  fire, 
early  in  the  morning,  fi'om  McAi'thur's  right,  and  were  imme- 
diately answered  by  a  concentrated  fire  from  sis  guns,  including 
one  ^TLI-ineh  cohunbiad.  Gun  No.  3,  Corporal  James  Busby, 
gunner,  dismounted  one  of  the  ganison  gims  diu'ing  the  first 
day's  firing. 

Some  briUiant  shots  were  made  by  the  m-ineh  i-ifles  of  the 
Seventh  Massachusetts — they  haying  struck  the  Brooks  rifle, 
in  Port  MeDermett,  five  times  while  it  was  being  fixed  twice. 

Along  the  line,  generally,  there  was  not  so  much  artilleiy 
firing  as  on  the  preceding  day. 

In  the  Thhteenth  coi"ps  work  was  progressing  on  three 
heavy  batteries — Xos.  1.  i?,  and  5.  After  dark  Capt.  Mack 
had  his  eighteen-poundei's  hauled  into  position  with  ropes, 
bv  hand,  and  got  ready  to  open  fire  the  following  morning. 

Bertram's  brigade,  on  the  left,  was  pushing  its  advance  line  up 
to  MeDermett  rapidly,  day  and  night.  But  it  had  some  natural 
advantage  in  approaching  under  cover  of  the  west  slope  of  the 
bluft*   on  which  the   extreme  left   of   their  line  rested.     This 


CAMPAIGN     OP     MOBILE.  93 

afforded  at  least  one  approacli ;  yet  the  side  of  the  bluff  was 
steep,  and  considerable  work  had  been  done  to  excavate  from 
its  side  a  terrace-walk.  Starting  fr-om  the  rear  line,  where 
the  view  of  the  bay  and  islands  was  extensive,  the  skirmish- 
ers went  down  a  few  steps  to  the  terrace-walk,  or  covered  way, 
and  passing  along  that  some  hundreds  of  yards,  they  turned 
to  the  right,  into  an  approach,  and  then,  going  another  hun- 
dred yards,  came  into  their  present  advance  line  of  continuous 
rifle-pits,  which  was  now  less  than  two  hundi'ed  yards  from 
the  guns  of  McDermett.  This  day  the  Ninety-fourth  Illinois 
was  on  duty  at  the  front,  and  one  of  its  men  (Thomas  Wilson, 
of  Company  A)  was  killed. 

Next,  on  the  right  of  Bertram,  was  Marshall's  brigade  of  the 
Sixteenth  corps,  occupying  and  advancing  the  works  commenced 
by  Veatch's  division  ;  its  right  resting  in  the  deep  ravine  which 
was  in  range  of  the  guns  of  Old  Spanish  fort.  Next,  on  the 
right,  was  Grier's  brigade  of  Benton's  division,  in  which  Capts. 
G.  G.  Stearns,  of  the  Seventy-seventh  Illinois,  and  Campbell,  of 
the  Ninety-sixth  Ohio,  had  been  detailed  to  take  charge  of  work 
in  the  trenches.  The  Twenty-eighth  and  Seventy-seventh  Illi- 
nois were  in  fr-ont,  and  at  night  a  sortie  was  made  on  then-  skir- 
mish line,  which  was  handsomely  repulsed. 

Next,  on  the  right.  Day's  brigade  (Benton's  division)  was  re- 
duced to  two  regiments,  the  Fiftieth  Indiana  and  Ninety-first 
Illinois  ;  and  on  the  right  of  that  was  the  brigade  of  Col.  Krez, 
whose  skirmishers  were  holding  an  exposed  position,  and  meet- 
ing with  some  loss. 

The  left  of  the  Sixteenth  corps  was  now  Hubbard's  brigade 
(McArthur's  division),  in  whose  front  an  approacli  had  been 
extended  to  within  two  hundred  yards  of  the  main  works  of 
the  garrison,  and  his  second  pa,rallel  there  constructed.  This 
was  manned  with  two  hundred  and  fifty  of  the  best  sharp- 
shooters of  the  brigade,  under  charge  of  Capt.  A.  P.  French, 


94  CAMPAIGN     OP     MOBILE. 

Fifth  Minnesota ;  the  detail  being  permanent.  The  operations 
in  that  brigade  were  conducted  with  equal  vigor  and  system. 
The  loss  in  the  brigade,  during  the  day,  was,  in  the  Thirty- 
third  Missouri,  three  killed  and  wounded,  including  Capt.  W. 
Irwin ;  in  the  Fifth  Minnesota,  one  wounded. 

In  McMillan's  brigade,  there  was  one  killed  in  the  Twenty- 
sixth  Indiana,  and  one  wounded  in  the  Thirty-third  Illinois. 

In  Carr's  division,  the  works  were  also  progressing  with  vigor. 
Moore's  brigade,  in  the  centre,  at  night,  commenced  work  on  a 
third  parallel,  thirty  yards  in  advance  of  the  second.  The 
casualties  in  the  division  were  two  killed  and  eight  wounded, 
two  of  the  latter  mortally. 

The  Navy. — On  this  day  another  vessel  was  sunk  by  a  tor- 
pedo. At  one,  P.  M.,  the  tinclad  steamer  Eodolph,  Acting 
Master  N.  M.  Dyer,  in  obedience  to  signal  from  flagship, 
weighed  anchor,  passed  within  hail,  and,  receiving  orders  to 
take  a  barge  alongside  containing  apparatus  for  raising  the 
Milwaukie,  proceeded  with  it  inside  the  Blakely  bar.  The  Eo- 
dolph  had  crossed  the  bar,  and  was  standing  up  toward  the 
wreck  of  the  Milwaukie,  when,  at  2:40,  p.m.,  being  directly 
between  the  Chickasaw  and  Winnebago,  she  exploded  a  torpedo 
under  her  starboard  bow,  and  rapidly  sank  in  twelve  feet  of 
water.  It  appeared  that  a  hole  had  been  made  in  her  ten  feet 
in  diameter.  By  this  casualty  four  of  her  crew  were  killed  and 
seven  wounded,  of  whom  five  were  colored  men. 

Here,  for  a  short  time,  let  us  withdraw  attention  from  the 
operations  at  Spanish  fort,  and  observe  the  movement  of  Steele's 
column  out  from  Pensacola. 


CHAPTER    XIII. 

OPERATIONS  OF  STEELE'S  COLUMN  FROM  PENSACOLA  BAY. 

Maj-Gen.  F.  Steele  arrived  at  Barrancas  on  the  28tli  of  Feb- 
ruary, and  assumed  command  of  the  troops  operating  from 
Pensacola  bay.  The  Second  and  Third  brigades  of  the  Second 
division,  Thirteenth  army  corps,  with  the  Second  Connecticut 
and  Fifteenth  Massachusetts  light  batteries,  five  thousand  two 
hundred  effective  men,  were  already  at  that  place  and  in  readi- 
ness to  march.  A  few  days  afterward  Hawkins'  colored  divis- 
ion, five  thousand  five  hundred  effective,  arrived,  and  by  the' 
middle  of  March,  Lucas'  cavalry  brigade,  two  thousand  five 
hundred,  had  landed.  The  whole  force  amounted  to  thirteen 
thousand  two  hundred. 

Steele  at  once,  in  person,  began  a  thorough  inspection  of  his 
troops ;  takmg  one  regiment  at  a  time  (formed  in  column  of 
companies),  and  going  through  it  examining  the  arms,  accoutre- 
ments, and  clothing  of  each  soldier. 

A  heavy  pontoon  train  had  arrived,  and  Capt.  Boyle  of  the 
Thirty-fourth  Iowa  drilled  his  company  successfully  in  the  prac- 
tice of  laying  the  bridge,  but  Gen.  Steele  wisely  concluded  to 
leave  it  behind. 

On  the  10th  of  March,  the  Second  division  got  orders  to  move 
to  Pensacola,  and  repair  the  wharf.  This  was  in  order  that  the 
place  could  be  available  as  a  depot  and  base,  if  subsequent 
operations  should  require  it.  The  same  afternoon  the  division 
commander  went  up  to  Pensacola  in  a  tug  and  ascertained  what 
work  needed  to  be  done. 


96  CAMPAIGN     OF    MOBILE. 

At  sunrise  the  next  morning  (Marcli  11),  tlie  division  was 
a  mile  from  camp,  just  entering  the  woods  on  the  eastern 
part  of  the  peninsula,  with  the  train  of  eighty  wagons  of  sup- 
pUes.  The  distance  round  the  head  of  the  bayou  to  Pensacola 
is  thu'teen  miles,  the  road  sandy  and  very  heavy.  It  was  the 
same  road  over  which  Jackson  marched  in  1818  with  his  army 
of  three  thousand  men  and  two  pieces  of  artillery.  Some  of  the 
road  was  imder  water ;  and  it  was  also  necessary  to  construct 
a  few  small  bridges.  Two  miles  oiit  of  Pensacola,  the  road  for 
several  hundred  yards  was  obstructed  with  slashings  of  pine- 
trees  ;  but  these  were  cut  and  rolled  out  of  the  way  in  a  most 
rapid  manner  by  the  pioneer  company,  assisted  by  details  from 
tlio  column.  The  advance  guard,  consisting  of  a  detachment 
of  the  Second  Maine  cavahy,  entered  the  towTi  soon  after  noon, 
and  by  three,  p.  m.,  the  division  was  on  its  camping  ground. 
The  Second  brigade  (Spiceley's)  camped  on  the  ridge  south  of 
the  old  fort ;  the  Thii-d  brigade  (Moore's)  camped  on  the  level 
ground  east  of  the  railroad.  The  march  had  been  pleasant  and 
successful. 

The  next  day,  being  Sunday,  repau's  of  the  wharf  were  not 
fuUy  commenced,  yet  Mr.  Gray,  principal  mechanic  in  the  quar- 
termaster's service,  arrived  from  Barrancas  with  a  detail  of  some 
fifty  men  from  the  colored  regiment,  with  tools,  and  commenced 
taking  up  plank  and  caps  fi'om  another  wharf.  The  repairs  that 
were  to  be  made  consisted  chiefly  in  driving  piles  and  making 
new  wharf  to  fill  up  two  gaps,  each  three  hundred  feet  in  length, 
in  the  central  or  main  wharf.  The  next  morning,  seventy  pine 
logs  for  pUes  were  hauled  from  the  neighboriug  woods  to  the 
wharf  before  eight  o'clock;  and  during  the  day  two  hundred 
were  cut  and  haiiled  ;  and  also  sharpened.  Mr.  Gray  was 
assisted  by  the  Pioneer  coi-ps  and  details  from  the  division,  and 
all  engaged  worked  in  an  earnest-hearted  manner.  Nearly  all 
the  planks  and  caps  needed  were  brought  in  boats  fi-om  the 


II 


CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE.  97 

neigLboring  wliarf ;  and  one  pile  was  nearly  driven  wlien  tlie 
wind  and  waves  rose  and  stopped  tlie  work.  There  being  no 
pile-di"iver,  the  piles  had  to  be  worked  into  the  ground  by  their 
own  weight.  For  example,  a  pile  having  been  placed  upright, 
a  rope  was  then  made  fast  near  the  top ;  and  while  the  pile  was 
kept  steady,  it  was  swayed  backward  and  forward  by  men  pull- 
ing on  two  sides  till  it  became  firmly  set  in  the  ground. 

The  next  day  the  storm  continued  and  no  work  could  be  done. 
On  the  15th  it  was  resumed.  It  was  also  concluded  to  lay  a 
railway  track  from  the  end  of  the  wharf,  when  it  should  be 
repaired,  up  the  main  street  as  far  as  the  quartermaster's  and 
commissary's  stores.  Capt.  McComas,  acting  engineer,  and  a 
detail  from  the  Eighty-third  Ohio,  under  officers  of  railroad 
experience,  then  commenced  taking  up  the  track  and  ties  on  the 
Montgomery  raikoad.  On  the  afternoon  of  Saturday,  the  18th, 
the  work  was  entirely  finished.  The  wharf  was  made  service- 
able and  strong ;  eight  hundred  yards  of  railroad  completed,  a 
platform  car  made  and  put  on  it  in  running  order.  This  was  all 
done  in  five  and  a  half  days.  Though  the  work  was  done  to 
provide  for  a  futm-e  contingency,  the  industrious  men  who  per- 
formed it  had  the  j)leasure  of  seeing  it  available  the  next  day,  in' 
landing  and  bringing  up  supplies. 

Pensacola  at  that  time  was  indeed  remarkable  for  its  ruined 
and  lonely  condition.  It  appeared  once  to  have  contained  five 
thousand  inhabitants ;  but  it  did  not  then  have  a  hundred.  It 
had  been  raided  upon  by  troops  on  both  sides.  Apparently  the 
best  part  of  the  town  had  been  swept  away  by  fire.  Amid  the 
ruins,  the  shrubbery,  and  here  and  there  delicate  flowers,  recalled 
a  period  of  taste,  if  not  of  affluence.  But  now  there  was  not  a 
dozen  sound  buildings  in  the  town,  and  not  a  single  shop  doing 
business. 

Not  knowing  how  long  they  would  remain,  the  troops  hand- 
somely pohced    theu'    camp   and    parade    grounds,   and    built 


98  CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE. 

quarters ;  using  for  the  latter  materials  from  the  ruined  build- 
ings in  town. 

Nor  did  they  neglect  to  devote  some  hours  to  mihtarj  exer- 
cises. 

Information  of  the  movement  of  these  troops  from  Barrancas 
(familiarly  known  in  that  neighborhood  as  the  "Navy-yard") 
reached  Gen.  Maury  in  Mobile  in  about  thirty-six  hours  after 
they  had  started;  but  their  number  was  estimated  at  about 
four  times  what  it  actually  was.  ^     At  that  time  the  confederates 

1  Lidell  to  Maury :  '■"Blakely,  March  12, 1  a.  m. — Despatch  from  Greenwood 
tiat  enemy  left  navy-yard  early  yesterday  morning  (the  11th)  in  direction  ol 
Goazalis.     Cavahy,  infantry  and  artillery,  twenty  thousand  strong." 

Same  to  Same:  ^^ March  12,  5:12  a.  m. — The  following  despatch,  just  received 
by  Capt.  Tutt,  a  reliable  ofBcer,  commanding  at  Greenwood :  '  Just  received  a 

despatch  from  Mr. confirming  the  movement  of  the  enemy  from  the 

navy-yard  yesterday  morning.  They  encamped  near  Pensacola  last  night  with 
eighteen  or  twenty  thousand,  where  they  were  to  be  joined  by  Gen.  Steele 
with  the  balance  of  the  command.  Whole  force  estimated  at  about  twenty-five 
thousand.     Think  they  are  coming  out  by  Gouzalis.' " 

Same  to  Same:  '■'■March  12,  5:10  p.  m. — They  had  seventy-nine  wagons  and 
about  seven  days'  provisions." 

Lidell  to   Col.  Armistead,  at  Pollard:  '■'March  12,  5:20  a.  m. — The  enemy  is 

moving  out  from  Pensacola Apprize  me  as  soon  as  you  ascertain  what 

direction  the  enemy  takes.     Collect  all  your  cavalry  and  keep  in  front  of  him." 

Lidell  to  Col.  Armistead:  "March  12,  6:45  p.  m. — By  direction  of  Gen- 
Maury  you  will  keep  as  close  to  the  enemy  as  possible,  and  keep  in  constant 
communication  with  Gen.  Dan.  Adams  at  Montevallo  and  Gen.  Taylor  at 
Meridian." 

Lidell  to  Armistead:  "Ma^xh  VI,  \0\\.0  v.-K Have  you  heard  anything 

from  your  Pensacola  road  scoiits  ?  Where  are  your  '  sub-terra'  shells  and  your 
piece  of  artillery  ?    Keep  them  with  you,  and,  if  possible,  use  them." 

Lidell  to  Armistead:  "  March  13,  9  p.  m. — Push  forward  your  scouts  at  once 
to  Pensacola  ;  find  out  where  the  enemy  is,  and  what  he  is  doing." 

Same  to  Same :  "  March  14,  11:30  p.  m. — The  main  body  wiU  yet  move 
toward  Pollard,  or  this  way.  Watch  him  closely  until  he  develops  his  inten- 
tions." 

Same  to  Same :  "  March  17. — Later  information  states,  that  the  enemy  is  in. 
creasing  rather  than  diminishing  his  force.  Unless  your  scouts  go  nearer  the 
navy-yard  and  Pensacola,  they  cannot  ascertain  the  facts." 


CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE.  99 

had  military  posts  at  Canoe  station  and  Pollard  on  the  Mont- 
gomery and  Mobile  railroad,  about  fifty  miles  north  of  Pensa- 
cola ;  and  there  was  a  picket  of  thirty  men  at  Pine  Barren 
creek.  On  the  12th,  Gen.  Lidell  telegraphed  Col.  Armistead 
at  Canoe  station  that  the  federals  had  moved  out  from  Pensa- 
cola.  This  was  a  mistake,  and  must  have  led  to  some  uncer- 
tainty. Col.  Armistead  complied  with  the  urgent  appeals  made 
to  him  to  send  scouts  down  to  Pensacola.  On  the  15th,  a  small 
party  of  confederates  appeared  in  front  of  the  picket  four  miles 
out  on  the  PoUard  road,  but  without  accomplishing  anything 
further  than  obtaining  a  glimpse  of  the  picket.  This  led  to 
the  strengthening  of  the  cavalry  picket  on  that  road  with  a 
company  of  infantry  so  disposed  as  to  render  the  capture  of  a 
small  party  probable  if  they  had  again  appeared. 

The  confederates  were  no  less  vigilant  and  eager.  Gen. 
Lidell  had  instructed  his  outposts  with  a  view  of  capturing 
any  federal  scouts  or  picket  that  might  be  sent  out,  specially 
enjoining  them  "  to  be  certain  of  capturing  the  whole  party,  so 
that  the  enemy  will  not  know  what  has  become  of  them."i 

On  the  19th,  Gen.  Steele,  with  Hawkins'  division  and  Lucas' 
cavalry  brigade,  moved  to  Pensacola ;  taking  the  short  route 
over  the  wide  ford  northeast  of  Barrancas.  The  cavahy  bri- 
gade consisted  of  the  Second  Illinois  cavalry  (but  then  detached 
to  act  with  Spurling),  First  Louisiana  cavalry,  Second  New 
York  veteran  cavahy,  the  battalion  of  Thirty-first  Massachu- 
setts mounted  infantrv,  and  the  Second  Massachusetts  light 
battery.  Part  of  this  brigade  crossed  the  ford  in  the  dark, 
and  the  Thirty-first  Massachusetts  lost  two  horses  with  equip- 

^  Liddl  to  Capt.  J.  V.  Tutt,  commanding  at  Greenwood:  "■  March  15. — Send 
out  a  force  suiBcient  to  capture  any  picket-posts  of  the  enenij'',  or  scouting 
parties  that  they  may  send  out.  You  will  instruct  the  officer  in  charge  (who 
must  be  a  competent  one)  to  be  certain  of  capturing  the  whole  party,  so  that 
the  enemy  wiU  not  know  what  has  become  of  them  ;  and  in  that  way  you  may 
be  able  to  gain  some  information  concerning  the  intentions  of  the  enemy." 


100  CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE. 

ments.  The  same  day,  Lieut.-Col.  Spurling,  with  eight  huii- 
dred  cavahy,  went  on  transports  to  the  east  shore  of  the  Black- 
water,  and  thence  moved  to  strike  the  raih^oad  above  Pollard. 

On  the  20th,  Steele's  command  moved  out  from  Pensacola  on 
the  Pollard  road,  with  ten  days'  rations — five  canied  by  the 
men  and  five  in  the  wagons.  There  were  about  two  hundred  and 
seventy  wagons  in  the  whole  column.  Each  division  took  charge 
of  its  own  train.  The  Second  division  of  the  Thirteenth  corps 
had  the  advance,  and  started  at  dayhght.  It  was  foUowed  by 
the  colored  division.  The  cavahy  brigade  (except  the  Second 
Illinois,  which  embarked  with  Spurhng)  left  Pensacola  at  three, 
p.  M.,  and  bivouacked  at  ten,  P.  M.,  four  miles  out,  the  roads 
having  been  badly  cut  up  by  the  infantry.  The  Second  divis- 
ion, being  in  the  advance,  moved  along  pleasantly,  halting  ten 
minutes  every  horn-,  and  went  into  camp  by  noon,  at  the  Twelve- 
mile  house,  in  a  pine  forest,  where  the  ground  sloped  a  few 
hundred  yards  down  to  a  clear  stream.  Each  regiment  came 
up  in  handsome  style,  with  the  music  playing.  Moore's  brigade 
had  been  seen  by  confederate  scouts,  and  the  number  of  regi- 
ments counted,  eight  miles  out  from  Pensacola.^ 

A  few  wagons  of  the  train  had  sunk  down  to  the  hubs  in  the 
sand  in  some  places,  and  these  were  not  up  till  after  dark.  Haw- 
kins' division  went  into  camp  not  far  from  the  Second,  before 
dark.  The  picket  on  the  road  was  posted  a  mile  and  a  half  out. 
It  was  in  charge  of  Capt.  Bockwell,  Thu'ty-fourth  Iowa,  who 
had  his  men  so  arranged  as  to  have  captured  any  confederate 
scouts  if  they  had  ventured  closely  up.     Before   midnight,  a 


1  Capt  Lewis  to  Col.  Garner,  Chief  of  Staff:  "  BlaMi/,  March  21.— Have 
just  received  folloTving  telegram  Hcl.  Qrs.,  Canoe  Station,  March  21.  To 
H.  L.  D.  Leicis,  A.  A.  A.  G. :  Scouts,  just  in,  report  five  (5)  regiments  of 
enemy's  infantiy,  with  small  body  of  cavalry,  eight  (8)  miles  this  side  of  Pen- 
sacola, at  twelve  o'clock  yesterday.  Have  sent  down  two  regiments  to  meet 
them,  if  stUl  advancing.  " '  C.  G.  Aemistead,  Col.  Comd'g.' " 


CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE.  101 

heavy  fall  of  rain  commenced,  and  continued  to  come  down  in  a 
steady  jDonr  till  ten  the  next  day.  It  was  the  same  storm  that 
impeded  the  column  marching  up  the  eastern  shore  of  the  bay 
to  Fish  river.  The  gi'ound  was,  in  many  places,  so  flooded, 
the  troops  were  driven  from  theh  slumber  and  rest  before 
morning. 

At  daylight  of  the  21st,  Spiceley's  brigade,  of  the  Second 
division,  moved  out  of  camp,  and  pursued  the  march.  Moore's 
brigade  remained,  to  take  charge  of  the  division  train.  As 
soon  as  it  was  light,  the  artillery  and  the  wagons  attempted 
to  get  out  of  park  and  move  on.  Then  appeared  a  most  dis- 
couraging and  dismal  prospect.  The  ground,  seeming  to  be 
a  mere  crust,  which  the  falling  torrents  had  softened  and  dis- 
solved, many  of  the  wagons  and  artillery  carriages  had  actually 
sunk  down  to  the  hubs  in  the  very  tracks  where  they  had 
stood.  The  thought  occurred  to  every  one  that  he  was  indeed 
in  the  midst  of  the  Florida  swamps !  In  the  midst  of  large 
trees,  where  the  ground  was  covered  with  a  thin  grass,  and 
with  every  indication  of  its  being  firm  and  solid,  the  wheels 
would  sink  down,  and  the  mules,  in  their  struggles  to  draw, 
would  themselves  plunge  into  the  quicksand,  and  require 
assistance  to  get  out.  Then  wagons  would  be  unloaded,  and, 
after  moving  a  little  way,  and  getting  upon  what  seemed  firm 
ground,  would  be  reloaded.  The  men  pushed  from  behind, 
and  tugged  at  every  wheel.  In  some  cases  ropes  were  hitched 
to  the  wagon-tongues,  and  the  men  laying  hold,  pulled  the 
loaded  wagons  a  considerable  distance.  Meantime,  the  pio- 
neers were  busy  with  their  axes,  cutting  down  small  trees  to 
corduroy  the  road.  At  first  only  bad  places  would  be  cordu- 
royed. But  these  were  constantly  occurring ;  for,  if  one  team 
passed  safely,  the  next  was  hable  to  be  stalled,  if  it  followed 
in  the  same  track.  It  seemed  desirable  to  avoid  corduroying 
the  entire  road,  yet  it  would,  perhaps,  have  been  economy  of 


102  CAMPAiaN     OF    MOBILE. 

labor  to  have  done  so.  During  tlie  day  Moore's  brigade 
performed  mucii  work  on  tlie  road,  and  ia  getting  the  train 
along.  The  division  marched  only  three  mUes,  and  camped 
near  the  Fifteen-mile  house.  The  most  of  the  train  was  up 
by  dark. 

The  division  commander  had  waited  to  see  the  artillery 
and  teams  get  started,  and  to  judge  how  far  they  could  move 
during  the  day.  He  then,  with  the  staff,  passed  on,  and  over- 
took Spiceley  at  eight  o'clock,  not  far  from  the  point  where  it 
was  intended  to  camp.  The  rain  was  still  falling.  Spiceley 
had  his  brigade  drawn  up  in  line  on  the  right  of  the  road, 
in  closed  ranks,  the  men  with  their  oilcloths  [ponchos)  on, 
standing  at  secure  arms,  with  a  cheerful  expression  of  coun- 
tenance. The  fine  brass  bands  of  the  Twenty-fourth  Indiana 
and  Seventy-sixth  Illinois  struck  up  inspiring  music.  It  was 
like  a  review — a  singular  spectacle,  but  one  dehghtful  to  the 
soldier.  None  but  a  natural  soldier  would  have  conceived  the 
idea. 

The  cavalry  brigade  started  at  noon,  and  marched  three  miles 
only,  such  were  the  difficulties  of  the  roq,d,  and  bivouacked  at 
dark.  Steele  did  not  move  his  quarters,  but  was  active  ia  help- 
ing along  the  column.  A  large  mail  having  arrived^  was  dis- 
tributed in  the  afternoon. 

The  next  day,  the  22d,  was  pleasant.  Spiceley's  brigade  fur- 
nished large  details  to  improve  the  road  four  miles  to  the  front. 
Before  noon,  Hawkins'  division  got  up  near  the  Fifteen-mile 
house,  and  camped.  Lucas'  cavahy  arrived  late  in  the  after- 
noon. About  noon,  Steele,  with  the  division  commanders,  ex- 
amiaed  the  road  three  miles  to  the  front.  The  inspector  exam- 
ined the  wagons,  and  caused  some  hundreds  of  pounds  of 
baggage  to  be  abandoned. 

The  confederates  were  still  using  every  exertion  to  ascertain 
Steele's  force  and  purpose.     Their  latest  information  estimated 


CAMPAIGN     OP     MOBILE.  103 

his  strength  at  thii-ty  thousand.  About  the  same  time,  they 
learned  that  Thomas  was  sending  down  forces  from  the  north.  ^ 

The  march  was  resumed  the  following  morning,  March  23d. 
The  cavalry  was  in  the  advance,  immediately  followed  by  Haw- 
kins' division.  In  the  Second  division  the  artillery  and  wagon- 
train  began  to  hitch  up  at  nine  o'clock,  and  the  division  was  on 
the  march  by  ten.  But  the  'road  was  so  cut  up  by  the  trains  in 
advance,  that  Spiceley's  brigade,  having  charge  of  the  train  of 
the  Second  division,  had  to  renew  its  labor  on  the  roads  before 
it  was  a  mile  fi'om  camp,  and  was,  in  fact,  busy  corduroying 
much  of  the  ten  miles  to  Pine  Barren  creek. 

A  detachment  of  confederate  cavalry  under  Lieut.-Col.  Leary 
was  watching  Steele's  advance,  and  occasionally  from  behind  log 
breastworks  on  a  favorable  crest  attempted  to  hold  him  in 
check.  Early  in  the  forenoon  there  was  considerable  noise  of 
musketry,  and  the  Thirty-first  Massachusetts,  Lucas'  rear 
battahon,  was  called  to  the  fi'ont  in  a  gallop.  But  the  obstruc- 
tion was  not  serious  ;  and  before  reaching  Pine  Barren  creek 
the  confederates  filed  off  toward  the  north,  for  they  knew  the 
bridge  was  destroyed,  and  that  the  stream  was  not  fordable. 

1  Lidell  to  Armistead:  "  March  22. — Let  me  know  what  is  going  on  in  your 
front." 

Lidell  to  Maury :  "  March  22,  5 :  15,  a.  m. — I  received  the  enclosed  despatches 
about  midnight,  and  send  them  to  you  by  first  boat.  Lieut.  Sibley's  report,  iu 
a  great  measui-e,  confirms  that  sent  yesterday  from  Col.  Armistead  from  Canoe 
station.  The  enemy's  strength  being,  however,  ten  thousand  less  [despatch  had 
estimated  Steele's  force  at  forty  thousand]  in  this  last.  You  will  see  that  Gen 
Thomas  co-operates  from  Vicksburgh  simultaneously.  I  now  think  there  ean 
be  no  longer  any  doubt  upon  the  subject.  It  is  sad  to  think  of  the  desolation 
that  will  follow  the  traces  of  these  columns  of  devastating  Yankees ! ! !  I  have 
nothing  late  from  the  force  coming  up  by  Ksh  river.  I  can  only  conjectiure 
that  if  sufficiently  large,  it  will  attempt  to  get  possession  of  Spanish  fort  for  a 
base,  whence  occupation  can  be  given  to  the  fleet  iu  the  bay.  In  carrying 
through  the  movement  on  Selma,  the  iise  of  the  Alabama  river  is  of  the  utmost 
importance  to  the  enemy ;  hence  I  don't  think  we  wiU  be  permitted  to  remain 
in  quiet  long." 


104:  CAMPAIGN     OF    MOBILE. 

Their  loss  had  been  one  killed  and  one  captured.  At  noon, 
Steele,  being  at  the  front,  came  to  where  the  ground  begins  to 
descend  to  the  Pine  Barren.  It  was  a  mile  from  that  strea-m. 
Just  there  was  a  farm  under  fair  tillage,  and  on  both  sides  of 
the  road  ^  high  rail  fence.  Four  miles  off  to  the  right  could 
be  seen  the  high  and  wooded  bank  of  the  Escambia,  ha\dng  a 
picturesque  appearance.  From  this  point  of  observation  to  the 
Pine  Barren  the  descent  was  some  three  hundred  feet ;  but 
there  were  several  intervening  hills,  and  on  both  sides  of  the 
road  an  open  pine  forest.  Gen.  Steele  soon  ascertained  the 
condition  of  Pine  Barren  creek ;  that  it  was  ten  feet  deep,  its 
banks  widely  overflowed,  and  the  current  violent ;  also  that  the 
bridge  was  destroyed.  Companies  A  and  D,  Capt.  Bond,  and 
Lieut.  Bond  of  the  Thirty-first  Massachusetts,  crossed  the 
stream,  dismounted,  on  driftwood,  and  after  exchanging  a  few 
shots  with  the  confederate  picket,  drove  it  away,  and  remained 
there  themselves  as  a  picket.  One  confederate  was  wounded. 
Capt.  Newton,  assistant-engineer  on  Gen.  Steele's  staff,  soon 
after  commenced  the  construction  of  a  bridge  assisted  by  large 
details  from  the  infantry.  The  cavahy  went  into  camp  on  the 
left  side  of  the  road  a  few  hundred  yards  from  the  creek,  and 
on  high  ground.  Hawkins'  division  about  opposite  on  the 
right  of  the  road.  The  Second  division  coming  up  by  the 
middle  of  the  afternoon  camped  on  both  sides  of  the  road  in 
rear  of  the  other  troops.  Steele's  tents  were  pitched  on  the 
left  of  the  road  in  the  centre  of  his  command.  By  direction, 
the  troops  repeated  the  evening  caU.  twice  to  give  the  confed- 
erates an  exaggerated  impression  of  their  number. 

The  weather  continued  pleasant  on  the  24th.  Lucas  had 
scouts  out  to  Williams'  station,  and  some  infantry  of  the  Second 
division  were  sent  down  to  the  Escambia  landing,  to  look  for 
steamboats,  which  were  expected  from  Barrancas  with  supplies. 
But  some  accident  prevented  their  arrival.     Captain  Newton, 


CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE.  105 

tliougii  in  poor  health,  continued  hard  at  work,  constracting  the 
bridge,  and  much  of  the  time  was  in  the  watei".  He  was  assisted 
by  Captain  Pickering's  pioneers,  and  other  details.  White  and 
colored  troops  were  working  together.  At  about  three  o'clock  in 
the  afternoon,  he  said  it  would  be  finished  in  an  hour,  which  was 
sooner  than  the  commanding  general  exj)ected.  This  informa- 
tion was  immediately  communicated  unofficially  to  Gen.  Lucas, 
who  ordered  "  Boots  and  Saddles"  to  be  sounded,  then  to  Gen. 
Hawkins,  and  then  to  Gen.  Steele,  who  at  once  sent  out  orders 
for  the  command  to  move  that  evening.  The  bridge  was  finish- 
ed at  the  time  specified  ;  and  was  three  hundred  feet  in  length. 
Considering  that  the  logs  had  to  be  newly  cut  and  carried  some 
little  .distance,  that  the  current  was  deep  and  swift,  that  its 
banks  were  flooded  bottoms,  covered  with  timber  and  under- 
brush, difficult  to  move  about  in,  a  bridge  of  that  kind  to  be 
made  in  one  day,  is  a  respectable  achievement.  Yet  it  was  no 
singular  instance  of  the  soldier's  enterprise  and  toil. 

The  cavalry  began  to  cross  as  soon  as  the  bridge  was  done. 
Its  wagon  train  moved  tardily.  It  had  to  descend  a  steep  hill, 
terminating  at  the  river  bank,  and  the  road  being  much  washed 
the  wagons  could  not  well  be  held  back,  and  were  in  danger  of 
striking  against  trees.  At  that  late  hour,  a  few  trees  had  to  be 
chopped  down,  and  some  other  work  done  on  the  road.  The 
Second  division  had  moved  out  of  camp  and  had  to  sit  down  on 
the  road  side  till  the  teams  had  got  over.  Spiceley's  brigade 
was  the  advance  of  that  division  and  the  Sixty-ninth  Indiana, 
Lieut.-Col.  Perry,  was  down  at  the  river  bank.  Next  to  the 
bridge,  the  road,  for  one  hundred  feet  or  more,  was  covered  with 
water  a  foot  deep ;  and  the  men  of  that  battahon  had  taken  off 
their  shoes  and  stockings,  and  rolled  up  theu'  trowsers,  so  as  to 
be  ready  to  wade  to  the  bridge.  It  was  nearly  dark  before  the 
cavalry  wagon  train  was  over.  The  Second  division  then  fol- 
lowed.    There  was  but  a  slight  rise  of  the  ground  from  the 


106  CAMPAIGN     OP     MOBILE. 

nortli  bank,  and  tlie  surface  was  tliickly  wooded  witli  pine. 
The  artillery  and  wagons  of  tlie  Second  division  liad  moved 
but  a  few  rods  after  crossing  the  Pine  Barren,  till  the  wheels 
began  to  sink  down  horridly.  Moore's  brigade  had  charge  of 
the  train,  and  the  men  -had  to  resume  the  toil  of  corduroying. 
The  artillery  and  train  got  a  mile  and  a  quarter  from  the  river 
at  about  eight  o'clock  in  the  evening,  and  bivouacked  on  rather 
high  ground,  half  a  mile  from  the  cavalry.  The  colored  division 
did  not  move  till  morning.  Lucas  had  pickets  out  about  two 
miles  to  the  front,  and  during  the  night  their  shots  were  fre- 
quently heard. 

In  course  of  the  day,  his  scouts  had  brought  in  a  Mr.  Wil- 
liams as  prisoner,  who  imparted  to  Gen.  Steele  some  informa- 
tion respecting  the  roads,  and  was  detained  by  the  latter  till 
the  next  day.  He  acquired  the  impression  that  Gen.  Steele 
was  moving  on  Montgomery,  which  was  not  singular.  Nor 
was  it  strange  that  a  citizen  should  estimate  his  force  to  be 
twenty-five  thousand.  But  that  it  should  be  thought  he  was 
taking  five  hundred  pieces  of  artillery  through  the  sivamps  of 
Florida,  must  indeed  be  considered  an  extraordinary  esti- 
mate. ^ 


^Lidell  to  Maury:  " Blakely ,  March  25. — The  following  despatch  has  just 
been  received  from  Col.  Armistead  :  '  Canoe  Station,  March.  25.  Capt.  Lewis, 
A.  A.  A.  Gt. :  Since  last  despatch,  a  scout  has  arrived :  says  Bud  Williams 
was  captured  by  enemy  yesterday,  and  detained  all  night  at  Clen,  Steele's 
headquarters.  From  observation,  and  information  received  from  enemy,  Wil- 
liams says  his  force  is  twenty-five  thousand,  with  over  five  hundred  wagons 
and  a  great  many  pieces  of  artillery,  thinks  five  hundred,  (!)  Says  G-en.  Steele 
kept  him  all  night  giving  information  as  to  the  roads  and  towns  between  Pol- 
lard and  Montgomery.  This  force  moving  on  Montgomery,  negro  and  white 
troops  about  equally  divided.  Steele  asked  information  as  to  all  roads  run- 
ning parallel  in  direction  of  Montgomery  and  Claiborne.'" 


CHAPTER    XIV. 

CONTINUATION  OF  STEELE'S  MARCH. 

Steele's  colunm  moved  out  on  tlie  morning  of  the  25tli,  at 
dayliglit,  with,  expectations  of  a  fight.  Scouts  had  brought 
reports  the  evening  before,  that  two  brigades  of  confederates> 
with  artillery,  were  intrenched  on  some  creek  a  few  miles  ahead, 
and  intended  to  make  a  determined  resistance.  The  picket 
firing,  which  had  been  heard  in  the  night,  and  other  cu'cum- 
stances,  seemed  to  render  the  report  probable. 

Lucas's  troops  encountered  slight  resistance  when  three 
miles  out.  At  nine  o'clock,  they  reached  Mitchell's  creek,  on  the 
opposite  bank  of  which  a  cavahy  force  of  about  four  hundred, 
under  Col.  Charles  P.  Ball,  was  intrenched.  Some  distance 
in  Ball's  rear  was  Clanton's  brigade,  as  a  reserve.  The  bridge 
had  been  partly  destroyed.  The  banks,  though  not  high,  were 
skirted  with  a  thick  growth  of  shrubbery,  which  was  material 
as  a  cover  and  defence.  Having  learned  the  nature  of  the 
force  in  his  front,  Lucas  sent  a  detachment  of  the  Second  New 
York  veteran  cavalry,  under  Col.  Christler,  through  the  woods 
to  the  left,  to  cross  the  stream,  if  practicable,  a  mile  above, 
and  come  in  on  the  right  flank  and  rear  of  the  confederates. 
He  then  caused  three  companies  of  the  Pii'st  Louisiana  cav- 
alry to  dismount  and  cross  the  stream  below.  They  attacked 
Ball's  left  with  great  spirit,  and,  after  a  short  contest,  made 
him  abandon  his  position.  This  firing  was  plainly  heard  by 
the  federal  infantry.  The  Second  division  followed  the  cavahy. 
And  at  about  ten,  A.  m.,  an  orderly  brought  word  from  Gen. 


108  CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE. 

Lucas,  tliat  lie  had  met  the  enemy  and  captured  three  or  four 
of  them. 

Col.  Christler  returned,  not  having  found  a  crossing.  After 
causing  the  bridge  to  be  repaired,  so  the  horses  could  pass 
over  safely,  Lucas  moved  forward  at  a  trot,  with  the  First 
Louisiana  and  a  portion  of  the  Second  New  York.  He  met 
the  confederate  forces  at  Cotton  creek,  and  again  at  Canoe 
creek,  but  at  each  place  his  men  pressed  on  with  so  much  vigor 
and  gallantry  that  they  were  not  long  held  in.  check.  At 
Cotton  creek  the  Second  Massachusetts  Hght  battery  opened 
fire,  and  for  a  few  moments  the  combat  seemed  severe.  The 
confederates  lost  a  few  men  in  that  skirmish.  On  the  north 
bank  of  Canoe  creek  the  ground  rose  to  a  height  of  two  hun- 
dred feet,  and  afforded  an  advantageous  position  to  the  con- 
federates, if  it  had  been  advisable  to  make  a  firm  stand.  From 
there  thev  fell  back  to  Pringle's  creek,  distant  about  four  miles. 

COMBAT  OT'  PRINGLE'S  CREEK. 

Pringle's  creek  was  a  shallow  stream,  skirted  with  shrubbery. 
Its  north  bank  rose  gradually  fifty  feet,  and  was  covered  with 
a  characteristic  growth  of  pine.  On  the  brow  of  that  crest 
was  a  high  fence  of  split  rails,  and  a  few  hard-wOod  trees  with 
heavy  foliage.  After  crossing  the  ford,  the  road  bore  round 
to  the  right,  making  a  gradual  ascent  of  the  hill,  and  was  much 
obscured  by  the  trees.  Three  hundred  yards  above  the  ford 
was  Pritchard's  small  grist-mill,  and  above  that  a  few  acres 
were  covered  with  a  mill-pond.  A  mile  below  there  was  the 
small  village  of  Bluff  Spring. 

Arriving  at  this  creek,  Col.  Ball,  to  save  his  command,  turned 
off  rapidly  toward  Williams'  station,  leaving  a  picket  on  the 
road.  He  did  not  suppose  Clanton's  brigade  would  again 
offer  battle,  and  both  he  and  Col.  Armistead,  who  was  with 
him,  deemed  Pringle's  creek  a  poor  position.     This  left  only 


I 


CAMPAIGN     OP     MOBILE.  109 

Clanton's  brigade  in  tlie  immediate  front  of  Lucas.  The  bri- 
gade consisted  of  two  Alabama  cavalry  regiments,  or  battalions, 
under  command  of  Col.  Leary  and  Maj.  Faulkner,  not  exceed- 
ing five  hundred  men  ;  and  attached  to  it  also  were  two  pieces 
of  artillery,  and  one  hundred  infantry  reserves,  which  remained 
on  the  north  bank  of  the  Escambia.  Gen.  Clanton  had  not  yet 
arrived  from  Pollard,  and  his  brigade  was  under  command  of 
Col.  Leary.  The  latter  made  a  breastwork  of  fence-rails  on 
the  rise  north  of  Pringle's  creek,  and  behind  it  again  formed 
his  men.  Immediately  in  their  rear  was  an  extensive  field, 
wooded  on  both  sides;  and  half  a  mile  back  of  them  their 
horses  were  tied,  in  a  thick  grove  of  hard  wood,  near  some 
old  log  buildings  which  had  been  used  for  soldiers'  quarters. 

A  sharp  engagement  ensued  as  soon  as  Lucas'  advance  came 
up.  The  confederates  were  driven  back  two  hundred  yards 
in  ten  muiutes,  and  were  still  falling  back  as  Gen.  Clanton 
galloped  up  and  ordered  a  halt.  At  this  Col.  Leary  seemed 
surprised,  and  told  Clanton  they  were  being  flanked.  Clanton 
repUed :  "  But  we  must  fall  back  in  order."  The  latter  then 
commanded  his  forces  to  dress  up  on  the  colors.  His  brave 
color-bearer,  young  Maynor,  held  the  colors  high,  and  repeated 
the  command,  "Dress  up  on  the  colors."  Fifteen  minutes  after- 
ward Clanton  fell  severely,  and  it  was  then  thought  mortally, 
wounded.  Immediately  the  buglers  of  the  First  Louisiana 
sounded  the  call  for  the  charge,  and  that  regiment  mounted 
and  led  by  its  commander,  Lieut.-Col.  A.  S.  Badger,  dashed 
forward  in  line  of  battle,  in  a  gaUant,  impetuous  manner,  and 
with  a  wild  and  thrilhng  cheer.  They  were  met  by  a  voUey ; 
and  though  some  of  their  number  feU,  the  fury  of  the  charge 
was  not  checked ;  and  in  a  few  moments  they  had  swept  over 
and  cajDtured  the  main  part  of  the  confederate  force.  The 
prisoners  consisted  of  Gen.  Clanton,  ten  other  officers,  and  one 
hundred  and  twenty  enhsted  men.     The  killed  and  wounded 


110  CAMPAIGN     OF    MOBILE. 

mimberecl  about  a  dozen.  A  battle-flag  was  captured  by  Private 
Tliomas  Eiley.  A  number  of  borses  and  mules  were  also 
captured.  The  loss  of  tbe  First  Louisiana  was  two  killed — • 
First  Lieut.  Albert  Scbaffer  and  a  bugler  wbo  fell  in  tbe 
charge — and  eight  wounded.  Maj.  J.  E.  Cowan  of  that  regi- 
ment received  a  severe  and  painful  injury  to  bis  leg  by  coming 
in  contact  with  a  borse.  Li  this  action  tbe  Second  New  York 
attacked  tbe  confederates  on  tbeir  flank.  Tbe  remainder  of 
Clanton's  command,  a  few  wbo  were  mounted,  were  pursued  to 
tbe  Escambia,  wbere,  not  knowing  tbat  tbe  bridge  was  torn  up 
from  tbe  centre,  tbey  leaped  into  tbe  swoUen  and  powerful  stream, 
and  escaped  to  tbe  opposite  sbore  or  were  drowned.  Tbe  others 
fled  into  the  swamps.  Lucas  bad  a  running  fight  all  the  way  to 
the  Escambia.  The  two  pieces  of  artillery  and  reserves  from 
the  north  bank  of  that  river  produced  an  effect  greater  than 
their  force  justified ;  such  is  tbe  moral  power  of  artOlery.  Tbey 
were  repbed  to  by  four  pieces  of  the  Second  Massachusetts, 
under  Lieut.  Greenleaf,  and  in  an  hour  compelled  to  retire. 

The  Second  division  headquarters,  with  Spiceley's  brigade  of 
that  division,  at  one  o'clock,  had  ascended  the  long  bill  north  of 
Canoe  creek  and  gone  into  camp.  Just  then  a  despatch  from 
Col.  Wbittelsey,  chief  of  staff  to  Gen.  Steele,  was  received 
stating  that  it  would  be  prudent  to  send  forward  a  brigade  and 
some  artillery  to  support  Lucas. 

The  commander  of  the  division  then  with  Spiceley's  brigade 
and  a  section  of  each  of  the  bght  batteries  hastened  forward- 
Just  beyond  Pringle's  creek  the  prisoners  were  received  and 
taken  charge  of  by  the  provost  guard  of  the  Second  division. 
The  detachment  arrived  at  the  Escambia  at  four  in  the  after- 
noon, and  only  a  short  time  after  the  cavalry,  having  marched 
seventeen  miles.  The  banks  of  the  Escambia  being  greatly 
overflowed,  and  it  being  essential  to  cross  it,  details  from 
Spiceley's  brigade  set  to  work  constructing  a  foot  bridge  on  the 


CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE.  Ill 

railroad  trestle  wliicli  crossed  tlie  river  a  few  rods  below  the 
destroyed  bridge.  But  before  tlie  infantry  bad  arrived  Liicas 
bad  sent  over  two  companies  of  the  Tbirty-first  Massacbusetts* 
dismounted,  as  pickets. 

Tbe  road  bad  required  considerable  labor  in  order  to  bring 
tbe  train  along,  and  tbe  remainder  of  tbe  infantry  tbat  day  got 
only  to  Cotton  creek.  Near  tbe  Escambia  tbe  road  crossed 
marshes  several  hundred  yards  in  extent,  and  much  of  the  way 
covered  with  ponds  of  water.  Through  these  it  was  perilous 
to  ride  and  tedious  to  march  afoot.  The  details  that  worked 
on  the  bridge  had  to  pass  through  such  places.  It  was  with 
much  difficulty  that  the  artillery  was  got  through. 

Information  of  the  fight  at  Pringie's  creek  and  its  result  was 
received  at  Mobile  the  same  day.^ 

Entry  of  Pollard. — In  pursuance  of  Gen.  Steele's  orders, 
Spiceley's  brigade  of  the  Second  divison,  marched  for  Pollard 
at  daylight,  the  26th.  It  was  also  accompanied  by  the  division 
commander  and  staff.  Infantry  were  sent,  because  cavalry 
could  not  yet  cross  the  river.  AU  went  a-foot ;  and  having 
crossed  over  on  the  railroad  trestle  in  single  file,  descended 
as  best  they  could,  some  fifteen  feet  upon  the  marshy  and 
overflowed  bank.  Thence,  for  some  distance,  the  way  lay 
through  swampy  places,  which  had  to  be  waded.  The  little 
Escambia  was  bridged  in  a  short  time.  On  its  opposite  bank 
some  confederate  scouts  were  seen,  and  two  or  three  shots  were 
fixed.  The  road  showed  tracks  of  the  artillery,  which  the  con- 
federates had  used  the  day  before,  and  the  federals  not  yet 
having  any  certain  knowledge  of  what  was  in  Pollard,  thought 


1  Gen.  Lidell  to  Col.  Spence:  '^ March  25. — Gen.  Clanton  was  wounded,  and 
with  Col.  Lary,  ]\Iajor  Wharton,  and  the  greater  part  of  the  brigade,  wore  cap- 
tured to-day  near  Bhiff  Springs.  CoL  Armistead  and  Col.  Ball,  not  with  them 
in  the  fight,  still  safe  and  in  front  of  the  enemy.  That  column  of  the  enemy 
have  a  large  wagon  train  and  are  moving  for  Montgomery." 


112  CAMPAIGN     OP     MOBILE. 

it  possible  tliej  might  there  meet  with  resistance.  Preparations 
were  accordingly  made  for  such  an  emergency.  But  no  armed 
confederates  could  be  found,  and  the  village  was  peaceably 
taken  possession  of.  It  was  a  small  village,  having,  perhaps, 
twenty  dwelhngs,  rude  and  much  scattered.  There  were  two 
or  three  wooden  storehouses,  used  by  the  confederates,  but 
there  was  no  property,  save  a  barrel  or  two  of  hard-bread. 
The  pubhc  storehouses,  and  only  those,  were  burned. 

A  thousand  yards  of  railroad  was  torn  up  by  the  Twenty- 
fourth  Indiana,  for  the  moral  effect,  but  the  bridges  were  not 
harmed,  for  it  was  thought  they  would  soon  be  useful  to  the 
federals. 

Spiceley's  brigade,  it  will  be  remembered,  consisted  of  two 
Indiana  regiments — the  Twenty-fourth  and  Sixty-ninth — and 
two  Illinois  regiments — -the  Sixty-seventh  and  Seventy-sixth — . 
and  it  was  in  fine  condition.  It  had  two  remarkably  good 
brass  bands ;  and  when  the  brigade  marched  away  from  the 
village,  these  bands  struck  up  their  inspiring  strains.  It  ap- 
peared as  if  the  whole  population  of  the  village,  consisting  prin- 
cipally of  women  and  children,  were  following  the  soldiers  away. 
They  walked  along  by  their  side,  talking  with  them  with  the 
utmost  good  humor. 

As  the  brigade  was  leaving  the  place,  some  of  the  cavalry 
foragers  entered,  they  having  effected  a  crossing  of  the  Escam- 
bia some  distance  above  the  railroad  bridge. 

The  infantry  returned  to  their  camp,  south  of  the  Escambia, 
at  four  in  the  afternoon.  The  Eighty-third  Ohio  had  come  up 
and  crossed  the  Escambia,  to  be  in  readiness  as  a  reserve. 

Spurling's  Operations. — On  the  morning  of  the  19th,  Lieut.- 
Col.  A.  B.  Spurling,  Second  Maine  cavahy,  began  to  move  from 
Barrancas  on  transports,  with  a  force  of  eight  hundred  mounted 
men,  with  instructions  to  cut  the  raihoad  above  Pollard.  He 
had  an  experienced  and  excellent  command,  consisting  of  the 


CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE.  113 

mounted  force  of  the  three  follo^dng  regiments  :  the  Second 
Maine,  Major  C.  A.  Miller ;  the  Second  Illinois,  Major  Frank 
Moore  ;  the  First  Florida,  Capt.  Francis  Lyons.  Two  compa- 
nies under  Capt.  E.  D.  Johnson,  Second  Maine  cavalry,  were 
landed  at  Milton,  and  moved  out  toward  Pollard,  to  diive  away 
any  confederate  scouts  that  might  be  there,  and  to  create  the 
impression  that  the  whole  force  would  land  there.  By  three, 
A.  M.,  of  the  20th,  Spurling  had  landed  his  force  on  the  east 
shore  of  the  Blackwater,  three  miles  below,  and  opposite  Milton, 
and  marched  for  the  railroad,  via  Andalusia.  Confederate 
scouts  were  frequently  met,  and  few  escaped  captui'e.  The 
night  of  the  23d,  from  eleven  to  one  o'clock,  the  column  halted 
to  rest,  a  few  miles  out  from  Evergreen. 

Capture  of  a  Staff  Officer. — Soon  after  the  column  halted.  Col. 
Spurling  rode  forward  to  his  advance,  and  had  scarcely  arrived 
there  when  he  heard  talking  in  front.  Dismounting  quickly,  he 
cautioned  the  men  to  be  on  the  alert.  He  then  stepped  forward 
a  few  paces,  and  satisfied  himseH  there  were  men  approaching. 
Then  he  crouched  down  beside  the  fence,  to  let  them  pass. 
There  were  three ;  and  as  soon  as  they  had  got  by,  Spurling 
jumped  in  their  rear  and  commanded  them  to  -surrender.  They 
demanded  to  know  who  he  was.  Spui'ling  replied,  "  I  am  a  hve 
Yankee."  At  that,  the  confederates  raised  their  rifles  on  him, 
and  Spurling  as  quickly  commenced  firing  on  them  with  a  re- 
volver, wounding  two  and  capturing  the  three.  They  proved  to 
to  be  Lieut.  Watts,  of  Gen.  Clanton's  staff,  and  two  scouts.  By 
this,  Spurling  prevented  alarm  being  given  of  his  approach,  and 
at  three  o'clock  on  the  morning  of  the  24:th  he  cut  the  rail- 
road seven  miles  above  Evergreen,  and  captured  an  up  and  a 
down  train  of  cars,  one  train  being  loaded  with  confederate 
troops,  whom  ho  took  prisoners.  Having  destroyed  consider- 
able raih'oad  track  and  rolling  stock,  he  came  down,  via  Sparta, 
bringing  his  prisoners  mounted  on  captured  horses.     At  Sparta, 

8 


114  CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE. 

he  burned  six  more  cars,  and  tlie  depot  containing  public  stores, 
which  had  been  sent  from  Pollard  for  safe  keeping.  The  morning 
of  the  26th,  attempting  to  cross  the  bridge  over  Murder  creek,  it 
was  found  to  be  partly  destroyed,  and  a  small  confederate  force 
was  posted  on  the  opposite  side,  behind  a  strong  barricade  of 
logs  ;  but  it  was  dislodged  and  driven  off  by  a  detachment  of 
the  Second  Illinois  and  Second  Maine  dismounted.  Lieut. 
Vose  and  one  man  of  the  Second  Maine  cavalry  were  wounded. 
The  bridge  was  then  repaired  and  crossed.  Col.  Spurling's 
command  arrived  at  Pollard  on  the  26th,  only  a  short  time  after 
Spiceley's  brigade  had  left,  and  joined  Steele's  column  the 
morning  of  the  27th,  he  having  accompHshed  the  object  of  his 
expedition  in  a  brilliant  manner,  and  without  the  loss  of  a  man. 

Steele  turns  toward  Blakehj. — The  evening  of  the  26th,  Steele 
called  his  division  commanders  together,  and  notified  them  the 
column  would  turn  the  next  morTiing  to  join  Canby.  There 
were  now  but  four  days'  rations  on  hand,  and  the  cormtry  was 
remarkably  destitute.  It  was  but  little  else  than  a  "wilderness. 
The  men  were  therefore  put  on  half-rations.  They  having  been 
exposed  to  wet  weather  and  heavy  fatigue  the  five  days'  rations 
they  caiTied  had  not  lasted  the  full  time,  as  to  all  the  men.  But 
there  were  some  who  had  been  saving,  and  were  still  fairly  pro- 
vided. A  large  number  were  without  anything,  and  were 
expecting  a  new  issue  when  they  received  orders  to  go  on  half- 
rations. 

Early  on  the  moiTiing  of  the  27th,  the  column  turned  and 
marched  westerly,  toward  Canoe  station,  on  the  Mobile  and 
Montgomery  railroad.  Unfortunately,  the  route  had  not  been 
previously  examined  and  repaired.  The  cavahy  moved  out  first, 
followed  by  Hawkins'  division ;  but  in  attempting  to  get  the 
wagons  along,  it  was  found,  that  the  first  two  miles  of  the  road 
needed  to  be  cordui"oyed.  This  prevented  the  fear  of  the 
Second  division  from  starting  tiU  noon.     The  prisoners  beiug 


CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE.  Il8 

in  charge  of  tliat  division,  those  of  them  who  were  wonnded 
were  carried  carefully  on  stretchers  to  the  neighboring  honses. 
Gen.  Clanton  was  thus  carried,  for  a  ball  had  passed  quite 
through  his  body,  and  he  was  supposed  to  be  mortally  wounded. 
But  he  recovered. 

Spurling's  prisoners,  upward  of  a  hundred,  were  turned  over 
to  Capt.  Garretson,  provost  marshal  of  the  Second  division. 
Spurhng's  men  had  supphed  themselves  plentifully  with  tobacco, 
which  they  distributed  generously  among  the  other  troops. 

The  confederates  appear  to  have  restored  their  telegraph 
communication  on  the  Montgomery  road  in  four  days  after  it 
was  cut. 

Col.  Hall,  after  leaving  Pringle's  creek,  passed  round  thirty 
miles  up  to  HoUins'  bridge,  and  the  next  night  (Sunday,  the 
26th)  swam  the  Escambia,  then  proceeded  to  Bellville,  and 
thence  to  Evergreen.  Col.  Armistead  remained  at  Bellville,  and 
from  there,  on  the  30th,  telegraphed  Gen.  LideU  of  the  occupa- 
tion of  Pollard  by  the  federals  on  the  26th,  and  Canoe  station 
the  27th.  1 

The  distance  to  Canoe  station,  on  the  route  the  column 
moved,  was  thirteen  miles.  After  passing  the  bad  road  near 
the  Escambia,  the  country  was  hilly,  and  it  seemed  that  there 
would  be  but  sHght  trouble  in  getting  the  wagons  along.  But 
the  rain  commenced  falling  soon  after  noon,  dissolving  the 
earth's  treacherous  surface.  The  main  part  of  the  column 
reached  Canoe  station  ia  good  season.  But  Spiceley's  brigade 
with  the  train  of  the  Second  division  had  to  bivouac  near 
Miles',  four  miles  from  Canoe  station.  The  artUlery  got  a  httle 
farther.  The  night  was  intensely  dark,  the  rain  was  coming 
down  in  torrents.     The  prospect  was  dismal. 

1  LideU  to  Maury :  "  March  31. — Col.  Armistead  telegraphs  from  Bellville 
via  Greenville,  30th,  that  the  enemy  were  in  force  at  PoUard  Sunday  morning, 
and  reported  to  have  occupied  Canoe  station  Monday.  He  heard  the  enemy 
would  turn  toward  Tensas  and  Blakely." 


116  CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE. 

The  28tli,  tlie  weather  was  pleasant  overhead.  The  Second 
division  worked  from  dayhght  till  eleven,  A.  M.,  and  corduroyed 
the  road  nearly  the  whole  way  from  Miles'  to  Canoe  station — 
four  miles — in  order  to  get  up  the  train  and  artillery.  The 
cavalry  and  Hawkins'  division  had  moved  on.  The  Second 
division  train  was  all  up  to  Canoe  station  by  one  o'clock.  A 
rest  was  then  taken  of  two  hours.  Eations  were  then  issued  for 
five  thousand  one  hundred  and  seventy-nine  men,  the  number  of 
enlisted  men  of  the  two  brigades  present,  and  for  two  hundred 
and  thirty-six  prisoners.  At  three,  P.  M.,  the  march  was  re- 
sumed in  a  northwesterly  direction.  The  troops  moved  out  in 
good  spirits  and  handsome  style,  the  music  playing.  Five  miles 
were  made  by  dusk,  when  they  again  went  into  camp  on  an 
abandoned  plantation.  Gen.  Steele  with  the  rest  of  the  column 
camped  about  five  miles  beyond. 

The  march  was  resumed  at  daylight,  the  29th,  by  the  Second 
division ;  but  the  roads  were  bad,  and  had  to  be  corduroyed 
much  of  the  way.  The  camp  of  Hawkins'  division  was  passed  at 
eleven  o'clock.  From  there  to  the  Perdido  was  three  miles,  and, 
heavy  rain  falling  in  the  afternoon,  that  distance  also  had  to  be 
corduroyed.  At  dusk  the  column  camped  near  the  Perdido. 
The  cavaky  moved  on  to  Weatherford's  plantation. 

For  the  past  three  days  cannonading  had  been  heard  in  the 
direction  of  Spanish  fort ;  and  there  was  a  rumor  that  the 
federals  had  assaulted  and  been  repulsed — ^badly  repulsed,  of 
course,  for  the  rumors  of  the  camp  are  seldom  moderate. 

Gen.  Steele  having  sent  some  scouts  with  despatches  to  Gen. 
Canby,  they  were  observed  by  the  confederates  at  Bay  Minette 
station.  ^ 


^  Lidell  to  HoUzdaw,  "commanding  advance:"  "March  29 Capt. 

Winston  has  just  reported  the  advance  of  the  enemy,  consisting  of  between 
fifty  and  one  hundred  cavahy,  was  at  Bay  Minette  station  this  afternoon,  at 
three  o'clock." 


CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE.  117 

The  moming  of  the  30tli  was  raw  and  windy,  and  the  sol- 
diers were  seen  in  tliick  circles  around  the  camp-fires.  The 
colored  division  moved  out  first,  and  was  followed  by  the 
Second  at  nine  o'clock.  The  Perdido,  where  forded,  was  two 
feet  deep,  and  some  trees  were  felled,  on  which  the  soldiers 
crossed.  To  get  the  artillery  along,  the  Second  division  made 
two  miles  more  of  corduroy,  and  made  it  promptly.  Consider- 
able work  had  to  be  done  also  on  the  road  near  McGills. 
Then  the  division  marched  two  miles  farther,  making  nine  from 
the  Perdido,  and,  at  dusk,  went  into  camp  in  the  woods,  on 
high  ground,  just  beyond  a  clear  stream.  The  cavalry  and 
Hawkins'  division  had  got  a  few  miles  beyond.  Toward 
evening,  the  foragers,  who  had  been  to  Montgomery  Hill, 
brought  in  some  beef  cattle  and  sheep,  which  were  greatly 
needed.  The  troops  were  on  third  rations,  and  the  majority 
were  suffering  with  hunger.  The  labor  and  exposure  were 
enough  to  reduce  men  who  were  well  fed.  As  it  was,  the 
effects  of  the  hardships  of  the  march,  and  the  scanty  fare, 
could  be  discerned,  day  by  day,  in  the  reduced  flesh  of  the  sol- 
diers. There  was,  perhaps,  a  day's  ration  still  in  the  train. 
It  was  singular  to  perceive  so  much  difference  in  the  economy 
and  husbandry  of  men.  While  some  would  be  living  on 
parched  corn,  a  few  would  have  haversacks  still  plump,  and 
well  furnished  with  bacon  and  hard  bread,  coffee  and  sugar.  ^ 

At  dayhght  on  the  31st,  the  Second  division  resumed  the 
march,  making  Stockton,  nineteen  miles,  by  two  o'clock.  The 
whole  column  arrived  there  about  that  time.  For  a  few  miles 
before  reaching  Stockton  the   country  was  more  settled  and 

1  "  Tired,  wet,  muddy,  and  hungry.  Our  supper  consisted  to-night  of  sassa- 
fras tea  and  parched  corn,  which  we  had  picked  up  from  the  ground  where 
om-  cavahry  had  fed." — Diary  of  a  Private  Soldier,  March  30. 

"  Rations  very  scarce,  and  forage  also.  The  prisoners  are  very  hungry,  but 
say  we  are  doing  the  best  we  can  with  them." — Diary  of  another  Enlisted  Man, 
March  31. 


118  CAMPAIGN    OP     MOBILE. 

fertile;  and  thougli  liilly,  tlie  road  was  fair.  It  was  indeed  a 
luxury  to  come  out  upon  a  road  tliat  did  not  need  corduroying. 
The  ration  question  began  there  to  assume  a  pleasanter  shape.  ^. 
There  was  plenty  of  fresh  meat.  Considerable  corn  was  also 
found,  and  a  grist-mill  there  was  kept  running  while  the  troops 
remained. 

The  trooDS  having  supplied  themselves  with  com  from  the 
neighboring  plantations,  the  march  was  resumed  the  forenoon 
of  AprU  1.  The  Second  division  was  in  the  rear,  and  its  last 
files  left  Stockton  at  noon.  The  road  being  hard,  though  hilly, 
Steele  with  the  cavahy  and  Hawkins  division  pushed  on  to 
within  two  miles  of  Blakely.  A  regiment  of  Pile's  brigade  was 
detached  to  guard  the  Hollyoak  bridge,  but  returned  the  next 
day. 

Capture  of  an  Outpost. — ^Lieut.-Col.  Spurling  still  retaining 
his  command,  was  sent  forward  from  Stockton  in  advance  to 
open  communication  with  Gen.  Canby,  Arriving  within  six 
miles  of  Blakely  he  encountered  confederate  scouts,  several  of 
whom  he  captured,  and  pursued  the  remainder  closely  two 
miles,  when  he  came  upon  a  stronger  force,  consisting  of  the 
Forty-ninth  Mississippi,  near  WUkins'  plantation,  posted  behind 
a  barricade  of  fence-rails  three  tier  deep.  Spurling  then  caused 
the  Second  Maine  to  dismount  to  attack  on  foot,  leaving  the 
First  Florida  as  a  reserve  and  as  a  guard  for  the  horses.  He 
then  disposed  the  Second  Illinois  with  sabres  drawn  in  rear 
of  the  Second  Maine,  who  were  already  skirmishing  briskly, 
and  steadily  advancing.  The  confederates  observed  the  bullets 
of  the  Second  Maine  to  rattle  faster  and  harder  on  their  rail 
barricade,  and  discerning  the  glittering  sabres  of  the  Second  Illi- 
nois farther  back  they  soon  gave  way.     Then  Spurling  ordered 

1  "  Marched  nineteen  miles  to-day.  Have  no  bread  or  coffee,  but  plenty  of 
pork,  beef,  and  mutton.  Drew  one  cracker  a  piece  to-night." — Diary  of  a 
Private  Soldier,  March  31. 


CAMPAIGN     or     MOBILE.  119 

tlie  Second  Illinois  to  charge,  whicli  it  did  in  gallant  style,  and 
captured  the  main  part  of  the  outpost  before  it  could  rally 
behind  its  second  line  of  works.  The  Second  Maine  followed 
as  soon  as  it  could  mount.  About  one  himdred  of  the  Forty- 
ninth  Mississippi  were  captured,  with  its  colors  and  arms. 
Spui-ling's  loss  was  one  lolled  and  three  wounded. 

About  the  same  time  the  confederate  outpost  at  O.  Sibley's 
was  withdrawn  and  the  bridge  set  on  fire.^  Lucas,  having 
learned  the  locality  of  the  bridge,  by  permission,  sent  the 
Second  Illinois  cavalry,  under  Lieut.-Col.  Moore,  to  hold  it, 
and  the  latter  arrived  in  season  to  save  it.  Lucas'  cavahy  also 
reconnoitered  the  position  of  Blakely  and  drew  the  fire  of  its 
ai-tillery.  One  of  the  cavahy-men  was  killed  within  a  thousand 
yards  of  the  principal  redoubt  on  the  Stockton  road ;  and  was 
afterward  buried  by  men  of  the  Second  division.  The  cavalry 
also  charged  on  an  outpost  on  Saluda  hill,  and  the  confederates 
having  ralKed  a  skirmish  ensued  in  which  there  were  one  or 
two  knied  and  wounded  on  both  sides.  During  the  day  the 
cavalry  lost  a  few  men  and  horses  by  the  explosion  of  toi'pedoes. 

Here,  then,  before  Blakely,  moving  with  rapid  and  defiant 
step,  was  the  column  which,  a  few  days  before,  was  supposed 
to  be  inexti-icably  stuck  in .  the  Florida   swamps.     It  is  not 


''^  Gapt.  Lewis  to  the  colonel  commanding  infantry  at  Sibley's  house :  ^^March 
31. — The  enemy  is  about  fifteen  miles  distant  near  the  raikoad  above  us, 
and  will  probably  advance  to-morrow  morning ;  in  view  of  which  Gen.  LideU 
directs  that  you  withdraw  your  advance  pickets  to-night  from  front  of  the 
enemy  to  Sibley's  creek  where  you  now  are.  You  will  direct  the  officer  in 
charge  of  the  squad  with  sub-terra  shells  to  plant  them  at  once,  except  in  the 
road,  where  they  will  not  be  placed  until  the  last  moment,  leaving  a  'vidette' 
in  the  road,  to  inform  any  of  our  men  coming  in  of  the  necessity  of  keeping  in 
the  middle  of  the  road.  It  is  necessary  for  you  to  concenti-ate  yoiu-  command 
in  order  to  be  ready  to  move  to  the  works — with  the  artillery — or  resist  the 
enemy  where  you  are  should  he  come  in  your  front  and  not  from  above. 
You  will  also  burn  the  Sibley  bridge  should  he  be  able  to  drive  you  from  the 
creek." 


120  CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE. 

strange  that  the  commanding  general  at  Blakely  apprehended 
an  assault.^ 

From  Stockton  to  the  raikoad,  crossing  at  Hall's,  the  distance 
is  fourteen  miles.  The  Second  division  reached  that  place  just 
before  dark,  and  received  orders,  which  had  been  left  by  Gen. 
Steele,  to  destroy  the  raihoad.  Spiceley's  bidgade  having  got  in 
first,  the  Twenty-fourth  Indiana  was  set  to  that  duty,  and 
effectively  destroyed  four  hundred  yards  of  track  ia  an  hour. 

FeatcKs  Moveinent  with  Supplies. — On  the  31st  of  March,  Gen. 
Canby  started  a  train  of  seventy-five  wagons  of  suppHes  to 
Steele.  The  train  was  in  charge  of  Veatch's  division,  which 
moved  out  from  near  Spanish  fort  at  eight  in  the  morning, 
arriving  at  Hollyoak  at  noon,  where  it  intrenched.  The  next 
day,  April  1,  a  detachment  of  one  hundred  of  the  Fourth  Ten- 
nessee cavalry,  under  Lieut.-Col.  Thornbuiy,  reported  to  Veatch, 
and  Maj.  McEntee,  Steele's  chief  quartermaster,  also  came  up 
from  Canby's  headquarters.  Yeatch  marched  again  at  three, 
p.  M.  At  sis,  p.  M.,  he  heard  firing  toward  Blakely.  The  column 
halted,  and  a  squadron  of  cavahy,  supported  by  two  regiments 
of  infantry  and  a  section  of  artillery,  marched  three  miles 
farther  toward  Blakely,  when,  everything  becoming  quiet,  and 
it  being  very  dark,  they  returned  to  the  division-camp.  The 
suppUes  were  got  to  Steele  the  next  night. 

i  Lidell  to  Maury:  "April  1. — In  view  of  the  fact  that  Steele  with  his 
negroes  may  assault  our  works  please  send  me  one  hundred  and  fifty  small 
arms  to  place  in  the  hands  of  aU  surplus  artillerists." 


CHAPTER  XY. 

INVESTMENT  AND   SIEGE   OF   BLAKELT. 

Blakely  is  situated  ten  miles  northeast  from  Mobile,  on  tlie 
east  bank  of  tlie  Appalacliee  river,  and  opposite  its  confluence 
with  the  Tensas.  The  extent  and  depth  of  its  adjacent  waters 
make  it  a  fine  natiu'al  port.  On  the  old  maps  it  appears  as  a 
place  of  importance,  and  forty  years  ago  it  had  a  population  of 
three  thousand ;  but  the  landowners  held  their  property  at  such 
high  prices  its  growth  was  checked,  and  the  people  soon  took 
down  their  buildings  and  moved  with  them  to  Mobile.  At  the 
time  of  the  war,  Blakely,  although  a  county-seat,  had  a  poj)ula- 
tion  not  exceeding  a  hundred.  Its  front  of  dry  ground,  on  the 
river,  is  a  mile  and  a  half  in  extent,  and  this  character  of  soil 
widens  on  going  from  the  river ;  but  on  each  side  of  it  is  low, 
swampy  ground,  densely  covered  with  hard-wood  timber  and  a 
rank  gTOwth  of  weeds  and  vines.  The  soil  is  sandy.  Near  the 
river  are  several  large  and  ancient  live-oaks  bountifully  festooned 
with  moss.  Approaching  the  place  from  the  river,  it  seems  nearly 
covered  with  a  growth  of  natural  forest,  yet  some  old  and  culti- 
vated openings  can  be  seen.  Five  hundred  yards  above  the 
landing  is  a  brick-yard,  and  near  that  a  spur  of  gTOund  fifty  feet 
higher  than  the  water  approaches  to  the  river,  upon  which  a  small 
stockade  fort  was  first  built.  Then  some  half  a  mile  from  that, 
on  a  plateau  of  equal  elevation,  was  an  incomplete  bastion-fort, 
of  red  earth.  Two  hundred  yards  from  the  landing,  almost 
secluded  by  the  drooping  branches  of  live-oaks,  is  the  court- 
house— a  small  two-story  brick  building,  painted  white,  and 


122  CAMPAIGN     or     i£OBILE. 

haying  in  its  basement  a  room  answering  tlie  pui'pose  of  a  jail. 
In  sight,  also,  are  four  or  fire  old  wooden  Tonildings.  From 
the  yicinitj  of  the  landing  two  principal  roads  direrge,  one 
bearing  northeast  to  Stockton,  the  other  southeast  to  Pensa- 
cola.  For  a  mile  they  run  about  parallel.  They  are  both 
grayeUy  roads,  much  worn  and  washed.  Pursuing  the  Stock- 
ton road,  it  was  one  mile  from  the  landing  to  the  line  of  con- 
federate fortifications. 

The  Pensacola  road  winds  around  on  high  ground-  On  this 
road  were  the  ruins  of  some  cottages  and  a  yariety  of  shrub- 
bery and  eyergreens. 

For  a  mile  back  from  the  landing  the  ground  has  a  general 
rise  till  it  reaches  the  line  of  breastworks,  where  it  is  about 
sixty  feet  aboye  the  water  leyel.  The  surface  is  uneyen,  and 
there  are  many  dells  thickly  wooded  with  magnolias,  beeches, 
pines,  and  other  trees,  and  abounding  with  clear  spiings  and 
streams.     These  are  its  attractiye  features. 

The  fortifications  were  constructed  in  a  soil:  of  semicircle 
around  Blakely ;  resting  on  a  bluff  close  to  the  riyer,  at  the 
extreme  left,  and  terminating  with  the  high  groimd,  a  few  rods 
from  the  riyer,  on  the  right.  The  line  was  neaiiy  three  miles 
m  length,  and  included  nine  well-built  redoubts — or  lunettes. 
The  fortifications  were  thoroughly  built,  and  were  armed  with 
about  forty  pieces  of  artillery.  But  the  ditches  were  not  more 
than  four  or  fiye  feet  deep.  From  six  to  eight  hundred  yards 
all  along  the  front  the  trees  had  been  felled — opines  on  the 
high  gi'ound  and  hard- wood  trees  in  the  rarines.  Fifty  yards 
out  from  the  works  was  a  line  of  abatis,  and  opposite  some 
of  the  redoubts  was  an  interior  line.  Then  three  hundred 
yards  out  to  the  fi-ont,  parallel  with  the  works,  was  another 
line  of  abatis,  and  behind  the  latter  were  detached  rifle-pits. 

The  gaiTison  of  Blakely  consisted  of  French's  diyision — ^then 
commanded  by  Gen.  Cockrell — as  the  left  wing,  its  right  extend- 


CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE.  123 

ing  a  little  below  tlie  redoubt  sontb  of  tlie  Stockton  road.  Tho 
troops  of  that  division  were  veterans,  mostly  from  Missom'i  and 
Mississippi.  Tlie  right  wing  consisted  of  Gen.  Thomas'  di- 
vision of  Alabama  reserves.  There  were  several  artillery  com- 
panies to  man  the  guns.  The  whole  garrison  numbered  about 
three  thousand  five  hundi'ed,  and  was  rmder  the  command  of 
Gen.  St.  John  Lidell. 

On  the  1st  of  April,  Lidell  instracted  Cockrell  to  make  a  dash 
on  Steele,  if  he  deemed  it  advisable,  and  cautioned  him,  if  he 
did  so,  to  use  "  a  small  but  rehable  force."  Cockrell  was  also 
directed  to  fill  the  skirmish  pits  on  the  entn-e  Hue  with  men 
from  his  division,  for  the  reason,  as  it  appears,  they  were  con- 
sidered more  experienced  and  reliable  than  the  reserves.  But, 
after  consultation  with  Cockrell,  this  plan  was  abandoned,  and 
Thomas  was  instructed  to  supply  the  advance  pits  in  his  fi-ont 
•^vdth  his  own  men. 

INVESTMENT  OF  BLAKELT. 

The  bivouac  of  the  colored  division  was  in  plain  hearing  of 
the  guns  at  Spanish  fort,  but  to  the  most  of  those  men  the 
sound  of  artillery  was  not  new.  The  men  had  lain  down,  each 
with  his  gun  beside  him,  the  night  of  the  1st,  in  a  sober  mood, 
and  rose  the  next  morning  in  similar  spuits,  for  they  were  yet 
on  slender  rations  of  parched  corn.  Heavy  firing  on  the  picket 
line  brought  them  into  line  of  battle  early  on  Sunday  morning, 
the  2d.  But  before  they  had  moved  out,  the  quartermaster's 
wagons  went  round  with  com,  and  two  ears  and  a  "  nubbin" 
were  dealt  out  to  each  man  as  rations,  producing  much  mer- 
riment. 

Drew's  brigade  was  in  the  advance,  and  the  picket  from  the 
Sixty-eighth  regiment,  under  Lieut.  Taisey,  was  down  on  the 
Stockton  road,  "\^^len  morning  broke,  the  lieutenant  could  see 
nothing  of  confederates  in  his  front,  and,  after  consulting  the 


124  CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE. 

ofl&cer  of  the  cavalry  detacliment  witli  him,  they  concluded  to 
venture  out  for  a  reconnoissance.  They  proceeded  without  in- 
terruption for  some  distance,  and  began  to  thiak  they  would  find 
the  way  unimpeded  into  Blakely,  when  suddenly,  from  a  clump 
of  trees  near  the  edge  of  the  slashings,  they  were  met  with  a 
handsome  volley.  The  firing  soon  grew  brisk,  and  the  confede- 
rate artillery  caused  them  to  fall  back. 

Then  Hawkins  moved  his  division  out  to  close  in  on  Blakely, 
marching  obhquely  to  the  right  from  the  Stockton  road,  through 
a  pine  forest,  with  skirmishers  deployed.  The  troops  felt  that 
they  would  encounter  a  veteran  foe  in  his  iutrenchments,  but 
that  reflection  neithej  lessened  the  firmness  of  their  step,  nor 
the  ardor  of  their  resolution.  Not  a  man  lagged,  but  with  eager 
strides  to  the  front,  they  kept  the  horses  of  the  mounted  officers 
on  the  trot.  In  the  midst  of  shot,  shell,  and  bullets,  they  had  to 
cross  an  abrupt,  deep,  broken  ravine,  made  doubly  difficult,  by  a 
dense  tangle  of  undergrowth.  The  regimental  commanders 
feared  that  they  would  come  out  of  it  a  confused  throng.  The 
company  officers  emerged,  took  their  respective  distances,  still 
moving  forward,  and  the  line  quickly  filled  up,  and  swept  along 
as  eagerly  and  collectedly  as  if  no  obstruction  had  been  met. 

The  first  earnest  resistance  encountered  was  about  a  mile  and 
a  quarter  ia  front  of  the  confederate  left,  at  a  stream  which  runs 
northwest,  through  a  deep  and  narrow  ravine,  and  near  where 
it  debouches  into  a  wooded  swamp.  The  skirmish  line  then 
consisted  of  six  companies  from  each  of  the  three  brigades. 
Col.  J.  B.  Jones  of  the  Sixty-eighth  regiment,  was  put  in  charge 
of  it,  and  the  maia  line  halted.  A  severely-contested  skirmish 
combat  then  took  place  on  gTound  which  became  the  extreme 
right  of  the  Federal  line  of  investment.  The  confederates  hung 
along  the  brow  and  slopes  of  the  bluff  bordering  on  the  swamp, 
and  Col.  Jones  found  it  no  easy  matter  to  dislodge  them.  They 
were  using  their  artillery  vigorously  from  the  redoubts,  and  a 


CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE.  125 

number  of  the  colored  division  had  fallen.  Three  more  com- 
panies from  each  brigade  were  sent  to  reinforce  the  skii-mish 
line  so  that  it  finally  comprised  twenty-seven  companies.  In 
course  of  three  hours  the  confederates  were  driven  back  about 
eight  hundred  yards.  Col.  Jones  established  his  line  in  the 
slashings  within  one  hundred  and  twenty  yards  of  the  confede- 
rates' outer  liile-pits ;  and  it  remained  as  the  skirmish  line  on 
the  right  duriag  the  siege.  Hawkins'  loss  was  about  forty  killed 
and  wounded.  Among  the  mortally  wounded  was  Lieut.  Ed- 
ward E.  Talbot,  a  gallant  young  officer  belonging  to  the  Sixty- 
eighth.  In  the  Forty-eighth,  four  were  kiUed  and  four  wounded, 
including  in  the  latter.  Col.  Crandall,  struck  by  a  shell.  The 
major  of  the  Ninety-seventh  was  shot  in  the  foot.  Col.  Jones 
was  conspicuous  along  the  line  for  bravery  and  had  two  horses 
shot  under  him. 

At  half-past  eight  o'clock,  LideU.  telegraphed  to  Maury  at 
Mobile,  that  he  thought  the  Federals  were  preparing  for  an 
assault,  and  that  skirmishing  was  then  occurring.  He  also  asked 
for  additional  artillery.^ 

The  Second  division  marched  from  Hall's  soon  after  day- 
Hght,  and  were  some  distance  on  the  road  before  sunrise.  As 
the  soldiers  ascended  the  high  ground  and  looked  off  to  the 
left,  over  the  wooded  dells,  they  could  see  through  the  hazy 
atmosphere  that  the  eastern  sky  was  still  crimson.  It  was 
not  long  before  firing  was  heard  at  the  front.  This  hastened 
their  pace,  and  they  arrived  before  Blakely  at  ten  o'clock. 

Steele,  Hawkins,  Lucas,  and  several  other  officers,  were  sit- 
ting upon  logs,  by  the  Stockton  road  where  it  is  crossed  by 


1  Gen.  LideU  to  Gen.  Ilaury  :  "  Blakely,  April  2,  8:30  a.  m.— "The  enemy 
camped  apparently  in  large  force,  one  mile  above  us,  last  night,  on  the  Stockton 
road,  and  is  now  engaged  skirmishing  on  the  left  flank,  preparing,  I  think,  for 
an  assault  or  demonstration  in  force.  I  need  additional  artillery,  temporarily, 
if  it  can  be  spared." 


126  CAMPAIGN     OF    MOBILE. 

the  road  from  Sibley's,  and  about  a  mile  from  tlie  Blakely 
breastworks ;  and  were  discussing  the  information  that  had 
been  brought  from  the  front.  The  fii-ing  in  HawMns'  front 
had  abated  somewhat,  yet  still  continued. 

It  had  been  Steele's  intention  to  first  strike  Hollyoak,  and 
wait  orders.  But  the  want  of  forage  compelled  him  to  go  by 
the  way  of  Stockton,  which  brought  him  close  to  Blakely. 
He  therefore  immediately  wrote  Canby  what  had  abeady 
been  accomphshed  before  Blakely ;  and  he  was  soon  after- 
ward instructed  to  continue  the  investment. 

Hawkins'  left  then  extended  within  two  hundred  yards  of 
the  Stockton  road,  but  he  had  a  strong  picket  in  the  bushes 
close  to  the  road.  The  Second  division  was  ordered  to  form 
on  the  left  of  Hawkins'  division.  It  had  been  formed  in  the 
following  order  :  The  Third  (Moore's)  brigade  in  line  of  battle, 
it  being  in  the  advan<;e ;  and  the  Second  (Spiceley's)  in  the 
rear,  in  the  shade — ^for  the  rays  of  the  sun  were  beating  down 
oppressively — in  column  of  division  closed  in  mass.  The  Sec- 
ond Connecticut  light  battery  was  in  position  on  the  left  of 
the  Stockton  road,  and  the  Fifteenth  Massachusetts  on  the 
right.  All  the  men  in  the  division  were  resting.  Then  before 
advancing  any  of  the  troops  the  commanding  officer  of  the 
division,  with  some  other  officers,  went  to  the  front  to  recon- 
noitre. They  bore  off  to  the  left  of  the  Stockton  road  in  the 
woods,  and  got  within  eight  hundred  yards  of  the  main  con- 
federate works,  and  where  they  could  weU  survey  the  position. 
It  was  also  seen  that  confederate  sharpshooters  were  numer- 
ously stationed  in  advanced  rifle-pits.  The  party  got  within 
two  hundred  yards  of  some  of  these,  but  by  cover  of  the  trees, 
and  quick  dodging,  they  escaped  being  hit.  Keturning  to  the 
line,  the  One  Hundred  and  Fourteenth  Ohio,  under  Col.  Kelly, 
and  the  Twentieth  Iowa,  under  Lieut.-Col.  Leake,  were  ad- 
vanced as  skirmishers,  and  moved  up  on  a  line  with  the  division 


CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE.  127 

on  the  riglit.  The  gi-ound  they  passed  over  sloped  a  little 
toward  Blakely.  It  was  covered  with  a  thin  and  small  gi-owth 
of  pines  where  the  One  Hundred  and  Fourteenth  Ohio  passed, 
but  where  the  Twentieth  Iowa  passed  the  timber  was  heavier. 
The  movement  could  not  be  entirely  concealed ;  and  the  con- 
federates opened  a  warm  fire  of  artillery,  but  it  occasioned  no 
loss  to  either  regiment.  The  skirmishers  of  that  regiment  be- 
came engaged,  and  compelled  the  advanced  line  of  confederates 
to  take  shelter  in  their  regular  line  of  rifle-]3its. 

About  noon,  Maj.-Gen.  Osterhaus,  chief  of  staff  to  Gen. 
Cauby,  came  up  from  Spanish  fort,  to  take  a  view  of  the 
position. 

Later  in  the  day,  the  Second  division  was  directed  to  com- 
plete the  line  of  investment  to  Bay  Minette,  a  distance  of  two 
miles.  Moore's  brigade  then  took  position  on  the  left.  The 
Twentieth  Iowa  and  One  Hundred  and  Fourteenth  Ohio  were 
withdrawn  at  five,  P.  M.,  and  the  line  occupied  by  the  Twenty- 
fourth  Indiana,  Lieut.-Col.  Sears,  in  front  of  Spiceley's  brigade, 
and  the  Thirty-fourth  Iowa,  Col.  G.  W.  Clark,  in  fi-ont  of 
Moore's  brigade.  These  were  large  regiments— the  Thirty- 
fourth  numbering  seven  hundred  and  forty-seven  effective,  and 
the  Twenty-fourth  numbering  seven  hundred  and  twenty-nine 
effective.  Their  deployed  line,  dui'ing  the  night,  occupied  about 
two  miles.  While  the  Thirty-fourth  Iowa  was  taking  position, 
one  of  its  men — Josiah  Robinson— was  severely  wounded  in  the 
face  by  a  musket-ball,  which  shattered  both  of  his  jaws  and 
tore  out  nearly  all  of  his  teeth.  During  the  evening,  John 
Hudson,  of  the  Twenty-fourth  Indiana,  was  killed. 

The  confederate  commander  observing  troops  moving  south 
of  the  Stockton  road,  and  even  below  the  Pensacola  road,  was 
still  more  apprehensive  of  an  assault.^ 

1  Lidell  to  Maury :  "April  2. — ^I  believe  the  enemy  are  preparing  to  assault 
toy  line  to-day.  Please  spare  me  some  light  artillery  temporarily,  and,  if  pos- 
sible, send  it  over  immediately." 


128  CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE. 

The  same  afternoon  tlie  ground  was  further  reconnoitred  by 
officers  of  the  Second  division,  and  also  by  Gen.  Comstock, 
chief  engineer  on  the  staff  of  Gen.  Ganby,  who  had  come  up 
from  Spanish  fort  for  that  purpose. 

-  That  night  both  divisions  commenced  intrenching  one  thou- 
sand yards  from  the  confederate  works,  but  the  spades  were 
few  for  so  long  a  line,  and  the  progress  was  slow.  At  ten 
o'clock,  the  commanding  officer  of  the  Second  division  and  Col. 
Spiceley  were  both  on  the  skirmish  line  of  the  latter's  brigade, 
and  moved  the  skirmishers  farther  to  the  front,  and  pointed 
out  where  the  pits  should  be  dug.  The  musketry-firing  seemed 
to  be  at  close  range.  It  was  quite  dark.  There  was  a  vehe- 
ment fire  of  artillery,  searching  the  Stockton  road  and  the 
ravine  running  parallel  with,  and  a  short  distance  south,  of  it. 
The  frequent  explosions  of  shells,  like  the  flashes  of  lightning 
in  a  severe  storm,  tended  to  blind  and  bewilder  one,  if  they  did 
nothing  worse.  The  confederate  artillerists  had  been  specially 
instructed  to  maintain  such  a  fire  as  would  compel  the  federals 
to  commence  their  intrenchments  a  considerable  distance  off. 
Their  gunboats,  on  their  left,  also  threw  shells  of  large  cahbre. 

At  eleven  o'clock,  the  commanding  officer  of  the  Second 
division,  with  some  of  the  staff  and  the  Pioneer  corps,  the  latter 
having  spades,  started  to  find  the  advanced  line  of  the  Third 
brigade,  expecting  to  strike  some  part  of  the  main  line  of  that 
brigade  on  the  way.  The  party  crossed  the  brook,  which  runs 
over  the  Stockton  road  near  the  confederate  works,  at  a  point 
three  quarters  of  a  mile  from  those  works,  and  near  where  the 
Second  division  headquarters  afterward  were  fixed.  They  then 
passed  down  on  the  left  of  that  brook,  confident  of  at  least 
striking  the  rear  of  the  Third  brigade  skirmish  line  ;  but  having 
gone  fully  as  far  to  the  front  as  they  expected  that  hue  was,  they 
halted.  An  aide  then  walked  forward  a  few  rods  in  the  darkness, 
but  was  fired  on  sharply  with  musketry,  the  balls  coming  in  the 


CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE.  129 

direction  of  the  party,  and  from  only  a  very  short  distance  off. 
It  seemed  then  that  the  fire  must  be  from  the  confederates,  and 
no  explanation  was  sought  for  in  that  position ;  but  the  party 
withdrew  and  made  a  new  start,  succeeding  better  the  second 
time,  yet  finding  the  Thii'd  brigade  farther  to  the  left  than  was 
expected.  The  aide  contended  that  the  firing  was  from  the 
skirmishers  of  the  Thii-d  brigade,  and  that  the  party  had  got 
upon  their  flank.  It  may  have  been  so,  and  undoubtedly  the 
result  would  have  been  different  but  for  the  darkness,  the  rough- 
ness of  the  ground,  and  the  thickness  of  the  shrabbery  with 
which  it  was  covered.  The  occurrence  is  mentioned  to  show  the 
difficulties  of  operations  in  the  night  on  strange  ground;  how 
surprises  and  accidents  will  obstruct  the  best  intentions,  and 
how  important  it  is  that  orders  shall  be  specific,  and  lines  kept 
well  closed. 

9 


CHAPTER    XVI. 

SIEGE  OF  SPANISH  FORT— SEVENTH  AND  EIGHTH  DAYS. 

April  2. — Sunday  morning  opened  clear  and  mild,  yet  gave 
no  pause  to  the  roar  of  artillery  and  tlie  screeching  of  sheEs. 
Before  the  sun  rose,  some  shots  were  distinguished  in  the 
direction  of  Blakely,  which  very  soon  increased  to  a  full  volume 
of  continued  musketry  and  booming  of  field  guns. 

The  usual  Sunday  morning  inspection  was  observed  at  eight 
o'clock  by  those  of  the  besiegers  not  on  duty ;  the  drum-beat 
all  along  the  line,  gave  the  signals ;  and  afterward  were  heard 
the  cheering  strains  of  the  brass  bands.  When  the  garrison 
artillerists  could  do  so,  they  were  disposed  to  blend  with  this 
agreeable  music  the  explosion  of  a  shell. 

The  two  left  sections  of  Mack's  Eighteenth  New  York  battery 
— ^four  twenty-pounder  rifles — opened  in  the  morning,  in  Gran- 
ger's front,  four  hundred  and  fifty  yards  from  McDermett. 
Capt.  Mack  noticed  that  it  was  the  eighth  Sunday  his  battery 
had  been  in  action.  The  sections  were  under  the  immediate 
command  of  Lieuts.  WiUiams  and  McConnel.  The  firing  was 
exceedingly  hvely  and  accurate ;  and  was  ably  answered  by  the 
guns  under  Captain  Barnes.  SoHd  shot  and  shells  hterally 
hailed  around  Mack's  battery,  and  many  of  his  command 
escaped  narrowly.  But  they  all  stood  up  to  their  work  without 
the  qaiver  of  a  hp.  About  eleven,  Slocum's  Washington  artil- 
lery came  to  the  assistance  of  Fort  McDermett,  for  the  latter 
was  receiving  some  heavy  blows  also  from  the  First  Indiana 
eight-inch  mortars,  and  the  Massachusetts  light  guns  on  Mack's 


CAMPAIGN     OP     MOBILE.  131 

left  and  rear.  The  Wasliington  artillery  almost  enfiladed 
Mack's  position,  and  liurled  their  hideous  projectiles  at  him 
from  eleven  o'clock  till  one  in  the  afternoon.  Having  no  guns 
to  bear  on  them — they  being  too  far  to  his  right  he  could  only 
increase  the  intensity  of  his  fire  on  the  guns  in  his  immediate 
front.  He  dismounted  .  their  twenty-four-pounder  howitzer,  and 
before  noon  their  guns  were  all  silent.  But  at  four,  p.  M.,  they 
opened  on  hinn  again,  save  the  twenty-four-pounder.  He  re- 
turned the  fire.  The  "Washingion  artillery  again  set  on  him,  and 
the  combat  continued  till  dark.  His  works  had  been  struck 
thirty-eight  times,  during  the  day ;  but  none  of  his  command 
were  lolled  or  wounded.  Most  of  the  ensuing  night  was  spent 
by  his  men,  repairing  the  injury  to  his  works.^ 

Fort  McDermett  had  suffered  the  most.  Its  parapet  had  been 
defaced,  and  an  Ylll-inch  mortar  shell  fr'om  Lieut.  Eaper's 
section  of  the  Fu-st  Indiana,  had  dropped  on  the  carriage  of  its 
Brooks'  rifle,  and  completely  disabled  it. 

On  the  extreme  right  of  the  Sixteenth  corps,  Capt.  S.  F. 
Craig's  battery.  A,  Sixth  Michigan  heavy  artillery,  had  four 
X-inch  mortars  in  position,  behind  a  ridge  two  himdred  yards 
fi'om  the  garrison  works  ;  from  which  he  had  a  fair  enfilading 
range. 

Farther  to  the  right  Wimmer's  and  Cox's  thirty-pounders,  and 
the  other  guns  commanding  Huger  and  Tracy  maintained  a 
steady  fire. 

Blankenship's  four  Ylll-inch  mortars   of  the  First  Indiana, 

began  to  fire  at  six  o'clock  in  the  mormng,  threw  one  hundred 

shells  at  Red  fort,  and  then,  his  ammunition  being  a  little  short, 

he  ceased  tiQ  night. 

In  Granger's  front  batteries.  No.  2  and  No.  5,  for  heavy  guns, 


1  "  The  night  after  this  the  confederate  sharpshooters  called  out  to  those  in 
Mack's  front,  and  inquired  what  battery  it  was,  and  on  being  informed,  replied 
humorously,  that  they  wished  it  might  be  taken  away. 


132  CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE. 

were  finished,  and  No.  6  commenced.  In  the  evening,  the 
Eighty-first  Illinois,  Lieut.-Col.  Rogers,  was  relieved  from  duty 
at  Minette  bayou,  and  took  position  on  Oarr's  extreme  right, 
and  extended  rifle-pits  toward  the  bay,  on  a  line  with  the  ad- 
vance works  of  the  rest  of  its  brigade,  now  less  than  two  hun- 
dred yards  from  the  garrison  breastworks. 

In  the  Third  division,  Sixteenth  corps,  the  casualties  were 
only  eight  killed  and  wounded,  including  Capt,  C.  G.  Stetson, 
of  the  Thirty- third  Wisconsin,  who  was  instantly  killed  by  a 
confederate  sharpshooter,  while  superintending  the  construc- 
tion of  the  advance  line  of  works.  In  the  Fii'st  division,  Six- 
teenth corps,  the  casualties  were  only  four. 

The  Navy. — The  Octorara  had,  on  the  31st,  taken  her  two  IX- 
inch  guns  aboard,  but  in  the  afternoon  grounded  on  the  west 
bank  of  the  channel.  About  noon  of  the  2d,  she  opened  fire 
on  the  confederate  transport  Jeff.  Davis,  then  standing  down 
the  river  for  the  landing  at  Spanish  fort,  and  succeeded  in 
striking  her  once,  when  she  turned  and  steamed  up  the  river, 
out  of  range.  After  this,  transports  did  not  venture  to  Spanish 
fort  in  the  daytime. 

The  Eighth  Day — April  3. — The  Navy. — -The  service  devolv- 
ing on  the  squadron  was  equally  difficult  and  dangerous.  Three 
vessels  had  now  been  destroyed,  and  a  number  of  lives  lost,  in 
consequence  of  the  thickly-strewn  torpedoes.  To  remove  these 
hidden  perils,  and  open  a  passage  for  the  squadron  up  the 
channel,  details  of  officers  and  seamen  kept  steadily  and  fear- 
lessly at  work.  In  these  duties  the  Metacomet,  Commander 
Pierce  Crosby,  appears  to  have  taken  the  lead. 

The  process  of  sweeping  for  torpedoes  was  performed  in 
boats,  by  pairs,  each  one  taking  the  end  of  a  line,  to  the  centre 
of  which  were  attached  light  weights,  and  small  ropes  in  loops, 
so  they  might  attach  themselves  to  anything  brought  in  con- 
tact with  them  upon  the  bottom.    The  boats  separated  a  short 


CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE.  133 

distance,  and  then  pulled  in  parallel  lines  up  or  down  tlie  clian- 
nel,  dragging  the  line  with  its  centre  upon  the  bottom.  Many 
torpedoes  were  thus  taken  up.  When  one  was  taken,  it  was 
dragged  upon  the  marsh  and  pierced  with  a  rifle-ball  or  auger, 
to  admit  water  to  drown  the  charge. 

Admiral  Thatcher  concluded  to  adopt  additional  means  to 
clear  the  channel,  in  the  natiu:e  of  nets  to  intercept  floating 
torpedoes ;  and  on  the  night  of  the  8d,  the  boats  of  the  Octo- 
rara,  with  a  small  boat  from  the  ironclad  Chickasaw,  got  the 
first  net  across  the  river,  from  the  wreck  of  the  Milwaukie  to 
the  flat  on  the   east   side   of  the  channel. 

Operations  of  the  Army. — The  four  X-inch  mortars  of  Com- 
pany K,  Sixth  Michigan  heavy  artillery,  Lieut.  Edward  C. 
Beardsley  in  temporary  command  of  the  company,  came  up 
on  the  night  of  the  1st  of  April,  and  the  mortars  were  set  in 
the  rifle-pits  till  suitable  works  could  be  constructed.  Their 
position  was  close  to  the  edge  of  the  bluff,  four  hundred  and  fifty 
yards  from  McDermett,  and  about  the  same  distance  to  the  left 
of  Mack's  twenty-pounder  battery.  But  between  the  first  and 
second  sections  of  the  Sixth  Michigan  mortars,  was  a  battery  of 
four  Ylll-inch  howitzers  of  the  Fii'st  Indiana  which  took  posi- 
tion there  this  day.  Lieut.  Beardsley's  first  section  opened  in 
the  afternoon  in  a  satisfactory  manner  in  presence  of  Gen. 
Granger  and  several  other  officers,  the  first  two  shells  being 
dropped  directly  on  the  top  of  the  parapet  of  McDermett. 

Mack's  twenty-pounders  worried  the  garrison  at  different 
times  during  the  day,  but  the  guns  of  the  latter  in  his  front 
continued  sUent ;  their  mortars,  however,  shelled  him  consider- 
ably. At  three,  p.  m.,  the  Washington  artillery  on  his  right 
again  commenced  on  him  throwing  shells  incessantly  to  a 
quarter  to  five,  P.  M.  His  works  were  struck  nine  times,  but  no 
serious  damage  was  done. 

Li  the  front  of  Gen.  A.  J.  Smith's  corps  two  of  the  light  guns 


134  CAMPAIGN     OP    MOBILE. 

of  the  Fourteentli  Indiana  batterj  were  taken  out  of  position, 
and  two  thirty-pounder  Parrotts  of  Hendrick's  battery  (L,  First 
Indiana  heavy  artillery),  under  Lieuts.  Clary  and  Benson,  were 
put  in  their  place.  But  the  construction  of  platforms  was  re- 
tarded by  the  garrison's  sharpshooters. 

Blankenship's  battery  (B,  First  Indiana)  had  been  engaged 
through  the  night  in  throwing  shells  into  the  garrison  to  dis- 
turb its  slumbers.  These  were  thrown  at  half-hour  intervals  . 
and  during  the  night  and  day  his  men  fired  one  hundred  and 
twenty-seven  rounds.  While  a  number  of  these  Indiana  men 
were  standing  round  their  camp-fire,  a  shell  from  the  garrison 
came  over  and  fell^  in  the  fire.  The  men  escaped  injury 
by  quickly  dropping  upon  the  ground  and  rolling  down  the 
hill. 

The  thirty-pounders  (Batteries  H  and  K,  First  Indiana)  on  Bay 
Minette  shore  were  still  engaged  actively  in  drawing  the  atten- 
tion of  Fort  Huger  from  the  besiegers'  flank,  and  fired  day  and 
night.  During  the  day  three  men  of  Battery  H  were  wounded — 
J.  8.  Holt  by  a  piece  of  shell  seriously,  and  Gray  and  Newman 
by  splinter  slight. 

In  the  Thirteenth  corps  front  Battery  No.  6  was  finished  and 
occupied  by  two  thirty-pounders  of  the  First  Indiana  Bat- 
tery (M).  Near  the  extreme  left  Capt.  Bough  advanced  his 
Vlll-inch  howitzer  two  hundred  yards  nearer  McDermett. 
Four  cohorn  mortars  were  put  in  position  under  direction  of 
Lieut:  Sibert,  First  Indiana. 

An  incident  occurred  in  the  front  of  Marshall's  brigade  which 
well  illustrates  both  the  soldier's  daring  and  magnanimity. 
While  the  Seventh  Minnesota  was  on  duty  in  the  advance 
trench  in  the  daytime,  a  bird  came  and  lit  some  yards  in  front 
and  between  their  line  and  the  confederates.  Many  shots  were 
fired  at  the  bird,  and  it  soon  dropped  to  the  ground.  At  this 
Private  Wm.  Eowe  of  Capt.  Buck's  Company  D,  jumped  up 


CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE.  135 

over  tlie  works  and  ran  out  in  plain  sight  of  the  confederates, 
picked  up  the  bird  and  returned  unmolested  to  his  place  in  the 
trench. 

The  toil  of  the  besiegers  was  incessant  and  severe.  They  now 
had  only  three  divisions  and  one  brigade  engaged  in  the  siege. 
The  second  parallel  had  been  opened ;  in  some  places  the  third ; 
approaches  or  saps  dug  and  hea"\^  batteries  from  day  to  day 
being  constructed.  It  was  by  no  means  smooth  work;  for  in 
some  places  the  ground  was  rocky,  in  others  it  was  filled  with 
stumps  and  roots,  and  covered  with  large  logs.  The  details  had 
become  so  wearing  on  the  men  that  the  officers  sometimes  took 
the  musket  and  went  on  duty  themselves  as  sharpshooters  while 
the  men  rested  and  slept.  Besides  the  works  abeady  referred 
to,  the  besiegers  had  in  rear  of  their  first  or  outer  line  construct- 
ed bomb-proof  quarters.  For  the  most  part  these  were  regular 
and  sunk  in  the  earth!  The  pits  would  hold  from  three  to  eight 
men,  and  so  arranged,  of  course,  that  the  occupants  could  lie 
down.  They  were  covered  over  with  layers  of  logs,  sometimes 
three  thicknesses,  over  which  were  from  one  to  four  feet  of 
earth,  varying  according  to  the  exposure  of  their  situation  and 
the  industry  of  the  occupants. 

Among  the  besiegers  the  estimate  of  the  strength  of  the  garri- 
son varied  from  three  thousand  to  ten  thousand.  The  garrison 
at  first  under-estimated  the  number  of  the  besiegers,  thinking 
they  did  not  exceed  ten  thousand. 

The  casualties  in  the  garrison  \\^ere  this  day  reported  to  be 
eight  killed  and  sixteen  wounded.  In  Carr's  division  they  were 
three  killed  and  nine  wounded.^ 


1 "  Sunday,  April  2 Huger  and  Tracy  very  vigorously  shelled  by  the 

enemy's  Bay  Minette  batteries  which  do  some  very  fine  practice.  All  going  on 
as  usual  at  Spanish  fort.  Enemy  steadily  advancing  against  our  salients,  par- 
ticularly on  the  flanks  of  our  line.  Mortar  practice  pretty  lively  on  both  sides 
at  Spanish  fort.     Making  a  ti'eadway  to  the  rear  of  Battery  Tracy  for  commu- 


CHAPTER    XVII. 

SIEGE    OF    SPANISH    FORT— NINTH    DAY. 

April  4. — Marshall  returned  with  his  brigade  to  his  old  posi- 
tion on  the  left  of  the  Sixteenth  corps.  While  in  the  Thirteenth 
corps  front  he  had  advanced  the  trenches  two  hundred  yards. 
His  labor  had  been  -  severe.  The  details  were  heavy ;  each 
regiment  furnishing  one  half  its  men  daily  for  duty.  Three 
companies  were  on  fatigue  and  two  on  skirmish  duty  one  day 
and  two  on  fatisiie  and  three  on  skirmish  the  next. 


nication  with  the  city,  owing  to  the  danger  and  diflBciilty  of  lauding  in  steamers 
either  by  night  or  day  at  the  wharf  of  Tracy." 

"  Monday,  April  3. — Shelling  of  Batteries  Huger  and  Tracy  from  the  enemy's 
Parrott  batteries  as  usual.  At  Spanish  fort  the  enemy  appears  to  be  engaged 
in  strengthening  his  first  and  second  parallels,  establishing  mortar  and  heavy 
artillery  batteries  and  makes  but  little  progress  in  his  approaches.  Very  heavy 
artillery  practice  toward  evening.  Continual  repairs  necessary  on  our  line, 
and  the  work  of  extending  our  left  to  Bay  Minette  across  the  marsh  continued 
as  the  enemy  seems  to  be  most  vigorous  in  front  of  our  left." — Diary  of  a  Con- 
federate Officer. 

Gibson  to  Maury :  "  April  2,  7:30  p.  m. — The  eighth  day  has  closed.  The 
situation  remains  unchanged.  The  enemy  in  the  first  day's  action  succeeded 
in  pushing  back  my  skirmish  lines  at  certain  points.  He  continues  to  erect 
very  heavy  batteries  and  is  using  large  mortars.  But  our  losses  become 
smaller  every  day,  our  ability  greater,  and  the  confidence  of  the  officers  and 
men  grows  stronger  and  stronger." 

Same  to  Same :  "  April  3, 1865. — We  have  laeen  thoroughly  shelled  all  night, 
especially  by  mortars  and  there  is  brisk  musketry  this  morning.  I  never  saw 
such  digging  as  the  enemy  does — ^he  is  like  a  mole.  He  is  constructing  heavy 
batteries  on  my  extreme  flanks  that  are  going  to  give  me  great  trouble.  I  wish 
I  had  more  men  and  guns.  We  have  all  been  up  all  night.  It  is  digging  all 
night  and  fighting  aU  day.  Be  certain  to  send  more  wooden  embrasures  of  the 
patent  I  requested,  iron  screens,  and  the  heavy  guns." 


CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE.  137 

Keturning  to  his  former  position  Marshall  opened  a  trench, 
from  Hubbard's  advance  parallel  toward  the  left,  connecting 
with  the  works  of  the  Thii'teenth  corps,  and  commenced  saps 
to  it  from  the  rear  line.  This  advanced  line  was  only  a  hundred 
yards  from  the  salient  of  the  garrison,  Battery  No.  3. 

To  fill  the  gap  made  by  the  withdrawal  of  Marshall,  Col.  Krez 
moved  his  brigade  around  to  its  proper  position  on  Benton's 
left.  The  ground  vacated  by  Krez  was  occupied  by  the  Six- 
teenth corps  extending  its  left. 

The  brigade  of  Col.  Krez  had  met  with  some  loss  since  the 
28th  in  holding  its  exposed  skirmish  line.  In  the  Twenty-eighth 
Wisconsin  two  had  been  killed  and  six  wounded  ;  in  the  Twenty- 
seventh  Wisconsin  one  had  been  killed  and  six  wounded ;  in  the 
Thirty-third  Iowa  one  had  been  kiUed  and  four  wounded. 

At  this  time  the  advance  parallels  of  the  besiegers  were 
within  a  hundred  yards  of  the  different  salients  of  the  garrison 
fortifications.  The  garrison  had  also  extended  counter  ap- 
proaches and  rifle-pits  so  that  the  sharpshooters  on  both  sides 
were  within  talking  distance. 

Forts  Huger  and  Tracy  were  strengthened  by  placing  bags  of 
sand  on  the  parapets  between  the  embrasures,  the  filled  sand- 
bags having  been  sent  down  the  river  in  the  night  on  flats. 

In  Granger's  fi'ont,  Battery  No.  1,  on  the  extreme  left,  was 
finished  for  eight  heavy  pieces. 

^  "At  Huger  and  Tracy  preparations  are  being  made  for  better  protection 
against  the  enemy's  shelling  by  erecting  sand-bag  merlons.  One  X-inch  colnm- 
biad  temporarily  displaced  to-day.  Sand  furnished  to  Tracy  and  Huger  by 
floating  down,  at  night,  flats  loaded  with  filled  sand-bags. 

"  Mortar  firing  going  on  steadily  aU  day  at  Spanish  fort.  The  enemy's  bat- 
teries are  largely  increased.  The  enemy's  line  now  up  to  within  one  hundred 
yards  of  all  of  our  salients.  Tremendous  cannonading  from  four,  p.  jr..  tiU 
seven,  from  about  thirty  to  forty  guns  and  a  dozen  mortars  on  the  part  of  the 
enemy.  We  reply  from  nearly  the  same  number.  But  few  casualties  on  our 
side,  not  exceeding  six  or  eight  all  told.  One  sap-roUer  appeal's  in  front  of  our 
left  centre.'"~Diary  of  a  Confederate  Officer. 


138  CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE. 

In  anticipation  of  the  general  bombardment  that  was  to  com- 
mence at  five,  P.  M.,  the  besiegers'  artillery  fired  but  little  before 
that  hour.  The  X-inch  mortars  of  the  Sixth  Michigan,  on  the 
left,  did  not,  however,  entirely  neglect  McDermett ;  and  their 
fire  was  answered.  A  twenty-four-pounder  sheU  exploded  at 
the  entrance  of  Lieut.  Beardsley's  magazine,  but  did  no  harm. 
Another  shell  struck  among  the  men  while  they  were  at  dinner 
down  under  the  bluff,  wounding  Corporal  Perrin,  and  arousing 
an  Irishman's  apprehensions  for  the  safety  of  the  coffee. 

Capt.  Blankenship's  battery  (B,  First  Indiana)  fired  twenty 
rounds  per  hour  from  each  mortar  from  five,  A.  M.,  till  five,  p.  m. 
This  battery  was  also  disturbed  at  the  dinner-hour.  A  shell 
came  through  the  captain's  tent  and  exploded,  causing,  in ;  the 
excitement,  the  dinner  to  be  upset,  and  "  all  the  queen's-ware 
to  be  broken — which,  however,  was  but  one  cup  and  saucer." 

The  two  twelve-pounders  of  Morse's  Fourteenth  Indiana, 
which  had  been  withdrawn  to  give  place  to  thirty-pounders, 
were  put  in  position  on  the  extreme  right. 

Lieut.  James  (Battery  I,  First  Indiana)  arrived  with  detach- 
ment, and  reheved  Lieut.  Sibert,  acting  adjutant,  in  charge  of 
the  cohorn  mortars. 

The  guns  of  Bay  Minette  battery  were  engaged  throughout 
the  day. 

Capt.  Foust  having  procured  a  fresh  supply  of  ammunition, 
his  battery  of  steel  guns  resumed  its  original  position. 

During  the  day  the  garrison  were  quite  annoying  with  their 
cohorn  mortars,  and  troubled  the  infantry  in  their  advanced 
pits  exceedingly.  The  fire  from  smaU  mortars  was  troublesome 
on  both  sides.  The  Sixteenth  corps  had  made  a  number  of 
wooden  mortars,  which  were  also  quite  effective.  Each  mortar 
was  made  of  a  log  about  a  foot  in  diameter,  sixteen  inches  in 
length,  and  of  calibre  for  a  four-inch  shell. 

Up  to  and  including  the  4th  of  April  the  loss  in  the  Thir- 


CAMPAIGN     OP     MOBILE.  139 

fceentli  corps  was  twenty-six  killed  and  one  hundred  and  sev- 
c3nty-seven  wounded. 

The  Navy. — In  the  afternoon,  the  Octorara  got  afloat  and 
resumed  fire  on  Spanish  fort  with  her  one-hundred-pounder 
Parrott. 

The  Garrison. — Phillips'  Tennessee  battery,  in  Red  fort 
(No.  4),  had  suffered  so  much  from  the  mortar  shells,  it  was 
reheved  by  Capt.  James  Garrity's  Mobile  battery.  The  effec- 
tive strength  of  the  latter  was  sixty-seven.  It  was  composed 
of  northem-born  men,  and  had  participated  in  the  j)i'ominent 
battles  of  the  Southwest,  from  Shiloh  to  Nashville. 

The  Bombardment. — At  this  date,  the  besiegers  had  in  posi- 
tion against  Spanish  fort,  thirty-eight  siege-guns  (including  six 
twenty-pounder  rifles,  and  sixteen  mortars),  and  thirty-seven 
field  guns,  all  of  which  (seventy-five),  with  the  Minette  bay 
battery,  against  Huger  and  Tracy,  opened  fire  at  five,  p.  m.,  and 
continued  till  seven,  p.  M.  The  orders  were  for  each  gun  to 
fire  every  three  minutes.  There  was  not  much  response,  except 
from  the  gims  of  Old  Spanish  fort.  It  was  a  well-sustained  and 
grand  bombardment.  The  garrison  sought  shelter  in  their 
bombproofs.  Clouds  of  dust  rose  from  their  parapets.  "  The 
earth,"  says  a  correspondent,  "  actually  trembled  from  the  effect 
of  this  mighty  fire."  Meanwhile,  the  sharpshooters,  in  the 
skirmish  trenches  or  pits,  kept  up  their  accustomed  firing. 

The  signal  had  been  given  by  Mack's  battery,  the  Eighteenth 
New  York.  That  battery  fired  three  hundred  and  sixty  rounds, 
and  its  works  were  hit  seventeen  times  during  the  day.  In  the 
bombardment  there  was  a  premature  explosion  of  one  of  its 
guns,  which  mortally  wounded  Aaron  Vosberg,  a  most  excellent 
and  gallant  young  soldier. 

Two  thirty-pounder  Parrotts,  of  Capt.  S.  E.  Armstrong's 
battery  (M,  First  Indiana  heavy  artillery),  had  taken  position, 
eight  hundred  and  fifty  yards  from  McDermett,  the  preceding 


140  CAMPAIGN     OP     MOBILE. 

night,  and  opened  fire  at  tlie  signal  for  the  bombardment. 
Their  fire  was  answered  with  great  vehemence  by  the  guns  of 
Old  Spanish  fort ;  and  the  shells  of  the  latter  dropped  thick 
and  fast  over  the  battery  of  Capt.  Armstrong.  Once  there  was 
a  pause  of  ten  or  fifteen  minutes  in  their  fire,  and  the  gunners 
of  Battery  M  were  congratulating  themselves  on  the  happy 
prospect  that  they  had  quit  for  the  day,  when  they  again 
opened  with  gTeater  fury,  nor  ceased  till  after  it  was  dark. 

The  No.  1  X-inch  mortar,  of  Company  K,  Sixth  Michigan, 
exploded  a  caisson  in  McDermett,  which  produced  a  loud  cheer 
among  the  besiegers. 

The  first  section  of  Hendrick's  Battery  (L,  First  Indiana), 
Lieuts.  Clary  and  Benson,  opened  on  Old  Spanish  fort  and  Bed 
fort,  from  Carr's  left ;  and  the  second  section,  Lieut.  Parker, 
near  McArthur's  right,  dismounted  the  columbiad  in  Bed  fort . 
but,  not  knowing  this  at  the  time,  the  guns  continued  in  the 
same  range  and  destroyed  the  embrasure. 

During  the  bombardment,  Blankenship's  battery  threw  one 
hundred  and  sixty  shells  inside  the  garrison  works. 

Capt.  Wimmer  observed  a  transport,  loaded  with  troops, 
approaching  from  above,  but  she  did  not  come  within  range. 

When  the  bombardment  was  over,  the  men  received  a  ration 
of  whiskey ;  the  bands  struck  up  patriotic  airs ;  and  cheers 
echoed  and  re-echoed  from  one  end  of  the  line  to  the  other. 

There  was  no  enthusiasm,  of  course,  in  the  garrison ;  yet,  a 
feehng  of  rehef  and  satisfaction.  Owing  to  the  art  of  bomb- 
proofs,  they  had  been  hurt  less  than  could  have  been  expected ; 
and  they  had  been  spared  an  assault.  Gen.  LideU  congratu- 
lated the  garrison  commander  on  his  shght  loss.  ^ 


1  Lidell  to  Gibson :  '^ April  4 Hope  yoii  will  yet  drive  away  toe 

Yaakee  devils,  and  am  delighted  that  you  have  suffered  so  little.    Will  try  and 
get  Gen.  Maury  to  send  you  another  Vlll-inch  columbiad." 


CHAPTER    XYIII. 

SIEGE     OF    SPANISH    FORT— TENTH,    ELEVENTH,    AND    TWELFTH 

DAYS. 

April  5. — At  this  stage  of  tlie  siege,  mortar-shells  were  thrown 
into  the  garrison  throughout  the  night  at  regmlar  intervals.  A 
ten-inch  mortar-shell  is  a  fraction  under  ten  inches  in  diameter, 
and  weighs  very  nearly  ninety  pounds.  An  eight-inch  shell  is 
nearly  eight  inches  in  diameter,  and  weighs  about  fifty  pounds. 
Some  idea  can  be  formed  of  the  noise  they  produce  in  explod- 
ing. But  although  that  was  calculated  to  break  the  slumber  of 
the  garrison,  what  was  most  to  be  dreaded  was  their  fatal  effect 
when  they  chanced  to  strike  near  troops ;  for  this  had  been 
experienced  in  distressing  examples.  On  this  day,  a  ten-inch 
shell,  fired  from  Captain  Craig's  Company  A,  Sixth  Michigan, 
struck  inside  the  garrison's  battery  (No.  5,  sand-bag  battery), 
and  went  through  six  feet  of  earth  and  three  layers  of  pine-logs» 
hterally  burying  twenty-six  men,  of  whom  one  was  killed  and 
five  were  wounded.  During  the  previous  night,  Blankenship's 
battery  had  thrown  fifty-four  eight-inch  shells  inside  the  garri- 
son works.  In  course  of  the  day,  he  fired  only  six  rounds. 
There  was  a  moderate  amount  of  firing  by  the  besiegers'  artil- 
lery, but  very  little  from  the  garrison.  The  twenty-pounders  of 
the  Eighteenth  New  York  were  engaged  nearly  all  day  but  were 
not  rephed  to.  Armstrong's  battery  was  not  annoyed,  and  he, 
having  been  directed  not  to  bring  on  an  engagement  without 
orders  from  the  corps  commander,  his  thirty-pounders  only  fired 
occasional  shots.     The  X-inch  mortars  of  the  Sixth  Michigan, 


142  CAMPAIGN     OP     MOBILE. 

ia  front  of  McDermett,  were  actively  engaged,  and  disabled  a 
twenty-four-ponnder  howitzer  in  tliat  fort. 

The  enterprise  of  the  besiegers  on  the  left  was  marked,  and 
Gen.  Gibson  was  apprehensive  an  effort  would  be  made  to  turn 
his  right.  ^ 

Capt.  Barnes  (Company  C,  Twenty-second  Louisiana),  while 
signalling  to  his  Ylll-inch  mortar,  in  rear  of  McDermett,  the 
effect  of  his  fire,  was  struck  by  a  musket-baU,  and  feU  severely 
wounded.  Up  to  this  time  the  casualties  in  his  company  had 
been  three  killed  and  twenty-three  woimded;  more  than  half 
its  effective  strength. 

This  day,  Gen.  Gibson  telegraphed  Maury  that  the  garrison 
flanks  were  swept  by  heavy  batteries,  that  his  men  were  worked 
all  the  time,  and  that  their  lines  were  thinner  than  when  they 
had  fought  under  Johnston  and  Hood.  He  also  asked  for 
a  force  of  negroes,  and  said  he  could  make  good  soldiers  of 
them.  2 

From  the  beginning  of  the  siege,  the  garrison  had  been  look- 
ing for  a  diversion  in  their  favor,  by  FoiTest.  But  the  blow 
struck  at  his  forces  by  Wilson,  and  the  faU  of  Selma,   were 


1  "  At  Huger  and  Tracy  operations  as  usual.  And  nothing  new  at  Spanish 
fort  except  an  apprehension  on  the  part  of  Gen.  Gibson  that  the  enemy  is 
attempting  to  turn  our  right  flank  along  the  marsh,  between  Blakely  river  and 
our  extreme  right." — Diary  of  a  Confederate  Officer. 

^  Gibson  to  Maury :  "  April  5. — ^Enemy  sweeps  my  flanks  with  heavy  bat- 
teries, and  presses  on  at  all  points.  Can't  you  send  me  a  Uttle  craft  under  my 
orders.  My  line  is  extended  now  to  the  water  and  in  it.  My  men  are  worked 
all  the  time,  and  I  don't  believe  I  can  possibly  do  the  work  necessary  in  the 
dense  flats  on  the  flanks.  Can't  you  take  a  look  at  the  situation  to-morrow. 
I  really  can't  spare  any  more  men  for  launches.  My  men  are  wider  apart  than 
they  ever  were  tmder  Generals  Johnston  and  Hood.  The  works  not  so  well 
managed  nor  so  strong,  and  the  enemy  in  larger  force,  more  active,  and  closer. 
Can't  you  send  me  the  detachments  belonging  to  Ector  and  Holtzclaw.  Can't 
you  send  a  force  of  negroes,  with  axes.  I  can  make  good  soldiers  of  the 
negroes." 


CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE.  143 

now  well  known,  and  produced  a  dispiriting  effect  on  tlie  gar- 
rison.^ 

April  6,  Eleventh  Day. — A  footway  was  now  finished  from 
Fort  Tracy  over  the  marsh  to  Conway's  bayou,  affording  a  new, 
but  limited  communication  for  the  garrison  with  Mobile.  Affairs 
appeared  to  be  gTowing  critical,  on  account  of  the  uncertainty 
and  danger  of  their  communications.  ^  The  artillerists  were  cau- 
tioned to  be  prudent  of  ammunition,  to  fire  only  when  they  saw 
the  enemy,  and  not  to  answer  his  artillery.  They  had  to  report 
how  their  ammunition  was  expended,  and  make  requisition 
every  night  for  what  they  would  need  the  ensuing  twenty-four 
houi's. 

The  planting  of  torpedoes  in  front  of  the  garrison  works,  and 
where  there  appeared  most  danger  of  close  approach,  was 
renewed.  The  previous  night  Gen.  Holtzclaw  had  staked  out  a 
new  hne  rimning  off  from  Eed  fort,  intending  to  withdraw  his 
left,  and  thus  materially  shorten  the  garrison  line  ;  but,  in  course 
of  the  forenoon.  Mack's  twenty-pounder  rifles  swept  down  the 
stakes  with  then-  fire  ;  Holtzclaw  told  Gibson  that  the  besiegers 
had  already  got  the  range  of  his  proposed  new  line,  and  the 
purpose  of  occupying  it  was  abandoned.  Lumsden's  battery  on 
the  garrison's  left  was  relieved  by  Perry's  Chattanooga  battery, 
with  one  hundred  and  twenty  effective  men. 

The  Besiegers. — In  Granger's  front.  Battery  No.  8,  and  the 

^  About  this  date  the  Mobile  Register  said :  "  We  suppose  it  is  useless  to 
conceal  that  a  Yankee  raiding  party  has  dashed  mto  Selma,  before  our  forces 
were  concentrated  to  prevent  it.  The  result  is  nothing  except  the  loss  of  the 
government  works  at  that  point." 

2  "At  Huger  and  Tracy  nothing  new.  A  good  communication  is  opened 
with  the  city  from  these  points  by  the  footway  to  Conwaj^'s  bayou.  At  Spanish 
fort  the  enemy  are  steadily  but  not  rapidly  approaching  our  salients.  An 
engineer  company  is  ordered  to  both  Blakely  and  Spanish  fort  to  commence 
mining  operations  against  the  enemy's  approaches.  Three  heavy  guns  removed 
to  Blakely  and  several  mortars,  all  our  operations  retarded  by  the  uncertainty 
and  danger  of  communications." — Diary  of  a  Confederate  Office)'. 


144:  CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE. 

riglit  branch  of  No.  4,  had  been  finished  the  previous  day.  The 
right  branch  of  Battery  No.  8,  was  finished  the  6th. 

There  was  but  little  artillery  firing  dui-mg  the  day.  Granger 
ordered  the  two  thirty-pounders  of  Capt.  Armstrong's  battery 
(Fii'st  Indiana)  to  be  brought  to  bear  in  an  enfilading  fire  upon 
the  garrison's  rifle-pits  in  front  of  Eed  fort.  The  embrasures 
not  admitting  of  this,  Armstrong  proposed  to  move  one  of  his 
guns  out  on  open  groimd  some  yards  to  the  left,  whence 
there  would  be  good  range.  After  some  hesitation,  permission 
was  given  him  to  do  this.  Fifteen  rounds  of  case  shot  and  shell 
were  fired  on  the  pits,  causing  the  confederate  sharpshooters  to 
scamper  out  of  them,  before  night,  and  several  shots  were  fired 
during  the  night.  When  the  gun  was  taken  out  a  continued  fire 
on  the  gunners  was  kept  up  by  sharpshooters  in  front  of  Mc- 
Dermett,  but  they  were  about  eight  hundi-ed  yards  off,  and  in- 
flicted no  injury.  Meantime,  a  rope  was  attached  to  the  trail  of 
the  gmi,  and  men  placed  in  readiness  to  haul  it  into  the  works 
in  case  the  garrison  guns  opened  upon  it. 

Blankenship's  mortars  (Company  B,  First  Indiana)  fired  only 
five  roimds  during  the  day.  Capt.  Richard  Campbell  (Battery 
I,  First  Indiana)  assumed  command  of  three  twenty-pounders  in 
McAi'thur's  front. 

Wimmer  withdrew  his  four  gTins  fi'om  Minette  bay  battery, 
and  moved  to  works  in  front  of  Blakely.  While  withdi-awing, 
there  was  a  heavy  fire  on  the  battery  from  the  confederate  gun- 
boats. 

There  was  no  interruption,  of  course,  of  work  in  the  trenches. 
On  the  left,  the  Twenty-third  Iowa  and  Ninety-fourth  Illuiois 
were  in  the  front,  and  established  a  new  line,  taldng  some  rifle- 
pits,  in  which  were  found  three  confederates,  dead. 

The  casualties  were  hght.  In  A.  J.  Smith's  corps  there  was 
one  killed  (in  Eleventh  Missouri),  and  eight  wounded. 

In  Hubbard's  brigade,  McArthiu-'s  division,  suspicion  was  ex- 


CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE.  145 

cited  during  tlie  afternoon  that  tlie  garrison  was  evacuating. 
Whereupon  Lieut.  Jules  Capon,  of  the  Ninth  Minnesota,  a 
brave  and  enterprising  officer,  with  a  detail  of  a  dozen  picked 
men  from  his  regiment,  was  directed  to  reconnoitre  the  garrison 
works  as  soon  as  it  should  become  dark.  He  succeeded  in 
getting  his  men  through  the  abatis  and  to  the  ditch  of  Red 
fort,  without  arousing  attention,  and  remained  there  long  enough 
to  become  satisfied  the  works,  were  still  occupied  in  force.  In 
withdrawmg,  he  was  fired  upon,  but  uone  of  the  party  were  hit. 

April  7 — Twelfth  Bay. —  The  Navy. — On  the  night  of  the 
5th,  the  channel  had  been  swept  with  chains  bj  a  couple  of 
tugs.  At  five,  A.  M.,  of  the  6th,  the  gamboats  steamed  up  and 
anchored  close  to  the  torpedo  net,  five  thousand  one  hundred 
and  seventy  yards  from  Spanish  fort ;  did  not  open  fire,  how- 
ever, on  account  of  the  presumed  exposed  condition  of  the  land 
forces  in  then-  advanced  rifle-pits.  But  on  the  morning  of  the 
7th,  the  flagship  signalled  the  Octorara  to  fire,  which  she  did. 
The  fire  was  continued  at  intervals  during  the  day,  the  supply 
of  ammunition  not  admitting  of  constant  firing. 

In  Fort  Huger,  a  twelve-pounder  howitzer  was  dismounted ; 
and  the  elevating  screw  of  a  X-inch  columbiad  on  bombproof 
was  shot  away,  disabhng  it,  by  a  ten-pounder  rifle  of  the  Bay 
Minette  battery. 

At  Tracy  the  sand-bag  additions  to  the  parapet  progressed, 
and  a  telegraph  was  started  direct  to  Mobile.  In  Spanish  fort 
Capt.  Slocum  ("Washington  artillery)  had  got  his  disabled 
columbiad  repaired  and  in  position.  The  garrison  experienced 
increasing  danger  from  the  besiegers'  enfilading  batteries,  and 
constructed  additional  traverses  and  bombproofs  for  cover. 
Cheveaux-de-fi-iese  were  also  prepared,  and  at  night  placed  in 
front  of  the  more  damaged  and  exposed  parts  of  theu"  works.  ^ 

1  "  Priday,  April  1. — At  Huger  and  Tracy  the  work  of  constructirT.s?  merlons 
progressing,  and  a  telegraph  Une  commenced  from  Tracy  direct  to  Mobile.    At 

10 


M6  CAMPAIGN     OF    MOBILE. 

The  strength  of  tlie  garrison  on  tlie  morning  of  April  7,  was 
as  follows  : 

Gibson's  brigade  (aggregate  present) 674 

Ector's  "  "  659 

Holtzclaw's  "  " ....988 

Artillery  "  506 

.    .    Total 2,827 

Number  of  small  arms 2,047 

The  Besiegers. — The  infantry  were  busy  still  in  advancing  their 
approaches ;  and  the  sharpshooting  on  both  sides  from  the 
advance  rifle-pits  rendered  it  unsafe  for  a  man's  head  to  be 
exposed  there  for  a  moment.  In  the  morning  there  was  a  sharp 
struggle  on  the  left  to  hold  the  position  which  had  been  gained. 
The  besiegers  now  used  embrasures  made  of  heavy  split  plank 
which  were  set  into  the  parapets,  and  under  the  angle  of  which 
fchey  fired.  The  confederates  also  used  wooden  embrasures  ; 
but  they  were  made  of  boards  and  covered  over  with  the  earth 
of  the  parapet.     The  men  called  them  "  Beauregard  screens." 

Among  the  batteries  already  finished  in  the  Sixteenth  corps, 
was  one  for  two  thirty-pounders  taken  from  the  Milwaukie,  and 
manned  by  some  of  her  crew. 

A  one  hundred-pounder  Parrott  under  Lieut.  Compton,  Bat- 
tery K  (First  Indiana),  with  detail  of  twenty  men,  was  put  in 
Minette  Bay  battery. 

Spanish  fort  unusual  activity  on  tlie  part  of  the  enemy's  sappers.  Hie  ap- 
proaches on  our  right  are  made  by  a  succession  of  close  parallels  without 
boyaux  ;  and  on  our  left  and  centre  he  has  gained  from  thirty  to  forty  feet 
since  yesterday.  A  new  battery  is  established  enfilading  a  portion  of  our  left 
and  taking  our  centre  in  reverse,  which  with  the  constant  mortar  firing  on  this 
portion  of  our  line  proves  to  be  very  annoying.  Our  troops  attempt  to  remedy 
this  by  making  additional  traverses  aud  bombproofs,  and  cheveaux-de-friese 
are  placed  in  front  of  the  exposed  and  damaged  portions  of  line  to  protect 
against  any  attempt  at  a  coup-de-main." — Diary  of  a  Gonfederaie  Officer. 


CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE.  147 

In  tlie  Tliirteentli  corps  two  more  batteries,  for  siege  guns, 
were  finished,  and  tlie  guns  put  in  position.  Lieut.  Stamper, 
Battery  B,  moved  his  two  Vlll-inch  mortars,  with  success,  a 
thousand  yards  to  the  right,  to  obtain  better  range  of  Ked  fort. 

During  the  day  the  artillery  firing  was  very  hght.  In  the 
afternoon  there  was  a.  heavy  fall  of  rain.  The  besiegers  were 
getting  ready  for  another  grand  bombardment ;  and  the  garrison, 
since  their  arsenal  at  Selma  had  been  destroyed,  felt  the  need 
of  economizing  ammunition. 

An  artUlery  officer  put  down  in  his  diary  the  following  :  "  The 

siege  progresses  splendidly.     How  different  from  .     There 

it  was  charge  !  charge  !  charge  !  Here  a  httle  more  good  sense 
is  shown,  and  a  regard  had  for  human  life  ;  and  the  end  ap- 
proaches much  more  rapidly." 

The  Hospital. — Each  corps  had  its  hospital  situated  two  miles 
to  the  rear.  They  were  amply  supphed  and  well  administered. 
As  fast  as  was  practicable,  the  patients  were  sent  in  steamers 
to  the  general  hospital  in  New  Orleans.  For  instance,  on  the 
evening  of  March  31,  one  hundred  of  the  federal  wounded, 
including  three  officers,  arrived  at  New  Orleans,  on  the  steamer 
N.  W.  Thomas,  under  charge  of  Surgeon  Humeston,  assisted  by 
Surgeon  Hagy. 


CHAPTER    XIX. 

SIEGE  OF  SPANISH  FORT— THIRTEENTH  AND  LAST  DAT. 

Saturday,  April  8.  —  Thirteenth  Day. — On  tlie  mommg  of 
the  8tli,  Generals  Gibson  and  Holtzclaw  were  of  the  opinion 
it  was  time  to  evacuate.  But  Lieut. -Col.  Williams,  who  had 
been  chief  of  artillery- in  Stewart's  corps,  expected  to  finish  a 
battery  for  four  twelve-pounders,  on  Holtzclaw's  left,  to  enfilade 
the  besiegers'  left,  and  expected  to  have  the  gains  in  position 
the  ensuing  night.  It  was,  therefore,  concluded  to  hold  on 
another  day,  to  give  Wilhams  an  opportunity  to  try  his  battery 
Meantime,  orders  were  given  for  all  the  garrison  artillery  to 
open  vigorously  at  four,  P.  M.  In  view  of  the  close  approach  of 
the  besiegers,  steps  were  also  taken  to  have  additional  torpedoes 
planted. 

The  Navy. — In  the  afternoon  the  guns  of  Old  Spanish  fort 
opened  on  the  boats  of  the  squadron  that  were  sweeping  the 
channel  for  torpedoes.  The  Octorara  then  resumed  her  effect- 
ive fire  with  the  one-hundred-pounder  Parrott. 

The  Besiegers. — In  the  Thirteenth  corps,  Battery  No.  12,  for 
three  siege  guns,  was  completed.  There  had  now  been  con- 
structed in  this  corps,  besides  the  batteries,  ten  thousand  five 
hundred  yards  of  parallel  and  sap. 

In  Bertram's  front  the  works  were  carried  to  within  one 
hundred  yards  of  McDermett. 

McArthur's  division  of  the  Sixteenth  corps  had  constructed 
three  thousand  nine  hundred  and  seventy-five  yards  of  parallel, 
and  two  thousand  and  thirty-five  yards  of  sap  besides  two  bat- 


■■■•i'. 


;:ii,i  I'''; 


)  <^    '^    -^ 


CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE.  149 

teries  for  heavy  giins.  Hubbard's  brigade  of  that  division  had 
approached  nearest  to  the  garrison  works,  the  head  of  the  sap 
from  his  second  parallel  being  only  sixty  yards  from  Ked  fort. 

Carr's  division,  in  addition  to  work  on  parallels  and  saps,  had 
done  most  of  the  work  of  batteries  for  about  fifty  guns,  in- 
cluding mortars.  In  his  front  the  siege  had  been  pushed,  as 
everywhere  else,  with  unceasing  vigor  and  industry.  There 
were  two  well-defijied  parallels,  and  some  work  done  on  the 
third ;  four  approaches  or  saj)s,  two  of  which  admitted  of  artil- 
lery passing  under  cover  ;  and  in  front  of  Moore's  brigade  there 
were  two  approaches  extending  within  a  hundi'ed  yards  of  the 
main  works  of  the  garrison.  On  Carr's  right  flank,  across  the 
swamp,  a  gabion  work  had  been  extended  by  carrying  earth 
from  the  high  ground,  affording  cover  to  sharpshooters,  a  hun- 
di'ed yards  from  the  garrison's  left. 

There  were  now  in  position  in  the  Minette  bay  battery  four 
thu'ty-pounder  and  two  one-hundred-pounder  rifles ;  against 
Spanish  fort,  fifty-three  siege  guns  (including  nine  twenty-pound- 
er rifles  and  sixteen  mortars)  and  thirty-seven  field  guns  (the 
Seventh  Massachusetts  was  withdrawn  and  moved  to  Blakely) : 
total  ninety-six  guns.  Four  siege  rifles  and  five  siege  ho^udtzers 
on  the  left  centre  enfiladed  the  garrison's  centre  and  left ;  and 
four  siege  howitzers  close  in  on  the  extreme  right  enfiladed  their 
centre. 

A  bombardment,  which  proved  to  be  the  final  one,  opened 
fi'om  all  these  guns  at  half -past  five,  P.  M.,  and  continued  till  haK- 
past  seven,  p.  m.  The  twenty-pounders  of  the  Eighteenth  New 
York,  Capt.  Mack,  again  fired  the  signal. 

Gen.  Canby  was  intending  to  assault  the  garrison's  works  the 
following  morning  at  eight  o'clock.  But  the  corjDS  commanders 
had  received  instructions,  when  the  investment  commenced,  to 
push  forward  the  works  as  fast  as  consistent  with  due  care  of 
the  men,   and  to  take    advantage   of   every  opportunity   that 


150  CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE. 

promised  successlul  and  decisive  results,  but  not  to  attempt  an 
assault  without  that  assiu'auce. 

Before  the  bombardment  commenced  the  besiegers  took  the 
precaution  to  double  the  force  of  theii"  sharpshooters  and  the 
reserves. 

The  garrison  having  arranged  for  a  general  artillery  fire, 
opened  before  the  bombardment  was  commenced  by  the  be- 
siegers. 

Mack  haA-ing  given  the  signal,  directed  his  fire  principally 
against  McDermett.  The  shot  and  shell  fi-om  the  latter  came 
against  his  battery  tliick  and  fast.  His  works  were  struck  at 
least  fifty  times,  but  not  one  of  his  men  received  even  a  scratch. 
Eiffht  onus  were  beinj?  fii'ed  from  McDermett,  Earher  in  the 
day,  one  of  Capt.  Mack's  gims  had  done  splendid  execution 
on  Eed  fort,  in  knocking  away  two  of  its  embrasiu-es,  and  a 
solid  shot  struck  down  an  oflicer  at  a  distance  of  three  fifths 
of  a  mile. 

The  four  thirty-pounders  of  Capt.  Armstrong's  battery  (M, 
First  Indiana^,  each  fired  every  haK-minute.  The  section  of 
his  battery  near  tlie  right  of  the  Thii'teenth  coi-ps,  had  been 
much  annoyed  by  the  garrison's  sharpshooters,  and  one  of  the 
cannoniers,  Private  "Wm.  H.  Sparks,  was  badly  wounded  in  the 
forehead. 

I^p  to  five  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  Capt.  Blankenship's  mor- 
tars had  fired  forty  rounds.  Diu'ing  the  bombardment  they 
fii-ed  one  hundred  and  twenty  roiuids. 

The  batteries  of  Bough,  Cox,  and  Hendricks,  were  doing  good 
service.  Tlie  latter  had  one  man  wounded.  In  Cox's  battery 
four  were  woimded.  It  has  been  seen  that  the  gi-eater  part  of 
tJie  First  Indiana  heavy  artillery  was  engaged  in  the  siege. 
The  regiment  was  under  the  command  of.  Col.  B.  F.  Hays,  who 
was  assisted  diu"ing  the  siege  by  Maj.  James  M.  Connelly,  in 
fi'ont  of  tlie  Sixteenth  coi-ps,  and  Maj.  J.  W.  Day,  in  fi-ont  of 


CAMPAIGN     OP     MOBILE.  151 

tlie  Tliii-teentli  coi-ps.  During  tlie  siege,  Battery  B  expended 
five  hundred  and  seventy  rounds  of  ten-inch  shell,  and  six  hun- 
dred and  thirty-nine  of  eight-inch  shell ;  C,  two  hundred  and 
eighty-six  rounds  ;  H,  seven  hundred  and  one  rounds  ;  I,  four 
hundi-ed  and  eleven  rounds ;  K,  seven  hundred  and  twenty 
rounds ;  L,  six  hundred  and  forty-three  rounds  ;  M,  four  hun- 
di'ed  rounds. 

The  fire  of  so  many  large  guns,  and  the  loud  explosion  of 
shells,  produced  one  of  those  sublime  scenes  which  seldom 
occur-,  even  in  the  grandest  operations  of  war.  There  is 
scarcely  anything  in  the  phenomena  of  nature  to  w^hich  it 
could  be  compared ;  certainly  not  the  distant  murmur  of 
the  thunder,  nor  its  near  and  startling  crash.  Yet,  in  moun- 
tain storms  may  have  been  witnessed  a  scene  to  which  this 
grand  commingling  of  many  thunders  forms  some  comparison. 
It  is  when  a  storm  having  risen,  the  dark  clouds  seem  to  lin- 
ger on  the  mountain-tops,  and  from  all  quarters  of  the  heavens 
the  awful  bolts  burst  forth  simultaneously. 

ASSAULT. 

Gen.  Carr  having  pushed  his  works  on  the  right  about  as 
close  to  the  garrison  works  as  practicable,  concluded  to  take 
advantage  of  the  cannonading,  and  carry,  by  assault  on  their 
flank,  some  two  hundred  yards  of  the  confederate  left,  and  gain 
a  crest  covered  with  a  gTOve  of  pines.  The  possession  of  that 
point  he  rightly  judged  would  give  him  a  commanding  position 
for  a  battery,  and  afford  an  effective  fire  in  reverse  on  their 
works  by  infantry. 

Ector's  brigade,  in  his  fi'ont,  comprised  the  Ninth,  Tenth, 
Fourteenth,  and  Thirty-second  Texas  regiments,  and  the 
Twenty-ninth  and  Thuiy-ninth  North  Carolina  regiments. 

Aiter  the  bombardment  had  commenced,  and  at  about  six 
o'clock,  Col.  Geddes,  commanding  the  brigade,  went  to  Lieut.- 


152  CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE. 

Col.  Bell,  tlien  commanding  the  Eiglitli  Iowa  infantry  volun- 
teers, informed  liim  that  Gen.  Carr  and  himself  had  concluded 
to  advance  two  companies  on  the  crest  of  the  hill,  well  up  to 
the  confederate  works,  as  a  picket  guard,  and  that  they  could 
inti'ench  themselves  during  the  night.  He  instiiicted  Col.  Bell 
to  accomplish  this  in  any  manner  he  chose,  but  to  be  particular 
to  keep  his  regiment  behind  the  gabion  work,  which  was  on  the 
right,  across  the  swamp.  Col.  Geddes  inquired  how  long  it 
would  take  him  to  get  ready  and  commence  the  advance  of  the 
two  companies,  so  that  he  could  return  to  the  lifle-pits  and 
direct  the  fire  of  the  brigade,  and  attract  the  attention  of  the 
garrison  forces  in  his  front.  Col.  Bell  replied,  "Fifteen  min- 
utes ;"  yet  he  had  nearly  a  quarter  of  a  mile  to  go,  the  compa- 
nies to  select,  and  arrangements  to  make.  At  ten  minutes  past 
six,  his  regiment  was  in  position  behind  the  gabion  work.  Com- 
pany A,  Capt.  Hemy  Mulis  commanding,  and  Company  G,; 
Lieut.  Hemy  Yineyard  commanding,  were  selected  for  the 
advance,  and  both  companies  promptly  moved  around  the  right 
of  the  gabion  work,  and  gallantly  deployed  forward  on  the 
centre,  Capt.  Muhs  commanding  the  line  of  skii-mishers.  They 
had  neaiiy  one  hundi'ed  yards  of  ground  to  pass  over  before 
reaching  their  objective  point,  the  most  of  which  was  wet  and 
soft,  and  covered  thickly  with  fallen  trees.  Col.  Bell  accompa- 
nied them  till  he  was  satisfied  they  would  gain  the  desii'ed  po- 
sition, when  he  retm-ned  to  the  balance  of  the  regiment  behind 
the  work.  But  his  little  assaulting  party  encountered  obstacles 
at  every  step.  Even  if  they  did  not  pause  to  fii'e,  their  progress 
could  not  be  rapid,  and  the  Texas  troops,  from  behind  their 
works,  were  on  the  alert,  and  resisted  them  with  as  sharp  a 
musketry-fii-e  as  was  in  their  power.  About  the  time  the  move- 
ment commeueed,  a  cheer  was  given  by  the  rest  of  the  division 
to  give  the  impression  that  a  general  assault  was  intended,  and 
to  draw  attention  from  the  real  point  of  attack.     This  made  the 


CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE.  153 

Texas  troops  only  the  more  emiilons  to  hold  their  groimd..  and 
their  fire  gi-ew  more  intense  and  deadly.  They  could  also  per- 
ceive too  well  its  effect — ^for  a  number  of  the  gallant  young  men  of 
the  Eighth  had  already  fallen.  The  remainder  of  the  party  had 
about  come  to  a  pause,  and  were  sharply  engaging  the  Texans, 
yet  with  disadvantage. .  Col.  Bell  then  took  the  resj)onsibihty  of 
sending  forward  Company  H,  Lieut,  Ball  commanding,  to  their 
support.  And  feeling  anxious  about  the  fate  of  those  in  front, 
and  his  regiment,  on  account  of  the  low  position  they  occupied, 
not  being  able  to  cover  them  at  all  with  their  fire,  he  sent 
Lieut.  Clark,  of  Company  E,  to  Col.  Geddes,  for  |)ermission  to 
advance  with  the  balance  of  his  command.  The  latter,  behind 
the  gabion-works,  could  see  the  contest  their  comrades  were 
engaged  in,  and  were  eager  to  rush  forward  to  their  assistance. 
Col.  Bell  feared  that  the  assaulting  party,  if  unsupported,  would 
finally  be  driven  back,  in  which  case  they  would  be  almost  anni- 
hilated. Li  a  few  moments,  therefore,  after  Lieut.  Clark  had 
started  off,  he  ordered  the  remainder  of  the  regiment  forward 
over  the  gabion-work,  crossing  himseK  in  the  centre,  and  each 
wing  closing  in  and  following  him  over,  a  few  at  a  time.  AiTiv- 
ing  on  the  ground  held  by  the  advance  companies,  it  was  found 
to  be  too  hot  a  place  to  stop  at  with  safety,  and  so,  with  his 
gallant  command,  he  charged  over  the  confederate  works  with- 
out halting.  The  resistance  was  so  vehement  that  his  men  had 
to  engage  the  Texans  sharply  before  forming,  and  they  were,  of 
course,  in  much  disorder  ;  but  there  was  no  hesitating  and  no 
flinching.  Col.  Bell  now  noticed  that  a  mortar-battery  in  his  rear 
was  bursting  shells  just  over  him,  not  knowing  who  he  was. 
Some  one  happily  suggested  to  him  to  plant  the  regimental  colors 
on  the  ca]otured  parapet,  which  was  done,  and  he  also  waved  his 
hat  for  the  battery  to  throw  its  shells  farther  up  the  line.  A  num- 
ber of  the  Eighth  had  fallen  before  reaching  the  gamson  works. 
Early  in  the  assault,  Hemy  Vineyard,  first  lieutenant,  Companij- 


154:  CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE. 

G,  was  struck  in  tlie  left  arm  by  a  musket-ball;  but  hardly  noti- 
cing it  he  pushed  on.  Near  the  crest  of  the  hill  his  left  thigh 
was  fractured,  and  it  proved  to  be  a  mortal  wound.  Some  of 
his  comradc3  gathered  around  him,  but  he  said  :  "  Pay  no  atten- 
tion to  me,  boys — move  on." 

Col.  BeU  sent  information  to  Col.  Geddes  of  his  success,  and 
requested  support.  But  it  was  dark  and  his  regiment  had  been 
engaged  an  hour  before  any  assistance  came. 

Meantime,  the  musketry  fire  was  intense.  For  the  rest  of 
Carr's  division  was  maintaining  a  constant  fire  from  their  front, 
partly  as  a  diversion  to  the  assault.  At  a  distance  the  sound 
was  terrible.  It  seemed  as  if  the  contestants  were  grappling 
in  a  close  death  struggle.     And  they  were. 

On  entering  the  works  the  Eighth  Iowa  became  furiously 
engaged  with  the  Texas  and  North  Carohna  troops,  and  many 
feU  on  both  sides.  But  the  Eighth  kept  forming  as  they  fought ; 
and  rushing  closer  and  closer  upon  their  adversaries  finally 
made  them  yield.  Those  who  could  not  escape  they  captured. 
Such  was  the  clamor  of  the  firing  on  all  parts  of  the  line,  that 
this  combat,  sharp  as  it  had  been,  was  hardly  discernible  by 
those  not  engaged  in  it.  Hence  those  of  the  Texans  next  on 
the  right,  being  in  detached  pits,  were  surprised  when  the 
Eighth  Iowa  advanced  upon  them.  There  were  from  four  to 
a  dozen  of  them  in  a  pit.  The  pits  were  deep  and  a  few  yards 
apart.  Detachments  of  the  Eighth  rushed  eagerly  upon  them 
demanding  their  surrender.  Some  of  them  compHed.  But 
there  were  many  who  refused,  even  when  the  bayonet  was  at 
their  breast,  and  the  muzzle  of  the  musket  at  their  head.  They 
fought  to  the  last  moment,  and  then,  with  the  words,  "  I  never 
will  surrender"  on  their  hps,  met  death  in  a  fearless  manner. 
Some  were  taken  prisoners  who  were  less  noble  and  brave, 
for,  after  being  ordered  to  surrender  by  the  men  of  the  Eighth, 
they  would  first  fire  on  them,  and  then  throw  up  both  hands 
a  ad  surrender. 


CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE.  155 

Lieut.-Col.  Bell,  with  liis  command,  captured  about  tliree 
hundred  yards  of  the  confederate  works,  three  stand  of  colors, 
and  three  hundred  and  fifty  pidsoners. 

The  loss  of  the  regiment  was  five  enhsted  men  killed,  three 
commissioned  officers  and  seventeen  enhsted  men  wounded, 
some  mortally.  The  officers  wounded  were  Capt.  F.  P.  Ket- 
lenring,  Company  B  ;  Lieut.  Henry  Vineyard  (mortally),  and 
Lieut.  Spencer  Smith,  Company  A. 

Entering  the  garrison  works  alone,  maintaining  there  a  severe 
struggle,  and,  finally,  in  a  victorious  manner,  sweeping  along 
the  rear,  capturing  works  and  prisoners,  was  a  daring  and 
romantic  exploit,  and  justly  entitles  the  Eighth  Iowa  to  bril- 
hant  distinction.  It  was  an  achievement  which  called  forth 
and  well  illustrated  the  best  elements  of   soldiership. 

It  was  some  time  after  dark  before  any  regiment  came  to 
Col.  Bell's  support.  The  first  troops  that  entered  the  works 
after  him  was  the  Eighty-first  Illinois,  Lieut.-Col.  Eogers  com- 
manding. It  had  three  men  wounded  in  the  engagement  that 
evening.  Next  followed  the  One  Hundred  and  Eighth  Illinois, 
Col.  Turner,  and  the  One  Hundred  and  Twenty-foiu'th  Illinois, 
Col.  Howe.  Each  of  these  regiments,  and  their  commanders, 
did  all  that  was  required  of  them  in  the  action,  in  a  gallant 
manner.  Col.  Geddes,  the  brigade  commander,  also  came  up, 
and  apprehending  an  attempt  on  the  part  of  the  garrison  to 
recover  the  works  which  had  been  captured,  placed  Lieut.-Col. 
Bell,  with  the  Eighth  Iowa,  outside  of  the  gaiTison  works, 
fronting  toward  them.  About  the  same  time  he  placed  CoL 
Turner,  of  the  One  Hundred  and  Eighth  Illinois,  in  temporary- 
command  of  all  the  troops  of  his  brigade  j)resent. 

As  soon  as  Gen.  Carr  had  learned  the  success  of  the  Eighth 
Iowa,  he  gave  orders  for  a  line  of  rifle-pits  i  to  be  thrown  up  at 
the  extent  of  the  ground  taken,  and  pei-pendicular  to  the  garri- 
son works.     And  the  work  was  commenced. 


156  CAMPAIGN     OP     MOBILE. 

Carr  then  hastened  to  the  naval  battery,  where  were  Gens. 
Canby  and  A.  J.  Smith,  and  mformed  the  commanding  general 
what  had  been  done  ;  and  he  was  ordered  to  follow  up  the 
advantage  gained  as  far  as  possible. 

In  the  mean  time,  the  firing  had  been  very  sharp  on  the  other 
flank  in  front  of  McDermett.  The  Nineteenth  Iowa  were  in  the 
advance  rifle-pits,  and  their  fire  and  that  of  the  batteries  had 
about  silenced  the  guns  in  that  work.  The  garrison  was  then 
so  much  pressed  that  Col.  Bruce  was  apprehensive  of  an  attack 
to  drive  him  back,  and  he  had  ordered  bayonets  to  be  fixed. 
Pretty  soon  the  Twenty-third  Iowa,  Col.  Glasgow,  came  up  to 
the  front  on  the  double  quick,  and  Bruce  then  expected  an 
assault  was  to  be  made. 

As  soon  as  Gen.  Gibson  learned  that  the  line  had  been  broken 
on  his  left,  he  directed  Gen.  Holtzclaw  to  have  it  restored  ;  but 
he  was  informed  by  the  latter  that  the  Texas  brigade  was 
doubled  up,  and  in  confusion,  and  that  the  attacking  force 
was  too  strong  to  be  driven  back.  These  officers  then  had  a 
hurried  consultation,  and  determined  it  was  best  to  evacuate. 
But  to  render  this  safe  it  was  necessary,  of  course,  that  they 
should  hold  Carr's  division  in  check ;  and  reinforcements  were 
sent  as  soon  as  possible  for  that  purpose. 

The  Eighth  Iowa  was  first  brought  to  a  stand  by  Coleman's 
North  Carohna  regiment  and  a  detachment  of  garrison  (or  pro- 
vost) guards,  commanded  by  Lieut.  A.  G.  Clark,  of  Gen.  Gib- 
son's staff,  and  Lieut.  Holtzclaw,  aide  to  Gen.  Holtzclaw.  This 
force  formed  perpendicular  to  their  main  works.  Its  strength 
was  between  two  hundred  and  three  hundred,  and  must  have 
felt  it  w-as  confronting  superior  numbers.  Nevertheless  they 
realized  that  the  safety  of  the  garrison  depended  upon  their 
valor,  and  also  that  it  was  perilous  to  remain  there  on  the  defen- 
sive. A  charge  was  ordered  and  attempted.  But  Carr's  ad- 
vance remained  steadfast,  except  that  a  few  skirmishers  were 


CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE.  157 

driven  back,  and  the  charge  repulsed  with  loss.  The  two  aides, 
rallying  their  men,  led  them  forward  with  a  dauntless  spirit. 
Lieut.  Clark  was  killed;  Lieut.  Holtzclaw,  severely  wounded. 
It  was  this  bold  front  that  enabled  the  garrison  safely  to 
escape. 

Col.  Zacharie,  commanding  Twenty-fifth  Louisiana  infantry, 
had  now  come  up  Tvdth  some  sixty  men  of  his  regiment.  He  had 
left  his  position  near  McDermett  and  had  double-quicked  to  Gib- 
son's headquarters,  and  thence  out  to  the  left,  with  instructions 
to  do  what  he  could  to  restore  the  Hne.  He  first  formed,  with 
his  left  covering  the  treadway,  and  his  right  thrown  forward,  and 
soon  afterward  advanced.  In  a  short  time  he  sent  foi'ward  a 
few  men  as  scouts  to  reconnoitre,  but  they  returned  saying  they 
could  see  nothing  of  the  federal  line.  He  sent  others  but  with 
no  better  success.  In  about  an  hour  and  a  half  he  sent  forward 
a  captain,  one  sergeant,  and  two  men  from  the  Twenty-second 
Louisiana,  telling  them  to  go  till  they  discovered  the  federal  luie. 
They  went  but  were  captured.  The  ground  in  front  of  the  fede- 
rals was  thickly  covered  with  timber  and  underbrush,  and  cut 
by  deep  ravines.  It  being  also  dark,  it  was  natiu'al  that  they 
should  be  cautious  and  make  sure  of  the  advantage  already 
gained. 

Gibson  was  withdi'awing  his  forces  on  the  treadway  across  the 
swamp.  This  treadway  extended  out  to  the  river  at  Fort  Hu- 
ger,  where  the  garrison  crossed  over  in  boats  and  embarked  as 
fast  as  possible  on  transports.  But  the  treadway  was  only  two 
feet  wide,  and  the  passage  over  it  was  slo"\^.  Moreover,  to  pre- 
vent noise,  the  troops  took  off  their  shoes  and  stockings  and 
walked  barefooted. 

The  pui-pose  of  evacuating  was  cautiously  imparted  and  went 
round  to  the  officers  in  a  whisper  ;  for  it  was  apprehended  some 
of  the  trooj)s  would  loudly  object.  The  first  movements,  there- 
fore, were  in  the  nature  of  a  feint.    When  the  right  wing  left 


158  CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE. 

tlieir  quarters,  laany  of  the  men  thonglit  they  were  going  to 
reinforce  the  left. 

At  about  nine  o'clock,  Capt.  Garrity  sent  in  a  requisition  for 
ammunition.  The  heutenant  brought  back  a  handful  of  spikes 
to  spike  the  guns.  He  and  his  command  left  an  hour  after- 
ward. Between  ten  and  eleven,  Gen.  Holtzclaw  informed  Col. 
Zacharie  that  he  was  evacuating,  and  to  exercise  his  discretion 
as  to  when  he  would  withdraw.  In  a  short  time  after  Zacharie 
withdrew  as  rear-guard,  with  the  Sixteenth  Louisiana,  Lieut. 
Col.  Lindsay,  who  had  made  the  charge  the  morning  of  27th 
March,  as  rear-guard  proper. 

Before  their  final  departure,  however,  a  party  of  these  troops 
had  gone  up  to  within  fifty  yards  of  CaiT's  advance,  and  on 
receiving  a  volley  fell  back  and  were  seen  no  more.  During  the 
evening  one  of  the  confederate  parties  that  charged  Carr's  ad- 
vance, came  up  within  thirty  yards  calling  out  "we  surrender," 
and  then  fired.  The  Eighth  Iowa  fired  on  them  and  fixed  bayo- 
nets, at  which  they  faced  about  and  ran  rapidly  back. 

Soon  after  the  Eighth  Iowa  made  a  lodgment,  Carr  had 
ordered  Col.  Moore  to  leave  three  hundred  men  in  the  trenches 
and  with  the  balance  of  his  brigade  move  round  to  the  right  to 
reinforce  Geddes'  brigade.  After  having  made  this  movement, 
Moore  set  the  Ninety-fifth  Illinois,  Col.  Blanding,  to  o]3ening  a 
road  through  the  abatis  and  works  for  troops  and  artillery  to 
pass ;  it  being  the  general  impression  that  the  garrison's  left 
was  withdrawn  merely  to  an  interior  line.  He  also  posted  the 
Thirty-third  Wisconsin  so  as  to  flank  the  confederates  should 
they  attempt  to  change  their  supposed  front. 

At  nine  o'clock,  perceiving  that  Geddes'  brigade  had  not 
developed  this  supposed  new  line  of  the  confederates,  on  his 
own  responsibility  he  moved  back  to  his  old  front.  Then, 
by  his  directions.  Major  James,  Seventy-second  Illinois,  with 
the  three  hundred  men  who  had  been  left  in  the  trenches 


CAMPAIGN     or     MOBILE.  159 

cliarged  the  garrison  skirmisliers  remaining  in  tlie  advance  pits, 
unconscious  of  the  evacuation,  and  captured  them  easily.  Moore 
then  moved  the  balance  of  his  brigade  over  the  main  works. 

About  the  same  time  Ward's  brigade  captured  the  garrison 
slrirmishers  in  its  front.  Some  of  the  latter  called  out,  "Don't 
shoot,  Yanks,  we  are  coming  in."  And  they  were  as  good  as 
their  word. 

Moore  soon  wheeled  to  the  left,  charged  along  the  garrison 
works  in  reverse  and  flank,  and  captured  a  number  of  prisoners, 
and  kept  on  till  he  got  to  Old  Spanish  fort  where  a  few  more 
prisoners  were  captured.  Learning  there  from  a  prisoner  how 
the  garrison  had  escaped,  he,  with  the  Thirty-third  Wisconsin, 
hastened  down  to  the  foot-bridge  but  was  too  late  to  accom- 
plish anything. 

Geddes  mth  his  brigade  reached  Old  Spanish  fort  between 
eleven  and  twelve,  and  the  men  being  tired  after  so  much  watch- 
ing and  fighting,  arms  were  stacked  and  they  were  allowed  to 
rest. 

There  was  now  a  scramble  for  the  hams  and  corn-meal  left 
by  the  garrison ;  and  especially  was  there  a  scramble  for  pos- 
session of  the  captured  guns. 

At  midnight,  the  Octorara  aimed  a  hundred-pounder  shell 
at  Old  Spanish  fort,  and  although  it  went  some  distance  beyond, 
the  troops  thought  it  prudent  to  change  their  position  for  the 
present.  After  leaving  proper  guards  over  the  captured  prop- 
erty, Carr's  division  retiu'ned  to  their  quarters,  having  in  their 
possession  between  four  hundred  and  five  hundred  prisoners. 
It  had  done  a  splendid  day's  work. 

As  soon  as  Gen.  Canby  was  informed  of  the  lodgment  made 
by  the  Eighth  Iowa,  he  sent  notice  of  the  fact  to  Granger, 
who  at  once  communicated  the  agreeable  intelhgence  to  his 
corps.  It  produced  much  enthusiasm.  The  men  cheered  all 
along  the  line. 


160  CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE. 

The  divisions  on  Carr's  left  it  appears  took  the  confederate 
pickets  in  their  respective  fronts.  But  this  was  not  done  till 
after  midnight.  In  McArthur's  division,  Capt.  French,  Fifth 
Minnesota,  of  Hubbard's  brigade,  having  charge  of  the  sharp- 
shooters, captured  those  in  front  of  that  brigade,  and  was 
followed  over  the  works  by  the  Forty-seventh  Illinois,  Maj. 
Bonham  commanding.  McArthur's  di^dsion  captured  one  com- 
missioned officer  and  forty-nine  enlisted  men. 

The  ground  in  front  of  the  confederate  main  works  was  con- 
siderably mined  with  torpedoes — or  as  they  were  called,  svh^ 
terra  shells.  Marshall's  entire  brigade,  of  McArthur's  division, 
moved  into  the  fort  b.efore  dayhght.  There  were  some  confed- 
erate dead,  then,  to  be  seen  in  their  front  lying  upon  the  ground. 
Of  these  one  appeared  to  have  been  killed  by  a  musket-ball 
while  planting  a  toipedo.  Close  by  him  was  a  spade ;  also  a 
torpedo  planted  about  two  feet  in  the  ground,  but  not  yet  cov- 
ered.    They  buried  him  there  with  it. 

In  front  of  Day's  brigade,  Benton's  division,  Capt.  Shepherd, 
Company  F,  Ninety-first  Illinois,  had  charge  of  the  skirmish 
line,  and  hearing  the  shouts  of  Carr's  division  entered  the  works 
in  his  front  unopposed,  with  a  detachment  of  the  Ninety-first 
and  the  Fiftieth  Indiana.  In  the  brigade  front  of  Col.  Krez  a 
detachment  of  his  brigade  first  entered  under  Maj.  Boydston, 
of  the  Thirty-third  Iowa,  and  on  the  extreme  left,  at  about 
midnight.  Col.  McNulta  with  the  Forty-ninth  Illinois  entered 
McDermett  capturing  the  picket  in  front,  and  soon  after  had 
the  colors  raised  over  that  heavy  work  amid  the  loud  cheers  of 
the  dehghted  men. 

The  siege  of  Spanish  fort  was  at  an  end.  About  five  hundred 
prisoners  and  aU  the  artillery,  nearly  fifty  pieces,  captured. 
Bertram's  brigade  was  ordered  to  remain,  and  garrison  Spanish 
fort,  with  instructions  to  collect  and  take  charge  of  the  ord- 
nance and  other  property.      All  the  rest  of  the  infantry,    and 


CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE.  161 

most  of  the  artillery,  were  ordered  to  moye  immediately  to 
Blakely. 

In  the  Thirteenth  coi'ps  the  loss  had  been :  in  Benton's 
division,  sixteen  killed,  one  hundred  and  sixteen  wounded, 
twenty-seven  captured,  and  one  missing  in  action — total,  one 
hundred  and  sixty ;  in  Bertram's  brigade,  about  eighty,  killed 
and  wounded. 

In  McArthur's  and  Carr's  di"vdsions  of  the  Sixteenth  corps, 
the  entire  loss,  in  the  siege,  was  twenty-six  killed,  three  hun- 
dred and  nineteen  wounded  and  captured. 

As  soon  as  Gen,  Canby  knew  of  Carr's  assault,  he  telegraphed 
to  Gen.  Steele,  at  Blakely,  to  send  down  a  brigade,  to  reinforce 
that  part  of  the  line.  Slack's  brigade  moved  down  promptly, 
and  reported  to  Gen.  Smith,  but  the  latter  sent  them  back, 
sapng  he  wanted  no  assistance.  "While  this  brigade  was  rest- 
ing, near  the  shore  of  Bay  Minette,  and  tlie  men  were  talking 
and  laughing,  a  part  of  the  garrison,  in  their  retreat,  were  pass- 
ing along  on  the  marsh,  not  many  yards  from  them,  and  within 
hearing. 

Retreat  of  the  Garrison.— As,  the  rear-guard  of  the  garrison 
were  stepping  upon  the  treadway,  they  heard  tremendous 
cheering  up  at  McDermett,  which  must  have  been  soon  after 
the  Ninety-fourth  Ilhnois  had  entered.  Shortly  after,  they 
heard  cheering  on  the  road  leading  to  Blakely,  and  conjectured 
their  victors  were  already  on  the  march  for  that  place  ;  but  the 
troops  they  heard  must  have  been  Slack's  brigade,  which  started 
back  to  Blakely  soon  after  midnight. 

There  was  no  httle  excitement  among  the  confederates  as 
they  thronged  the  marshy  bank  at  the  end  of  the  treadway. 
Some  shells  had  passed  closely  over  them  fi-om  the  right  of  the 
Sixteenth  corps,  as  they  had  come  over  the  treadway,  and  the 
jjlace  they  occupied  was  commanded  by  several  of  the  besiegers' 

batteries.     Wiad  and  tide  were  agaiast  them,  and  they  thought 

11 


162  CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE. 

it  "imsafe  to  use  any  other  vessels  than  the  light-draught 
blockade-runners.  Their  passage  over  to  Huger  was,  therefore, 
slow,  and  thej  were  stiU  huddled  on  the  marshy  bank,  with  a 
prospect  of  daylight  finding  hundreds  of  them  still  there.  At 
this  juncture,  it  being  midnight.  Col.  Lockett,  chief  engineer, 
proposed  to  Gen.  Gibson  that  a  portion  of  the  troops  endeavor 
to  make  their  way  up  to  Blakely  through  the  marsh.  Being 
acquainted  with  the  locality,  he  offered  to  guide  the  column 
himself.  The  suggestion  was  adopted,  and  about  a  thousand 
of  the  garrison  took  up  the  march  for  Blakely.  The  distance 
was  five  miles.  The  march  was  difficult,  but  not  so  difficult  as 
might  have  been  apprehended ;  for  there  are  few  things  the 
soldier's  resolution  cannot  overcome.  The  route  lay  through 
mud  and  water,  through  marsh  grass,  canebrakes,  or  thick 
underbrush,  and  over  bayous.  The  men  often  sank  down  in 
the  swamps,  and  sometimes  had  to  be  pulled  out  by  their  com- 
rades. It  was  reported  that  some  were  lost,  but  the  better 
opinion  is  they  all  arrived  safely  at  Blakely.  They  reached 
that  place  at  dawn,  thoroughly  exhausted  and  presenting  a 
singular  appearance.  In  coui'se  of  the  day,  they  proceeded  on 
steamers  to  Mobile. 


CHAPTER    XX. 

OBSERVATIONS  ON  THE  SIEdE  OF, SPANISH  FORT. 

Gen.  Beaiu'egarcl  considered  it  a  mistake  for  the  confederates 
to  garrison  any  part  of  the  Eastern  shore  of  Mobile  bay.  His 
opinion  was  that  Huger  and  Tracy  should  have  been  made  self- 
sustaining  forts,  and  that  the  main  garrison  should  be  in  Mobile. 
That  appears  to  be  the  better  opinion. 

The  object  of  holding  S]3anish  fort  was  to  protect  Huger  by 
preventing  the  establishment  of  batteries  to  bombard  the  latter. 
But  it  really  could  not  effect  much  in  that  respect,  because 
some  distance  north  of  Spanish  fort,  on  the  shore  of  Bay 
Minette,  the  site  of  batteries  actually  estabhshed,  gims  could  be 
placed  which  in  two  weeks  time  would  have  crushed  Huger  and 
Tracy. 

Nevertheless,  there  was  an  advantage  to  the  confederates  in 
having  Spanish  fort.  It  was  a  cover  whence  parties  could  have 
been  sent  out  to  obstruct  the  communications  of  the  federals, 
and  operating  as  the  former  could  on  interior  lines  they  could 
have  concentrated  a  sufficient  force  there  to  cause  much  an- 
noyance. 

This  suggests  the  answer  to  the  opinion  expressed  by  some 
confederate  engineers,  that  it  was  a  mistake  in  the  federal  com- 
mander to  have  noticed  Spanish  fort  at  all,  they  holding,  that  it 
would  have  been  better  for  his  purpose  to  have  passed  those  works 
and  attempted  the  destruction  of  Huger  and  Tracy,  with  bat- 
teries on  Bay  Minette  or  shore  ;  or  passing  all  the  eastern-shore 
garrisons  to  have  gone  round  to  the  confluence  of  the  Tombigbee 


164  CAMPAIGN     OP     MOBILE.    '  "" 

and  tlie  Alabama,  the  occupation  of  Mobile  by  tlie  confederates 
being  tlien  a  question  of  supplies.  Undoubtedly  the  evacuation 
of  Spanish  fort  could  have  been  compelled  by  indirect  opera- 
tions, yet  before  the  accomphshment  of  that,  was  there  not  too 
much  danger  to  be  apprehended  to  the  communications,  if  an 
enterprising  enemy  should  be  left  in  a  strong  position  on  the 
very  line  necessary  to  use  ?  On  the  12th  April,  Gen.  Maury  left 
Mobile,  with  four  thousand  five  hundred  infantry.  About  five 
hundred  had  been  captured  at  Spanish  fort,  three  thousand  at 
Blakely,  and  the  killed  and  wounded  must  have  numbered  at 
both  places  five  hundred  ;  so,  that  at  the  beginning  of  the  siege 
his  effective  force  must  have  been  about  nine  thousand.  If  an 
opportunity  had  warranted,  this  force  could,  with  but  little 
trouble,  have  concentrated  at  Spanish  fort.  But  it  would  have 
been  dangerous  to  have  had  half  that  force  sallying  out  from 
that  garrison. 

The  garrison  fuUy  expected  to  be  assaulted  on  the  27th  of 
March.  That  was  one  reason  why  it  was  not  best  to  assault. 
The  character  of  the  works  were  not  then  fully  known  to  the  fed- 
erals. Furthermore,  there  was  no  pressing  necessity  nor  special 
object  to  be  gained  by  an  immediate  assault.  On  the  contrary 
not  much  would  have  been  gained  in  time  as  the  army  would 
still  have  been  waiting  for  supplies.  As  has  been  seen,  some 
portions  of  the  fortifications  around  Spanish  fort  were  quite  elab- 
orate, as  also  the  obstructions  in  front ;  and  they  had  been  made 
by  skilful  engineers.  The  troops  behind  them  were  veterans. 
Ordinary  prudence  would  dictate  that  the  besiegers  should  at 
least  have  one  hne  of  works  behind  which  they  could  fall  back 
in  security  in  case  of  an  unexpected  accident  or  reverse.  Nev- 
ertheless if  a  general  assault  had  been  ordered  on  the  first  day 
or  on  any  subsequent  day,  there  is  no  doubt  it  would  have  been 
successful.  And  this  is  the  opinion  of  the  garrison  officers. 
But  it  would  have  been  stubbornly  resisted,  and  success  would 


CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE.  165 

have  cost  many  valuable  lives.  Tlie  best  place  for  tlie  assault 
was  where  it  occurred ;  for  it  was  the  weakest  part  of  the  garri- 
son's line.  The  fact  that  it  was  unexpected  and  the  darkness 
probably  are  the  reasons  for  its  not  being  followed  up  rapidly 
enough  to  capture  aU  the  garrison.  Gen.  Canby  had  already  de- 
termiaed  to  carry  the  works  by  a  general  assault  the  next  morn- 
ing at  eight  o'clock,  which  no  doubt  would  have  been  a  lucky 
hour  ;  for  the  garrison  commander  had  cautioned  his  troops  to 
"be  prepared  for  an  assault  every  morning  before  dayhght,  ev- 
ery day  at  twelve,  m.,  and  every  evening  before  dark."  An  as- 
sault would  not  have  been  expected  at  eight. 

The  besiegers  and  garrison  ahke  are  entitled  to  praise  for  con- 
stant industry  and  for  energy.  The  besiegers  had  the  most 
work  to  do  ;  and  the  works  constructed  will  long  remain  as  evi- 
dence of  their  willing  toil. 

The  garrison  commander,  Gen.  Gibson,  was  competent  and 
active,  and  inspired  his  troops  with  enthusiasm.  He  was  highly 
complimented  by  his  superior  officers  for  his  conduct  during 
the  siege.  Second  to  him  in  command  was  Gen.  Holtzclaw, 
also  an  accompHshed  and  earnest  officer.  In  fact  the  officers 
and  troops  comprising  the  garrison  were  remnants  of  many 
historic  campaigns,  and  possessed  no  small  share  of  culture 
and  spuit. 

The  only  neglect  which  can  be  cited  against  the  garrison 
was  their  failure  to  construct  strong  and  connected  works  on 
their  left  down  across  the  swamp.  This  is  where  they  were 
assaulted.  Their  works  there  were  disconnected  and  their 
occupants  were  captured  in  detail.  More  uidustry  and  care 
there  would  have  enabled  them  to  repulse  the  attack,  or  would 
have  prevented  the  attack  that  was  made. 

The  garrison  displayed  uncommon  resolution  and  courage 
in  the  frequency  of  its  sorties.  About  a  dozen  must  have  been 
made  in  aU.     One  was  attended  with  briUiant  success.     Holtz- 


166  CAMPAIGN     OF    MOBILE. 

claw  had  arranged  for  two  more  sorties  on  the  night  of  the  8th. 
They  were  intended  against  the  right  and  left  of  McArthur. 

It  appears  that  a  formal  siege  of  Spanish  fort,  with  heavy 
artillery,  was  not  decided  upon  till  after  the  investment.  Siege 
batteries  were  then  sent  for  and  brought  on  transports  from  the 
forts  at  the  mouth  of  the  bay.  During  the  siege  the  ammuni- 
tion was  brought  up  from  Fort  Morgan,  and  the  labor  of  land- 
ing it  there  was  performed  by  the  Sixth  Michigan. 

Some  experienced  confederate  artillerists  at  Spanish  fort 
expressed  the  opinion  that  the  firing  of  the  besiegers'  land  bat- 
teries was  not  generally  good.  While  the  results  of  the  latter's 
fire  must  be  their  justification,  it  is  proper  to  remark  that  there 
was  some  complaint  about  the  ammunition.  Col.  Hays,  com- 
manding First  Indiana  heavy  artillery,  states  in  his  report  that 
the  Hotchldss  pattern  of  solid  shot  would  end  over  when  fixed, 
and  that  the  shells  would  burst  prematurely.  The  shells,  he 
says,  were  made  more  effective  by  emptying  out  the  powder 
with  which  they  were  charged  and  refilling  them  with  sand,  and 
then  using  them  as  solid  shot. 

Ahvays  seek  an  Enfilading  Fire. — The  engineer  operations  of 
the  besiegers  were  directed  by  Gen.  Comstock  and  Col.  McAl- 
Hster,  and  were  conducted  with  skill  and  energy.  Positions 
were  soon  selected  and  batteries  started  whence  damaging 
enfilading  fire  could  be  delivered ;  an  object  ever  to  be  kept  in 
view  in  the  use  of  all  arms. 

Have  tJie  TrencJies  continuous,  and  Approaches  secure. — The 
stumps  and  fallen  trees  afforded  so  much  cover  to  the  besiegers' 
skirmishers  that  even  the  first  or  second  day  they  got  out  some 
hundreds  of  yards  beyond  any  continuous  line  of  rifle-pits.  They 
continued  to  occupy  such  advanced  positions  before  approaches 
to  them  were  started ;  and  were  consequently  in  a  very  exposed 
situation.  The  result  of  this  was  the  loss  of  a  captain  and 
twenty  men  in  Benton's  front.    If,  as  should  have  been  done, 


CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE.  167 

an  approacli  liad  been  started  and  followed  close  up  to  the  line 
occupied  by  tlie  skirmisliers,  tliey  could  then  have  retreated 
when  so  severely  shelled,  or  reinforcements  could  have  been 
sent  to  them.  As  it  was,  they  were  at  the  mercy  of  the  gar- 
rison. In  a  siege,  the  skirmishers  or  picket  should  be  but  a 
short  distance  from  the.  advance  line  of  works,  unless  they  have 
a  safe  approach  from  that  line  to  their  posts.  The  loss  of 
twenty  men  in  a  siege,  out  of  rifle-pits,  has  much  more  moral 
effect  than  the  loss  of  the  same  number  on  an  open  battle-field. 
Scipio  is  said  to  have  been  overjoyed  when  bo  inflicted  on 
Cffisar  a  loss  of  only  twenty-seven  men,  and  that  on  ojDen 
ground. 


CHAPTER    XXI. 

SIEGE  OF  BLAKELT— SECOND,  THIRD,  AND  FOURTH  DATS. 

April  3 — Second  Bay  of  the  Siege. — The  ground  lying  between 
the  combatants,  viewed  from  a  distance,  appeared  level,  but  it 
was  much  cut  up  by  ravines,  the  sides  of  which  were  scalloped 
with  numerous  and  deep  depressions.  Some  of  the  ravines  rau 
parallel  with  the  confederate  works,  others  perpendicular  tc 
them,  and  affording  a  damaging  fire  for  their  artillery.  Along 
the  bottoms  of  the  principal  ravines  ran  clear  and  gurgling 
brooks,  haK  concealed  by  the  luxuriant  bushes  and  vines,  and 
the  banks  of  which  were  marshy.  The  general  elevation  of  the 
ground  was  eighty  feet  above  the  water,  and  sixty  feet  w'as,  per- 
haps, the  greatest  depth  of  any  of  the  ravines. 

Where  the  Second  division  commenced  its  first  line  of  in- 
trenchments,  a  thousand  yards  from  the  main  line  of  the  con- 
federates, the  ground  was  a  little  higher  than  that  occupied  by 
the  latter ;  and  from  that  position  there  was  a  gradual  decline 
for  three  hundred  yards  toward  the  front.  The  ground  occu- 
pied by  the  colored  division  was  about  on  a  level  with  the  con- 
federate works.  The  position  of  both  divisions  was  favorable  on 
two  accounts — ^it  was  in  the  woods,  and  there  was  an  abundance 
of  good  running  water. 

In  Hawkins'  division  the  work  of  intrenchment  was  con- 
tinued ;  but  that  division  suffered  considerably  from  the  con- 
federate artOlery,  and  especially  from  the  gunboats,  which,  to 
some  *  extent,  had  an  enfilading  fire.  Scofield's  brigade  wsiS, 
held  in  reserve ;  but  at  night  the  Fiftieth,  Col.  Gilchrist,  and 


CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE.  169 

the  Fifty-first,  Col.  Webber,  were  sent  to  tbe  front,  and  the 
brigade  commander  was  there  with  them  till  eleven,  p.  m.,  when 
the  work  was  ordered  discontinued. 

In  the  Second  division,  Moore's  brigade  closed  up  to  the 
right,  connecting  with  Spiceley's  brigade  ;  but  between  them 
was  a  wooded  ravine,  and  running  stream.  The  latter  was 
bridged  during  the  day,  and  both  brigades  made  considerable 
progress  in  the  first  strong  and  continuous  line  of  intrench- 
ments. 

Spiceley's  brigade  was  extended  two  himdred  yards  to  the 
right  to  connect  with  Hawkins'  division.  And  in  the  evening 
the  skirmishers  of  that  brigade  gained  thu"ty  yards  to  the 
front,  and  established  new  detached  pits. 

The  camp  of  each  regiment  was  close  to  the  first  Kne  of 
intrenchments,  and  so  arranged  a,s  to  have  some  natural  shel- 
ter of  the  ground. 

In  Spiceley's  brigade,  the  Twenty-fourth  Indiana,  Lieut.-Col. 
Sears,  was  on  the  right.  Nest,  on  the  left,  were  the  Sixty- 
seventh  Illinois,  Col.  Busey ;  the  Sixty-ninth  Indiana,  Lieut.- 
Col.  Perry ;  the  Sexenty-sixth  lUinois,  Lieut.-Col.  Vifquain. 
In  Moore's  brigade,  the  Eighty-third  Ohio,  Lieut.-Col.  Bald- 
win, was  on  the  right,  and  next  the  One  Hundred  and  Four- 
teenth Ohio,  Col.  KeUy ;  the  Twentieth  Iowa,  Lieut.-Col.  Leake  ; 
the  Thirty-seventh  Illinois,  Col.  Black  ;  and  the  Thirty-fourth 
Iowa,  Col.  Clark. 

The  casualties  in  the  division,  were  one  killed  and  five 
wounded.  Of  the  latter  was  Col.  Spiceley,  who  was  not, 
however,  stopped  from  his  active  duties. 

Toward  evening,  certain  movements  of  the  confederates  in 
front  of  Moore's  brigade,  excited  the  suspicion  of  a  sortie, 
and  Hotchkiss'  Second  Connecticut  battery  was  sent  round  to 
the  left ;  but  it  did  not  go  into  position,  and  returned  to  its 
camp,  near  the  Stockton  road,  at  dark. 


170  CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE. 

Gen.  Steele  had  his  headquarters  at  O.  Sibley's.  The  head- 
quarters of  the  Second  division  were  moved  from  near  the 
Stockton  road  to  a  ravine  at  a  point  six  hundred  yards  in 
-rear  of  the  centre  of  the  division.  The  headquarters  of  the 
Colored  division  vp^ere  also  in  a  ravine  in  rear  of  about  the 
centre  of   the  division. 

Veatch's  division,  of  the  Thirteenth  corps,  having  received 
orders,  at  midnight  of  the  2d,  to  move  immediately  to  reinforce 
Steele,  arrived  before  Blakely  at  daylight  of  the  3d ;  and  in 
course  of  the  forenoon  took  position,  with  a  brigade  front, 
across  the  Pensacola  road.  But  Garrard's  division,  of  the 
Sixteenth  corps,  having  also  come  up  from  C.  Sibley's  on  the 
3d,  went  into  position  on  the  left  of  the  Pensacola  road,  a 
thousand  yards  from  the  confederate  works.  Col.  Rinaker's 
brigade  being  on  the  right.  Gen.  Gilbert's  in  the  centre,  and 
Col.  Harris'  on  the  left.  Veatch's  division  was  then  withdrawn 
and  remained  near  O.  Sibley's,  as  a  reserve. 

During  the  ensuing  night,  Garrard's  division  covered  its  front 
with  a  line  of  rifle-pits,  and  the  skirmishers  of  each  brigade 
occupied  ground  some  distance  in  advance.  The  Tenth  Kansas, 
of  Gilbert's  brigade,  had  three  men  wounded,  one  mortally. 

In  Harris'  brigade,  the  Eleventh  Wisconsin  supported  the 
skirmish  line,  and  kept  within  fifty  yards  of  it.  At  eleven,  p.  m., 
the  skirmish  line  was  warmly  engaged,  and  the  commanding 
officer  of  the  Eleventh  sent  forward  a  company  to  reinforce  it. 
At  the  same  time  he  received  information  that  the  confederates 
had  come  out  of  their  works,  and  were  flanking  the  skirmishers 
on  the  left.  He  then  sent  Companies  E  and  G  to  protect  the 
flank. 

The  firing  continued  through  the  night,  but  darkness  deprived 
it  of  effect,  except  to  weary  both  sides  equally  and  hold  each 
other  at  bay. 

During  the  day  the  sharpshooters  of  the  confederates  main- 


CAMPAIGN-  OF     MOBILE.  171 

tained  a  watcMiil  fire,  and  at  intervals  their  artillery  was  sharp 
and  savage.  They  had  ah-eady  disabled  two  guns  by  firing, 
and  the  commander  sent  for  more.^ 

April  4 — Third  Bay  of  Siege  of  Blcikely. — In  the  Second 
diAdsion,  the  work  progressed  on  the  first  and  second  lines  of 
intrenchments,  and  th^  same  was  occurring  on  Hawkins'  left. 
In  the  afternoon,  both  divisions  got  a  new  supply  of  inti'enchuig 
tools,  and  the  work  went  on  faster.  Toward  evening,  the 
Second  division  was  preparing  to  advance  its  skirmish-line. 
Soon  after  five,  the  men  cheered,  on  account  of  the  grand 
bombardment  of  Spanish  fort,  the  mighty  clamor  of  which 
was  plainly  heard.  The  shouts  from  many  thousand  voices 
made  the  confederates  think  that  they  were  going  to  be  as- 
saulted, and  at  sight  of  the  skirmish-line  of  Moore's  brigade 
they  fell  back  rapidly  to  an  interior  line  of  pits,  so  that  Moore's 
skirmishers,  consisting  of  details  from  each  regiment  of  the 
brigade,  advanced  nearly  three  hundred  yards  without  resist- 
ance. This  carried  his  line  out  of  the  woods,  and  upon  a  sort 
of  plateau  on  a  level  with  the  garrison's  main  works,  and  only 
five  hundred  yards  distant  therefrom.  Intrenchments  were 
then  commenced  on  the  line  thus  gained  and  continued,  but 
the  work  was  diffictdt,  for  there  were  numerous  stumps,  and 
the  surface  was  strewn  with  fallen  pines. 

In  front  of  Spiceley's  brigade  the  ground  was  more  earnestly 

1  Lidell  to  Maury :  ^^ April  '^. — No  change  of  importance  here.  ]\Iucli  firing 
and  some  shelling  dmring  night,  upon  enemy  attempting  to  establish  line  of 
skirmish  pits." 

Same  to  Same :  "April  3. — Will  you  send  another  '  Blakely'  gmi,  in  place  of 
one  which  exploded  at  the  muzzle  to-day  ?" 

Same  to  Same :  "  April  3,  8:45  p.  m. — Please  send  me  the  Blakely  gun  as 
soon  as  possible,  as  two  of  the  guns  on  this  line  have  been  disabled  and  sent 
to  Mobile  for  repairs.  Enemy  made  an  attempt  to  establish  their  picket  Une 
on  our  centre  just  at  dark." 

Same  to  Same :  ''April  3,  8:45  p.  m. — Please  send  me,  by  first  boat,  a  quantity 
of  two-inch  plank,  oak  if  possible,  to  make  screens  for  the  guns." 


172  CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE. 

contested,  and  his  sldrmisli3rs  gained  only  one  hundred  and 
fifty  yards.  In  making  the  advance  Sergeant  J.  W.  Ficldin, 
of  the  Twenty-fourth  Indiana,  exhibited  special  gallantry.  No 
loss  was  then  suffered.  Later  in  the  evenining  Corporal  Haw- 
kins of  the  Twenty-fourth  was  wounded. 

In  Pile's  and  Scofield's  front  of  Hawkins'  division,  the  lines 
were  advanced  about  two  hundred  yards.  But  that  division 
suffered  severe  loss  as  well  from  the  gunboats  as  the  sharp- 
shooters and  artillerists  in  front. 

Up  to  this  time  no  artillery  had  been  used  by  the  besiegers. 
But  during  the  night  a  sunken  battery,  with  good  cover  for  the 
g-unners,  was  made  on  the  Stockton  road  on  a  line  with  the  first 
parallel,  for  one  of  the  ten-pounder  rifles  of  the  Second  Connect- 
icut battery.  The  gun,  with  full  detachment  under  Lieut.  Gray, 
was  put  in  position  sometime  after  midnight,  being  hauled  a 
quarter  of  a  mile  by  hand. 

At  nine,  p.  m.,  Dennis'  brigade,  of  Yeatch's  division,  moved 
to  the  front  and  occupied  the  ground  between  the  Second  divis- 
ion and  the  Pensacola  road  connecting  with  Garrard's  right. 

In  the  morning,  Garrard's  division  advanced  its  skirmishers 
still  farther  to  the  front.  In  Gilbert's  brigade  the  skirmish  hue 
was  commanded  by  Maj,  H.  S.  Bailey,  Sixth  Minnesota,  and  in 
the  movement  two  were  killed  and  several  wounded.  Maj. 
Bailey  had  a  rib  fractured  by  a  piece  of  shell.  Lieut.  Gresham 
of  the  Sixth  Minnesota  was  sHghtly  wounded.  In  Harris' 
brigade  the  Fifty-second  Indiana  and  Fifty-eighth  Illinois 
w^ere  on  the  front  line,  also  one  company  of  the  Eleventh  Wis- 
consia  as  sharpshooters.  Two  deserters  from  the  confederates 
came  in  and  were  taken  by  Lieut.  Leonard,  adjutant  of  the 
Fifty-second  Indiana,  to  the  brigade  commander.  They  related 
that  Blakely  was  garrisoned  by  three  thousand  five  hundred 
men,  and  that  labor  was  stiU  being  done  on  the  works. 

In  course  of  the  day.  Gen.  Steele's  chief  of  staff,  Lieut.-Col. 


CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE.  173 

Whittlesey,  was  on  the  front  line,  making  observations,  and  com- 
ing to  where  the  Fifty-second  Indiana  was  posted,  he  advanced 
fifty  yards  in  front  of  the  skirmish  hne  to  an  old  log  building, 
which  had  been  used  as  a  barrack,  and  chmbed  upon  the  rafters 
to  get  a  good  view.  Being  seen  by  the  enemy,  their  artillery 
soon  opened  on  him,  and  shells  exploded  above  and  around  him, 
and  through  the  house  beneath,  yet  he  continued  to  write  in  his 
note-book  as  if  nothing  was  happening,  tiU  he  had  finished  his 
observations,  and  then  descended  and  left. 

Lidell  reported  his  loss  on  the  4th,  two  killed  and  twelve 
wounded. 

April  5 — Fourth  Day. — At  the  break  of  day,  just  as  soon  as 
the  confederate  works  could  be  seen,  Lieut.  Gray  opened  with 
the  ten-pounder  of  the  Second  Connecticut,  from  the  Stockton 
road,  firing  obliquely  at  the  work  immediately  south  of  that 
road,  which  indeed  was  the  most  prominent  point  of  resistance, 
on  the  confederate  line.  Thirty  rounds  were  fired  before  there 
was  any  reply,  then  the  response  was  warm.  Lieut.  Gray  con- 
tinued at  intervals  to  fire  during  the  day  and  battered  down  one 
of  the  embrasures  of  the  assailed  redoubt.  Six  confederate 
guns  were  brought  to  bear  on  his  snug  battery,  and  the  explo- 
sions around  it  were  frequent  and  close,  but  hurt  not  a  man.  At 
night  the  damage  to  the  work  was  repaired. 

Separate  batteries  for  two  more  of  Hotckkiss'  guns  were  being 
built  on  the  left  of  the  Stockton  road,  and  farther  to  the  fi'ont 
than  Lieut.  Gray's.  At  night  a  battery  was  commenced  near 
the  right  of  Moore's  brigade,  for  the  Fifteenth  Massachusetts. 

In  the  evening  the  skirmish  line  of  Spiceley's  brigade  ad- 
vanced one  hundred  and  fifty  yards,  and  intrenched  within 
eighty  yards  of  the  confederate  rifle-pits,  which  had  a  distinct 
Hne  of  abatis  for  cover.  In  front  of  Moore's  brigade  the  skir- 
mishers were  forty  yards  in  advance  of  the  line  gained  the  pre- 
vious evening,  making  their  way  as  best  they  could  through  the 


174  CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE. 

network  of  pine  logs,  and  being  within  one  hundred  and  sixty 
yards  of  the  well-fortified  confederate  sharpshooters. 

Both  brigades  now  had  two  well-built  lines  of  intrenchment 
with  safe  approaches.  The  men  were  advancing  steadily  and 
Sure,  and  casualties,  though  generally  fatal,  were  not  numerous. 
The  whole  loss  in  the  Second  division  during  the  day  was  three 
killed  and  one  wounded  ;  namely,  killed ;  Sergeant  S.  G.  Harter, 
Sixty-ninth  Indiana,  Privates  C.  Grove  and  "W.  L.  Johnson, 
Twenty-fourth  Indiana ;  wounded,  Thos.  McGoyem,  One  Hun- 
dred and  Fourteenth  Ohio. 

In  Hawkins'  division,  on  the  right,  there  was  an  apprehension 
at  night  of  a  sortie,  and  at  nine,  P.  M.,  the  Third  brigade  (Lieut.- 
Col.  Kinsey  commanding)  of  Veatch's  division,  marched  out  in 
rear  of  Hawkins  as  a  reiaforcement. 

In  Veatch's  front,  the  Eighth  Illinois  was  on  the  skirmish- 
line,  and  had  one  man  wounded.  At  nine,  P.  M.,  it  was  relieved 
by  the  Forty-sixth  Uliuois,  Col.  Dornblaser  commanding,  who 
sent  out  two  full  companies  as  skirmishers.  The  right  of  the 
line  was  then  advanced  twenty-five  yards,  to  connect  with  the 
left  of  the  Second  division,  and  the  left  was  carried,  forward  one 
hundred  yards,  meeting  with  httle  opposition. 

In  Garrard's  division,  on  the  left,  some  advance  was  made  in 
front  of  Harris'  brigade.  The  Thirty-fourth  New  Jersey  was  on 
the  skirmish-line ;  but  the  left  of  that  hue  was  occupied  by 
Company  E,  Eleventh  Wisconsin,  under  command  of  Lieut. 
McDonald.  During  the  night,  the  latter  officer,  with  a  few 
men,  moved  forward,  across  a  ravine  covered  with  slashings,  to 
open  ground,  and  intrenched  a  short  distance  from  the  con- 
federate rifle-pits,  and  held  his  position  successfully  against 
warm  resistance. 

In  the  afternoon,  the  position  of  Einaker's  brigade  of  Gar- 
rard's division  was  changed  from  the  right  to  the  left,  but  the 
camps  were  not  moved  till  the  succeeding  day.     At  five,  P.  M. 


CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE.  175 

Maj.  Winter,  of  the  Eighty-nintli  Indiana,  witli  five  hundred 
men  of  that  brigade,  moved  down  to  the  left  through  the  woods, 
to  complete  the  investment  of  Blakely,  connecting  with  the  left 
of  Harris'  brigade,  and  extending  as  near  the  river  as  practica- 
ble. On  that  part  of  the  ground  the  woods  extended  to  within 
four  hundred  yards  of  .the  right  of  the  confederate  works,  and 
to  a  stream  running  parallel  with  them,  and  the  banks  of  which 
were  thickly  wooded.  About  opposite  the  eighth  redoubt  of  the 
confederates,  that  stream  assumes  the  character  of  a  swamp, 
widening  as  it  approaches  the  river.  It  is  thickly  covered  with 
trees,  and  the  water  is  a  foot  deep.  At  sunset,  Maj.  Winter  de- 
ployed one  hundred  men,  six  paces  apart,  and  holding  four  hun- 
dred as  reserve,  moved  to  the  front.  His  left  passed  over  a  small 
field,  and  then  the  line  began  to  descend  a  hill-side,  and  was  soon 
struggling  across  the  stream  and  swampy  ground.  They  were 
then  greeted  by  one  or  two  volleys  fi'om  the  brow  of  the  high 
ground,  two  hundred  yards  in  front  of  them.  They  pressed 
on,  and  emerging  from  the  woods  and  tangled  underbrush, 
came  out  where  the  trees  had  been  felled,  and  began  to  ascend 
the  rise  of  ground,  and  reaching  the  brow,  the  men  on  his 
left  were  within  two  hundred  yards  of  the  garrison's  main 
works.  Maj.  Winter  observed  that  his  right  did  not  connect 
with  the  skirmish  line  of  Harris'  brigade,  but  that  he  was 
considerably  to  the  left  and  in  advance  of  it,  and  being  also 
in  some  danger  fi'om  the  fire  of  that  line,  he  sent  Capt.  Hub- 
bard, of  the  One  Hundred  and  Nineteenth  Elinois,  to  notify 
its  commander  of  his  position.  Maj,  Winter  had  now  gained 
a  most  important  position,  it  being  considerably  nearer  to  the 
garrison  works  than  any  other  part  of  the  besiegers'  line.  It 
was,  of  course,  too  good  a  position  to  expect  to  hold  with  ease. 
A  fire  of  artillery  and  musketry  was  opened  on  him,  and,  un- 
fortunately, he  ordered  a  retreat.  He  withdrew  his  line  over 
the  stream,  and  commenced  fortifying  several  hundred  yards  to 
the  rear. 


176  CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE. 

"WTien  Capt.  Hubbard  returned,  lie  was  surprised  to  find  only 
tlie  first  sergeant  and  seventeen  men  of  his  own  company,  who 
had  halted  at  the  edge  of  the  stream  to  wait  for  him.  He 
thought  a  key  position  had  been  given  up.  Then  posting  his 
few  men  as  securely  as  possible  behind  logs,  he  went  to  find 
the  reserve  ;  and,  after  some  persuasion,  got  permission  to  have 
Capt.  Chubb's  company,  of  the  Eighty-ninth  Indiana,  go  to 
the  front  and  join  his  left.  Maj.  Winter,  at  the  same  time, 
advanced  his  reserve,  and  intrenched  on  the  high  ground  in 
rear  of  the  stream,  near  where  an  old  road  passes  which  leads 
into  Blakely.  The  companies  of  Capts.  Chubb  and  Hubbard 
took  position  north  .of  that  road.  It  was  about  eleven  o'clock 
when  Lieut.  McDonald  of  the  Eleventh  Wisconsin  made  the 
advance  before  mentioned,  and  joined  their  right.  Soon  after, 
Capt.  Hubbard  brought  forward  a  company  of  reserves  with 
shovels,  and,  sending  his  own  men  a  little  in  advance,  com- 
menced digging  rifle-pits. 

Lucas,  with  his  cavalry,  marched  to  occupy  Clairborne,  on  the 
Alabama.  During  the  day  the  besiegers  heard  of  the  fall  of 
Selma. 

The  loss  in  the  garrison,  on  the  5th,  was  reported  to  be  one 
killed  and  twelve  wounded.  Lidell  sent  to  Spanish  fort  for 
sharpshooters  armed  with  the  Whitworth  rifles,^  and  reported 
that  he  had  men  killed  and  wounded  at  the  Blakely  wharf  by 

1  Lidell  to  Maury :  "  April  5 The  enemy  have  erected  a  battery  on 

my  left — ^have  fired  occasionally  from  it.  Quite  heavy  skirmishing  in  my 
front." 

Lidell  to  Gibson :  "  April  5. — ^I  am  miich  in  need  of  sharpshooters.  Send 
me  the  Whitworth  riflemen,  or  half  of  them,  if  yon  cannot  spare  all.  The 
enemy  are  very  near  you,  and  here  they  are  at  some  distance,  but  with  their 
sharpshooters  kill  and  wound  men  at  the  Blakely  wharf.  1  wiU  send  you  five 
other  men." 

Gen.  Lidell  to  Maj.  Myers,  Ord.  Offlcer  :  "  April  5. — ^I  wish  two  hundred 
feet  of  three-inch  rope  to  parbuckle  a  large  gun  in  position,  and  have  it  on 
hand  whenever  it  may  be  needed." 


CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE.  177 

the  besiegers'  sliarpsliooters.  On  account  of  limited  supply 
of  ammunition  lie  directed  the  firing  to  be  restricted  to  a  few 
picked  skirmishers.  He  also  sent  for  fireballs  to  Hght  up  his 
fi'ont,  and  enable  him  to  use  his  artillery  with  more  effect  in 
the  night.  ^ 

1  Liclell  to  Myers  :  "Ajml  5. — Have  made  for  me  as  soon  as  possible  some  fire- 
balls for  twenty-four-pounder  cohorn  mortars.  The  enemy  are  tiying  to  advance 
their  lines  during  the  night,  and  I  want  to  light  np  the  front  of  our  works,  in 
order  to  see  their  positions,  and  allow  the  artillery  to  be  used  with  effect." 

12 


CHAPTER    XXII. 

SIEGE  OF  BLAKELT— FIFTH,  SIXTH,  AND  SEVENTH  DATS. 

April  6 — The  Fifth  Day. — At  three  o'clock  on  the  morning  of 
the  6th,  the  garrison  made  a  sortie  fi'om  opposite  their  fourth 
redoubt  down  to  their  right,  advancing  a  line  with  much  noise 
and  shouting,  for  the'  purpose,  as  it  appeared,  of  dislodging  the 
besiegers'  skirmishers.  No  ground,  however,  was  lost  by  the 
besiegers,  yet  a  noisy  combat  of  musketry  ensued,  lasting  for 
an  hour ;  and  above  all  the  turmoil  roared  the  garrison's 
artillery.  On  the  extreme  left  of  the  besiegers,  where  were 
Capt.  Chubb's  company  of  the  Eighty-ninth  Indiana,  Capt. 
Hubbard's  of  the  One  Himdi'ed  and  Nineteenth  Illinois,  and 
Lieut.  McDonald's  of  the  Eleventh  "Wisconsin,  the  charging 
party  came  up  within  a  few  feet  of  the  newly-dug  pits,  but 
finding  them  resolutely  occupied  had  to  give  way.  Lieut. 
McDonald  had  with  him  Sergeant  Moore  and  about  a  dozen 
men.  Being  hard  pressed,  he  undertook  to  awe  his  assail- 
ants by  a  stratagem,  and  called  out  "First  and  Second  brigade 
supports,  forward !"  which  had  a  good  effect. 

Li  fi'ont  of  Moore's  brigade  of  the  Second  division,  the  attack 
appeared  to  be  mainly  against  the  working  party  on  the  battery 
which  was  being  made  for  the  Fifteenth  Massachusetts.  The 
atmosphere  being  thick  and  heavy,  the  sound  of  the  musketry 
seemed  closer  than  usual.  The  darkness  was  also  complete, 
and,  it  being  known  hoAv  tired  and  worn  the  men  were,  there 
was  some  uneasiness  felt  at  the  division  headquarters  lest  some 
pai-t  of  the  line  had  been  forced  back.     Lieut.  Pettibone,  aide- 


CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE.  179 

de-camp,  hastened  down  to  tlie  front  line  alone,  and  brought 
back  the  pleasing  intelligence  that  everything  was  right. 

In  Garrard's  division,  a  position  about  three  hundred  yards 
farther  in  advance  was  gained  in  front  of  Gilbert's  and  Haiiis' 
brigades.  The  advance  was  made  at  midnight.  In  front  of 
Harris'  brigade,  the  force  consisted  of  Companies  A,*<3,  and  H, 
from  the  Eleventh  Wisconsin,  under  Capt.  Lang,  and  the  One 
Hundi-ed  and  Seventy-eighth  New  York,  and  was  commanded 
by  Lieut.-Col.  J.  B.  GondaKo,  of  the  latter  regiment.  In  fr-ont 
of  Gilbert's  brigade,  it  consisted  of  companies  from  the  Tenth 
Kansas  and  Thirty-second  Iowa,  and  was  commanded  by  Major 
Hutchinson,  of  the  Thirty-second.  Each  man  was  provided 
^\ith  a  spade,  and,  at  the  given  signal,  the  line  advanced  in 
good  shape,  though  opposed  by  a  sharp  fire.  Some  two  hun- 
dred and  fifty  yards  were  gained  by  Lieut.-Col.  GondaKo,  which 
brought  him  about  six  hundred  yards  fo-om  the  garrison's  main 
works.  The  loss  in  his  line  was  one  killed  and  four  wounded. 
Major  Hutchinson  was  ordered  to  advance  three  hundred  yards, 
which  would  bring  his  line  also  six  hundred  yards  from  the 
main  works  of  the  garrison.  He  performed  the  duty  in  a  truly 
soldierlike  manner.  His  men  being  deployed  and  in  line,  he 
placed  himseK  on  their  right,  and,  moving  forward  with  them, 
caused  them  to  dress  on  him,  he  at  the  same  time  counting  the 
paces  as  he  marched  along,  and  going  till  he  had  got  the  full 
and  required  distance.  His  course  lay  near  the  Pensacola  and 
Blakely  road.  Having  gained  the  required  distance,  the  whole 
line  commenced  a  rifle-pit. 

On  the  left  of  Harris'  fr^ont.  Company  F,  Lieut.  McConnell, 
of  the  Eleventh  Wisconsin,  was  posted  on  the  opposite  side  of 
a  ravine ;  and  being  isolated  fr'om  the  fine  on  his  right,  Com- 
pany H,  of  the  Eleventh,  was  sent  to  his  support,  and  Company 
G,  of  the  same  regiment,  was  also  sent  to  fill  up  the  gap  be- 
tween him  and  the  companies  on  his  right.    The  balance  of  the 


180  CAMPAIGN     OF    MOBILE. 

Eleventli  was  held  in  reserve  occupjing  tlie  trenclies  vacated 
by  the  stirmish-Hne. 

Work  was  also  being  done  in  Garrard's  division,  for  a  battery 
for  the  Seventeenth  Ohio. 

All  along  the  line  of  the  besiegers,  the  work  of  opening  or 
widening  trenches  and  approaches  was  progressing  with  vigor. 

In  the  Second  division,  front,  two  additional  separate  batter- 
ies beiQg  j&nished  for  the  ten-ponnder  rifles  of  the  Second  Con- 
necticut, two  more  guns  of  that  battery  opened  at  daylight,  one 
being  under  command  of  Lieut.  Whitney,  the  other  under  Lieut. 
Hanley.  Both  these  guns  as  well  as  the  one  under  Lieut.  Gray, 
were  served  with  effect.  In  the  morning  Corporal  Beecher  with 
one  of  the  guns  last  in  position,  fired  at  the  colors  in  the  Stock- 
ton road  redoubt  (No.  4),  and  caused  the  speedy  removal  of  a 
couple  of  tents. 

The  loss  in  the  Second  Division  was  only  four  wounded. 

The  artUlery  firing  by  the  garrison  during  the  forenoon  was 
fierce.  Gen.  Lidell  reported  that  there  was  constant  firing  du- 
ring the  night,  and  that  he  had  several  men  wounded  in  the 
night  by  stray  shots.^  He  asked  for  a  company  of  sappers  and 
miners.  He  also  expected  the  besiegers  would  open  the  next 
morning  with  artillery  from  five  different  positions.'^  At  eleven, 
p.  M,,  he  requested  the  captain  of  the  3Iorgan  to  send  two  small 
boats  under  charge  of  a  commissioned  ofiicer  to  picket  the 
mouth  of  the  bayou,  just  below  his  right  flank,  and  the  lower 
mouth  of  the  bayou,  near  Bay  Minette. 

April    7 — Sixth    Day. — Just    before    dayhght    the    garrison 


1  Liddl  to  Col.  Garner,  Chief  of  Staff:  "  BlaTcely,  Ajyril  6. — Enemy  at  this 
place  keeps  up  a  constant  firing  throughout  the  night  with  skirmishers,  and  is 
busil}''  engaged  erecting  his  batteries.  Several  men  wounded  dui-ing  the  night 
by  stray  shots." 

2  Lidell  to  Maury :  "  April  6,  7:40  p.  m It  is  very  probable  the  enemy 

will  open  upon  us  early  in  the  morning  from  five  different  positions. 


CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE.  181 

made  another  sortie  against  the  advance  hne  of  the  troops  of 
the  Thirteenth  and  Sixteenth  corps.  They  came  out  apparently 
in  strong  force,  dehvering  repeated  volleys  and  charging  with 
cheers  up  to  the  pits  of  the  federals.  The  artillery  also  per- 
formed its  part,  and  for  two  miles  along  the  line  the  tumult  of 
the  roar  of  musketry  and  cannonading  was  startling.  At  such 
an  hour  was  felt  how  much  depended  on  the  steadfast  soldier- 
shi]3  and  activity  of  a  few  men  at  the  front.  The  confederates 
were  repulsed,  and  it  was  reported  with  unusual  loss.^  The  loss 
in  the  Tenth  Kansas  was  one  killed.  In  the  Fifty-second  Indi- 
ana, two  wounded.  The  five  companies  of  the  latter  regiment 
expended  during  the  night  about  seven  thousand  rounds  of  car- 
tridges and  the  firing  was  probably  in  the  same  proportion  on 
other  parts  of  the  line.  In  front  of  Einaker's  brigade,  Lieut. 
Col.  Taylor,  of  the  One  Hundred  and  Nineteenth  Illinois,  was  in 
command  of  the  skirmish-line  and  advanced  the  left  of  it  across 
the  stream  and  swamp  and  had  some  pits  dug. 

During  the  afternoon  of  the  7th  and  the  succeeding  evening, 
rain  fell ;  the  air  was  chilly,  and  duty  in  the  muddy  trenches 
was  uncomfortable. 

Veatch's  fi-ont  was  occupied  by  Dennis'  brigade.  The  Twen- 
ty-third Wisconsin  was  engaged  in  making  a  battery  in  Haw- 
kins' front,  and  lost  one  man  kiUed  and  four  wounded. 

On  the  right  of  Hawkins,  at  the  edge  of  the  bluff,  a  fine 
battery  was  being  constructed  for  five  thirty-pounder  Parrotts, 
under  the  direction  of  Capt.  Newton,  assistant-engineer,  to  drive 
off  the  gunboats.  Large  details  fi-om  the  Colored  division  were 
constantly  at  work  on  it,  yet  many  of  the  gabions  and  fascines 
were  being  made  by  details  from  Veatch's  division.  "Working 
parties  on  the  battery  were  concealed  from  the  gunboats  by 
the  large  forest-trees  along  the  brow  of  the  bluff. 

lA  report,  afterward  captured,  of  Col.  Laws,  Second  Alabama  reserves, 
showed  that  his  loss  was  fifteeu  killed  and  twenty-two  wounded. 


182  CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE. 

The  niglit  attack  liad  interfered  witli  the  labor  on  the  bat- 
teiT  for  the  tw-elve-poiinder  Xapoleons  of  the  Fifteenth  Massa- 
chusetts on  the  left  centre  of  the  Second  diyision,  and  it  was 
not  entii-elv  finished  at  davhght  of  the  7th.  Lieut.  Eowse  com- 
manding the  battery,  however,  had  four  giins  in  position  and 
at  that  time  opened  fire.  The  redoubt  opposite  him  was  only 
five  himdred  yards  distant  and  had  two  Ught  steel  lifled  guns 
and  a  twelye-poimder  howitzer,  while  eleven  hundred  yards  ob- 
liquely to  his  left  was  a  thirty-pounder  Parrott ;  and  there  were 
several  other  guns  in  his  front.  The  confederates  returned  an 
accurate  and  severe  fire,  fihing  up  the  embrasTU*es  and  silencing 
the  Fifteenth  in  a  short  time.  The  gimners  of  the  Fifteenth 
Massachusetts  clung  to  then*  work  with  gallantry.  Corporals 
Clark,  Essex,  and  Gove,  were  mentioned  for  good  behavior. 
Private  George  E.  Cooney  jumped  up  into  the  embrasure  to 
clear  out  the  obstmctions  and  was  seriously  wounded.  Two 
others  were  wounded.  None  of  the  guns,  however,  were  injured. 
TTork  continued  on  the  battery  the  ensuing  night. 

The  three  ten-pounders  of  the  Second  Connecticut  continued 
to  do  good  service  and  remained  uninjui-ed. 

In  Moore's  brigade  of  the  Second  division,  the  third  parallel 
was  widened  to  from  six  to  eight  feet,  and  fi'om  its  left  an 
approach  was  being  carried  forward  by  the  Thirty-seventh 
minois,  under  the  personal  dii'ection  of  its  commanding  officer. 
Col.  Black,  and  was  then  thirty  yards  to  the  front. 

In  Spiceleys  brigade,  the  third  parallel  was  opened  one 
hundred  and  fiftr  vards  from  the  left,  along  a  crest,  connectinsr 
with  an  approach  which  had  been  finished  the  preceding  day. 
Tliis  tliird  line  was  only  about  five  hundred  yards  from  the  con- 
federate works,  and  was  subject  to  dangerous  fire  from  sharp- 
sJiooters  strongly  posted  on  the  brow  of  a  ravine,  ofi'  to  the  left. 
Only  one  man  worked  in  the  ti'ench  at  a  time.  Lieut.-CoL 
Yifquaia   and   Capt.   Howard,   of  the    Xiuety-seventh  Ulinois. 


CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE.  183 

having  been  specially  detailed,  were  superintending  tlie  con- 
struction of  tlie  rifle-pits  and  approaches  in  that  brigade. 

The  loss  in  the  division  was  five  wounded. 

Operations  of  the  Cavalry. — Gen.  Steele  having  directed 
Lieut.-Col.  Spurhng  to  break  up  a  party  of  confederates  who 
were  hovering  in  the  rear,  the  latter  started  out  in  the  morning 
on  that  enterprise,  with  twenty  picked  men.  They  disguised 
themselves  in  confederate  uniform,  and  the  neighborkig  citizens, 
supposing  them  to  be  confederates,  informed  Spurling  that 
Capt.  Dupree  and  Lieut.  Fitzgerald,  with  twelve  men,  would  be 
at  a  certain  house  at  one  o'clock,  p.  m.,  for  the  purpose  of  cap- 
turing some  "Yankees"  who  were  in  the  habit  of  visiting  there. 
Spurling  then  moved  on,  and  met  the  party  near  the  house  in 
question,  attacked  them,  killed  one  and  wounded  one,  and  cap- 
tured the  captain,  lieutenant,  and  seven  men. 

In  the  garrison,  three  siege  guns  were  put  in  position.  The 
Vll-inch  guns  were  waiting  for  platforms.  New  sldrmish-pits 
were  made  at  night.  The  commander  reported  that  he  had 
not  men  enough  to  occupy  the  whole  line,  and  asked  that  a 
hundred  negroes  might  be  sent  him  for  fatigue  duty.  ^ 

The  garrison  was  notified  that  at  eight  o'clock  on  the  follow- 
ing morning  their  artillery  would  open  at  all  points  against  the 
besiegers,  and  the  skirmishers  were  enjoined  to  take  all  possible 
advantage  ia  their  firing.^ 


■^  Lidell  to  Maury :  ''April  7. — Three  siege  guns  are  in  position  and  will  be 
ready  for  use  to-morrow  morning.  The  heavy  guns  will  be  delayed,  for  want 
of  platforms  and  all  necessary  appliances.  Have  not  sufficient  men  to  occupy 
the  whole  line  ;  hence  the  labor  of  digging,  and  duty  in  skirmish  pits,  is  very 
hard  upon  the  men.  If  you  could  spare  me  a  hundred  negroes  for  a  few  nights, 
I  could  get  all  the  approaches  and  traverses  constructed  promptly  and  save  the 
men.    It  is  better  to  use  them  than  to  lose  them.'' 

2  GapL  Lewis  {A.  A.  G.),  to  Getis.  Gockrell  and  TJiomas :  "April  7.— Gen. 
Lidell  dii-ects  me  to  inform  you,  that  at  eight,  a.  m.,  to-morrow,  our  artillery 
will  open  upon  the  enemy  at  all  points  along  om-  lines  ;  and  he  directs  that 


184  CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE. 

Between  the  skirmisliers  of  Garrard's  division,  of  the  Six- 
teenth corps,  and  of  Thomas'  Alabama  reserves,  a  system  of 
intercourse  had  grown  up,  which  the  garrison  commander  justly 
condemned.  The  men  on  the  skirmish  hne  made  truces  of  some 
hours'  leng-th,  during  which  they  would  meet  and  converse  in  a 
friendly  manner,  often  discussing  public  questions  relating  to 
the  war.  They  would  also  exchange  newspapers,  and  trade 
coffee  and  sugar  for  tobacco.  They  agreed  also  that  there 
should  be  no  firiag  while  the  skirmish-Hne  was  being  reheved. 
Then  when  they  resumed  their  places,  it  would  sometimes  hap- 
pen that  one  or  the  other  would  call  out  to  warn  his  adversary 
that  he  was  about  to^  fire.  The  garrison^  _cDmmancler_Ie£!gcned 
that  the  Sixteenth  corps  men  were  "  very  bold,"  and  that  they 
exposed  themselves  "  without  being  fired  upon  with^siifficient 
effect  to  make  them  timid."  To  abate  the  mischief,  he  directed 
Gen.  Thomas,  commanding  the  reserves,  to  send  a  company  to 
report  to  Gen.  Cockrell,  to  exchange  for  a  company  of  his  com- 
mand, and  that  the  old  soldiers  of  Cockrell's  division  should  be 
scattered  m  the  skirmish  pits  with  Thomas'  men.  ^ 

April  8 — Seventh  Day  of  the  Siege. — At  one  o'clock  the 
morning  of  the  8th,  the  garrison,  with  their  usual  enterprise 
advanced  a  strong  skirmish-line,  covered  by  the  fire  of  artillery, 
against  Yeatch's  front,  and  the  right  of  the  Second  division, 


you  order  your  skirmisliers  to  take  all  advantage  possihle  of  firing  upon  the 
enemy's  skirmishers  and  artillerists,  Avhen  the  salvo  is  made." 

^Gapf.  Butler  {A.  A.  A.  G),  to  Gen.  Thomas  :  ''April  7.— Gen.  LideU  directs 
me  to  say,  that  he  did  not  recoUect  the  reported  capture  of  the  second  pit. 
He  has  been  informed  that  the  enemy  in  your  front  is  very  bold,  and  that  his 
men  expose  themselves  without  being  fired  upon  with  sufficient  effect  to  make 
them  timid.  He  wishes  you  to  caution  your  skirmishers  to  use  their  utmost 
vigilance  in  preventing  the  encroachments  of  the  enemy,  and  directs  that  you 
send  one  company  to  report  to  Gen.  CockreU,  to  exchange  for  a  company  of  his 
command,  and  he  wishes  you  to  scatter  these  old  soldiers  about  in  the  skir- 
mish pits  with  your  men  along  the  front  where  tJtie  enemy  is  now  attacking." 


CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE.  185 

usin^-,  in  front  of  tlie  latter  a  blue  liglit  for  a  signal.  The  move- 
ment was  repulsed  successfully;  but  an  alarm  was  caused  all 
along  tlie  line,  and  for  an  liour  the  firing  was  heavy,  especially 
in  front  of  the  Colored  division.  Gen.  Osterhaus,  chief  of  staff, 
rode  up  from  Spanish  fort,  to  ascertain  what  was  going  on ;  and 
Gen.  Canby  telegraphed  to  Steele  for  the  same  object.  The 
latter  rephed  that  nothing  unusual  was  occurring. 

In  Veatch's  front  the  Ninety-ninth  Illinois  had  three  men 
wounded  in  the  affair,  and  there  were  sKght  casualties  on  other 
parts  of  the  line. 

On  Garrard's  left,  where  the  One  Hundred  and  Nineteenth 
minois  was  on  duty  at  the  front,  the  first  line  of  rifle-pits 
beyond  the  stream  having  been  made  a  few  yards  back  from 
the  brow  of  the  hill,  a  new  line  of  pits  was  made  some 
sixty  or  seventy  yards  in  advance.  In  the  night  the  skir- 
mishers moved  into  the  new  trench  to  give  it  a  trial,  and 
having  fired  a  few  shots  to  draw  the  fire  of  the  confederates 
and  then  giving  them  a  volley  aimed  at  the  blaze  of  their 
muskets,  the  One  Hundred  and  Nineteenth  men  raised  a  yell 
as  if  intending  to  charge.  They  heard  the  fire  taken  up  all 
along  the  hne,  the  artillery  firing  on  both  sides,  and  also  the 
confederate  gun-boats ;  and  they  thought  their  volley  and  shouts 
caused  all  the  tumult. 

At  eight  in  the  forenoon,  the  garrison  opened  with  aU  their 
artillery,  and  fired  with  uncommon  vehemence  for  an  hour. 
The  shells  frequently  struck  the  parapets  of  the  besiegers'  rifle- 
pits  and  exploded  over  them.  There  were  many  narrow  escapes, 
but  few  casualties.  Their  fire  was  replied  to  ia  Garrard's  front 
by  the  Seventeenth  Ohio  Hght  battery ;  and  ia  Hawkins'  fi'ont 
by  two  guns  of  the  Second  Massachusetts,  under  Lieut.  Swan. 
The  battery  for  the  Fifteenth  Massachusetts  was  in  such  condi- 
tion that  four  of  its  guns  could  be  served  in  it  with  safety,  and 
they  renewed  their  fire  with  effect.     The  three  guns  of  the  Second 


186  CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE. 

Coimecticut  were  also  engaged.  In  course  of  tlie  day  tlie  one  on 
the  left,  and  farthest  to  the  front,  was  disabled  by  its  own  recoil. 

When  the  engagement  was  hottest.  Col.  Matthews,  of  the 
Niaety-nintli  Illinois,  in  Yeatch's  front,  saw  a  confederate  flag 
inside  the  garrison  in  his  immediate  front,  and  he  at  once  caused 
his  regimental  colors  to  be  planted  on  the  parapet  of  the  works 
he  occupied.  This  iaduced  a  livelier  fire,  and  once  his  colors 
were  knocked  down  by  a  shot,  which,  at  the  same  time,  com- 
pletely covered  three  of  his  men  with  earth. 

Many  of  the  shots,  aimed  at  the  Fifteenth  Massachusetts 
battery,  passed  over  and  struck  about  the  camp  of  Moore's 
brigade,  and  would  have  done  much  injury  if  the  men  had  not 
been  well  protected  by  their  earthworks.  A  shell  passed  close 
to  Lieut.-Col.  Baldwin,  of  the  Eighty-third  Ohio,  and  tore  down 
a  part  of  his  quarters. 

"Work  in  advancing  the  trenches  was  steadily  progressing  on 
all  parts  of  the  besiegers'  front.  On  the  extreme  left,  Maj. 
Chapman,  of  the  One  Hundred  and  Twenty-second  Illinois,  was 
in  command  of  the  skirmish-Hne,  and  caused  new  pits  to  be  dug 
farther  to  the  left  and  to  the  front.  At  one  point,  his  men  occu- 
pied a  position  within  fifteen  yards  of  a  rifle-pit  of  the  con- 
federates. 

During  the  day,  orders  were  received  by  the  Second  division 
to  be  in  readiness  to  march  with  five  days'  rations  in  the  haver- 
sack and  fifteen  in  wagons.  This  was  most  unwelcome  to  all  of 
the  division,  for  work  on  trenches  and  approaches  had  been 
going  on  with  enthusiasm  day  and  night,  and  it  was  felt  that 
whatever  was  in  their  front  must  soon  yield.  The  prospect  of 
losing  the  results  of  their  toil  might  well  have  dampened  their 
ardor ;  but  it  did  not.  The  crack  of  the  sharpshooter's  rifle  did 
not  abate,  and  the  spade  was  none  the  less  nimbly  handled. 

A  similar  order  was  sent  to  Carr's  division,  of  the  Sixteenth 
corps,  then  on  the  eve  of  its  victorious  assault  on  Spanish  fort. 


CAMPAiaN     OF    MOBILE.  187 

But  the  necessity  for  tlae  movement  did  not  occur,  and  neither 
division  marched.  The  order  was  occasioned  by  a  false  alai-m 
of  confederate  troops  gathering  in  considerable  force  above 
Stockton. 

Combat  loitli  the  Gunboats. — At  ten  o'clock,  there  was  rain.  At 
twelve  o'clock,  three  thirty-pounder  Parrotts,  of  Capt.  Wim- 
mer's  battery  (H,  First  Indiana  heavy  artillery),  were  ia 
position  in  the  battery  on  Hawkins'  right ;  and,  at  two  o'clock, 
the  trees  having  first  been  cut  down  to  give  a  suitable  range, 
fire  was  opened  on  the  gunboats,  lying  a  mile  distant,  in  the 
Tensas. 

These  steamers  consisted  of  the  Morgan,  built  of  wood  and 
carrymg  eight  guns ;  the  Nashville,  clad  with  six  inches  of  iron 
before,  and  with  iron  round  the  pilot-house,  carrying  five  large 
guns  and  a  howitzer ;  and  the  Huntsville,  a  turtle-backed  iron- 
clad, carrying  four  Ylll-inch  guns.  The  heavy  projectiles  from 
these  boats  had  annoyed  the  besiegers  every  day,  striking  quite 
close  to  the  different  headquarters  ;  but  had  inflicted  the  princi- 
pal injury  on  the  colored  troops,  who  now  raised  a  glad  shout 
as  they  heard  the  first  booming  from  the  assailing  battery. 

Expectation  was  at  a  high  pitch.  Drew,  Whittlesey,  and 
several  other  officers,  were  present  to  watch  the  effect  of  the 
firing,  for  the  guns  and  gunners  were  in  good  repute.  The 
thirty-pounders  of  the  First  Indiana  were  loaded  with  percus- 
sion shells,  and  the  first  shot  struck  the  Morgan  in  her  middle. 
That  blow  was  the  first  warning  the  gunboats  had  of  the  exist- 
ence of  the  battery;  and  it  was  a  few  minutes  before  a  reply 
was  made.  In  the  meantime,  Capt.  Wimmer  maintained  an 
accurate  and  splendid  fire.  Then  the  Morgan  and  Nashville 
opened  on  the  battery  and  fired  with  accuracy,  exploding  their 
shells  against  its  ample  and  well-beaten  parapets.  Yet  so 
elaborately  and  thoroughly  had  the  work  been  made  that  it 
seemed  impervious.     The  only  casualties  were  two  men  wound- 


188  -  CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE. 

ed  by  earth  tltrown  by  a  sliell.  Tlie  firing  became  intense  and 
tlie  effect  was  grand.  It  was  not  long  till  tlie  Morgan  and 
Nashville  in-  a  disabled  condition  steamed  off  out  of  range. 
Then  Wimmer  turned  his  guns  with  solid  shot  on  the  Hunts- 
ville,  and  as  soon  as  it  was  dark  she  also  made  her  escape. 

The  Garrison. — A  detail  of  colored  men  was  sent  to  cut  the 
timber  on  the  right  of  the  Ninth  redoubt,  and  a  strong  picket 
force  kept  in  their  front.  The  confederate  artillery  endeavored, 
but  without  success,  to  silence  the  Seventeenth  Ohio  battery.^ 
The  commander  of  the  garrison  reported  that  his  batteries  were 
briskly  replied  to  at  eight,  A.  M.,  from  several  points.  At  nine, 
P.  M.,  fireballs  were  thrown  from  redoubts  1  and  4  to  assist 
their  pickets.^  Toward  night  the  troops  on  both  sides  re- 
marked the  awful  cannonading  at  Spanish  fort,  and  at  ten  the 
besiegers  heard  of  the  assault  there  and  that  a  lodgment  had 
been  effected. 


1  Lidell  to  Maury:  "  April  8,  8:45,  a.  m. — Enemy  kept  up  a  brisk  fire  about 
half-past  two,  a.  m.,  from  their  lines  in  front  of  5,  6,  7,  for  about  one  and  a  half 
hours.  At  eight,  a.  m.,  our  batteries  commenced  opening  upon  them,  which, 
up  to  this,  have  been  briskly  replied  to  from  several  points,  and  one  imme- 
diately in  front  of  No.  7,  throwing  shells  into  Blakely  and  at  the  Brickyard 
landing.     We  are  not  yet  able  to  silence  this  battery." 

2  Capt.  Leiuis  to  Gens.  Gockrell  and  Tliomas :  "  April  8. — G-en.  LideU  di- 
rects me  to  inform  you  that,  at  nine,  p.  m.,  fireballs  will  be  thrown  from  re- 
doubts 1  and  4,  and  desires  you  to  have  yoiu-  pickets  relieved  before  that 
time,  and  let  them  be  informed  of  the  above,  so  that  they  wiU  be  able  to  take 
every  possible  advantage  of  the  enemy,  and  increase  the  effectiveness  of  their 
fire. 


CHAPTER  XXIII. 

SIEGE  OF  BLAKELY— EIGHTH  AND  LAST  DAY  OF  THE  SIEGE. 

The  morning  of  Sunday,  tlie  9tli  of  April,  was  calm,  for  the 
sldrmisli  line  was  nnnsually  quiet.  At  nine  o'clock  there  was  a 
shower  of  rain.  Afterward  the  sun  came  out  bright  and  warm, 
but  toward  evening  dark  clouds  rolled  up  from  the  west. 

The  fall  of  Spanish  fort  enabled  Gen.  Canby  to  send  more  ar- 
tillery to  Blakely,  and,  in  course  of  the  day,  sis  or  eight  more 
guns  opened  on  the  side  of  the  besiegers,  but  were  faintly 
answered. 

The  Fourth  Massachusetts  hght  battery,  Capt.  Trull  com- 
manding, arrived  from  Spanish  fort,  and  opened  with  two  guns 
from  a  battery  in  Scoiield's  brigade  front,  of  Hawkins'  divis- 
ion ;  and  on  the  extreme  right,  two  of  the  thirty-pounders  of 
the  First  Indiana  were  turned  on  the  garrison  and  fired  over 
thick  timber.  These,  with  the  two  light  giins  of  the  Second 
Massachusetts,  in  Pile's  brigade  fi-ont,  made  sis  guns  engaged 
in  Hawkins'  front  the  last  day  of  the  siege,  and  they  did  good 
execution.  Some  of  the  men  in  Scofield's  brigade  were  injured 
by  shells  fi'om  a  mortar  in  the  garrison.  When  the  thirty- 
pounder  shells  from  the  First  Indiana  guns  were  screeching  over 
the  heads  of  the  colored  troops,  they  cried,  "  Another  through 
train  to  Mobile." 

In  the  Second  division  front  two  ten-pounders  of  the  Second 
Connecticut,  and  four  twelve-pounders  of  the  Fifteenth  Massa- 
chusetts, fired  at  intervals  through  tlie  day  and  with  much 


190  CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE. 

spirit,  the  latter  sending  some  of  tlieir  sliots  against  tlie  gar^ 
risou's  left. 

In  Veatcli's  front  two  twelve-ponnders  of  tlie  Seventh  Massa- 
chiisetts,  Oapt.  Storer,  were  in  position  and  engaged,  in  an 
untinislied  battery. 

Bnt  the  largest  proportion  of  the  artillery  the  last  day  was  in 
Garrju'd's  front.  Capt.  Mack  left  Spanish  fort  at  four,  A.  M., 
with  his  eighteen-poiinders,  and  at  nine,  a.  m.,  reported  to  Gen. 
Steele.  The  battery  went  into  camp  for  a  -while,  and  at  five, 
p.  M.,  took  position  nine  hnntli-ed  yai'ds  fi'om  the  garrison  works, 
behind  a  trench  on  Gen.  Garrard's  right.  On  his  left,  and 
considerably  to  the  jear,  were,  fom-  thii-ty-ponnder  Parrotts,  of 
Cox's  and  Hemlrick's  batteries,  of  the  Fii-st  Indiana,  which  had 
come  up  from  Spanish  fort.  Along  his  second  line  of  intrench- 
ments  near  his  right  were  four  ten-poiinder  Parrotts,  of  Capt. 
Lowell's  Second  Illinois,  and  three  of  Capt.  Eice's  Seventeenth 
Ohio  Napoleons.  Late  in  the  afternoon,  foiu*  ten-poimder  Par- 
rotts, of  Ginn's  Thii'd  Indiana,  took  position  fai-ther  to  the  left 
on  open  groimd  masked  by  timber. 

The  besiegers  now  had  three  lines  of  intrenchments  or  con- 
tinuous rifle-pits  with  approaches,  the  Thii'd  being  within  about 
six  bundled  yards  of  the  ganison's  main  works,  and  some 
portions  of  the  line  were  nearer.  The  skii-mishei'S  on  Garrard's 
left  were  within  thi'ee  humli-ed  yards  of  it,  the  ground  there 
affording  cover  up  to  about  that  distance.  On  the  right  of 
Moore's  brigade,  of  the  Second  division,  an  approach  had  been 
opened  a  hundred  yards  out  from  the  advance  parallel  and 
within  four  hiindred  yards  of  the  main  works  of  the  ganison, 
and  skii-mishers  were  posted  within  one  himdi'ed  and  forty  yards 
of  the  principal  hue  of  confederate  rifle-pits.  On  Spiceley's 
left,  of  the  same  division,  the  parallel  was  within  about  five 
hxmdred  yards  of  tlie  garrison's  main  works,  but  withdiew  as  it 
extended  to  the  right,  so  tliat  from  the  poiat  where  it  crossed 


I 


CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE.  191 

tlie  Stockton  road  tlie  advance  trench  was  five  liundred  and 
eighty  yards  from  the  main  works  in  front ;  but  there  were 
detached  pits  forty  yards  farther  in  advance.  There  was  a  safe 
approach  to  the  left  part  of  that  trfench  ;  and  the  soldiers  with 
characteristic  humor  had  put  up  in  it  a  sort  of  guide-board 
with  the  inscription  ".)|@°^  To  Blakely."  Another  approach 
was  being  started  thence  to  the-  front.  An  approach  was  also 
commenced  to  it  from  the  right  wing  of  the  Twenty-fourth 
Indiana.  In  digging  that  advance  trench  two  torpedoes  had 
been  excavated ;  and  others  in  Spiceley's  front  had  been  ex- 
ploded by  stray  musket-balls. 

In  Hawkins'  division  Pile's  skirmish-line  had  been  advanced, 
during  the  night  of  the  8th,  one  hundred  and  forty  yards,  and 
rifle-pits  dug  in  the  new  position.  On  the  right  of  Scofield's 
brigade  an  approach  was  extended  withiu  two  hundred  and  forty 
yards  of  the  principal  hne  of  confederate  rifle-pits. 

Each  division  commander  had  daily  reported  to  Steele  tha 
progress  of  the  works,  and  the  casualties. 

Up  to  this  time  the  casualties  had  been  :  in  the  Colored  divis- 
ion, sixteen  killed,  and  one  himdred  and  seventy-six  wounded ; 
in  each  of  the  other  divisions  the  loss  had  been  about  four  or 
five  killed,  and  fi-om  twenty  to  thirty  wounded. 

In  the  forenoon,  some  boats  had  been  seen  from  the  tree- 
observatory  in  rear  of  the  besiegers,  to  put  out  from  Blakely 
loaded  with  troops.  A  report  soon  afterward  flew  through  the 
trenches  that  the  garrison  was  evacuating ;  and  this  seemed  to 
be  confirmed  by  the  imusual  silence  of  both  their  artillery  and 
sharpshooters.  There  was,  therefore,  a  general  desu-e  all  along 
the  line  to  take  the  first  opportunity  to  move  forward  to  "  feel 
the  enemy." 

Garrard  received  instructions,  iu  the  forenoon,  from  his  corps 
commander,  to  assault  the  works  in  his  front  in  the  afternoon ; 
and  was  informed  that  the  other  two  divisions  of   the  corps 


192  CAMPAIGN     OP     MOBILE. 

would  be  up  to  reinforce  him,  and  that  he  should  have  all  the 
artillery  he  wanted. 

Then,  about  three  in  the  afternoon,  Garrard  had  a  consulta- 
tion with  his  brigade  commanders,  at  his  own  headquarters, 
Gen.  Yeatch  also  being  present,  and  fixed  upon  half-past  five 
o'clock,  p.  M.,  for  an  assault  to  be  made  in  his  front. 

Notice  of  the  intended  assault  was  immediately  sent  to  the 
troops  of  that  division  by  the  respective  brigade  commanders. 

About  three  o'clock,  Lieut.  Pettibone,  aide-de-camp,  was  sent 
from  the  headquarters  of  the  Second  division  to  obtain  permis- 
sion from  Gen.  Steele  for  that  division  to  move  on  the  garrison 
works,  "  as  far  as  it  could  go." 

Gen.  Steele  was,  at  the  same  time,  actively  engaged  making 
arrangements  for  an  advance,  and  was  found  in  the  saddle  by 
the  aide-de-camp,  who  returned,  saying  Gen,  Steele  desired  the 
movement  to  be  made,  and  fixed  the  time  for  it  at  half-past  five, 
p.  M.  Then,  not  knowing  that  the  movement  was  to  be  general, 
the  same  staff  officer  was  sent  to  give  notice  to  Gen.  Hawkins 
of  the  proposed  advance,  that  there  might  be  concert  of  action. 
He  returned  with  the  information  that  Canby  and  Steele  were 
both  at  Hawkins'  headquarters,  and  that  a  general  advance 
would  be  made  at  half-past  five,  p.  M. 

Gen.  Yeatch  received  official  notice  at  five,  P.  M.,  through 
Capt.  Lacy,  of  Gen.  Steele's  staff,  that  a  general  advance  would 
be  made  at  half-past  five,  p.  m.  ;  and  he  was  directed  to  "  enter 
the  enemy's  works,  if  possible." 

Tlie  Garrison. — All  this  while  the  besiegers  were  much  de- 
ceived, in  supposing  that  any  part  of  the  garrison  had  evacu- 
ated. The  troops  who  had  been  seen  to  leave  on  steamers 
were  a  portion  of  the  jaded  force  that,  through  mud  and  water, 
had  made  their  way  from  Spanish  fort ;  and  not  all  of  them 
had  left  Blakely. 

Meantime,  the  garrison  commander  was  informed,  by  signal 


CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE.  193 

telegraph  from  Battery  Tracy,  that  the  federal  forces  were 
moving  from  Spanish  fort  up  to  Blakely.  As  soon  as  he  heard 
this  he  apprehended  that  the  besiegers,  with  such  reinforce- 
ments, would  be  pretty  certain  to  assault ;  and  he  sent  out  the 
intelHgence  to  the  division  and  separate  artillery  commanders, 
with  instructions  for  them  to  hold  their  commands  "in  readi- 
ness for  an  assault  at  any  moment."^  A  copy  of  the  order  was 
captured,  containing  the  endorsements  of  some  officers,  expres- 
sive of  their  ardent  determination  to  hold  their  position  at  all 
hazards — ^which,  undoubtedly,  was  the  universal  sentiment  of 
the  garrison. 

They  had  suffered  a  severe  artillery  fire  during  the  forenoon, 
having  two  guns  dismounted,  but  their  artillery  were  saving 
their  ammunition  to  repel  an  assault,  and  abstained  from 
re|)lying.  ^ 

PreUminary  Advance  hy  the  Colored  Troops. — Previous  to  the 
general  assault  which  took  place  at  about  six  o'clock,  there 
was  an  advance  and  spirited  combat  in  front  of  the  Colored 
division. 


1  Ccqjt.  Lewis  to  Gen.  CocJcrell  and  others :  ^^ April  9. — Gen.  Lidell  directs  me 
to  inform  you,-  that  Col.  Patton  signals  the  following  from  Battery  '  Tracy' : 
'  Wagon  trains  and  heavy  columns  of  infantry  have  been  crossing  Bay  Minette 
bridge  all  the  morning.' 

"  In  view  of  the  above,  Gen.  Lidell  directs  that  you  hold  yovix  command  in 
readiness  for  an  assault  at  any  moment." 

2  Lidell  to  Maury :  "April  9 We  have  had  the  constant  fire  of  five 

batteries  on- us  this  morning,  dismounting  two  guns,  field  pieces,  including  the 
only  Blakely  gun.  Col.  Patton  has  signalled  Capt.  Grayson  (3:20  p.  m.),  that 
artillerj"  accompanies  the  infantry.  There  is  nearly  one  quarter  of  a  mile,  from 
the  right  of  Gen.  Thomas,  through  the  swamp,  and  to  the  river,  that  is  unoccu- 
pied by  any  troops  ;  and  the  track  of  the  garrison  from  Spanish  fort  discloses 
to  an  enemy  the  means  of  approach  to  this  place,  on  that  side.  I  shall  move 
my  quarters  to  that  locality,  and  make  every  disposition  available.  I  am  hav- 
ing the  new  place  of  landing  prepared  for  the  use  of  boats,  small  craft,  and, 
possibly,  steamboats." 

13 


194  CAMPAIGN     OE     MOBILE. 

In  Gen.  Pile's  brigade,  whicli  was  the  left  one  of  the  Colored 
division,  the  Seventy-third  regiment,  Lieut.-Col.  Merriam,  and 
the  Eighty-sixth,  Major  Mudget,  were  in  the  advance  trench. 
A  little  after  noon,  Gen.  Pile  received  word  from  each  of  those 
officers,  that  the  confederate  sharpshooters  in  their  front  had 
suddenly  become  quiet,  and  they  asked  permission  to  "  feel  the 
enemy."  Pile  then  ordered  one  commissioned  officer,  and 
thirty  select  men  from  each  regiment  to  be  in  readiness  to 
advance.  He  also  caused  the  two  guns  of  the  Fourth  Massa- 
chusetts hght  artillery  to  fire  a  few  shots,  to  see  what  reply 
would  be  ehcit.  No  reply  was  made.  He,  then,  at  about 
three  o'clock,  was  starting  to  the  front  to  advance,  when  Maj.- 
Gen.  Osterhaus,  chief  of  staff,  rode  up,  dismounted,  and  went  for- 
ward with  him.  After  examining  the  ground,  Gen.  Osterhaus, 
directed  that  half  the  men  selected  for  the  movement  should  get 
into  a  ravine  immediately  in  front  of  the  right  regiment,  then 
move  up  to  a  crest  held  by  the  skirmish-hne.  At  a  given  signal 
they,  with  the  remainder  of  the  party  who  were  to  spring  out  of 
the  rifle-pits  on  the  left,  were  to  charge  and,  if  possible,  capture 
the  confederate  rifle-pits.  This  was  undertaken  in  a  resolute 
manner,  Capt.  Jenkins  of  the  Eighty-sixth,  and  Capt.  Brown,  of 
the  Seventy-third,  assisted  by  the  skirmish-line  under  Capt. 
Greenwood  of  the  Eighty-sixth,  leading  the  movement.  A  gall- 
ing fire  was  immediately  opened  on  them,  both  from  the  sharp- 
shooters and  artillery.  They  then  grew  more  cautious  and 
sought  as  they  advanced  what  protection  there  was  from  stumps 
and  logs.  These,  however,  afforded  but  little  cover;  and  to 
advance  at  all  they  had  to  jump  over  fallen  trees  and  logs, 
and  were  consequently  much  exposed.  The  ground  was  exceed- 
ingly rough,  and  they  had  three  hundred  yards  to  go.  The 
garrison  sharpshooters  had  a  strong  line  of  abatis  in  their  front, 
and  felt  cool  and  confident.  They  took  advantage  of  the  ex- 
posure of  the  assaulting  party  and  shot  down  many.      Capt. 


CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE.  195 

Brown  of  tlie  Seventy-tliird  was  mortally  woimded.  Still,  offi- 
cers and  men  kept  moving  forward  witli  self  possession  and 
courage,  and  though  fighting  at  disadvantage,  returned  the 
fire  with  spu'it.  Gen.  Osterhaus  declared  that  they  fought  as 
well  as  the  best  of  troops. 

Perceiving,  by  the  steady  advance  of  the  party,  that  they 
meditated  a  serious  attack,  the  garrison  sent  out  reinforcements 
to  their  skirmish-line,  and  the  contest  grew  more  obstiuate. 
Here  and  there  a  man  of  the  colored  troops  would  fall  back  a 
few  yards  for  better  shelter,  for  the  artillery  was  playing  on 
them  with  searching  tire,  but  the  general  Hue  held  its  ground 
and  advanced  rather  than  fell  back.  Pile  reinforced  them  with 
five  compa,nies,  with  instructions  to  hold  the  ground  gained  and 
''  intrench  immediately  in  rear  of  the  enemy's  abatis."  In  about 
an  hour  they  had  advanced  three  hundred  yards,  got  possession 
of  the  garrison's  advanced  rifle-pits,  and  inflicted  some  loss  on 
the  occupants  of  the  latter  as  they  fell  back  to  their  breast- 
works. 

The  skirmish-Hne  in  front  of  Scofield's  brigade  and  Drew's 
brigade  was  advanced  at  about  four  o'clock,  and  the  confederate 
pits  were  also  captured  in  their  fronts,  yet  not  without  loss.  In 
Drew's  brigade,  on  the  extreme  right,  the  Sixty-eighth  regiment, 
with  Lieut.-Col.  Densmore  in  command,  and  the  Seventy-sixth, 
Major  Nye,  were  at  the  front.  The  skirmish-line  being  doubled 
for  the  advance,  there  were  four  companies  from  each  of  the  two 
regiments  engaged.  The  movement  was  conducted  by  Col.  J. 
B.  Jones,  of  the  Sixty-eighth  by  a  left  wheel.  The  men  first 
took  ofi^  their  coats  so  as  to  move  more  readily  through  the 
brush,  and  charged  in  their  shirt-sleeves.  They  had  three  hun- 
dred yards  to  pass  over.  The  skirmishers  who  had  been  on 
duty  and  were  in  the  front  first  rushed  out  of  their  pits  and  ^vere 
followed  closely  by  the  second  line,  aU  moving  on  the  double- 
quick  and  making  a  deafening  clamor  by  their  cheers.     By  the 


196  CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE. 

time  tliey  had  gained  a  hundred  yards  the  confederate  skirmish- 
ers began  to  retreat  from  their  advance  pits.  The  assaulting 
party  met  an  effective  artillery  and  musketry  fire  from  the  garri- 
son and  lost  several  of  their  number,  yet  they  pushed  on  in 
a  dauntless  manner  to  the  confederate  pits,  and  then  in  obedi- 
ence to  Col.  Jones'  orders,  laid  down  behind  the  abatis.  In  the 
charge,  Col.  Jones  was  shot  through  his  hand  with  a  musket 
ball,  but  continued  at  his  work. 

At  this  time  Col.  Drew's  reserve  regiment,  the  Forty-eighth, 
Col.  F.  M.  Crandall  commanding,  was  in  camp  nearly  a  mile 
in  the  rear ;  yet  Drew,  being  confident  that  the  force  there 
present  could  carry  ihe  main  works  in  his  front,  or  else,  im- 
pelled by  the  enthusiasm  of  the  moment,  ordered  the  balance 
of  the  Sixty-eighth  and  Seventy-sixth  to  charge,  giving  the 
order — "  Forward  on  the  enemy's  works,"  at  the  same  time  wa- 
ving his  hat.  This  was  only  a  few  minutes  after  Jones'  move- 
ment was  completed.  He  passed  along  the  trench,  loudly 
giving  the  command,  for  there  was  now  a  great  din,  and  com- 
pany officers  and  men,  as  fast  as  they  heard  it  direct  from 
him — for  the  best  disciplined  could  hardly  be  expected  to  be 
formal  when  they  heard  an  order  to  charge — broke  off  on  the 
double-quick  with  shouts,  and  charged  with  the  greatest  enthu- 
siasm. Not  starting  in  line,  both  regiments  soon  got  mingled 
together,  and  they  encountered  a  galling  fire  from  every  gun 
that  could  be  brought  to  bear  on  them.  Yet  the  officers  were 
using  their  best  endeavors  to  keep  the  men  in  line.  The  fatal 
track  of  the  cannon-ball,  of  grape,  canister,  and  shells,  was 
soon  apparent.  Lieut.  Manhardt,  of  the  Sixty-eighth,  was 
instantly  killed  by  a  grape-shot,  while  endeavoring  to  execute  an 
order  to  close  the  men  to  the  right.  Capt.  George  Giger,  of  the 
Sixty-eighth,  was  mortally  wounded  while  rallying  the  men  to 
close  up  to  the  left.  Many  of  the  men  had  fallen.  Col.  Jones, 
in  passing  along,  felt  something  pulling  at  his  trowsers,  and, 


CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE.  197 

looking  down,  a  man,  who  was  mortally  wounded  in  the  first 
charge,  besought  him  to  take  his  cartridges  "  to  the  boys." 
Jones  himself  soon  after  feU,  stunned  by  the  explosion  of  a 
shell. 

Col.  Drew,  and  the  two  regiments  with  him,  had  moved  along 
the  ground  on  a  level  with  the  garrison's  left  redoubt,  and  had 
to  face  a  deadly  fire.  At  length  he  ordered  that  they  should 
pass  to  the  right  and  advance  on  the  bluff  side,  where  they 
would  have  some  cover ;  and  in  a  few  minutes  aU,  except  a  few 
who  continued  on  the  high  ground,  were  skirting  the  brow  of 
the  bluff,  intending  to  reach  the  left  of  the  confederate  works 
and  go  in  if  possible.  The  bluff  side  was  steep  and  thickly 
covered  with  slashings.  The  ground  also  was  springy  and  soft, 
and  it  was  extremely  difficult  for  the  troops  to  get  along.  While 
a  squad  of  men  paused  to  fire  over  the  brow  of  the  bluff,  others 
hurried  along  to  take  an  advanced  position,  and  then  the  former 
squad  again  would  drop  down,  work  their  way  along  and  take  a 
position  farther  to  the  front.  A  storm  of  missiles  was  still 
sweeping  over  them,  and  they  were  losing  some  of  their  number 
from  exhaustion  as  well  as  wounds.  Finally,  the  last  depression 
affording  any  protection  was  reached.  From  there  to  the  main 
parapet  was  smooth  ground  of  less  than  a  hundred  steps.  Then 
they  halted  to  take  breath  and  wait  the  arrival  of  those  who  had 
fallen  behind,  preparatory  to  their  last  effort.  A  few  of  the  men 
pushed  on  some  yards  below  the  hiU,  but  were  soon  either  killed 
or  driven  back. 

It  soon  seemed  clear  to  them  that  they  were  too  few  for  the 
work  in  hand.  Their  numbers  were  counted  over  and  found 
to  be  nineteen  officers  and  sixty-five  men !  Officers  in  too  great 
proportion.  "What  was  to  be  done  ?  There  is  reinforcement  in 
a  cheer.  They  cheered,  fired  volleys,  and  cheered  again  as  if 
about  to  charge.  They  wondered  why  the  reserve  did  not  show 
itself,  and  why  more  of  their  own  comrades  were  not  up.     Many 


198  CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE. 

of  tlie  latter,  poor  fellows,  would  never  again  be  up.  Then  they 
listened  but  in  vain  to  hear  anj  shots  on  their  own  side.  They 
could  see  the  garrison  works  teeming  with  men,  and  felt  that 
they  were  in  imminent  danger  of  a  sally.  To  go  forward  was 
folly,  to  go  back  was  less  to  their  notion. 

Col.  Drew  then  went  back,  to  hasten  up  the  reserve,  and 
the  senior  officer  left  with  the  party  was  Lieut.-Col.  Densmore, 
of  the  Sixty-eighth.  They  kept  firing  volleys  at  the  parapet 
and  cheering. 

The  garrison,  suspecting  the  charging  party  were  in  trouble, 
attempted  a  sally,  yet  with  diffidence.  Capts.  Holcomb,  Nor- 
wood, Lieut,  Kogers;  and  some  other  officers,  with  a  few  men 
who  kept  on  the  high  ground,  had  got  some  cover  near  the  main 
works,  but  they  and  the  party  over  the  bluff  were  ignorant  of 
each  other's  whereabouts.  When  the  former  saw  the  sally  party 
starting,  they  fired  on  it  with  all  their  might,  and  Densmore's 
men,  hearing  some  of  the  shots  go  over,  also  put  in  a  volley, 
with  one  of  their  cheers.  This  happy  concurrence  repulsed 
the  sally.  But  Densmore's  men  did  not  know  the  result,  and 
eontiaued  to  apprehend  an  attack ;  and,  while  awaiting  with 
absorbing  anxiety  the  arrival  of  the  reserve,  they  continued 
their  volleys  and  cheers. 

Then  three  ominous-appearing  vessels  steamed  out  in  sight, 
and  the  men,  as  if  wiUing  to  catch  at  straws,  exclaimed,  "  They 
are  Union  gunboats  that  have  arrived  just  in  season  to  help  us  !" 
and  then  they  had  a  cheer  for  the  "Union  gunboats."  Dens- 
more  said  nothing  to  them  of  the  confederate  flag  he  saw  at  the 
mast-head.  Shortly,  the  garrison  ran  a  howitzer  outside  of 
their  works,  and  threw  canister  into  the  logs  and  brush,  which 
compelled  the  colored  troops  to  hug  closer  to  the  ground. 

After  waiting  some  time,  Lieut.-Col.  Densmore  had  sent  back 
a  captain  for  the  reserve.  Afterward  he  sent  a  Heiitenant, 
charging  him  to  let  nothing  but  death  prevent  his  bringing 


CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE.  199 

back  men  or  orders.  He  began  to  think  he  woukl  need  to 
send  a  third  messenger,  when  an  officer  showed  himself  suffi- 
ciently to  get  his  attention.  But  the  din  of  canister,  bullets, 
and  hand-grenades,  prevented  a  word  being  heard.  Then  the 
officer  took  off  his  hat  and  beckoned  the  party  back. 

Too  indignant  and  sullen  to  hurry,  they  retreated  in  order 
bringing  back  theu'  dead  as  far  as  possible,  and  taking  all  their 
wounded.  They  returned  as  they  went,  a  part  halting  to  fire 
while  the  rest  retreated  to  the  next  cover.  When  they  had  got 
far  enough  away  to  render  it  safe  for  the  gunboats  to  fire  with- 
out endangering  the  garrison,  those  boats  opened  a  raking  fire 
along  the  side  of  the  bluff. 

The  party  got  back  to  their  trenches  in  time  to  see  the  re- 
serve arrive  from  the  rear.  But  the  little  detachment  with  Nor- 
wood and  Holcomb  still  remained  in  their  position,  nearly 
up  to  the  garrison  works. 

As  the  movement  commenced,  this  party  had  hastened  for- 
ward through  impediments  of  fallen  tree-tops,  in  face  of  a 
sharp  fire,  and  when  within  a  hundred  yards  of  the  fort,  a 
shower  of  musket-balls,  thrown  from  cannon,  beat  around  them. 
Out  of  eleven  officers  of  the  party,  seven  were  there  killed  or 
wounded.  They  became  apprehensive  of  a  counter-charge,  and 
of  being  flanked.  If  captured,  they  also  apprehended  that 
their  rights  as  prisoners  would  not  be  respected.  After  a  short 
consultation,  they  rightly  concluded  the  best  thing  to  be  done 
was  to  fight  it  out.  Then  the  men  fixed  bayonets,  and  some 
were  heard,  with  clenched  teeth,  to  say  they  would  die  sooner 
than  surrender  or  retreat.  AVitli  fixed  bayonets  this  gallant 
party  charged  down  the  line  parallel  with  the  fort,  and,  after 
a  short  but  desperate  resistance,  drove  the  garrison  sharp- 
shooters from  the  interior  line  of  abatis  into  their  main  works, 
and  gained  a  position  whence  they  could  silence  the  more  de- 
structive g-uns.     Here  they  remained  till  the  final  assault. 


200  CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE. 


THE  ASSAULT. 


The  skirmisli-line  of  Gen.  Pile's  brigade  had  been  intrenching 
in  their  new  position,  under  heavy  fire,  about  forty  minutes, 
when  the  cheering  of  the  white  troops  was  heard  on  their  left. 
An  officer  then  ran  in  that  direction  till  he  could  see  what  was 
taking  place,  and  quickly  returning,  signalled  to  Gen.  Pile  that 
the  Second  division  were  charging  on  the  main  works  in  their 
front.  ^ 

Then  Pile  ordered  forward  his  brigade,  and  the  assault  be- 
came general  in  Hawkins'  entire  front.  The  brigades  of  Pile, 
Scofield,  and  Drew,  charged  almost  simultaneously,  and  carried 
the  works  in  their  respective  fronts.  Greater  gallantry  than 
was  shown  by  officers  and  men  could  hardly  be  desired.  The 
latter  were  burning  with  an  impulse  to  do  honor  to  then-  race, 
and  rushed  forward  with  intense  enthusiasm,  in  face  of  a  ter- 
rible file.  As  they  got  close  to  the  works  some  of  the  con- 
federates, di'eading  to  fall  into  their  hands,  ran  off  to  surrender 
to  the  white  troops.  In  Drew's  front,  several  of  the  co2ifed- 
erates,  with  muskets,  remained  outside  of  the  works,  refused  to 
surrender,  and  maintained  a  cool  and  desperate  struggle  till 
they  fell.  In  Scofield's  line,  the  explosion  of  a  single  torpedo 
killed  and  wounded  thirteen  of  the  Fifty-first  regiment.  As  his 
men  were  advancing,  they  heard  a  confederate  officer  behind  the 
works  exclaim,  "  Lay  low  and  mow  the  ground — ^the   d d 

1  "  This  movement  on  vaj  part  was  followed  up  by  the  Second  brigade  on 
my  right,  and  the  work  of  intrenching  had  been  progressing,  under  heavy  fire, 
forty  minutes,  when  cheering  on  my  left  notified  me  that  Gen.  Andrews' 
division  was  moving  forward.  Still  ignorant  whether  this  was  an  assault  on 
the  enemy's  main  works,  or  merely  a  following  up  of  the  movement  already 
made  by  me,  I  sent  a  staff  officer  to  my  left  to  report  if  their  advance  continued 
beyond  the  first  line  of  abatis,  and  parallel  with  my  advance,  who  immediately 
signalled  that  Gen.  Andrews'  division  was  already  advancing  to  assault  the 
main  works." — Gen,  Pile's  Official  Eeport, 


CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE.  201 

niggei's  are  corQing !"  which  became  a  byword  in  camp.  The 
colored  troops  captured  nine  guns,  twenty-two  commissioned 
officers,  and  two  hundred  and  one  enhsted  men.  The  Seventy- 
third  colored  regiment — New  Orleans  troops — was  the  first  of 
Pile's  brigade  to  plant  its  colors  on  the  parapet ;  and  Sergt. 
Edward  Simon,  of  Company  I  of  that  regiment,  was  mentioned 
for  his  signal  bravery. 

The  prisoners  were  generally  treated  with  kindness.  A  col- 
ored soldier  of  the  Fiftieth  regiment  found  his  former  young 
master  among  the  prisoners.  They  appeared  happy  to  meet, 
and  drank  from  the  same  canteen.  Some  of  the  Louisiana 
men,  however,  made  an  attack  on  the  prisoners  and  were  with 
difficulty  restrained  fi'om  injuring  them.  The  latter  almost 
invited  attack  by  manifesting  an  unreasonable  dread  of  the 
colored  soldiers  ;  huddling  together  in  heaps,  and  acting  as  if 
their  captors  were  wild  beasts.  Capt.  Norwood  and  Lieut. 
Gleason  of  the  Sixty-eighth  were  w.ounded,  the  latter  mortally, 
in  their  effi)rts  to  save  the  prisoners. 

Afterward  the  prisoners  w^ere  taken  to  the  camp  of  the  Col- 
ored division,  and  some  of  them  endeavored  to  lead  the  way  so 
as  to  avoid  torpedoes ;  yet  one  of  the  guards  had  his  leg  blown 
off  by  the  explosion  of  a  torpedo  near  Scofield's  trenches,  but 
nothing  Hke  ]-etaliation  was  manifested. 

Hawkins'  loss  in  the  assault  was  thii'ty-two  killed  and  one 
hundred  and  forty-seven  wounded.  Of  these  a  pretty  large  pro- 
portion were  officers.  Several  of  the  latter  have  been  named. 
Among  those  who  fell  in  the  assault  were  Maj.  Mudget  of  the 
Eighty-second,  and  Capt.  S.  E.  "Wilson  of  the  Seventy- sixth, 
acting  assistant  adjutant-general  on  Col.  Drew's  staff.  The 
total  loss  in  kihed  and  wounded  in  that  division  before  Blakely 
was  three  hundred  and  seventy-one — namely :  lolled,  five  com- 
missioned officers  and  forty-three  men ;  w^ounded,  twenty-two 
commissioned  officers  and  three  hundred  and  one  men.    The 


202  CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE. 

confederate  loss  in  their  front  in  killed  and  wounded  was  about 
a  tidrd  as  large. 

Second  Division. — Cols.  Spiceley  and  Moore,  brigade  com- 
manders, were  at  division  headquarters  about  four  o'clock, 
when  the  order  of  assault,  or  advance — ^for  it  was  not  then 
thought  there  would  be  much  resistance — was  agreed  upon. 
It  was  arranged  that  a  regiment,  deployed  as  skirmishers, 
should  advance  in  front  of  each  brigade  ;  and  after  it  had 
gained  the  distance  of  one  hundred  and  fifty  yards,  that  the 
remainder  of  the  brigades  should  foUow,  deployed  in  line  of 
battle.  The  movement  was  to  commence  with  the  Second 
brigade,  and  the  cheer  of  the  skirmish-line,  as  it  started,  was 
to  be  the  signal  for  the  skdrmish-line  to  start  in  front  of  the 
Third  brigade.  The  commander  of  the  latter  brigade,  CoL 
Moore,  selected  the  Eighty-third  Ohio  as  the  skirmish  regi- 
ment in  his  front,  and  the  Mnety-seventh  Illinois,  at  the  re- 
quest of  its  commanding  officer,  was  designated  for  the  skir- 
mishers of  the  Second  brigade. 

Both  brigades  were  in  the  two  front  trenches  at  about  half- 
past  five  ;  and  the  first  notice  most  of  the  men  had  of  the 
assault  was  the  order  to  fall  in.  Of  the  men  in  camp  that 
Sunday  afternoon,  some  had  been  writing  home  that  they  were 
soon  to  march — ^for  they  were  under  marching  orders.  Others 
were  washing  their  clothes ;  and  so  from  the  humblest  duties, 
they  hastened  to  take  part  in.  the  grandest. 

Lieut.-Col.  Yifquain  had  the  Ninety-seventh  deployed,  and 
had  passed  along  the  trench  once  or  twice  to  see  that  every- 
thing was  in  readiness,  when  an  explosion  of  a  torpedo  occurred 
on  the  rear  edge  of  the  trench,  tearing  off  the  leg  of  Capt. 
"Wisner,  of  the  Ninety-seventh  Illinois,  who  was  endeavoring  tc 
pass  to  his  company,  and  injuring,  to  all  appearances,  fatally, 
One  or  two  men.  It  was  no  happy  augury  ;  and  as  the  wounded 
were  borne  along  the  trench   and  approach  to  the  rear,  the 


1 


CAMPAIGN     OP     MOBILE.  203 

spirits  of  tlie  beliolders  seemed  depressed.     Such  is  the  terror 
of  concealed  dangers. 

This  occurrence  caused  a  few  moments'  delay,  and  it  was 
quarter  to  six  when  the  movement  commenced.  Precisely  at 
that  time,  Lieut.-Col.  Yifquain,  in  a  clear,  insphing  tone,  and 
with  his  sword  drawn,'  and  elevated,  gave  the  command,  "  For- 
ward, Ninety-seventh !"  Then  he  and  his  gallant  regiment 
sprang  upon  the  parapet,  and  with  loud  cheers,  which  were 
taken  up  by  all  the  troops  left  behind,  they  dashed  forward 
on  the  run.  Instantly  they  were  greeted  with  a  shower  of 
bullets,  and  before  they  had  got  twenty  yards  a  few  men  fell. 
In  less  than  half  a  minute  the  Eighty-third  Oliio,  led  by  Lieut.- 
Col.  Baldwin,  swept  over  the  parapet  in  theii"  front,  and,  with 
thrilling  shouts,  moved,  on  the  run,  for  the  redoubt  in  then* 
front.  Three  or  four  pieces  of  artillery,  from  the  garrison, 
quickly  opened  on  these  regiments,  firing  with  great  rapidity, 
and  they  also  encountered  a  bitter  musketry  fire.  The  confed- 
erate sharpshooters  at  first  were  disposed  to  hold  theu"  position ; 
and  the  men  of  the  Ninety-seventh  commenced  firing  when  they 
had  got  eighty  yards.  The  skii-mish  grew  more  and  more  bitter, 
the  Ninety-seventh  every  minute  gaining  ground  and  the  confed- 
erates giving  way.  While  the  skhmish  was  occurring,  Lieut.-Col. 
Vifquain  ran  back  with  a  prisoner  to  the  trench  from  which  he 
had  started,  then  hastened  to  his  regiment  and  resumed  the 
charge,  following  the  course  of  the  Stockton  road.  The  prisoner 
stated  that  the  whole  garrison  still  remained  at  Blakely.  Every 
one  could,  by  that  time,  see  that  such  was  the  fact,  for  the  con- 
federates were  getting  out  of  then*  rifle-pits  and  falling  back  to 
their  main  works  in  literal  swarms.  Over  a  hundred  of  these 
were  seen,  in  a  straggling  crowd,  to  ascend  the  hill  on  which 
was  Eedoubt  No.  4,  just  south  of  the  Stockton  road.  At  the 
same  time  the  breastworks  appeared  numerously  manned.  It 
was  apparent  there  was  to  be  a  much  severer  straggle  than  had 
been  expected. 


204  CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE. 

The  Ninety-seventh  EHnois  had  got  but  a  short  distance  when 
the  Seventy-sixth  IlUnois,  Col.  S.  T.  Busey,  sprang  forward. 
About  the  same  time,  the  Sixty-ninth  Indiana,  Lieut.-Col.  O. 
Perry,  also  rushed  forward ;  and,  afterward,  the  Twenty-fourth 
Indiana,  Lieut.-Col.  Sears,  charged  from  the  right.  These 
regiments  advanced  on  the  run  with  great  enthusiasm  and 
gallantry.  The  Sixty-ninth  Indiana  took  the  Stockton  road, 
and  entered  the  confederate  works  a  Httle  south  of  that  road. 
Lieut.-Col.  Perry  was  severely  wounded  before  he  had  got  two 
hundred  yards.  The  Seventy-sixth  Illinois  charged  directly  on 
the  redoubt  in  their  front,  the  one  north  of  the  Stockton  road, 
and  preserved  its  alHgnment  well  till  it  got  to  the  second  line  of 
abatis.  One  man  of  that  regiment  was  killed  at  the  first  line 
of  abatis  and  rifle-pits ;  then,  at  the  second  line,  the  battle 
became  fierce  and  bloody.  The  confederates  maintained  a  bold 
front  from  behind  their  breastworks,  and  when  the  Seventy-sixth 
was  within  fifty  yards  of  the  redoubt,  they  suffered  severely  from 
the  confederate  musketry  and  artillery.  While  a  part  of  the 
regiment  maintained  a  spirited  fire,  the  rest  crossed  the  abatis. 
Lieut.  Wm.  F.  Kenaga  was  shot  through  a  leg  at  the  second 
abatis,  and  nearer  the  works  was  hit  in  the  ankle-joint  of  his 
other  leg ;  then,  unable  to  walk,  he  kept  upright  on  his  knees 
and  ralHed  and  cheered  the  men.  The  color-sergeant,  Hussey, 
was  killed  within  twenty  feet  of  the  works ;  then  the  colors  were 
taken  by  the  noble  and  brave  Corporal  Goldwood,  who,  as  he 
was  planting  them  on  the  parapet,  received  the  contents  of  three 
muskets  so  close  that  the  discharge  burnt  his  clothes,  and  he  fell 
dead  inside  the  works  with  the  colors  in  his  arms. 

The  Seventy-sixth  and  the  confederates  were  now  fighting 
across  the  works,  and  those  of  the  regiment  in  the  rear  were 
coming  up  as  fast  as  they  could  pass  the  obstructions.  Col.. 
Busey  ran  along  close  to  the  parapet,  and,  with  his  revolver, 
disabled  the  gunner  of  a  howitzer  about  to  be  fired,  and  which 


CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE.  205 

aitorward  proved  to  liave  a  double  charge  of  grape  and  can- 
ister ;  tlien  turning  to  the  right,  he  exchanged  shots  with  two 
at  short  range.  Afterward,  he  ordered  Lieut.-Col.  Jones,  with 
Capts.  Hughes  and  Ingerson,  and  Lieut.  Warner,  with  from 
twenty  to  fifty  men,  to  charge  the  right  flank  of  the  redoubt, 
while  he,  with  another  squad,  charged  the  fi'ont.  They  charged 
with  bayonets,  and  drove  the  confederates  from  the  works. 

Fifty  yards  in  rear  of  the  redoubt  the  ground  began  to  slope 
considerably.  It  had  been  cleared  of  thick  underbrush,  and  the 
latter  had  been  piled  in  a  row  along  the  crest.  Behind  that 
cover  the  confederates  formed  again,  and  gave  another  volley, 
wounding,  among  others.  Col.  Busey  and  Capt.  Hughes.  Then 
the  Seventh-sixth  charged  them  again,  and  they  threw  down 
their  arms,  and  ran  into  the  woods  and  toward  the  landing. 
Col.  Busey  sent  detachments  in  pursuit  of  them.  Upward  of 
four  hundred  prisoners  fell  into  the  possession  of  the  Seventy- 
sixth.  It  had  five  men  killed  inside  the  works.  Its  whole  niim- 
ber  of  killed  was  sixteen,  of  whom,  besides  those  already  men- 
tioned, were  Sergeant  Perkins  and  Corporals  Hopkins  and 
Tremain.  There  were  eighty  wounded,  some  mortally  ;  so  that 
its  entire  casualties  were  about  one  hundi-ed.  Among  the 
wounded  were  Lieuts.  Martin  and  Warner.  The  Seventy-sixth 
Illinoig  entered  the  works  over  the  south  sahent  of  the  redoubt, 
and  over  the  breastworks  extending  south.  Its  national  colors 
were  planted  on  the  breastwork.  It  was  claimed  by  his  com- 
rades that  Private  Eldrick  Bromillet,  of  Company  D,  was  the 
first  one  of  the  regiment  over  the  works.  He  was  killed  fifty 
yards  inside  the  works  by  a  confederate  captain,  and  the  latter 
was  killed  by  Bromillet's  comrade.  That  regiment  used  the 
bayonet  in  the  charge,  and  displayed  throughout  the  highest 
degree  of  valor.  No  regiment  on  the  field  that  day  suffered  so 
heavily,  none  exhibited  more  intrepid  bravery.  And  higher 
praise  than  that  cannot  be  awarded  troops. 


206  CAMPAIGN     OF    MOBILE. 

Tlie  Twenty-fourth.  Indiana  entered  tlie  works  on  the  right 
of  the  Seventy-sixth  Illinois,  soon  after  the  latter  had  pos- 
session. The  right  of  the  Twenty-fourth  had  to  pass  one  or 
two  deep  ravines,  in  which  was  wet  ground  covered  with  fallen 
trees,  and,  when  part  way  to  the  confederate  works,  the  regi- 
ment was  halted,  and  ordered  to  lie  down.  But  such  was  the 
ardor  of  the  men,  that  their  commander  found  it  difficult  to 
-restrain  them,  and  bade  them  go  on.  Such  was  their  ardor 
they  did  not  stop  to  capture  the  confederate  skirmishers,  nor 
even  to  disarm  all  they  met.  One  of  the  latter  raised  his  hands, 
to  indicate  his  submission,  and  after  the  Twenty-fourth  men 
iiad  passed  hi-m  turned  and  fired  on  them,  grazing  the  ear  of 
a  man  named  Messer.  The  latter  then  turned  upon  him,  and 
shot  him  dead.  A  man  named  Walker,  in  Company  C,  had 
told  his  comrades  where  he  would  fall,  and  after  they  had 
passed  the  spot  they  looked  back,  and  saw  that  he  was  indeed 
lying  there.  A  shell  burst  right  over  the  Twenty-fourth, 
enveloping  the  men  in  a  cloud  of  smoke,  yet  doing  no  more 
serious  injury  than  tearing  to  pieces  the  hat  of  one  man,  the 
cartridge-box  of  another,  and  the  stock  of  another's  musket. 
However,  the  confederates  thought  it  had  done  more  mischief, 
and  raised  a  cheer.  The  loss  of  the  Twenty-fourth  was  about 
twelve,  killed  and  wounded.  Not  far  from  the  works,  fell  the 
lamented  Capt.  George  E.  Merchant,  commanding  Company  J). 
He  lived  only  till  the  next  day.  He  was  an  excellent  officer, 
and  dearly  beloved  by  his  company  and  comrades. 

The  Ninety-seventh  Illinois  had  pushed  forward  over  the 
obstructions,  against  a  dreadful  fire,  and,  having  started  de- 
ployed as  skirmishers,  the  men  got  much  scattered ;  but  they 
well  knew  how  to  take  care  of  themselves,  and  officers  and  men 
performed  their  duty  with,  unflinching  valor.  The  colors  of  the 
regiment  were  planted  on  the  works  between  the  Stockton  road 
and  the  redoubt  south  of  it,  almost   simultaneously  with  the 


CAMPAIGN     OP     MOBILE.  207 

Eiglity-tliii'd  Ohio.  They  were  carried  by  Sergeant  Ed-s^in 
D.  Lowe,  and  in  the  charge  they  were  struck  and  torn  by  the 
fire  of  the  artillery,  but,  unharmed  himself,  he  kept  them  con- 
spicuously in  the  advance,  and,  undismayed  by  the  thick 
dangers  around  him,  planted  them  firmly  on  the  works,  then 
fell  with  a  mortal  wound.  But  the  hand  that  struck  him  down 
was  soon  itseK  laid  cold,  by  an  unerring  shot  from  one  of  the 
color-guard.  The  Ninety-seventh  Illinois  lost  nine  killed  and 
fifty-three  wounded.  Among  the  latter  were  five  officers. 
Capt.  Howard  and  Lieut.  Orem  were  both  struck  down  when 
near  the  main  works.  The  loss  in  the  Sixty-ninth  Indiana 
battalion  was  ten,  wounded.  Col.  Spiceley  and  staff  entered 
the  works  about  with  the  Twenty-fourth. 

The  right  of  the  Eighty-third  Ohio  had  three  ravines  to  pass, 
and  the  ravine  nearest  the  garrison  works  was  deep  and  long 
enough  to  include  nearly  the  whole  of  the  regiment.  When 
it  had  advanced  about  two  hundred  yards,  it  had  come  to  the 
principal  line  of  confederate  rifle-pits,  still  to  some  extent  oc- 
cupied. The  Eighty-third  there  paused  a  few  moments  for 
the  right  to  get  up  out  of  the  ravine ;  the  confederate  sharp- 
shooters' guns  were  taken  from  those  who  surrendered,  and 
broken.  Then  the  colors  of  the  Eighty-third  moved  on  the 
line  still  advancing  as  fast  as  the  nature  of  the  ground  and  the 
obstacles  of  brush  and  logs  would  admit.  It  soon  began  to 
descend  the  ravine  two  hundred  yards  from  the  main  works, 
and  for  two  or  tlu'ee  long  minutes  was  lost  sight  of.  It  was 
passing  the  ravine  through  which  ran  a  rivulet,  and  in  the  bot- 
tom of  which  was  a  jungle  of  slashings  almost  defying  the  pas- 
sage of  persons  even  at  a  time  of  leisure  and  unencumbered 
with  weapons.  Then  it  began  to  ascend  the  high  ground  in 
front  of  the  redoubt  where  were  some  detached  rifle-pits.  A 
few  steps  farther  and  it  was  up  to  another  line  of  abatis,  breast- 
high,   apparently  impassable,  and  fifty  yards  from  the  works. 


208  CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE. 

Before  this  the  foremost  of  the  Eighty-third  stooped  down  to 
avoid  the  destructive  fire  which  was  being  poured  upon  them, 
to  take  breath,  and  to  wait  till  the  wings  could  close  up.  Fif- 
teen yards  inside  of  the  line  of  abatis  just  before  them  was 
another  line,  not  readily  seen  at  a  distance,  consisting  of  stakes 
firmly  driven  into  the  ground  close  together,  and  sharpened  at 
the  end.  Then,  thirty-five  yards  from  that,  was  the  ditch  and 
the  high  parapet  of  the  redoubt.  The  infantry  troops  which 
manned  that  redoubt  and  the  adjacent  breastworks,  consisted  of 
CockreU's  Missouri  brigade,  comprising  the  First,  Thkd,  Fourth, 
and  Fifth  Missouri  infantry,  and  the  First  and  Third  Missouri 
cavalry,  dismounted ;  one  of  the  most  famous  fighting  brigades 
of  the  confederate  army.  These  troops  stood  up  in  a  bold  man- 
ner behind  their  breastworks,  firing  on  their  assailants  as  if  they 
hoped  to  repulse  them.  There  seemed  to  be  a  constant  blaze  of 
musketry  along  the  breastworks.  The  artillery  was  served  with 
the  same  desperate  energy.  The  guns  vomited  forth  grape  and 
canister  with  a  fury  that  made  one  shudder.  But  most  of  the 
shots  went  over  the  mark. 

^Tiile  the  Eighty-third  Ohio  was  in  that  position  the  Sixty- 
ninth  Indiana  and  Ninety-seventh  Illinois  were  on  their  right, 
on  lower  ground,  near  the  Stockton  road,  and  hotly  engaged. 
Lieut.  Col.  Baldwin  caused  part  of  his  regiment  to  return  the 
fire  of  the  garrison  while  the  rest  made  an  opening  through  the 
abatis.  The  colors  of  the  regiment  were  flying  conspicuously, 
and  both  flagstafis  were  shot  in  two  and  the  colors  riddled  with 
bullets. 

WhUe  this  scene  was  occurring,  a  division  staff-officer  was  sent 
to  have  the  Twenty-fourth  Indiana  move  down .  to  reinforce  the 
Ninety-seventh  Illinois,  whose  colors  were  seen  not  far  from  the 
main  works  ;  but  the  Twenty-fourth  was  abeady  on  the  way  to 
the  works  farther  to  the  right,  and  the  officer  found  it  inside  of 
them.     About  the  same  time,  another  staff-officer  was  sent  to 


CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE.  209 

hasten  fonvard  the  main  hne  of  the  Third  brigade  in  support 
of  the  Eighty-third  Ohio  ;  but  before  he  reached  its  commander, 
it  was  advancing  on  the  double-quick,  the  colors  flying,  the  men 
cheering,  and  the  whole  line  looking  splendidly.  On  the  right, 
was  the  Thirty-fourth  Iowa,  Col.  G.  W.  Clark ;  next  the  One 
Hundred  and  Fourteenth  Ohio,  Col.  J.  H.  Kelly  ;  the  Thirty- 
seventh  Illinois,  Col.  Chailes  Black ;  and  the  Twentieth  Iowa, 
Lieut.-Col.  J.  B.  Leake  ;  all  superior  regiments,  with  gallant 
and  able  commanders.  Their  appearance  on  the  field,  of  course, 
began  to  excite  dismay  in  those  against  whom  the  Eighty-third 
was  contending.  Lieut.-Col.  Baldwin,  as  soon  as  a  passage  was 
opened  through  the  abatis,  gave  the  order  for  the  regiment 
again  to  advance.  This  was  done  with  a  dauntless  spirit.  The 
men,  with  then*  bayonets,  pried  an  opening  through  the  next 
line  of  abatis,  then  rushed  forward,  bearing  their  fljdng 
colors,  and,  though  still  encountering  numerous  obstructions, 
in  the  nature  of  wire  lines,  were  soon  upon  the  redoubt.  Capt. 
Gany,  of  the  Eighty-third,  was  among  the  first  to  moimt  the 
parapet,  but  a  private  soldier  is  said  to  have  been  the  first  over 
them.  Lieut.-Col.  Baldwin  was  soon  on  the  parapet ;  and  see- 
ing that  the  most  of  his  regiment  was  ready  to  mount  the  works, 
he  jumped  down  inside,  and  cried  out,  "  Sm-render  !"  The  com- 
manding officer  inquired,  "  To  whom  do  we  surrender  ?"  Bald- 
win answered,  "  To  i:]ie  Eighty-thu'd  Ohio."  Then  the  officer 
said,  "  I  believe  we  did  that  once  before," — referring  to  a  some- 
what similar  occasion  at  Yicksburgh. 

It  was  about  twenty  minutes  from  the  time  the  Eighty-tliird 
began  the  charge  till  it  was  in  possession  of  the  works ;  but 
some  contest  was  kept  up  for  a  few  minutes  in  rear  of  the 
redoubt  after  the  first  had  entered.  Two  volleys  were  fired 
inside  the  works,  in  the  edge  of  the  woods,  five  minutes  after 
the  Eighty-third  was  inside. 

The  loss  of  the  Eighty-thii-d  Ohio  was  seven  killed  and  twenty- 

14 


210  CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE. 

one  wounded.  Among  tlie  killed  were  Corporal  Hnglies,  and 
Privates  De  Mar  (on  the  works),  Cook,  Cox,  Anderson,  and  Yan 
Amsdale.  Among  the  wounded  were  Capt.  Gary  and  Lieut. 
Snyder. 

The  other  regiments  of  Moore's  brigade  met  with  some  resist- 
ance. The  Thu-ty-fourth  Iowa  had  three  killed,  and  twelve 
wounded.  The  brigade  commander  advanced  in  the  charge 
near  that  regiment.  A  man  of  Company  H,  of  the  Thirty- 
fourth,  was  shot  at  by  a  wounded  confederate  lying  in  a  rifle- 
pit,  having  been  passed  by  the  skirmishers.  Another  man,  of 
Company  H,  then  dealt  him  a  fatal  blow  with  his  clubbed 
musket.  The  loss  in-  the  Thirty-seventh  Illinois  was  one  killed 
and  three  wounded.  In  the  One  Hundred  and  Fourteenth  Ohio, 
two  wounded.  The  Twentieth  Iowa  escaped  loss  in  the  assault^ 
and  only  had  its  flag  shot  through.  That  regiment  entered  the 
works  at  the  two-gun  battery,  on  the  brow  of  the  ravine,  south 
of  Bedoubt  No.  4.  About  eight  hundred  prisoners  were  taken  in 
front  of  Moore's  brigade.  The  whole  number  of  prisoners  taken 
by  the  Second  division  was  thirteen  hundred,  including  a  general 
commanding  a  division ;  also  ten  or  twelve  guns  and  several 
stands  of  colors.  The  works  carried,  in  its  front,  were  three 
quarters  of  a  mile  in  extent,  and  embraced  two  strong 
redoubts  (Nos.  3  and  4)  and  a  two-gun  battery.  After  dark, 
while  the  men  were  picking  up  the  dead  and  wounded,  a 
few  torpedoes  were  exploded.  In  this  way  a  man  of  the 
Second  Connecticut  battery  and  one  of  the  One  Hundred 
and  Fourteenth  Ohio  were  killed,  and  one  or  two  others 
wounded.  The  whole  loss  of  the  Second  division  in  the 
assault  was  two  hundred  and  thirty-three,  namely :  forty-one 
killed  and  one  hundred  and  ninety-two  wounded.  The  con- 
federate loss  in  killed  and  wounded,  in  front  of  that  division 
was  not  fully  ascertained.  About  twenty  confederates  were 
buried  near  the  works. 


Campaign    op   mobile.  211 

FeatcVs  Division. — Next,  on  the  left,  in  Veatcli's  division, 
Dennis'  brigade  had  the  advance,  the  Third  brigade,  Lieut.-Col. 
Kinsey  commanding,  being  held  in  reserve.  Slack's  brigade  was 
not  called  out  of  camp,  it  having  been  on  duty  the  preceding 
night  in  going  to  and  retiuTiing  from  Spanish  fort.  Gen,  Dennis' 
brigade  was  disposed  as  follows  :  The  Eighth  Illinois  (Ogelsby's 
old  regiment),  a  veteran  and  splendid  regiment.  Col.  Sheetz 
commanding,  was  in  the  advance  parallel.  The  Eleventh  Illi- 
nois (veteran).  Col.  Coats  commanding,  was  to  follow  in  supj^ort 
in  line  of  battle  on  the  left,  and  the  Forty-sixth  Illinois,  Col. 
Domblaser,  on  the  right.  Col.  Sheetz  was  instnicted  to 
advance,  with  the  Eighth  Illinois  deployed  as  skirmishers,  as 
soon  as  he  saw  the  troops  moving  in  the  assault  on  his  right 
and  left. 

At  the  moment  the  Eighth  HHnois  advanced,  the  Eighty-^ 
third  Ohio  had  got  about  halfway  to  the  main  works.  The 
line  of  the  Eighth  Illinois,  deployed  in  one  rank,  extended 
about  four  hundred  yards.  Thie  regiment  numbered  seven  hun- 
dred. The  distance  to  the  confederate  works  was  six  hundred 
yards.  There  was  first  a  slight  ravine  to  pass,  and  then  the 
ground  was  moderately  level ;  but  the  course  of  the  right  of  the 
line  lay  over  the  irregularly-scalloped  side  of  a  deep  ravine. 
There  were  two  or  three  lines  of  abatis  to  overcome,  and  the 
gi-ound  was  partly  covered  with  fallen  trees.  There  was  also 
some  obstruction  by  wires.  Yet  that,  including  a  strip  of 
ground  adjoining  on  the  left,  was,  perhaps,  the  smoothest  part 
of  the  field  of  Blakely,  and  it  was,  perhaps,  the  most  exposed. 

The  Eighth  Illinois  took  up  the  soldiers'  war-cry,  and  rushed 
forward  in  the  charge  with  all  the  compulsive  force  that  a 
skirmish-line  can  have.  They  made  but  short  pause  at  the 
confederate  rifle-pits.  Those  of  the  occupants  who  did  not  fall 
back  rapidly  to  their  main  works,  were  killed  or  captured.  The 
abatis  was  passed,  either  by  springing  over  it,  or  by  pulling 


212  CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE. 

it  one  side  and  making  passage  ways  tlirougli  it.  The  nearer 
the  Eighth  got  to  the  main  works,  the  fiercer  raged  the  tempest 
of  bullets  against  them.  Besides  a  constant  volume  of  mus- 
ketry, they  encountered  the  rapid  fire  of  four  pieces  of  artillery. 
They  returned  the  fire  to  some  extent.  Meantime  the  besiegers' 
batteries  in  their  rear  were  dropping  shells  on  the  garrison's 
works  with  excellent  effect.  "When  within  about  a  hundred 
yards  of  the  main  works,  the  contest  seemed  desperate,  and  it 
was  apparent  the  Eighth  was  losing  many.  The  Eleventh  and 
Forty-sixth  had  got  halfway  over  the  field,  moving  in  a  gal- 
lant manner,  when  an  order  reached  them  to  halt,  the  right  of 
Garrard's  division  having  been  seen  to  pause.  Then  the 
orderly,  Murray,  who  carried  the  order,  went  on  with  a  similar 
one  to  the  Eighth,  but  the  latter,  with  victorious  strides^ 
was  already  on  the  parapets  of  the  redoubt,  and  the  brave 
orderly  entered  the  works  close  by  Lieut.-Col.  Wheaton, 
of  the  Eighth.  The  latter  and  Sergt.  John  Switzer,  of  Com- 
pany B,  were  the  first  of  the  regiment  upon  the  works.  A 
shot  fi'om  one  of  the  besiegers'  batteries  struck  the  parapet 
while  Wheaton  was  going  over  the  works ;  and  while  he  was 
close  to  the  parapet,  two  men  of  the  Eighth  were  killed  by  the 
last  artillery  fire  from  the  redoubt.  Wheaton  ordered  Sergt. 
Switzer  to  shoot  the  gunner ;  but  before  it  could  be  done, 
Sergt.  Henderson  had  struck  him  down  with  the  butt  of  his 
musket. 

Ca]3t  Miller  entered  several  yards  to  the  left  of  Wheaton, 
and  Private  James  B.  Garwood,  of  his  company,  was  shot  down 
by  his  side  when  on  the  top  of  the  works.  Capt.  Miller  there 
encountered  an  officer  of  the  garrison,  who  attempted  to  shoot 
him  with  a  revolver,  and  took  him  prisoner.  Then  seeing  their 
flag,  which  was  planted  in  the  ground  that  the  bearer  might 
better  assist  in  the  defence,  he  tore  it  from  the  staff. 

The  confederates  fell  back  from  their  works,  into  the  timber, 


CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE.  213 

and  continued  firing  till  the  most  of  the  Eighth  were  over 
the  breastworks.  As  soon  as  the  Eleventh  and  Forty-sixth 
had  come  up,  the  Eighth  moved  down  toward  the  landing. 

Veatch's  loss  in  the  assault  was  thirteen  killed  and  sixty-four 
wounded.  Of  these  the  Eighth  Illinois  lost  ten  killed  and 
fifty-four  wounded.  Among  the  severely  wounded  of  the  Eighth 
were  Capt.  Coleman — who,  after  having  been  brought  to  the 
ground,  continued  to  wave  his  sword  and  cheer  his  men — also 
Lieuts.  Sanderson  and  Harrington. 

In  Veatch's  front  were  captured  about  three  hundred  prison- 
ers, one  thirty-pounder  Parrott,  one  ten-pounder  Parrott,  two 
twelve-pounder  howitzers,  and  one  Ylll-inch  columbiad.  The 
latter  was  in  position,  but  the  embrasure  for  it  had  not  been 
finished. 

Garrard's  Division. — The  trench  containing  the  right  of  the 
First  brigade  (Col.  Rinaker's),  and  left  of  the  Third  brigade 
(Col,  Harris'),  of  this  division,  being  the  nearest  point  to  the 
confederate  works,  Gen.  Garrard  du-ected  that  the  assault  in 
his  front  should  commence  there,  and  be  taken  up  on  the  right 
and  left.  His  order  of  attack  was  two  hues  of  skirmishers,  to 
be  supported  by  the  main  line  of  battle.  When  the  first 
skirmish  line  had  started,  and  appeared  to  be  advancing  with 
success,  the  second  line  was  to  follow,  and  when  the  first  hue 
had  reached  the  enemy's  works,  the  main  line  was  to  charge. 
Tliis  plan  was  adopted  by  him  on  account  of  the  terrible 
obstructions  in  his  front. 

His  three  brigades  were  in  position  at  about  the  appouited 
hoiu".  Col.  Rinaker,  assisted  by  his  acting  aide-de-camp, 
Lieut.  McLain,  of  the  Eighty-ninth  Indiana,  had  been  arrang- 
ing the  position  of  his  brigade,  and  was  about  ready  to  give  the 
order  to  advance,  when  the  commander  of  the  Third  Indiana 
light  battery  reported  to  him  for  orders.  This  caused  him  a 
little  delay,  and  his  brigade  did  not  move  precisely  with  Harris'. 


21'4  CAMPAIGN     OP     MOBILE. 

Col.  Harris'  brigade  was  formed  in  two  lines.  In  the  first 
line,  the  Fifty-eighth  Illinois,  Capt.  John  Mnrphy  commanding, 
was  on  the  right ;  the  Eleventh  Wisconsin,  Maj.  J.  S.  Miller, 
on  the  left ;  the  One  Hundred  and  Seventy-eighth  New  York, 
Lieut.-Col.  J.  B,  Gondalfo,  in  the  centre.  In  the  second 
hne,  the  Thnty-fourth  New  Jersey,  Col.  Lawrence,  was  on  the 
right ;  and  the  Fifty-second  Indiana,  Lieut.-Col.  Main,  on  the 
left.  Company  A,  Capt.  Park,  Company  F,  Lieut.  McConnell, 
and  Company  D,  Capt.  Toms,  of  the  Eleventh  Wisconsin,  were 
selected  for  the  skirmish-line  of  that  regiment,  and  they 
deployed  and  lay  down  in  front  of  the  trench  previous  to 
the  movement.  These  troops  had  to  charge  six  hundred  yards 
(more  than  one  third  of  a  mile),  over  broken  ground,  covered 
with  the  usual  amount  of  obstructions.  At  quarter  to  six 
o'clock.  Col.  Harris  directed  his  acting  assistant  adjutant-gen- 
eral, Capt.  R.  E.  Jackson,  of  the  Eleventh  Wisconsin,  to  order 
the  charge  to  commence  ;  which  order  was  soon  given,  and 
promptly  obeyed.  When  the  skirmish-line  of  the  Eleventh 
had'  gained  one  hundred  yards,  they  received  such  a  heavy  fire 
from  the  confederates'  well-fortified  and  numerously  manned 
pits,  that  Maj.  Miller,  fearing  they  would  be  checked,  took  the 
responsibility  of  ordering  forward  the  rest  of  his  regiment,  com- 
manding, "  Forward,  Eleventh  !"  Instantly  the  Eleventh  Wis- 
consin sprang  out  of  their  trench,  and,  T^dth  the  ringing 
cheers  of  veterans,  rushed  onward,  mth  emulous  ardor  and 
high  resolve,  to  victory  or  death.  They  followed  so  closely 
upon  the  retreating  confederate  skirmishers,  as  to  save  them- 
selves from  a  general  fire  from  the  main  works  till  within 
about  one  hundred  yards  of  them.  Then  they  encountered 
a   destructive  fire   of  musketry,   and  grape,   and  canister. 

Though  many  were  struck  down,  and  the  ranks  of  the 
leading  groups  were  visibly  thinned,  the  survivors  moved  on 
with  imfaltering  step  to  the  main  works,  and  there  engaged 


i 


CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE.  215 

in  a  hand-to-liaiicl  contest  with  the  most  imyielding  spiiits 
of  the  garrison.  Lieut.  Angus  R.  McDonald,  Sergeant  Daniel 
B.  Moore,  and  six  others,  were  within  thirt}'-  yards  of  the 
works,  and,  by  Lieut.  McDonald's  orders,  they  fixed  bayo- 
nets, and  charged  them.  When  close  to  the  parapet  a  vol- 
ley killed  five  of  their  number,  and  knocked  the  lock  ojff  of 
Moore's  gun.  Then  McDonald  ordered  that  they  should  wait 
till  others  came  up ;  but  Sergeant  Moore,  in  the  din,  not 
hearing  the  order,  mounted  the  works.  The  gallant  Corporal 
Joel  Wheeler,  of  Company  A,  had  preceded  him  and  was 
shot  dead  on  the  parapet.  McDonald  quickly  followed  and 
demanded  a  suiTender.  At  that  time  the  main  part  of  the 
Eleventh  was  coming  up  within  a  few  yards,  but  one  or 
two  volleys  were  afterward  fired  on  them  from  behind  the 
works.  A  portion  of  the  garrison  had  already  broke  and  was 
fleeing  toward  the  landing.  Where  McDonald  and  Moore 
entered  were  eight  who  surrendered;  but  ten  yards  to  their 
right  was  a  squad  of  twelve  under  charge  of  an  oflScer,  who 
were  still  pouring  a  deadly  fire  into  the  right  of  the  Eleventh. 

The  officer   exclaimed  :    "  No  quarter  to  the  d d  Yankees." 

Lieut.  McDonald  and  Sergeant  Moore  feU  into  their  hands, 
and  then  followed  a  desperate  struggle.  Five  or  six  attacked 
McDonald  with  bayonets,  but  he  fought  them  with  his  sword, 
knocking  some  down,  and  killed  two.  He  received  two  bayonet 
thrusts  in  his  breast  and  a  musket  ball  m  his  thigh,  when  he 
fell.  A  confederate  fell  over  him  whom  he  used  as  a  shield 
against  a  farther  thrust  by  the  bayonet.  Then  Sergeant  Moore, 
who  had  also  received  a  bayonet  wound,  picked  up  a  confederate 
musket  and  shot  McDonald's  assailant  dead. 

Other  gallant  men  of  the  Eleventh  were  soon  upon  the  works, 
closely  followed  by  the  regiment.  Then  came  with  eager  step 
the  rest  of  the  brigade  with  its  commander.  Col.  Harris ;  and 
when  the  troops  were  in  full  possession  of  the  works  a  shout  of 


216  CAMPAIGN     OP     MOBILE. 

triumpli  went  up  tliat  baffles  description.  The  men  flocked 
around  their  commander  witli  earnest  and  joyful  greetings. 
But  no  single  voice  could  be  lieard.  Col.  Harris  pointed  up  to 
the  flag,  no-;v  proudly  waving  on  the  captured  works.  Then 
again  the  emotions  of  patriotism  and  of  victory  burst  forth  in 
tumultuous  shouts.  Near  them  the  ground  was  thickly  strewed 
with  the  wounded  and  the  dead,  and  many  of  the  latter  were 
buried  near  the  works.  Among  the  killed  in  the  Eleventh  Wis- 
consin, were  Lieut.  Richard  Coddell,  Sergeant  W.  H.  Phelps, 
and  Corporals  Wheeler,  Allbaugh,  Shea,  and  Ingamills.  Its 
whole  number  of  killed  was  fifteen,  and  it  had  two  commissioned 
officers,  including  Lieut.  Wm.  Charlton,  twelve  non-commis- 
sioned officers,  and  thirty-two  privates  wounded.  Total  casual- 
ties in  the  Eleventh  Wisconsin,  sixty-one.  In  the  Fifty-eighth 
HHnois,  Lieut.  Thomas  Malloy  was  killed  on  the  works,  and 
Lieut.  Atwater  severely  wounded ;  and  there  were  other  casual- 
ties in  that  regiment.  In  the  One  Hundred  and  Seventy-eighth 
New  York,  there  was  one  killed  and  four  wounded  ;  in  the  Fifty- 
second  Indiana  two  killed  and  eight  wounded ;  in  the  Thirty- 
fourth  New  Jersey,  Corporal  Hampton  was  killed  and  three 
were  wounded. 

Soon  after  the  works  in  Harris'  front  were  taken,  detachments 
of  his  brigade  marched  down  to  the  landing  for  prisoners.  The 
Fifty-second  Indiana  was  placed  as  guard  over  the  artillery  and 
prisoners. 

Similar  enthusiasm  and  gallantry  characterized  Gen.  Gilbert's 
brigade,  next  on  the  right,  which  advanced  soon  after  Harris'. 
It  was  formed  in  three  lines.  The  Tenth  Kansas,  Lieut.-Col. 
Charles  S.  Hills  commanding,  and  Company  B,  of  the  Twenty- 
seventh  Iowa,  deployed  as  skirmishers  in  the  advanced  trench, 
six  hundred  yards  from  the  main  works.  The  Twenty-seventh 
Iowa,  Col.  Lake ;  the  One  Hundred  and  Seventeenth  Illinois, 
Col.  Moore,  and  Companies  D,  H,  and  K,  of  the  Thirty-second 


CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE.  217 

Iowa,  under  Maj.  Hufccliinson,  in  tlie  second  line.  The  Sixth 
Minnesota,  Lieut.-Col.  Grant,  and  the  other  seven  companies  of 
the  Thirtj-second  Iowa,  Lieut.-Col.  Eberhart,  forming  the 
reserve  line,  and  posted  eleven  hundi-ed  yards  from  the  main 
works.  The  severest  part  of  the  charge  fell  upon  the  Tenth 
Kansas,  and  they  breasted  'the  storm  that  beat  against  them 
with  a  noble  heroism.  In  their  front,  as  elsewhere,  the  artillery 
uttered  its  last  fierce  thunders,  pouring  forth  shell,  grape,  and 
canister;  the  musketry  volleys  roiled  along  the  line  in  quick 
succession,  and  clouds  of  smoke  rose  up  from  the  works.  The 
Tenth  Kansas  directed  their  steps  toward  the  Sixth  redoubt ; 
yet  such  was  the  fire  upon  them,  and  not  wishing  to  pause  to 
return  it,  they  turned  for  a  moment  down  the  side  of  a  ravine. 
But  an  enfilading  fire  greeted  them  there ;  and  with  hardly  a 
pause,  they  soon  gained  the  high  ground  again,  crossed  two  hues 
of  abatis,  then  the  ditch,  and  mounted  the  parapets. 

The  furious  fire  that  had  beset  them,  made  them  cluster 
in  a  group,  and  they  entered  the  works  more  as  a  column 
in  mass  than  in  line.  Then,  vnth.  fixed  bayonets,  they  swept 
along  the  works  to  their  right,  mixing  blue  and  gray  to- 
gether ;  and  the  latter,  seeing  their  helpless  condition,  hud- 
dled into  the  angles  of  the  fort,  and  making  little  resistance, 
suiTendered  by  scores.  Yet  there  was  some  firing  after  the 
Tenth  were  inside  the  works,  for  a  number  of  the  confederates 
refused  to  surrender.  One  captain  caught  up  a  musket  and 
fired  at  Capt,  Wood,  of  the  Tenth,  while  the  latter  was  calling 
on  him  to  surrender,  and  then  another,  and  a  tMrd  musket, 
each   time  failing  to  hit   Capt.  Wood. 

Then  Coi-poral  Schultz,  of  the  Tenth,  sent  a  ball  through 
the  confederate's  head,  and  he  fell.  Several  other  instances 
of  the  same  kind  occurred.  Meantime,  some  of  the  leading 
confederate  officers  were  approaching  officers  of  the  Tenth, 
handing  them  their  swords,  and  beseeching  them  to  stop  the 


218  CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE. 

"butcliery,"  as  they  termed  it.  But  it  appears  none  were 
uitentionallj  killed  after  they  liad  ceased  fighting.  The  con- 
federate commanders  Tvere  not  able  to  get  all  to  surrender, 
even  after  resistance  seemed  utterly  fruitless. 

A  number  of  pieces  of  aiiillery  and  several  hundred  prison- 
ers -were  captured  in  Gilbert's  front. 

The  Tenth  Kansas  had  seven  killed  and  twelve  wounded,  and 
of  the  latter,  Lieut.  John  Bryan  and  Private  Plummer  died 
of  their  "wounds.  Among  the  killed  were  Sergeant  George 
Daller  and  Corporals  Buxton  and  Thompson.  There  were 
four  wounded  ia  the  Twenty-seventh  Iowa,  including  Lieut. 
Eisenhart ;  one  killed,  and  one  wounded  in  the  One  Hundred 
and  Seventeenth  Illinois  ;  one  wounded  in  the  Sixth  Minnesota, 
and  one  in  the  Thirty-second  Iowa.  The  whole  loss  in  Gilbert's 
brigade  was  eight  killed  and  nineteen  wounded.  After  the 
brigade  was  in  possession  of  the  works,  large  detachments 
hurried  down  to  the  landing,  and  through  the  woods,  for 
prisoners.  Maj.  Hutchinson,  of  the  Thirty-second  Iowa,  with 
a  squad  of  eight  men,  held  a  large  number  of  confederates  in 
check,  in  range  of  their  gunboats,  in  a  manner  to  prevent  the 
latter  from  firing  on  the  Union  troops. 

Rinaker's  brigade  had  from  three  hundred  to  four  hundred, 
yards  of  rough  grotmd  to  charge  over,  before  reaching  the 
confederate  works.  The  One  Hundred  and  Nineteenth  Illinois, 
Col.  Thomas  J.  Kinney,  deployed  as  skirmishers,  commenced 
the  charge  in  front  of  that  brigade,  advancing  with  cheers, 
on  the  run,  at  a  signal  by  the  bugle.  The  supporting  line  con- 
sisted of  the  Eighty-ninth  Indiana  on  the  right,  the  One  Hun- 
dred and  Twenty-second  Illinois  in  the  centre,  and  the  Twenty- 
first  ^Missouri  on  the  left.  Lieut.-Col.  Craven,  of  the  Eighty- 
ninth  Indiana,  had  accompanied  the  regiment  down  to  the 
front,  although  ill,  but  was  not  able  to  take  part  in  the  charge, 
and  the  command  fell  upon  Major  Winter.     At  the   second 


CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE.  219 

signal  on  the  bugle,  these  three  regiments  advanced  with  eager 
step.  The  most  of  the  One  Hundred  and  Nineteenth  was  then 
only  thirty  yards  in  front ;  and  the  gTound  was  so  irregular,  and 
the  obstacles  so  numerous,  that  both  lines  were  soon  merged 
together.  Yet  the  latter  regiment  pushed  forward  as  fast  as 
men  could  go,  stopping  to  fire  but  httle.  The  greater  part 
of  the  confederates  retreated  fi'om  theh  rifle-pits  to  the  main 
works,  and  it  seemed  to  be  a  race  between  them  and  the  assault- 
ing troops  as  to  which  should  reach  them  first.  A  vehement  and 
excited  fire  from  the  main  works  assailed  the  advancing  troops, 
the  artillery  of  two  redoubts  being  turned  upon  them.  Yet 
the  gTins  did  less  injury  than  was  to  have  been  apprehended. 
Each  regiment  sustahied  some  loss.  Lieut.-Col.  Drish,  of  the 
One  Hundred  and  Twenty-second,  fell  struck  by  a  piece  of 
shell,  and  the  command  devolved  on  Major  Chapman,  Two 
of  that  regiment,  named  MiUer,  were  killed,  and  eleven  wounded. 
In  the  Eighty-niath  Indiana,  one — Coi-poral  Cowan — was  killed, 
and  five  wounded,  two  of  whom,  Hutchinson  and  Coppock, 
died.  The  color-bearer  of  the  Twenty-first  Missouri  was  shot 
down  when  near  the  works,  and  they  were  seized  by  Cox  of 
Company  G,  One  Hundred  and  Twenty-second  Illinois,  and 
planted  on  the  works.  The  loss  in  the  One  Hundred  and 
Nineteenth  was  sixteen  killed  and  wounded — and  the  most  of 
those  casualties  occurred  hi  Capt.  Hubbard's  company,  and  his 
brother,  Edward  P.  Hubbard,  a  private  soldier,  was  among  the 
mortally  wounded.  Some  twenty  of  that  company  charged  the 
works  with  fixed  bayonets,  and  were  among  the  first  to  enter 
them.  As  Kinaker's  brigade  got  close  to  the  works,  the  most 
of  the  infantry — ^Alabama  reseiwes — retreated  toward  the  river. 
The  artillerists,  however,  held  their  positions,  and,  refusing  to 
surrender,  were  shot.  Uany  of  the  artillerists  were  armed  with 
rifles.  After  entering  the  works,  the  Twenty-first  Missouri  and 
Capt.  Bostwick's  company,  of  the  One  Hundi-ed  and  Twenty- 


220  CAMPAIGN     OP    MOBILE. 

second  Illinois,  turned  to  tlie  left  and  charged  down  in  rear  of 
tlie  works  to  the  last  redoubt.  Einaker's  brigade  took  three  or 
four  battle-flags,  the  artillery  in  their  front,  and  several  hundred 
prisoners. 

The  redoubts  in  Garrard's  front  had  eighteen  embrasures, 
and  his  division  carried  all  the  works  in  its  front,  capturing  the 
artillery,  and  sixteen  hundred  prisoners,  including  two  general 
of&cers.  The  loss  in  his  division  was  :  commissioned  officers, 
two  killed  and  seven  wounded ;  enlisted  men,  thirty-nine  killed 
and  one  hundred  and  seventeen  wounded ;  total,  one  hundred 
and  sixty-five. 

The  total  casualties'  of  the  federals,  engaged  in  the  assault, 
was  one  hundred  and  twenty-seven  killed  and  five  hundred  and 
twenty-seven  wounded ;  grand  total,  six  hundred  and  fifty-four. 
Number  of  prisoners  captured,  three  thousand  four  hundred 
and  twenty-three,  including  three  general  officers.  There  were 
also  captured,  several  battle-flags,  upward  of  forty  pieces  of 
artillery,  the  small  arms  used  by  the  infantry,  and  all  the  gar- 
rison stores. 

It  is  not  easy  to  estimate  the  loss  of  the  garrison  in  killed 
and  wounded ;  but  it  was  probably  a  third  as  large  as  that  of 
the  besiegers.  There  were  a  few  boats  out  in  the  stream,  and 
some  of  the  garrison  attempted  to  swim  to  them,  and  it  was 
reported  a  number  were  drowned. 

Wellington  well  said  that  a  battle  could  not  be  painted. 
Neither  can  language  fully  describe  so  great  and  ever-chang- 
ing a  scene. 

It  has  been  seen  what  was  the  nature  of   the  ground  over 
which  the  assault  was  made  ;  that  it  was  cut  up  by  ravines,  ^ 
rough,  and  covered  with  obstructions.     It  was  known,  also,  to 
be  mined  with  torpedoes   in  various   places ;    and    there  was 
reason  to  dread  them. 

Thirty-five  regiments — fully  sixteen  thousand  troops — partici- 


I 


CAMPAIGN     OF    KOBILE.  221 

pated  in  tlie  assault.  The  lines  were  three  miles  in  length,  and 
the  advance  of  the  entire  line  was  remarkably  simultaneous. 

The  scene  was  picturesque  and  grand.  From  different  points 
of  view  the  assaulting  hues  could  be  seen  for  a  mile  or  two,  as 
far  even  as  the  forms  of  men  could  be  distinguished  moving 
over  the  broken  ground.  The  regimental  colors,  though  not  in 
perfect  Hne,  were  steadily  advancing,  and  the  troops  were  dash- 
ing on  over  and  through  the  obstructions  like  a  stormy  wave.  It 
was  at  a  moment  when  the  shock  of  battle  was  the  fiercest.  In 
the  clamor  could  be  heard  the  voices  of  the  assaulting  troops. 
Nothing  could  exceed  their  enthusiasm.  If  then  they  could 
have  known  the  great  event  that  had  occurred  a  few  hours 
before — that  Lee  had  surrendered — and  that  their  contest  would 
probably  be  the  last  important  struggle  of  the  war,  they  could 
hardly  have  experienced  more  exulting  emotions,  or  pressed 
forward  with  more  dauntless  step.  It  seemed  as  if  "  all  the  joy, 
all  the  sensation  of  life,  was  in  that  one  moment,  that  they  cast 
themselves  with  the  fierce  gladness  of  mountain  torrents,  head- 
long on  that  brief  revelry  of  glory." 

Gen.  Steele,  during  the  assault,  was  along  the  front  of  the 
Second  division,  and,  with  his  staff,  kept  up  with  the  main  hne 
of  Moore's  brigade.  "When  he  saw  the  advance  line  entering 
the  works,  he  exclaimed :  "  I  knew  they  would  do  it.  I  told 
you  they  would  go  over  those  works." 

He  soon  after  sat  down,  and  signed  a  despatch  to  Gen.  Canby, 
which  Capt.  Lacy,  his  assistant  adjutant-general,  had  written,  in 
these  words  :  "  We  have  stormed  the  entire  line  of  works,  and 
our  troops  are  now  in  full  possession."  A  reply  soon  came, 
written  by  Col.  Christensen,  saying  :  "  Gen  Canby  says  :  '  God 
bless  you,  and  God  bless  your  brave  command.'  " 

It  was  dark  before  the  prisoners  could  be  collected  together 
and  formed  to  march  back  with  the  different  divisions  to  their 
camps ;  and  gTeat  care  had  to  be  taken  to  avoid  dangers  from 


222  CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE. 

torpedoes.  All  the  fore  part  of  tliat  night,  there  were  occa- 
sional explosions  of  torpedoes,  and  a  few  men  were  killed  by 
them  while  searching  for  the  dead  and  wounded.  It  was  a 
discordant  and  melancholy  sound  to  hear. 


CHAPTER    XXIY. 

OBSERVATIONS  ON  THE  SIEGE  AND   ASSAULT   OF  BLAKEI.Y. 

1.  The  fall  of  Blakely,  and  caj)ture  of  its  garrison,  left  the  con- 
federates only  four  thousand  five  hundred  troops  for  the  imme- 
diate defence  of  Mobile,  which  being  too  small  a  force  to  hold 
the  city,  they  marched,  on  the  11th,  for  Meridian.  Gen.  Maui-y 
followed  at  daylight  of  the  12th. 

Canby,  by  signals,  learned  of  the  evacuation  of  the  city  the 
evening  of  the  11th,  and  had  troops  immediately  in  motion  for 
its  occupation.  Granger,  with  the  First  and  Third  divisions  of 
his  corps,  embarked  on  transports  at  Stark's  landing,  at  dayhght 
of  the  12th,  and,  with  a  portion  of  the  squadron,  under  Thatcher, 
crossed  over  the  bay,  landing  two  miles  below  the  city,  and 
entered  it  unopposed.  The  Third  division  marched  on  to  "\Miist- 
ler's  station,  and  overtook  and  skh'mished  with  the  rear-guard  of 
the  confederate  column. 

It  was  not  Gen.  Canby's  purpose,  under  any  circumstances,  to 
besiege  Mobile  from  the  land  side.  If  the  city  had  held  out 
longer,  he  would  have  moved  across  the  head '  of  the  bay,  by 
means  of  transports  and  pontoons,  and  established  batteries  on 
the  islands  in  front  of  the  city.  And  some  steps  toward  such  a 
movement  had  ah'eady  been  taken. 

2.  The  conduct  of  the  garrison  of  Blakely  is,  on  the  wliole,  de- 
serving of  commendation.  The  troops  manifested  much  energy 
and  sphit  during  the  siege,  often  making  bold  salhes  in  the 
night,  and  disturbing  the  besiegers.  They  were  expectiag  an 
assault  about  the  time  it  took  place,  and  felt  considerable  confi- 


224  CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE. 

dence  tliey  could  repulse  it.  Had  an  assault  been  made  before 
the  fall  of  Spanish  fort,  it  would  probably  have  been  more 
bloody,  though  not  repulsed ;  for  the  garrison  would  have  had 
more  hope  in  resisting.  But,  after  they  knew  that  fifteen  or 
twenty  thousand  more  troops  had  come  up  from  Spanish  fort 
(these,  however,  were  two  miles  in  the  rear  in  their  camps),  they 
had  reason  to  feel  that  the  odds  against  them  were  too  great  for 
successful  resistance.  The  assaulting  troops  had  the  moral 
reinforcement  of  the  Spanish  fort  troops. 

The  garrison  had  a  large  number  of  sharpshooters  or  skir- 
mishers in  pits  three  hundred  yards  in  front  of  their  main 
works.  These  had  ,an  opportunity  to  fire  only  one  or  two 
rounds,  and  then  fell  back ;  but  there  being  no  covered  way, 
and  not  being  able,  on  account  of  the  obstacles,  to  move 
rapidly,  they  were  for  a  short  time  a  sort  of  cover  to  the 
assaulting  troops,  embarrassing,  if  not  preventing,  the  fire  of 
those  behind  the  main  works.  If,  instead  of  being  three  hun- 
dred yards  to  the  front,  they  had  been  in  pits  fifty  yards  in 
front,  with  approaches  to  the  main  works,  a  double  line  of 
musketry  fire  could  then  have  been  poured  on  the  assaulting 
troops  just  as  they  were  reaching  the  most  difiicult  abatis. 

The  rules  for  defending  fortifications  requhe  the  garrison  to 
mount  the  parapet  when  they  find  the  assaulting  troops  are 
attacking  closely.  This  does  not  appear  to  have  been  done 
anywhere  on  the  line. 

3.  But  it  was  a  mistake  to  keep  the  garrison  at  Blakely  an 
hour  after  the  fall  of  Spanish  fort.  Every  possible  means 
shoidd  have  been  used  to  remove  it  before  an  assault  could  be 
made.  But  Gen.  Maury  aEeges  :  "  It  woidd  have  been  diiScult 
to  do  this  after  day  dawned,  and  up  to  that  time  all  of  Span- 
ish fort  garrison  had  not  been  transferred  from  Blakely  to 
Mobile." 

4.  Gen.  Maury,  in  an  account  which  he  wrote  of  the  siege, 


CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE.  225 

makes  tlie  just  remark,  that  "the  marshes  about  Mobile,  as 
marshes  almost  everywhere  else,  produced  a  gi-eater  moral 
effect  upon  besiegers  and  besieged  than  facts  justified."  On 
account  of  the  existence  of  a  swamp  on  the  left  of  the 
besiegers,  the  investment  of  Blakelj  was  not  complete  on  that 
flank  to  within  four  or  five  hundred  yards.  The  swamp  was 
narrow,  and  could  have  been  bridged,  and  there  was  no  good 
excuse  for  the  investment  being  incomplete. 

5.  Whether  the  time  for  the  assault  icas  favorable,  is  an 
interesting  question,  and  will  doubtless  be  answered  affirma- 
tively. The  troops  engaged  in  it  had  the  moral  support  of 
the  presence  of  the  rest  of  the  army  which  had  come  fi'om 
Spanish  fort.  When  the  garrison  saw  the  assaulting  lines 
advancing,  they  felt  that  the  woods  behind  them  were  also  full 
of  troops ;  for  they  had  heard  of  heav;)^  columns  moving  over 
Minette  bayou.  Suppose  the  assault  had  taken  place  the  day 
before?  Is  it  not  probable  the  resistance  w^ould  have  been 
greater  ?  They  certainly  would  have  had  more  hope  of  effect- 
ing a  repulse.  As  it  was,  the  general  assault  was  not  repulsed 
at  any  point. 

It  is  probable  Gen.  Steele  would  not  have  ordered  a  general 
assault  for  two  or  three  days  longer  had  it  not  been  for  the  fall 
of  Spanish  fort,  such  was  the  distance — from  five  to  six  hundred 
yards — to  charge  over.  But  it  perhaps  saved  life  that  the 
assault  was  made  fi"om  the  third  parallel,  and  without  waiting 
till  a  fourth  was  dug.  The  besiegers  had  come  upon  torpedoes  in 
their  digging,  and  doubtless  many  lives  would  have  been  lost  by 
farther  extending  the  approaches  and  trenches.  After  the 
assault,  it  was  ascertained  the  advance  trench,  on  the  right  of 
the  Second  di'sdsion,  ran  between  tioo  rows  of  torpedoes  ! 

6.  The  besiegers  deserve  commendation  for  the  amount  of 
vjorh  they  performed.  And,  it  should  be  remarked,  that  not  one 
of  their  number  was  captui'ed.     Yet,  unouestionably,  more  work 

15 


226  CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE. 

miglit  have  been  performed ;  for  there  are  few  operations  in 
which  the  energy  and  industry  of  men  are  exhausted.  Each 
division  constructed  its  works  according  to  its  own  plans,  and 
with  but  httle,  if  any,  outside  professional  assistance.  Several 
miles  of  trenches  and  approaches  were  made,  and  they  will  long 
remain  as  proof  of  the  labor  that  was  done.  Over  the  field  of 
Blakely  the  bushes  are  beginning  to  grow  up,  and  in  a  few  years 
another  forest  will  no  doubt  cover  the  ground.  But  many  of 
the  trenches  wiU  remain.  The  storms  of  centuries  will  not  wear 
them  away. 


CHAPTER    XXy. 

EEDUCTION  OF  FORTS  HUGER  AND  TRACT. 

Forts  Huger  and  Tracy  held  out  three  days  after  the  fall 
of  Spanish  fort.  They  v/ere  not  days  of  quiet.  Guns  were 
now  turned  on  them  from  McDermett  and  old  Spanish 
fort.  The  Octorara  approached  nearer  and  delivered  a  more 
unerring  and  effective  fire.  The  old  and  a  new  battery 
on  Bay  Minette  shore  also  hurled  against  them  a  copious 
shower  of  heavy  projectiles.  Both  those  forts  repHed  with 
spirit.  Their  garrisons  expected  soon  to  evacuate,  and  were 
lavish  of  ammunition. 

April  9. — Capt.  Foust's  battery  (First  Missouri)  moved  into 
old  Spanish  fort,  unspiked  two  one-hundred-pounder  Brooks' 
rifles,  and  opened  them  on  Huger.  In  the  eveniag  one  of  them 
was  bursted.  Another  one-hundred-pounder  Parrott,  under 
Lieut.  Parker  (First  Indiana),  was  put  in  the  Bay  Minette 
shore  battery,  making  two  there  of  that  calibre,  which  were 
also  engaged.  On  the  north  shore  of  that  bayou,  batteries 
were  begun  for  two  more  one-hundred-pounder  rifles  and  four 
thirty-pounder  rifles. 

The  Navy. — At  twenty  minutes  past  one,  A.  M.,  the  squacbon 
observed  Ughts  in  Old  Spanish  fort,  and  twenty  mmutes 
afterward  they  received  a  message  through  the  army  signal 
officer,  that  the  works  were  evacuated. 

Torpedoes  still  held  the  navy  in  check ;  but  energetic  efforts 
were  being  made  to  remove  them.  About  one  hundred  and 
fifty  had  already  been  removed.     A  second  net  having  been 


228  CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE. 

stretched  across  the  channel,  about  a  mile  and  a  half  above 
the  first  one,  the  intervening  part  of  the  channel  was  swept 
with  chains,  by  tugs.  At  forty  minutes  past  three,  P.  M.,  the 
Octorara  and  ironclads  weighed  and  stood  over  the  first  net, 
steamed  up  to  the  second,  and  came  to  anchor  a  thousand 
yards  below  Old  Spanish  fort.  The  tall  reeds  on  the  marsh 
so  obstructed  the  view  of  Huger,  that  range-stakes  were  neces- 
sary for  pointing  the  guns ;  and  as  the  reeds  would  not  burn, 
men  were  sent  on  shore  with  poles,  and  a  lane  was  beaten, 
through  which  the  fort  could  be  seen. 

The  Octorara  now  opened  fire  on  Huger  with  her  hundred- 
pounder  Parrott,  at  a 'distance  of  five  thousand  four  hundred 
yards — a  little  upward  of  three  miles !  Her  first  shots  fell 
short.  Some  of  the  Spanish  fort  garrison  had  not  yet  got 
away  from  Huger ;  the  noise  of  the  Octorara' s  shells  were  famil- 
iar to  them,  and  they  joyfully  congratulated  themselves  when 
they  saw  them  fall  short.  Soon,  however,  a  shell  came  and 
plunged  into  the  river,  three  hundred  yards  above  the  fort. 
The  next  one  struck  the  very  centre  of  the  works,  making  their 
boggy  foundations  rock  and  tremble  (to  use  the  expression  of 
one  who  was  there)  like  a  ship  in  a  gale  of  wind.  The  sub- 
sequent shots  told  with  good  effect  on  their  bombproof s.  One 
man  was  killed. 

The  confederates  thought  the  Octorara's  gun  was  served  with 
remarkable  skill.  It  was  a  saying  among  them  that  it  must  be 
served  by  "one-eyed  Brannegan,"  a  famous  gunner  and  deserter 
from  their  service.  They  considered  indeed  that  it  was  handled 
with  skill  surpassing  that  of  Sergeant  Bonner,  of  the  Twenty- 
second  Louisiana  regiment,  who  was  celebrated  in  the  confede- 
rate service  for  his  efficiency  in  that  respect. 

The  captain  of  this  hundred-pounder  gun  on  the  Octorara, 
and  who  fired  every  round,  was  James  Welsch,  chief  boatswain's 
mate,   an  old  man-of-war's  man.     He  was  subsequently  dis- 


CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE.  229 

cliarged  at  the  end  of  his  three-years  term  of  service.  His  skill 
was  remarkable,  and  there  should  be  inducements  for  such  men 
to  remain  in  the  navy. 

The  gun  itself  was  a  navy-Parrott  rifle,  manufactured  at  the 
West  Point  foundry,  under  the  supervision  of  its  designer. 
Eighty-pound  Parrotf  shells  were  fired  from  it,  with  the  reduced 
charge  of  eight  pounds  of  powder. 

April  10. — The  morning  of  the  10th  was  thick,  and  a  shell 
fired  at  dayhght,  showed  that  it  was  best  to  suspend  the  fire. 
At  half  past  nine,  it  was  resumed  in  reply  to  guns  which  had 
opened  on  the  Mustang,  in  which  Gen.  Bailey  had  gone  up  to 
Spanish  fort,  and  continued  slowly  for  two  hours.  At  forty 
minutes  past  one,  p.  m.,  the  guns  of  Huger  were  firing  on  the 
squadron's  boats,  which  were  sweejDing  for  torpedoes;  and  the 
Octorara  again  opened  fire  in  reply.  But  diu'ing  the  day  she 
fired  only  seventy-three  rounds.  In  course  of  the  day  the  tug 
Glasgow  came  up  with  Commodore  James  S.  Palmer  on  board, 
and  being  beyond  signal  distance  from  the  Admiral's  ship,  his 
pendant  as  divisional  commander,  was  hoisted. 

Lieut.  Beardsley,  with  Company  K,  Sixth  Michigan,  moved 
into  Old  Spanish  fort  in  the  forenoon,  and  relieved  Capt.  Foust. 
Besides  serving  the  one  hundred-pounder,  Beardsley  got  a  new 
thirty-pounder  Parrott  (made  at  Selma  only  a  few  months 
before)  in  position  and  at  work.  At  four,  P.  M.,  Capt.  Fousfc  com- 
menced with  two  of  his  hght  pieces,  and  at  five,  p.  m.,  Beardsley 
got  a  twenty-pounder  Parrott  unspiked  and  at  work.  All  the 
whUe  the  fire  from  Huger  and  Tracy  was  tremendous,  for  they 
were  using  more  than  a  dozen  heavy  guns  without  mercy,  and 
made  it  deathly  hot  around  Old  Spanish  fort.  A  detachment  of 
the  Ninety-fourth  Illinois  opened  fire  with  a  thu-ty-pounder  on 
McDermett, 

April  11. — ^Foust's  battery  had  been  firing  all  night.  At 
eleven  o'clock  of  the  same   night,  Lieut.  Beardsley,  with  ten 


230  CAMPAIGN     OP     MOBILE. 

men  of  Ms  company,  got  a  hundred-pounder  Brooks  rifle 
mounted  in  McDermett  on  a  new  carriage  tlie  garrison  had  just 
procured,  but  not  used.  Much  to  his  surprise,  Beardsley  found 
that  the  gun  was  spiked  and  shotted.  They  then  worked  till  it 
was  just  daylight,  when  they  succeeded  in  blowing  out  the  spike 
by  firing  the  gun  from  the  muzzle.  They  had  scarcely  lain 
down  to  get  a  little  sleep  when  the  guns  from  Huger  opened  on 
them.  They  then  jumped  up  and  returned  the  fire  with  the 
one-hundred-pounder.  The  firing  continued  heavy  and  grand 
through  the  day.  It  was  the  last  day  for  great  guns  in  Mobile 
bay — the  last  for  the  war.  The  smoke  rolled  up  in  cloudy 
columns.  The  bellowing  peals  reverberated  far  inland  and  far 
out  upon  the  sea.  Four  thirty-pounders,  from  the  north  shore 
of  Bay  Minette,  fired  on  Tracy.  On  the  south  shore,  the  two 
one-hundred-pounders,  with  the  eight  thirty-pounders  of  the 
First  Indiana,  were  still  engaged.  Likewise  the  guns  at  Old 
Spanish  fort,  manned  by  Foust's  company.  During  the  day,  a 
salute  of  one  hundred  shotted  rounds  was  fired  in  honor  of  the 
national  victories.  Some  twenty  guns,  in  all,  of  the  land- 
batteries  were  delivering  a  destructive  fire  on  those  forts.  A 
battery  was  also  in  progress  on  the  north  shore  of  Bay  Minette 
for  two  one-hundred-pounders  and  four  thirty-pounders.  From 
Huger,  shot  after  shot  came  in  quick  succession,  ploughing  up 
the  ground  about  McDermett.  One  shot  destroyed  a  wheel  of 
a  thirty-pounder,  and  six  shots  were  buried  in  the  magazine. 

The  Octorara  was  also  engaged  at  intervals  during  the  day 
with  her  one-hundred-pounder. 

In  the  evening,  the  guns  of  Huger  and  Tracy  ceased  their 
mighty  roar,  but  not  till  the  garrisons  were  ready  to  leave. 

In  the  evening,  Gen.  A.  J.  Smith,  with  a  detachment  of  his 
corps,  went  down  to  the  shore  of  Bay  Minette,  intending  to 
move  out  in  the  night  in  boats  and  flats  and  carry  Huger  and 
Tracy  by  assault.     About  ten,  P.  M.,  a  signal  officer,  with  orders 


CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE.  231 

from  liim,  went  to  Armstrong's  batteiy  to  have  tlie  iiriug  cease. 
This  being  complied  with,  the  oflficers  soon  after  tiumecl  their 
attention  intently  on  those  forts.  As  they  sat  peering  through 
the  darkness,  with  their  glasses  in  the  direction  of  Huger,  they 
saw  the  glimmer  of  lanterns  passing  to  and  fi'o,  and  at  about 
half-past  ten,  signal  •  lights  were  seen.  The  indications  were 
that  the  forts  were  being  evacuated. 

At  about  nine  in  the  evening,  the  first  cutter  of  the  Octorara, 
on  picket  just  below  Huger,  fell  in  with  a  skiff  that  was  pulhng 
down  the  river.  In  the  skiff  were  eight  men  who  rej)resented 
themselves  to  be  refugees  and  deserters  from  that  fort.  They 
said,  in  answer  to  questions,  that  Huger  and  Tracy  had  been 
hastily  evacuated  immediately  after  dark,  and  that  the  armament 
and  ordnance  stores  had  not  been  destroyed.  This  information 
was  communicated  to  the  officer  in  charge  of  the  boats  sweeping 
for  torpedoes.  A  landing  was  made  at  the  forts,  and  they  were 
taken  possession  of  by  the  officers  and  men  of  the  boats.  It 
seemed  a  happy  and  fitting  circumstance  that  these  forts  should 
first  come  into  the  possession  of  the  navy,  not  because  the  navy 
had  done  the  most  toward  compelling  their  evacuation,  but 
because  it  had  done  all  it  was  possible  to  do,  and  in  a  good 
spirit.  Yet,  in  the  honors  of  victor}'^  all,  of  course,  have  a  share. 
It  is  seldom,  if  ever,  that  any  particular  organization  has  a  right 
to  claim  them  entire  ;  or  to  claim  a  specific  share. 

This  night  the  pontoniers  happened  to  be  on  duty  in  those 
waters.  They  had  come  to  take  away  the  canvas  bridge — 
the  lower  one  on  the  bayou — and  in  some  way,  it  seems,  got 
knowledge  of  the  evacuation  and  entered  the  forts  themselves. 
The  next  day  the  guns  in  those  forts  had  inscriptions  on  them 
to  this  effect :  "  Eleven  o'clock,  p.  M.,  April  11.  Captured  by 
the  One  Hundred  and  Fourteenth  Illinois"  (pontoniers).  Also, 
the  names  of  individual  soldiers.  This  was  an  excellent  joke, 
and  a  fine  sarcasm  on  those  thoughtless  men  who  would  parcel 


232  CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE. 

out  the  honors  of  conquest.  For  pontoniers,  though  not 
expected  to  be  the  first  inside  a  captiu'ed  fort,  have  a  share  in 
the  glory  of  the  victory, 

Wednesday,  April  12. — The  channel  was  swept  with  chains, 
by  tugs,  and  the  Octorara  and  ironclads,  preceded  by  the  Glas- 
gow, steamed  up  to  the  obstructions  at  Huger.  The  Glasgow 
passed  through  the  gap.  During  the  night,  a  boat  from  the 
Octorara  went  up  the  Blakely  river  to  the  Tensas,  and  ascer- 
tained there  were  no  other  obstructions.  At  dayhght  on  the 
13th,  the  Octorara  attempted  to  foUow  the  Glasgow  through 
the  obstractions  of  the  gap,  but  did  not  succeed.  The  channel 
was  then  blown  out,  sfnd  the  wreck  of  a  sunken  scow  removed. 
At  about  noon,  the  Octorara  and  the  ironclads  steamed  through 
the  gap  and  through  Tensas  and  Spanish  rivers,  anchoring  off 
Mobile  at  about  eight  o'clock,  P.  m. 

Admiral  Thatcher  was  already  ofl'  Mobile,  having  the  day 
previous,  with  a  portion  of  the  squadron,  accompanied  Granger's 
forces  across  the  bay  from  Stark's  landing. 

A  few  days  afterward  the  Sixteenth  corps  marched  rapidly  to 
Montgomery.  Steele,  with  his  command,  proceeded  to  the  same 
place  on  transj)orts,  leaving,  however,  one  division  at  Selma. 

The  campaign  may  be  said  to  have  occupied  twenty-two 
days.^  The  result  has  been  seen.  The  number  of  prisoners 
accounted  for  by  Canby's  provost-marshal  general  was  four 
thousand  nine  hundi'ed  and  twenty-four.  His  own  loss  in 
killed  and  wounded  was  fifteen  hundred. 

^  Strength  of  Canbv's  army  in  the  field : 

Two  dh-isions,  and  one  hrigade  of  Thirteenth  corps,       .  13,200 

Sixteenth  corps, 16,000 

Engineers,  artillery,  and  cavalry 3.000 

Total, 32.200 

Column  under  Steele, 13,200 

Grand  total,        , 45,400 


CHAPTER    XXYI. 

ADVENTURES  AND  INCIDENTS. 

The  wheel  of  fortune  does  not  always  withhold  its  honors 
from  those  who,  at  obscure  posts,  are  constant  and  faithful. 

During  the  siege  of  Spanish  fort,  tlie  base  of  supphes  for  the 
army  was  at  Stark's  landing.  The  commanding  officer  at  a 
base,  every  one  will  admit,  should  be  energetic,  vigilant,  and 
prudent.  Wharves  are  to  be  built — labor  day  and  night  to  be 
performed — ordnance  and  ammunition  are  to  be  received — 
vessels  laden  with  provisions  and  forage  are  to  arrive  and 
be  promptly  discharged — sick  and  wounded  soldiers  are  to 
be  put  aboard  vessels  and  sent  off.  Industry,  good  order, 
humanity,  should  prevail.  The  quartermaster  and  commissary 
have  much  responsibility,  but  the  military  commander  present 
is  also  responsible  that  everything  goes  right. 

The  officer  in  command  at  Stark's  landing,  also  in  command 
of  the  engineers,  was  Gen.  Bailey,  well-known  for  distinguished 
service  in  building  a  dam  on  Red  river.  "While  the  inspiring 
scenes  of  battle  had  been  occurring  some  distance  off,  yet  in  his 
hearing,  he  had  been  performing  the  duties  of  a  more  secluded 
position. 

On  the  9th  of  April,  Gen.  Canby  being  at  Blakely,  and 
anxious  to  get  transports  up  to  Spanish  fort,  inquired,  through 
Gen.  Osterhaus,  chief  of  staff,  by  telegraph,  of  Bailey,  if  he 
could  find  some  courageous  captain,  who  would  move  uj)  and 
try  the  channel  ? 

Gen.  Bailey  replied,  that  he  would  try  to  find  a  captain  of  a 


'234  CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE. 

vessel  who  woiild  go  ;  Init,  tliat  failing  to  find  one,  he  would  go 
himself.  Not  long  afterward  he  telegraphed  again  to  Gen. 
Canby's  headquarters,  that  the  Mustang  had  come  in,  and  that 
he  would  go  up  ou  her  as  soon  as  her  freight  was  dischai'ged, 
whieh  was  heing  rapidiv  done  ;  and  inqnu-ed  whether  it  would 
be  better  to  go  that  evening  or  wait  till  morning.  An  answer 
promptly  came,  to  wait  till  morning  ;  and  that  the  commanding 
general  felt  much  regret  that  he  had  determined  to  go  himself 
on  so  perilous  an  adventure. 

On  the  morning  of  the  10th,  Gen.  Bailey,  with  his  staff,  Maj. 
G.  Pien,  Foiu-th  "VTisconsin  cavah-v,  Capt.  J.  H.  Meredith, 
Lieuts.  Xolan,  Hill,  -Martin,  and  Biu'dick,  embarked  on  the 
Mustang.  She  was  a  steamer  which  had  formerly  ran  on  the 
Rio  Grande,  but  was  now  about  worn  out. 

Ha-s-ing  got  into  the  channel,  she  soon  passed  the  admiral's 
flag-ship,  then,  farther  on,  the  monitors,  and  neai"  them  the 
three  siuiken  ii'onclads,  theii-  hulls  now  just  above  the  water. 
Some  hundred  yards  more  brought  her  to  the  fii-st  torpedo  net. 
Her  wheels  stopped,  and  she  glided  over  it.  Half  a  mile 
farther  they  reached  the  Octorara,  the  advance  gunboat,  and 
thei-e  anchored.  G^n.  Bailey,  with  some  of  his  staff,  and  the 
captain  of  the  Mustang,  went  aboard  the  Octorara,  and  pro- 
ciued  information  concerning  the  channel.  He  also  learned 
the  progress  that  had  been  made  in  taking  up  torpedoes  :  and 
that  there  was  scarcely  any  danger  in  a  hght-di'aft  boat,  like 
the  MnstanEC  (drawing  only  two  and  a  half  feet"*  soins:  to 
Spanish  fort  landing  ;  as  boats  and  tugs  of  the  squadron,  draw- 
ing about  as  much,  had  been  above  there.  He  also  learned 
that  he  would,  in  all  probability,  draw  the  fii'e  of  Fort  Huger. 
The  Mustang  then  steamed  on  up  the  river,  and  soon  passed 
over  the  second  net,  fi-om  which  several  torpedoes  had  been 
taken  the  night  before.  After  passing  this,  they  had  some 
cause  to  apprehend  danger  fi-om  floating  torpedoes.    But  thdr 


CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE.  235 

boats  were  ready  to  launch  in  case  of  accident.  Finally,  thev 
readied  the  landing  at  Spanish  fort  in  safety. 

On  going  ashore,  Gen.  Bailey  proceeded  to  the  quarters  ol 
Col.  Bertram  ;  and  had  been  there  but  a  few  minutes,  when  a 
signal-officer  came  in  and  informed  him  that  the  commander  at 
Tracy  had  ordered  every  gun  of  Huger  to  be  "  brought  to  bear 
on  that  steamer,  and,  for  G-d's  sake,  to  sink  her."  At  this 
announcement,  Gen.  Bailey,  and  staff,  hastened  on  board,  to 
put  back  to  Stark's  landing.  But  the  Mustang  was  slow  in 
turning,  and  getting  into  the  channel,  and  shot  and  shell  were 
all  the  whUe  coming  from  Huger.  Forty-one  were  fired  at  the 
Mustang,  a  few  striking  her,  but  they  caused  no  serious  injury, 
though  an  explosion  of  one  of  the  shells  disagreeably  be- 
sprinkled some  of  the  party  with  earth  and  sand. 

She  got  back  safely  to  Stark's  landing,  having  been  gone  four 
hours,  and  Bailey  reported  the  result  of  his  trip.  The  com- 
manding general  telegraphed  the  following  reply  :  "  Your  inter- 
esting report  of  the  expedition  to  Spanish  fort  is  received  ;  and 
the  promptness  and  signal  bravery  displayed  by  you  are  highly 
appreciated." 

Incidents  of  the  Siege. — Reckless  exposure  of  hfe  in  a  siege 
commands  no  part  of  that  applause  which  is  earned  by  daring 
in  its  true  sense.  Yet,  hght  censure  will  be  cast  on  such  exam- 
ples, considering  the  tendency  for  men  to  grow  timid  by  long 
continued  service  in  trenches. 

The  daily  history  of  every  regiment  in  the  siege  would  doubt- 
less exhibit  individual  acts  of  gallantry,  and  even  of  rashness, 
on  the  part  of  the  enlisted  men. 

On  the  second  day  of  the  siege,  Company  D,  Seventh  Minne- 
sota, was  on  the  sku-mish-line  in  McArthur's  front,  and  had 
approached,  under  cover  of  logs  and  stumps,  to  within  about 
three  hundred  and  fifty  yards  of  the  garrison's  main  hue  of 
works.     Sergeants  Vidito  and  Canfield,  and  Private  Leighton, 


236  CAMPAIGN     or     MOBILE, 

were  fartliest  advanced,  and  in  short  mnsket-range  of  tlie  con- 
federates. They  were  each  six  foot  high,  and  when  thev  fii-ed, 
wouki  rise  fi-om  behind  a  log,  stand  dehberatelv,  and  aim,  dis- 
charge their  muskets,  and  watch  to  see  the  effect.  It  was  only 
after  repeated  commands  fi'om  theii"  captain  that  they  became 
more  cautions. 

The  consequence  of  unnecessarT  exposiu'e  was  more  apt  to  be 
like  what  occuiTed  in  the  followuig  case  :  On  the  oth  of  April,  a 
man  of  the  Thii'ty-lifth  "Wisconsin  persisted  in  standing  on  the 
bank  in  rear  of  the  sunken  battery  of  the  Sixth  ]Michigan.  On 
being  told  by  one  of  the  men  that  he  would  be  hit,  replied : 
"  The  ball  isn't  moulded  yet  that  would  hit  me."  Scarcely  had 
the  words  been  uttered  when  he  received  a  ball  thi'ough  his 
right  elbow  ;  a  womid  that  lost  the  poor  fellow  his  arm. 

TThen  the  annals  of  wai*  are  tnily  written,  painful  blundei"S  are 
often  disclosed,  which  repress  the  exultation  of  "sictoiy. 

The  night  Spanish  fort  was  being  evacuated,  two  federal 
soldiers,  who  had  been  for  some  time  held  as  prisoner's  at  Fort 
Tracy,  managed,  amid  the  darkness  and  confusion,  to  make 
their  escape  in  a  skiff'.  Eeaching  the  main  land,  they  moved 
cautiously  alona;  the  shore  :  but  some  of  the  federals  ha  vine; 
followed  down  after  the  retreating  garrison,  heai'd  the  nistling 
of  the  bushes,  and  thinking  it  was  some  straggling  confederates, 
challenged  them  to  sm-render.  Presuming  the  demand  came 
from  confederates,  the  fugitives  made  no  answer,  whereupon 
they  were  fii-ed  on,  and  one  of  them  was  instantly  killed.  The 
other  cried  for  quarter,  and  soon  found  himself  among  fiiends. 
The  body  of  liis  dead  comrade  was  secured  and  buried  with 
funeral  honors. 

So,  during  the  siege,  each  side  lost  a  few  killed  by  the 
accidents  or  mistakes  of  its  own  firing. 

The  night  before  the  linal  bombardment,  Capt.  Gaiiity  and 
a  man  of  his  battery  made  their  way  up  to  where  the  federals, 


CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE.  237 

in  McArthur's  front,  were  digging  an  approach,  and  so  close 
that  some  of  the  dirt  was  thrown  upon  them.  Garrity  listened 
to  the  talk  of  the  men,  and  heard  them  say,  "  We'll  give  the 
rebels to-morrow." 

One  night,  in  the  same  division  front,  some  confederates 
came  out  to  reUeve  the  sharpshooters,  and  the  federals  gave 
them  a  volley  that  quite  disconcerted  them,  and  drove  the 
most  of  them  back  into  the  main  works.  In  the  excitement, 
one  of  their  number,  a  son  of  Erin,  ran  up  to  one  of  the  federal 
pits,  and  stooping  down,  anxiously  inquired,  "  Is  this  No.  3  ?" 
"  Yes  ;  jump  down  quick  !"  was  the  answer.  Down  he  jumped, 
a  prisoner. 

One  night,  the  Eighth  Wisconsin  skirmishers  captured  a 
small  confederate  post  of  three  men,  one  of  whom  was  an 
Irishman.  He  was  asked  if  the  confederates  had  any  torpedoes 
in  their  front,  and  rej)lied,  "  I  trod  light  when  I  came  out." 

Sometimes  the  firing  between  the  federal  and  confederate 
sharpshooters  would  cease,  and  there  would  be  some  conver- 
sation between  them.  It  was,  however,  specially  prohibited, 
on  tlie  part  of  the  latter,  by  the  garrison  commander ;  yet  the 
men  were  instructed  by  every  means  practicable  to  exaggerate 
the  numbers  of  the  garrison. 

Conversation,  when  it  occurred,  was  generally  jocular  and 
sarcastic  in  its  character,  and  often  partook  of  criticism  of  the 
artillery.  When  a  federal  addressed  a  confederate,  he  called 
out,  "Holloa,  Johnny."  The  confederate  answered,  "Holloa, 
Yank."  One  day,  in  front  of  McDermett,  a  federal  soldier  had 
called  out  to  the  confederates  several  times,  but  got  no  answer. 
Finally,  in  good  earnest,  he  asked  why  they  so  refused  to 
answer.  The  confederate  rephed,  "Because  you  all  insult  us 
so  when  we  talk  with  you." 

Soldiers  are  proverbial  for  their  wit  and  good  humor,  and  the 
confederates  were  no  exception  to  the  rule.     They  used  to  say, 


238  CAMPAIGN     OF     kOBILE. 

"Jeff.  Davis  will  have  to  rent  a  piece  of  land  to  fight  the  war  out 
on."  They  often  declared,  "We  are  fighting  for  our  rights  in  the 
territories  under  the  Dred  Scott  decision." 

In  Spanish  fort  the  artillerists  named  their  heavy  guns  in 
honor  of  the  ladies  of  their  officers,  with  the  name  in  large  capi- 
tals placarded  on  the  gun  as  "  The  Lady  Gibson,"  "  The  Lady 
Slocum,"  "  The  Lady  Maury,"  &c.,  &c.  The  gunners  spoke  of 
them  by  these  names  instead  of  No.  1,  2,  &c.,  and  were  always 
exceedingly  pohte  and  comphmentary  to  them.  They  also 
named  the  federal  guns,  but  called  them  "  Anna  Maria,"  "  Sarah 
Jane,"  "Elizabeth  Ann,"  &c.,  &c.  And  when  a  federal  gun 
fired,  the  sentinel  would  say,  "  Look  out,  boys,  Anna  Maria  is 
going  to  speak."  It  would  pass  down  the  line,  and  all  knew  in 
advance  the  direction  the  shot  would  come,  and  get  shelter. 
Then  when  one  of  their  guns  was  to  be  fired,  they  would  say, 
"  Ah,  my  lads !  Look  out  now  for  the  Lady  Slocum ;  when  she 
speaks  the  Yanks  must  hush  up  and  hide." 

The  effect  of  some  of  the  shells  was  fearful.  One  day  a  fede- 
ral mortar  shell  fell  inside  the  garrison  works,  plunged  through 
seven  feet  of  earth  and  logs,  and  killed  four  men  and  wounded 
three,  all  of  whom  were  asleep.  One  of  the  men  was  thrown  up 
twenty  feet  into  the  air  and  came  down  dead,  of  course,  for 
every  bone  in  him  was  broken ;  but  he  was  not  at  all  torn. 


CHAPTER    XXVII. 

FURTHER  OPERATIONS  OF  LUCAS'  CAVALRY— COMBAT  OF  MOUNT 

PLEASANT. 

On  the  morning  of  April  5,  Gen.  Lucas  moved  out  from 
near  Blakely  witli  all  of  his  command,  except  the  Thirty-first 
Massachusetts  mounted  infantry,  taking  ten  days'  half  rations, 
and  all  the  forage  the  men  could  carry,  to  occupy  Claiborne,  on- 
the  Alabama  river.  The  same  night  he  camped  at  Stockton, 
and  the  next  morning  continued  his  march.  On  the  fore- 
noon of  the  7th,  while  halting  to  feed,  a  fr*eedman  came  to 
him,  on  his  way  from  Gen.  Wilson,  bearing  despatches  from  that 
officer  to  Gen.  Canby.  He  had  come  down  the  river,  ha^'ing 
passed  through  more  than  one  confederate  camp,  but  had  eluded 
detection.  The  papers  were  carefully  sewed  up  in  the  collar  of 
his  vest.  Gen.  Lucas  furnished  the  faithful  man  a  mule  to  ride,, 
and  sent  him  on  to  Gen.  Canby,  with  a  guard,  under  a  sergeant. 

Combat  of  Mount  Pleasant. — From  the  same  bearer  of  des- 
patches, Lucas  learned  that  a  force  had  recently  come  up  from 
Mobile  and  occupied  Claiborne  ;  and  he  resolved  to  capture  it. 
With  that  view,  he  marched  till  a  late  hour  in  the  night.  Start- 
ing at  daylight  the  next  morning,  April  8th,  some  delay  was 
soon  after  experienced  in  repairing  a  bridge  so  as  to  cross  his 
artillery.  At  Mount  Pleasant,  Maj.  Ives,  with  a  battalion  of  the 
First  Louisiana  cavafry,  had  dispersed  a  detachment  of  militia. 
The  column  halted  an  hour  at  that  place  to  feed,  and  on  resum- 
ing the  march,  Maj.  Ives  kept  a  quarter  of  a  mile  in  advance. 
In  course  of  an  hour,  while  marching  along  in  the  wood,  where 


240  caxpaictX    of    ^roBiLE. 

the  ground  was  swampv.  Lis  battalion  Tras  met  nnexpectedlT  br 
a  sharp  volleT  of  miisketrr,  proceeding  from  a  force  drawn  up  in 
line  of  battle,  but  nearly  concealed,  on  the  farther  side  of  a 
piece  of  low  ground.  The  suddenness  of  the  attack  checked 
the  advance,  and,  for  a  moment,  threw  it  into  confusion ;  but 
order  was  soom  restored,  and  Maj.  lyes  deployed  his  small  force, 
answered  the  fire,  yet  had  to  fall  back,  though  slowly.  Lucas 
beino-  near  at  hand,  ordered  the  remainder  of  the  Fh-st  Louisi- 
ana,  under  Lieut.-Col.  Badger,  forward  at  the  gallop,  and  the 
rest  of  the  cohmin  to  follow  at  a  trot.  The  First  Louisiana, 
haying  deployed,  made  a  gallant  charge  on  the  attacking  force. 
The  latter  consisted 'of  the  Fifteenth  confederate  cayalry.  It 
was  well  posted;  but  the  charge  was  so  spirited  and  well 
supported  that  they  made  but  brief  resistance,  and  then  gaye 
way.  Lucas  pursued  with  yigor  for  two  miles,  capturing  two 
battle-flags,  three  commissioned  officers,  and  sixty  men,  with 
many  horses  and  anns.  The  yictory  would  haye  been  more 
complete  but  for  the  miry  nature  of  the  ground.  The  loss  in 
Lucas'  command  was  confined  to  the  First  Louisiana,  and  con- 
sisted of  two  men  killed,  and  one  commissioned  officer  (Lieut. 
Boyle'i  and  four  men  wounded.  The  casualties  of  the  Fifteenth 
confederate  were  reported  to  be  greater.  That  regiment  retired 
north,  moying  rapidly  through  Claiborne.  Lucas  reached 
that  place  at  eleyen,  p.  ii.,  and  went  into  camp.  "While  there, 
his  scouts  captured  several  more  prisoners,  some  of  whom 
were  officers  or  agents  of  importance,  and  by  the  18th,  the 
whole  number  in  his  possession  was  one  hundred  and  fifty. 
On  that  eiay,  pursuant  to  orders  from  Gen.  Canby,  he  marched 
for  Blakely. 


CHAPTER    XXVIII. 

OPERATIONS  OF  WILSON'S  CAVALRY  IN  ALABAMA. 

While  Canby  was  moving  upon  Mobile,  Thomas  caused  a 
diversion  to  be  made  in  his  favor  by  a  column  of  cavalry 
under  Brevet  Maj.-Gen.  J.  H.  Wilson.  But  the  operations  of 
that  column  included  results  beyond  those  of  a  co-operative 
character ;  and  they  have  hardly  ever  been  surpassed,  even 
by  the  achievements  of  Alexander. 

The  condition  and  purposes  of  the  confederates  in  Central 
Alabama  show  that  the  flank  and  rear  of  Canby's  army 
would  have  been  much  harassed  but  for  Wilson's  movement. 
Lieut.-Gen.  Taylor,  commanding  the  department  of  Alabama, 
Mississippi,  and  East  Louisiana,  in  some  respects,  it  is  true, 
was  in  straitened  circumstances.  He  could  no  longer  procure 
materials  nor  transportation  on  credit,  and  was  dependent  on  the 
funds  derived  from  the  produce  loan,  cotton  being  the  maia 
article.  There  were  many  deserters  from  his  forces  ;'  and  soon 
after  the  fall  of  Mobile  and  Selma,  he  would  have  accej)ted 
colored  troops  but  for  a  lack  of  arms.-    Nevertheless,  there  was 

1  Gapt.  Surget  [A.  A.  G.),  to  Gen.  Hodges,  March  16. — ^Calls  his  attention  to 
the  large  number  of  deserters  and  absentees,  and  adds:  "Employ  the  Texas 
and  Arkansas  troops  in  vigorously  hunting  down  all  those  who  fail  to  comijly 
with  the  provisions  of  those  orders.  Some  cases  of  shooting  would  have  a 
beneficial  effect." 

2  April  15, 1865. — Mr.  Wm.  Lyon,  of  Deraopolis,  Ala.,  who,  on  behalf  of 
citizens  of  Marengo  and  adjoining  counties,  tenders  the  miUtary  services  of 
negroes,  is  informed  that,  although  Lieut.-Gen.  Taylor  has  no  instructions  from 
Richmond  on  the  subject,  he  would  accept  the  services  of  negro  troops  if  he 

16 


242  CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE. 

a  respectable  force  ready  for  service  in  the  field.  And  Taylor 
entertained  a  hope  that  he  would  be  able  to  defeat  the  federal 
columns  in  detail.^  Forrest,  having  command  of  the  cavalry, 
was  at  West  Point,  Mississippi.  On  the  23d  of  March,  Taylor 
ordered  troops  to  Greenville  to  resist  Steele,  who  was  then 
thought  to  be  moving  on  Montgomery,  ^  His  veteran  battalions 
were  directing  their  steps  southeastwardly,  when  the  rattling  of 
Wilson's  sabres  was  heard  from  the  north.  ^  Then  they  paused, 
and  soon  wheeled  about.  Taylor  hoped  he  would  be  able  to 
overpower  this  unexpected  column ;  and  he  promised  Maury 
that  when  he  had  accomplished  that  purpose  he  would  go  to  his 
assistance.* 

had  arms  for  them.  The  assistant  adjutant-general  requests  Mr.  Lyon  to  ascer- 
tain the  number  that  can  be  had. 

1  LieuL-Gen.  Taylor  to  Gen.  R.  E  Lee:  ^^  Meridian,  March  27 His 

[enemy's]  cavahy,  from  Florida  coast,  has  struck  Montgomerj^  railroad  at 
Evergreen.  A  raid  advancing  from  North,  and  another  from  northeast  Ala- 
bama, toward  Selma  and  Montgomery.  Another  threatening  Prairie  region 
from  Memphis.  My  intention  is  to  meet  and  whip  these  detached  columns 
before  they  can  advance  far  into  the  country  or  unite  with  each  other." 

2  Gapt.  8urget  to  Gen.  D.  W.  Adams,  Selma  or  Montevallo :  "  March  23. — 
Armistead  reports  enemy  moving.  Direct  Gen.  Bufo'rd  to  move  at  once  for 
Greenville  via  Selma,  or  point  where  pontoon  is.  Assist  the  movement  by 
sending  baggage  by  rail  and  steamboat.  Forrest  wiU  send  other  troops  to  con- 
centrate at  same  point.  Communicate  with  Armistead  and  dispose  troops  as 
movements  of  enemy  may  render  advisable.  Push  forward  completion  of  the 
pontoon  near  Selma." 

Gapt.  Surgdj  to  Gen.  D.  W.  Adams :  "  March  25. — Greenville  is  the  point 
toward  which  all  troops  be  pushed  rapidly  as  possible." 

Same  to  Same. — "  Chalmers'  and  Jackson's  divisions  are  ordered  via  Finche's 
ferry  to  Selma." 

Taylor  to  Gen.  B.  W.  Adams,  Montevallo :  "  West  Point,  Miss.,  March  25. — 
Troops  are  being  pushed  forward  to  Selma  to  meet  raid  from  below.  Use 
every  exertion  to  prevent  them  cutting  road  to  Pollard  and  Columbus." 

3  Taylor  to  Forrest:  "March  27. — Gens.  Adams  and  Roddy  are  still  of 
opinion  that  it  is  a  large  and  well-equipped  cavahy  force  moving  from 
above." 

*  To  Gen.  Maury :  ''  Ma7'ch  28. — The  Lieutenant-General  hopes  in  three  or 
four  days  to  whip  the  large  raid  moving  from  north,  and  then  will  be  in  con- 
dition to  assist  you." 


CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE.  243 

Organization  of  Wilson's  Cavalry. — For  several  weeks  pre- 
vious to  tlie  campaign,  the  cavalry  corps  of  the  military  division 
of  the  Mississippi,  numbering  twenty-two  thousand,  had  been  in 
camp  on  the  north  bank  of  the  Tennessee,  at  Gravelly  Springs 
and  Waterloo.  The  surface  of  the  country  is  there  rolling  ;  the 
soil  rocky.  The  men  had  comfortable  quarters,  the  horses  good 
shelter,  and  supphes  were  furnished  in  abundance.  The  fault 
in  the  cavahy  system  had  previously  been  overwork  in  detach- 
ments, a,nd  the  absence  of  instruction  and  uniformity  of  equip- 
ment. Gen.  Wilson  instituted  a  thorough  system  of  instruction, 
and  every  necessary  effort  was  made  to  bring  the  corps  to  the 
highest  possible  state  of  efficiency.  The  troops  were  drilled  in 
the  double-rank  formation.  Wilson  discovers  the  true  genius  of 
a  soldier  when  he  says  that  the  future  victories  of  the  corps 
were  "  won  by  patient  industry  and  instruction  while  in  the  can- 
tonments of  GraveUy  Springs  and  Waterloo." 

Early  in  February,  Knipe's  division,  numbering  five  thousand, 
was  sent  round  by  water  to  Cauby,  leaving  under  Wilson's 
immediate  command  seventeen  thousand  men,  requiring  about 
five  thousand  horses  for  a  complete  remount.  The  lack  of  horses 
compelled  him,  reluctantly,  to  leave  Hatch's  division  at  East- 
port,  and  the  divisions  assigned  for  the  march,  were  the  Firstj 
Second,  and  Fourth,  commanded,  respectively,  by  McCook,  Long, 
and  Upton  ;  comprising,  in  all,  a  little  over  twelve  thousand 
mounted  men.  The  dismounted  men  of  the  three  divisions, 
numbering  fifteen  hundred,  were  designated  as  escort  for  the 
supply  train  ;  were  organized  into  battahons,  and  commanded 
by  Maj.  Archer. 

The  division  commanders  were  directed  to  see  that  every 
trooper  was  provided  with  five  days'  light  rations  in  haversacks, 
twenty-four  pounds  of  grain,  one  hundred  rounds  of  ammuni- 
tion, and  one  pair  of  extra  horseshoes  for  his  horse  ;  that  the 
pack-animals  were  loaded  with  five  days'  rations  of  hard-bread, 


244  CAMPAIGN     OF    MOBILE. 

ten  of  sugar,  coffee,  and  salt ;  and  the  wagons  with  forty-five 
days'  rations  of  coffee,  twenty  of  sugar,  fifteen  of  salt,  and 
eighty  rounds  of  ammunition.  This  allowance  was  prescribed 
on  the  basis  of  a  sixty  days'  campaign,  and  under  the  supposi- 
tion that  the  command  would  be  able  to  supply  itself  from  the 
country  through  which  it  marched,  with  everything  else  in 
abundance.  Only  enough  hard-bread  was  taken  to  last  through 
the  sterile  region  of  North  Alabama. 

The.  supply  and  baggage  train  numbered  about  two  hundred 
and  fifty  wagons,  and  was  under  the  charge  of  Captain,  W.  E. 
Brown,  acting  chief  quartermaster. 

In  addition,  there  was  a  light  canvas  pontoon  train  of  thirty 
boats,  transported  by  fifty  six-mule  wagons,  and  in  charge  of  a 
battalion  of  the  Twelfth  Missouri  cavalry,  Maj.  J.  M.  Hubbard 
commanding.  ^ 

Wilson's  instructions  from  Lieut.-Gen.  Grant,  allowed  him  the 
amplest  discretion,  as  an  independent  commander. 

The  March. — As  the  rains  had  retarded  Canby's  columns,  so 
the  overflow  of  the  Tennessee  delayed  Wilson  ;  and  it  turned 
out  that  there  was  a  happy  concurrence  in  their  movements. 
Wilson  commenced  crossing  the  Tennessee  on  the  18th  of 
March ;  and  at  daylight  of  the  22d,  the  order  of  march  having 
been  designated,  the  movement  began  from  Chickasaw.  The 
scanty  condition  of  the  country,  and  the  purpose  of  creating 
doubt  in  the  mind  of  the  enemy  as  to  the  real  object  of  the 
column,  rendered  it  prudent  that  it  should  move  on  diverging 
routes. 

Upton's  division,  followed  by  his  train,  marched  rapidly  by 
the  most  easterly  route,  passing  Barton's  station,  EusselviUe, 


1  Here,  and  in  many  of  the  following  pages,  I  borrow  largely  from  the 
report  of  Brevet  Maj.-Gen.  J.  H.  "Wilson,  dated  Macon,  Georgia,  June  29, 
1865. 


CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE.  245 

Mount  Hope,  and  Jasper,  to  Sanders'  ferry,  on  ttie  west  fork  ot 
the  Black  Warrior  river. 

Long's  division  marched  by  the  way  of  Cherokee  station  and 
Frankfort ;  but  being  encumbered  by  the  pontoon  train,  and 
having  mistaken  the  road  by  which  it  should  have  ascended 
the  mountain,  was  considerably  delayed  in  reaching  E-usselville. 
Thence  it  marched  south,  by  the  Tuscaloosa  road,  till  it  crossed 
Upper  Bear  creek  ;  then  turned  to  the  eastward,  by  the  head  of 
Buttahatchie  creek,  crossed  Byler's  road  near  Thorn  hill,  and 
struck  Blackwater  creek  about  twenty-five  miles  from  Jasper, 
The  crossing  of  the  last-mentioned  stream,  and  the  road  for  six 
miles  beyond,  were  as  bad  as  could  be,  but,  by  industry,  every- 
thing was  got  through  to  Jasper,  and  the  ford  on  the  Warrior, 
with  but  httle  loss  of  time. 

McCook's  division  pursued  the  same  route  to  Bear  creek  on 
the  Tuscaloosa  road,  but  instead  of  turning  to  the  eastward 
at  that  place,  continued  the  march  toward  Tuscaloosa  as  far 
as  Eldridge,  and  thence  east  to  Jasper. 

In  this  order  the  whole  command  arrived  at  and  crossed  the 
Black  Warrior  river. 

The  ford  on  the  west  branch  was  extremely  difficult  of 
approach  as  well  as  of  passage.  The  country  on  both  sides, 
very  rugged  and  six  or  seven  hundred  feet  above  the  bed  of 
the  stream,  was  entirely  destitute  of  forage  ;  the  stream  itself 
was  at  the  time  hkely  to  become  entirely  impassable  by  the  rain 
which  threatened  to  occur  at  any  moment.  Wilson,  therefore, 
having  heard  at  Jasper,  on  the  27th,  that  a  part  of  Forrest's 
force  imder  Chalmers,  was  marching  by  way  of  Bridgeville 
toward  Tuscaloosa,  and  apprehending  that  the  balance  of  For- 
rest's force  might  be  sent  in  the  same  direction,  directed  his 
division  commanders  to  replenish  the  haversack,  to  see  that 
the  pack  animals  were  fully  laden,  to  leave  all  the  wagons, 
except  the   artillery,   and    march  vdth    the    greatest    possible 


246  CAMPAiax    OF   mobile. 


1 


rapidity,  Wa  Eljtoii  to  MouteTallo.  He  felt  conlideut  tlie 
enemy  would  endeavor  to  cheek  Ms  movement  -witli  tlie  hope 
of  desti\mug  the  siipplv  ti-ain.  So  he  left  it  between  the  two 
streams,  with  instructions  to  have  it  pushed  on  as  far  as  Elyton, 
where  it  would  receive  fiu'ther  orders.  In  crossing  the  two 
branches  of  the  TTai'rior  each  division  lost  a  few  horses,  but 
no  men. 

TVhile  at  Elyton,  on  the  evening  of  the  30th,  "Wilson  directed 
McCook  to  detach  Croxton's  brigade,  with  orders  to  move  on 
Tuscaloosa  as  rapidly  as  possible,  burn  the  public  stores,  mili- 
tary college,  bridges,  foundries,  and  factories  there,  return 
toward  the  main  column  by  the  way  of  Centerville  road, 
and  rejoin  it  at  or  in  the  vicinity  of  Sehna.  Besides  covering 
the  trains  and  inflicting  a  heavy  blow  on  the  enemy,  Wilson 
hoped  by  that  detachment  to  develop  any  movement  intended 
to  intercept  his  main  column.  The  achievements  and  hazards 
of  Croxtons  brigade  will  be  related  hereafter. 

On  the  28th,  Forrest  was  moviag  fi-om  TTest  Point  via  Finche's 
ferry  ;  and  the  same  day  he  learned  that  Lren,  Dan.  Adams' 
scouts  from  Montevallo  reported  the  federals  moving  on  Tusca- 
loosa witli  a  force  estimated  at  five  thousand.  On  that  day, 
also,  he  was  informed  that  Gen.  Adams  reported  that  three 
divisions  under  TTilson  camped  at  Jasper  the  night  of  the 
26th,  and  that  their  destination  was  Elyton  and  Montevallo. 
On  the  2Stli,  the  Kentucky  brigade  was  put  in  motion  to  strike 
tlie  federal  rear  from  Tuscaloosa.  On  the  29th,  ordei-s  were 
again  sent  to  Gen.  TV.  L.  Brandon  to  send  twenty-five  himdred 
Mississippi  reserves  from  Scooba  to  "West  Point. 

Sl'irmishe-s  near  Montevalio. — Gen.  ITpton's  division  in  the 
advance  encountered  a  small  mounted  force  at  Elyton,  but 
pushed  it  rapidly  across  the  Cahawba  to  Montevalio.  The 
enemy  having  felled  trees  into  the  ford  and  otherwise  obstructed 
it,  the  railroad  brid^ce  near  Hillsborougli  was  floored  over  bv 


CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE.  247 

Gen.  E.  F.  Winslow's  brigade.  Upton  crossed  his  division  and 
pushed  on  to  Montevallo,  where  he  arrived  late  in  the  evening 
of  the  30th.  Winslow's  brigade  had  a  slight  skirmish  just 
before  entering  Montevallo,  which  was  participated  in  by  three 
companies  of  the  Fourth  Iowa,  under  Maj.  W.  W.  Woods,  and 
one  man  of  the  Fourth  Iowa  was  slightly  wounded.  Long  and 
McCook  marched  by  the  same  route.  In  that  region  Uj[)ton's 
division  destroyed  the  Ked  Mountain,  Central,  Bibb,  and  Co- 
lumbiana iron-works,  Cahawba  rolling  miUs,  five  collieries,  and 
much  valuable  property;  all  of  which  were  m  fuU  operation. 
Wilson  arrived  at  Montevallo,  on  the  afternoon  of  March  31, 
where  he  found  Upton's  division  ready  to  resume  the  march. 
Directly  after,  the  confederates  made  their  appearance  on  the 
Selma  road,  pushing  in  the  federal  pickets.  By  Gen.  Wilson's 
direction,  Upton  moved  his  division  out  at  once,  Gen.  A.  J. 
Alexander's  brigade  being  in  advance.  After  a  sliai*p  fight  and 
handsome  charge,  by  the  Fifth  Iowa  cavalry,  Col.  J.  M.  Yomig 
commanding,  Alexander's  brigade  drove  the  confederate  cavalry, 
a  part  of  Crossland's  Kentucky  brigade,  and  Roddy's  division, 
rapidly  and  in  confusion  toward  Randolph.  On  their  seeking 
to  make  a  stand  at  Six-Mile  creek,  south  of  Montevallo,  Upton 
caused  Rodney's  battery  (I,  Fourth  United  States  artillery)  to 
take  position  and  open  fire,  and  pushed  Winslow's  brigade  to 
the  front.  The  Tenth  Missouri  cavahy,  Lieut.  Col.  F.  W.  Ben- 
teen  commanding,  dismounted  and  forced  the  confederates  from 
their  position,  the  Tenth  suffering  a  loss  of  two  men  woimded. 
While  that  regiment  was  moimtiag,  the  Third  Iowa  cavahy.  Col. 
J.  W.  Noble  commanding,  took  the  advance  and  charged  the 
confederates  with  one  company  at  a  time  on  the  road  when 
their  column  was  in  retreat.  A  portion  of  the  confederates 
being  separated  from  their  main  force,  Capt.  Johnson,  of  the 
Third,  ■v\'ith  two  companies,  was  sent  to  the  right  and  charging 
with  vigor  and  gallantry,  captured  a  number.     On  the   main 


248  CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE. 

road,  the  confederates  were  driveii  to  Eandolpli,  leaving  many 
animals  and  men  along  the  road.  Winslow's  brigade  took 
seventj-five  prisoners.  The  Thii-d  Iowa  behaved  with  its 
habitual  gall?.ntrj.  It  was  led  by  Col.  Noble,  whose  adjutant 
lost  his  horse  in  the  first  charge.  Meantime,  the  enemy  being 
familiar  with  the  ground  attacked  the  rear  and  right  of  Wins- 
low's  brigade,  when  Lieut.-Col.  Peters,  commanding  the  Fourth 
Iowa,  dismounted  seven  companies  of  that  regiment,  charged 
the  enemy,  driving  him  about  two  miles,  killing  and  wounding 
several  and  capturing  two.  The  loss  of  the  Fourth  was  three 
severely,  and  two  shghtly  wounded.  The  gallantry  of  men  and 
officers  had  been  conspicuous  thi'oughout  the  day,  and  much 
increased  the  moral  supremacy  of  the  corps. 

Upton's  division  bivouacked  that  night  fourteen  miles  south 
of  Montevallo,  and  at  dawn  the  next  day,  April  1,  moved  forward 
to  Randolph.  At  that  point,  in  pursuance  of  the  order  of  march 
for  the  day.  Gen.  Upton  turned  to  the  east,  for  the  purpose 
of  going  by  the  way  of  Old  Maplesville,  and  thence  by  the  Old 
Selma  road,  while  Gen.  Long  was  instracted  to  push  forward 
on  the  new  road. 

Cajjture  of  Despatches. — At  Randolph,  Upton's  scouts  cap- 
tured a  confederate  courier  just  from  Centreville,  from  whose 
person  were  taken  two  despatches,  one  from  Brig.-Gen.  "W.  H. 
Jackson,  commanding  one  of  Forrest's  divisions,  and  one  from 
Major  Anderson,  Forrest's  chief  of  staff.  From  the  first  "Wil- 
son learned  that  Forrest,  with  a  part  of  his  command,  was  in  his 
front — which  had  also  been  learned  from  prisoners — that  Jack- 
son with  his  division,  and  all  the  wagons  and  artiheiy  of  the 
confederate  cavahy,  marching  from  Tuscaloosa,  via  Trion 
toward  Centreville,  had  encamped  the  night  before  at  Hill's 
plantation,  three  miles  beyond  Scottsboro ;  that  Croxton,  with 
the  brigade  detached  at  Elyton,  had  struck  Jackson's  rear 
guard  at  Trion  and  interposed  himself  between  it  and  the  train ; 


CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE.  249 

tliat  Jackson  had  discovered  this,  and  intended  to  attack  Crox- 
ton  at  daylight,  April  1.  He  learned  from  the  other  despatch 
that  Chalmers  had  also  arrived  at  Marion,  Alabama,  and  had 
been  ordered  to  cross  to  the  east  side  of  the  Cahawba,  near 
that  place,  for  the  purpose  of  joinmg  Forrest  in  "Wilson's 
fr-ont,  or  in  the  works  at  Selma.  He  also  learned  that  a  force 
of  dismounted  men  were  stationed  at  Centreville,  with  orders  to 
hold  the  bridge  over  the  Cahawba  as  long  as  possible,  and  in  no 
event  to  let  it  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  federals. 

Shortly  after  the  interception  of  these  despatches  Wilson 
received  a  despatch  fr^om  Croxton,  written  from  Trion,  the  night 
before,  stating  he  had  struck  Jackson's  rear ;  and  instead  of 
pushing  on  toward  Tuscaloosa,  as  he  was  ordered,  he  would 
follow  and  endeavor  to  bring  him  to  an  engagement,  hoping, 
thereby  to  prevent  his  Junction  with  FoiTest. 

Having  this  information,  Wilson  directed  McCook  to  strength- 
en the  battalion  previously  ordered  to  Centreville,  by  a  regiment 
and  to  follow  at  once  with  La  Grange's  entfre  brigade,  leaving 
all  pack-trains  and  wagons  with  the  main  column,  so  that  he 
could  march  with  the  utmost  celerity ;  and  afrer  seizing  the 
Centreville  bridge,  and  leaving  it  under  protection  of  a  sufficient 
guard,  to  cross  the  Cahawba,  and  continue  his  march  by  the 
Scottsville  road  toward  Trion.  His  orders  were  to  attack  and 
break  up  Jackson's  forces,  form  a  junction  with  Croxton,  if 
practicable,  and  rejoin  the  corps,  with  his  entire  division,  by 
the  Centreville-road  to  Selma.  Although  McCook  did  not  leave 
Eandolph  till  near  eleven,  A.  M.,  and  the  distance  to  Scottsville 
was  nearly  forty  miles,  Wilson  hoped,  by  the  movement  to  do 
more  than  secure  the  Centreville  bridge,  and  prevent  Jackson 
fr'om  joining  the  force  in  front  of  the  main  column. 


250  CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE. 


BATTLE  OF  EBENEZER  CHURCH. 


Having  anticipated  Forrest,  in  liis  cliaracteristic  plan  of  get- 
ting upon  tlie  rear  of  his  adversary,  Wilson  directed  Long  and 
Upton  to  allow  him  no  rest,  but  push  him  toward  Selma  with 
the  utmost  rapidity.  Those  officers  comprehended  the  situa- 
tion, and  pressed  forward,  with  zeal  and  activity,  on  the  roads 
that  have  been  indicated.  The  advance  of  both  divisions 
encountered  small  parties  of  confederates,  but  drove  them 
'back  to  their  main  force  at  Ebenezer  church,  six  miles  north 
of  Plantersville.  Forrest  had  chosen  a  position  on  the  north 
bank  of  Bogler's  creek",  and  disposed  of  his  force  for  battle,  his 
right  resting  on  Mulberry  creek,  and  his  left  on  a  high  wooded 
ridge,  with  four  pieces  of  artillery  to  sweep  the  Randolph  road, 
upon  which  Long's  division  was  advancing,  and  two  on  the 
Maples^dlle  road.  He  had  under  his  command,  in  line,  Arm- 
strong's brigade  of  Chalmers'  division  ;  Koddy's  division ;  Cross- 
land's  Kentucky  brigade  ;  and  a  battalion  of  three  hundi'ed 
infantry,  just  arrived  from  Selma  ;  in  all,  about  &ve  thousand 
men.  Part  of  his  front  was  covered  by  a  slashing  of  pine  trees 
and  rail  barricades. 

Gen.  Long,  on  discovering  the  confederates  in  strength  close 
upon  the  main  body,  reinforced  his  advance  guard  (a  battalion 
of  the  Seventy-second  Lidiana  mounted  infantry)  by  the  balance 
of  the  regiment,  dismounted,  and  formed  it  on  the  left  of  the 
road.  As  it  moved  forward,  the  confederate  advance  fell  back. 
At  that  juncture,  he  ordered  forward  four  companies  of  the 
Seventeenth  Indiana  mounted  infantry,  Lieut.-Col.  Frank  "White 
commanding.  With  drawn  sabres,  that  gallant  battahon  drove 
the  enemy,  in  confusion,  into  the  main  line,  dashed  against  that, 
broke  through  it,  rode  over  the  artillery,  and,  finally,  turned  to 
the  left,  and  cut  its  way  out,  leaving  one  officer  and  sixteen  men 
in  the  hands  of  the  confederates,  either  killed  or  woimded.     In 


CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE.  251 

tliis  charge,  Capt.  Taylor,  of  the  Seventeenth  Indiana,  lost  his 
Hfe,  after  having  led  his  men  into  the  very  midst  of  the  enemy, 
and  engaged  in  a  running  fight,  of  two  hundred  yards,  with 
Forrest  in  person. 

"While  this  was  transpiring,  Upton's  division  was  coming  from 
a  northeasterly  direction  on  the  Maplesville  road.  Alexander's 
brigade  was  in  the  advance,  and  hearing  the  firing  and  cheers 
of  Long's  men  on  the  right,  when  within  three  miles  of  Ebenezer 
church,  pushed  forward  at  the  trot,  and  soon  came  to  the  scene 
of  action.  Alexander  promptly  deployed  his  brigade  mostly  on 
the  right  of  the  road,  intending  to  connect  with  Long's  left,  and 
soon  afterward  advanced  his  hne  dismounted.  In  less  than  an 
hour,  although  the  resistance  was  determined,  the  ]30sition  was 
carried  by  a  gallant  charge,  and  the  confederates  routed.  Gen. 
Alexander's  brigade  captured  two  guns  and  about  two  hundred 
prisoners,  while  one  gun  fell  into  the  hands  of  Gen.  Long's 
division. 

Winslow's  brigade  came  up  just  as  the  engagement  was  being 
decided ;  and  two  regiments,  the  Third  Iowa  leading,  were 
hastened  to  the  front.  Capt.  Arnim's  Company  I  of  the  Third 
was  thrown  out  on  the  left  of  the  road,  and  directed  to  charge 
a  hne  formed  on  the  bank  of  the  creek  four  hundred  yards  fi'om 
the  head  of  "Winslow's  column.  That  company,  having  to 
throw  down  a  fence  under  severe  fire,  had  one  ofiicer,  Lieut.  J. 
J.  Yeach,  and  several  men  woimded,  losing  also  about  fifteen 
horses.  The  column  moving  forward  the  last  of  Forrest's  forces 
retired,  and  the  Thu^l  Iowa  cavahy  pursued  them  five  miles  to 
Plantersville.  Capt.  John  Brown's  Company  L  charged  over  a 
deep  stream,  captiu^ed  a  color  company,  and,  indeed,  more  men 
than  his  command  numbered. 


CHAPTER  XXIX. 

CAVALRY  OPERATIONS  CONTINUED.— BATTLE  OF  SELMA. 

The  night  of  April  1,  Wilson's  corps  bivouacked  near  Plant- 
ersville,  nineteen  miles  from  Selma.  "With,  almost  constant 
fighting,  it  had  driven  its  adversaries  twenty-four  miles  since 
morning.  It  gave  them  no  pause  nor  rest.  At  daylight  of  the 
2d,  Long's  division  took  the  advance,  closely  followed  by 
Upton's.  Wilson,  having  paid  heed  to  that  important  injunction 
of  Napoleon — to  be  informed  of  the  condition  of  the  enemy- 
had  obtained  a  well-drawn  sketch,  and  complete  description  of 
the  defences  of  Selma. 

That  city  is  situated  on  the  north  bank  of  the  Alabama  river, 
about  one  hundred  feet  above  high  water.  It  contained  an 
arsenal  and  foundries,  and  was  the  most  important  confederate 
depot  of  the  southwest. 

Itii fortifications  consisted  of  a  bastioned  line  on  a  radius  of 
nearly  three  miles,  extenduig  from  the  Alabama  river  below  to 
the  same  above  the  city.  That  part  of  the  hne  west  of  the  city 
was  covered  with  a  miry,  deep,  and  almost  impassable  creek,  with 
sloping  banks ;  that  on  the  east  side,  by  a  swamp,  extending 
from  the  river  almost  to  the  SummerviUe  road,  and  entirely 
impracticable  for  mounted  men  at  all  times.  On  the  east  side 
also  is  a  stream  with  high  and  precipitous  banks.  The  profile 
of  the  works  was  as  follows :  Height  of  parapet,  six  to  eight 
feet ;  thickness,  eight  feet ;  depth  of  ditch,  five  feet ;  width, 
from  ten  to  fifteen  feet ;  height  of  stockade  on  the  glacis,  five 
feet;    sunk   in    the    earth,   four  feet.     The  place  was  indeed 


KOTKS 

3  Stccka^e  Prison 
4t  J^val  J^ouTtdn- 
6  aSAJ^ojtndry-  S?iot 
SheG.  Jc^hchinery 

6  do-        do.     Ctzsttn^s 

7  do.        do.     R.R.  Car 
Mlieels  ct  c. 

8  do.   "^Vare  House 

9  do.  do.       Cotton 
\20  R-R-H^airinq  ^ Marine  SJtap 

n  Jbn'derMia 

12      do*     Magaxine 

23  ILR.En0ine  Souses 

M  RJR^Depats 

25  Coed-  Skutes 

2£  Sarracks 


SattgiyJ  ^ih.r.S 


Profile  ofstodcaded  R.P, 
^_^H~  Xiao  of  cvitUnuous  Farapet. 

Line  of  stockaded.  RiAePit. 

Inner  J.int^  fUeasy  "Worksi  \ad\ni3hed-, 
One  30  Pdn  Parrott  ciiptured  in, 
27a 2  commanding 
Bange  Lino  Road,. 

Nos.  J  to  24^  Cufht  Wbrfa  on  outer Zinv     ■ 
ibrField  ArtOlery  Bastions  Jiodans 
tlcwit/i  77  Embrasures. 
a.!)  c  JZanJdruf  Redajts  <<"  c- 
d-id. Sndosed  Bastions  fbrRi/termn: 
/^  19 Field  Guns  captured  in  Positxon,  ( 
othtrs  cupturcd  fust  outside  of 

h  Ponton  Rrid,/e. 


JklAP    OF   THE    CITY 
OF 

SELMAAND  ITS  DEFENCES 

ALABAMA 

Captured  by  Assault  by  the  Cavalry  Corps  M.D.  M. 

April  2d.  1865 

Bvt.Maj.  Genl.  J.H.WILSOX  Comdg. 

Scale 


CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE.  253 

strongly  and  elaborately  fortified,  and  the  stockade  in  fi'out  of 
the  ditch  was  no  inconsiderable  obstruction. 

Wilson  directed  Long  to  march  by  the  flanks  of  brigades, 
approach  the  city,  and  cross  to  the  Summer^dlle  road,  without 
exposing  his  men,  and  to  develop  his  Hne  as  soon  as  he  should 
arrive  in  fi'ont  of  the  works.  Upton  was  directed  to  move  on 
the  Range  Line  road,  sending  a  squadron  on  the  Bmnsville 
road.  Lieut.  Eendelbrook,  with  a  battahon  of  the  Fom-th 
United  States  cavalry,  was  instructed  to  move  down  the  rail- 
road, burning  stations,  bridges,  and  trestle-work,  as  far  as 
Burnsville.  By  rapid  marching,  without  opposition,  the  troops 
were  all  in  sight  of  the  town,  and  mostly  in  position,  by 
four,  P.  M. 

Lieiit.-Gen.  Taylor  left  the  city  at  about  that  houi',  leaving 
Forrest  in  command,  who  had  under  him  a  garrison  numbering 
nearly  seven  thousand,  including  the  citizen  militia.  Preachers 
of  the  gospel  took  muskets  and  went  into  the  trenches. 

ASSAULT. 

As  Gen.  Wilson  approached  the  city  he  perceived  that  the 
information  he  had  received  was  generally  correct.  He  then 
made  a  reconnoissance  of  the  works  from  left  to  right,  for  the 
purpose  of  satisfying  himself  as  to  the  true  point  of  attack,  and 
the  probable  chances  of  success.  He  directed  Gen.  Long  to 
assault  the  works  by  moving  diagonally  across  the  road  upon 
wliich  his  troops  were  posted,  while  Gen.  Upton,  at  his  own 
request,  with  a  picked  force  of  three  hundred  men,  was  directed 
to  penetrate  the  swamps  upon  his  left,  break  through  the  line 
covered  by  it,  and  turn  the  garrison's  right,  the  balance  of  his 
division  to  conform  to  the  movement.  The  signal  for  the  ad- 
vance was  to  be  the  discharge  of  a  single  gun  fi'om  Eodney's 
battery,  to  be  given  as  soon  as  Upton's  turning  movement 
had  developed  itself. 


254  CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE. 

Before  that  plan  could  be  executed,  and  while  waiting  for 
the  signal  to  advance,  Gen.  Long  was  informed  that  a  strong 
force  of  confederate  cavah-y  had  begnin  skirmishing  with  his 
rear,  and  threatened  a  general  attack  upon  his  pack  train  and 
led  horses.  He  had  left  a  force  of  six  companies  well  posted  at 
the  creek,  in  anticipation  of  that  movement,  afterward  ascer- 
tained to  have  been  made  by  Chalmers,  in  obedience  to  the 
instructions  of  Forrest.  This  force  was  at  Marion  the  day 
before,  and  was  expected  on  the  road  from  that  place.  Fearing, 
lest  the  affair  might  compromise  the  assault  upon  the  main 
position.  Long  (having  strengthened  the  rear  by  another  regi- 
ment), determined  to  make  the  assault  at  once,  and  without 
waiting  for  the  signal,  gave  the  order  to  advance.  His  com- 
mand was  formed  in  line  of  battle  dismounted,  the  Seventeenth 
Indiana  mounted  infantry  on  the  right,  and  next,  from  right  to 
left,  the  One  Hundred  and  Twenty-third  Illinois  and  Mnety- 
eighth  Illinois  mounted  infantry,  the  Fourth  Ohio  cavalry,  and 
Fourth  Michigan  cavalry,  comprising  in  all  fifteen  hundred 
officers  and  men.  They  had  to  charge  across  open  ground  six 
hundred  yards  to  the  works,  exposed  to  the  fire  of  artillery  and 
musketry,  and  that  part  of  the  line  they  were  to  assault  was 
manned  by  Armstrong's  brigade,  regarded  as  the  best  of  For- 
rest's corps,  and  numbering  fifteen  hundred  strong.  Long's 
division  sprang  forward  in  an  unfaltering  manner.  Its  flanks 
had  some  difficulty  in  crossing  a  ravine  and  marshy  soil ;  but  in 
less  than  fifteen  minutes  it  had  swept  over  the  works  and 
driven  the  confederates  in  confusion  toward  the  city.  But 
the  loss  was  considerable,  and  among  the  wounded  was  Gen. 
Long  himself,  who  was  temjDorarily  succeeded  in  command 
by  Col.  Minty.  Wilson  arrived  on  that  part  of  the  field  just 
after  the  works  were  carried.  He  at  once  notified  Upton  of  the 
success,  directed  Col.  Minty  to  form  Long's  division  for  a 
new  advance,  ordered  Col.  Tail,  commanding  the   Seventeenth 


CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE.  255 

Indiana,  to  place  liis  own  regiment  and  the  Fom'tli  United 
States  cavalry,  Lieut.  O'Connel,  and  the  Board  of  Trade  bat- 
tery, Capt.  Kobinson  commanding,  and  renewed  the  attack. 
The  garrison  had  occupied  a  new  line,  but  partially  finished,  on 
the  edge  of  the  city.  A  gallant  charge  by  the  Fourth  United 
States  cavalry  was  repulsed,  but  it  rapidly  re-formed  on  the 
left.  It  was  now  quite  dark.  Upton's  division  advancing  at 
the  same  time,  a  new  charge  was  made  by  the  Fourth  Ohio, 
Seventeenth  Indiana,  and  Fourth  cavalry,  dismounted.  The 
troops,  inspired  by  the  wildest  enthusiasm,  swept  everything 
before  them,  and  penetrated  the  city  in  all  directions.  Upton's 
division,  though  encountering  less  resistance,  charged  with  its 
habitual  spirit  and  devotion.  It  was  said  that  the  men,  finding 
it  too  difficult  to  break  down  or  pry  away  the  sharp-pointed 
stockade  in  front  of  the  earthworks,  those  behind,  coming  on 
swiftly,  jumped  on  the  shoulders  of  the  foremost  and  leaped 
the  obstructions,  thus  storming  the  works  by  a  game  of  "  leap- 
frog."^ Nor  was  such  a  humorous  expedient  inconsistent  with 
the  coolness  and  fervid  valor  of  those  splendid  troops. 

Duiing  the  first  part  of  the  action,  the  Chicago  Board  of 
Trade  battery  had  occupied  a  commanding  position,  and  steadily 
replied  to  the  garrison  guns. 

The  loss  in  Long's  division  was  forty  Idlled  and  two  hundred 
and  sixty  wounded.  Of  the  latter,  besides  Long,  were  Cols. 
Miller,  McCormick,  and  Briggs.  "Wilson's  force,  engaged  and 
in  supporting  distance,  was  nine  thousand  men  and  eight  guns. 

The  garrison  fought  with  considerable  coolness  and  skill. 
Forrest  was  reported  to  have  been  engaged  personally  in 
two  or  three  romantic  combats ;  and  he,  with  Gens.  Armstrong, 
Koddy,  and  Adams,  and  a  number  of  men,  escaped  under  cover 
of  darkness,   by   the   Burnsville   or  river   road.     A  portion  of 

^  higersoU's  Iowa  and  the  Rebellion,  p.  465. 


256  CAMPAIGN     OP     MOBILE. 

CJpton's  division  pursued  on  the  Burnsville  road  until  long 
after  midnight,  capturing  four  guns  and  many  prisoners. 

The  immediate  fruits  of  Wilson's  victory  were  thu^ty-one 
field  guns  and  one  thirty-pounder  Parrott ;  two  thousand  seven 
hundred  prisoners,  including  one  hundred  and  fifty  officers ;  a 
number  of  colors,  and  large  quantities  of  stores  of  every  kind. 

As  soon  as  the  troops  could  be  assembled  and  got  into 
camp.  Brevet  Brig.-Gen.  Winslow  was  assigned  to  the  command 
of  the  city,  with  orders  to  destroy  everything  that  could  benefit 
the  confederate  cause.  In  the  excitement  of  the  hour,  some 
acts  of  plunder  were  committed. 

Gen.  Upton  was  directed  to  march  at  dayHght  with  his 
division,  for  the  purpose  of  driving  Chalmers  to  the  west  side 
of  the  Catawba,  to  open  communication  with  McCook,  who  was 
expected  from  Centreville,  and  to  assist  him  in  bringing  in 
the  train. 

In  anticipation  of  the  fall  of  Selma  the  confederates  burned 
twenty-five  thousand  bales  of  cotton,  sent  the  steamers  that 
were  there,  down  the  Alabama,  to  go  up  the  Tombigbee,  and 
cut  loose  a  pontoon  bridge  which  floated  down  to  Oven  bluff. 

Gen.  Wilson  directed  Lieut.  Haywood,  Fourth  Michigan  cav- 
alry, engineer  officer  on  his  stafit",  to  employ  all  the  resources 
of  the  shops  in  the  city  in  the  construction  of  pontoons,  ynih.  the 
intention  of  laying  a  bridge  and  crossing  to  the  south  side  of 
the  Alabama  river,  as  soon  as  he  could  satisfy  himself  of  Gen. 
Canby's  success  in  the  operations  against  MobUe.  On  April 
5,  Upton  and  McCook  arrived  with  the  train,  but  nothing 
definite  had  been  heard  of  Croxton.  McCook  had  been  entirely 
successful  in  liis  operations  against  Centreville,  but  on  reaching 
Scottsboro,  he  found  Jackson  well  posted  "svith  a  force,  he 
thought  too   strong  to   attack.      After   a   sharp   skirmish  ^    he 

1  Gapt.  Surget  [A.  A,  G.),  to  Maj.  Hope,  Demopolis :  "  Ajjril  3. — If  news  of 
Jackson's  victory  be  true,  he  ought  to  cover  Demopolis." 


I 


CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE.  257 

returned  to  Centreville,  burned  the  Scottsboro  cotton  factory 
and  Cahawba  bridge,  and  returned  toward  Selma.  Meantime, 
Col.  Noble,  Third  Iowa,  with  a  detachment  of  Winslow's 
brigade,  made  a  march  to  the  rear  through  Summerfield  to 
Johnson's  ferry,  returning  on  the  6th. 

On  the  3d,  Gen.  Wirt  Adams,  at  West  Point,  was  ordered  to 
prepare  immediately  to  move  east  via  Pickensville  with  every 
available  man  of  his  own  and  Scott's  Louisiana  brigade,  lea-sdng 
the  battery  behind.  On  the  4th,  Lieut.-Gen.  Taylor  was  at 
Mobile.  On  the  same  day,  Capt.  Surget  telegraphed  from 
Meridian  to  Gen.  Hodge  at  Jackson,  that  there  were  some 
eighty  federal  prisoners  there,  recent  captures.  On  the  5th, 
Taylor  returned  from  Mobile,  and  at  one,  P.  M.,  telegraphed 
Forrest  as  follows  : 

"  Returned  from  Mobile  this  morning.  Wirt  Adams  left 
Columbus    this    morning    with    fifteen    hundred   men   to   join 

you  at  Marion  via   Pickensville 'Tis  useless  to  fight 

enemy  until  we  are  strong  enough  to  whip  him.  Hang  on  his 
flanks  and  rear,  cut  off  small  parties  and  delay  his  movements 
till  you  can  get  your  whole  force  in  hand." 

The  same  day  Capt.  Surget  informed  Forrest — "  At  Mobile 
everything  goes  on  well.  Yankees  have  gained  nothing  thus 
far." 

On  the  6th  of  April,  Gen.  Wilson  having  ordered  Maj.  Hub- 
bard to  lay  a  bridge  over  the  Alabama  with  the  utmost  despatch, 
went  to  Cahawba  to  see  Gen.  Forrest,  who  had  agreed  to  meet 
Wilson  there,  under  a  flag  of  truce,  to  arrange  an  exchange  of 
prisoners.  Wilson  soon  discovered  that  he  need  not  es^^ect 
liberahty  in  the  matter,  and  that  Forrest  hoped  to  recapture 
the  prisoners  in  his  hands.  During  the  conversation,  Wilson 
learned  from  Forrest  that  Croxton  had  had  an  engagement  with 
Wu't  Adams,  near  BridgeviUe,  forty  miles  southwest  of  Tusca- 
loosa, two   days  before.     This,  it   appears,  assured  Wilson  of 

17 


258  CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE. 

Croxton's  success  and  safety,  and  lie  determined  to  lose  no 
time  in  crossing  to  the  south  side  of  the  Alabama.  Returning 
to  Selma  he  urged  every  one  to  the  utmost  exertions.  The 
river  was  qiiite  full  and  rising,  its  current  swift  and  strong. 
The  weather  was  also  unsettled  and  rainy,  but  by  great  energy 
and  labor  night  and  day  the  bridge,  eight  hundred  and  seventy 
feet  long,  was  constructed,  and  the  command  all  crossed  by  day- 
light of  the  10th.  Three  tunes  the  bridge  was  swept  away. 
Gen.  Alexander  narrowly  escaped  drowning;  boats  were  cap- 
sized, and  men  precipitated  into  the  stream,  but  the  crossing 
was  finally  accomphshed  with  success. 

Behind  him,  in  the  destroyed  arsenal,  foundries,  arms,  stores, 
and  military  munitions  of  every  kind,  Wilson  had  left  immense 
ruin.     He  had  struck  the  Confederacy  a  disastrous  blow. 

At  Selma,  he  left  the  severely  wounded  of  his  command,  and 
many  paroled  prisoners.  But  the  confederates  considered  the 
parole  illegal,  and  ordered  the  men  to  duty. 

Wilson  now  determined  to  march,  by  the  way  of  Montgomery, 
into  Georgia,  and,  after  breaking  up  railroads,  and  destroy- 
ing stores  and  army  supplies  in  that  state,  to  march  thence, 
as  rapidly  as  possible,  to  the  theatre  of  operations  in  North 
Carolina  and  Virginia. 

He  was  now  able  to  secure  greater  mobility  to  his  command. 
Enough  horses  had  been  captured  to  mount  all  the  dismounted 
men.  The  surplus  wagons,  and  all  of  the  bridge  train,  except 
enough  for  twelve  bags,  were  destroyed.  The  column  was 
cleared  of  the  multitude  of  freedmen  who  hovered  around  it, 
except  such  ablebodied  ones  as  could  enhst,  who  were  organ- 
ized into  regiments,  one  to  each  division.  Efficient  officers  were 
a.ssigned  these  commands ;  and  how  well  they  succeeded,  is 
shown  by  the  fact,  that  "  ia  addition  to  subsisting  themselves 
upon  the  country,  they  marched  (upon  one  occasion)  forty-five 
miles,  and  frequently  as  much  as  thirty-five,  in  one  day." 


CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE.  259 

In  the  march  from  Selma,  La  Grange's  brigade,  of  McCook's 
division,  was  given  the  advance.  The  recent  rains  had  rendered 
the  roads  quite  mnddy,  and  a  small  body  of  confederate  cavahy, 
in  falling  back  before  La  Grange,  destroyed  several  bridges,  so 
that  the  progress  of  the  column  was  slow. 

On  the  morning '  of  the  12th,  the  advance-guard  .  reached 
Montgomery,  the  capital  of  Alabama,  and  received  the  sur- 
render of  the  city  from  the  mayor  and  council.  The  confed- 
erate general,  Adams,  with  a  small  force,  after  falling  back  from 
before  Wilson's  column,  to  the  city,  burned  ninety  thousand 
bales  of  cotton,  stored  there,  and  continued  his  retreat  to  Mount 
Meigs,  on  the  Columbus  road. 

Gen.  McCook  assigned  Col.  Cooper,  Fourth  Kentucky  cav- 
alry, to  the  command  of  the  city,  and  immediately  began  the 
destruction  of  the  public  stores.  Maj.  Weston  of  the  Fourth 
Kentucky,  with  a  small  detachment  of  his  regiment,  made  a 
rapid  march  toward  Wetumpka,  swam  the  Coosa  and  Talla- 
poosa rivers,  and  captured  five  steamboats  and  their  cargoes, 
which  were  taken  to  Montgomery  and  destroyed. 

The  grand  column  entered  Montgomery  in  imposing  style. 
The  capitol  stands  on  a  commanding  site,  and  is  visible  far  out 
in  the  country.  As  they  approached  the  city  the  troopers  were 
deUghted  to  see  the  federal  flag  restored  to  its  position,  and 
proudly  floating  from  the  dome  of  the  first  capitol  of  the  then 
tottering  confederacy. 

Pausing  two  days  at  Montgomery,  Wilson  resumed  his  march 
on  the  morning  of  the  14th,  moving  into  Georgia  and  accom- 
pHshing  brilliant  results ;  the  most  important  of  which  was  \h.e 
capture,  on  the  16th  of  April,  of  the  fortified  posts  of  Columbus 
and  West  Point.  On  the  20th,  he  entered  Macon,  where  he  was 
met  by  news  of  the  armistice. 


CHAPTER    XXX. 

OPERATIONS  OF  CROXTON'S  BRIGADE. 

Gen.  Jolm  T.  Croxton's  brigade  consisted  of  the  Second 
Micliigan  cavaby,  Col.  Johnston,  the  Fourth  Kentucky  mounted 
infantry,  Col.  Kelly,  the  Sixth  Kentucky  cavalry,  Maj.  Fidler, 
and  the  Eighth  Iowa  cavalry,  Col.  Dorr,  fifteen  hundred  effective. 

Leaving  the  Fourth  -Kentucky  cavalry  temporarily  with  the 
train,  Croxton,  on  the  morning  of  March  31,  marched  from 
Elyton  for  Tuscaloosa,  having  eleven  hundred  effective  men. 
He  took  no  artillery  nor  train,  save  one  headquarters  bag- 
gage-wagon, three  ambulances,  and  the  allowance  of  pack 
mules.  The  men  had  each  about  one  hundred  and  twenty 
rounds  of  ammunition,  and,  like  the  main  column,  were  armed 
with  Spencer  carbines. 

At  five,  p.  M.,  when  approaching  Trion,  some  twenty  miles 
from  Tuscaloosa,  and  while  ascending  a  rise  of  ground,  in  a 
wooded  and  broken  country,  the  advance  detected  indications 
of  the  enemy,  which  proved  to  be  the  rear  of  Gen.  W.  H.  Jack- 
son's division,  estimated  at  twenty-six  hundred,  and  having 
artillery.  Croxton's  brigade  deployed  in  line  near  the  toj)  of 
the  hill,  with  videttes  on  the  crest,  and  having  remained  in 
that  position  till  dark,  went  into  camp  off  the  road.  Meantime, 
thorough  scouting  on  the  flanks,  showed  hostile  forces  on 
Croxton's  left  and  left  rear. 

SJdrmish  at  Trion. — At  daylight  the  next  morning,  April  1, 
Croxton,  in  order  to  elude  Jackson,  though  still  having  Tusca- 
loosa in  view,  turned,  by  an  unfrequented  road,  in  a  northeast- 
erly direction,  to  the  Dirt  creek  road,  and  marched  rapidly  for 


CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE.  261 

ten  or  fifteen  miles.  Jackson,  however,  made  a  sharp  attack 
before  the  brigade  was  all  out  of  camp,  the  Sixth  Kentucky 
cavalry  losing  some  thirty  men,  including  a  lieutenant,  captured. 
A.  scouting  party,  of  the  Eighth  Iowa,  was  cut  off,  all  of  whom, 
except  one,  killed,  made  their  way  to  Gen.  Wilson. 

Gen.  Jackson  addressed  a  despatch  to  the  commanding  officer 
at  Tuscaloosa,  informing  him  that  he  had  attacked  and  dis- 
persed Croxton's  force  ;  adding  :  "  It  is  scattered  in  the  moun- 
tains, and  cannot  again  be  collected.  Assure  the  fair  ladies  of 
Tuscaloosa,  that  the  tread  of  the  Vandal  hordes  shall  not  pollute 
the  streets  of  their  beautiful  city." 

Croxton  marched  that  day  about  forty  miles,  striking  the 
Black  Warrior  river  at  Johnson's  ferry.  The  Foui'th  Kentucky 
joined  him  at  noon.  The  same  night  he  crossed  the  Black 
Warrior.  The  stream  was  high  and  rapid ;  and  the  men 
resorted  to  various  plans  to  get  across.  The  forty  miles' 
march — and  some  had  been  on  duty  the  previous  night — had 
made  them  tired  and  stiff,  but  they  addressed  themselves  to  the 
duty  of  crossing  the  swollen  river  with  cheerful  alacrity.  A 
small  flat-boat  was  used,  but  it  would  have  required  much  time 
for  the  whole  brigade  to  cross  in  that.  Some  attempting,  while 
mounted,  to  swim  their  horses,  were  carried  under  by  the 
current.  Others,  to  be  odd,  stripped  to  their  shirts,  and  were 
piloted  across,  holding  to  their  horses'  tails ;  a  scene  which 
occasioned  no  little  merriment.  A  few  horses  were  lost  in 
crossing. 

The  brigade  marched  thirty-two  miles  the  next  day,  and  at 
ten,  P.  M.,  arrived  before  Tuscaloosa,  but  on  the  opposite  side 
of  the  river.  The  bridge  was  refloored,  and  Col.  Johnston, 
of  the  Second  Michigan  cavalry,  with  one*hrmdred  and  fifty 
officers  and  men  of  his  regiment,  crossed  the  bridge,  surprised 
the  guards,  and  captured  the  pieces  of  artillery.  The  Eighth 
Iowa  entered  about  the   same   time,  and  Col.  Dorr  received 


262  CAMPAIGN    OF     MOBILE. 

formal  surrender  of  tlie  town  at  one,  A.  m.  Upward  of  fifty 
prisoners  were  captured  and  paroled.  After  daylight,  Croxton 
caused  the  iQilitarj^college,^  the  public  works  and  stores,  to 
be  destroyed.  He  remained  there  till  the  5th,  trying  to  com- 
municate with  Wilson  or  McCook.  The  confederate  scouts  were 
hanging  around  Tuscaloosa,  and,  knowing  that  Jackson  and 
Chalmers  were  between  him  and  Sehna,  he  thought  it  too 
hazardous  to  undertake  to  reach  that  place  by  way  of  Centre- 
ville.  He  therefore  decided  to  move  toward  Eutaw,  in  the 
hope  of  crossing  the  Warrior  lower  down,  and  cutting  the 
railroad  between  Sehna  and  Demopolis.  On  the  5th,  he  re- 
crossed  the  Black  Warrior,  burned  the  bridge,  marched  out  on 
the  Columbus  (Mississippi)  road,  and,  on  the  6th,  turned  toward 
Eutaw.  The  same  morning,  at  seven  o'clock,  Gen.  Wirt  Adams, 
with  fifteen  hundred  men,  left  Pickensville,  intending  to  join 
Forrest  at  Marion,  by  the  way  of  Einche's  ferry.  Croxton,  at 
the  time,  thought  his  force  was  larger. 

Comhat  of  Pleasant  Ridge. — About  two,  p.  m.,  Adams'  men 
began  to  annoy  the  rear  of  Croxton's  brigade,  consisting  of 
the  Sixth  Kentucky  cavalry,  near  Pleasant  Kidge.  Meantime, 
Croxton  had  re-crossed  the  Sipsa  river,  and  turned  on  the 
military  road  toward  Tuscaloosa.  In  front  of  the  Sixth  Ken- 
tucky were  the  two  ambulances  and  the  wagon,  and  next  in 
front  of  them  was  the  Second  Michigan.  At  about  five,  p.  m., 
Adams  charged  the  rear  with  much  vigor,  the  shock  falling 
entirely  on  the  Sixth  Kentucky  cavahy.  The  commanding 
officer,  Maj.  Eidler,  sent  forward  to  Col.  Johnston  that  he  was 
hard  pushed,  and  needed  help,  but  before  the  message  could 
be  delivered,  he  himself  and  nearly  a  third  of  his  regiment  were 
captured  or  disabled.  One  of  the  ambulances  was  captured 
at  the  same  time,  in  which  was  Croxton's  valise. 

The  Second  Michigan  cavahy  halted  and  formed,  facing  to 
the  rear,  partly  behind  a  httle  ridge  with  bushes  on  both  sides 


CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE.  263 

of  the  road,  a  portion  of  tlie  line  being  dismoimted.  In  tlieii 
rear  was  a  house,  and  farther  back  a  hill  and  woods.  In  their 
front  was  a  field  extending  one  hundred  yards,  and  beyond  that 
a  body  of  timber.  Heavy  rain  was  falling,  accompanied  with 
thunder  and  lightning ;  yet  it  was  a  cold  rain,  and  every tlmig 
around  was  dreary.  .  The  ground  was  muddy,  night  was  coming 
on,  and  it  was  believed  a  superior  force  would  soon  be  hurled 
against  them.  Soon  the  Sixth  Kentucky  cavalry  came  hurrying 
up  in  some  disorder,  and  the  Second  Michigan  made  an  opening 
for  them  to  pass  through.  All  the  column  except  the  Second 
Michigan  marched  on.  Adams'  forces,  encoui-aged  with  their 
success,  charged,  mounted,  against  the  Second  Michigan,  fully 
expecting  to  rout  them.  But  the  latter,  reserving  their  firt 
till  they  were  within  short  range,  repulsed  them.  Then  the 
confederates  retired  out  of  sight,  dismounted,  and  charged 
again.  But  again  the  Second  Michigan  men  held  their  position 
like  statues,  and  drove  them  back  with  heavier  loss.  Adams' 
men  charged  repeatedly  in  a  heroic  manner,  and  as  often  were 
repulsed.  Their  rallying  cries,  and  the  exhortations  by  their 
officers,  could  be  plainly  heard.     One  was  heard  to  say,  "  The 

d d  Yankee  cowards  won't  fight — they'll  run!"     This  only 

increased  the  sullen  feelings  of  the  Second  Michigan  men. 
Then-  line  never  wavered.  Their  own  safety,  probably  the 
safety  of  the  brigade,  was  secured  by  their  firm  courage  and 
their  unerring  aim.  Finally,  at  dark,  Adams  ceased  his  attack. 
His  loss  must  have  been  severe.  ^     The  Second  Michigan  cavah-y 


1  "  We  have  reliable  information  that  Gen.  Wirt  Adams,  Math  comparatively- 
small  force,  met  the  enemy  under  Croxton,  about  two  thousand  five  hundred 
strong,  at  Pleasant  Ridge,  Alabama,  and  whipped  them  badl}-,  killing  thirteen 
men,  and  capturing  and  wounding  a  large  number,  as  well  as  taking  all  tlieir 
artillery,  wagons,  ambulances,  po?i?'oons,  and  all  of  Gen.  Croxton's  papers.  Gen. 
Adams  lost  about  three  hundred  men.  Capt.  W.  B.  Luckett,  of  Wood's  regi- 
ment, was  killed  in  the  engagement.  The  enemy  outnumbered  Adams  at  least 
two  to  one." — Jackson  (^Miss.)  JSfeios, 


264  CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE. 

suffered  but  little,  having  only  three  men  wounded.  Col.  John- 
ston had  his  horse  killed  under  him.  The  regiment  then 
marched  on,  and  at  twelve  o'clock  overtook  the  rest  of  the 
brigade  in  camp. 

On  the  7th,  Croxton  went  into  camp  near  Northport,  a  few 
miles  from  Tuscaloosa.  His  foraging  parties  and  scouts  on  the 
road  to  Columbus  misled  Wirt  Adams'  men,  who,  on  that 
evening,  reported  him  moving  toward  Columbus.  Adams  then 
turned  his  column  in  that  direction,  and  arrived  there  at  one, 
p.  M.,  on  the  8th,  having  marched  forty-five  miles  in  eleven 
hours.  ^  This  put  him  about  seventy  miles  northwest  from 
Croxton.  Chalmers  was  moving  toward  Columbus  the  same 
time,  and  reached  there  the  9th. 

On  the  11th,  Croxton  was  still  in  camp  near  Northport  on  the 
Boiler  road,  and  picketing  three  miles  out  toward  Columbus.- 
The  same  day  he  sent  four  hundred  freedmen  toward  Decatur. 
On  the  morning  of  the  12th,  he  marched  northward ;  and  pass- 
ing on  through  Jasper,  recrossed  the  west  fork  of  the  Black 
Warrior  river  at  Hadley's  mill,  marched  nearly  due  east  by  the 
way  of  Mount  Penson  and  Trussville,  crossed  the  Coosa  at 
True's  and  Collins'  ferries,  and  continued  on  to  Talladega,  a 
region  opulent  in  mineral  resources.  The  numerous  streams 
they  crossed  were  much  raised  by  the  spring  freshet.  The  men 
with  theu'  horses  had  to  swim  them,  incurring,  in  some  instances, 
no  little  peril.     A  few  men  were  drowned.     The  arms,  saddles, 

1  Gen.  Wirt  Adams  to  Capt.  E.  Siirget,  A.  A.  O. :  "  Golumhus,  April  8. — 
The  Yankee  column  which  was  attacked  and  driven  toward  Tuscaloosa  on  the 
6th,  was  reported  by  my  scouts  last  night  as  making  forced  marches  on  Colum" 
bus.  I  marched  my  command  forty-five  miles  in  eleven  hours,  reaching  there 
at  one,  p.  m.,  to-day.    No  reliable  intelligence  of  his  approach  thus  far." 

2  Lieut.-Col.  Wm.  3fariin  to  Gapt.  Surget :  "  Tuscaloosa,  5  p.  m.,  April  ll.. — 
A  prisoner  states  that  they  (Croxton's  force)  would  cross  at  or  about  this 
place,  and  move  in  direction  of  Selma.  One  thousand  men  could  take  them 
all.    I  have  despatched  Gen.  Adams." 


CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE.  265 

and  accoutrements,  were  generally  ferried  over  in  canoes,  flats, 
or  even  sugar-troughs. 

On  tlie  22d  of  April,  tlie  Eiglitli  Iowa,  being  in  advance, 
charged  into  Talladega,  witli  drawn  sabres,  against  Gen,  B.  H. 
Hill's  brigade,  and  put  that  force  to  route,  losing  two  men, 
captured,  and  having  one  wounded  by  a  sabre-cut.  Tlie  two 
captured  men  were  taken  by  a  squad  of  thirteen  confederates  ; 
but  Lieut.  Bennett,  of  the  Eighth,  with  only  two  men,  charged 
and  scattered  them,  and  rescued  the  two  prisoners. 

At  Talladega,  Croxton  replenished  the  haversacks,  and,  on  the 
23d,  pushed  on,  northeasterly,  destroying  the  railroad,  and 
skii'mishing  with  Hill,  who  had  artillery,  and  was  falling  back 
on  Jackson^dlle.  The  Second  Michigan  cavalry  was  in  the 
advance,  but  cordd  not  bring  Hill's  forces  to  an  engagement, 
except  with  the  advance  guard.  That  regiment  had  one  man 
killed,  of  Company  B,  near  Oxford,  and  a  detail  having  gone 
back  to  bury  him,  found  too  many  confederates  gathering  to 
render  their  stay  safe.  The  Eighth  Iowa,  in  the  rear  had  two 
men  killed. 

In  the  region  of  the  Blue  mountains,  Croxton's  command 
destroyed  valuable  iron  and  nitre  works,  besides  railroad 
bridges,  depots,  and  rolling  stock. 

On  the  24th,  the  Eighth  Iowa  cavalry  was  detached  and  sent 
to  Jacksonville,  and,  on  the  way,  had  Uvely  skirmishes.  Before 
reaching  that  place,  a  freedman  informed  the  commander  of  the 
Eighth,  that  Hill's  forces  were  in  line  in  Jacksonville,  waiting 
for  him.  Then  the  Eighth  at  once  broke  into  a  gallop,  and 
dashed  on  with  enthusiasm.  A  lieutenant  exclaimed,  "  I  do 
hope  they  have  a  battery."  And  a  captain  said,  "  I  wish  every 
man  of  Hill's  command  had  a  cannon,  for  we  would  have  t!i  m 
aU  before  night."  But  the  remnant  of  HiU's  forces — al)out  one 
hundred — made  a  rapid  retreat  from  the  town.  The  Eighth  Iowa 
rejoined  the  brigade  the  same  night,  having  marched  forty  miles. 


266  CAMPAIGN     OP     MOBILE. 

On  the  25tli,  Croxton  moyed  out  on  tlie  road  leading  to  New- 
nan,  Georgia.  The  next  day,  while  crossing  the  Chattahoochee 
river,  a  white  flag  appeared  on  the  opposite  bank. 

Then  those  soldiers  heard,  but  with  unlike  emotions,  of  the 
fall  of  Richmond,  the  surrender  of  Lee,  and  the  assassination  of 
Lincoln. 

OBSERVATIONS  ON  WILSON'S  RAID. 

1.  If  Wilson  had  moved  on  Selma  with  five  or  six  thousand 
men,  as  first  proposed,  he  would  have  found  himself  in  the 
presence  of  Forrest  with  an  inferior  force.  He  undoubtedly 
would  have  diverted  that  able  commander  for  a  while,  from  any 
movement  toward  Mobile,  but  in  doing  so  must  have  suffered 
considerably;  and,  in  aU  probability,  would  have  furnished 
another  of  those  examples  which  had  ah-eady  become  too  fre- 
quent, of  the  poor  success  which  attends  aggressive  operations 
with  an  inferior  force.  It  was  "Wilson's  own  sagacity,  as  we 
have  seen,  that  led  to  his  taking  a  column  sufficiently  powerful 
for  the  task  before  it.  Yet  Colonel  Dorr  and  other  officers  in 
his  command,  who  had  spent  some  time  as  prisoners-of-war  in 
the  South,  had  even  two  years  before  urged  the  advantage  of 
moving  large  columns  into  the  very  heart  of  the  confederacy; 
forces  which  would  be  able  to  cause  just  such  widespread  and 
irreparable  injury  as  was  inflicted  by  Wilson's  victorious  corps. 
Had  such  columns  been  moved  into  the  South  a  year  or  two 
earlier,  they  would  have  found  but  shght  fortifications  surround- 
ing the  important  towns. 

2.  The  capture  of  Selma  must  be  regarded  as  the  most 
remarkable  achievement  in  the  history  of  modern  cavahy.  The 
valor  of  the  troops  engaged  in  tliat  splendid  assault,  illustrates 
the  maxim  of  Alexander,  that  "  No  place  is  impregnable  to  the 
brave  nor  secure  to  the  timorous." 

3.  Croxton,  when  he  rejoined  Wilson,  had  marched  six  hun- 


CAMPAIGN     OF     MOBILE.  267 

dred  and  fifty  miles  in  thirty  days.  His  command  encountered 
many  liardsliips,  and  nothing  but  its  phick  and  good  soldiership 
brought  it  out  so  successfully.  It  would  seem  that  Croxton's 
better  course  would  have  been  to  have  marched  northeasterly 
from  Tuscaloosa  the  morning  after  entering  that  place,  instead  of 
again  recrossing  the  31ack  Warrior,  The  critical  moment  was, 
when  he  was  attacked  by  Wirt  Adams,  near  Pleasant  Eidge. 
The  firmness  of  Col.  Johnston  and  the  Second  Michigan  there 
was  highly  exemplary.  Adams  made  a  forced  march  to  Colum- 
bus, and  got  seventy  miles  from  him.  But  for  the  stern  treat- 
ment he  had  received  from  the  Second  Michigan,  he  doubtless 
would  have  followed  the  column  when  close  upon  its  heels. 

Croxton's  command  felt  an  apprehension  lest  they  would  get 
out  of  ammunition,  but  their  supply  lasted  to  the  end.  And 
most  of  the  time  the  men  were  in  good  spirits. 


INDEX 


Adams,  Gen.  D.  W.,  Taylor's  Despatch  to,   242 

(note)  ;  At  Selma,  255. 
Adams,  Gen.  Wirt,  at  West  Point,  257  ;    attacks 

Cri:)xton  at  Pleasant  Ridge,  262  ;  marclies  to 

Columbus,  264  (note). 
Adventure  on  Skirmish-Line,  131,134,  235-238. 
Alabama  (see  Reserves,  Number  of  Regiments, 

&c.) 
AuBAUGH,  Corporal,  killed  in  Assault,  216. 
Alexander,  Gen.  A.  J.,  Brigade  of,  247,  251. 
Ambulances,  Allowance  in  Field,  28. 
Ammunition,  Amount  to  be  kept  on  Hand,  29; 

Quality  of  at  Siianish  Fort,  166  ;   at  Blakelv, 

177. 
A>fEERSON,  Col.  (Confed.),  at  Fort  Gaines,  16. 
Anderson,  Ma,j.,  Chief  of  Staff  to  Forrest,  248. 
Andrews,  Col.  J.  A.,  commanls  Texas  Brigade,  44. 
Archer,  Maj.,  commands  Escjrt  of  Supply  T^ain, 

243. 
Armistead,  Col.,  Despatches   to,  98  (note)  ;    De- 
spatch from,  100  (note). 
Armstroxg,  Capt.  S.  E.,  Battery  at  Spanish  Fort, 

139,  144,  150. 
Armstrong,  Gen.,  Brigade  of,  at  Ebenezor  Church, 

250  ;  at  Selma,  255. 
Army,  Besieging,  Concentration  and  Equipment 

of,  21. 
Aknim,   Capt.,  Company  at   Battle  of   Ebenezer 

Church,  251. 
Arnold,  Gen.  R.,   arrives  at  Fort  Morgan  with 

Siege  Train,  18. 
Artillery  (see  Names  of  Batteries),  Position  of 

Confederate  at  Spanish  Fort,  70  ;  Singular  Es- 
timate of  in  Steele's  Column,  106  (and  note)  ; 

Additional  sent  to  Blakely,  189. 
AsFiBY,  Sergeant,  mentioned,  83. 
Assault,  at  Spanish  Fort,  151  ;   when    intended, 

165  ;  on  Blakely,  200-222  ;  on  Selma,  253. 
Attack  on  Wagon  Train,  35. 
Atwaier,  Lieut.,  mentioned,  216. 


IS 


Badger,  Lient.-Col.  A.  S.,  109,  240. 

Bailey,  Gen.,  mentioned,  229  ;   Trip  to  Spanish 

Fort,  233-235. 
Bailey,  Maj.  H.  S.,  mentioned,  43,  172. 
Baldwin,  Lieut. -Col.   169  ;  in  Assault,  203,  208. 
Ball,  Col.  C.  P.,107. 
Ball,  Lieut.,  153. 

Barnes,  Capt.  S.,  71,  84,  85,  90  ;  Wounded,  142. 
Barrancas,  Description  of,  23  ;    the  Camp  there, 

23, 24.     • 
Beardslky,  Lieut.  E.  C,  at  Spanish  Fort.  133,  138, 

22!>. 


Beauregard,  Gen.,  Opinion  of  Defences,  163. 

Bell,  Lieut  .-Col.,  53. 

Benson,  Lieut.,  78. 

Pbxteen,  Lieut. -Col.,  247. 

Benton,  Gen.,  Division  marches  to  Fish  River, 
33-35  ;  at  Spanish  Fort,  56.73,  93, 160. 

Bertram,  Col.,  his  Brigade  on  the  March,  34. 

Bl^vnding,  Col.,  mentioned,  37,  77, 158. 

Blaniosnship,  Capt.,  81, 92, 1.31, 140, 150  ;  Explosion 
of  Shell  in  his  Camp,  134,  138. 

Boardman,  Maj. ,  43. 

Bomb-proofs  at  Spanish  Fort,  135. 

Bond,  Capt. ,  104. 

Bonner,  Sergeant,  228. 

BosT'mcK,  Capt. ,  219. 

Blockade-Running  stopped  by  Fall  of  Forts  Mor- 
gan and  Gaines,  19. 

Bough,  Capt. ,  84,  134, 150. 

BowYER,  Col.  E.,  54. 

BoYDSTON,  Maj.,  160. 

Boyle,  Capt.,  95. 

Bradley,  Lieut. -Col.,  Geo.,  55. 

Br.annegak  (Confed.  Gunner),  228. 

Bkiggs,  Col.,  wounded  at  Selma,  255. 

Briggs,  Lieut.,  78. 

Britton,  Lieut  .-Col.  W.  B.,  54. 

Bromillet,  Eldricb,  in  Assault,  205. 

Brown,  Capt,,  194. 

Brown,  Capt.  J. ,  Charge  by  his  Company,  251. 

Brown,  Capt.  W.  E.,  has  charge  of  a  Sujjply  Train, 
244. 

Brown,  Lieut. -Col.  (Confed.),  Despatch  to,  39 
(note) . 

Brown,  Lieut. -Col.  (Ninety-sixth  Ohio),  56. 

Bruce,  Lieut.-Col. ,  John.,  57,  156. 

Bryan,  Lieut.  John,  218. 

Buck,  Capt.  Norman,  64, 134. 

Bullock,  Capt.  W.  M.,  at  Spanish  Fort.  53. 

Burnett,  Col.  W.  E.,  killed  at  Spanish  Fort,  84. 

Busey,  Col.  S.  F.,  24, 169  ;  in  Assault,  204,  205. 

BUS.SY,  Capt  ,  89. 

Buxton,  Corporal,  218. 

Beecher,  Corporal,  ISO. 

Bell,  Lieut.-Col.,  152. 

Besiegers,  Toil  of,  135. 

Bi..\CK,  Col.  Charles,  169, 182  ;  in  Assault,  209. 

Blakely  (Alabama),  Federal  Oivalry  appear  be- 
fore, 119  ;  Description  of.  121,  122  ;  Garrisoa 
of,  122,  123  ;  Investment  of,  12:i-127  ;  Prog- 
ress of  Siege,  168  ;  Casualties  in  its  Garrison. 
176  ;  Sortie  bv  Garrison,  178  :  Garrison  puts 
New  Guns  in  Position,  183  ;  Eighth  and  Last 
day  ot  Siege,  189  ;  Suspicion  of  Garrison 
evacuating,  191 ;  carried  by  Assault,  193- 
222  ;  Observations  on  Siege  and  Assault  of, 
223-226. 

Bombardment  (see  Fort  Morgan)  of  Spanish  Fort, 
139:  Final.  150,  151. 

DnNMA-.l.  M'*..  1    0. 


270 


INDEX. 


C 

Campaign  of  Mobile,  Plan  of,  31. 
Camp  at  Barrancas,  24. 
Campbell,  Capt.  R.,  144. 
Campbell,  Col.,  73. 

Canby,  Maj.-Gen.  E.  R.  S.,  assumes  Command 
Military  Division  West  Mississippi,  13  ;  sends 
Troops  East,  14  ;  His  Movable  Forces,  21  ; 
Thorough  Orders  for  Equipment  and  Mobility 
of  Army,  26  ;  Intentions  as  to  Assault,  59  ; 
sends  Supplies  to  Steele,  120  ;  Purpose  to  As- 
sault, 149  ;  Orders  respecting,  156  ;  communi- 
cates Fact  of  Lodgment,  159  ;  sends  Additional 
Artillery  to  Blakely,  189  ;  at  Hawkins'  Head- 
quarters, 192  ;  Reply  to  General  Steele,  221  ; 
Purpose  as  to  Besieging  Mobile  from  Land 
Side,  223  ;  Estimate  of  his  Forces  in  Field, 
232. 

Canoe  (Station),  99, 115. 

Capon,  Lieut.  J.,  Enterprise  of,  145. 

Caer,  Gen.  E.  A.,  Drills  in  his  Division,  39  ;  Move- 
ment of  Division  on  Spanish  Fort,  50  ;  Loss 
in  his  Division  First  Day,  54  ;  its  Approaches, 
77,  79,  94,  149  ;  assaults  Spanish  Fort,  151, 
155. 

Casualties  at  Spanish  Fort,  161.     , 

Cavalry  (see  Lucas,  SparJing,  Wilson). 

Chalmers,  Gen.,  moves  toward  Columbus,  264. 

Chapman,  Maj.,  186,  219. 

Chaklton,  Lieut.  William,  at  Ulakely,  216. 

Chicago  Board  of  Trade  Battery,  255. 

Chickasaw  (Gunboat) ,  67. 

ChristexN'Sen,  Col.,  mentioned,  221. 

Christler,  Col.,  107. 

Chubb,  Capt.,  176. 

Clanto.v,  Gen.,  his  Brigade,  107  ;  captured  at 
Pringle's  Creek,  109. 

Clark,  Col.  G.  W.,  24, 169  ;  in  Assault,  209. 

Clark,  Corporal,  mentioned,  182. 

Clark,  Lieut.,  153. 

Clark,  Lieut.  A.  G.,  killed  in  Charge,  156,157. 

Clary,  Lieut.,  134. 

Clothing,  Allowance  in  Field,  29. 

Coats,  Col.,  at  Blakely,  211. 

Cobb's  Colored  Regiment  of  Engineers,  14. 

Cockrell,  Brig.-Gen.,  his  Command,  44  ;  at  Alexis 
Spring,  45  ;  at  Blakely,  123. 

CoDDELL,  Lieut.  R.,  killed  at  Blakelj',  216. 

Coleman,  Capt. ,  213. 

Coleman,  Col.,  86. 

Colored  Division  (see  Hawkins). 

CoMSTOCK,  Gen.,  visits  Blakely,  128;  Services 
at  Spanish  Fort,  166. 

Confederate  Officer,  Diary  of,  68  (note),  77,  80,  135 
(note),  142. 

Confederates,  strengthen  Defences  on  Eastern 
Shore  Mobile  Bay,  19  ;  Plans  and  Position  of, 
44  ;  Loss  in  Front  of  Second  Division,  210  ;  in 
Garrard's  Front,  215  ;  Humorous  Remarks  of 
Soldiers,  238  ;  Deserters  from  Army,  241 
(note). 

Connelly,  Maj.  J.  M. ,  50. 

CooNEY,  Private  G.  R.,  mentioned,  182. 

Coopkr,  Col.,  commands  Montgomery,  259. 

Corduroying  Roads,  34, 116. 

Corps  (see  "Thirteenth,"  "Sixteenth,"  "Re- 
serve"). 

Cowan,  Corporal,  219. 

Cowan,  Maj.  J.  E.,  110. 

Cox,  Capt.,  Battery  of,  81,  150 ;  at  Blakely, 
190. 

Craig,  Capt.  S.  F. ,  131. 

Crandall,  Col.,  wounded  at  Blakely,  125, 196. 

Craven,  Commodore,  at  Fort  Morgan,  15. 

Craven,  Lieut. -Col.,  218. 

Crosby,  Liei  t.-Com.  P.  ,132. 

Crossland,  Brigade  of,  247,  250. 


Croxton,  Gen.  J.  T.,  Operations  of  his  Brigade, 
260  ;  captures  Tuscaloosa,  261  ;  Combat  of 
Pleasant  Ridge,  262  ;  Skirmish  with  Gen. 
Hill's  Forces,  265  ;  Observations  on  his  Opera- 
tions, 266. 

CxTRTis,  Maj.  E.  P.,  73. 


D 

Dailer,  Sergeant,  218. 

Danley's  Ferry,  39. 

Da^tdson,  Gen.,  Expedition  of,  20. 

Day,  Col.,  Brigade  of,  56,  93. 

Day,  Maj.  J.  W.,  150. 

De  Mar,  Private,  mentioned,  210. 

Dennis,  Gen.,  Brigade,  55;  at  Blakely,  181;  in 
Assault,  211-213. 

Densmore,  Lieut. -Col.,  participates  in  Assault, 
195,198. 

Deserters  from  Confederate  Army,  241  (note). 

Despatches,  Capture  of  Confederate,  248. 

Diary  (see  Confederate  Officer)  of  a  Soldier,  as  to 
Rations,  117, 118  (note). 

Dornblaser,  Col.,  at  Blakely,  174,  211. 

Dorr,  Col.,  260  ;  receives  Surrender  of  Tusca- 
loosa, 261,262. 

Douglas,  Stephen  A.,  how  received  in  Mobile,  9. 

Drew,  Col.,  his  Brigade  before  Blakely,  123  ;  As- 
sault by,  195-201. 

Drill,  Brigade,  at  Barrancas,  25. 

Drish,  Lieut. -Col.,  219. 

DuTTON,  Capt.,  mentioned,  56. 

Dyer,  N.  M.  ,  94. 


E 


Ead's  Turrets,  67. 

Ebenezer  Church,  Battle  of,  250,  251. 

Eberhart,  Lieut. .-Col. ,  21 7. 

ECTOR.  Gen.,  Texas  Brigade,  44, 151. 

Eighteenth  New  York  Battery,  83. 

Eighth  Iowa,   53 ;  Casualties  on  Second  Day  of 

Siege,  63  ;  Assaults  Spanish  Fort,  152-155. 
Eighth  Illinois  at  Blakely,  174;  in  Assault,  211- 

213. 
Eighth  iowa  Cavah-y,  260,  265. 
Eighth    Vt'"isconsin    Infantry,    Skirmish    at   Fish 

River,  40  ;  at  Spanish  Fort,  54. 
Eighty-first  Illinois,  Skirmish  at  Minette  Bridge, 

51  ;  at  Spanish  Fort,  132, 155. 
Eighty-ninth  Indiana  at  Blakely,  175, 218,  219 
Eighty-sixth  (Colored)  Regiment,  194. 
Eighty-third  Ohio  at  Barrancas,  24  ;  at  Blakely, 

169  ;  in  Assault,  202,  203,  207,  208,  209. 
Eisenhart,  Lieut.,  218. 
Eleventh  Illinois  at  Blakely,  174,  211,  213. 
Eleventh  Missouri  at  Spanish  Fort,  54. 
Eleventh  Wisconsin  at  Blakely,  170,  174 ;  in  As- 
sault, 214-216. 
Enfilading  Fire,  Advantage  of,  in  Siege,  166. 
Equipment,  of  Infantry,  what,  29. 
Escambia,  Fight  on  the,  109,  110. 
Essex,  Corporal,  mentioned,  182. 
Evergreeo  entered  by  Cavalry,  118. 
Exploit,  Gallant,  of  Men  of  Ninety -fourth  Illinois, 

83. 


Farragut  arrives  off  Mobile,  12  ;  Gallant  Conduct 

in  Mobile  Bay,  15,  16. 
Faulkner,  Maj. ,  109. 
FiCKLiN,  Sergeant  J.  W.,  mentioned,  172. 
FiDLER,  Maj.,  260. 


INDEX. 


271 


Fifteenth  Massachusetts  Battery  at  Blakcly,  173, 

182,  isy. 

Fifth  l.iwa  Cavalry,  247. 

Fifth  Minnesota,  54. 

Fiftieth  Indiana  moves  from  Arkansas,  25 ;  at 
Spanish  Tort,  65. 

Fifty -eighth  Illinois  at  Blakely.  172,  214,  216. 

Fiftv-flrst  (Colored)  in  Assault,  200. 

Fifty  socoud  Indiana  at  Blakely,  172,  214,  2X6. 

First  Florida  (Cavalry),  113. 

First  Indiana  (Light)  Battery,  53,  82. 

First  Indiana  (Heavy  Artillery),  81,  150  ;  at 
Blakeiy,  187. 

First  Louisiana  (Cavalry),  107  ;  its  Charge  at 
Priugle's  Creek,  109  ;  in  Comhat  of  Mount 
Pleasant,  240. 

Fish,  Corporal,  mentioned,  58. 

Fish  Eiver,  Passage  of  S^ixteenth  Corps  up,  37  ; 
Condition  at  Danley's,  39. 

FrrcH,  Capt.  A.  H. ,  79. 

Florida  S.vvamps,  Diiflcult  March  through,  101. 

Foi.Som,  Lieut.,  wounded,  55. 

Forrest,  Lieut.-Gen.,  Situation  of  his  Command, 
242,  246  ;  at  Battle  of  Ebenezer  Church,  250, 
251  ;  in  Romantic  Combats,  255. 

Fort  (see  Gaines,  Morgan,  Spanish,  &c.) 

Fortieth  Missouri,  52. 

Forty-eighth  Ohio,  24. 

Forty-eighth  (Colored),  196. 

Forty-fourth  Jlissouri,  51. 

Forty-uinth  Mississippi,  Colors  captured,  118. 

Forty-ninth  Missouri,  5'2. 

Forty-seventh  Illinois,  54. 

Fortv-sevcnth  Indiana,  its  Flank  charged  on,  49. 

Forty -sixth  Illinois,  at  Blakely,  174,  211. 

Fourteenth  Indiana,  Light  Battery,  53,  62. 

Fourteenth  Wisconsin,  52. 

Fourth  Iowa  Cavalry,  247. 

Fourth  Kentucky  Cavalry,  259. 

Fourth  Kentucky  Mounted  Infantry,  260,  261. 

Fourth  .Massachusetts  Battery,  78;  at  Blakely,  189. 

Fourth  Michigan  Cavalry,  254. 

Fourth  Ohio  Cavalrv,  254. 

Fourth  U.  S.  Artillery,  in  Wilson's  Raid,  247. 

Fourth  U.  S.  Cavalry,  at  Selma,  255. 

Fourth  Wisconsin  Cavalry,  Lieut.  Knowles'  De- 
tachment, 34. 

FOTJST's  Battery,  on  the  March,  84  ;  at  Spanish 
Fort,  138  ;  Operations  against  Huger  and  Tra- 
cy, 227,  229. 

Frank,  Maj.  George  R.,  killed  at  Spanish  Fort,  54. 

Freedmen^  three  Regiments  of,  organized  by  Wil- 
son, 258. 

French,  Capt.  A.  P.,  93, 166. 

Fky,  Corporal,  mentioned,  55. 


Gaines  (Fort),  Description  of,  11  ;  Siege  of,  14, 16, 
17.  ■ 

Gamble,  Lieut.  Com. ,  70. 

Garrard,  Gen.  K.,  Division  at  Sibley's  Mill,  50  ; 
before  Blakely,  170, 179  ;  new  rifle-pits  in  his 
Front,  185  ;  Artillery  in  his  Front,  190  ;  in- 
structed to  Assault,  ioi  ;  in  Assault,  213-220. 

Garretso.v,  Capt.,  115. 

Garrison  of  Spanish  Fort,  60  ;  visited  by  Gen. 
Maury,  80  ;  Ammunition  of,  90  ;  Strength  of, 
146  ;  withdraws,  156,  161  ;  of  Blakely,  Loss  in, 
176 ;  Conduct  of,  223  ;  of  Selma,  253. 

GARRrry,  Capt.  J.,  Battery  at  Spanish  Fort,  139  ; 
Last  Requisition  for  Ammunition,  158. 

Garwood,  J.  R.,  mentioned,  212. 

Gary,  Capt.,  in  Assault,  209,  210. 

Gates,  Col.  (Confod.) ,  Command  of,  44. 

Geddes,  C\iI.,  Brigade,  51 ;  Prepares  for  Assault, 
157, 159. 


Gere,  Lieut.-Col.  W.  B.,  54. 

Gigkr,  Capt  G.  mortally  wounded  at  BLakely,  196. 

GiiuERT,  Geu.,  Brigade  at  Blakely,  170,  179,  216- 
218. 

(.'iXN,  Capt.,  Battery  of,  190. 

Gliason,  Lieut.,  mortally  wounded  in  saving  Pris- 
oners, 201. 

GoLDWoon,  Corporal,  in  Assault,  204. 

GovB,  Corporal,  mentioned,  182. 

Gibson,  Brig. -Gen.  R.  L.  (Confed.)  Command  of, 
44  ;  Advance  from  Spanish  Fort,  45  ;  Despatch, 
50  (note) ;  Despatch  from  Spanish  Fort,  59,  61  ; 
General  Order  of  (note) ,  87  ;  Despatches,  136  ; 
Apprehension  of  being  llanked,  142  ;  Opinion 
a.s  to  Evacuation,  148  ;  orilers  Line  restored, 
156  ;  as  a  Commander,  Hj5. 

Gilchrist,  Col. ,  168. 

GiLLis,  Lieut. -Cum.,  67. 

GiNN,  Capt.  T.  J. ,  55. 

Glasgow,  Col. ,  156. 

Gondalfo,  Lieut.-Col.  J.  B.,  179,  214. 

Granger,  Maj. -Gen.  Gordon  (see  Thirteenth  Corps) , 
in  Siege  of  Forts  Gaines  and  Jlorgan,  14-20  ; 
assigned  to  Command  Thirteenth  Corps,  25  ; 
on  Skirmish  Line,  43  ;  at  Spanish  Fort,  143, 
144  ;  occupies  Mobile,  223. 

Grant,  Gen. ,  Instructions  to  Banks,  13;  to  Wil- 
son, 244. 

Grant,  Lieut.-Col.,  217. 

Gravelly  Springs,  Oivalry  Camp  at,  243. 

Gray,  Lieut.,  172, 173. 

Gray,  Mr.,  96. 

Grayson,  Capt,,  ElTectivo  Fire  of  his  Battery,  91. 

Green,  Col.  D.  P.,  Brigade  of,  56-93. 

Greenleaf,  Lieut.,  110. 

Greenwood,  Capt.,  194. 

Geesiiam,  Lieut.,  172. 

Grier,  Col.  D.  P.,  Brigade  of  56,  93. 

Grierson,  Gen.,  Expedition  from  Memphis,  20. 

Gunboats,  Combat  with,  187. 

GUNN,  Capt.  J.,  64. 


K 

BUgt,  Surgeon,  147. 

Hall,  Col  ,  Movement  of,  115. 

Hall's,  Railroad  Destroyed  at,  120. 

HA5IPT0N,  Corporal,  killed  at  Blakely,  216. 

Hanley,  Lieut.,  180. 

Harrington,  Lieut. ,  213. 

Harris,  Col.,  Brigade  at  Blakely,  170, 179  ;  in  As- 
sault, 213-216. 

Harter.  Sergeant  S.  G.,  killed  at  Blakcly,  174. 

Hatch,  Gen.,  Division  of  Cavalry  left  behind,  243. 

Hawkins'  (Geu.)  Division  (Colored)  Arrives  at 
Barrancas,  25;  March  from  Pensacola,  101- 
103  ;  before  Blakely,  123-125,  168,  169,  171, 
181,  187  ;  Trenches,  191  ;  Assault  on  Blakely, 
193-202. 

Hays,  Col.  B.  F.,  His  Opinion  of  the  Ammunition, 
166. 

H.\YwooD,  Lieut. ,  bridges  Alabama  River,  256. 

Heath,  Col.  W.  H.,  mentioned,  55. 

He.vderson,  Sergeant,  212. 

Hent)rick's  (Capt.)  Battery,  92,  134  ;  at  Blakely, 
190. 

Hernden,  Col.  T.  H.,89. 

Hill,  Gen.  B.  H.,  Brigade  of,  265. 

Hills,  Lieut.-Col.,  mentioned,  43  ;  in  Assault,  216- 
218. 

HOLBROOK,  Col.,  85. 

HoLCOWB,  Capt,,  in  Assault  on  Blakely,  198, 199. 

HoLLiDAY,  Corporal,  mentiouod,  58. 

HOLTZCLAW,  Brig. -Gen.  J.  T.  (Confed.),  Command 

of,  44,  80;    Regiments  in   his  Brigade,  8ir; 

Stakes  out  New  Line,  143  ;  Character  as  an 

Omcer,  165. 


272 


INDEX. 


HoLTZCLAW  Lieut.  (Aide-de-Camp) .  156. 

Hood.  Gen. ,  Veterans  from  his  Army.  44. 

HoPKKS.  Corporal.  205. 

Hospital,  Provision  for,  28  :  at  Spanish  Fort,  147. 

HoTCHKiss'  (Capt.)  Battery  at  Blafcely,  172, 173. 

Howard.  Capt.,  182  ;  wounded,  207. 

Howe,  Col  J.  H. .  51. 155. 

Hcbkakd,  Capt..  on  Skirmish-Line,  175,  219. 

HtTBBAKD.  Col. ,  Brigade  at  Spanish  Fort,  54, 77,  93, 

144. 
HiTBBARD,  JIaj.  .1.  M.,  commands  Pontoon  Train, 

244. 
HtrBB-iRD.  Private  E.  P.,  219. 
Hrosox.  John.  kiUed  at  Blakely,  127. 
Huger  (Fort),  70.  71^  137:  Howitzer  dismounted 

in,  145  :  Reduction  of,  227-:.32. 
Hughes,  Capt. ,  205. 
Hughes.  Corporal,  210. 
HtrsiESTOX.  Surgeon,  147. 
Hu>iET,  Col.  P.  F.,89. 
HcssET.  Color-Sergeant,  in  Assanlt,  204. 
HtJTCHissox,  Maj.,"  his  Advance  of  Skirmish-Line. 

179  ;  in  Assault,  217,  218. 


Illinois  (see  Numher  of  Kegiment). 

Incident  on  Skirmish-Line  "l34  ;  of  the  Siege,  235- 
238. 

Indiana  (see  Xumher  ofEegiment). 

IsGAiims,  Corporal,  killed  at  Blakely,  216. 

ISGERSox,  Capt.,  205. 

Inspections,  iiequent  before  Campaign,  26  ;  Sim- 
day,  130. 

Iowa  (see  Number  of  Beeiment). 

Irwix,  Capt.  W..94. 

IviS,  JIaj.,  240.  ■ 


J.iCKSO::,  Capt.  K.  E. .  214. 

Jacksos.  Gen.  W.  H. ,  one  of  his  Despatches  cap- 
tured, 24S  :  Despatch  in  regard  to  Tuscaloosa, 

261. 
Jacobt,  Capt.  L.,  Light  Batterv  at  Spanish  Fort. 

53. 
JAME3,  Maj. ,  15S. 
jESKiis,  Capt.,  194. 
JoHXSOx,  Capt.  E.  D.,  113. 
JoEDCsoy,  Capt.  (Third  Iowa  Cavalry)  in  a  Charge, 

247. 
JoHs-STO>\  Col.  (of  Second  Michigan  Cavalrv),  260  ; 

m  Combat  of  Pleasant  Kidge,  262-264,  287. 
JoHN'STox,  Gen.  J.  E. ,  his  Remarks  on  Defences 

of  Mobile,  10. 
JoxES,  Col.  Bush,  Despatch  to,  near  Hollywood,  40 

(note). 
JoxB5,CoL  J.B.,  at  Blakely,  124,125  ;  participates 

iu  the  Assi^ult ,  195,  19S. 
Jo^"ES,  Lieut. -Col.,  in  Assault,  205. 
JoxES,  Lieut. -Com.,  67. 


K 

Kansas  (see  Xumber  of  Regiment). 

Keelek,  Lisut-CoL  W.  B.,  55. 

Kelly,  Col.  J.  H.,  24,  126,  169  ;  in  Assault,  209. 

Kelly.  Col.  (of  Fourth  Kentucky  Moimted  Infan- 

trv),  260. 
Kexag'a,  Lieut.  W.  F.,  204. 
Kenuer,  Encampment  at.  21,  22. 
Kentucky  (see  Xumber  of  Regiment). 
Ketibrlng,  Capt.  F.  P.,  155. 
Kickapoo  (Gunboat).  67. 
Kimball,  Major,  39. 


Klv>-ey.  Col  T.  J.,21S. 

KiNSEY,  Lieut. -Col..  Brigade  of,  55;  at  Blakely, 
174.211. 

KiRKLA-ND,  Lieut.  Com. ,  67. 

K>'EE,Maj.  S.  G.  55. 

KsiPE.  Gen. ,  Cavalrv  Division  of,  sent  roimd  to  Can- 
by,  243. 

Knowles.  Lieut.,  mentioned,  34. 

Krez,  Col.  C, Brigade  of,  56,  64,  93, 137. 


Lacy,  Capt.,  mentioned,  192,  221. 

Lake.  Col.,  in  Assault  on  Blakely,  216. 

Laxg.  atp't.,  179. 

Lawrence.  Col.,  214. 

Leadbetiek.  Gen.,  Works  built  by,  10. 

Leake,  Lieut.-Col.  126. 169  ;  in  Assault,  209. 

Leary,  Col.,  109. 

Lee.  Gen.  R.  E.,  Taylor's  Despatch  to,  242  (note). 

Leoxard,  Lieut.,  at  Blakely.  172. 

Lidell.  Gen.  St.  John,  Activity  ot  his  Scouts.  39; 
Despatches  40  (note)  ;  Commands  on  Eastern- 
Shore.  44:  Flans  of.  46,  47  (and  note);  De- 
spatches from,  80,  S3,  86,  90  :  at  Blakely,  123, 
127  (note)  ;  171,  176,  ISO.  ISS  ;  prepares  to 
receive  Assault .  193. 

Lieurxer,  Capt. .  Works  built  by,  10. 

LiXDSAY,  CoL  K..  Attack  on  Federal  Pickets,  49  ; 
helps  cover  Retreat  of  Garrison,  158. 

LocKETT,  Col. ,  conducts  half  of  Spanish  Fort  Gar- 
rison to  Blakely,  162, 

LoxG,  Glen.,  Cavalry  Division  of,  243  ;  at  Ebenezer 
Church,  250, 251  ;  at  Selma,  253,  255. 

Louisiana  (see  Number  ofEegiment). 

Low,  Lieut.  Com. ,  67. 

Lowe,  Sergeant  E.  D. ,  in  Assault,  207. 

Lowell,  Capt.,  190. 

Lucas,  Gen.,  Cavalr.v  Brigade  reaches  Barrancas, 
26  ;  March  froni  Pensacola,  102,  103  ;  Crosses 
Pine  Barren.  105  :  Skirmish  at  ilit^^helPs 
Creek,  107:  Combat  at  Pringle's  Creek.  lOS. 
109  :before  Blakely.  119  :  Moves  to  Claiborne, 
176  ;  Combat  of  Mount  Pleasant,  239. 

LuMSDEx,  his  Battery,  72. 

Lyox,  Mr.  Wm.,  otters  Colored  Men  for  Soldiers, 
241  (note). 


m 

Mack,  Capt. ,  Batterv  of,  S3  (see  Eighteenth  New 
York),  93,  130,  133, 150  ;  Arrives  at  Blakelv, 
190. 

Mackay,  Col.,  mentioned,  35. 

Major,  Corporal, mentioned, 58. 

Main-,  Lieut.-Col.,  214. 

JIalloy,  Lieut.  T. .  killed  at  Blakely,  216. 

Maxhakdt,  Lieut.;  killed  at  Blakely,  196. 

March,  Difficult,  of  Thirteenth  Corps,  33-35. 

JLiRKS,  Mnj.  W. .  71. 

Marsh.  Col.  J.  H.,  54. 

Marshall.  Col.  W.  R.,  wounded,  41  ;  Brigade  at 
Spanish  Fort,  54,  77,  93, 136, 160. 

Maetix,  Lieut.-Col.,  Despatch  of,  234  (note). 

Martix,  Lieut.,  205. 

Maryland  (see  Number  of  Regiment). 

Massachusetts  (see  Number  of  Regiment). 

iL\ssEXBERY,  his  Batterv,  72. 

JUtthews,  Col.  A.  C.  43 ;  at  Blakely,  186. 

Maury.  Maj.-Gen.  D.  H.,  His  Report  referred  to, 
20  (note'i  ;  Confederate  Commander,  District 
of  the  Giilf.  44  :  his  Visit  to  the  Garrison,  SO  ; 
(for  Despatches  to,  see  Lidell,  Gibson  ;) 
moves  from  Mobile,  223  ;  Observations  of,  on 
Siege  of  Blakely,  224. 

M.\YXOR,  Confederate  Color-Bearer,  109. 


INDEX. 


273 


McAmsTER,  Col.,  Engineer  Operations  of,  166. 
McArthur,  Geu.,  Pickets  felt  of  in  his  Front,  40  ; 

Advance  of  Division  on  Spanish  Fort,  52,  54, 

94,  110. 
McCoMAS,  Capt. ,  96,  97. 
McCoNNEL,  Lieut,  (of  Eleventh  Wisconsin),  179, 

•:i4. 
McCoN.vEL,  Lieut. ,  130. 
McGooK,  Gen.,  Cavahy  Division  of,  243,  258, 
McCoRMiCK,  Col. ,  wounded  at  Selma,  255. 
McDermett  (Fort),  in  Line  of  Works  at  Spanish 

Fort,  4S,  49,71. 
McDonald,  Lieut.   A.,   174  ;    Stratagem  of,  178  ; 

Gallant  Conduct  of,  215. 
McExTEE,  Maj.,  120. 
McFarland,  Capt. ,  66. 
McGiNNiii,  Gen.,  at  Siege  of  Fort  Gaines,  14. 
McLaej,  Lie  ;t  ,  213. 

McMiLLEN,  Col. ,  Brigade  at  Spanish  Fort,  54,  94. 
McNuLTA,  Col.  John,  €6,  79,  160. 
Merchant,  Ca|  t.  Geo.  E. ,  in  Assault,  206. 
Meredian,  H;  adquarters  Confederate  Department 

Conimanier,  44. 
Merriam,  Lieut. -Col.,  194. 
Metacomet,  Crew  of,  removes  Torpedoes,  132. 
Michigan  (see  Number  of  Regiment). 
Miller.  Maj.  C.  A.,  113. 
Miller,  Jlaj.  J.  S.,  214. 
illLLER,  Capt. ,  112. 
Miller,  Col.,  wounded  at  Selma,  255. 
Milwaukie  (Gunboat),  Sinking  cf,  67. 
Minettc  (Bay)  Battery  on,  81,119. 
Minnesota  (see  Number  of  Regiment). 
MiJiTY,  Col.,  at  Selma,  254. 
Missouri  (see  Number  of  Regimenti. 
Mitchell,  Lieut.  J.  H. ,  63. 
Mobile,  Remai-ks  concerning,  9  ;  its  Fortifications, 

10, 11  ;  Earlier  Operations  against,  13  ;  Easy 

Capture,  when  coul  1   have  been  made,  20  ; 

Confederate  Garrison  of,  44  ;  Feeliug  in  during 

Siege,  88  ;  occupied,  223. 
Montevallo,  Skirmish  at,  246. 
Montgomery,  to  what  Extent  an  Objective  Point, 

31  ;  entsred  by  Wilson's  Column,  259. 
Moore,  Col.  F.  W.,  24;  his  Brigade,  101,  170; 

Parallels  widened,  182  ;  in  the  Assault,  202, 

209. 
Moore,  Col.  J.  B.,  Demonstration  of  Brigade  on 

Western  Shore,  36  ;  Advance  on  Spanish  Fort, 

51,  77,  94  ;  Movements  of,  158,  159. 
Moore,  Cul.  (117th  111.),  216, 
Moore,  Maj.  Frank,  113. 
MooRE,  Sergeant  D.  B.,  mentioned,  179  ;  in  Assault 

at  Blakely,  215. 
Morgan,  Capt.,  39  (note). 
Morgan  (Fort),  Description  of,  11;  Siege  of,  14- 

20. 
Morse,  Capt.  F.  W.,  his  Battery  at  Spanish  Fort, 

53,  82, 138. 
Mortar-Shells,  thrown  at  Night,  141. 
Morton,  Capt.,  82. 
Mount  Pleasant,  Combat  of,  239. 
MnoGET,  Maj.,  194. 
MuHS,  Capt.  H.,  152. 
Murphy,  Capt.  J.,  in  Assault,  214 
Murray,  Orderly,  mentioned,  212. 
Myers,  Capt.  L.  K.,  Adventure  on  Skirmish-Line, 

73-77. 


N 

Naval  Battery  in  Sixteenth  Corps  Front,  146. 

Navy,  Op-rations,  66,  69,  94,  132,  139,145,148, 
227-232. 

Negroes,  as  Soldiers,  143  (see  Cfflored  Troops)  ; 
Lieut.-Gen.  Taylor's  Disposition  to  employ, 
241  (note)  ;  Wilson  organizes,  258. 


Newton,  Capt.,  builds  Bridge  over  Pine  Barren, 

104  ;  constructs  Battery  at  Blakely,  181. 
Newton,  Lieut.,  A.  C,  85. 
New  York  (see  Number  of  Regiment). 
NiELDS,  H.  C,  Bravery  ot^  15. 
Nineteenth  Iowa,  at  Spanish  Fort,  57, 156. 
Ninety-eighth  Illinois  Mounted  Infantry  at  Selma, 

254. 
Ninetv-fifth  Illinois,  52  ;  Loss  first  day  at  Spanish 

Fort,  64,  158. 
Ninety-fourth  Illinois  in  Siege  of  Fort  Morgan,  17  ; 

Gallant  Exploit  of  Men  of,  at  Spanish  Fort, 

83  ;  loss  in.  93. 
Ninetv-ninth  Illinois  in  Skirmish,  43  ;  at  Blakely, 

186. 
Ninety-seventh  Illinois,  24  ;  in  Assault,  202,  203, 

204,  206. 
Ninety-sixth  Ohio  in  Siege  of  Forts  Morgan  and 

Gaines,  14  ;  at  Spanish  Fort,  56. 
Ninth  Miunesota  at  Spanish  Fort,  54. 
Noble,  Capt.  J.  L.,  Attack  on  his  working  Party, 

65. 
Noble,  Cbl.  J.  W.,  at  Montevallo,  247,  24S  ;  Scouts 

from  Selma,  257. 
North  Carolina  Troops,  154. 
Norton,  .loel,  mentioned,  57. 
Norwood,  Capt.,  in  Assault  on  Blakely,  198. 
Nye,  Maj.,  195. 


O 

Observations,  on  the  Siege  of  Spanish  Fort,  163- 
167  ;  on  Siege  of  Blakely,  223-226  ;  on  Wil- 
son's Raid,  266,  267. 

O'CoxNEL,  Lieut.,  255. 

Octorara    (Gunboat) ,  67  ;   some  Account  of,  65 
opens  Fire,  79,  132,  139,  145,  159  ;  splendid 
Firiug  by,  2-28. 

Ohio  (see  Number  of  Regiment). 

Old  Spanish  Fort,  71;  Night  of  Assault,  159. 

One  Hundred  and  Eighth  Illinois,  51.  53.  63,  155. 

One  Hundred  and  Fourteenth  Illinois,  231. 

One  Hundred  and  Fourteenth  Ohio,  moves  to  Bar- 
rancas, 22  ;  before  Blakely,  126  ;  in  Assault, 
209,  210. 

One  Hundred  and  Nineteenth  Illinois,  175,185  ; 
in  Assault,  218,  219. 

One  Hundred  and  Seventeenth  Illinois,  2l6,  218. 

One  Hundred  andSeventv-eighth  New  York,  179, 
214. 

One  Hundred  and  Sixty-first  New  York,  Attack 
upon,  49. 

One  Hundred  and  Twenty-fourth  Illinois,  51,  53, 
63,  155. 

One  Hundred  aad  Twenty -second  Illinois,  186, 218, 
219. 

One  Hundred  and  Twenty-third  Illinois,  Mounted 
Infantry,  at  Selma,  254. 

Orders,  tu  fit  Troops  for  Campaign,  27  (note). 

Orem,  Lieut.,  wounded,  207. 

Organization,  of  Besieging  Army,  21  ;  of  Cavalry 
Corps,  243. 

Osage  (Gunboat),  Sinking  of,  70. 

OsTERHAUS,  Maj.-Gen.  P.  J.,  at  Blakely,  127,  185, 
194. 

Owen,  his  Battery,  71. 


Page,  Gen.  (Confed.),  at  Fort  Morgan,  19. 

Palfrey,  Col. ,  82. 

Palfrey,  Capt.  H.  G. ,  83. 

Palmer,  Ojmmodore  J.  S.,  229, 

Park,  Capt.,  214. 

Parker,  Lieut.,  92,  227. 

Patsmier,  Capt.,  71. 


18 


274 


INDEX. 


Patton,  Col.  J. ,  commands  Artillery,  60,  70. 
Ponsacola,   Rspairs  on  Wharf  at,  96  ;  Condition 

of,  97  ;  Steele  moves  from,  100. 
Perdiclo,  River,  forded,  IIT. 
Perkis'S,  Sergt.,  205. 
Pebrin,  Corporal,  138. 
Perry,  Lieat.-Col.  (».,  24, 105,  169,  204. 
Peter.'^,  Lieut. -Col. ,  248. 
Pettiboxe,  Lieut.  H.  D. ,  mentioned,  178,  192. 
Phelps,  Sergt.  W.  H.,  liilled  in  Assault,  216. 
Phtllips,   his    Battery,   72  ;    relieved    by  Garri- 

ty's,  139. 
Pickering,  Capt.,  105. 
PiEN,  Maj.  G.,  234. 
Pile,  Gen.  W.  A.,  at  Blakely,  172, 191 ;  Assault  by 

his  Brigade,  194, 195,  200. 
Pine  Barren  (Creek),  Picket  at,  99  ;  bridged,  104, 

105. 
Pioneers,  Company  to  each  Division,  29. 
Plan  of  Operations,  31. 
Pleasant  Ridge,  Combat  of,  262. 
Pollard  (Ala.),  Post  at,  99  ;  Entry  of,  HI. 
Pontoon  (Trail)),  at  Barrancas,  95  ;    of  "Wilson's 

Column,  244. 
Pringle's  Creek,  Combat  on,  108, 109. 
Prisoners,  Safety  of  Garrison,  201 ;  Arrangements 

for  Exchange  of  Wilson's  and  Forrest's,  257. 


Quarters,  Allowance  of  on  Campaign,  28. 


Rapek,  Lieut.,  81, 131. 

Rations,  Limitation  of,  in  the  Field,  29  ;  of  Garrison 
of  Spanish  Fort,  89  ;  reduced,  115,  117  ;  to 
Colored  Troops,  123  ;  of  Wilson's  Cavalry,  243, 
244. 

Bed  Fort,  shelled,  131. 

Reed,  Capt.  J.  R.,  55. 

Register  (Mobile),  Remarks  on  Fall  of  Selma,  143 
(note). 

Rendelbrook,  Lieut.,  253. 

Reserve  Corps,  of  the  West  Mississippi,  21  ;  Organ- 
ized into  Thirteenth  Corps,  25. 

Retreat  of  Garrison  from  Spanish  Fort,  161. 

Rice,  Capt.,  at  Blakely,  190. 

RiDSOUR,  Lieut.,  83. 

KlLEY,  Thos.  ,110. 

RixAKER,  Col.,  Brigade  at  Blakely,  170;  changes 
Position,  174  ;  in  Assault,  213,  218,  219,  220. 

Boad,  through  the  Swamps,  34,  101, 115, 116. 

BoBiN-sox,  Capt.,  255. 

Rockwell,  Capt. ,  100. 

RoDN'ET,  his  Battery  mentioned,  247. 

Rodolph,  (Tinclad), sinking  of,  94. 

RoDT,  Gen.,  Division  of,  247,  250,  at  Selma,  255. 

EoGEais,  Col.  A.  AV.,  Skirmish  at  Minette  Bayou, 
51  ;  at  Spanish  Fort,  132,  155. 

RoGERSjLieut. ,  in  Assault  on  Blakely,  198, 199. 

RowE,  William,  Daring  of,  134. 

RowsE,  Lieut..  182. 

Ryan,  Capt. ,  54. 


S 

Sanderson,  ?.  Lieut. ,  213. 

ScHAFFER,  Lieut.  A. ,  killed  at  Pringle's  Creek,  110 

ScHTLTZ,  Corporal,  mentioned.  217. 

SconELD,  Col.,  Brigade  of,  168  ;  Assault  bv,  195- 

201. 
Second  Division    (Thirteenth    Corps)  ordered    to 

move  from  Barrancas,  95  ;  March  from  Pen- 
•  SMola,  101-103  ;  Arrival  at  the  Escambia,  110  ; 


at  Canoe  Station,  116;  before  Blakely,  125- 
127,  168,  171  ;  Batteries  in  Front  of,  180  ; 
ordered  to  be  in  Readiness  to  march,  186  ;  its 
Trenches,  190  ;  prepares  for  an  Advance,  192  ; 
Assault  on  Blakely,  202-210. 

Sears,  Lieut. -Col.,  169. 

Second  Connecticut  (Battery)  at  Blakely,  172, 180, 
189,  210. 

Second  Illinois  (Battery),  190. 

Second  Illinois  (Cavalry),  113,  118. 

Second  Iowa  (Battery) ,  55,  82. 

Second  Maine  (Cavalry).  113, 118. 

Second  Massachusetts  (Battery),  185. 

Second  Michigan  (Cavalry),  260,  261  ;  Brave  Con- 
duct in  Combat  of  Pleasant  Ridge,  262,  263. 

Second  New  York  (Vet.  Cavalry),  107. 

Second  Tennessee  (Cavalry)  ,  43. 

Selma,  Notice  of  its  Fortiflcations,  252  ;  captured, 
255  ;  Destruction  of  Property  in,  256,  258. 

Seventeenth  Indiana  Mounted  Infantry,  250,  251. 

Seventeenth  Ohio  (Battery)  180,  185, 187. 

Seventh  Massachusetts  (Battery)  at  Spanish  Fort, 
57,  78,  92. 

Seventh  Vermont,  56  ;  Capture  of  Detachment  of, 
84-87. 

Seventy -second  Dlinois,  51;  Loss  first  day  at  Span- 
ish Fort,  54  ;  Charges  Garrison  Skirmishers, 
158, 159. 

Seventy-second  Ohio,  54. 

Seventy-seventh  Illinois  in  Siege  of  Forts  Morgaa 
and  Gaines,  14. 

Seventy -seventh  Ohio  leaves  Arkansas,  25. 

Seventy-sixth  Illinois,  24  ;  in  Assault,  204,  205. 

Seventy -sixth  (Colored)  Regiment,  195. 

Seventy-third  (Colored)  Regiment,  194  ;  plants  its 
Colors  on  Works,  201. 

Sharpshooters,  77,  146  ;  magnanimity  of  Confed- 
erate, 134  ;  Offer  to  surrender,  159. 

Shea,  Corporal,  mentioned,  216. 

Sheetz,  Col.,  at  Blakely,  211. 

Sheijha,  Lieut. -Col.  V.,  Worlis  built  by,  11. 

Shepherd,  Capt. ,  160. 

Sibert,  Lieut.,  134. 

SmLET,  C. ,  Mill  of,  43. 

Sibley,  Lieut.,  attacks  Wagon- train,  35. 

Sibley,  0. ,  Mill  of,  45  ;  Outpost  withdrawn  from, 
119. 

Siege-train  organized  at  Fort  Gaines,  26. 

Siege  of  Spanish  Fort,  Progress  of,  147 ;  com- 
pleted, 160  (see  Blakely). 

Simon,  Sergeant  E. ,  mentioned,  201. 

Sixteenth  Corps  moves  down  the  Mississippi,  25, 
26  ;  at  Fish  River,  37  ;  investment  of  Spanisn. 
Fort,  50-55,  62  ;  Use  of  Wooden  Mortars,  138  ; 
moves  to  Montgomery,  232. 

Sixth  Kentucky  (CavalrV) ,  260  ;  in  Combat  of 
Pleasant  Ridge,  262,  263. 

Sixth  Minnesota,  43,  172,  217,  218. 

Sixty-eighth  (Colored)  Regiment,  its  Part  in  As- 
sault, 195-200. 

Sixty-ninth  Indiana  at  Barrancas,  24  ;  in  Assault, 
204,  207. 

Skirmishers  (see  Sharpshooters)  ;  Advance  of,  at 
Blakely,  171 ;  Communication  between  184. 

Slack,  Gen.,  Brigade  of ,  55  ;  at  Spanish  Fort,  66, 
161  ;  at  Blakely,  211. 

Slocum,  Capt.  C.  H. ,  72, 145. 

Smith,  Capt.  J.  J.'s,  Pontoniers,  34. 

Smith,  Lieut.  W.  F..,  at  Spanish  Fort,  53. 

Smtth,  Maj.-Gen.  A.  J.  (see  Sixteenth  Corps)  ; 
narrow  Escape  at  Mmette  Bridge,  51 ;  re- 
bukes Men  for  cheering  him,  52  ;  has  to  move 
Quarters,  72;  Operations  in  his  Front,  133, 
151-156  ;  Intention  to  assault  Huger  and 
Tracy,  220. 

Snyder,  Lieut. ,  in  Assault,  210. 

Soldiers  (see  Sharpshooters,  Skirmishers)  ;  re- 
ligious Worship  by,  41 ;  in  Bivouac,  50;  on 


INDEX. 


275 


Short  Rations,  117  ;  after  Bombardment,  140  ; 
Communication  on  Skirmish-Line,  184  ;  Re- 
mark of  Colored  in  regard  to  Shells,  189  ; 
Characteristic  Humor  of,  191  ;  Remarks  of 
Confederate,  238  ;  Valor  at  Selma,  255  ;  Man- 
ner of  crossing  Streams,  261,  264, 265, 

Sortie,  on  Party  of  Seventh  Vermont,  84;  expec- 
tation of  at  Blakely,  169, 174. 

Spanish  Fort,  Description  of,  48.  49  ;  Investment 
of,  50  ;  Omtinuation  of  Siege,  60,  130  ;  Num- 
ber of  Guns  in  Position  to  April  4,  139  ; 
assaulted,  151  ;  captured,  IpO  ;  Observations 
on  Siege  of,  163-167. 

Spence,  Col.,  Despatches  to  at  Montrose,  40  (note) 
scouting,  45  (and  mite). 

Sficeley,  Col.  W.  T. ,  24  ;  Brigade  of,  on  March 
102  ;  enters  Pollard,  111  ;  at  Blakely,  127 
170;  in  Assault,  202,207. 

Spurixng,  Lieut.-Col.  A.  B.,  Operations  of,  112-114 
captures  Outpost,  118  ;  Capture  by,  183. 

Squadron,  Naval,  66  (see  Navy). 

Stall',  Organization  ol ,  30. 

Sr-\5iPER,  Lieut.,  147. 

Starr,  Lieut.-Col.,  mentioned,  58. 

Stearns,  Capt.  R.  B.,  Capture  of,  84-87. 

Steele,  Maj.-Gen.  F.,  commands  Forces  at  Kenner, 
21 ;  assumes  Command  Column  at  Barrancas, 
95  ;  marches  from  Pensacola,  100  ;  turns 
toward  Blakely,  114  ;  Headquarters  at  Sib- 
ley's, 170  ;  Reply  to  Canby,  185  ;  prepares  to 
advance,  192  ;  in  the  Assault,  221 ;  moves  to 
Montgomery,  232. 

Stepson,  Capt.  C.  G.,  killed  at  Spanish  Fort,  132. 

Stocker,  Lieut.,  73. 

Stockton,  Lieut.-Col.,  mentioned,  36. 

Stockton,  Town  of,  Steele's  Column  reaches,  117. 

Stone,  Capt.,  mentioned,  58. 

Storeb,  Capt. ,  mentioned,  57. 

Streams,  Difficulties  in  crossing,  261,  264,  265. 

SuRGET,  Capt.,  Despatch  to  Gen,  Hodges,  241. 

Swan,  Lieut.,  185. 

SwrrzER.  Sergt.  John,  212. 


T 

Taisey,  Lieut.  123. 

Taylor,  Capt. ,  killed  in  Charge,  251. 

Taylor,  Lieut.-Col.,  181. 

Taylor,  Lieut.-Gen.  Richard,  his  Command,  44  ; 
his  Despatches  to  Gen.  Lee,  44  (note)  ;  Con- 
dition of  his  Command,  241,  242  ;  Leaves  Sel- 
ma, 253  ;  Visits  ilobile,  257. 

Tecumseh  (Shi|.),  in  Mobile  Bay,  15. 

Tennessee  (Ram),  Encounter  with,  16. 

Tennessee  (see  Number  of  Regiment) . 

Tenth  Kansas  in  Skirmish,  43;  at  Blakely,  179, 
181 ;  in  Assault,  216-213. 

Tenth  Minnesota,  54. 

Tenth  Missouri  Cavalry,  247. 

Texas  Regiments,  151. 

THATcmsR,  Rcar-Admiral,  66  ;  adopts  Means  to  re- 
move Torpedoes,  133,  232. 

Third  Indiana  Battery,  55,  82. 

Third  Iowa  Cavalry,  247,  251. 

Third  Marylaud  (Dismounted  Cavalry),  14. 

Thirteenth  Corps,  organized,  25  ;  March  to  Fish 
River  33-36  ;  Investment  of  Spanish  Fort, 
55-58  ;  Operations,  Second  day  of  Siege,  64  ; 
Fifth  day,  82;  Casualties  in,  138-139  ;  Enthu- 
siasm in,  159. 

Thirtieth  Missouri,  41. 

Thirty-eighth  I^>wa,  in  Siege  of  Fort  Morgan,  17. 

Thirty-fifth  Iowa,  55. 

Thirty-fifth  Wisconsin  leaves  Arkansas,  25. 

Thirty-fourth  III wa  in  Siege  of  Forts  Gaines  and 
Morgan,  14-20  ;  moves  to  Barrancas,  22  ;  at 
Blakely,  127, 169  ;  in  Assault,  209,  210. 


Thirty-fourth  New  Jersey,  174,  214,  216. 

Thirty-second  Iowa,  179. 

Thirty-seventh  Illinois  in  Assault,  209,  210. 

Thirty-third  Illinois,  54. 

Thirty-third    Iowa    moves    from    Arkansas,  25  ; 

Casualties  in,  64. 
Thirtv-third  Missouri,  55. 
Thirty-third  Wisconsin,  51,  54. 
Thjm.as,  Brig. -Gen.  B.  .M.,  Confederate  Command 

of,  44,  80. 
Thompson  ,  Corporal ,  218. 

IHORNBURY,  LiCUt.-Col.,  120. 

Toms,  Capt.,  214. 

Torpedoes  near  D'Olieve's  Creek,  42  ;  sweeping 
Channel  for,  132  ;  Effects  of  Explosion  of  One, 
200  ;  at  Blakely,  222. 

Tracy  (Fort),  70,  71,  137  ;  Additions  to  its  Para- 
pet, 145  ;  Reduction  of  227-232. 

Transportation,  Allowance  on  Campaign,  28. 

Transports  (Coufod.),  11  ed  on,  81. 

Treadway,  Work  on,  80  ;  Garrison  retreats  over 
157.  ' 

Tremain,  Corporal,  in  Assault,  205. 

Trenches,  work  in,  at  Spanish  Fort,  78  ;  com- 
menced at  Blakely,  128  ;  Length  of,  at  Spanish 
Fort,  148  ;  how  should  bo  built,  166  ;  Extent 
of  Besiegers'  at  Blakely,  190. 

Trion,  Skirmish  at,  260. 

Trull,  Capt.,  Battery  of,  78, 189. 

Turner,  Col.  Charles,  53,155. 

TtJTT,  Capt.,  withdraws  from  Greenwood,  45  ;  De- 
spatches from,  98  (note). 

Twelfth  Iowa ,  55. 

Twelfth  Missouri  Cavalry,  244. 

Twentieth  Iowa  before  Blakely,  126  ;  in  Assault, 
209,  210. 

Twentieth  Wisconsin  in  Siege  of  Fort  Morgan,  16  ; 
at  Spanish  Fort,  67. 

Twenty-eighth  Wisconsin  moves  from  Arkansas, 
25  ;  at  Spanish  Fort,  56  ;  Casualties  in,  64. 

Twenty-flrst  Alabama  at  Miuctte  Bridge,  51. 

Twenty-first  Iowa  in  Skirmish,  42,43  ;  at  Spanish 
Fort,  65. 

Twenty-first  Missouri,  218,  219. 

Twenty-first  New  York  Battery,  56. 

Twenty-fourth  Indiana  moves  from  Kenner  to 
Barrancis,  22  ;  destroys  Railroad  at  Pollard, 
112  ;  at  Hall's,  120  ;  at  Blakely,  127  ;  in  As- 
sault, 206. 

Twenty-niuth  Illinois,  Loss  in,  79. 

Twenty-ninth  Iowm  moves  from  Arkansas,  25  ;  at 
Spanish  Fort,  65,  79. 

Twenty-second  Louisiana  (Confed.),  70. 

Twenty-seventh  Iowa  in  Assault  on  Blakely,  216, 
218. 

Twenty-seventh  Wisconsin  attached  to  the  Thir- 
teenth Corps,  25. 

Twenty-sixth  Indiana,  54. 

Twenty -sixth  New  York,  Battery  hauled  through 
Swamp,  34  ;  at  Spanish  Fort,  56. 

Twenty-third  Iowa,  144, 156. 

Twenty-third  Wisconsin,  Loss  in,  181. 

Tyson,  Lieut,  commands  Naval  Battery,  18. 


U 

Upton,  Gen. ,  Cavalry  Division  of,  243  ;  Skirmish 
near  Montevallo,  246  ;  Scouts  capture  De- 
spatches, 248  ;  in  Battle  of  Ebenezer  Church, 
251  ;  at  Selma,  253-255. 


Van  Anda,  Lieut.-Col.,  42. 
Van  LiEcrw,  Capt.,  82. 
Veach,  Lieut.  J.  J.,  261. 


276 


INDEX. 


Veatch,  Gen.,  Division  marches  to  Fish  River.  33  ; 
at  Spanish  Fort,  79  ;  moves  with  Supplies, 
120  ;  before  Blalfely,  170,  172  ;  notified  to  Ad- 
vance, 192  ;  in  Assault,  211-213. 

Vermont  (see  Number  of  Regiment). 

Victories,  Influence  of  Industry  and  Instruction  in 
Securing,  243. 

ViTQUAiN,  Lieut.-Col.  Victor,  24,  169,  182  ;  in  As- 
sault, 202,  203. 

Vineyard,  Lieut.  Henry,  Gallant  Conduct  of,  1.52, 
153, 154. 


W 

Wabd,  Col. ,  Brigade  of,  51, 159. 

Warot:r,  Lieut.,  205. 

Washington,  Artillery  at  Spanish  Fort,  131. 

Waterloo  (Teun),  Cavalry  Camp  at,  243. 

Watson,  Capt.  C. ,  leads  Sortie,  85. 

Watts,  Lieut.,  113. 

Webber,  Col. ,  at  Blakely,  169. 

Welsch,  J.,  Expertness  as  Gunner,  228. 

Were,  Capt'.,  79. 

Western   Shore    (Mobile    Bay),   Demonstration 

on,  36. 
Wharf,  Repair  of,  at  Pensacola,  96,  91 
Wheaton,  Lietit.-Col.  L..  in  Assault,  212. 
Wheeler,  Corporal  J.,  killed  at  Blakely,  215. 
WmTB,    Lieut.-Col.    F.,     Churge    at     Ebenezer 

Church,  250. 
Whitney,  Lieut. ,  180. 
WniirLESEY,  Lieut.-Col.,  at  Blakely,  173. 
WiLKiNS'  Plantation,  Skirmish  at,  118. 


WiLUAMS,  Lieut.-Col.  J.  M  ,  61,  89, 148. 

Williams,  Lieut.,  130. 

Williams,  Mr.,  106. 

Wilson,  Capt.  S.  R.,  killed  at  Blakely,  201. 

WnsoN,  Gen.  J.  H.,  Cavalry  Operations  of,  241 
Organization  of  Column,  243  :  Marches,  244 
at  Elyton,  detaches  Croxton's  Brigade,  246 
Victory  at  Ebenezer  Church,  250,  L'51 ;  cap 
tures  Selma,  253-255  ;  Interview  withForrest 
at  Cahawha,  257  ;  Column  leaves  Selma,  258, 
259  ;  Observations  on  his  Raid,  266,  267. 

WiMMER,  Capt.  W.  P.,  SI,  131  ;  moves  to  Blakely, 
144  ;  Effective  Fire  on  Gunboats,  187. 

Winnebago  (Gunboat),  67. 

WiNSLOW,  Gen.  E.  F.,  Brigade  of,  247  ;   at  Ebene- 
zer Church,  251  ;  commands  Selma,  256. 

Winter,  Maj.,  at  Blakely,  175,  218. 

Wisconsin,  (see  Number  of  Regiment). 

WiSNER,  Capt.,  202. 

Wood,  Capt.,  217. 

Woods,  Maj.  W.  W.,247. 

Works,  Regiments  to  cover  Front  with,  30. 


Yancey,  his  Visit  to  Mobile,  9. 
Young,  Col.  J.  M.,  at  Monte vallo,  247. 


Zacharie,  Col.,  covers  Retreat,  157. 


B.  Van  Nostrand'  s  Puhlications. 

Barre  Duparcq''s  9Iilitary  Art  and  History.  Elements  of 
Military  Art  and  History  comprising  the  History  and  Tactics  of  the 
separate  Arms;  the  Combination  of  the  Arms;  and  the  minor  operations 
of  War.  By  Edward  db  la  Barre  Duparcq,  Chef  de  Bataillon  of 
Engineers  in  the  Army  of  France ;  and  Professor  of  tlie  Military  An  In 
the  Imperial  School  of  St.  Cyr.  Translated  by  Brig. -Gen.  Geo.  W.  Oul- 
LUM,  U.  S.  A.,  Chief  of  the  Staff  of  Major-Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck,  Gen^ral- 
in-Chief  U.  S.  Army.     1  vol.  8vo,  cloth.     $5.00. 

'Iread.tbe  original  a  few  years  since,  and  considered  it  the  veiy  best  work  I  had 
Been  npon  the  subject.  Gen.  Culhitn's  ability,  and  familiarity  with  the  technical  lan- 
guage of  French  military  writers,  are  a  sufficient  guarantee  of  the  correctness  of  his 
translation."  H.  W.  HALLECK,  Major-Gen.  U.  S.  A. 

Beliefs  Military  f ^aw.  A  Treatise  on  Military  Law  and  the  Prac- 
tice of  Courts-Martial.  By  Capt.  S.  V.  Benet,  Ordnance  Department, 
U.  S.  A.,  late  Assistant  Professor  of  Etliics,  Law,  &c.,  Military  Academy, 
West  Point.     Fifth  edition,  reidsed.     1  voL  8vo,  law  sheep.     $4.50. 

"This  boolv  Is  manifestly  well  timed  just  at  this  particular  period,  and  it  is,  without 
doubt,  quite  as  happily  adapted  to  the  purpose  for  which  it  was  written.  .It  is  arranged 
with  admirable  method,  and  written  witli  such  perspicuity,  and  in  a  style  so  easy  and 
graceful,  as  to  engage  the  attention  of  every  reader  who  may  be  so  fortunate  as  to  open 
its  pages.  This  treatise  will  make  a  valuable  addition  to  the  library  of  the  lawyer  or  the 
civilian;  while  to  the  military  man  it  seems  to  be  indispensable." — PhiladelplUa  Even- 
ing Journal. 

Halleck's  luteriiatioiial  Law.  International  Law;  or.  Rules 
Regulating  the  Intercourse  of  States  in  Peace  and  War.  By  Major-Gen. 
H.  W.  Halleck,  Commanding  the  Army.    1  vol.  8vo,  law  sheep.     $G.OO. 

"  The  work  -will  be  found  to  be  of  great  use  to  army  and  navy  officers,  to  professional 
la^vyers,  and  to  all  interested  in  the  topics  of  which  it  treats — topics  to  which  present 
events  give  a  gret.tly  enhanced  importance — such  as  'Declaration  of  "War  and  its 
Effects ;'  '  Sieges  and  Blockades ;'  '  Visitation  and  Search ;'  '  Eight  of  Search ;'  '  Prize 
Courts ;' . '  Military  Occupation ;'  '  Treaties  of  Peace ;'  '  Sovereignty  of  States,'  Ac,  and 
valuable  information  for  consuls  and  ambassadors." — JT.  T.  Evening  Post, 

History  of  West  Point.  And  its  Military  Importance  during  the 
American  Revolution;  and  the  Origin  and  Progress  of  the  United  States 
Military  Academy.  By  Capt.  Edward  C.  Botnton,  A.  M.,  Adjutant  of 
the  ililitary  Academy.  With  numerous  Maps  and  Engravings.  1  vol. 
8vo,  blue  cloth,  $6.00;  half  mor.,  $7.50;  full  mor.,  $10.00. 

"It  records  the  earliest  attempt  at  instituting  a  Military  School  by  the  Continental 
Congress,  in  17T6.  It  conducts  us  through  the  life  of  the  institution,  arguing  with  terse- 
ness its  constitutionality,  defending  its  educational  princlple8,iand  explaining  the  neces- 
•ity  for  its  preservation." — United  Service  Magazin*. 


D.  Van  NostranW  s  Publications. 


History  of  tbe  United  States  Naval  Academy.  With 
Biographical  Sketches,  and  the  Names  of  all  the  Superintendents,  Profes- 
sors, and  Graduates ;  to  which  is  added  a  Record  of  some  of  the  earhest 
votes  by  Congress,  of  Thanks,  Medals,  and  Swords  to  Naval  Officers. 
By  Edward  Chauncet  Marshall,  A.  M.  1vol.  12mo,  cloth,  plates.  $1.00. 

"Every  naval  man  will  find  it  not  only  a  pleasant  companion,  but  an  invaluable  book 
of  reference.  It  is  seldom  that  so  much  information  is  made  accessible  in  so  agreeable  a 
manner  iaso  small  a  space." — New  York  Times. 

Scott's  Military  Dictionary.  Comprising  Technical  Definitions ; 
Information  on  Raising  and  Keeping  Troops ;  Actual  Service,  including 
Makeshifts  and  improved  Materiel^  and  Law,  Government,  Regulation, 
and  Administration  relating  to  Land  Forces.  By  Colonel  H.  L.  Scott,  In- 
spector-General TJ.  S.  A.  1  vol.  large  octavo,  fuUy  illustrated,  half  mo- 
rocco, $6 ;  half  russia,  $8 ;  full  morocco,  $10. 

"  This  book  is  really  an  Encylopaedia,  both  elementary  and  technical,  and  as  such  occu- 
pies a  gap  in  military  literature  which  has  long  been  most  inconveniently  vacant.  This 
book  meets  a  present  popular  want,  and  will  be  secured  not  only  by  those  embarking  in 
the  profession  but  by  a  great  number  of  civilians,  who  are  determined  to  follow  the  de- 
scriptions and  to  understand  the  philosophy  of  the  various  movements  of  the  Campaign. 
Indeed,  no  tolerably  good  library  would  be  complete  without  the  work." — Ne/w  York 
Times. 

Benton's  Ordnance  and  Gunnery.  A  Course  of  Instruction 
in  Ordnance  and  Gunnery;  compiled  for  the  use  of  the  Cadets  of  the 
United  States  Mihtary  Academy.  By  Capt.  J.  G.  Benton,  Ordnance  De- 
partment, late  Instructor  of  Ordnance  and  Gunnery,  Military  Academy, 
West  Point ;  Principal  Assistant  to  Chief  of  Ordnance,  U.  S.  A.  Second 
Edition,  revised  and  enlarged.    1  vol.  8vo,  cloth,  cuts.     $5.00. 

"  There  is  no  one  book  within  the  range  of  our  military  reading  and  study,  that  con- 
tains more  to  recomcnend  it  upon  the  subject  of  which  it  treats.  It  is  as  full  and  com- 
plete as  the  narrow  compass  of  a  single  volume  would  admit,  and  the  reputation  of  the 
author  as  a  scientific  and  practical  artillerist  is  a  sufficient  guarantee  for  the  correctness 
of  his  statements  and  deductions,  and  the  thoroughness  of  his  labors." — N.  Y.  Observer, 

Cribbon's  Artillerist's  manual.  •  Compiled  from  various  Sources, 
and  adapted  to  the  Service  of  the  United  States.  Profusely  illustrated 
with  woodcuts  and  engravings  on  stone.  Second  edition,  revised  and 
corrected,  with  valuable  additions.  By  Gen.  John  Gibbon,  U.  S.  A. 
1  vol.  8vo,  half  roan.     $6.00. 

This  book  is  now  considered  the  standard  authority  for  that  particular  branch  of  the 
Service  in  the  United  States  Army.  The  War  Department,  at  "Washington,  has  exhibited 
its  thorough  appreciation  of  the  merits  of  this  volume,  the  want  of  which  has  been  hither- 
to much  felt  in  the  service,  by  subscribing  for  700  copiee. 

2 


D.  Va?i  Nostrandls  Publications. 


Jomiiii's  liife  of  the  Emperor  IVapoleoH  I.  Life  of  Napo- 
leon. By  Baron  Joraini,  General-in-Chief  and  Aide-de-Camp  to  the 
Emperor  of  Russia.  Translated  from  the  French,  with  Notes,  by  11.  TV. 
Halleck,  LL.  D.,  Major-General  United  States  Army;  author  of  "Elements 
of  Military  Art  and  Science,"  "  International  Law,  and  the  Laws  of  War,'' 
etc.,  etc.  In  four  volumes  octavo,  with  an  Atlas  of  Sixty  Maps  and 
Plans.  Price,  in  red  cloth,  $25.00 ;  half  calf,  or  half  morocco,  $35.00; 
half  russia,  $37.50. 

"It  is  needless  to  say  any  thing  in  praise  of  Jomini  as  a  writer  on  the  science  of  war. 

"  General  Halleck  has  laid  the  professional  soldier  and  the  student  of  military  history 

under  equal  obligations  by  the  service  he  has  done  to  the  cause  of  military  literature  in 

the  preparation  of  this  work  for  the  press.     His  rare  qualifications  for  the  task  thus 

undertaken  will  be  acknowledged  by  all. 

"The  Notes  with  which  the  text  is  illustrated  by  General  Halleck  are  not  among  the 
least  of  the  merits  of  the  publication,  which,  in  this  respect,  has  a  value  not  possessed  by 
the  original  work.    *    *    *"    —National  IntelUgencer. 

"  The  Atlas  attached  to  this  version  of  Jomini's  Napoleon  adds  very  materially  to  its 
value.  It  contains  sixty  Maps,  illustrative  of  Napoleon's  extraordinary  military  career, 
beginning  with  the  immortal  Italian  Campaigns  of  1796,  and  closing  with  the  decisive 
Campaign  of  Flanders,  in  1815,  the  last  Map  showing  Ihe  Battle  of  Wavre.  These  Maps 
take  the  reader  to  Italy,  Egypt,  Palestine,  Germany  Moravia,  Russia,  Spain,  Portugal, 
and  Flanders;  and  their  number  and  variety,  and  the  /ast  and  various  theatres  of  action 
■which  they  indicate,, testify  to  the  immense  extent  of  Napoleon's  operations,  and  to  the 
gigantic  character  of  his  power.    *    *    *"    —Boston  Traveller, 

Jomini's  Orand  Military  Operations.  Treatise  on  Grand 
Military  Operations ;  or,  a  Critical  and  Military  History  of  the  Wars  of 
Frederick  the  Great,  as  contrasted  with  the  Modern  System,  together 
with  a  few  of  the  most  important  Principles  of  the  Art  of  War.  By 
Baron  Jomini,  General-ia-Chief  and  Aide-de-Camp  to  the  Emperor  of 
Russia.  Translated  from  the  French  by  Col.  S.  B.  Holabird,  A.  D.  C. 
U.  S.  A.     2  vols.  8vo,  cloth,  with  an  Atlas  of  40  Maps  and  Plans.  $15.00. 

Jomini's  Campaigrn  of  Waterloo.    The  PoHtical  and  Military 
History  of  the  Campaign  of  Waterloo.     Translated  from  the  French  of 
General  Baron  de  Jomini,  by  Capt.  S.  V.  Benet,  Ordnance  Department, 
U.  S.  Army.     Third  edition.     1  vol.  12mo,  cloth,  $1.25. 
"Baron  Jomini  has  the  reputation  of  being  one  of  the  greatest  military  historians  and 
critics  of  the  century.     His  merits  have  been  recognized  by  the  highest  military  author- 
ities in  Europe,  and  were  rewarded  in  a  conspicuous  manner  by  the  greatest  militiry 
power  in  Christendom.    He  learned  the  art  of  war  in  the  school  of  experience,  the  best 
and  only  finishing  school  of  the  soldier.    He  served  with  distinction  in  nearly  all  the 
campaigns  of  Napoleon,  and  it  was  mainly  from  the  gigantic  military  operations  of  this 
matchless  master  of  the  art  that  he  was  enabled  to  discover  its  true  principles,  and  to 
ascertain  the  best  means  of  their  application  to  the  infinity  of  combinations  which  actual 
war  presents.    Jomini  criticises  the  details  of  Waterloo  with  great  science,  and  yet  in  a 
manner  that  interests  the  general  reader  as  well  as  the  professional."— .Vew  York  World. 

3 


D.  Van  NostranW  s  Publications. 


Roeiner's    Cavalry;    its   History,    Management,    and 
Uses  in  War.     By  J.  Eoemer,  LL.  D.,  late  an  Officer  of  Cavalry  in 
the  Service  of  the  Netherlands.     Elegantly  illustrated,  with  one  hundred 
and  twenty-seven  fine  wood  engravings.     In  one  large  octavo  volume, 
beautifully  printed  on  tinted  paper.     Cloth,  $6;  half  calf,  $7.50. 
"  By  far  the  best  treatise  upon  Cavalry  and  its  uses  in  the  field,  which  has  yet  been 
published  in  this  country,  for  the  general  use  of  ofiicers  of  all  ranks,  is  this  elaborate  and 
interesting  work.     Eschewing  the  elementary  principles  and  tactics  of  cavalry,  which 
may  be  learned  from  any  hand-book,  the  author  treats  of  the  uses  of  cavalry  in  the  field 
of  strategy  and  tactics,  and  of  its  general  discipline  and  management.     The  range  of  the 
work  includes  an  admirable  treatise  upon  rifled  fire-arms,  an  historical  sketch  of  cavalry, 
embodying  many  interesting  facts,  an  account  of  the  cavalry  service  in  Europe  and  this 
country,  and  a  treatise  on  horses,  their  equipment,  management,  &c.     The  work  is  copi- 
ously illustrated  and  elegantly  printed.     It  is  interesting  not  alone  to  military  men  but 
to  the  general  reader,  who  will  gain  from  its  pages  valuable  historical  facts  and  very  clear 
ideas  of  some  branches  of  the  art  of  war,  such  as  the  employment  of  spies,  gaining  infor- 
mation in  an  enemy's  country,  advance  movements,  and  other  strategical  manoeuvres." — 
£ost07i  Journal. 

Nolan's  System  for  Training  Cavalry  Horses.  By  Ken- 
ner  Garrard,  Captain  Fifth  Cavalry,  U.  S.  A.  1  vol.  12mo,  cloth.  24 
lithographed  plates.     $2.00. 

"This  work  is  clearly  written,  is  eminently  practical,  is  fully  illustrated,  and  contains 
numerous  hints  as  applicable  to  the  discipline  and  management  of  the  draught-horse  as 
that  of  "his  more  showy  and  fiery  brother  of  the  cavalry." — Boston  Journal. 

Barnard  and  Barry's  Peninsular  Campaign.  Report  of 
the  Engineer  and  Artillery  Operations  of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac,  from 
its  organization  to  the  close  of  the  Peninsular  Campaign.  By  Brig.-Gen. 
J.  G-.  Barnard,  and  other  Engineer  Officers,  and  Brig.-Gen.  "W.  P.  Barry, 
Chief  of  Artillery.  Illustrated  by  numerous  Maps,  Plans,  etc.  1  vol. 
8vo,  cloth,  $4.00. 

*'The  title  of  thiS  work  sufficiently  indicates  its  importance  and  value  as  a  contribu- 
tion to  the  history  of  the  great  rebellion.  General  Barnard's  Report  is  a  narrative  of  the 
Engineer  operations  of  the  Array  of  the  Potomac  from  the  time  of  its  organization  to 
the  date  it  was  withdrawn  from  the  James  Eiver.  Thus  a  record  is  given  of  an  impor- 
tant part  in  the  great  work  which  the  nation  found  before  it  when  it  was  first  confronted 
with  the  necessity  of  war;  and  perhaps  on  no  other  point  in  the  annals  of  the  rebellion 
will  future  generations  look  with  a  deeper  or  more  admiring  interest." — Buffalo  Courier. 

Tlie  "  C.  S.  A.,"  and  ttie  Battle  of  Bull  Rnn.  (A  Let- 
ter to  an  English  friend),  by  J.  G.  Barnard,  Lieut.-Colonel  of  EngineerSj 
TJ.  S.  A.,  Brigadier-General  and  Chief  Engineer,  Army  of  the  Potomac. 
With  five  Maps.     1  vol.  8vo,  cloth.     $2.00. 

"The  work  is  clearly  written,  and  can  but  leave  the  impression  upon  every  reader's 
mind  that  it  is  truth.  We  commend  it  to  the  perusal  of  every  one  who  wants  an  intelli- 
gent, truthful,  and  graphic  description  of  the  '  C.  S.  A.,'  and  the  Battle  of  Bull  Enn." — 
Mew  York  Observer. 

4 


D.  Van  NostranWs  Publications. 


Sinipson'§  Ordnance  and  IVaval  Gunnery.  A  Treatise  on 
Ordnance  and  Naval  Gunnery,  compiled  and  arranged  as  a  Text-Book  for 
the  U.  S.  Naval  Academy.  By  Lieut.  Edward  Simpson,  U.  S.  N.  Third 
edition,  revised  and  enlarged,     1  vol.  8vo,  plates  and  cuts,  clotli.    $5.00. 

"  It  is  scarcely  necessary  for  us  to  say,  that  a  work  prepared  by  a  writer  bo  practically 
conversant  witli  all  the  subjects  of  which  he  treats,  and  who  has  such  a  reputation  for 
Bcientiflc  ability,  cannot  fail  to  take  at  once  a  high  place  among  the  text-books  or  v^ur 
naval  service.  It  has  been  approved  by  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy,  and  will  henceforth 
be  one  of  the  standard  authorities  on  all  matters  connected  with  Naval  Gunnery."— i^'eu) 
York  IleraldU 

HoIIey's  Ordnance  and  Armor.  Embracing  Descriptions, 
Discussions,  and  Professional  Opinions  concerning  the  Material,  Fabrica- 
tion, Requirements,  Capabilities,  and  Endurance  of  European  and  Amer- 
ican Guns  for  Naval,  Sea-Coast,  and  Iron-Clad  Warfare,  and  their  Rifling, 
Projectiles,  and  Breech-Loading;  also.  Results  of  Experiments  against 
.A.rmor,  from  Oflicial  Records.  With  an  Appendix,  referring  to  Gun- 
Cotton,  Hooped  Guns,  etc.,  etc.  By  A.  L.  HoUey,  B.  P.  With  493  illus- 
trations.    1  vol.  8vo,  948  pages.    Half  roan,  $10.00. 

LueeN  Naval  IJglit  Artillery.  Instructions  for  Naval  Light 
Artillery,  afloat  and  ashore,  prepared  and  arranged  for  the  U.  S.  Naval 
Academy,  by  Lieutenant  W.  H.  Parker,  U.  S.  N.  Second  edition,  revised 
by  Lieutenant  S.  B.  Luce,  U.  S.  N.,  Assistant  Instructor  of  Gunnery  and 
Tactics  at  the  U.  S.  Naval  Academy.  1  vol.  Svo,  cloth,  with  twenty- two 
Plates.     $3.00. 

"  The  service  for  which  this  is  the  text-book  of  instruction  is  of  special  importance  in 
the  present  war.  The  use  of  light  boat-pieces  is  constant  and  important,  and  young  ofti- 
cers  are  frequently  obliged  to  leave  their  boats,  take  their  pieces  ashore,  and  manoeuvre 
them  as  field  artillery.  Not  unfrequently,  also,  they  are  incorporated,  when  ashore,  with 
troops,  and  must  handle  their  guns  like  the  artillery  soldiers  of  a  battery.  '  The  Exercise 
of  the  Howitzer  Afloat'  was  prepared  and  arranged  by  Captain  Dahlgren,  whose  name 
gives  additional  sanction  and  value  to  the  book.  A  Manual  for  the  Sword  and  Pistol  is 
also  given.  The  Plates  are  numerous  and  exceedingly  clear,  and  the  whole  typography  is 
excellent" — Philadelphia  Inquirer. 

■|Vard'§  IVaval  Ordnance  and  Gunnery.  Elementary  In- 
struction in  Naval  Ordnance  and  Gunnery.  By  James  H.  Ward,  Com- 
mander U.  S.  Navy;  author  of  "Naval  Tactics,"  and  "Steam  for  the 
Million."    New  edition,  revised  and  enlarged.     Svo,  cloth.     $2.00. 

"  It  conveys  an  amount  of  information  in  the  same  space  to  be  found  nowhere  else,  and 
given  with  a  clearness  which  renders  it  useful  as  well  to  the  general  as  the  professional 
Inquirer." — K.  Y.  Evening  Fust. 

"The  whole  detail  of  Ordnance,  in  its  history,  philosophy,  and  application,  is  given 
by  Commander  Ward  in  such  a  manner  (with  occasional  diagrams)  as  to  convey  to  the 
student  accurate  notions  for  practical  use." — Jfew  Yorker. 

5 


lance's  Seamanship.  Compiled  from  various  authorities,  and  Ulua- 
trated  with  numerous  original  and  selected  Designs.  For  the  use  of  the 
United  States  Naval  Academy.  By  S.  B.  Luce,  Lieut.-Commander  U.  S.  N. 
In  two  parts.    Second  Edition.    One  royal  octavo  volume,  doth.    $10.00. 

Squadron  Tactics  Under  Steam.  By  Foxhall  A.  Parker, 
CJommander  U.  S.  Navy.  Pubhshed  by  authority  of  the  Navy  Depart- 
ment.    1  voL  8vo,  with  numerous  Plates.     $5.00. 

"In  this  useful  work  to  Navy  officers,  the  author  demonstrates — by  the  aid  of  profuse 
diagrams  and  explanatory  text — a  new  principle  for  manoeuvring  naval  vessels  in  action. 
The  author  contends  that  the  winds,  waves,  and  currents  of  the  ocean  oppose  no  more 
serious  obstacles  to  the  movements  of  a  steam  fleet,  than  do  the  inequalities  on  the  sur- 
face of  the  earth  to  the  manoeuvres  of  an  army.  It  is  in  this  light,  therefore,  that  he 
views  a  vast  fleet — simply  as  an  army ;  the  regiments,  brigades,  and  divisions  of  which 
are  represented  by  a  certain  ship  or  ships." — Scientific  American. 

Xautical  Routine  and  Stowage.  "With  Short  Eules  in  Navi- 
gation. By  John  McLeod  Murphy  and  "Wm.  N.  Jefifers,  Jr.,  U.  S.  Navy. 
1  voL  8vo,  blue  cloth.     $2.50, 

Osbon's  Hand-Book  of  tbe  United  States  Navy.  Be- 
ing a  Compilation  of  all  of  the  Principal  Events  in  the  History  of  every 
Vessel  of  the  United  States  Navy,  from  April,  1861,  to  May,  1864. 
Compiled  and  arranged  by  B.  S.  Osbon.     1  voL  12mo,  blue  cloth.    $2.50. 

"As  a  condensed  and  compact  history,  as  well  as  a  work  containing  a  vast  amount  of 
information,  this  work  cannot  be  surpassed." — Boston  Traveller. 

Brandt's  Gunnery  Catecbism.  G-unnery  Catechism,  as  applied 
to  the  Service  of  Naval  Ordnance.  Adapted  to  the  Latest  Official  Regu- 
lations, and  approved  by  the  Bureau  of  Ordnance,  Navy  Department. 
By  J.  D.  Brandt,  formerly  of  the  U.  S.  Navy.  1  vol.  18mo,  illustrated, 
blue  cloth.     $1.50. 

"  This  manual  is  very  full  of  information  and  instruction,  and  shows  the  'chief  end'  of 
Gunnery,  and  the  aim  of  those  who  follow  that  profession.  It  is  indispensable  to  all 
those  who  are  suddenly  introduced  to  a  gun-deck,  and  will  be  found  a  valuable  aid  also 
to  experienced  officers." — Commercial  Advertiser . 

Barrett's  Gunnery  Instructions.  Gunnery  Instructions,  sim- 
phfied  for  the  Volunteer  Officers  of  the  United  States  Navy,  with  Hint3 
to  Executive  and  other  Officers.  By  Lieut.  Edward  Barrett,  U.  S.  N., 
Instructor  of  G-unnery,  Navy  Yard,  Brooklyn.    1  vol.  12mo,  cloth.   $1.25. 

"It  is  a  thorough  work,  treating  plainly  on  its  subject,  and  contains  also  some  valu- 
able hints  to  executive  officers.  No  ofllcer  in  the  volunteer  navy  should  be  without  a 
co|  J  ''^^Boston  Evening  Traveller. 

6 


D.  Van  NostrandJs  Puhlicatlons. 


Totten's  Naval  Text-Book.  Naval  Text-Book  and  Dictionary, 
compiled  for  the  use  of  the  Midshipmen  of  the  U.  S.  Navy.  By  Com- 
mander B.  J.  Totten,  U.  S.  N.  Second  and  revised  edition.  1  vol.  12mo 
$3.00. 


Calcniated  Tables  of  Ranges  for  Navy  and   Army 

Ouns.    "With  a  Method  of  Finding  the  Distance  of  an  Object  at  Sea. 
By  Lieut.  W.  P.  Buckner,  U.  S  N.     1  vol.  8vo,  cloth.     $1.50. 


Manual  of  Internal  Rales  and  Regulations  for  Men- 
Of- War.  By  Commodore  U.  P.  Levy,  U.  S.  N.,  late  Flag  Officer  com- 
manding U.  S.  Naval  Force  in  the  Mediterranean,  &c.  Flexible  blue 
cloth.     Third  Edition,  revised  and  enlarged.     50  cents. 

"Among  the  professional  publications  for  which  we  are  indebted  to  the  war,  we  will- 
ingly give  a  prominent  place  to  this  useful  little  Manual  of  Rules  and  Eegulations  to  be 
observed  on  board  of  ships  of  war.  Its  authorship  is  a  sufficient  guarantee  for  its  accu- 
racy and  practical  value ;  and  as  a  guide  to  young  officers  in  providing  for  the  discipline, 
police,  and  sanitary  government  of  the  vessels  under  their  command,  we  know  of  nothing 
superior."— jr.  Y.  Herald. 


King's   Lessons   and   Praetieal  Notes  on   Steam,  The 

Steam  Engine,  PropeUers,  &c.,  &c.,  for  Young  Marine  Engineers,  Stu- 
dents, and  others.  By  the  late  W.  H.  King,  U.  S.  Navy.  Revised  by 
Chief  Engineer  J.  W.  King,  U.  S.  Navy.  Ninth  Edition,  enlarged.  8vo, 
cloth.    $2.00. 

"  This  Is  the  ninth  edition  of  a  valuable  work  of  the  late  "W.  H.  King,  U.  S.  Navy.  It 
contains  lessons  and  practical  notes  on  Steam  and  the  Steam-Engine,  Propellers,  &c.  It 
is  calculated  to  be  of  great  use  to  young  marine  engineers,  students,  and  others.  The 
text  is  illustrated  and  explained  by  numerous  diagrams  and  representations  of  machi- 
nery. This  new  edition  has  been  revised  and  enlarged  by  Chief  Engineer  J.  "W.  King, 
U.  8.  Navy,  brother  to  the  deceased  author  of  the  work."— 5o«^»  Daily  Adteriiaer. 

Ward's  Steam  for  the  million.  A  popular  Treatise  on  Steam 
and  its  Application  to  the  Useful  Arts,  especially  to  Navigation.  By 
J.  H.  "Ward,  Commander  U.  S.  Navy.  New  and  revised  Edition.  1  voL 
8vo,  cloth.     $1.00. 


The  Naval  Howitzer  Ashore.    By  FoihaU  A.  Parker,  Com- 
mander U.  S.  Navy.     1  vol.  Svo,  with  Plates.    Cloth.    $4.00. 


D.  Van  Nostr and' s  Publications. 


Oillmore's  Fort  Sumter.  OfQcial  Report  of  Operations  against 
tlie  Defences  of  Charleston  Harbor,  1863.  Comprising  the  Descent  upon 
Morris  Island,  the  Demolition  of  Fort  Sumter,  and  the  Siege  and  Reduc- 
tion of  Ports  "Wagner  and  Gregg.  By  Major-Gen.  Q.  A.  Gillmore,  U.  S. 
Volunteers,  and  Major  U.  S.  Corps  of  Engineers.  "With  Maps  and  Litho- 
graphic Plates,  Views,  &c.     1  vol.  8vo.    cloth.  $10. 

Oillmore's  Siege  and  Reduction  of  Fort  Pulaski, 
Georgia.  Papers  on  Practical  Engineering.  No.  8.  Official  Report 
to  the  U.  S.  Engineer  Department  of  the  Siege  and  Reduction  of  Fort 
Pulaski,  Ga.,  February,  March,  and  April,  1862.  By  Brig.-Gen.  Q.  A. 
GiLLMOEE,  U.  S.  A.  Illustrated  by  Maps  and  Views.  1  vol.  8vo,  cloth. 
$2.50. 

"This  Is  an  official  history  of  the  siege  of  Fort  Pulaski,  from  the  commencement,  with 
all  the  details  in  full,  made  up  fcom  a  daily  record,  forming  «a  most  valuable  paper  for 
future  reference.  The  situation  and  construction  of  the  Fort,  the  position  of  the  guns, 
both  of  the  rebels  and  the  Federals,  and  their  operation,  are  made  plain  by  maps  and 
engraved  views  of  diflferent  sections.  Additional  reports  from  other  officers  are  fur- 
nished in  the  appendix,  and  every  thing  has  been  done  to  render  the  work  full  and  reli- 
able."— Boiton  Journal. 

Oillmore's  Treatise  on  Limes,  Hydraulic  Cements,  and 
Mortars.  Papers  on  Practical  Engineering,  U.  S.  Engineer  Depart- 
ment, No.  9,  containing  Reports  of  numerous  Experiments  conducted  in 
New  York  City,  during  the  years  1858  to  1861,  inclusive.  By  Q.  A. 
GiLLMOEE,  Brig.-Gen.  U.  S.  Volunteers,  and  Major  U.  S.  Corps  of  Engi- 
neers. With  numerous  Illustrations.  One  voL  8vo.  $4.00. 
"This  work  contains  a  record  of  certain  experiments  and  researches  made  under  the 

authority  of  the  Engineer  Bureau  of  the  War  Department  from  1858  to  1861,  upon  the 

various  hydraulic  cements  of  the  United  States,  and  the  materials  for  their  manufacture. 

The  experiments  were  carefully  made,  and  are  well  reported  and  compiled." — Journal 

Franklin  Institute. 

The  Volunteer  Quartermaster.  Containing  a  Collection  and 
Codification  of  the  Laws,  Regulations,  Rules,  and  Practices  governing  the 
Quartermaster's  Department  of  the  United  States  Army,  and  in  force 
March  4,  1865.  By  Captain  Roelifp  Bkinkebhoff,  Assistant  Quarter- 
master U.  S.  Volunteers,  and  Post  Quartermaster  at  "Washington.  1 
vol.  12mo,  cloth.  $2.50. 

This  work  ombraces  all  the  laws  of  Congress,  and  all  the  orders  and  circulars  of  the 
War  Office  and  its  bureaus,  bearing  upon  the  subject.  It  also  embodies  the  decisions  of 
the  Second  Comptroller  of  the  Treasury,  so  far  as  they  affect  the  Quartermaster's  Depart- 
ment. These  decisions  have  the  force  of  law  in  the  adjustment  of  accounts,  and  are  there- 
fore invaluable  to  all  disbursing  officers. 


[—- 

I  I).  Van  Nostrand^s  PuUlcatlons. 


Culluin's  IWilitary  Bridges.  Systems  of  Military  Bridges  in  Uso 
by  the  United  States  Army;  those  adopted  by  the  Great  European 
Powers;  and  such  as  are  employed  in  British  India.  With  Directions 
for  the  Preservation,  Destruction,  and  Re-establishment  of  Bridges.  By 
Brlg.-Gen.  George  \Y.  Cullum,  Lieut.-Col.  Corps  of  Engineers,  U.  S.  A. 
1  vol.  8vo.    With  numerous  Illustrations,   cloth.   $3.50. 

"We  have  no  man  more  competent  to  prepare  such  n  work  than  Brig.-Gen  Cullum 
who  had  the  almost  exclusive  supervision,  devising,  building,  and  prep.iring  for  service 
of  the  various  bridge-trains  sent  to  our  armies  in  Mexico  during  our  war  with  that 
country.  The  treatise  before  us  is  very  complete,  and  has  evidently  been  prepared  with 
scrupulous  care.  The  descriptions  of  the  various  systems  of  military  bridges  adopted 
by  nearly  all  civilized  nations  are  very  interesting  even  to  the  non-professional  reader 
and  to  those  specially  interested  in  such  subjects  must  be  very  instructive,  for  they  are 
evidently  the  work  of  a  master  of  the  art  of  military  bridge-building."- WasAi/io^on 
Chronicle. 

Haupt's  military  Bridi^es.  For  the  Passage  of  Infantry,  Artil- 
lery, and  Baggage-Trains ;  with  Suggestions  of  many  new  Expedients 
and  Constructions  for  Crossing  Streams  and  Chasms  ;  designed  to  utilize 
the  Resources  ordmarily  at  command,  and  reduce  the  amount  and  cost  of 
Army  Transportation.  Including  also  Designs  for  Trestle  and  Truss 
Bridges  for  Military  Railroads,  adapted  especially  to  the  wants  of  the 
Service  of  the  United  States.  By  Herman  Haupt,  Brig.-Gen.  in  charge 
of  the  Construction  and  Operation  of  the  U.  S.  Military  Railways,  Author 
of  "  General  Theory  of  Bridge  Construction,"  &c.  Illustrated  by  sixty- 
nine  Lithographic  Engravings.     8vo,  cloth.     $6.50. 

"This  elaborate  and  carefully  prepared,  though  thoroughly  practical  and  simple  work, 
is  peculiarly  adapted  to  the  military  service  of  the  United  States.  Mr.  Haupt  has  added 
very  much  to  the  ordinary  facilities  for  crossing  streams  and  chasms,  by  the  instructions 
afforded  in  this  vi ork.'"— Boston  Courier. 

Holley's  Railway  Practice.  American  and  European  Railway 
Practice,  in  the  Economical  Generation  of  Steam,  including  the  Materials 
and  Construction  of  Coal-burning  Boilers,  Combustion,  the  Variable 
Blast,  Vaporization,  Circulation,  Superheating,  Supplying  and  Heating 
Feed-water,  &c.,  and  the  Adaptation  of  Wood  and  Coke-burning  Engines 
to  Coal-burning;  and  in  permanent  Way,  including  Road-bed,  Sleepers, 
Rails,  Joint  Fastenings,  Street  Railways,  &c.,  &c.  By  Alexander  L. 
Holley,  B.  P.     With  77  hthographed  plates.     1  vol.  folio,  cloth.    $12.00. 

*  *  ♦  "All  these  subjects  are  treated  by  the  author  in  both  an  intelligent  and  in- 
telligible manner.  The  facts  and  ideas  are  well  arranged,  and  presented  in  a  clear  and 
simple  style,  accompanied  by  beautiful  engravings,  and  wo  presume  the  work  will  be 
regarded  as  indispensable  by  all  who  are  interested  in  a  knowledge  of  the  construction 
of  railroads,  and  rolling  stock,  or  the  working  of  locomotives."— &te»</;fc  American. 

9 


D.  Van  Nostrand)  s  Puhlications. 


Autborized  U.  S.  Infantry  Tactics.  For  the  Instruction, 
Exercise,  and  MaucEuvres  of  the  Soldier,  a  Company,  Line  of  Skirmish- 
ers, BattaUon,  Brigade,  or  Corps  d'Armee.  By  Brig.-Gen.  Silas  Caset, 
U  S.  A.     3  vols'  24mo.     Cloth,  hthographed  plates.     $2.50. 

Tol.  I. — School  of  the  Soldier;  School  of  the  Company;  Instruction  for 
Skirmishers. 

Vol.  II. — School  of  the  Battalion. 

Yol.  III. — Evolutions  of  a  Brigade ;  Evolutions  of  a  Corps  d'Armee. 

"  War  Depaktmekt,  WASinNGTON,  August  11, 1S62. 
"  The  System  of  Infantry  Tactics  prepared  by  Brig.-Gen.  Silas  Casey,  U.  8.  A.,  having 
been  approved  by  the  President,  Is  adopted  for  the  instruction  of  the  Infantry  of  th« 
Armies  of  the  United  States,  whether  Eegular,  Volunteer,  or  Militia. 

"EDWIN  M.  STANTON,  Secretary  of  War." 

U.  S.  Tactics  for  Colored  Troops.  U.  S.  Infantry  Tactics, 
for  the  Instruction,  Exercise,  and  Manoeuvres  of  the  Soldier,  a  Company, 
Line  of  Skirmishers,  and  Battalion,  for  the  use  of  the  Colored  Troops  of 
the  United  States  Infantry.  Prepared  under  the  direction  of  the  "War 
Department.     1  vol.,  plates.    $1.50. 

"War  Department,  Washington,  March  9, 1863. 
"  This  system  of  United  States  Infantry  Tactics,  prepared  under  the  direction  of  the 
War  Department,  for  the  use  of  the  Colored  Troops  of  the  United  States  Infantry,  having 
been  approved  by  the  President,  is  adopted  for  the  Instruction  of  such  troops. 

"  EDWIN  M.  STANTON,  Secretary  of  War." 

Kelton's  Bayonet  Exercise.  A  New  Manual  of  the  Bayonet, 
for  the  Army  and  Militia  of  the  United  States.  By  Colonel  J,  C.  Kelton, 
U.  S.  A.     With  forty  beautifully  engraved  plates.     Red  cloth.     $2.00. 

"  This  Manual  was  prepared  for  the  use  of  the  Corps  of  Cadets,  and  has  been  introduced 
at  the  Military  Academy  Avith  satisfactory  results.  It  is  simply  the  theory  of  the  attack 
and  defence  of  the  sword  applied  to  the  bayonet,  on  the  authority  of  men  skilled  in  the 
use  of  arms." — New  York  Times. 

Berrimau's  Sword-Play.  The  Militiaman's  Manual  and  Sword- 
Play  without  a  Master. — Rapier  and  Broad-Sword  Exercises  copiously 
Explained  and  Illustrated;  Small-Arm  Light  Infantry  Drill  of  the  United 
States  Army ;  Infantry  Manual  of  Percussion  Muskets ;  Company  Drill 
of  the  United  States  Cavalry.  By  Major  M.  W.  Berriman,  engaged  for 
the  last  thirty  years  in  the  practical  instruction  of  Military  Students. 
Fourth  edition.     1  vol.  12mo,  red  cloth.     $1.00. 

1  "This  work  will  be  found  very  valuable  to  all  persons  seeking  military  instruction; 
but  it  recommends  itself  most  especially  to  officers,  and  those  who  have  to  use  the  sword 
or  sabre.  We  believe  it  is  the  only  work  on  the  use  of  the  sword  published  in  this 
country." — New  York  Tablet. 

10 


D.  Van  Nostrand's  Publications. 


Heavy  Artillery  Tactics.— 1  §63.  Instruction  for  Heavy  Ar- 
tillery; prepared  by  a  Board  of  Officers,  for  tlie  use  of  the  Army  of  the 
United  States.  With  service  of  a  gun  mounted  on  an  iron  carriage.  In 
one  volume,  12mo,  with  numerous  illustrations,   cloth.  $2.50. 

"War  Department,  ) 

.^^,  .  "  "Washinoton,  D.  C,  Oct.  20,  1862.  \ 

This  system  of  Heavy  Artillery  Tactics,  prepared  under  direction  of  the  War  De- 
partment, hflvinR  been  approved  by  the  President,  is  adopted  for  the  instruction  of 
trooi,s  when  acting  as  heavy  artillery.      EDWIX  M.  STANTON,  Secretary  of  Far." 

"The  First  Part  consists  of  sixteen  lessons  relating  to  the  service  of  the  single  piece  in- 
cluding the  gun,  howitzer,  mortar,  and  columbiad ;  also,  the  formation  of  batteries  the  art 
of  .aiming  pieces  and  firing  hot-shot.  Part  Second  relates  entirely  to  mechanical  manoeu- 
vres  and  appliances  for  handling,  mounting,  dismounting,  and  transporting  heavy  pieces. 
1  art  Third  is  of  a  miscellaneous  cnaracter,  containing  directions  for  embarking  and  disem- 
barking artillery  and  ordnance  stores;  also,  tables  of  dimensions  and  weights  of  -uns 
can-iages,  shot,  shell,  machines,  and  implemenis,  with  charges  for,  and  ranges  of  heav; 
artillery.  These  instructions  are  not  only  copious  in  detail,  but  aptly  illustrated  with 
thirty-nine  elegant  steel-plate  engravings."— ^w««<<7i. 

Roberts's  Haiid-Book  of  Artillery.  For  the  Service  of  the 
Umted  States  Army  and  Mihtia.  New  revised  and  greatly  enlarged 
edition.  By  Major  Joseph  Egberts,  U.  S.  A.  1  vol.  18mo  cloth 
$1.25.  ' 

"A  complete  catechism  of  gun  practice,  covering  the  whole  ground  of  this  branch  of 
military  science,  and  adapted  to  militia  and  volunteer  drill,  as  well  as  to  the  re<nilar 
army.  It  has  the  merit  of  precise  detail,  even  to  the  technical  names  of  all  parts'of  a 
gun,  and  how  the  smallest  operations  connected  with  its  use  can  be  best  performed  It 
has  evidently  been  prepared  with  great  care,  and  with  strict  scientific  accuracy" 
New  York,  Centurij.  •'■ 

Duaiie's  Manual  for  Engineer  Troops.    Consisting  of  Part 
I.,  Pontoon  DriE;   II.,  Practical  Operations  of  a  Siege;    III,  School  of 
the   Sap;    lY.,  MiUtary  Mining;    V.,   Construction  of  Batteries.     By 
Major  J.  C.  Duane,  Corps  of  Engineers,  U.   S.   Army.      1  vol    l''mo 
cloth.     $2.50.  "      ' 

"I  have  carefully  examined  Capt.  J.  C.  Duane's  'Manual  for  Engineer  Troops,'  and  do 
not  hesitate  to  [.ronounce  it  the  very  best  work  on  the  subject  of  which  it  treats. 

"H.  W.  HALLECK,  Major- General,  U.  S.  ^." 

Dufour's  Principles  of  Strategy  and  Grand  Tactics. 

Translated  from  the  French  of  General  G.  H.  Dufour.     By  William  P. 
Ceaighill,  Capt.  of  Engineers,  U.  S.  Army,  and  Assistant  Professor  of 
Engineering,   U.   S.  Military  Academy,  West  Point.      From   the  last 
French  Edition.    Illustrated.    In  one  volume  12mo.    cloth.    $3.00. 
"In  all  military  matters  General  Dufour  is  recognized  as  one  of  the  first  authoritiej  in 
Europe,  and  consequently  the  translation  of  this  very  valuable  work  is  a  most  acceptable 
addition  to  our  military  lihmvies.^-Londou  Naval  and  Jililitary  Gazette, 
11 


D.  Van  Nostrandl  s  Publications. 

Tlioinajii's  Rifled  Ordnance.  A  Practical  Treatise  on  the  Ap- 
plication of  the  Principle  of  the  Eifle  to  Guns  and  Mortars  of  every 
Calibre.  To  which  is  added,  a  new  theory  of  the  initial  action  and  force 
of  Fired  Gunpowder.  By  Ltnall  Thomas,  P.  R.  S.  L.  Fifth  edition, 
revised.     One  volume,  octavo,  illustrated,     cloth-   $2.00. 

"At  a  time  when  the  manufacture  of  guns  engrosses  the  attention  of  thousands  on 
thousands,  any  practical  treatise  which  may  suggest  desirable  alterations  or  innovations 
it  of  importance,  and  deserves  that  attention  we  doubt  not  will  be  extended  to  the  pres- 
ent volume." — Boston  Ekiening  Oazette. 

IVilcox's  Rifles  and  Rifle  Practice.  An  Elementary  Trea- 
tise on  the  Theory  of  Rifle  Firing ;  explaining  the  causes  of  Inaccuracy 
of  Fire  and  the  manner  of  correcting  it ;  with  descriptions  of  the  Infan- 
try Rifles  of  Europe  and  the  United  States,  their  BaUs  and  Cartridges. 
By  Captain  C  M.  Wilcox,  U.  S.  A.  New  edition,  with  engravings  and 
cuts.     Green  cloth.     $2.00. 

"The book  will  be  found  intensely  interesting  to  all  who  are  watching  the  changes  in 
the  art  of  war  arising  from  the  introdirction  of  the  new  rifled  arms.  We  recommend  to 
our  readers  to  buy  the  book." — Military  Gazette. 

L<endy's  Maxims  and  Instructions  on  the  Art  of  War, 

Maxims,  Advice,  and  Instructions  on  the  Art  of  "War;  or,  A  Practical 
Military  Guide  for  the  use  of  Soldiers  of  all  Arms  and  of  all  Countries. 
Translated  from  the  French  by  Captain  Lexdy,  Director  of  the  Practical 
MiUtary  College,  late  of  the  French  Staff,  etc.,  etc.  1  vol.  18mo,  cloth. 
75  cents. 

"This  book  treats  generally  of  the  art  of  war  and  the  conduct  of  campaigns,  and  with- 
out going  into  all  the  details  of  a  soldier's  business,  .aims  to  explain  the  principles  on 
which  an  army  may  be  well  established  in  camp,  or  successfully  led  and  manccuvred  on 
the  field." — Providence  Journal. 

Andrews's  Hints  to  Company  Officers  on  tlieir  Mili- 
tary Duties.  By  Captain  C.  C.  Andrews,  Third  Regiment  Minne- 
sota Volunteers.     1  vol.  18mo,  cloth,     60  cents. 

"This  is  a  hand-book  of  good  practical  advice,  which  oflacers  of  all  ranks  may  study 
with  advantage." — Philadelphia  Press. 

Ileth's  System  of  Target  Practice. — For  the  use  of  Troops 
when  armed  with  the  Musket,  Rifle-Musket,  Rifle,  or  Carbine.  Prepared 
prmcipally  from  the  French,  by  Captain  Henry  Heth,  10th  Infantry,  U  S. 
A.     18mo,  cloth.     75  cents. 

15 


-/- 


/ 


-^    -r. 


c  »^ 


-^ 


^^ 


.-i." 


-f^    V" 


«-^  -r: 


-7*- 


.-^o:^ 


-0'        V 


v^' 


\\- 


\- 


0  '    ^         a\ 


0 

-7* 


^■^J.      ^ 


-ir.        ^    a  ft  > 


'OO' 


^, 


■>'"  ,0- 


8    1    A  -  \\ 


^        o*^' 


ci-. 


-^. 


^        ^ 

C^"^ 


0^^ 


o5  -n^. 


<^^v^ 


■*■ 


,0"      X 


^'  f^jm^:.    -^^^  ^v 


o>     ^  '  *  ^ 


'^  c'^ 


c,- 


^^^ 

.^^  % 


v^^     "t. 


-8>      .A 


,-^ 


V      c 


oH      r. 


vOO^ 


