jr/hF& 


Q    .    «<A 


IVith  the  Publishers'  Compliments. 


THE    MISSISSIPPI 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 

in  2011  with  funding  from 

The  Institute  of  Museum  and  Library  Services  through  an  Indiana  State  Library  LSTA  Grant 


http://www.archive.org/details/mississippiOOgree 


CAMPAIGNS  OF   THE   CIVIL    WAR.—  VIII 


THE   MISSISSIPPI 


FRANCIS    VINTON    GREENE, 

LIEUT.   OF    ENGINEERS,    U.  S.  AEMY  ;    LATE  MILITARY  ATTACHE  TO   THE 

U.  S.  LEGATION  AT  ST.  PETERSBURG  ;    AUTHOR  OF   "  THE  RUSSIAN 

ARMY    AND    ITS    CAMPAIGNS    IN    TURKEY  IN    1877-78,"   AND 

OF   "  ARMY  LIFE  IN  RUSSIA  " 


NEW  YORK 

CHARLES    SCRIBNER'S    SONS 

1882 


Copyright  by 
CHARLES  SCRIBNERS   SONS 


Trow's 

Printing  and  Bookbinding  Company 

201-213  East  \2tl1  Street 

NEW  YORK 


PREFACE 


The  following  pages  are  founded  upon  a  careful  study  of 
the  Records  of  the  War  of  the  Rebellion,  now  in  course  of 
publication  by  the  War  Department,  and  not  upon  the  recol- 
lection of  personal  experience,  as  it  was  not  my  fortune  to 
belong  to  the  generation  which  fought  the  Great  War.  I 
have  earnestly  endeavored  to  make  them  accurate,  and  be- 
lieve that  they  contain  no  statement  of  fact  which  cannot  be 
substantiated  by  the  Records.  Such  interpretation  as  has 
been  put  upon  these  facts  is,  with  all  deference,  submitted 
to  the  judgment  of  the  candid  reader. 

I  desire  to  express  my  sense  of  obligation  to  Colonel  R. 
N.  Scott,  U.  S.  Army,  in  charge  of  the  publication  of  the 
Records,  for  his  kindness,  not  only  in  affording  me  unre- 
stricted access  to  the  Archives,  but  also  in  giving  me  infor- 
mation, which  his  thorough  knowledge  of  the  subject  alone 
could  give,  to  assist  my  search  through  them. 

Washington.  August  31, 1882. 


CONTENTS. 


PAGE 

List  of  Maps, xi 


Introductory,    1 

CHAPTER  L 
The  First  Year's  Operations, 4 

CHAPTER  II. 
Iuka  and  Corinth, 29 

CHAPTER  III. 
The  First  Move  against  Vicksburg,     .        .        .        .55 

CHAPTER  IV. 
Bayou  Expeditions, 91 

CHAPTER  V. 
The  Campaign  in  Rear  of  Vicksburg,  .        .        .        .135 


viii  CONTENTS. 

CHAPTER  VI. 

PAGE 

The  Siege  and  Surrender  op  Vicksburg,   .        .        .  174 

CHAPTER  VII. 
Port  Hudson, 209 

CHAPTER  VIII. 
Concluding  Operations, 234 

APPENDIX  A. 
Summary  of  Principal  Events, 239 

APPENDIX  B. 
Returns   of   Halleck's  Army  at  Corinth,  May  31, 
1862, .243 

APPENDIX  C. 
Returns  of  Confederate  Army  at  Corinth,  May  28, 
1862, 244 

APPENDIX  D. 
Correspondence  with  Reference  to  the  Dispersion 
of  Halleck's  Army  after  the  Capture  of  Cor- 
inth,       245 

APPENDIX  E. 
Organization  of  the  Army  of  the  Tennessee,  April 
30,  1863, ;        .        .         .248 


CONTENTS.  ix 

APPENDIX  F. 

PAGE 

Organization  of  Troops  in  the  Department  op  the 
Mississippi  and  East  Louisiana,  April  30,  1863,    .  255 

APPENDIX  G. 
Correspondence  between  General  Grant  and  Gen- 
eral Banks  Relative    to  the  Co-operation  of 
their  Armies, •  258 

APPENDIX  H. 
Union  Losses  in  the  Vicksburg  Campaign,  .        .        .  263 

Index, 265 


LIST   OF  MAPS. 


PAGE 

The  Theatre  of  War  in  the  West,  1862-63,  Frontispiece. 

Memphis  to  Iuka,  1862, 35 

Iuka,  September  19,  1862, 40 

Corinth,  October  3-4,  1862, 46 

Memphis  to  Vicksburg,  1862-1863, 57 

Chickasaw  Bluffs,  December  29,  1862,        .        .        .     76 

Arkansas  Post,  January  11,  1863, 85 

Campaign  against  Vicksburg,  1863,         .        .        to  face  135 

Champion's  Hill,  May  16,  1863, 153 

Siege  of  Vicksburg,  1863,         ....        to  face  174 
Operations  in  Louisiana,  February  to  July,  1863,    .  212 

Port  Hudson,  1863, 226 

Helena,  July  4,  1863, 235 


THE   MISSISSIPPI. 


INTKODUCTOKY. 

The  military  operations  of  the  Civil  War  were  practically 
limited  on  the  west  by  the  irregular  line  running  near  the 
95th  meridian,  which  forms  the  western  boundary  of  the 
States  between  Louisiana  and  Minnesota.  The  territory  of 
the  United  States  east  of  that  line  contains  about  1,130,000 
square  miles  ;  and  it  would  be  divided  into  two  parts,  almost 
exactly  equal  in  size,  by  an  irregular  line  from  west  to  east 
following  the  course  of  portions  of  the  Missouri,  Mississippi, 
Ohio,  and  Potomac  Eivers.  This  was  the  very  line  which 
upon  the  outbreak  of  war  became  the  frontier  between  the 
two  hostile  sections. 

Singularly  enough,  in  a  territory  of  such  vast  proportions, 
the  capital  cities  of  both  sections  were  situated  on  the  same 
slope  of  a  range  of  mountains  not  far  from  the  coast,  and 
both  were  very  close  to  the  common  frontier,  being,  in  fact, 
only  115  miles  distant  from  one  another.  The  possession  of 
these  capitals  was,  next  to  the  destruction  of  armies,  the  ob- 
ject constantly  sought  for  in  the  East ;  for  four  long  years, 
therefore,  excepting  the  expeditions  which  gained  certain 
points  along  the  sea-coast,  but  made  no  impression  on  the 
interior  of  the  Confederacy,  the  tide  of  war  in  the  East 
VIII  —1 


2  THE  MISSISSIPPI. 

surged  back  and  forth  across  a  small  portion  of  Virginia, 
Maryland,  and  Pennsylvania,  until  the  end  finally  came  at 
Appomattox.  The  site  of  Lee's  surrender  was  but  little 
more  than  one  hundred  miles  distant  from  the  first  battle- 
field of  Bull  Eun. 

In  the  West  the  course  of  the  war  was  entirely  different ; 
beyond  the  Alleghanies  there  was  no  one  point  which  called 
for  such  extraordinary  defensive  efforts  as  those  which  were 
expended  on  Richmond,  nor  was  there  any  Confederate  gen- 
eral who  possessed  the  vigorous  defensive  skill  and  resource 
of  Lee.  There  the  great  territorial  object  was  the  posses- 
sion of  the  Mississippi  River ;  by  gaining  and  holding  which 
the  Union  armies  would  possess  a  great  natural  highway 
and  line  of  communications  for  future  operations,  and  would 
cut  off  the  Confederacy  from  the  fertile  resources  of  Arkan- 
sas, Louisiana,  and  Texas.  For  two  years  and  three  months 
after  the  fall  of  Fort  Sumter  both  sides  strove  incessantly — 
the  one  to  gain,  the  other  to  hold,  the  control  of  the  great 
river.  The  contest  was  finally  decided  at  Vicksburg  and 
Port  Hudson  in  July,  1863,  and  then  "  the  Father  of  Waters 
again  went  unvexed  to  the  sea." 

Once  fairly  possessed  of  the  river,  the  Western  armies 
were  free  to  concentrate  and  move  to  the  interior  without 
fear  of  exposing  their  flank  and  rear,  and  they  moved  on  by 
Chattanooga,  Atlanta,  Savannah,  and  Goldsboro,  defeating 
hostile  armies  and  eating  out  the  vitals  of  the  country,  until 
the  end  saw  them  almost  join  hands  with  their  comrades  in 
Virginia.  In  these  Western  operations,  which  began  at  St. 
Louis  in  1861,  and  ended  near  Raleigh  in  1865,  the  tide  of 
conquest  was  twice  met  by  a  counter-current  of  invasion 
under  Bragg  and  Hood,  but  in  neither  case  was  more  than 
a  portion  of  the  Northern  armies  swept  back.  The  main 
force   kept   steadily  onward,   and  it  was   the   unparalleled 


INTRODUCTORY.  3 

good  fortune  of  the  Army  of  the  Tennessee  to  be  constantly 
advancing,  now  faster,  now  slower,  against  retreating  armies 
during  four  years  of  nearly  incessant  combat,  and  to  accom- 
plish a  forward  conquering  march  of  well-nigh  three  thou- 
sand miles,  the  like  of  which  has  not  been  seen  in  civilized 
lands  during  the  Christian  era. 

Of  the  great  chain  of  events  here  roughly  indicated,  those 
links  which  cover  the  movements  on  the  Mississippi  are  to 
be  described  in  the  following  pages. 


CHAPTER  I. 

THE  FIRST  YEAR'S  OPERATIONS. 

The  struggle  for  the  control  of  the  Mississippi  began  at 
St.  Louis,  in  those  exciting  events  of  May,  1861,  which  have 
been  so  well  described  in  the  first  volume  of  this  series. 
By  the  energy  and  courage  of  Nathaniel  Lyon  and  Frank  P. 
Blair,  Jr.,  this  city  was  saved  to  the  Union  cause,  and  the 
secessionists  were  driven  to  the  western  and  southwestern 
portions  of  Missouri,  where  the  first  military  operations  of 
the  West  were  initiated  by  Jackson,  Price,  and  McCullough. 
At  the  same  time  M.  Jeff.  Thompson,  one  of  the  secession 
leaders  of  Missouri,  was  preparing  to  dispute  the  posses- 
sion of  the  southeastern  part  of  the  State  along  the  Mis- 
sissippi. He  first  appears  in  the  records  at  the  village  of 
Pocahontas,  in  Arkansas,  a  few  miles  south  of  the  Missouri 
line,  whence,  on  July  2d,  he  addressed  a  letter  to  Jefferson 
Davis,  offering  his  services  to  the  Confederacy,  and  stating 
that  "Missouri  has  no  great  leader  in  whom  the  people  have 
confidence,"  and  "the  only  way  the  fifty  to  one  hundred 
thousand  gallant  young  soldiers  can  be  made  available,  and 
the  rich  prize  of  this  great  State  secured,  is  by  a  powerful 
demonstration  from  this  portion  of  the  country."  He  had 
previously  been  commissioned  a  brigadier-general  in  the 
Missouri  State  Guard,  and  had  raised  and  brought  with 
him  a  small  force  of  militia ;  but  the  Confederacy  does  not 
appear  to  have  highly  appreciated  his  fitness  for  a  great 


THE  FIRST  YEAR'S  OPERATIONS.  5 

leader,  for  on  July  22d,  W.  J.  Hardee,  Brigadier-General,  C. 
S.  A.,  assumed  command  of  the  District  of  Upper  Arkansas, 
and  five  days  later  fixed  his  headquarters  at  Pocahontas. 
Thompson,  however,  was  subject  only  to  the  orders  of  Gov- 
ernor Jackson,  of  Missouri.  At  the  same  time  Maj.-Gen.  L. 
Polk  was  in  command  of  "  Department  No.  2,"  which  em- 
braced West  Tennessee  and  the  State  of  Mississippi,1  with 
headquarters  at  Memphis.  On  July  27th,  he  ordered  Brig.- 
Gen.  Gideon  J.  Pillow  to  proceed  from  Memphis  to  New 
Madrid,  with  a  force  of  six  thousand  men,  denominated 
"  The  Army  of  Liberation."  The  total  strength  of  the 
forces  of  Pillow,  Hardee,  and  Thompson  was  from  twelve 
thousand  to  fifteen  thousand  men,  and  it  was  their  inten- 
tion, so  soon  as  they  should  be  reinforced  to  a  sufficient 
strength,  to  advance  and  take  Cape  Girardeau,  a  command- 
ing bluff  on  the  west  side  of  the  river,  about  one  hundred 
miles  below  St.  Louis ;  thence,  in  connection  with  other 
troops  of  Polk  on  the  east  bank,  they  hoped  to  gain  pos- 
session of  Cairo,  at  the  mouth  of  the  Ohio ;  and  thus  solidly 
established  on  the  Mississippi  they  designed  to  move  north- 
ward and  westward  to  the  Iron  Mountain  Railroad  and  liber- 
ate the  State. 

These  expectations  were,  however,  not  realized.  On  Au- 
gust 28th,  Brig.  -Gen.  U.  S.  Grant,  then  serving  at  Jefferson 
City,  Mo.,  was  ordered  by  Fremont  to  proceed  forthwith 
to  Cape  Girardeau  and  assume  command  of  all  troops  in  the 
vicinity  of  the  mouth  of  the  Ohio.  He  was  specially  di- 
rected to  fortify  Cairo,  Bird's  Point,  and  Cape  Girardeau, 
to  destroy  all  fortifications  erecting  by  the  Confederates, 
and  to  drive  their  forces  away  from  the  river.  Grant 
reached  Cape  Girardeau  on  August  30th,  and  proceeded  to 

1  Extended  on  September  2d  to  include  Arkansas  "and  all  military  operations 
in  Missouri." 


6  THE  MISSISSIPPI 

Cairo  on  September  2d.  He  arrived  none  too  soon.  For 
a  few  days  before  his  arrival,  Pillow  had  abandoned  his  pro- 
ject of  liberating  Missouri,  and  had  suggested  to  Polk  that 
the  high  bin  If  on  the  Kentucky  bank  at  Columbus,  about 
fifteen  miles  below  Cairo,  should  be  seized  and  fortified  for 
defence ;  and  Polk,  having  made  up  his  mind  that  the  neu- 
trality of  Kentucky  could  not  longer  be  allowed  to  interfere 
with  military  operations,  had  left  Memphis  and  moved  up 
the  river.  At  New  Madrid  he  took  Pillow's  troops  with 
him,  increasing  his  strength  to  about  15,000  men;  with 
these  he  took  possession  of  Columbus  on  September  4th, 
and  immediately  began  fortifying  it,  while,  at  the  same 
time,  he  sent  a  detachment  toward  Paducah,  at  the  mouth 
of  the  Tennessee  River.  Grant  heard  of  this  on  the  next 
day,  September  5th,  and  that  night  started  from  Cairo,  with 
two  regiments  on  transports,  for  Paducah,  where  he  arrived 
the  next  morning,  just  in  time  to  forestall  the  action  of  the 
Confederates.  On  returning  to  Cairo,  on  the  6th,  he  re- 
ceived an  order  from  Fremont,  dated  the  previous  day,  to 
seize  and  fortify  the  Kentucky  shore  opposite  Cairo.  Grant 
immediately  executed  this  order. 

These  early  events  are  related  somewhat  in  detail,  because 
they  resulted  in  giving  the  Federal  forces  possession  of  two 
points — the  junctions  of  the  Tennessee  and  Ohio,  and  of  the 
Ohio  and  Mississippi  Rivers — which  controlled  the  water 
highway  from  Cincinnati  to  St.  Liouis,  and  were  therefore  of 
vital  importance  to  the  Union  cause. 

During  the  autumn  and  winter  months  of  1861,  both  sides 
were  gathering  strength,  but  their  relative  positions  re- 
mained unchanged.  On  December  31st,  Grant's  return  of 
"  present  for  duty "  aggregated  14,374  men,  and  they  were 
stationed  at  Cape  Girardeau  and  Cairo,  and  on  the  Missouri 
and   Kentucky  shores,  opposite  the  latter   point.     On  the 


THE  FIRST  YEAR'S   OPERATIONS.  7 

same  date,  Polk's  return  of  "present  for  duty"  was  (after 
deducting  the  1,372  at  Fort  Henry)  19,661 ;  the  greater  part 
of  them  were  stationed  at  Columbus,  and  the  rest  at  New 
Madrid,  Fort  Pillow,  and  Memphis.  His  first  point  of  de- 
fence was  on  the  bluff  at  Columbus,  which  had  been  so 
extensively  fortified  that  it  was  the  habit  to  speak  of  it  in 
reports — as  later  of  Vicksburg  and  other  points — as  "the 
Gibraltar  of  the  West."  The  next  was  at  New  Madrid  and 
Island  No.  10,  opposite  the  line  between  Kentucky  and 
Tennessee,  where  fortifications  were  begun  during  the  last 
day  of  August.  Eighty  miles  farther  down  the  river,  and 
about  the  same  distance  above  Memphis,  was  situated  Fort 
Pillow,  on  a  lofty  bluff  between  the  Hatchie  River  and 
the  Mississippi.  The  fortifications  at  this  point  were  very 
extensive,  consisting  of  a  water  battery  at  the  base  of  the 
bluff,  and  of  several  small  detached  works,  and  a  continu- 
ous line  of  strong  intrenchments,  four  to  five  miles  in  length, 
on  the  ridge.  The  total  length  of  intrenchments  was  esti- 
mated at  ten  miles,  and  their  armament  was  thirty-two  guns. 
Twelve  miles  below  Fort  Pillow  was  a  smaller  work,  called 
Fort  Randolph.  In  the  immediate  vicinity  of  Memphis  there 
were  no  eligible  sites  for  fortification  which  would  not  ex- 
pose the  city  to  bombardment  and  destruction,  and  it  was 
not  fortified.  Between  Memphis  and  New  Orleans  there 
were  no  fortifications  in  1861. 

It  was  not,  however,  with  land  defences  and  armies  alone 
that  either  side  purposed  to  contest  the  mastery  of  the  great 
river.  On  both  sides,  and  especially  on  the  Union  side, 
the  navy  was  destined  to  take  part  in  the  contest,  by  means  of 
novel  and  peculiarly  constructed  boats,  which,  carrying  large 
guns  for  that  period,  and  acting  as  siege  artillery  of  great 
power  and  extraordinary  mobility,  were  to  accompany  the 
armies  in  all  their  movements,  and  render  invaluable  service. 


8  THE  MISSISSIPPI. 

On  the  Union  side,  the  plans  for  these  vessels  were  ma- 
tured early  in  1861.  After  much  consultation,  in  which 
General  Totten,  General  Meigs,  Captain  Eads,  Naval-Con- 
structor Lenthall,  and  others  presented  their  views,  plans 
and  specifications  were  drawn  up,  and  the  Quartermaster- 
General  was  authorized  to  advertise  for  proposals.  Captain 
Eads  was  the  lowest  bidder,  and  a  contract  was  made  with 
him  on  August  5,  1861,  for  the  construction  of  seven  gun- 
boats, to  be  completed  in  sixty-five  days.  These  boats  were 
named  after  river  cities,  Pittsburg,  Cincinnati,  St.  Louis, 
Louisville,  Cairo,  Carondelet,  and  Mound  City,  though, 
from  their  peculiar  appearance,  they  were  commonly  known 
as  the  "  turtles."  They  were  in  every  way  formidable  ves- 
sels ;  each  was  175  feet  in  length,  50  feet  in  breadth,  6  feet 
in  depth  of  hold,  and  512  tons  in  burthen.  The  hull  was 
flat-bottomed,  with  sides  inclined  at  an  angle  of  forty-five 
degrees,  and  projecting  but  one  foot  above  the  water.  On 
the  hull  was  constructed  a  casemate,  or  box,  150  by  50  feet, 
with  inclined  sides  8  feet  high,  inside  of  which  were  the  guns 
and  machinery.  This  casemate  was  constructed  of  wood, 
and  plated  with  2^  inches  of  iron  on  the  forward  end,  and 
on  each  side  opposite  the  engine.  Each  was  propelled  by  a 
single  wheel  near  the  stern,  had  a  speed  of  nine  miles  per 
hour,  and  carried  an  armament  of  13  guns,  principally  6-inch 
rifles.  They  were  all  delivered  to  the  Government  at  St. 
Louis,  on  December  5,  1861.  In  addition  to  these,  there 
were  two  other  iron-clads,  the  Essex  and  Benton,  of  1,000 
tons  burthen,  which  were  originally  snag-boats,  and  had 
been  purchased  by  Fremont  and  rebuilt  at  St.  Louis.  They 
also  were  ready  on  December  5,  1861. 

Prior  to  the  construction  of  these  boats,  Commander  John 
Eodgers,  of  the  Navy,  had  been  sent  to  the  West,  and  had 
purchased   on  the    Ohio  Eiver    three   ordinary  passenger 


THE  FIRST  YEAR'S  OPERATIONS.  9 

boats,  the  Tyler  (afterward  called  Taylor),  Lexington,  and 
Conestoga,  of  400  to  600  tons  each,  and  of  great  speed ;  and 
had  rebuilt  them  for  naval  purposes,  by  tearing  off  all  the 
ordinary  top -work,  and  building  a  wooden  rampart  to  protect 
the  guns,  wheels,  and  machinery.  They  were  not  armored, 
but  carried  a  battery  of  9  guns  each. 

In  the  spring  of  1862,  Mr.  Charles  Ellet,  a  distinguished 
engineer,  impressed  upon  the  War  Department  the  impor- 
tance of  having  a  class  of  vessels  which  should  carry  only  a 
few  light  howitzers  for  defence,  and  should  rely  for  offensive 
strength  upon  their  power  as  rams.  He  was  appointed  a 
colonel  in  the  army  and  authorized  by  Secretary  Stanton 
to  proceed  to  the  West,  and  purchase  and  reconstruct  on 
the  Ohio  Eiver  such  vessels  as  were  suitable  for  his  purpose. 
The  crews  of  his  vessels  were  supplemented  by  a  force  of 
volunteers  serving  in  the  army,  under  command  of  his 
brother,  Lieut. -Col.  Alfred  W.  EUet.  Colonel  Ellet  bought 
and  rebuilt  four  side-wheel  and  four  stern-wheel  vessels, 
of  sizes  varying  from  200  to  400  tons,  and  appeared  in  the 
Mississippi  with  his  fleet  in  May,  1862. 

Still  another  type  of  vessel  was  found  in  the  mortar-boats, 
which  were  scows  of  sufficient  size  to  carry  one  13-inch  mor- 
tar.    They  were  towed  from  point  to  point  by  tugboats. 

A  considerable  number  of  vessels  of  various  classes  were 
also  captured  from  the  enemy,  so  that  in  the  summer  of 
1862  the  fleet  in  the  upper  Mississippi  contained  45  vessels, 
with  an  aggregate  tonnage  of  19,464  tons  and  an  armament 
of  143  guns,  in  addition  to  38  mortar  boats. 

On  the  Confederate  side  the  preparations  for  naval  strength 
were  hardly  less  complete.  Several  boats  were  bought  or 
seized  on  the  Mississippi,  between  Memphis  and  New  Or- 
leans, and  converted  to  military  use  ;  generally  by  taking  off 
everything  above  the  hull,  and  constructing  on  it  a  wooden 
1* 


10  THE  MISSISSIPPI. 

rampart,  plated  with  railroad  iron.  Though  the  plating  on 
these  vessels  was  heavier  than  on  the  Northern  ships,  yet 
their  construction  was  not  as  strong,  their  armament  was  in- 
ferior, and  their  machinery  was  constantly  breaking  down. 
The  Confederates  also  had  several  iron-clad  rams  of  a 
cigar  shape. 

The  beginning  of  the  year  1862  found  both  sides  fairly  well 
prepared  for  active  operations.  Grant  commanded  at  the 
mouth  of  the  Ohio,  and  had  possession  of  the  shores  of  both 
rivers  at  that  point,  and  of  the  mouths  of  the  Tennessee  and 
Cumberland  Eivers  higher  up.  Opposed  to  him  was  a  force 
under  Polk,  a  few  miles  down  the  Mississippi  at  Columbus, 
and  another  at  Forts  Henry  and  Donelson,  a  short  distance 
up  the  Tennessee  and  Cumberland  rivers.  The  right  of  the 
Confederate  line  of  defence  was  at  Bowling  Green,  where 
the  railroads  from  Louisville  to  Nashville  and  to  Memphis  di- 
verge. On  January  30th,  Halleck  ordered  Grant  to  attack  this 
line  at  its  centre,  i.e.,  at  Forts  Henry  and  Donelson,  and  im- 
mediately upon  receipt  of  the  order  Grant  started  up  the  Ten- 
nessee River  with  a  force  of  17,000  men,  embarked  on  trans- 
ports and  escorted  by  a  squadron  of  four  armored  and  three 
unarmored  gunboats  under  Commodore  A.  H.  Foote.  Fort 
Henry  was  captured  on  February  6th,  and  Fort  Donelson  on 
the  16th.  The  Confederate  line  was  completely  broken,  and 
the  establishment  of  Grant's  force  on  the  railroads  in  rear  of 
Columbus  rendered  the  speedy  evacuation  of  that  place  a 
necessity.  As  soon  as  authentic  information  of  the  fall  of 
Fort  Donelson  was  received  on  the  18th,  General  G.  T. 
Beauregard,  who  was  then  at  Jackson,  Tennessee,  on  his  way 
from  Virginia  to  assume  command  at  Columbus,  telegraphed 
to  the  Adjutant  General  at  Richmond  that  Columbus  was 
untenable  and  advised  its  abandonment.     The  Secretary  of 


THE   FIRST  YEAR'S   OPERATIONS.  H 

War  replied  on  the  following  day  that  its  evacuation  was  de- 
cided upon,  and  on  February  20th  he  sent  orders  to  that 
effect  to  Polk. 

The  destruction  of  this  first  line  of  Confederate  defence 
in  the  West  carried  consternation  throughout  the  South  ;  it 
was  seen  at  once  that  the  future  safety  of  the  Confederacy 
depended  upon  holding  the  Memphis  and  Charleston  Kail- 
road  ;  it  was  therefore  determined  to  form  a  second  line  of 
defence  with  the  left  on  the  Mississippi  River  at  Fort  Pillow 
or  Memphis,  the  centre  at  Corinth  or  near  the  bend  of  the 
Tennessee  River,  and  the  right  at  Chattanooga  ;  the  position 
at  Island  No.  10  and  New  Madrid,  which  had  already  been 
partially  fortified,  was  to  be  retained  as  an  outpost  in  ad- 
vance of  the  left,  but,  as  the  despatches  show,  with  no  great 
reliance  upon  its  capacity  for  defence.  Polk  was  ordered  to 
send  thither  from  Columbus  all  his  heavy  guns,  but  only  a 
portion  of  his  troops  ;  the  rest  being  kept  at  Humboldt,  a 
central  point  on  the  Mobile  and  Ohio  Railroad.  Beauregard 
appears  for  a  moment  to  have  had  a  visionary  idea  of  assum- 
ing the  offensive,  for  on  February  21st  he  addressed  a  cir- 
cular letter  to  the  Governors  of  Tennessee,  Louisiana,  and 
Mississippi,  calling  upon  each  of  them  for  5,000  troops  ;  and 
on  the  same  day  he  also  wrote  to  Ma j. -Gen.  Earl  Van  Dorn, 
who  commanded  in  Arkansas,  asking  for  his  co-operation. 
To  the  latter  he  said :  "  I  have  just  called  on  the  Governors  of 
Tennessee,  Louisiana,  and  Mississippi  for  5,000  men  from 
each  State.  I  have  15,000  disposable  for  the  field.  If  you 
could  certainly  join  me,  via  New  Madrid  or  Columbus,  with 
10,000  more,  we  could  take  the  field  with  40,000  men  ;  take 
Cairo,  Paducah,  the  mouths  of  the  Tennessee  and  Cumber- 
land Rivers,  and  most  probably  be  able  to  take  also  St. 
Louis  by  the  river.  What  say  you  to  this  brilliant  pro- 
gramme, which  I  know  is  fully  practicable  if  we  can  get  the 


12  THE  MISSISSIPPI. 

forces  ?  At  ail  events  we  must  do  something  or  die  in  the 
attempt ;  otherwise  all  will  shortly  be  lost."  The  Gover- 
nors of  the  States  promptly  responded  with  promises  of 
troops,  but  General  A.  S.  Johnston,  who  was  in  chief  com- 
mand in  the  West,  does  not  appear  to  have  attached  much 
importance  to  the  "brilliant  programme."  His  practical 
mind  was  engaged  in  the  problem  of  collecting  as  strong  a 
force  as  possible  on  the  Memphis  and  Charleston  Railroad, 
for  the  purpose  of  there  fighting  a  decisive  battle,  on  the 
issue  of  which  all  plans  for  the  future  must  depend. 

Polk  meanwhile  was  removing  his  stores  and  guns,  140  in 
number,  from  Columbus  to  Island  No.  10;  on  March  2d, 
everything  having  been  removed  except  two  guns  in  a  re- 
mote outwork,  he  set  fire  to  all  his  buildings  and  took  his 
departure,  one  portion  of  his  command  going  by  transports 
to  New  Madrid,  and  the  other  by  land  along  the  Mobile 
Railroad.  Foote's  squadron,  accompanied  by  two  regiments 
under  Brig. -Gen.  W.  T.  Sherman,  took  possession  early  on 
the  morning  of  the  4th. 

Polk's  movements  were  probably  hastened  at  the  last  by 
the  advance  of  Brig. -Gen.  John  Pope,  who  had  organized  a 
force  of  about  20,000  men  on  the  west  bank  of  the  Mississippi, 
just  above  Cairo,  and  had  begun  to  move  south  toward  New 
Madrid  on  February  28th,  on  which  day  he  had  a  skirmish 
with  Thompson's  Missouri  militia.  Pope  reached  New 
Madrid  on  March  3d,  and  after  a  siege  of  a  month,  with  the 
assistance  of  Foote's  squadron,  he  finally  captured  the  whole 
of  the  Confederate  forces  in  that  vicinity — about  7,000  men 
— on  April  7th.  On  the  12th,  Pope  embarked  his  army  on 
transports,  and,  escorted  by  Foote's  squadron,  proceeded 
down  the  river,  arriving  near  Fort  Pillow  on  the  14th.  Plans 
were  made  for  a  combined  attack  on  the  17th,  but  on  that 
day  Pope  received  orders  from  Halleck  to  take  his  force 


THE  FIRST  YEAR'S  OPERATIONS.  13 

to  Pittsburg  Landing  without  delay,  and  he  started  up  the 
river  that  afternoon.  The  withdrawal  of  the  army  made  the 
attack  impossible. 

Meanwhile,  during  the  month  of  March,  Grant's  army  had 
advanced  up  the  Tennessee  Eiver,  and  Buell's  had  marched 
across  from  Nashville  to  join  it.  A.  S.  Johnston  had  re- 
treated from  Bowling  Green,  through  Nashville  and  Mur- 
freesborough  to  the  Memphis  and  Charleston  Bailroad,  and 
thence  to  Corinth,  bringing  with  him  the  troops  afterward 
known  as  Hardee's  Corps;  Bragg  had  come  to  the  same 
point  from  Mobile  and  Pensacola,  and  Polk  from  Columbus, 
with  that  portion  of  his  troops,  which  had  not  gone  to  New 
Madrid.  Beauregard  had  collected  what  few  troops  there 
were  along  the  Memphis  and  Charleston  Bailroad.  Van 
Dorn  had  come  in  person  from  Arkansas  to  Corinth,  and  his 
troops  had  received  orders  to  follow  him,  but  had  not  yet 
arrived.  Both  sides  being  thus  concentrated,  the  first  great 
battle  in  the  West,  and  the  most  sanguinary,  was  fought  at 
Shiloh  on  April  6th  and  7th.  Immediately  after  that  battle 
Halleck  assumed  command  in  person  at  Shiloh,  and  ordered 
Pope  to  join  him  with  his  force.  Van  Dorn's  troops  also 
joined  Beauregard,  who  had  succeeded  Johnston  in  com- 
mand on  the  death  of  the  latter.  Beauregard  fell  back 
slowly,  and  Halleck  advanced  with  great  caution  to  Corinth, 
which  was  evacuated  by  the  Confederates  on  May  30th, 
Beauregard  retreating  southward  on  the  Mobile  and  Ohio 
Railroad.  The  Union  troops  being  thus  in  possession  of  the 
Memphis  and  Charleston  Bailroad  at  Corinth,  the  Confed- 
erate position  at  and  above  Memphis  was  turned  and  ren- 
dered untenable,  in  the  same  manner  that  Columbus  had 
been  turned  by  the  capture  of  Forts  Henry  and  Donelson. 
Fort  Pillow  was  therefore  abandoned  by  its  garrison  on  the 
night  of  the  4th  of  June,  and  Fort  Randolph  on  the  follow- 


14  THE  MISSISSIPPI. 

ing  day,  the  greater  part  of  their  garrisons  being  taken  down 
the  river  in  transports  to  Vicksburg. 

The  results  of  the  campaign  up  the  Tennessee  River  had 
been  not  only  the  capture  of  the  hostile  army  at  Fort  Donel- 
son,  and  the  defeat  and  loss  inflicted  upon  that  at  Shiloh, 
but  also  the  outflanking  of  all  the  Confederate  positions  on 
the  Mississippi  from  Cairo  to  Memphis  and  their  consequent 
abandonment.  The  Confederates  had,  however,  a  strong 
fleet  at  Memphis,  under  Commodore  Montgomery,  and  be- 
fore giving  up  that  city  they  determined  to  try  conclusions 
with  Foote's  fleet,  not  with  any  intention  to  save  Memphis, 
for  there  was  nothing  to  prevent  Halleck's  army  from  march- 
ing into  it,  but  with  the  hope  of  destroying  or  crippling  the 
fleet. 

Foote  had  remained  in  the  vicinity  of  Fort  Pillow  after 
the  departure  of  Pope's  army  on  April  17th,  but  no  active 
operations  had  been  undertaken  further  than  to  bombard 
the  fort  with  the  mortar  boats.  On  the  9th  of  May,  he 
was  finally  obliged  to  relinquish  the  command  of  his  squad- 
ron, on  account  of  the  wound  he  had  received  at  Fort  Don- 
elson,  from  which  he  had  been  suffering  constantly  for  three 
months.  He  was  succeeded  by  Commodore  C.  H.  Davis. 
On  the  following  day,  May  10th,  about  7  a.m.,  the  Confed- 
erate flotilla  of  eight  vessels  came  out  from  under  the  guns 
of  Fort  Pillow,  and  attacked  the  Union  flotilla,  which  con- 
sisted of  seven  armored  gunboats.  A  severe  battle  took 
place,  in  which  the  Confederates  used  their  vessels  as  rams 
with  great  effect,  completely  disabling  the  Cincinnati  and 
Mound  City,  which  were  both  sunk  in  shoal  water,  though 
they  were  soon  afterward  raised  and  repaired.  The  Union 
ordnance  was,  however,  far  superior  to  that  of  the  Confed- 
erates, and  its  projectiles  penetrated  four  of  the  latter's 
vessels,  disabling  their  machinery,  and  rendering  them  help- 


THE  FIRST  YEAR'S   OPERATIONS. 


15 


less.  At  the  end  of  an  hour,  the  Confederates  withdrew  to 
the  fort,  towing  their  disabled  vessels,  which  were  subse- 
quently repaired  at  Memphis. 

Upon  the  abandonment  of  Fort  Pillow,  on  June  4th,  Davis 
proceeded  down  the  river,  arriving  at  dark  on  the  5th  with- 
in two  miles  of  Memphis,  where  he  anchored  for  the  night. 
At  daylight  the  next  morning,  June  6th,  the  Confederate 
flotilla  was  discovered  lying  at  the  levee  at  Memphis.  It 
consisted  of  the  same  vessels  which  had  taken  part  in  the 
action  off  Port  Pillow  a  month  previous. 

The  two  flotillas  were  composed  of  the  following  vessels : 


UNION. 

Guns. 

Benton 16 

Louisville 13 

Carondelet 13 

Cairo 13 

St.  Louis 13 

Queen  of  the  West ram 

Switzerland " 

Monarch " 

Lancaster  . .  ^ " 

68 


CONFEDERATE. 

Guns. 

Little  Rebel 2 

Bragg 3 

Beauregard   4 

Price  4 

Sumpter 3 

Lovell 4 

Thompson  4 

Van  Dorn 4 


28 


At  4.20  a.m.,  the  Union  flotilla  got  under  way  and  began 
to  drop  down  the  river ;  the  Confederates  immediately 
opened  fire,  and  advanced  slowly  to  meet  them,  though 
maintaining  such  a  position  in  front  of  the  city  that  it  was 
difficult  for  the  Union  boats  to  return  the  fire  without  dan- 
ger of  firing  into  the  city.  The  fire  was  nevertheless  re- 
turned, and  after  it  had  continued  for  about  twenty  minutes, 
Colonel  Ellet,  in  the  ram  Queen  of  the  West,  followed  by 
the  Monarch,  dashed  out  from  under  the  Arkansas  shore, 
passed  in  front  of  Davis's  flotilla,  and  steamed  at  full  speed 
against  the  enemy's  vessels.  Ellet  designed  to  strike  the 
Beauregard,  which  was  in  advance,  but  he  missed  this  ves- 


16  THE   MISSISSIPPI. 

sel,  and  crashed  into  the  Lovell,  cutting  her  almost  in  two, 
and  sinking  her  in  deep  water,  with  the  greater  part  of  her 
crew.  While  the  Queen  was  still  entangled  with  the  Lovell, 
the  Beauregard  turned  and  rammed  her,  and,  in  turn,  re- 
ceived a  blow  from  the  Monarch.  The  Price,  by  this  time, 
had  joined  in  the  fight,  and  the  Monarch  made  a  pass  at  her, 
but  missed  her,  and  the  Beauregard,  endeavoring  to  strike  the 
Monarch,  missed  her,  and  cut  away  the  port-wheel  of  her  own 
consort,  the  Price.  The  Benton,  which  was  in  advance  of 
the  gunboat  fleet,  now  arrived,  and  sent  a  well-directed  shot 
through  the  boiler  of  the  Beauregard,  completing  her  dis- 
ablement. The  result  of  this  general  melee  was  as  follows : 
on  the  Confederate  side,  the  Lovell  had  been  sunk,  and  the 
Beauregard  and  Price  were  comxDletely  disabled.  On  the 
Union  side,  the  ram  Queen  had  been  disabled,  and  had  run 
to  the  Arkansas  shore,  and  the  Monarch  had  followed  her» 
taking  the  Beauregard  in  tow,  which  sunk  as  soon  as  she 
reached  shoal  water.  As  the  rams  Lancaster  and  Switzer- 
land had  turned  up  the  river  through  some  misunderstand- 
ing of  orders,  the  rams  took  no  further  part  in  the  action. 

By  this  time,  however,  the  gunboats  had  all  closed  with 
the  Confederate  flotilla,  and  a  running  fight  ensued,  which 
lasted  for  about  an  hour,  in  the  presence  of  thousands  of 
spectators  on  the  Tennessee  shore,  and  which  ended  ten 
miles  below  the  city.  In  this  fight,  the  Little  Rebel  re- 
ceived a  shot  through  the  steam-chest,  and  was  immediately 
run  on  the  Arkansas  shore ;  the  Thompson  was  set  on  fire, 
and  grounded  some  distance  below  Memphis,  where  the  fire 
reached  the  magazine  and  blew  her  up ;  the  Sunipter  and 
Bragg  were  disabled  by  shells,  and  one  was  captured  while 
the  other  was  run  ashore  and  deserted  by  her  crew.  The 
Van  Dorn  alone  escaped,  the  Monarch  and  Switzerland  being- 
sent  in  pursuit,  but  failing  to  overtake  her. 


THE  FIRST  YEAR'S  OPERATIONS.  17 

The  result  of  this  engagement  was  most  decisive ;  three  of 
the  Confederate  vessels — Lovell,  Beauregard,  and  Thomp- 
son— were  wholly  destroyed,  four  of  them — Little  Rebel, 
Price,  Sumpter,  and  Bragg — were  captured,  and  saved  in 
such  condition  that  with  extensive  repairs  they  were  subse- 
quently incorporated  with  the  Union  flotilla.  In  addition 
to  this  annihilation  of  the  Confederate  flotilla,  five  large 
transports  and  a  considerable  amount  of  cotton  were  cap- 
tured, and  a  large  ram  and  two  tugs  on  the  stocks  were  de- 
stroyed. The  Confederate  loss  in  men  was  not  accurately 
known,  but  was  estimated  at  one  hundred  killed  and  wound- 
ed, and  one  hundred  and  fifty  captured.  On  the  Union  side, 
Colonel  Ellet  received  a  wound  in  the  leg,  from  which  he 
subsequently  died,  and  three  men  on  the  Carondelet  were 
slightly  injured.  No  other  gunboat  but  the  Carondelet  was 
struck.  The  city  of  Memphis  was  surrendered  to  Commo- 
dore Davis  by  the  mayor  immediataty  after  the  fight,  and 
the  two  regiments  which  accompanied  the  flotilla  marched 
in  and  took  possession  at  11  a.m. 

For  the  next  three  weeks  Davis  remained  at  Memphis 
with  the  greater  part  of  his  flotilla ;  but  on  June  12th  he 
organized  an  expedition  consisting  of  the  Mound  City,  St. 
Louis,  Lexington,  and  Conestoga,  accompanied  by  three  of 
the  captured  transports,  carrying  the  Forty-sixth  Indiana, 
under  Colonel  Fitch.  This  force  proceeded  down  the  Mis- 
sissippi to  the  mouth  of  White  River,  and  thence  up  that 
stream  to  the  village  of  St.  Charles,  where  the  Confeder- 
ates had  erected  some  batteries  at  the  crossing  of  the  main 
road  from  Memphis  to  Little  Rock.  The  object  of  this  expe- 
dition was  to  destroy  these  batteries,  clear  the  river  of  hostile 
boats,  and  open  communication  with  Maj.-Gen.  S.  R.  Curtis, 
who,  after  the  battle  of  Pea  Ridge,  had  begun  a  march  east- 
ward to  open  communications  on  the  Mississippi.     The  ex- 


18  THE  MISSISSIPPI 

pedition  reached  St.  Charles  on  June  16th,  and  attacked 
and  captured  the  batteries  on  the  same  day.  The  loss  would 
have  been  trifling  but  for  one  well-aimed  shot,  which  pene- 
trated the  casemate  of  the  Mound  City,  and  exploded  the 
steam-drum.  Many  of  the  crew  were  killed  outright,  others 
were  frightfully  scalded,  and  some  jumped  overboard,  and 
were  drowned.  Out  of  175  people  on  board,  only  35  escaped 
uninjured.  Having  destroyed  the  batteries,  the  expedition 
returned  to  Memphis.  Curtis  did  not  arrive  in  time  to  com- 
municate with  the  gunboats,  but,  continuing  his  march,  he 
reached  the  Mississippi  at  Helena,  about  eighty  miles  below 
Memphis,  on  July  13th. 

On  June  29th,  Davis  left  Memphis,  and  proceeded  down 
the  Mississippi,  with  the  Benton,  Carondelet,  Louisville, 
and  St.  Louis,  and  six  mortar  boats  in  tow  of  transports. 
On  July  1st  he  arrived  at  Young's  Point,  a  few  miles  above 
Yicksburg,  and  there  joined  hands  with  Admiral  D.  G.  Far- 
ragut's  fleet  from  New  Orleans.  The  entire  river  from  Cairo 
to  the  Gulf  had  now  been  navigated  by  Union  vessels,  but 
another  long  year  and  many  weary  efforts  were  required  be- 
fore it  was  free  from  Confederate  control. 

It  is  now  necessary  to  refer  briefly  to  the  early  movements 
up  the  Mississippi  from  its  mouth.  The  ever- memorable 
passage  of  the  forts  below  New  Orleans  by  Farragut's  fleet 
took  place  on  April  24th,  and  on  the  25th  Farragut  arrived 
off  New  Orleans.  General  Lovell,  who  commanded  the  Con- 
federate troops  in  the  city,  immediately  evacuated  the  place, 
retreating  up  the  line  of  the  Jackson  Eailroad,  and  on  May 
1st,  Maj.-Gen.  B.  F.  Butler  arrived  with  his  troops  and  took 
possession  of  the  city,  relieving  a  few  marines  who  had  been 
landed.  > 

A  portion  of  Farragut's  fleet  immediately  proceeded  up 
the  river,  meeting  no  resistance  more  serious  than  the  wordy 


THE  FIRST  YEAR'S  OPERATIONS.  19 

protests  of  majors  of  undefended  cities.  Baton  Eouge  was 
taken  on  May  8th,  and  Natchez  on  the  12th.  No  fortifica- 
tions were  encountered  south  of  Vicksburg,  at  which  place 
the  advanced  division,  under  Commander  S.  P.  Lee,  of 
the  Oneida,  arrived  on  May  18th.  He  immediately  sum- 
moned the  Mayor,  as  well  as  the  officer  commanding  the  de- 
fences, to  surrender,  but  the  demand  was  defiantly  refused. 
A  day  or  two  later  Farragut  himself  arrived  with  additional 
vessels,  and  with  him  came  two  transports,  carrying  two 
regiments  and  a  battery — about  fifteen  hundred  men  in  all 
— under  command  of  Brig. -Gen.  Thomas  Williams,  who  had 
been  detached  by  Butler  for  this  service.  A  reconnoissance 
of  the  place  was  made,  and  then  a  council  of  war  was  held 
by  Farragut  and  his  commanders,  at  which  Williams  was 
present.  Williams  was  of  opinion  that  his  force  was  alto- 
gether too  small  to  accomplish  anything  against  such  de- 
fences, and  a  large  majority  of  the  naval  commanders  ad- 
vised against  Farragut's  proposition  to  run  by  the  batteries. 
Nothing,  therefore,  was  done,  and  Farragut  returned  to  New 
Orleans  with  part  of  his  fleet,  and  Williams  took  his  troops 
back  to  Baton  Rouge.  These  events  took  place  in  the  lat- 
ter part  of  May,  1862. 

It  appears,  from  the  records,  that,  on  December  18,  1861, 
Colonel  Edward  Fontaine,  Chief  of  Ordnance  of  the  Mis- 
sissippi Army,  wrote  to  Governor  Moore,  of  Louisiana, 
proposing  to  go  to  Vicksburg,  make  surveys,  and  begin  the 
erection  of  fortifications.  Moore  forwarded  the  letter  to 
Lovell,  who  replied  that  he  had  no  objection  to  the  journey, 
but  he  was  unable  to  assist  in  constructing  the  fortifica- 
tions, because  he  had  "no  competent  officer,  no  guns,  no 
powder." 

Almost  immediately  after  the  battle  of  Fort  Donelson,  in 
February,  1862,  Bragg,  who  was  then  in  command  at  Pensa- 


20  THE  MISSISSIPPI. 

cola,  directed  Col.  J.  L.  Autry  to  proceed  to  Vicksburg  with 
his  regiment,  the  27th  Mississippi.  In  the  month  of  March 
guns  and  ammunition  were  sent  from  Pensacola  to  Vicks- 
burg;  and,  after  the  battle  of  Shiloh  and  the  capture  of 
Island  No.  10,  in  April,  1862,  Beauregard  drew  up  a  project 
of  fortification  for  batteries,  containing  about  forty  guns  and 
a  garrison  of  three  thousand  men,  and  sent  it  to  Capt.  D.  B. 
Harris,  of  the  Confederate  Engineers,  then  serving  at  Fort 
Pillow,  with  a  letter  of  instructions,  dated  at  Corinth,  April 
21st,  directing  him  to  proceed  to  Vicksburg,  collect  a  force 
of  1,000  negroes,  and  begin  the  construction  of  the  works  at 
once.  Special  directions  were  given  in  this  letter  to  locate 
batteries  so  as  to  prevent  the  construction  of  a  canal  across 
the  peninsula  opposite  the  city. 

The  fortifications  of  Vicksburg  were  therefore  begun  in 
the  latter  part  of  April,  1862.  At  this  time,  it  will  be  re- 
membered, Halleck,  with  all  the  available  Union  troops  in 
the  West,  was  about  to  begin  his  advance  from  Shiloh, 
Beauregard,  reinforced  by  Van  Dorn,  was  preparing  to  de- 
fend Corinth,  and  Farragut  was  passing  the  forts  below 
New  Orleans. 

When  Lovell  retreated  northward  from  New  Orleans  at 
the  time  of  its  capture,  he  fully  appreciated  the  importance 
of  defending  Vicksburg,  and,  therefore,  while  retaining  the 
bulk  of  his  force  on  the  Jackson  Bailroad,  he  at  once  des- 
patched Brig.-Gen.  Martin  L.  Smith,  who  had  been  an  officer 
of  Topographical  Engineers  before  the  war,  with  five  regi- 
ments to  Vicksburg,  with  orders  to  assume  command  and 
complete  the  fortifications  with  the  utmost  despatch.  Smith 
arrived  at  Vicksburg  on  May  12th,  and  served  there  until 
its  surrender  more  than  a  year  afterward.  He  found  three 
batteries  completed,  and  a  fourth  in  progress.  Continu- 
ing work  night  and   day  on  the   others,  he   had  six  bat- 


THE  FIRST  YEAR'S  OPERATIONS.  21 

teries  finished  and  armed  when  the  advance  division  of  Far- 
ragut's  fleet  arrived  on  May  18th.  For  the  next  ten  days  he 
was  in  extreme  anxiety,  fearing  that  he  would  be  unable  to 
meet  a  vigorous  attack,  but  his  anxiety  was  finally  relieved 
by  Farragut's  departure.  In  spite  of  a  desultory  bombard- 
ment by  that  jjortion  of  the  fleet  which  remained,  the  ten 
batteries  originally  projected  were  completed  and  armed  by 
the  middle  of  June.  Reinforcements  then  began  to  arrive. 
Breckenridge's  corps  of  Bragg's  army,  and  Ruggles's  com- 
mand from  Grenada — in  all  about  15,000  men — were  ordered 
to  Vicksburg  on  June  22d  ;  and  Van  Dorn,  who  had  super- 
seded Lovell,  arrived  in  person  and  took  command  on  June 
28th. 

On  reaching  New  Orleans  about  June  1st,  on  his  return 
from  his  first  trip  to  Vicksburg,  Farragut  found  most  urgent 
letters  from  the  Navy  Department,  impressing  upon  him  the 
importance  of  clearing  the  Mississippi,  only  one  point  of 
which,  Vicksburg,  then  remained  in  Confederate  control. 
Although  Farragut  was  anxious  to  attack  Mobile,  and  had 
no  faith  in  his  ability  to  take  Vicksburg  without  the  aid  of 
a  large  land  force,  yet  he  prepared  as  quickly  as  possible  to 
make  the  attempt,  in  compliance  with  the  wishes  of  the  De- 
partment. The  mortar-flotilla,  consisting  of  sixteen  vessels 
under  Commander  D.  D.  Porter,  was  sent  up  in  advance  of 
him  and  reached  Vicksburg  on  June  20th.  On  the  same  day 
Farragut  left  Baton  Rouge  with  the  large  vessels  of  his  fleet, 
accompanied  by  transports  carrying  Williams  and  his  bri- 
gade of  four  regiments  and  two  batteries,  numbering  about 
three  thousand  men.  They  reached  Vicksburg  on  June  25th, 
having  stopped  on  the  way  near  Natchez  and  Grand  Gulf 
to  attack  batteries  which  had  been  erected  since  their  first 
expedition,  but  which  were  now  abandoned  on  their  approach. 
Upon  arriving  at  Vicksburg  Williams  landed  his  troops  on 


22  THE  MISSISSIPPI. 

the  Louisiana  shore,  and  collecting  a  force  of  about  1,200 
negroes  from  the  neighboring  plantations  he  began  digging 
the  canal  across  the  peninsula.  The  line  adopted  for  this 
was  the  same  as  had  been  laid  out  several  years  before,  at 
a  time  when  the  States  of  Louisiana  and  Mississippi  were 
in  dispute  as  to  their  boundaries,  and  the  former  State  had 
determined  to  dig  a  canal  which  should  cut  off  Vicksburg 
from  the  river. 

Meanwhile  Farragut's  fleet  was  all  assembled  at  Vicksburg 
by  June  25th.  It  consisted  of  three  ships  and  seven  gun- 
boats, carrying  in  all  106  guns,  and  of  sixteen  mortar-boats 
carrying  each  one  13-inch  mortar.  "Williams  also  placed  his 
ten  field  guns  on  the  Loaisiana  shore  to  assist  the  fleet. 
The  armament  of  the  Confederate  batteries  cannot  be  accu- 
rately stated ;  it  probably  did  not  exceed  40  guns,  but  they 
had  the  advantage  of  being  on  a  bluff  about  200  feet  high, 
from  which  they  obtained  a  plunging  fire  on  the  vessels. 

The  mortar-boats  having  been  anchored  in  position,  Far- 
ragut's fleet  passed  the  batteries  early  on  the  morning  of 
June  28th.  It  was  simply  an  artillery  duel,  lasting  about 
two  hours,  at  the  end  of  which  time  Farragut  came  to  an- 
chor above  the  peninsula  with  two  ships  and  five  gunboats  ; 
one  ship  and  two  gunboats,  as  well  as  the  mortar-fleet,  had 
remained  below  the  town.  His  total  losses  were  15  killed 
and  42  wounded,  and  the  damage  to  his  fleet,  in  spite  of  the 
heavy  firing,  was  not  very  serious.  Farragut  states  in  his 
report  that  "  the  rebels  were  soon  silenced  by  the  combined 
efforts  of  the  fleet  and  flotilla,  and  at  times  did  not  reply  at 
all  for  several  minutes,"  and  the  same  statement  is  made  by 
his  commanders  ;  Smith,  however,  states  that  "not  a  single 
gun  was  silenced,  none  disabled,  and  the  serious  bombard- 
ment of  the  preceding  seven  days  had  thrown  nothing  out 
of  fighting   trim."     It  is  probable  that  some   of  the  guns 


THE  FIRST  YEAR'S  OPERATIONS.  23 

ceased  firing  for  a  time  but  that  none  of  them  were  perma- 
nently silenced  or  disabled.  In  any  event,  it  was  perfectly 
evident  that  the  navy  could  do  no  serious  damage  to  the 
batteries.  Farragut  clearly  stated  the  case  in  his  report  by 
saying,  "  The  forts  can  be  passed,  and  we  have  done  it  and 
can  do  it  again  as  often  as  may  be  required  of  us  ;  "  but  "  I 
am  satisfied  that  it  is  not  possible  to  take  Vicksburg  with- 
out an  army  of  12,000  to  15,000  men." 

The  combined  fleets  of  Farragut  and  Davis  therefore  re- 
mained in  the  vicinity  of  Vicksburg,  part  of  them  above  and 
part  below  the  town  ;  Williams  with  his  little  force  con- 
tinued digging  the  canal,  and  the  Confederates  worked  away 
at  their  batteries,  not  only  increasing  the  number  of  those 
at  Vicksburg  but  erecting  new  ones  at  Grand  Gulf,  about 
fifteen  miles  down  the  river. 

The  line  for  the  canal  was  not  well  located,  for  it  was  per- 
pendicular to  the  direction  of  the  current,  and  at  each  end 
the  current  impinged  upon  the  shore  opposite  to  that  on 
which  they  were  digging.  It  would  have  been  of  no  service 
if  completed,  but  before  its  completion  the  river  suddenly 
rose  one  night  and  inundated  and  destroyed  all  that  had 
been  accomplished.  "Williams's  troops  were  much  prostrated 
with  sickness,  and  as  he  could  accomplish  nothing  where  he 
was  he  prepared  to  return  to  Baton  Eouge. 

Farragut  was  also  expecting  an  order  to  return  down  the 
river,  when,  on  July  15th,  an  event  occurred  which  caused 
him  deep  mortification.  Early  on  the  morning  of  that 
day  some  of  the  light  draft  gunboats  of  Davis's  flotilla 
had  been  sent  up  the  Yazoo  River  on  a  reconnoissance  to  ob- 
tain information  concerning  the  large  iron-plated  ram, 
Arkansas,  which  was  known  to  be  building  up  that  stream, 
and  of  whose  strength  extraordinary  reports  had  been  circu- 
lated.   The  vessels  had  not  been  long  gone  before  firing  was 


24  THE   MISSISSIPPI. 

heard,  and  soon  after  they  appeared  at  the  mouth  of  the 
Yazoo,  coming  down  with  all  speed  and  closely  followed  by 
the  Arkansas.  It  so  happened  that  not  one  of  Farragut's 
vessels  had  steam  up,  and  in  broad  daylight  in  the  morning 
the  ram  passed  directly  through  his  fleet,  receiving  its  broad- 
sides almost  without  injury,  and  proceeded  to  the  shelter  of 
the  batteries  at  Vicksburg.  Farragut  was  much  chagrined, 
and  determined  at  once  to  run  past  the  batteries  again 
that  night  and  endeavor  to  destroy  the  ram  in  the  pas- 
sage. He  succeeded  in  passing  the  batteries  with  a  loss  of 
5  killed  and  16  wounded,  but  in  the  darkness  and  confu- 
sion no  damage  was  done  to  the  Arkansas.  The  river  was 
now  rapidly  falling  and  Farragut  became  anxious  lest  his 
large  vessels  should  be  unable  to  return  to  deep  water. 
It  was,  therefore,  with  great  relief  that  he  received,  on 
July  20th,  the  expected  order  from  the  Navy  Department 
to  return.  He  waited  a  few  days  for  Williams  to  embark 
his  men,  and  then  on  the  27th  started  down  the  river. 
On  the  same  day  Davis's  flotilla  started  up  the  river,  and 
Yicksburg  was  left  entirely  free.  "Williams's  troops  re- 
turned to  Baton  Eouge,  where  two  gunboats  remained  with 
him,  the  rest  of  Farragut's  fleet  going  on  to  New  Orleans, 
where  it  arrived  July  29th. 

All  immediate  danger  at  Vicksburg  was  therefore  over, 
and  in  the  various  artillery  engagements  which  had  taken 
place  during  the  two  months  since  the  fleet  first  arrived,  the 
Confederates  had  lost  only  22  men  in  killed  and  wounded. 
They  were  very  properly  jubilant  at  their  successful  de- 
fence, yet  with  commendable  promptitude  they  determined 
to  renew  the  offensive.  For  this  purpose  Van  Dom  issued 
orders  on  the  same  day,  July  27th,  that  the  fleets  moved 
off,  directing  Breckenridge  to  select  5,000  men  from  his 
corps  and  proceed  by  rail,  via  Jackson,  to  Camp  Moore,  on 


THE   FIRST  YEAR'S  OPERATIONS.  25 

the  New  Orleans  Railroad,  just  south  of  the  Louisiana  line ; 
here  he  was  to  be  reinforced  by  the  command  of  Euggles 
and  then  proceed  to  attack  Baton  Rouge.  The  object  of 
this  movement  was  to  regain  possession  of  a  point  on  the 
Mississippi  south  of  the  mouth  of  Red  River,  and  thus  re- 
tain control  of  the  navigation  of  that  river,  by  which  sup- 
plies could  be  brought  from  Western  Louisiana  and  Texas. 
Breckenridge  reached  Camp  Moore  on  July  28th,  and  organ- 
izing his  force  into  two  divisions  began  his  march  against 
Baton  Rouge  on  the  30th.  His  force  consisted  of  eighteen 
regiments  and  four  batteries  and  he  states  that  its  strength 
was  6,000  when  he  began  his  march,  but  owing  to  sickness 
it  was  so  reduced  that  the  morning  report  of  August  4th 
showed  only  3,000  effectives,  and  he  "did  not  carry  into  the 
action  more  than  2,600  men."  This  would  give  only  about 
130  men  per  regiment,  and  it  is  doubtless  an  under-estimate. 
Williams's  force  consisted  of  six  regiments  and  three  bat- 
teries ;  it  is  said  that  one-half  of  the  men  were  on  the  sick 
list,  suffering  from  fevers  contracted  at  Vicksburg,  and  the 
estimate  of  2,500  "present  for  duty,"  which  was  made  at 
the  time,  is  probably  quite  accurate.  He  was  anticipating 
an  attack,  and  had  placed  his  men  in  readiness  for  battle 
on  the  north  and  east  of  the  town.  The  Confederates 
opened  the  battle  at  daylight,  and  it  lasted  with  consid- 
erable energy  for  the  space  of  six  hours.  A  portion  of  the 
Union  line  was  at  first  forced  back,  and  their  camps,  which 
were  in  advance  of  the  line,  were  occupied  and  plundered 
by  the  Confederates.  About  10  a.m.,  however,  their  ad- 
vance was  completely  checked  ;  one  division  and  three  bri- 
gade commanders  had  been  killed  or  wounded,  the  men 
had  lost  very  heavily,  and  were  suffering  for  water,  and  the 
ram  Arkansas,  which  had  descended  the  river  with  the  pur- 
pose of  driving  off  the  Union  gunboats  and  assisting  in  the 
VIII.— 2 


26  THE  MISSISSIPPI. 

battle,  had  not  made  its  appearance.  Breckenridge,  there- 
fore, gave  up  the  contest,  and  retired  to  a  creek  about  two 
miles  in  rear,  where  he  remained  during  the  afternoon,  in- 
tending, as  he  claims,  to  renew  the  fight  as  soon  as  the 
Arkansas  should  come  in  sight.  Late  in  the  afternoon, 
however,  he  received  word  that  the  Arkansas  was  dis- 
abled about  five  miles  up  the  river,  and  he  therefore  con- 
tinued his  retreat  during  the  night  about  twelve  miles  to  the 
north,  halting  on  a  small  stream  known  as  the  Comite  Eiver. 
During  the  battle,  Commander  W.  D.  Porter,  with  the  Essex 
and  four  other  gunboats,  was  stationed  in  the  river  opposite 
the  right  flank  of  "Williams's  troops,  and,  when  the  Con- 
federates began  to  retreat,  these  vessels  fired  on  them  with 
considerable  effect.  The  next  morning  three  of  the  vessels 
proceeded  up  the  river,  and  a  few  miles  above  the  town  they 
came  in  sight  of  the  Arkansas,  and  immediately  opened  fire 
upon  her.  One  of  the  engines  of  this  vessel  had  broken 
down  on  the  previous  day,  and,  in  stopping  to  repair  it,  she 
had  been  prevented  from  taking  part  in  the  battle.  On  the 
morning  of  the  6th,  she  got  up  steam,  but  had  proceeded 
only  a  short  distance  when  the  other  engine  gave  way.  Be- 
fore it  could  be  repaired,  the  Essex  and  other  Union  vessels 
came  in  sight,  and  the  commander  of  the  Arkansas,  deeming 
his  vessel  in  no  condition  to  fight,  ran  her  ashore,  landed 
his  crew,  set  fire  to  the  vessel,  and  turned  her  adrift.  She 
floated  down  the  river,  and  blew  up  as  soon  as  the  fire 
reached  the  magazine. 

The  Union  loss  in  this  engagement  at  Baton  Rouge  was 
reported  at  90  killed,  and  250  wounded.  The  Confederate 
returns  make  their  loss  84  killed,  307  wounded,  and  56  miss- 
ing ;  total,  447.  In  addition  to  two  colonels  of  regiments, 
the  Union  troops  lost  their  commander,  General  Williams, 
a  valuable  and  experienced  officer,  who  had  served  on  Gen- 


THE  FIRST  YEAR'S   OPERATIONS.  27 

eral  Scott's  staff  throughout  the  Mexican  War.  He  was 
killed  at  the  head  of  his  men  just  before  the  close  of  the 
action.  Among  the  Confederate  killed  and  wounded  were 
Generals  Clark  and  Helm,  and  two  colonels  commanding 
brigades. 

Breckenridge's  attack  had  thus  been  unsuccessful,  but  the 
object  of  his  expedition,  which  was  to  gain  possession  of 
a  point  below  the  mouth  of  Red  River,  was  fully  achieved. 
Two  days  after  the  battle,  instead  of  returning  to  Camp 
Moore,  and  thence  back  into  Mississippi,  he  marched  his 
men  to  Port  Hudson,  thirty  miles  above  Baton  Rouge,  and 
began  the  construction  of  heavy  batteries,  for  which  the 
site  was  admirably  adapted.  On  August  19th,  the  batteries 
being  well  advanced,  he  left  a  portion  of  his  command, 
under  Ruggles,  to  garrison  them,  and  with  the  rest  rejoined 
Van  Dorn  at  Jackson,  Miss.  Port  Hudson  remained  in  the 
possession  of  the  Confederates  from  this  time  until  after 
the  fall  of  Vicksburg  in  the  following  summer.  On  the 
other  hand,  the  troops  which  had  composed  "Williams's 
command  abandoned  Baton  Rouge  and  returned  to  New  Or- 
leans. 

It  was  now  within  a  few  days  of  one  year  since  Grant  had 
arrived  at  Cairo,  and  Polk  at  Columbus,  and  active  opera- 
tions for  the  control  of  the  great  river  had  begun.  During 
that  year  the  river  had  been  cleared  and  held  from  Cairo 
down  to  Vicksburg ;  New  Orleans  had  been  taken,  and  the 
fleet  had  ascended  to  Vicksburg.  That  point  alone  re- 
mained to  the  Confederates,  and,  for  a  while,  they  held  ii  by 
the  frailest  possible  tenure.  One  more  effort,  with  a  land 
force  of  10,000  men,  at  any  time  during  the  months  of  May 
or  June,  1862,  and  the  entire  river  wo  aid  have  been  se- 
curely in  possession  of  the  Union  forces.  That  effort  was 
not  made ;  whether  it  could,  or  could  not  have  been,  it  is 


28  THE  MISSISSIPPI 

difficult  to  say.  Perhaps  Halleck  might  have  marched  his 
whole  army  to  Vicksburg  by  a  rapid  movement  after  the 
evacuation  of  Corinth,  trusting  to  success  to  establish  his 
base  on  the  Mississippi ;  possibly  he  might  have  sent  10,000 
men  via  Memphis,  or  back  via  the  Tennessee  River,  and 
thence  down  the  Mississippi.  But  Halleck  himself  did  not 
think  so.  When  Farragut  reported,  after  passing  the  bat- 
teries on  June  28th,  that  an  army  was  necessary  to  take 
Vicksburg,  Halleck  answered  that  "the  scattered  and  weak- 
ened condition  of  my  forces  renders  it  impossible,  at  the 
present,  to  detach  any  troops  to  co-operate  with  you  at 
Vicksburg."  At  all  events,  the  effort  was  not  made,  and  the 
opportunity  rapidly  slipped  away.  The  Confederates  were 
reinforced  at  Vicksburg,  the  navy  could  do  nothing  unaided, 
and  on  their  departure,  the  Confederates  immediately  re- 
sumed the  offensive,  and  regained  control  of  the  river,  from 
Baton  Rouge  to  Helena,  Ark.,  a  distance  of  300  miles  in  a 
straight  line,  and  twice  as  far  by  the  windings  of  the  river. 
"Within  this  distance,  batteries  were  erected  or  strengthened 
wherever  the  river  touches  the  eastern  bluffs — at  Port  Hud- 
son, at  Natchez,  at  Grand  Gulf,  at  Vicksburg ;  and  a  fort 
was  also  erected  a  short  distance  up  the  Arkansas  River, 
from  the  cover  of  which  gunboats  could  issue  forth  and  de- 
stroy all  unarmed  vessels.  The  Confederacy  thus  gained  a 
lease  of  life  for  another  year  on  the  Mississippi. 


CHAPTER  n. 

IUKA  AND  CORINTH. 

In  the  second  volume  of  this  series  General  Force  has 
traced  the  events  of  the  first  military  operations  in  the 
West,  from  Fort  Henry  to  Corinth.  Although  conducted 
along  the  line  of  the  Tennessee  River,  their  object,  as  al- 
ready stated,  was  to  aid  in  the  great  problem  of  gaining  con- 
trol of  the  Mississippi,  and  their  result  was  the  repossession 
of  that  river  from  Cairo  to  Memphis.  They  were  concluded 
on  May  30,  1862,  by  the  evacuation  of  Corinth  by  the  Con- 
federate army,  under  Beauregard,  and  its  occupation  by  the 
Union  army,  under  Halleck.  The  first  great  step  in  the 
problem  having  thus  been  accomplished  by  the  Union  army, 
the  question  arose  as  to  what  should  be  the  next  step.  On 
June  1st,  the  situation  was  as  follows:  Halleck  had  under 
his  command  at,  or  near  Corinth,  the  largest  army  ever  as- 
sembled west  of  the  Alleghanies;  its  return  is  given  in 
full  in  Appendix  B.,  but  it  may  be  summarized  by  saying 
that,  after  deducting  the  detachments  under  Mitchell  and 
others,  its  strength  present  and  absent  was  173,019,  of  which 
128,315  were  present,  and  of  these  latter  108,538  were  fit  for 
duty  on  the  morning  of  that  day.  In  addition  to  these 
troops,  near  Corinth,  Mitchell's  division  of  Buell's  army, 
numbering  about  G,500  effectives,  was  at  Huntsville,  Ala., 
moving  along  the  Memphis  and  Charleston  Railroad  toward 
Chattanooga ;   another   division  of   the   same   army,    under 


30  THE  MISSISSIPPI. 

Morgan,  numbering  nearly  9,000  effectives,  was  at  Cumber- 
land Gap  in  East  Tennessee ;  and  a  brigade  of  3,000  men 
remained  in  Nashville.  Finally,  Curtis,  with  an  army  of 
about  10,000  men,  was  in  Northwestern  Arkansas,  preparing 
to  march  toward  the  Mississippi.  The  Union  armies,  there- 
fore, had  a  total  effective  strength,  in  round  numbers,  of 
137,000  men,  about  two-thirds  of  which  were  concentrated 
at  Corinth,  and  the  rest  scattered  in  Arkansas,  along  the 
Tennessee  River,  and  in  Eastern  Tennessee. 

Opposed  to  them  the  Confederates  had  an  army  under 
Beauregard,  which  was  retreating  from  Corinth  along  the 
Mobile  and  Ohio  Railroad  toward  Tupelo.  Its  return  of  May 
28th,  which  is  given  in  full  in  Appendix  C,  shows  a  total, 
present  and  absent,  of  112,692,  of  which  75,429  were  present, 
and  of  these  latter  57,147  were  considered  effective  or  fit  for 
duty  on  the  day  of  the  return — over  18,000  being  sick.  Op- 
posed to  Mitchell  was  a  brigade  of  2,000  men  in  Chattanooga, 
under  General  Leadbetter,  who  had  been  detached  from  the 
army  of  Kirby  Smith ;  the  rest  of  which  army,  numbering 
12,000  men,  was  near  Knoxville,  confronting  Morgan's  divi- 
sion at  Cumberland  Gap.  The  Confederates  had  also  a  de- 
tachment under  Lovell  at  Jackson,  and  another  under  M. 
L.  Smith,  at  Vicksburg,  the  two  numbering  about  8,000 
men.  In  Arkansas  their  total  strength  was  about  26,000, 
although  the  troops  were  considerably  scattered  and  were 
poorly  armed. 

The  total  effective  force  of  the  Confederates  in  the  West 
was  therefore  about  105,000  men,  against  137,000  in  the 
Union  armies  opposed  to  them,  although  the  paper  strength 
of  the  two  armies  was  about  175,000  and  220,000.  The  Con- 
federate armies  were  greatly  discouraged  and  demoralized 
by  the  almost  unbroken  series  of  reverses  which  they  had 
sustained  during  the  last  four  months.     The  Union  troops 


IUKA   AND   CORINTH.  31 

were  correspondingly  elated  at  their  success.     Wliat  was  to 
be  their  next  move  ? 

This  question  was  the  most  vital  in  character  and  its  solu- 
tion the  most  far-reaching  in  consequences,  that  ever  arose 
in  the  West,  and  it  should  therefore  be  examined  in  all  its 
bearings.  It  has  generally  been  held  that  Halleck's  action 
at  this  juncture  was  the  worst  possible  under  the  circum- 
stances, but  the  case  was  not  free  from  embarrassment  and 
complication,  and  these  should  be  carefully  considered.  A 
glance  at  the  map  will  show  that  there  were  two  great  high- 
ways leading  into  the  heart  of  the  Confederacy ;  one  was 
down  the  Mississippi  Valley  to  Vicksburg  and  thence  to 
Mobile,  and  the  other  was  along  the  railroad  from  Chatta- 
nooga to  Atlanta  and  thence  to  the  sea-coast.  The  starting- 
points  for  both  were  along  the  railroad  from  Memphis  to 
Chattanooga,  which,  though  much  injured,  was  now  in  Hal- 
leck's possession.  This  railroad  extended  northeastward 
from  Chattanooga  to  Richmond,  and  was  the  only  through 
route  at  that  time  leading  eastward  from  the  Mississippi 
River  within  the  limits  of  the  Confederacy.  South  of  this 
the  only  railroad  connection  between  Memphis  or  Vicksburg 
and  Atlanta  or  Chattanooga  was  via  Mobile.  Halleck  had 
therefore  an  interior  line  of  communications  for  operations 
in  both  directions.  The  distances,  however,  were  very  great 
— from  Chattanooga  to  Corinth  over  200  miles,  and  from 
Corinth  to  Vicksburg  over  300  miles.  If,  then,  Halleck 
took  the  whole  of  his  force  to  Chattanooga,  he  left  the  Mis- 
sissippi River  and  its  parallel  railroads  open  for  an  advance 
of  the  Confederates  to  the  mouth  of  the  Ohio,  and  if  he 
marched  his  whole  army  toward  Vicksburg  he  left  the  road 
open  from  Chattanooga  via  Nashville  to  Louisville  and  Cin- 
cinnati. It  was  of  far  more  importance  to  hold  these  cities 
than  to  overrun  the  whole  Confederacy.    Moreover,  it  seemed 


32  THE  MISSISSIPPI. 

very  doubtful  if  so  large  an  army  as  100,000  men  could  be 
supplied  any  longer  in  the  vicinity  of  Corinth.  Up  to  this 
time  Halleck  had  drawn  his  supplies  by  the  Tennessee 
River,  but  this  river  was  now  rapidly  falling,  and  there  was 
reason  to  believe  that  the  navigation  would  soon  become  so 
difficult  that  supplies  in  large  quantities  could  not  be  for- 
warded by  that  route.  Halleck  must  then  resort  to  the  rail- 
roads, but  these  had  been  destroyed  by  the  Confederates  in 
their  retreat,  all  the  way  from  Columbus.  Until  they  could 
be  repaired  the  army  must  disperse  to  subsist. 

There  was  still  another  reason  in  the  fact  that  McClellan 
imagined  that  Beauregard's  troops  had  been  sent  to  Rich- 
mond, and  he  therefore  urged  that  a  portion  of  Halleck's 
army  should  be  brought  to  the  Peninsula,  and  the  Govern- 
ment seemed  disposed  to  accede  to  his  representations.  It 
was  evident  that  if  any  considerable  part  of  the  army  was 
detached  to  so  distant  a  point  as  Virginia,  all  that  had  been 
gained  in  the  West  would  be  lost ;  and  of  course  the  larger 
Halleck's  army  in  one  body  the  more  urgent  would  be  the 
demand  from  McClellan.1  On  purely  military  grounds, 
therefore,  the  propriety  of  keeping  his  army  together  was 
at  least  open  to  question.  If  we  consider  the  political 
grounds,  the  question  was  still  more  difficult.  Mr.  Lincoln's 
heart  ached  for  the  suffering  Unionists  in  East  Tennessee, 
To  be  a  Union  man  in  the  vicinity  of  Knoxville  in  1862 
meant  something  more  than  the  mere  expression  of  opinion, 
it  meant  the  constant  facing  of  death.  "  Treason  "  to  the 
Confederacy  was  then  indeed  made  odious,  and  its  punish- 
ment was  hanging  without  trial.  The  sufferings  which 
these  brave  men  had  endured  for  their  devotion  to  the 
Union  had  induced  Mr.  Lincoln  to  write  constant  despatches 


See  appendix  D,  at  the  end  of  the  volume. 


IUKA  AND   CORINTH.  33 

during  the  preceding  winter  to  Halleck  and  Buell  urging  an 
advance  into  East  Tennessee  ;  lie  had  yielded  his  judgment 
on  the  representation  that  this  was  not  a  judicious  military 
move ;  but  now  that  the  Mississippi  had  been  opened  to 
Memphis  he  again  urged  the  relief  of  East  Tennessee,  and 
his  appeals  were  not  without  effect.  On  June  5th  he  tele- 
graphed Halleck,  enclosing  a  despatch  from  McClellan,  re- 
commending the  occupation  of  Chattanooga,  and  later  (June 
30th)  he  telegraphed  that  the  expedition  to  East  Tennessee 
must  not  be  abandoned  under  any  circumstances.  To  the 
first  telegram  Halleck  replied  that  preparations  for  Chatta- 
nooga had  already  been  made,  and  in  fact  on  June  2d  he  had 
notified  Buell  that  he  might  expect  an  order  to  move  his 
whole  army  eastward. 

That  an  energetic  commander  might  have  done  more  than 
Halleck  did  seems  incontestable ;  he  might  have  sent  a  por- 
tion of  Buell's  army — not  to  slowly  repair  the  railroad— but  to 
march  with  all  haste  to  reinforce  Mitchell,  seize,  fortify,  and 
hold  Chattanooga  against  all  comers,  and  draw  its  supplies 
directly  from  Nashville.  With  the  balance  of  his  force, 
enough  to  largely  outnumber  Beauregard,  he  might  have 
pursued  the  latter  with  vigor,  bringing  him  to  battle  without 
fortifications  or  else  continuing  his  pursuit  to  Vicksburg, 
Halleck  meanwhile  drawing  his  own  supplies  by  boat  or  rail 
from  Memphis.  But  it  is  universally  admitted  that  energy 
in  the  field  was  not  one  of  Halleck's  characteristics.  His 
orders  were  cautious  to  the  extent  of  feebleness,  and  while 
his  troops  were  scattered  about  trying  to  hold  and  repair 
300  miles  of  railroad — from  Memphis  to  near  Chattanooga — 
running  parallel  to  the  enemy's  front,  the  enemy  under 
Bragg  (who  had  superseded  Beauregard)  seized  the  initia- 
tive, divided  his  forces,  and  by  a  movement  which  was  pre- 
eminentlv  remarkable  for  its  boldness,  its  skill,  and  its  sue- 


34  THE  MISSISSIPPI. 

cess,  transferred  a  part  of  his  army  to  Chattanooga,  whence 
he  led  Buell  a  stern  chase  straight  to  Louisville.  The 
Union  opportunity  was  thus  lost,  and  Bragg  was  allowed  to 
control  the  course  of  events  in  the  West ;  the  Union  armies 
wrere  not  again  united  until  Vicksburg  had  been  taken,  and 
the  whole  force  put  under  Grant's  direction  in  order  to 
drive  Bragg  out  of  Chattanooga  in  November,  1863. 

Halleck's  orders  for  the  dispersion  of  his  army  were  as 
follows  :  on  June  3d,  McClernand  was  sent  with  his  own  and 
"Wallace's  divisions  of  the  Array  of  the  Tennessee  to  Bolivar, 
on  the  MississipjDi  Central  Bailroad.  On  June  4th,  Pope, 
who  was  pursuing  Beauregard  south  of  Corinth,  was  notified 
not  to  bring  on  a  battle,  Halleck  adding,  "  I  think  the 
enemy  will*  continue  his  retreat,  which  is  all  I  desire." 
Pope's  army  went  into  camp  near  Bienzi.  On  June  9th 
Sherman  was  ordered  with  his  own  and  Hurlbut's  division 
to  move  along  the  railroad  to  Memphis,  and  on  the  same 
day  Buell  received  his  definite  orders  to  march  his  whole 
army  eastward  along  the  railroad  to  Chattanooga.  On  the 
10th,  the  order  of  April  30th,  by  which  the  army  had  been 
divided  into  right  wing,  center,  left  wing,  and  reserve,  was 
revoked,  and  Grant,  Buell,  and  Pope,  were  ordered  to  re- 
sume command  of  their  Armies  of  the  Tennessee,  Ohio,  and 
Mississippi  respectively.  Halleck  remained  at  Corinth  for 
five  weeks  longer,  but  nothing  was  done  but  slowly  to  re- 
pair the  railroads,  against  which  the  Confederates  occa- 
sionally made  a  dash.  On  July  16th  he  left  for  Washington, 
to  assume  his  new  duties  as  General-in-Chief.  Grant  was 
left  in  command  of  all  troops  in  the  vicinity  of  Memphis 
and  Corinth  and  as  far  back  as  Columbus,  Ky.,  but  as  Hal- 
leck expected  to  return  in  a  few  weeks  and  keep  his  head- 
quarters in  the  West,  no  successor  was  appointed  to  his  late 
command  nor  did  he  give  any  definite  instructions  as  to  the 


IUKA   AND   CORINTH. 


35 


movements  of  troops  in  that  region.  His  first  telegram 
to  Grant,  dated  July  31st,  is  in  these  words:  "You  must 
judge  for  yourself  the  best  use  to  be  made  of  your  troops. 
Be  careful  not  to  scatter  them  too  much  ;  also  to  hold  them 
in  readiness  to  reinforce  Buell  at  Chattanooga  if  necessary." 
This  dispersion  of  Halleck's  army,  combined  with  Bragg's 
bold  offensive — and  possibly  also  the   disastrous  course  of 


Memphis  to  luka.     1862. 

events  at  this  time  in  Virginia — reduced  all  the  Union  armies 
in  the  West  to  the  defensive.  Grant  was  left  with  about 
60,000  men,  composed  of  Pope's  "Army  of  the  Missis- 
sippi" (now  commanded  by  Bosecrans,  Pope  having  been 
ordered  to  Virginia)  and  the  "  Army  of  the  Tennessee,"  ex- 
cept Wallace's  division,  which  had  been  sent  to  Curtis  at 
Helena.  But  Bragg's  invasion  of  Tennessee  soon  caused 
such  alarm  that  two  divisions,  and   subsequently  a  third 


36  THE  MISSISSIPPI. 

division,  of  Bosecrans's  army  were  sent  to  reinforce  Buell, 
reducing  Grant's  force  to  about  42,000.  With  these  he  was 
required  to  guard  the  line  of  road — two  hundred  miles 
long — from  Memphis  to  Decatur,  and  he  was  specially 
directed  to  keep  open  his  communications  with  Buell. 
Under  these  requirements  no  concentration  of  his  force  nor 
offensive  measures  were  to  be  thought  of.  He  therefore  oc- 
cupied three  important  i:>oints  of  his  road — Memphis,  Cor- 
inth, and  Tuscumbia — with  considerable  bodies,  and  posted 
the  rest  of  his  men  at  Jackson  and  Bolivar,  central  points 
in  rear,  from  which  they  could  readily  be  moved  in  any  re- 
quired direction.  In  this  position  he  awaited  the  move- 
ments of  the  enemy  into  whose  hands  the  power  of  initia- 
tive had  passed. 

On  the  Confederate  side  Bragg  remained  in  camp  at  Tu- 
pelo, Miss.,  until  July  22d,  when  he  issued  orders  sending 
the  Army  of  the  Mississippi,  numbering  about  35,000  men, 
under  Hardee,  to  Chattanooga  by  rail,  via  Mobile ;  he  went 
with  this  column  in  person.  At  Chattanooga  his  army  was 
augmented  by  recruits,  and  by  calling  in  detachments,  and, 
on  August  16th,  he  moved  northward  toward  Kentucky,  in 
conjunction  with  Kirby  Smith's  army  from  Knoxville.  No 
successor  was  appointed  to  Bragg  in  Mississippi,  and,  by 
his  departure,  the  Confederate  forces  in  that  region  were 
reduced  to  two  independent  bodies,  each  about  16,000  in 
strength ;  one,  under  Yan  Dorn,  was  charged  with  the  de- 
fence of  the  river,  and  the  other,  under  Price,  was  to  guard 
the  Mobile  and  Ohio  Railroad  south  of  Corinth.  Van 
Dorn's  troops  were  scattered  from  Holly  Springs  to  Vicks- 
burg,  and  a  few  days  after  Bragg's  departure  Yan  Dom  or- 
dered the  expedition  against  Baton  Rouge,  as  already  nar- 
rated. Price's  troops  were  less  scattered,  most  of  them 
being  in  the  vicinity  of  Tupelo. 


IUKA  AND   CORINTH.  37 

Nothing  of  any  consequence  took  place  for  a  month.  In 
the  latter  part  of  August  a  cavalry  raid  was  undertaken  by 
Generals  Armstrong  and  Jackson,  who  moved  from  Holly 
Springs  to  the  vicinity  of  Bolivar,  with  a  force  of  3,700 
men,  and  did  some  damage  to  the  railroad  between  Jackson 
and  Bolivar. 

On  September  2d,  Price  received  a  despatch  from  Bragg, 
saying  that  Buell  was  "  in  full  retreat  upon  Nashville,"  and 
directing  him  to  "  watch  Eosecrans  and  prevent  a  junction, 
or,  if  he  escapes,  follow  him  closely."  Price  immediately 
communicated  this  to  Van  Dorn,  and  proposed  a  junction  of 
their  forces,  but  Van  Dorn  replied  that  he  could  not  get  all 
his  men  together  at  Holly  Springs  until  the  12th.  Price 
thereupon  determined  to  move  forward  alone.  His  advance 
reached  Iuka  on  the  13th,  and  had  a  skirmish  with  the 
small  garrison  stationed  there ;  on  the  following  day  his 
main  force  came  up  and  entered  the  place.  Three  days  later 
he  received  a  despatch  from  Bragg,  stating  that  documents 
captured  at  Nashville  proved  that  part  of  Bosecrans's  army 
had  been  there  (which  was  true,  as  two  divisions  of  that 
army  had  been  sent  to  Buell  in  August),  and  asking  Price 
to  hasten  his  advance  into  Tennessee.  Price,  however, 
knew  very  well  that  Eosecrans  was  between  Iuka  and  "Cor- 
inth, and  felt  certain  that  Bragg  had  been  misled  in  his  in- 
formation. As  the  spirit  of  his  orders  was  to  attack  Eose- 
crans, he  had  no  hesitation  in  abandoning  his  expedition  to 
Tennessee.  He  therefore  sent  despatches  on  the  17th  to 
Van  Dorn,  again  proposing  the  union  of  their  forces,  and  an 
attack  on  Corinth.  On  the  19th  he  received  Van  Dorn's  an- 
swer, acceding  to  his  proposition,  but  asking  him  to  move 
to  Bienzi  in  order  to  effect  a  junction.  Van  Dorn,  having 
secured  Port  Hudson,  and  the  gunboats  having  retreated  up 
and  down  the  river,  had  left  small  garrisons  at  Vicksburg 


38  THE  MISSISSIPPI. 

and  Port  Hudson,  and  collected  all  the  rest  of  his  force  at 
Holly  Springs,  and  was  now  ready  for  the  offensive.  Price 
made  preparations  to  march  toward  Rienzi  the  next  morn- 
ing, when,  late  on  the  afternoon  of  the  19th,  his  pickets 
were  driven  in  by  Rosecrans  at  Iuka. 

This  battle  was  brought  about  in  the  following  manner : 
Grant  was  watching  Price's  and  Van  Dorn's  movements  as 
carefully  as  possible,  in  daily  expectation  of  an  attack ;  but 
on  September  10th  he  confessed  that  he  was  unable  to  "  de- 
termine the  objects  of  the  enemy."  On  the  following  day 
he  telegraped  that  everything  indicated  an  attack  on  Cor- 
inth within  the  next  forty-eight  hours.  He  therefore  made 
some  changes  in  the  jDosition  of  his  troops,  moving  Hurl- 
but's  division  from  Memphis  to  Bolivar,  Ord's  from  Bolivar 
to  Corinth,  and  drawing  in  Rosecrans's  troops  from  Iuka 
and  Tuscumbia  to  the  vicinity  of  Corinth.  His  army  was 
then  at  three  central  points,  Memphis,  Bolivar,  and  Corinth, 
ready  to  move  promptly  as  soon  as  the  enemy's  movements 
were  developed.  Price's  advanced  guard,  as  already  stated, 
entered  Iuka  on  September  13th,  and  on  the  15th  a  recon- 
noissance  by  Rosecrans' s  cavalry  developed  the  fact  that 
Price  occupied  Iuka  in  force.  Grant  immediately  prepared 
to  attack  him.  In  the  absence  of  positive  knowledge  as  to 
the  enemy's  plans,  three  suppositions  were  possible.  First, 
that  Price  intended  to  cross  the  Tennessee  for  the  purpose 
of  joining  Bragg,  or  attacking  Buell's  rear.  Halleck  tele- 
graphed to  Grant  on  the  17th,  to  do  everything  in  his  power 
to  prevent  this,  as  a  junction  of  Bragg  and  Price  "  would  be 
most  disastrous."  Second,  that  Corinth  was  to  be  attacked 
simultaneously,  by  Van  Dorn  from  the  southwest,  and  by 
Price  from  the  east  or  northeast.  Third,  that  Price  would 
endeavor  to  draw  Grant  away  from  Corinth  in  pursuit,  while 
Van  Dorn  should  attack  that  place   from   the   southwest. 


IUKA   AND   CORINTH.  39 

"Whatever  the  enemy's  plans  might  be,  Grant  satisfied  him- 
self that  Van  Dorn  conld  not  reach  Corinth  with  any  con- 
siderable force  in  less  than  f onr  days,  and  he  determined  to 
attack  Price  at  once,  and,  if  possible,  overwhelm  him,  and 
return  to  Corinth  before  Yan  Dorn  could  arrive.  Grant, 
therefore,  ordered  Eosecrans  to  move  south  about  twelve 
miles  to  Bienzi  and  Jacinto,  leave  small  detachments  in 
those  places  to  prevent  a  surprise  on  Corinth  from  the 
south,  thence  move  rapidly  eastward  with  the  bulk  of  his 
force — about  9,000  men — till  he  was  opposite  Iuka,  then 
turn  northward  and  attack  on  the  roads  coming  from 
Jacinto  and  Fulton.  Ord,  with  about  six  thousand  men, 
was  to  move  along  the  railroad  to  Burnsville,  then  take 
roads  north  of  the  railroad,  and  attack  on  the  north  and 
west  of  Iuka.  The  whole  plan  of  attack  was  based  on  occu- 
pying the  Jacinto  and  Fulton  roads,  thus  cutting  off  Price 
from  all  retreat  to  the  west  or  south.  If  the  attack  were 
successful,  he  would  be  driven  against  the  Tennessee  Eiver, 
where  it  was  hojDed  to  crush  him. 

Grant  went  in  person  with  Ord's  column,  which  reached 
Burnsville  on  the  18th,  and  encamped  within  six  miles  of 
Iuka,  its  advance  moving  forward  to  within  a  few  miles  of 
the  town,  and  skirmishing  with  Price's  cavalry.  Prepara- 
tions were  made  to  attack  at  4.30  a.m.,  the  following  day. 
After  midnight,  however,  word  was  received  from  Eosecrans 
that,  through  the  fault  of  a  guide,  his  march  had  been 
slightly  delayed,  and  one  of  his  divisions  was  still  at  Jacinto, 
twenty  miles  from  Iuka ;  he  would,  therefore,  not  be  able 
to  reach  Iuka  before  one  or  two  o'clock  on  the  following 
afternoon.  Grant  thereupon  ordered  Ord  not  to  attack 
until  he  heard  firing  from  the  other  side  of  Iuka.  During 
the  19th,  the  direction  of  the  wind  was  such  that  the  firing 
was  not  heard.     Eosecrans  sent  word,  at  12. -10  p.m.,  that  he 


40 


THE  MISSISSIPPI. 


was  within  eight  miles  of  Iuka,  but  this  was  not  received  by 
Grant  until  after  night.  Hearing  nothing  from  Eosecrans 
during  the  day,  and  no  sounds  of  firing,  Grant  and  Ord  con- 
cluded that  Eosecrans  could  not  reach  the  field  that  day, 
and  Ord  was  therefore  instructed  to  skirmish  with  the  en- 
emy, but  not  to  bring  on  a  general  engagement. 

Eosecrans,  however,  had  moved  at  daylight,  and  pushing 
his  men  with  great  energy,  his  leading  division,  under  Ham- 
ilton, reached  a  point  about  two  miles  southwest  of  Iuka, 

on  the  Jacinto  road, 
about  4  p.m.  Here 
they  encountered 
strong  opposition 
from  the  enemy,  and 
the  battle  was  at  once 
opened.  Hamilton 
formed  his  division 
across  the  forks  of 
the  road,  on  the  wood- 
ed knoll  shown  on  the 


X/Z&*4                                    1 

Iuka,  September  19,  1862. 


accompanying  map. 
Stanley's  division,  as 
it  came  up,  was  halt- 
ed on  the  road  in  rear,  and  only  one  regiment  of  it  was  hotly 
engaged.  Hamilton  posted  a  battery  at  the  forks  of  the  road, 
and  the  battle  was  mainly  a  contest  for  this  point.  Price 
had  two  divisions,  commanded  by  Generals  Little  and 
Maury.  Little's  division  was  in  the  outskirts  of  the  village 
on  the  south,  and  Maury's  on  the  north.  As  soon  as  his 
skirmishers  were  driven  in  on  the  Jacinto  road,  Price  or- 
dered Little's  division  to  advance  on  that  road,  and  Maury 
to  move  into  the  village,  and  be  in  readiness  to  assist,  if 
necessary.     He  was  not  called  upon,   however,   the  battle 


IUKA  AND   CORINTH.  41 

being  fought  on  the  Confederate  side  by  Little's  division, 
and  mainly  by  two  brigades  of  it,  numbering  between  three 
and  four  thousand  men.  These  two  brigades  attacked  Ham- 
ilton's position  at  the  forks  of  the  road  with  great  vehe- 
mence, and  after  some  unsuccessful  efforts,  finally  earned 
that  point,  capturing  the  battery,  and  forcing  Hamilton's 
line  back  a  few  hundred  yards,  but  again  losing  both  the 
battery  and  the  position  under  a  determined  advance  of 
Hamilton's  men,  assisted  by  one  regiment  of  Stanley's. 
Darkness  then  put  an  end  to  the  fighting,  and  Hamilton's 
division  was  withdrawn  to  the  field  in  rear,  its  place  being 
taken  by  Stanley's  division,  which  had  been  but  slightly 
engaged.  Price  at  once  began  his  preparations  for  retreat, 
and  during  the  night,  Eosecrans  heard  the  rumbling  of  his 
wagons  moving  off  to  the  southeast.  At  daylight,  Stanley's 
men  moved  cautiously  forward,  and  found  that  the  enemy's 
position  was  abandoned ;  they  then  pressed  on  to  the  village, 
but  found  nothing  but  a  few  stragglers  in  it.  Price's  whole 
command  had  escaped  by  the  Fulton  road.  Stanley's  divi- 
sion was  pushed  forward  in  pursuit  on  the  Fulton  road, 
and  Hamilton  was  countermarched  on  the  Jacinto  road, 
but  at  night,  both  found  themselves  distanced  by  the  enemy, 
and  gave  up  the  pursuit.  It  will  be  seen  from  the  map 
that  Eosecrans,  in  his  eagerness  to  reach  the  field  on  the 
appointed  day,  and  in  accordance  with  the  report  he  had 
sent  to  Grant  (but  which  was  not  received  until  night), 
had  pushed  forward  on  the  Jacinto  road,  and  on  arriving 
near  the  town  had  been  immediately  attacked  by  the  enemy, 
and  forced  into  action.  He  therefore  had  no'  opportunity 
to  move  Hamilton's  division  over  to  the  Fulton  road,  as  had 
been  arranged  in  the  orders  for  the  battle.  This  road  was 
thus  left  open,  and  Price  availed  himself  of  it  to  escape 
with  great  promptness.     Eosecrans  sent  word  to  Grant  at 


42  THE   MISSISSIPPI. 

10.30  p.m.  of  the  19th,  informing  him  of  the  engagement  of 
the  afternoon,  and  asking  him  to  attack  in  the  morning  in 
force,  adding,  "We  will  try  to  get  a  position  on  our  right, 
which  will  take  Iuka."  Grant,  therefore,  pushed  forward 
with  Ord's  troops  early  on  the  20th,  but  on  arriving  at  Iuka 
found  that  Price  had  escaped.  The  opportunity  to  destroy 
Price  was  lost  by  the  unfortunate,  but  unavoidable,  lack  of 
concert  on  the  19th,  and  by  the  precipitation  with  which 
Eosecrans  came  to  the  field,  and  was  forced  to  fight  without 
occupying  the  Fulton  road.  Price,  as  we  have  seen,  had,  at 
that  time,  no  intention  of  going  to  Tennessee,  but  he  suc- 
ceeded in  returning  southward,  and  subsequently  in  joining 
Van  Dorn,  in  accordance  with  the  agreement  which  had 
been  made  between  them. 

Eosecrans  reported  his  losses  in  the  battle  of  Iuka  at  144 
killed,  598  wounded,  and  40  missing — total  782,  nearly  700  of 
which  were  in  Hamilton's  division,  which  brought  only  2,800 
men  into  action.  There  is  a  great  discrepancy  in  the  reports 
of  the  Confederate  losses.  Price,  in  his  report  dated  Sep- 
tember 26th,  puts  them  at  86  killed  and  408  wounded — total 
496 ;  but  Eosecrans's  Provost -Marshal  certifies  that  he 
buried  265  who  were  found  dead  on  the  field,  that  120  more 
died  in  hospital,  that  342  wounded  were  found  in  Iuka,  361 
were  taken  prisoners,  and  it  was  estimated  that  350  wounded 
were  carried  off — making  a  total  of  1,438.  General  Little 
was  killed  just  as  his  division  was  coming  into  action. 

Price  retreated  southward  and  reached  Baldwyn,  on  the 
Mobile  and  Ohio  Eailroad,  on  September  23d,  and  imme- 
diately notified  Van  Dorn  at  Holly  Springs  of  his  arrival. 
Eosecrans  and  Ord  returned  to  Corinth. 

Previous  to  this  time  Grant  had  found  that  it  was  impos- 
sible to  maintain  the  railroad  from  Memphis  to  Corinth, 
which  ran  parallel  to  the  enemy's  front  and  was  subject  to 


IUKA  AND   CORINTH.  43 

frequent  raids  by  the  enemy's  cavalry.  This  line  had  there- 
fore been  practically  abandoned  from  Chewalla  to  the  vicin- 
ity of  Memphis,  and  communication  was  kept  up  by  means 
of  the  railroads  in  rear,  forming  two  sides  of  a  triangle  from 
Memphis  to  Humboldt  and  Humboldt  to  Corinth.  The  rail- 
road east  of  Corinth  was  also  practically  abandoned,  as  noth- 
ing had  been  heard  directly  from  Buell  for  several  weeks. 
In  order  to  put  himself  in  direct  communication  with  both 
wings  of  his  army,  at  Memphis  and  at  Corinth,  Grant  estab- 
lished his  headquarters  at  Jackson,  on  October  1st.  The  re- 
turns of  his  army  on  that  day  show  that  he  had  48,000  effec- 
tive men,  as  follows:  7,000  under  Sherman  at  Memphis, 
12,000  under  Ord  at  Bolivar,  23,000  under  Eosecrans  at 
Corinth,  a  small  reserve  of  6,000  at  Jackson,  ready  to  be 
used  whenever  needed.  On  September  30th,  movements  of 
the  Confederates  were  apparent  in  the  vicinity  of  Grand 
Junction,  on  the  Memphis  and  Charleston  Railroad.  These 
movements  were  of  such  a  character  that  Grant  was  left  in 
doubt  whether  Bolivar  or  Corinth  was  to  be  the  point  of 
attack.  On  the  following  day,  however,  it  was  learned  that 
the  Confederates  were  concentrated  at  Pocahontas,  about 
twenty  miles  northwest  of  Corinth,  and  Grant  became  con- 
vinced that  Corinth  was  to  be  the  objective.  He  imme- 
diately notified  Eosecrans  to  be  prepared,  and  directed 
Hurlbut  at  Bolivar  to  watch  the  enemy's  movements  and  at- 
tack him  on  the  flank  if  an  opportunity  offered. 

Meanwhile,  on  September  25th,  Van  Dom  had  received 
Price's  letter  announcing  his  arrival  at  Baldwyn,  and  had 
immediately  requested  him  to  move  to  Eipley,  and  had  put 
his  own  forces  in  motion  for  the  same  place.  These  latter 
consisted  of  a  division  under  Lovell,  containing  three  bri- 
gades under  Generals  Bust,  Villepigue,  and  Bowen.  Bust's 
brigade  was  composed  of  a  portion  of  the  troops  that  Breck- 


44  THE   MISSISSIPPI. 

enridge  had  led  to  Baton  Rouge  (Breckenridge  having  now 
gone  in  person  to  join  Bragg),  Villepigue's  of  the  troops 
that  had  formerly  garrisoned  Fort  Pillow  and  had  since  been 
stationed  on  the  Mississippi  Central  Railroad,  and  Bowen's 
of  a  portion  of  Lovell's  original  command  at  New  Orleans 
and  Jackson.  Van  Dorn  and  Price  met  at  Ripley  on  Sep- 
tember 28th,  and  Van  Dorn  took  command,  being  the  senior 
officer.  The  return  of  his  troops  on  that  day  shows  that, 
after  deducting  the  garrisons  left  at  Vicksbnrg,  Port  Hud- 
son, and  other  places,  he  had  about  22,000  in  the  field, 
Price's  troops  numbering  about  14,000  and  Lovell's  about 
8,000.  About  15,000  exchanged  prisoners  had  lately  arrived 
in  the  interior  of  Mississippi,  but  they  had  not  yet  been 
armed.  On  the  other  hand,  new  regiments  had  been  formed 
at  the  North,  and  several  of  them  were  destined  to  Grant's 
command,  but  they  had  not  yet  arrived. 

Van  Dorn  having  got  his  army  together  at  Bipley  on 
September  28th,  moved  northward  on  the  following  day, 
and  reached  Pocahontas  on  October  1st.  Here  he  carefully 
surveyed  the  field  in  front  of  him  and  matured  his  plans  for 
the  offensive.  The  reasons  governing  his  action  are  stated 
with  great  clearness  in  his  admirable  report  of  these  opera- 
tions, dated  October  20, 1862.  Three  points  in  front  of  him, 
Memphis,  Bolivar,  and  Corinth,  were  strongly  fortified, 
forming  the  arc  of  a  circle  of  which  the  chord  was  about 
one  hundred  miles  long.  He  judged  that  to  take  Memphis 
would  give  no  military  advantage,  and  it  was  doubtful  if  it 
could  be  held  without  heavy  guns  against  the  Union  gun- 
boats. To  attack  Bolivar  was  to  penetrate  into  the  re-en- 
trant of  the  three  fortified  places  and  to  render  himself  liable 
to  disastrous  attacks  on  both  flanks.  But  "if  a  successful 
attack  could  be  made  upon  Corinth  from  the  west  and  north- 
west, the  forces  there  driven  back  on  the  Tennessee  and  cut 


IUKA   AND   CORINTH.  45 

off,  Bolivar  and  Jackson  would  easily  fall,  and  then,  upon 
the  arrival  of  the  exchanged  prisoners  of  war,  West  Tennes- 
see would  soon  be  in  our  possession,  and  communication 
with  General  Bragg  effected  through  Middle  Tennessee. 
The  attack  on  Corinth  was  a  military  necessity  requiring 
prompt  and  vigorous  action."  There  can  be  no  doubt  that 
this  reasoning  was  perfectly  sound ;  a  successful  attack 
upon  Corinth  would  in  all  probability  have  forced  Grant 
back  to  Kentucky  in  the  same  manner  that  Bragg  had  car- 
ried Buell  back  to  Louisville,  and  all  the  results  of  the  cam- 
paign from  Fort  Henry  to  Corinth  would  then  have  been  lost. 

Van  Dom,  therefore,  started  to  attack  Corinth  with  the 
utmost  energy.  Having  reached  Pocahontas  on  October  1st, 
he  turned  sharply  to  the  east,  crossed  the  Hatchie,  and  biv- 
ouacked at  Chewalla  on  the  night  of  the  2d.  The  march 
was  resumed  at  daylight  on  the  3d,  Lovell's  division  in  ad- 
vance, marching  on  the  right  of  the  Memphis  and  Charles- 
ton Railroad.  Arriving  near  Corinth,  about  10  a.m.,  his  line 
of  battle  was  formed  with  Lovell's  three  brigades  in  line, 
each  supported  by  a  reserve,  on  the  right  or  south  of  the 
Memphis  and  Charleston  Railroad ;  Price's  corps  was  on  the 
left,  in  the  angle  between  the  two  railroads,  Maury's  divi- 
sion, with  two  brigades  in  line  and  one  in  reserve,  connect- 
ing with  Lovell,  and  Hebert's  (formerly  Little's)  division, 
similarly  formed,  on  Maury's  left.  Jackson's  cavalry  bri- 
gade was  on  the  right  of  the  whole  line,  and  Armstrong's  on 
the  left.  Van  Dorn's  intention  was  to  open  the  attack  with 
Lovell's  division,  in  the  hope  that  Rosecrans  would  strength- 
en his  left  by  withdrawing  from  his  right,  and  then  his  main 
force,  under  Price,  was  to  make  the  principal  attack  on 
Rosecrans's  right. 

In  the  meantime.  Rosecrans  had  been  fully  informed  of 
the  enemy's  approach,  and  had  drawn  into  Corinth  all  the 


46 


THE  MISSISSIPPI. 


detachments  posted  in  observation  on  the  exterior.  His 
force  consisted  of  the  two  divisions  of  his  own  army,  under 
Stanley  and  Hamilton,  and  the  2d  and  6th  divisions  of  the 
Army  of  the  Tennessee,  commanded  by  Davies  and  Mc- 
Kean.     His   position  was  well   defended   by  a  line   of  re- 


Corinth,  October  3-4,  1862. 


doubts,  constructed  within  a  short  distance  of  the  town,  and 
by  an  outer  line  of  intrenchments,  about  two  miles  in  ad- 
vance, which  had  been  built  by  the  Confederates  prior  to 
their  evacuation  in  May.  During  the  night  of  October  2d 
to  3d,  Bosecrans  issued  orders,  directing  his  divisions  to 
move  at  3  a.m.,  and   take   post  in   advance   of   his   line   of 


IUKA   AND   CORINTH.  47 

redoubts,  and  about  half-way  to  the  outer  line;  Hamil- 
ton's division  was  on  the  right,  facing  north,  Davies  in  the 
centre,  and  McKean's  division  on  the  left,  on  the  Chewalla 
road,  with  three  regiments  advanced  to  the  outer  line  of 
works.  Stanley's  division  was  just  south  of  the  town,  in 
reserve.     These  positions  were  assumed  about  9  a.m. 

Van  Dorn,  meanwhile,  had  been  advancing  from  Chewalla, 
skirmishing  all  the  way  with  the  outposts  of  McKean's  divi- 
sion, and  about  10  a.m.,  he  deployed  into  the  formation  pre- 
viously given.  Lovell,  on  the  right,  at  once  came  in  contact 
with  the  three  regiments  of  McKean's  division,  posted  in  an 
advantageous  position  on  a  hill  at  the  intersection  of  the 
Memphis  Kailroad  with  the  outer  line  of  works.  Deeming 
it  important  to  hold  this  hill,  Brig.  Gen.  J.  McArthur,  com- 
manding the  first  brigade  of  McKean's  division,  moved 
forward  with  four  regiments  to  the  support  of  the  three 
already  posted  there.  At  the  same  time,  Davies  asked,  and 
obtained,  permission  to  move  his  division  forward  to  the 
outer  line  of  works.  These  two  advances  were  eccentric, 
and  the  result  was  a  considerable  gap  between  Davies  and 
McKean's  divisions.  A  severe  contest  took  place  on  this 
outer  line,  Lovell's  division  being  opposed  to  McArthur, 
and  Maury's  division  attacking  the  left  of  Davies's.  The 
Confederates  finally  penetrated  between  Davies  and  Mc- 
Arthur, and  the  whole  Union  line  was  forced  back,  and  took 
up  a  second  position  about  half  a  mile  in  advance  of  the 
inner  redoubts,  Davies  refusing  his  left  flank,  and  McArthur 
his  right.  Lovell's  division  was  now  moved  past  the  left  of 
McKean's  division,  and  came  in  front  of  the  redoubts  on  the 
southwest  of  the  town.  This  caused  McArthur,  as  well  as 
Crocker's  brigade  of  McKean's  division,  to  fall  back  to  these 
redoubts,  and,  at  the  same  time,  Price's  entire  corps  made 
another  violent  attack  upon  Davies's  division,  and  forced  it 


48  THE  MISSISSIPPI. 

back  upon  Battery  Eobinett,  where  it  re-formed  and  held  its 
position  nntil  night.  One  brigade  of  Stanley's  division  was 
sent  to  Davies's  assistance  during  his  retreat,  and  the  rest  of 
this  division  was  preparing  to  assist,  when,  about  5.30  p.m., 
the  enemy's  attack  ceased.  Meanwhile,  Hamilton's  division, 
on  the  extreme  right,  had  taken  but  little  active  part  in  the 
action.  In  the  morning  it  was  formed  on  the  east  of  the 
Mobile  and  Ohio  Railroad,  facing  north,  and  from  there  ad- 
vanced to  the  outer  line  of  intrenchments.  The  enemy's 
attack,  however,  was  entirely  beyond  Hamilton's  left,  and 
upon  Davies's  division.  Hamilton  changed  front  to  the  left, 
so  as  to  face  the  railroad.  He  then  intended  to  attack  the 
enemy's  left  flank,  as  he  was  advancing  against  Davies,  but 
one  of  his  brigades  diverged  too  far  to  the  right,  and  the 
other  was  considered  too  weak  to  attack  alone.  Before  this 
error  could  be  corrected,  the  enemy  had  ceased  his  attack, 
possibly  alarmed,  as  Hamilton  claims,  by  the  presence  of  the 
latter  on  his  left  flank. 

The  battle  closed  for  this  day  at  sunset,  a  little  before  six 
o'clock.  It  had  been  most  encouraging  for  the  Confederate 
arms.  Eosecrans  had  been  driven  back  for  a  distance  of 
about  two  miles  and  had  taken  refuge  in  the  redoubts  just 
outside  of  the  town  ;  the  Confederates  passed  the  night 
within  a  few  hundred  yards  of  these  redoubts,  and  they 
hoped  on  the  morrow  to  complete  the  destruction  of  the 
Union  army.  This  army,  however,  was  by  no  means  de- 
moralized or  disheartened.  During  the  night  its  position 
was  rearranged  so  as  to  make  a  strong  defence  in  the  morn- 
ing. McKean's  division  was  placed  on  the  extreme  left  in 
the  vicinity  of  Battery  Phillips,  south  of  the  Memphis  Rail- 
road ;  Stanley's  division  took  post  across  that  road  in  Bat- 
teries Williams  and  Robinett,  relieving  Davies's  division 
which  retired  to  Battery  Powell  on  the  north  of  the  town, 


IUKA   AND  CORINTH.  49 

and  there  formed  facing  northwest ;  Hamilton's  division 
formed  the  extreme  right,  beyond  Davies's  division  and 
facing  north.  Eosecrans's  force  of  23,000  men  was  there- 
fore concentrated  on  the  arc  of  a  circle  around  Corinth  less 
than  two  miles  in  length,  and  the  prominent  points  of  this 
line  were  defended  by  strong  redoubts. 

Van  Dorn  also  rearranged  his  troops  during  the  night. 
Lovell's  division  was  placed  on  the  south  of  the  Memphis 
railroad,  facing  east  toward  the  town.  Maury's  division 
was  in  front  of  Battery  Eobinett  with  three  batteries  estab- 
lished so  as  to  cover  the  whole  ground  on  the  west  of  the 
town ;  and  Hebert's  division  was  formed  on  his  left.  His 
orders  were  that  at  daylight  Hebert  should  open  a  vigorous 
attack  on  the  left,  pivoting  on  his  own  right  and  swinging 
his  left  down  along  the  Ohio  Railroad  against  Battery  Powell 
and  the  town ;  at  the  same  time  Maury's  batteries  were  to 
open  on  the  west  against  Battery  Eobinett  and  his  infantry 
were  to  move  straight  on  Corinth  between  the  two  railroads. 
When  Hebert's  and  Maury's  divisions  were  well  engaged 
Lovell  was  to  attack  vigorously  from  the  southwest. 

This  whole  plan  miscarried,  in  Van  Dom's  opinion,  owing 
to  the  delay  in  Hebert's  division,  which  was  to  open  the  en- 
gagement. This  divisiorf  did  not  attack  at  daylight,  and  at 
7  a.m.  Hebert  reported  in  person  to  Van  Dorn,  saying  that 
he  was  sick.  His  senior  brigade  commander  was  ordered 
to  take  command  of  the  division  and  carry  out  the  move- 
ment ordered.  But  it  was  nearly  nine  o'clock  before  the  di- 
vision got  started,  and  meanwhile  Maury's  men  were  already 
engaged,  so  that  the  attack  was  somewhat  disjointed.  It  was, 
however,  conducted  with  great  gallantry  and  determination. 
Hebert's  division,  under  Brig.  Gen.  Martin  E.  Green,  advanced 
with  four  brigades  in  echelon,  the  left  thrown  forward ;  the 
whole  division  pivoted  on  the  right  and  swung  around  until 

vin.— a 


50  THE  MISSISSIPPI. 

it  occupied  a  position  facing  south  in  the  woods  north  of 
Corinth.  It  then  rushed  forward  from  these  woods,  the  two 
brigades  on  the  right,  composed  of  Missouri  troops,  direct- 
ing their  attack  against  Battery  Powell,  and  the  other  two 
against  Hamilton's  line  to  the  east  of  that  battery.  These 
latter  brigades  were  warmly  received  by  Hamilton  and  were 
driven  off  after  a  severe  contest  without  reaching  his  works  ; 
but  the  Missouri  troops  captured  Battery  Powell  with  all 
its  guns,  forcing  back  the  infantry  in  and  near  it,  and  spread- 
ing confusion  among  the  artillery  posted  for  its  support.  A 
portion  of  Davies's  division  subsequently  rallied,  however, 
and  assisted  by  a  brigade  of  Hamilton's  division,  recaptured 
Battery  Powell  with  its  guns,  driving  out  the  Missouri 
troops  with  great  loss. 

As  soon  as  Maury  heard  heavy  firing  on  his  left  he  gave 
the  order  for  his  division  to  move  forward  straight  toward 
Corinth.  Two  regiments  of  Moore's  brigade  on  his  right 
at  once  came  against  Battery  Robinett,  which  they  en- 
tered and  there  engaged  in  a  desperate  hand-to-hand  en- 
counter with  the  men  of  Stanley's  division  defending  it.  In 
this  they  were  worsted,  Colonel  Rogers,  commanding  the 
2d  Texas,  being  killed  in  the  midst  of  the  work ;  they 
were  then  driven  out.  The  rest  of  this  brigade,  and  Phi- 
fer's  brigade  on  its  left,  moved  straight  forward  against  the 
left  flank  of  Davies'  division,  swept  it  away,  and  penetrated 
into  the  heart  of  the  town.  Here  they  were  met  by  some  re- 
serve regiments  of  Sullivan's  brigade,  which  formed  the  left 
of  Hamilton's  division,  and  being  in  disorder  in  the  streets 
and  subjected  to  cross  fire  of  artillery  from  both  flanks 
of  the  Union  army,  they  lost  heavily  and  were  forced  to  re- 
treat. The  remaining  brigade  (Cabell's)  of  Maury's  division, 
was  sent  to  reinforce  the  Missouri  troops  that  had  captured 
Battery  Powell,  but  before  they  arrived   the  latter  troops 


IUKA  AND   CORINTH.  51 

had  already  been  routed ;  Cabell  charged  up  against  Battery 
Powell  but  was  met  by  a  terrible  fire  and  was  unable  to 
reach  the  parapet ;  he  was  at  once  forced  to  join  in  the  re- 
treat, although  a  portion  of  one  of  his  regiments  on  the  right 
was  able  to  reach  the  town  in  company  with  the  rest  cf 
Maury's  men,  and  retreated  with  them. 

The  duration  of  this  fighting  in  and  around  Corinth  did 
not  exceed  an  hour,  but  its  character  was  most  sanguinary. 
While  it  had  been  in  progress,  Lovell  was  preparing  to 
make  an  attack  on  the  southwest,  and  had  entered  into  some 
skirmishing  in  front  of  Battery  Phillips.  But  before  his 
preparations  for  assault  were  complete,  he  received  an  order 
to  send  one  brigade  to  check  the  onslaught  upon  Maury's 
troops  at  they  came  out  of  town  ;  and  this  order  was  quickly 
followed  by  another  to  employ  his  whole  division  as  a  rear- 
guard for  the  army,  which  was  now  in  full  retreat. 

The  fighting  was  over,  and  the  Confederates  were  all 
moving  off  by  noon.  Bosecrans  rode  over  the  field,  and 
satisfied  himself  of  the  enemy's  retreat,  but  decided  not  to 
begin  pursuit  until  the  following  day.  General  Grant 
blamed  him  for  this  delay,  but  Bosecrans  justified  it  on  the 
ground  that  his  men  were  worn  out  by  "  two  days  of  fight- 
ing, and  two  almost  sleepless  nights  of  preparation,  move- 
ment, and  march."  He  notified  his  troops  to  rest  them- 
selves, replenish  their  ammunition,  and  be  ready  to  start 
after  the  enemy  in  the  morning. 

While  the  battle  was  going  on  during  the  3d,  Brig. -Gen. 
J.  B.  McPherson,  who  had  been  charged  with  the  reconstruc- 
tion of  the  railroads,  but  had  held  no  command,  arrived  at 
Jackson  from  Columbus,  and  was  ordered  by  Grant  to  take 
command  of  two  unassigned  brigades  stationed  along  the 
railroad  between  Jackson  and  Corinth,  organize  them  into 
a  division,  and  push  on  to  Corinth.     He  picked  up  his  four 


52  THE  MISSISSIPPI. 

regiments  during  the  4th,  carried  them  by  train  to  within 
twelve  miles  of  Corinth,  then  disembarked,  and  marched 
the  rest  of  the  way,  reaching  Corinth,  and  reporting  to 
Rosecrans  at  4  p.m.  He  was  ordered  to  move  his  division 
at  daylight  in  pursuit  of  the  enemy  on  the  road  to  Chewalla. 
On  the  morning  of  the  4th,  also,  Hurlbut,  in  obedience  to 
orders  from  Grant,  moved  with  his  division  from  Bolivar  to 
Pocahontas,  with  orders  to  intercept  the  Confederate  re- 
treat. He  bivouacked  for  the  night  on  the  west  bank  of 
the  Hatchie  River,  just  south  of  the  railroad.  On  the  fol- 
lowing morning  Ord  arrived  and  took  command  of  this 
column.     Van  Dorn's  army  passed  the  night  at  Chewalla. 

Early  on  the  morning  of  the  5th,  Van  Dorn  continued 
his  retreat,  and  Rosecrans's  troops  moved  out  from  Corinth 
in  pursuit,  McPherson  in  the  lead,  followed  by  Stanley, 
and  McKean's  and  Hamilton's  divisions  on  parallel  roads. 
Through  some  mistake  in  taking  the  roads,  all  four  divisions 
ran  against  each  other  about  seven  miles  from  Corinth ;  the 
columns  were  delayed,  and  had  gone  no  farther  than  Che- 
walla by  nightfall.  Van  Dorn  reached  the  Hatchie,  oppo- 
site Ord's  command  at  Davis's  Mills,  early  in  the  morning, 
and  his  advance  guard  seized  the  bridge,  but  it  was  imme- 
diately attacked  by  Ord  and  driven  back  across  the  bridge. 

A  very  considerable  affair  ensued  between  Ord's  little 
command  and  the  whole  of  Van  Dorn's  army,  in  which  Ord 
was  severely  wounded.  Van  Dorn  was  not  pressed  in  his 
rear  by  Rosecrans,  whose  troops  were  over  twelve  miles 
away,  and  he  managed  to  defend  himself  against  Ord,  and 
to  continue  his  retreat  on  the  east  bank  of  the  Hatchie  for 
six  miles  to  Crum's  Mill.  Here  there  was  a  bridge  on  which 
he  crossed  his  whole  army  during  the  night.  The  following- 
day  he  continued  his  retreat  to  Ripley,  and  thence  to  Holly 
Springs.     Rosecrans  and  Hurlbut  pursued  as  far  as  Ripley, 


IUKA  AND  CORINTH.  53' 

when,  owing  to  their  lack  of  preparation  for  an  extended 
movement,  Grant  ordered  them  to  return  to  Corinth  and 
Bolivar. 

For  the  numbers  engaged,  this  was  one  of  the  most  hotly 
contested  battles  of  the  war.  Rosecrans  reported  his  losses 
at  315  killed,  1,812  wounded,  and  232  missing ;  total,  2,359. 
Concerning  the  Confederate  losses  there  is  the  usual  dis- 
crepancy. Their  official  returns  give  505  killed,  2,150 
wounded,  and  2,183  missing;  total,  4,838.  On  the  other 
hand,  Rosecrans  states  that  he  took  2,268  prisoners,  and  his 
Medical  Director  says  that  1,423  Confederates  were  buried 
on  the  field.  The  usual  proportion  of  wounded  to  killed 
being  about  five  to  one,  this  would  make  Van  Dorn's  total 
loss,  including  prisoners,  over  nine  thousand.  On  the 
Union  side  General  Hackleman  was  killed ;  General  Ogles- 
by  and  a  number  of  colonels  commanding  brigades  or  regi- 
ments were  also  wounded. 

Upon  hearing  of  Van  Dorn's  defeat  at  Corinth,  Jefferson 
Davis  nominated  J.  C.  Pemberton  to  be  Lieutenant-General, 
and  directed  him  to  proceed  forthwith  to  Mississippi.  He 
arrived  at  Jackson,  Miss.,  and  assumed  command  on  Octo- 
ber 14th.  Van  Dorn  was  severely  blamed  for  the  loss  of  the 
battle  of  Corinth,  and  one  of  his  brigade  commanders  pre- 
pared charges  against  him  for  "  undertaking  an  important 
expedition  .  .  .  without  due  consideration,"  and  for  gen- 
eral failure  and  neglect  of  duty.  He  applied  for  a  court  of 
inquiry,  and  one  was  ordered,  consisting  of  Generals  Price, 
Tilghman,  and  Maury.  This  court  completely  exonerated 
Van  Dorn,  and  unanimously  reported  that  every  allegation 
made  against  him  was  fully  disproved,  and  that  no  further 
proceedings  were  necessary.  Van  Dorn  continued  in  com- 
mand of  a  division,  under  Pemberton,  and  subsequently 
under  Bragg,  until  his  death  in  May,  1863. 


54  THE   MISSISSIPPI. 

Rosecrans,  on  the  other  hand,  received  full  credit  for  his 
two  victories.  Immediately  after  Iuka  he  was  made  a  Major- 
General,  his  commission  dating  back  to  March,  1862 ;  and 
three  weeks  after  the  battle  of  Corinth  he  was  ordered  to 
Louisville,  and  appointed  to  the  command  of  the  Army  of 
the  Cumberland,  in  place  of  Buell. 

As  the  battle  of  Antietam  (September  17th)  brought  Lee's 
invasion  of  Maryland  to  a  close,  and  the  battle  of  Perryville 
(October  8th)  was  the  culmination  of  Bragg's  advance  into 
Kentucky,  so  this  battle  of  Corinth  (October  5th)  marks  the 
farthest  point  reached  in  the  Confederate  wave  of  reaction 
along  the  Mississippi,  which  had  followed  the  unsuccessful 
naval  operations  at  Vicksburg,  and  the  dispersion  of  Hal- 
leck's  army.  From  this  time  forward,  the  Confederates  were 
thrown  on  the  defensive ;  the  Union  army  resumed  the  of- 
fensive and  steadily  advanced,  slowly  at  first,  but  none  the 
less  surely. 


CHAPTEE  HI. 

THE  FIRST  MOVE  AGAINST  VICKSBURG. 

On  October  24th  the  order  was  issued  from  the  War  De- 
partment ordering  Eosecrans  to  supersede  Buell,  and  de- 
nominating the  troops  under  Grant,  as  the  Thirteenth  Army 
Corps.  The  "Army  of  the  Mississippi"  thus  lost  its  dis- 
tinctive designation.  The  troops  in  the  whole  of  Grant's 
department  numbered  about  48,500  at  the  middle  of  the 
month,  and  were  thus  distributed  : 

District  of  Memphis,  Major-General  Sherman 7,000 

District  of  Jackson,  Major-General  Hurlbut 19,200 

District  of  Corinth,  Brigadier-General  Hamilton 17,500 

District  of  Columbus,  Brigadier-General  Dodge 4,800 

Total 48,500 

The  reverses  sustained  by  the  Union  armies  in  the  East 
during  the  summer,  had  necessitated  a  further  call,  on  July 
2d,  for  300,000  volunteers,  to  serve  for  three  years  or  the 
war,  and  in  October  a  large  number  of  these  were  already 
raised  and  organized.  As  early  as  October  8th,  Halleck  had 
notified  Grant  that  he  might  expect  "  a  large  body  of  new 
levies."  In  view  of  the  favorable  turn  of  affairs  in  Vir- 
ginia and  Kentucky,  the  defeat  of  Van  Dora,  and  the  pros- 
pect of  reinforcements,  Grant  now  felt  at  liberty,  for  the 
first  time  since  Halleck's  departure  in  July,  to  make  prepa- 


56  THE  MISSISSIPPI. 

rations  for  the  offensive,  and  he  immediately  turned  his 
thoughts  in  that  direction.  On  October  26th,  he  addressed 
— somewhat  hesitatingly — a  letter  to  Halleck,  suggesting 
"  the  destruction  of  the  railroads  to  all  points  of  the  com- 
pass from  Corinth,"  and  the  concentration  of  his  forces  near 
Grand  Junction.  He  then  thought  that  he  "would  be  able 
to  move  down  the  Mississippi  Central  Road,  and  cause  the 
evacuation  of  Vicksburg,  and  capture  or  destroy  all  the  boats 
on  the  Yazoo  River."  Grant  hastened  to  add,  "  I  am  ready, 
however,  to  do  with  all  my  might  whatever  you  may  direct, 
without  criticism." 

It  does  not  appear  that  any  answer  was  returned  to  this 
letter,  or  any  notice  taken  of  it.  Grant  was  therefore 
forced  either  to  lie  idle,  or  to  do  what  he  could  on  his  own 
responsibility  in  the  absence  of  instructions.  He  was  not 
authorized  to  abandon  Corinth  or  any  other  of  the  many 
positions  held  by  his  scattered  force,  but  he  thought  that 
by  taking  two  divisions  from  Bolivar,  under  McPherson, 
and  three  from  Corinth,  under  Hamilton,  he  might  assemble 
a  force  of  about  30,000  men  in  the  vicinity  of  Grand  Junc- 
tion, and  from  there  move  southward,  while  Sherman  made 
a  slight  demonstration  out  from  Memphis.  Orders  to  this 
effect  were  issued  on  November  1st,  and  on  the  4th  the 
troops  arrived  at  Grand  Junction  and  La  Grange,  where 
Grant  joined  them  in  person  on  the  same  day.  Halleck  was 
informed  of  this  movement  on  November  2d  by  a  telegram, 
in  which  Grant  stated  his  intention  to  move  on  to  Holly 
Springs,  and  possibly  to  Grenada,  repairing  the  railroad 
and  telegraph  as  he  advanced.  Halleck  telegraphed  his  ap- 
proval of  the  advance,  "  as  soon  as  you  are  strong  enough 
for  that  purpose."  He  also  added  that  orders  had  been  sent 
to  the  troops  at  Helena  (in  the  department  commanded  by 
Curtis,  at  St.  Louis)  to  cross  the  river  and  threaten  Grenada. 


THE  FIRST  MOVE  AGAINST   VICKSBURG. 


57 


On  the  receipt  of  this  despatch,  Grant  ordered  Hamilton 
to  push  out  reconnoissances  with  his  cavalry  toward  Holly 


Memphis  to  Vicksburg.     1862-1863. 

Springs  and  Ripley,  and  develop  the  position  of  the  enemy. 
But  on  November  6th  he  received  a  telegram  from  Halleck, 
promising  a  reinforcement    of   20,000  men  in  a  few  days. 
3* 


58  THE  MISSISSIPPI. 

The  prospect  of  so  large  a  reinforcement  induced  Grant  to 
suspend  his  operations  until  they  should  arrive,  and  he  im- 
mediately sent  a  despatch  to  Sherman,  countermanding  the 
order  for  his  advance.  McPherson,  however,  was  directed 
to  send  two  divisions  of  infantry  to  reconnoitre  toward 
Holly  Springs.  He  came  upon  a  force  of  the  enemy,  esti- 
mated at  10,000  men,  behind  the  Coldwater,  in  advance  of 
Holly  Springs,  and  learned  that  there  were  two  other 
bodies  of  10,000  and  13,000  men  respectively,  at  Holly 
Springs  and  Abbeville.  He  then  returned  to  the  vicinity  of 
Grand  Junction,  reaching  there  on  the  evening  of  the  9th. 

On  the  same  evening  Grant  telegraphed  to  Halleck  that 
the  reinforcements  were  arriving  very  slowly,  and  if  they 
did  not  come  on  more  rapidly,  he  should  attack  as  he  was. 
Halleck  replied  that  several  regiments  had  already  left  Illi- 
nois for  Memphis,  and  more  were  to  leave  in  a  few  days. 
He  added,  "Memphis  will  be  made  the  depot  of  a  joint 
military  and  naval  expedition  on  Vicksburg."  This  was 
very  vague,  and,  as  rumors  had  been  floating  about  for  sev- 
eral days  that  an  independent  expedition  was  fitting  out  to 
descend  the  Mississippi,  under  McClernand,  it  became  ne- 
cessary for  Grant  to  learn  definitely  what  his  status  was,  and 
whether  these  rumors  were  true.  As  he  said  in  his  letter  to 
Sherman,  of  November  6th,  it  was  impossible  for  him  to 
make  any  plans  until  he  learned  where  and  how  the  other 
Union  armies  were  to  advance,  so  that  all  might  co-operate. 
He  therefore  telegraphed  to  Halleck  in  these  words  :  "  Am 
I  to  understand  that  I  lie  still  here  while  an  expedition 
is  fitted  out  from  Memphis;  or  do  you  want  me  to  push 
south  as  far  as  possible  ?  Am  I  to  have  Sherman  move  sub- 
ject to  my  order,  or  is  he  and  his  forces  reserved  for  some 
special  service?  Will  not  more  forces  be  sent  here?" 
Halleck  replied  :  "  You  have  command  of  all  troops  sent  to 


THE  FIRST  MOVE  AGAINST  VICKSBURG.  59 

your  Department,  and  have  permission  to  fight  the  enemy 
where  you  please."  On  the  13th,  Grant  telegraphed  that  his 
cavalry  had  entered  Holly  Springs,  the  enemy  having  re- 
treated behind  the  Tallahatchie,  but  stated  that  he  did  not 
deem  it  advisable  to  move  forward  until  he  was  prepared  to 
follow  up  any  success.  He  also  asked  for  additional  locomo- 
tives to  be  sent  to  Memphis.  To  which  Halleck  replied  that 
it  was  not  advisable  to  repair  the  railroad  south  of  Memphis  ; 
that  operations  in  Mississippi  "  must  be  limited  to  rapid 
marches  upon  any  collected  forces  of  the  enemy,"  and  that 
"  the  enemy  must  be  turned  by  a  rapid  movement  down  the 
river  from  Memphis  as  soon  as  sufficient  force  can  be  col- 
lected.1' This  was  the  first  intimation  of  any  definite  plan, 
and  was  an  outline  of  the  movement  executed  by  Grant  and 
Sherman  during  the  month  of  December. 

The  explanation  of  the  contradictory  despatches  above 
quoted,  and  the  lack  of  instructions  from  Halleck  to  Grant, 
is  found  in  the  fact  that  the  authorities  in  Washington  were 
at  this  time  acting  at  cross  purposes.  In  the  month  of 
August,  Maj.-Gen.  John  A.  McClemand,  then  command- 
ing a  division  under  Grant,  had  obtained  leave  of  absence, 
and  had  gone  to  Washington.  His  correspondence  with 
the  President  and  the  War  Department  is  not  on  record, 
but  it  is  known  that  he  had  frequent  interviews  with  the 
President,  with  whom  he  had  long  been  acquainted,  both 
personally  and  politically,  in  Illinois.  In  these  interviews 
McClernand  endeavored  to  impress  upon  the  President 
the  great  importance,  in  a  political,  military,  and  com- 
mercial view,  of  opening  the  Mississippi  Kiver  to  New 
Orleans.  He  suggested  an  independent  expedition  as  the 
best  means  to  accomplish  this  purpose.  Both  the  President 
and  the  Secretary  of  War  were  convinced  by  his  arguments, 
and,  on  October  21st,  the  latter  issued  a  secret  order,  direct- 


60  THE  MISSISSIPPI. 

ing  McClernand  to  proceed  to  Indiana,  Illinois,  and  Iowa, 
raise  and  organize  volunteers,  and  send  them  to  Memphis 
or  Cairo,  "  to  the  end  that,  when  a  sufficient  force,  not  re- 
quired by  the  operations  of  General  Grant's  command  shall 
be  raised,  an  expedition  may  be  organized,  under  General 
McClernand's  command,  against  Vicksburg,  and  to  clear 
the  Mississippi  River,  and  open  navigation  to  New  Orleans." 
Mr.  Lincoln  endorsed  on  the  back  of  this  order,  that,  though 
confidential,  it  might  be  shown  to  the  Governors  of  States 
and  other  persons,  in  General  McClernand's  discretion,  and 
that  he  took  a  deep  interest  in  the  success  of  the  expedition. 
No  intimation  of  this  order  was  given  to  Grant,  but  it  was 
necessarily  communicated  to  Halleck.  As  an  educated  sol- 
dier, Halleck  could  not  but  see  that  McClernand's  course 
was  in  violation  of  all  military  discipline,  that  the  expedi- 
tion must  necessarily  have  a  demoralizing  and  disorganizing 
effect  on  Grant's  army,  and  that  two  commanders  on  the 
Mississippi,  having  the  same  object  in  view,  were  not  only 
unnecessary,  but  liable  to  bring  about  disaster.  McCler- 
nand had  also  served  under  his  command,  and  he  probably 
did  not  entertain  so  high  an  opinion  of  his  abilities  as  did 
the  President  and  Secretary.  It  is  believed — though  writ- 
ten evidence  of  this  is  not  extant — that  Halleck  protested 
against  the  entire  proposition,  but  without  avail.  McCler- 
nand undoubtedly  left  Washington  with  the  impression  that 
he  was  to  have  sole  command  of  the  expedition ;  and  he 
proceeded  to  Illinois,  whence  he  reported,  on  November 
10th,  that  twenty  regiments  had  been  raised  and  forwarded, 
and  twelve  more  were  nearly  ready.  These  were  the  very- 
troops  to  which  Halleck  referred  in  his  despatches  to  Grant 
as  coming  to  reinforce  him.  McClernand  seems  to  have 
gained  some  inkling  of  this,  for,  on  the  13th,  he  telegraphed 
Stanton :    "I   infer   that   General   Grant   claims   the   right 


THE  FIRST  MOVE  AGAINST  VICKSBURG.  CI 

.  .  .  .  to  control  all  troops  sent  to  Columbus  and  Mem- 
phis ; "  to  which  Stanton  replied  that  the  troops  were  not 
withdrawn  from  his  orders,  but  sent  temporarily  to  Mem- 
phis and  Helena  for  organization. 

Thus,  while  Stanton  and  McClernand  were  making  their 
plans  for  an  independent  movement  down  the  river,  Halleck 
and  Grant  were  arranging  an  advance  with  the  whole  force 
along  the  Mississippi  Central  Railroad,  Grant  being  in  ig- 
norance of  McClernand's  propositions  and  Halleck  not  feel- 
ing at  liberty  to  communicate  them,  because  McClernand's 
status  was  not  publicly  announced,  and,  possibly,  not  fully 
determined.  Meanwhile  Grant  resolved  to  push  forward  on 
his  own  responsibility,  and  on  November  15th  he  notified 
Sherman  to  meet  him  at  Columbus,  where  he  explained  his 
intentions  in  detail.  With  the  troops  near  Grand  Junction 
he  would  move  direct  to  Holly  Springs,  while  Sherman  was 
to  move  out  with  part  of  his  force  from  Memphis  and  join 
him  on  the  Tallahatchie.  Curtis  was  to  be  asked  to  send  a 
force  across  the  river  from  Helena  to  threaten  the  enemy's 
rear  at  Grenada.  The  orders  for  this  movement  had  already 
been  given,  when,  on  November  23d,  Grant  received  a  de- 
spatch from  Halleck,  inquiring  how  many  men  could  be 
spared  to  go  down  the  river  to  Vicksburg,  "  reserving  merely 
enough  to  hold  Corinth  and  "West  Tennessee."  Grant  re- 
plied that  16,000  men  could  be  spared  from  Memphis  (where 
reinforcements  had  arrived),  but  none  from  the  rest  of  the 
Department,  as  orders  had  already  been  given  for  an  advance 
against  Pemberton,  an  outline  of  which  was  given.  He 
asked  if  these  orders  should  be  countermanded.  Halleck 
replied,  "Proposed  movement  approved.  Do  not  go  too 
far." 

Accordingly  Sherman  moved  out  from  Memphis  on  the 
24th,  McPherson  and  Hamilton  from  Grand  Junction  on  the 


62  THE   MISSISSIPPI. 

27th,  and  a  portion  of  the  troops  from  Helena,  under  Brig.- 
Gen.  A.  P.  Hovey,  on  the  27th.  Grant  reached  Holly  Springs 
with  the  main  body  on  the  29th ;  his  cavalry  crossed  the 
Tallahatchie  December  1st,  his  infantry  occupied  Abbe- 
ville on  the  2d,  and  Sherman  reached  the  Tallahatchie  at 
Wyatt  on  the  2d.  Washburn's  cavalry,  forming  the  ad- 
vance of  Hovey's  column,  pushed  to  within  seven  miles  of 
Grenada  on  the  29th  and  on  the  following  day  destroyed  a 
small  portion  of  both  railroads  about  ten  miles  north  of 
Grenada.  He  then  moved  up  the  Memphis  road  to  Panola, 
and  thence  back  to  the  Mississippi,  the  entire  force  reaching 
Helena  on  the  8th.  There  was  constant  skirmishing  be- 
tween all  of  these  advancing  columns  and  the  retreating 
Confederates,  during  the  six  days  beginning  with  November 
28th,  but  at  no  point  did  it  rise  to  the  importance  of  an  en- 
gagement. 

On  the  Confederate  side  the  operations  during  the  month 
of  November  had  been  limited  to  observation  of  the  enemy's 
movements,  every  detail  of  which,  including  the  reports  of 
McClernand's  projected  river  expedition,  seems  to  have  been 
promptly  and  accurately  reported  to  them.  Pemberton  kept 
his  headquarters  at  Jackson,  and  Van  Dorn  commanded  the 
troops  near  Holly  Springs  and  Oxford ;  which  were  formed 
into  two  corps,  under  Lovell  and  Price,  each  of  two  di- 
visions. The  losses  at  Corinth  had  been  more  than  made  up 
by  returned  prisoners,  and  Van  Dorn's  effective  strength  was 
about  24,000.  M.  L.  Smith  still  commanded  at  Vicksburg, 
with  about  6,000  men,  and  Brig.-Gen.  W.  N.  B.  Beale  at  Port 
Hudson  with  5,500.  There  was  also  a  small  force  at  Jack- 
son, so  that  in  all  Pemberton  had  something  less  than  40,000 
men.  He  constantly  reported  to  the  authorities  at  Rich- 
mond that  his  force  was  entirely  inadequate  to  hold  his  posi- 
tions, and  asked  for  reinforcements  from  Bragg,  and  from  the 


THE  FIRST   MOVE  AGADJST  VICKSBURG.  63 

Trans-Mississippi  Department  under  Holmes,  stating  that 
unless  these  were  sent  he  must  withdraw  his  whole  force  to 
Vicksburg  for  its  defence.  When  Grant  first  advanced  from 
Grand  Junction,  Pemberton  ordered  Van  Dorn  (November 
8th)  to  retire  from  Holly  Springs  to  behind  the  Tallahatchie, 
and  again  urged  upon  the  authorities  his  desj)erate  situa- 
tion. When  Grant  renewed  his  advance  at  the  close  of  the 
month,  and  the  troops  from  Helena  moved  against  his  rear, 
Pemberton  promptly  abandoned  his  fortifications  on  the 
Tallahatchie,  and  fell  back  behind  the  Yallabusha  at  Gre- 
nada. He  established  his  troops  in  the  latter  position  on 
December  5th,  and  on  the  same  day  Grant  entered  Oxford 
and  Sherman  arrived  at  College  Hill,  a  few  miles  northwest 
of  that  place. 

Grant  had  now  advanced  about  sixty  miles  from  Grand 
Junction,  but  his  supplies  were  still  drawn  from  Columbus, 
Ky.,  over  a  single-track  road,  180  miles  long,  to  Holly 
Springs,  where  he  established  a  depot.  His  request  for 
additional  locomotives  and  cars  had  been  disapproved, 
and  he  had  been  instructed  not  to  repair  the  railroad 
south  from  Memphis.  A  good  deal  of  rain  had  lately 
fallen,  making  the  roads  very  difficult  for  hauling,  and  it 
was  impossible  for  him  to  advance  farther  without  some 
more  permanent  arrangements  for  his  supplies.  He  had 
received  no  definite  instructions  as  to  the  movements  re- 
quired of  him,  or  the  general  plans  of  the  War  Depart- 
ment. His  advance  had  been  conducted  without  any  hearty 
support  from  Washington  and  apparently  somewhat  in  oppo- 
sition to  the  plans  of  the  authorities,  for  three  times  within 
a  month  it  had  been  arrested  by  telegrams  from  Halleck. 
If  his  advance  was  to  be  continued  the  railroad  from  Mem- 
phis must  be  repaired  and  the  other  roads  abandoned  or  de- 
stroyed.    In  order  to  learn,  if  possible,  what  it  was  intended 


04  THE  MISSISSIPPI. 

that  he  should  do,  he  telegraphed  Halleck  on  December  4th, 
"  How  far  south  would  you  like  me  to  go?"  and  he  stated 
that  it  would  be  impossible  for  him  to  advance  beyond  Gren- 
ada and  hold  his  present  line  of  communications.  He  sug- 
gested, therefore,  that  he  might  cut  the  Mobile  and  Ohio 
Railroad  at  Tupelo,  and  hold  the  enemy  on  the  Yallabusha, 
while  a  force  from  Memphis  and  Helena  descended  the 
river  to  Vicksburg.  This  was  in  accordance  with  Halleck's 
despatches  of  November  10th  and  15th. 

Halleck  replied  on  the  following  day,  approving  of  the 
j>lan  of  cutting  the  railroad  at  Tupelo,  but  doubting  the  pro- 
priety of  attempting  to  hold  the  country  south  of  the  Talla- 
hatchie. He  preferred  singly  to  hold  the  line  from  Mem- 
phis to  Corinth  with  a  small  force,  while  the  main  body 
descended  the  river.  The  troops  for  Vicksburg  were  ordered 
to  be  back  in  Memphis  on  the  20th.  On  the  5th,  Grant  tele- 
graphed that  the  roads  were  becoming  bad,  and  again  ex- 
pressed his  confidence  in  the  result  of  an  expedition  down 
the  river  against  Vicksburg,  provided  the  troops  from  He- 
lena took  part.  On  the  7th,  Halleck  replied,  giving  Grant 
authority  to  move  his  troops  as  he  thought  best,  and  also  to 
retain  all  troops  from  Curtis's  command  which  had  crossed 
the  Mississippi.  Upon  receipt  of  this  discretionary  author- 
ity Grant  immediately  sent  for  Sherman  to  discuss  the 
matter.  He  had  two  plans  in  view,  first,  to  send  Sherman 
back  to  Memphis  with  two  divisions,  there  to  be  reinforced 
by  troops  lately  arrived  and  the  troops  at  Helena,  and  then 
to  move  down  the  river  in  transports  to  the  mouth  of  the 
Yazoo,  land  there  and  attack  Vicksburg  in  rear,  while  he 
himself  pressed  forward  from  Oxford  in  co-operation ;  or  sec- 
ond, to  bring  his  entire  force  to  Grenada,  establish  a  depot 
there,  repair  the  railroad  back  to  Memphis,  and  then  move 
rapidly  against  Jackson  and  the  rear  of  Vicksburg.     There 


THE  FIRST  MOVE  AGAINST   VICKSBURG.  65 

were  very  grave  objections  to  the  first  plan,  because  the 
enemy  had  a  short  interior  line  of  railroad  from  Grenada  to 
Vicksburg,  enabling  him  to  concentrate  rapidly  at  either 
point,  while  the  two  parts  of  the  Union  army  would  be  prac- 
tically cut  off  from  direct  communication  with  each  other, 
and  if  any  accident  should  happen  to  delay  either  column 
co-operation  between  them  would  be  impossible.  Neither 
column  would  be  in  any  danger  of  disaster,  for  Sherman 
could  return  to  his  transports  and  Grant  could  easily  defend 
himself  in  retreat,  if  necessary,  against  Pemberton ;  but  there 
were  many  chances  against  complete  success.  On  the  other 
hand,  the  direct  movement  by  land  would  necessitate  the  re- 
pair of  the  railroad  to  Memphis,  which  would  require  con- 
siderable time ;  beyond  Grenada,  there  would  be  no  railroad, 
and  the  common  roads  were  in  a  very  bad  condition  for 
hauling.  The  advance  would  necessarily  be  very  slow, 
and  meanwhile  the  Confederates  might  be  reinforced.  By 
going  down  the  Mississippi  it  was  thought  that  much  time 
might  be  saved,  and  that  possibly  Sherman  might  arrive 
on  the  Yazoo  without  the  knowledge  of  the  Confederates 
and  surprise  them  before  troops  could  be  brought  from 
Grenada. 

After  a  full  discussion  of  the  matter  Grant  decided  in 
favor  of  the  first  plan,  and  on  December  8th,  gave  Sherman 
his  orders  to  return  to  Memphis  with  one  division,  take 
command  of  all  troops  in  Memphis  and  on  the  east  of  the 
Mississippi  opposite  Helena,  organize  them  into  brigades 
and  divisions,  and  proceed  down  the  river  in  co-operation 
with  the  gunboat  fleet  under  Admiral  Porter,  to  reduce 
Vicksburg  in  such  manner  as  his  judgment  should  dictate. 
These  orders  were  reported  the  same  day  to  Halleck,  who 
telegraphed  his  approval,  but  added  that  "  the  President 
may  insist  upon  designating  a  separate  commander ;  if  not, 


6G  THE   MISSISSIPPI. 

assign  such  officers  as  you  deem  best.  Sherman  would  be 
my  choice  as  the  chief  under  you." 

Sherman  left  College  Hill  the  next  morning,  sending  a 
detachment  of  cavalry  across  the  country  to  Helena  to  no- 
tify General  Steele  of  his  part  in  the  expedition,  and  taking 
Morgan  L.  Smith's  division  with  him  to  Memphis,  where  he 
arrived  December  12th.  There  he  fitted  out  his  expedition 
and  descended  the  river,  as  will  be  subsequently  described. 

It  had  been  his  intention  to  leave  Memphis  on  the  18th, 
but  the  transports  did  not  arrive  in  time,  and  the  embarka- 
tion took  place  on  the  19th,  and  the  expedition  started  on 
the  20th.  On  the  18th,  Halleck  telegraphed  to  Grant  that 
the  President  directed  that  McClernand  should  command 
the  river  expedition.  Grant  forwarded  this  order  by  tele- 
graph the  same  day  to  McClernand  at  Springfield,  and  to 
Sherman  at  Memphis.  Both  telegrams  had  to  go  by  way  of 
Columbus,  Ky.,  and  as  Forrest  cut  the  line  on  the  morning 
of  the  19th,  neither  reached  its  destination.  Sherman  thus 
proceeded  in  accordance  with  the  original  programme,  in 
complete  ignorance  of  McClernand's  assignment;  and  he 
had  already  arrived  in  the  vicinity  of  Yicksburg  before  Mc- 
Clernand left  Illinois. 

Meanwhile  the  Confederate  authorities  had  become  thor- 
oughly alarmed  for  the  safety  of  the  Mississippi,  and  on  No- 
vember 24th  General  J.  E.  Johnston  had  been  assigned  to 
the  command  of  all  Confederate  troops  between  the  Alle- 
ghanies  and  the  Mississippi  ;  the  principal  part  of  which 
were  in  Bragg's  and  Pemberton's  armies.  He  reached  Chat- 
tanooga on  December  4th,  and  had  barely  time  to  communi- 
cate with  Bragg  before  Jefferson  Davis  arrived  to  give  his 
personal  attention  to  affairs  in  Mississippi.  After  consulta- 
tion with  Bragg,  Davis  ordered  Stevenson's  division  and 
Vaughn's  brigade  of  McCown's  division —about  9,000  men 


THE   FIRST  MOVE  AGAINST   VICKSBURG.  G7 

in  all— to  be  detached  from  Bragg's  army  and  sent  to  Peni- 
berton's  relief.  He  then  started  in  person  for  Jackson  and 
Vicksbnrg,  requesting  Johnston  to  accompany  him.  They 
arrived  at  Jackson  on  December  19th,  the  day  that  Sherman 
was  embarking  at  Memphis.  After  visiting  Vicksburg  and 
Grenada,  Davis  returned  to  Richmond,  leaving  Johnston  in 
general  charge  of  all  operations  in  the  West.  His  position 
was  anomalous  and  unsatisfactoiy,  for  the  two  armies  of 
Bragg  and  Pemberton  were  so  widely  separated  that  they 
could  not  act  in  concert,  and  communication  between  them 
was  so  precarious  and  uncertain  that  it  was  impossible  for 
one  man  to  efficiently  direct  both.  On  the  other  hand, 
two  commanders  with  either  one  of  the  armies  were  un- 
necessary. Johnston  appreciated  this  and  asked  Davis  to 
assign  him  to  some  other  duty,  but  his  request  was  refused. 
Upon  arriving  at  Chattanooga  and  learning  the  condition 
of  Pemberton's  army,  Johnston  had  at  once  telegraphed  to 
Bragg,  asking  him  to  send  a  force  of  cavalry  from  Tennessee 
to  fall  upon  Grant's  communications  with  Columbus.  Bragg 
did  not  receive  the  despatch,  but  he  had  already  made  the 
dispositions  requested,  on  the  strength  of  information  re- 
ceived direct  from  Pemberton.  Brig. -Gen.  N.  B.  Forrest 
was  detailed  for  the  duty  with  a  force  of  about  2,500  cavalry. 
He  left  Columbia,  Tenn.,  on  December  11th;  and  on  the 
same  day  Rosecrans,  at  Nashville,  telegraphed  Grant  as  fol- 
lows :  "  Tell  the  authorities  along  the  road  to  look  out  for 
Forrest."  No  point  was  indicated,  but  Grant  at  once  in- 
structed the  commanding  officers  at  Corinth  and  Jackson  to 
be  on  their  guard  against  a  movement  by  Forrest.  Forrest 
reached  the  Tennessee  at  Clifton,  about  fifty  miles  east  of 
Jackson,  on  the  13th,  crossed  it  on  an  old  flat-boat — his  ani- 
mals swimming — on  the  14th  and  15th,  and  advanced  toward 
Jackson ;  on  the  16th  he  reached  Lexington,  where  he  met 


68  THE  MISSISSIPPI. 

a  force  of  700  cavalry  and  two  guns  under  Col.  Eobert  G. 
Ingersoll,  who  had  been  sent  from  Jackson  by  General 
Sullivan  to  reconnoitre.      (See  map  on  page  35.) 

This  force  was  entirely  routed,  and  nearly  one-fourth  of  it, 
including  Col.  Ingersoll,  was  captured.  On  the  19th,  For- 
rest pushed  on  toward  Jackson.  Meanwhile,  Brig. -Gen. 
Sullivan,  commanding  the  District  of  Jackson,  had  received 
information,  on  the  15th,  of  Forrest's  arrival  at  Clifton,  and 
on  the  17th,  of  his  having  crossed  the  river  and  being  in 
motion  toward  Jackson.  He  communicated  these  facts  to 
Grant  on  the  same  days.  Grant  immediately  telegraphed 
to  Sullivan  to  attack  Forrest  in  front,  and  to  Dodge,  at 
Corinth,  to  move  out  and  attack  him  in  flank ;  also  to 
Brig. -Gen.  Lowe,  at  Fort  Henry,  to  move  south  and  prevent 
any  more  Confederates  from  crossing.  These  orders  were 
repeated  in  vigorous  terms  on  the  18th.  Dodge  moved 
promptly  with  two  brigades,  leaving  Corinth  at  midnight  of 
the  18th,  and  marching  toward  Jackson;  but  Sullivan's 
troops  were  scattered,  and  he  had  been  able  to  send  out 
only  two  regiments  when  Forrest  arrived  in  the  vicinity  of 
Jackson,  and  attacked  them  on  the  19th.  Forrest  drove 
this  force  back  into  Jackson,  but  not  deeming  it  prudent  to 
attack  that  place,  which  was  well  fortified,  he  hastily  with- 
drew during  the  night,  and  turning  northward  on  the  line  of 
the  Mobile  and  Ohio  Boad,  he  attacked  and  captured  in  suc- 
cession all  the  small  posts,  and  destroyed  the  railroad  as  far 
as  the  Kentucky  line,  where  he  rested  on  the  25th.  Thence 
he  began  to  retrace  his  steps  toward  the  southeast,  along 
the  branch  railroad  running  from  Union  City  through 
Dresden.  (See  map,  Frontispiece.)  Meanwhile,  Sullivan 
had  been  reinforced  at  Jackson  by  troops  sent  back  by 
Grant  from  Oxford,  and  had  collected  a  force  of  about 
4,000    men.      He    sent    this    force    forward   to    Humboldt 


THE  FIRST  MOVE  AGAINST  VICKSBURG.  69 

and  Trenton,  and  then,  hearing  that  Forrest  was  at  Dresden, 
marched  across  to  Huntington  to  intercept  his  retreat.  For- 
rest, however,  passed  around  his  rear,  between  Huntington 
and  Humboldt,  and  would  have  escaped  easily,  but  for 
delay  in  crossing  his  wagons  through  a  muddy  stream, 
where  the  bridges  had  been  destroyed.  As  soon  as  this  was 
passed  he  continued  his  march  toward  Lexington,  and  Sulli- 
van pushed  after  him  with  all  haste,  moving  south  on  the 
direct  road  from  Huntington  to  Lexington.  On  December 
31st,  at  a  point  known  as  Parker's  Cross  Roads,  a  few  miles 
north  of  Lexington,  the  leading  brigade  of  Sullivan's  com- 
mand, and  Forrest's  troops  came  in  sight  of  each  other  on 
converging  roads,  and  a  fight  was  inevitable.  This  bri- 
gade numbered  about  1,500  men,  and  Forrest  was  more 
than  a  match  for  it ;  he  gradually  drove  it  eastward  and 
southward  from  the  cross-roads,  but  the  fighting  lasted 
several  hours,  and  during  this  time  Sullivan  was  advancing 
with  his  other  brigade,  and,  about  3  p.m.,  came  upon  For- 
rest's rear.  Forrest  was  then  obliged  to  extricate  himself 
as  best  he  could,  and  he  succeeded  in  escaping  with  a  loss 
of  about  300  men,  six  guns,  and  several  caissons  and  am- 
munition wagons.  Continuing  his  retreat  through  Lexing- 
ton that  night  and  the  following  day,  he  was  approaching 
Clifton,  on  the  morning  of  January  1st,  when  he  discov- 
ered a  regiment  of  Union  cavalry,  sent  by  Dodge  from 
Corinth,  across  the  road.  This  was  quickly  driven  off,  and 
he  reached  the  river  bank  at  noon.  Raising  the  same  old  flat- 
boat  which  had  served  him  two  weeks  before,  but  which  had 
since  sunk,  he  ferried  his  men  and  wagons  over,  and  swam  his 
animals,  and  by  eight  o'clock  in  the  evening  he  was  safe  on  the 
eastern  bank  of  the  Tennessee.  An  additional  force  of  cav- 
alry sent  from  Corinth  did  not  reach  Clifton  until  January  3d, 
and  was  then  merely  able  to  exchange  shots  across  the  river. 


70  THE  MISSISSIPPI. 

In  this  raid  Forrest  had  destroyed  the  railroad  from  point 
to  point  throughout  the  distance  of  sixty  miles  from  Jack- 
son to  Columbus ;  and  with  a  loss  of  less  than  400  men,  he 
claims  to  have  killed,  wounded,  and  captured  nearly  2,500  of 
his  enemy.  Grant's  communications  with  Columbus  and 
Washington  were  cut  off  from  the  19th  to  the  30th  of  De- 
cember, and  the  transportation  of  supplies  was  interrupted 
for  a  longer  period. 

While  Forrest  was  thus  striking  against  the  upper  part  of 
Grant's  communications,  another  move  was  made  against 
that  portion  of  them  between  Holly  Springs  and  Grand 
Junction.  Just  prior  to  that  time,  viz.,  on  December  13th, 
Grant  had  sent  the  greater  part  of  his  own  cavalry  on  a  raid 
against  the  Mobile  and  Ohio  Road  in  the  vicinity  of  Tupelo. 
They  were  engaged  on  this  expedition,  when,  on  the  19th, 
word  was  received  that  a  considerable  body  of  Confederate 
cavalry  had  left  Grenada  the  day  previous,  and  was  moving 
northward  past  Grant's  left  flank,  with  the  evident  intention 
of  striking  his  rear.  Van  Dorn  had,  in  fact,  taken  personal 
command  of  all  the  cavalry  in  his  army — about  3,500  men — 
and  moved  northward  for  this  purpose.  Grant  immediately 
collected  what  cavalry  he  had  left  and  sent  them  back  as 
rapidly  as  possible  to  defend  the  railroad,  and  at  the  same 
time  telegraphed  to  the  commanding  officers  of  Holly 
Springs,  Grand  Junction,  and  other  points  in  rear,  notifying 
them  of  the  movement  of  the  enemy's  cavalry,  and  directing 
them  to  be  prepared,  and  to  defend  their  posts  at  all  haz- 
ards. These  orders  were  received  and  acknowledged  on 
the  afternoon  of  the  19th,  yet,  nevertheless,  at  daylight  on 
the  20th,  Col.  Murphy,  commanding  at  Holly  Springs,  was 
completely  surprised  by  Van  Dorn,  and  surrendered  his 
whole  command  of  1,500  men  almost  without  firing  a  shot. 
Van  Dorn  stopped  for  a  day  to  burn  up  the  supplies  form- 


THE  FIRST   MOVE   AGAINST   VICKSBURG.  71 

ing  Grant's  depot,  estimated  at  $1,500,000  in  value,  and  then 
pushed  on  northward  to  Davis's  Mills,  just  south  of  Grand 
Junction,  where  he  was  beaten  off  on  the  21st.  He  then  ad- 
vanced to  Bolivar,  where  he  was  unsuccessful  in  a  skirmish 
on  the  24th,  which  induced  him  to  retrace  his  steps.  He 
attacked  the  little  post  of  Middleburg,  just  south  of  Bolivar, 
where  he  was  met  by  a  most  gallant  defence,  and  was  driven 
off.  He  then  passed  to  the  east  of  Grand  Junction,  and 
reached  Bipley  on  the  25th.  Grant  had  sent  all  his  available 
cavalry  in  pursuit,  under  Col.  Mizner,  but  the  pursuit  was 
feeble,  and  Van  Dorn  was  not  overtaken.  Mizner  gave  up 
the  chase  beyond  Bipley,  and  Van  Dorn  returned  in  safety 
to  Grenada,  passing  again  beyond  Grant's  left  flank. 

These  two  simultaneous  raids  of  Forrest  and  Van  Dorn 
had  a  most  decisive  effect  upon  the  issue  of  the  campaign. 
Van  Dorn  destroyed  the  depot  of  accumulated  supplies,  and 
Forrest  destroyed  the  only  road  by  which  fresh  supplies 
could  be  brought  up.  The  country  had  been  exhausted  by 
the  support  of  two  armies  subsisting  on  it  in  part  for  several 
months.  There  was  no  alternative  for  Grant  but  to  fall 
back  and  open  direct  communications  with  Memphis.  He 
immediately  put  his  army  on  three-quarter  rations,  made 
preparations  to  gather  up  whatever  food  was  still  left  in  the 
country,  and  issued  orders  to  fall  back  behind  the  Talla- 
hatchie on  December  21st.  On  the  23d  Grant  wrote  from 
Holly  Springs  to  "The  Commanding  Officer,  Expedition 
down  the  Mississippi,"  saying  that  the  Confederate  raids 
had  broken  up  his  communications,  that  he  had  fallen  back 
behind  the  Tallahatchie,  and  that  any  farther  advance  on 
his  part  was  impracticable.  He  would  therefore  be  unable 
to  hold  the  enemy  on  the  Yallabusha,  except  by  a  mere  de- 
monstration. This  was  six  days  before  Sherman  attacked  at 
Chickasaw  Bluffs,  and,  had  the  letter  reached  him,  it  would 


72  THE   MISSISSIPPI. 

doubtless  have  modified  Sherman's  operations.  But  it  had 
to  go  by  courier  to  Memphis,  and  there  await  a  boat  going 
down  the  river.  McClernand  arrived  at  Memphis  before 
any  boat  left,  and  the  letter  was  delivered  to  him.  Sher- 
man, therefore,  did  not  hear  of  its  contents  until  communi- 
cated to  him  by  McClernand  on  January  3d,  several  days 
after  his  assault  had  been  made.  There  was  no  communica- 
tion of  any  kind  between  Grant  and  Sherman  from  the  time 
the  latter  left  the  vicinity  of  Oxford,  on  December  8th,  until 
the  arrival  of  the  steamer  which  brought  McClernand. 

During  the  last  week  in  December,  Grant  gradually  with- 
drew a  portion  of  his  troops  from  the  Tallahatchie,  sending 
them  to  the  vicinity  of  Grand  Junction,  with  orders  to  re- 
open and  guard  the  railroad  from  Memphis  to  Corinth.  He 
remained  in  person  at  Holly  Springs,  and  the  greater  part 
of  McPherson's  command  was  posted  in  advance  on  the  Tal- 
lahatchie. Telegraphic  communication  had  meantime  been 
re-established  with  Washington,  via  Columbus,  and  on 
January  8th  Grant  received  a  telegram  from  Halleck,  dated 
the  night  before,  saying  that  Richmond  papers  had  been 
received,  giving  full  accounts  of  Sherman's  repulse  at  Chick- 
asaw Bluffs,  and  urging  him  in  the  strongest  language  to 
take  all  disposable  force  in  Mississippi  and  West  Tennessee, 
and  reinforce  Sherman  at  once.  Grant  immediately  gave 
orders  to  abandon  Holly  Springs  and  move  back  to  the 
vicinity  of  Grand  Junction.  He  then  repaired  to  Memphis, 
arriving  there  on  January  10th,  sent  letters  of  inquiry  to 
McClernand  and  Porter,  and  telegraphed  to  St.  Louis  for 
transportation  to  take  16,000  men  to  Vicksburg. 

It  is  now  necessary  to  follow  the  course  of  Sherman's  move- 
ments down  the  Mississippi.  He  reached  Memphis  on  his 
return  from  Oxford,  as  already  stated,  on  December  12th ;  and 
immediately  sent  dispatches  of  Grant's  and  his  own  to  Por- 


THE  FIRST  MOVE  AGAINST  VICKSBURG.  73 

ter,  at  Cairo,  asking  for  the  co-operation  of  his  fleet,  and  to 
the  Chief  Quartermaster  at  St.  Louis,  requiring  transports 
for  30,000  men  to  be  at  Memphis  in  time  to  start  on  the 
18th.  It  was  short  notice,  but  by  the  energy  of  Col.  Eobert 
Allen  and  Capt.  L.  B.  Parsons,  sixty-seven  boats  arrived  at 
Memphis  on  the  morning  of  the  19th,  and  the  embarkation 
began  on  the  same  day.  Porter's  fleet  had  arrived  the  pre- 
vious day.  Sherman  had  brought  back  with  him  the  divi- 
sion of  M.  L.  Smith,  and  at  Memphis  he  found  the  new  regi- 
iments  sent  forward  by  McClernand ;  these  he  organized 
into  two  divisions,  under  A.  J.  Smith  and  G.  W.  Morgan. 
The  troops  at  Helena  were  organized  into  a  fourth  division 
under  Brig. -Gen.  F.  Steele.  The  whole  force  amounted  to  50 
regiments  and  10  batteries,  and  numbered  in  all  about  32,000 
men  with  60  guns.  The  expedition  left  Memphis  on  De- 
cember 20th,  stopped  at  Helena  on  the  21st  to  pick  up 
Steele's  division,  resumed  its  journey  on  the  22d,  and  reached 
Milliken's  Bend,  twenty  miles  above  Vicksburg,  before  day- 
light on  the  25th.  Here  A.  J.  Smith's  division  was  landed 
on  the  Louisiana  shore,  to  advance  against  and  break  up  the 
railroad  coming  into  Vicksburg  from  the  west,  over  which 
great  quantities  of  supplies  were  transported  to  the  Confed- 
erates. On  the  26th,  the  remaining  three  divisions  contin- 
ued on  to  the  mouth  of  the  Yazoo  River,  and  moved  up  that 
river  thirteen  miles,  where  they  disembarked  on  the  bottom 
lands  between  the  Yazoo  River  and  the  Walnut  Hills.  A.  J. 
Smith's  division  rejoined  them  the  next  day. 

These  hills  are  simply  a  portion  of  the  great  bluff  bound- 
ing the  valley  of  the  Mississippi  River  on  the  east.  The 
waters  of  the  Mississippi  run  sharp  against  this  bluff  at 
Vicksburg,  but  just  above  that  city  the  river  and  bluff 
diverge,  the  latter  trending  off  to  the  northeast,  and  not 
being  met  again  by  the  Mississippi  short  of  Memphis,  a  dis- 
VIII.— 4 


74  THE  MISSISSIPPI. 

tance  of  over  two  hundred  miles  in  a  straight  line.  The 
space  between  the  river  and  the  bluff,  which  is  sixty  miles 
wide  at  its  widest  part,  is  low  bottom  land  filled  with  innum- 
erable creeks  and  bayous  and  lakes  marking  former  beds  of 
the  river.  All  of  these  waters  are  drained  southeastwardly 
into  the  Yazoo  River,  which  runs  along  the  base  of  the 
bluff  for  over  one  hundred  miles,  and  is  formed  at  its  head 
by  the  Yallabusha  and  Tallahatchie  Rivers,  draining  the 
high  land  north  and  east  of  Grenada. 

It  was  Sherman's  intention  to  descend  the  Mississippi 
as  rapidly  as  possible,  and,  while  Grant  held  the  bulk  of 
Pemberton's  force  on  the  Yallabusha,  near  Grenada,  to 
surprise,  if  j)ossible,  the  Confederates  at  Vicksburg,  and 
gain  possession  of  a  point  of  the  Walnut  Hills,  near 
Haines'  bluff,  twelve  miles  northeast  of  Vicksburg,  from 
which  his  force  could  be  supplied  by  the  MississijDpi 
and  Yazoo  Rivers.  Then,  if  he  was  strong  enough,  he 
would  take  Vicksburg  himself ;  if  not,  he  hoped  to  cut 
the  railroad  between  Vicksburg  and  Jackson,  and  then 
defend  himself  on  the  banks  of  the  Yazoo  until  Grant's 
force,  pushing  Pemberton  south  from  Grenada,  could  join 
him.  The  whole  plan  was  based  on  the  idea  of  a  surprise 
on  Sherman's  part,  and  a  co-operation  between  the  two 
armies.  It  entirely  miscarried.  The  co-operation  of  Grant's 
force  was  rendered  impossible,  as  we  have  seen,  by  the  de- 
struction of  his  supplies  and  communications  by  Van  Dorn 
and  Forrest ;  and  the  anticipation  of  a  surprise  was  not  real- 
ized. The  Confederates  not  only  had  spies  in  Memphis, 
and  in  every  plantation  along  the  river  bank,  but  they  had 
small  detachments  of  cavalry,  partisans,  and  guerillas  con- 
cealed along  the  river.  Sherman's  progress  was  reported  by 
them  with  great  accuracy  twice  a  day  from  the  hour  of  leav- 
ing Memphis.     These  reports   reached    Pemberton  on  De« 


THE  FIRST  MOVE  AGAINST  VICKSBURG.  75 

cember  23d  and  24th  from  so  many  different  sources  as  to 
leave  no  doubt  of  their  accuracy.  The  whole  plan  was 
thus  revealed  to  Johnston  and  Pemberton,  who  immediately 
took  steps  to  frustrate  it. 

On  the  23d,  Vaughn's  brigade  was  ordered  from  Grenada 
to  Vicksburg,  followed  on  the  25th  by  one  brigade,  and 
on  the  26th  by  the  other  brigade  of  Maury's  division. 
These  movements  were  quickly  made  by  rail.  On  the  26th 
word  was  received  that  Sherman's  troops  were  landing  up 
the  Yazoo,  and  Pemberton  immediately  went  in  person  to 
Vicksburg,  ordering  Price's  corps,  at  Grenada,  and  Steven- 
son's division,  lately  arrived  at  Jackson  from  Chattanooga, 
to  follow  him.  Instead,  then,  of  having  to  contend  with 
the  6,000  men  forming  the  garrison  of  Vicksburg,  Sher- 
man had  not  less  than  12,000  men  in  front  of  him  in  for- 
tified positions  along  the  bluff.  The  bluff  was  fully  two 
hundred  feet  high,  and  had  an  unbroken  view  of  the 
whole  bottom  land  as  far  as  the  Yazoo.  A  thousand  men 
posted  in  trenches  on  this  bluff  ought  easily  to  keep 
off,  and  slaughter  ten  thousand  moving  to  attack,  and  the 
enterprise  was  doomed  to  failure.  Sherman,  however, 
knew  nothing  of  the  arrival  of  Confederate  reinforcements, 
and  having  proceeded  thus  far,  it  was  out  of  the  ques- 
tion for  him  to  withdraw  without  making  a  vigorous  as- 
sault. 

Sherman  landed  his  troops  at  Johnson's  plantation,  oppo- 
site the  mouth  of  Steele's  bayou,  on  December  26th.  The 
triangular  space  between  Vicksburg.  Haines'  Bluff,  and 
Johnson's  plantation  is  bounded  by  the  Yazoo  Kiver  on  one 
side,  and  the  Walnut  Hills  on  the  other.  It  is  low,  allu- 
vial land,  overflowed  in  the  highest  stages  of  the  liver, 
and  filled  at  all  times  with  a  number  of  bayous  and  swamps. 
In  the  whole  twelve  miles  between  Haines'  Bluff  and  Vicks- 


76 


THE  MISSISSIPPI. 


burg  there  were   but   five  points  where  it  was  practicable 
to  pass  from  the  Yazoo  through  the  network  of  bayous  to 


Ft 

HAINES*  BL$|f£* 

r 


VlCKSBURG 

Settle  of  Miles 


Chickasaw  Bluffs.    December  29,  1862. 


the  bluffs.  All  of  these  j>oints  were  commanded  by  Con- 
federate batteries.  At  the  point  where  Sherman  landed  he 
had  Chickasaw  Bayou  on  his  left  and  a  former  bed  of  the 


THE  FIRST  MOVE  AGAINST  VICKSBURG.  77 

Yazoo,  commonly  known  as  "  the  Lake,"  in  his  front.  Still 
farther  to  his  left  was  another  stagnant  bayou  called  Thomp- 
son's Lake.  Chickasaw  Bayou,  Thompson's  Lake,  and  "  the 
Lake  "  all  unite  at  a  point  about  two  miles  from  the  Yazoo 
and  half  a  mile  from  the  bluffs,  and  at  this  point  a  small 
brook  running  out  from  the  hills  empties  into  them. 

In  landing,  Steele's  division  formed  the  extreme  left,  on 
the  left  of  Chickasaw  Bayou,  Morgan's  division  came  next 
on  the  right  of  that  bayou,  M.  L.  Smith's  division  next,  and 
A.  J.  Smith's  on  the  right,  following  the  road  leading  from 
Johnson's  plantation  direct  to  Vicksburg.  These  positions 
were  taken  on  the  27th,  and  during  that  day  the  four  col- 
umns moved  forward  skirmishing  slightly  with  the  enemy. 
On  the  28th  a  general  advance  was  made,  in  the  nature  of 
a  reconnoissance,  as  far  as  the  lake  in  front  of  the  bluff ;  in 
this  reconnoissance  M.  L.  Smith  was  seriously  wounded 
in  the  hip  and  obliged  to  leave  the  field,  a  loss  greatly 
regretted  by  Sherman  in  his  report.  On  the  left,  Steele 
found  his  way  blocked  by  Thompson's  Lake,  which  could 
only  be  crossed  on  a  narrow  corduroy  causeway,  completely 
enfiladed  by  one  of  the  enemy's  batteries,  which  would  mow 
down  the  narrow  head  of  column  as  fast  as  the  men  could 
show  themselves  ;  he  was  therefore  ordered  to  return  to 
the  Yazoo  Biver,  cross  back  in  the  transports  to  the  other 
side  of  Chickasaw  Bayou,  and  come  up  in  support  of  Mor- 
gan's division ;  this  he  did  during  the  afternoon  and  night 
of  the  28th.  In  the  centre,  Morgan,  who  had  the  only  pon- 
toon train  in  the  command,  laid  it  across  a  small  bayou  sup- 
posing it  to  be  the  old  lake  near  the  bluff;  on  reaching  the 
latter  he  found  that  there  was  a  natural  crossing  over  it. 
On  the  right  A.  J.  Smith  advanced  along  the  main  road  on  a 
line  with  the  other  columns.  There  was  considerable  skir- 
mishing throughout  the  day  with  the  advanced  pickets  of 


78  THE  MISSISSIPPI. 

the  Confederates,  but  the  losses  were  slight,  the  Confed- 
erates retiring  to  the  bluff.  The  troops  passed  the  night 
of  the  28th  in  position  along  the  lake  parallel  to  the 
bluff  and  about  five  hundred  yards  from  it.  The  next 
morning  (29th)  further  reconnoissances  were  made  and  or- 
ders were  then  given  for  the  assault.  The  main  attack  was 
to  be  made  against  the  centre  of  the  enemy's  line  by  Mor- 
gan's division,  supported  by  Steele's  ;  A.  J.  Smith,  with  the 
division  of  M.  L.  Smith  and  one  brigade  of  his  own,  was  to 
cross  a  narrow  sand  bar  across  the  lake  about  a  mile  below 
the  point  of  Morgan's  attack,  and  then  advance  against  the 
levee,  on  the  other  side  of  which  the  Confederates  were 
strongly  intrenched ;  this  attack  was  to  be  a  demonstration 
in  the  nature  of  a  diversion  in  favor  of  Morgan,  or  a  real  at- 
tack, according  to  the  amount  of  success  achieved.  On  the 
extreme  right  the  rest  of  A.  J.  Smith's  division  was  to  make 
a  demonstration  on  the  road  to  Vicksburg. 

At  twelve  o'clock  the  signal  for  the  assault  was  given  and 
immediately  De  Courcy's  brigade  of  Morgan's  division 
crossed  the  lake  and  advanced  through  a  terrible  fire  over 
the  half  mile  of  gently  sloping  ground  in  the  nature  of  a 
glacis,  which  led  up  to  the  Confederate  works  on  the  bluff. 
On  his  left,  Blair's  brigade  of  Steele's  division  crossed  the 
lake  near  its  junction  with  Chickasaw  Bayou,  and  made  a 
similar  advance  through  an  equally  hot  fire.  These  two 
brigades  reached  the  enemy's  works,  but  they  were  entirely 
unsupported ;  Thayer's  brigade  of  Steele's  division  took  a 
wrong  direction  and  only  one  regiment  was  brought  into  ac- 
tion ;  Lindsey's  brigade  attempted  to  build  a  bridge  across 
the  lake  on  De  Courcy's  right,  but  did  not  succeed  and  did 
not  cross  the  lake  at  all ;  Sheldon's  brigade  of  the  same  di- 
vision was  not  brought  into  action  further  than  to  come  up 
in  rear  of  Lindsey  where  it  lost  a  dozen  men  by  stray  shots. 


THE  FIRST  MOVE  AGAINST  VICKSBURG  79 

The  attack  of  M.  L.  Smith's  division  was  not  successful ;  one 
regiment  in  the  lead,  the  Sixth  Missouri,  crossed  the  sand- 
bar but  found  that  the  only  way  to  climb  the  levee  was  by  a 
narrow  path  barely  wide  enough  for  two  men  abreast ;  the 
Confederates  were  almost  over  their  heads,  and  but  forty  feet 
from  them,  and  it  was  impossible  to  advance  against  their 
-fire  on  this  narrow  path ;  this  regiment  therefore  sheltered 
itself  by  digging  out  part  of  the  bank  of  the  levee  with  their 
hands  and  remained  there  until  darkness  enabled  them  to 
retreat.  The  whole  brunt  of  the  assault  was  made  by  the 
two  brigades  of  De  Courcy  and  Blair,  and  one  regiment 
(Fourth  Iowa)  of  Thayer's  brigade,  numbering  not  more 
than  6,000  men  in  all ;  they  advanced  with  the  utmost  gal- 
lantry right  up  to  the  Confederate  works,  but  arrived  there 
they  looked  around  and  saw  that  nothing  was  coming  to 
their  support.  The  other  two  brigades  of  Morgan's  divi- 
sion did  practically  nothing  to  assist  them.  Cut  to  pieces 
by  front  and  cross  fire,  De  Courcy's  and  Blair's  men  were 
finally  forced  to  yield,  and  between  3  and  4  p.m.  they  fell 
back  and  recrossed  the  levee.  De  Courcy's  brigade  lost 
about  700,  Blair's  743,  and  the  Fourth  Iowa  111  men  ;  the 
losses  in  the  rest  of  the  force  amounted  to  less  than  400, 
the  exact  total  being  1,929,  viz.:  191  killed,  982  wounded, 
and  756  missing.  The  batteries  against  which  the  attack 
was  made  were  defended  by  only  six  regiments  of  S.  D. 
Lee's  brigade,  which  formed  a  part  of  the  original  garrison 
of  Vicksburg  under  Martin  L.  Smith.  Their  loss  was  less 
than  100  men,  and  the  entire  losses  of  the  Confederates  dur- 
ing the  skirmishing  of  the  27th  and  28th  and  the  assault  of 
the  29th  was  only  57  killed,  120  wounded,  and  10  missing ; 
total  187. 

Sherman's  troops  remained  in  their  positions  close  to  the 
lake  during  the  night  of  the  29th.     He  at  first  thought  of 


80  THE  MISSISSIPPI. 

renewing  the  assault  in  the  morning,  but  concluded  that  the 
position  was  too  strong,  especially  as  the  enemy  would  now 
concentrate  all  his  force  upon  the  point  where  the  attack 
had  been  made.  He  therefore  determined  to  hold  his  pres- 
ent ground,  but  send  10,000  men  to  try  an  assault  higher 
up  the  river  at  Haines'  Bluff.  Porter  agreed  to  escort  the 
transports  and  cover  the  landing,  and  the  movement  was 
fixed  for  the  night  of  December  31st.  The  troops  were 
selected  and  embarked  during  the  night,  and  Sherman 
then  returned  to  his  original  position,  intending  to  engage 
the  enemy  there  as  soon  as  cannonading  should  be  heard 
above.  At  daylight,  however,  he  received  word  that  the  fog 
was  so  dense  that  the  boats  could  not  move,  and  the  affair 
must  be  postponed  until  the  next  night.  During  the  day 
he  received  further  word  from  Porter  that,  on  the  next 
night,  the  moon  would  not  set  until  5.25  a.m.,  so  that  the 
landing  could  not  be  made  in  darkness.  Porter  considered 
the  affair  too  hazardous  under  these  circumstances,  and  it 
was  therefore  abandoned. 

The  position  in  which  Sherman's  troops  were  now  situated 
was  extremely  disagreeable  and  dangerous ;  they  were  biv- 
ouacked in  the  low,  marshy,  bottom  land,  where  a  slight 
rise  in  the  river  any  night  might  swamp  and  drown  the 
whole  command ;  the  water-marks  on  the  trees  ten  feet 
above  the  ground  had  an  ominous  look,  and  all  were  of 
opinion  that  any  further  assaults  were  impracticable.  Sher- 
man therefore  determined  to  re-embark  his  men,  and  return 
to  the  mouth  of  the  Yazoo  River,  which  was  done  without 
opposition  from  the  enemy  on  January  2d.  Here  he  met 
McClernand,  who  had  reached  Memphis  on  December  28th, 
left  on  the  30th,  and  arrived  at  Milliken's  Bend  on  Janu- 
ary 1st.  He  exhibited  his  orders  placing  him  in  com- 
mand of  the  river  expedition,  and  Sherman  immediately  re- 


THE  FIRST  MOVE  AGAINST  VICKSBURG.  81 

linquished  the  command,  and,  in  his  own  words,  "  subsided 
quietly  into  the  more  agreeable  office  of  a  corps  com- 
mander," with  the  intention  to  "endeavor  to  make  it  a  good 
one." 

The  project  of  a  combined  movement  on  Yicksburg, 
partly  by  land  and  partly  by  the  river,  thus  ended  in  com- 
plete failure.  The  failure  was  due  to  the  destruction  of 
Grant's  supplies  through  the  cowardice  or  incapacity  of  the 
officer  in  command  at  Holly  Springs,  and  to  the  formidable 
character  of  the  Confederate  position  for  defence,  both  of 
which  were  contingencies  which  could  not  have  been  fore- 
seen. Yet  it  cannot  be  forgotten  that  the  Mississippi  was 
opened  from  Cairo  to  Memphis  in  the  most  brilliant  and  suc- 
cessful manner  by  the  campaign  from  Fort  Henry  to  Corinth, 
conducted  in  rear  of  the  river  by  a  united  army-;  that  all  at- 
tempts against  Vicksburg  by  the  river  failed,  and,  after 
months  of  unsuccessful  efforts  through  creeks  and  bayous,  it 
was  finally  taken  by  a  campaign  against  its  rear,  starting  from 
the  south  of  Vicksburg.  It  is  therefore  a  question  for  dis- 
cussion whether  it  would  not  have  been  better  to  have  estab- 
lished a  base  at  Memphis,  repaired  the  railroad  south  of  that 
point,  and  advanced  with  every  available  man  united  in  a 
single  force,  along  the  Mississippi  Central  Kailroad,  for  the 
purpose  of  bringing  Pemberton  to  battle  and  crushing  him. 
If  he  declined  battle,  he  must  either  have  retreated  on  Mo- 
bile, leaving  Vicksburg  free,  or  else  have  retreated  into  Vicks- 
burg, whence  he  could  have  been  followed  as  far  as  Haines' 
Bluff,  and  a  base  established  there,  as  was  done  in  the 
spring  of  1863.  The  risks  of  such  a  movement  were  far  less 
than  in  the  final  campaign  from  Bruinsburg  through  Jack- 
son to  Haines'  Bluff.  It  will  be  remembered  that  a  direct 
movement  from  Memphis  against  the  rear  of  Vicksburg  was 
the  one  suggested  by  Grant  in  his  letter  to  Halleck,  of  Oc- 
4* 


82  THE  MISSISSIPPI. 

tober  26th,  before  he  had  any  intimation  of  the  plans  of 
Halleck  or  the  President.  Grant,  however,  had  only  a  lim- 
ited discretion  in  the  matter,  and  the  responsibility  for  the 
movements  in  December,  1862,  whether  wise  or  unwise, 
must  rest  with  the  authorities  in  Washington.  "While  Grant 
approved,  and  even  urged,  the  movement  down  the  river, 
yet  all  other  movements  were  rendered  impossible  by  his 
orders. 

There  is  one  other  feature  which  must  be  stated  in  order 
to  complete  the  discussion  of  this  first  movement  against 
Vicksburg,  and  that  is  the  co-operation  expected  from  New 
Orleans.  No  allusion  has  hitherto  been  made  to  it,  because 
there  was  no  such  co-operation,  but  it  was  fully  intended 
that  there  shonld  be,  and  in  nearly  all  of  Halleck's  tele- 
grams to  Grant  in  November  and  December,  1862,  reference 
was  made  to  the  co-operation  of  General  Banks.  That  offi- 
cer had  been  directed  to  supersede  Butler  in  command  of 
the  Department  of  the  Gulf  by  orders  issued  on  November 
9,  1862  ;  and  his  instructions  laid  special  stress  on  the  im- 
portance of  moving  up  at  once  to  open  the  Mississippi. 
Owing,  however,  to  the  delay  in  collecting  the  reinforce- 
ments which  were  to  accompany  him,  Banks  did  not  sail 
from  New  York  till  December  4th,  nor  reach  New  Orleans 
till  December  14th.  A  large  part  of  his  force  was  immedi- 
ately sent  up  the  river,  without  disembarking  at  New  Or- 
leans, to  Baton  Rouge,  of  which  they  took  possession  with- 
out resistance.  But  they  did  not  feel  strong  enough  to 
advance  against  Port  Hudson  until  three  months  later.  The 
troops  on  the  lower  Mississippi  had,  therefore,  no  influence 
upon  the  movements  of  December,  1862,  against  Vicksburg. 

The  question  of  what  was  now  to  be  done  with  the  troops 
forming  the  river  expedition  cannot  be  more  clearly  stated 
than  in  the  following  words,  taken  from  a  letter  written  to 


THE   FIRST   MOVE   AGAINST   VICKSBURG.  83 

Halleck  by  Sherman,  dated  "  On  board  Forest  Queen,  Jan- 
uary 5,  1863  : " 

"I  reached  Vicksburg  at  the  time  appointed,  landed,  assaulted,  and 
failed.  Re-embarked  my  command  unopposed  and  turned  it  over  to 
my  successor,  General  McClernand.  At  first  I  proposed  to  remain 
near  Vicksburg  to  await  the  approach  of  General  Grant  or  General 
Banks  to  co-operate,  but  as  General  McClernand  had  brought  intelli- 
gence, the  first  that  had  reached  me,  that  General  Grant  had  fallen  back 
of  the  Tallahatchie,  and  as  we  could  hear  not  a  word  of  General  Banks 
below,  instead  of  remaining  idle  I  proposed  we  should  move  our  entire 
force  in  concert  with  the  gunboats  to  the  Arkansas,  which  is  now  in 
boating  condition,  and  reduce  the  Post  of  Arkansas,  where  seven  thou- 
sand of  the  enemy  are  intrenched  and  threaten  this  river.  One  boat, 
the  Blue  Wing,  towing  coal  barges  for  the  navy  and  carrying  dis- 
patches, has  been  captured  by  the  enemy,  and  with  that  enemy  on  our 
rear  and  flank  our  communications  would  at  all  times  be  endangered. 
General  McClernand  agreed,  and  Admiral  Porter  also  cheerfully  as- 
sented, and  we  are  at  this  moment  en  route  for  the  Post  of  Arkansas, 
fifty  miles  up  the  Arkansas  River." 

McClernand  had  assumed  formal  command  on  January 
4th,  styling  his  troops  the  "  Army  of  the  Mississippi  "  and  di- 
viding them  into  two  corps,  the  first  under  Morgan  consist- 
ing of  Morgan's  and  A.  J.  Smith's  divisions,  and  the  second 
under  Sherman,  consisting  of  Steele's  and  Stuart's  (formerly 
M.  L.  Smith's)  divisions.  The  entire  force  left  Milliken's 
Bend  on  the  5th,  and  proceeded  up  the  Mississippi  to  the 
mouth  of  White  River,  arriving  there  on  the  8th  ;  ascending 
that  stream  a  few  miles  they  passed  through  a  cut-off  into 
the  Arkansas,  and  on  the  evening  of  the  9th,  they  came  in 
sight  of  the  Arkansas  Post,  called  by  the  Confederates  Fort 
Hindman. 

A  portion  of  the  Mississippi  squadron  accompanied  the 
transports  as  an  escort.  During  the  six  months  which  had 
elapsed  since  it  left  Vicksburg  in  July,  1862,  this  squadron 


84  THE  MISSISSIPPI. 

had  been  largely  augmented,  and  it  now  numbered  11  iron- 
clads, 38  unarmored  gunboats,  6  rams,  and  15  tugs  and  des- 
patch boats,  in  all  70  vessels  with  a  capacity  of  16,905  tons, 
a  force  of  5,500  men,  and  an  armament  of  304  guns. 

Porter  had  with  him  on  this  expedition  the  following  de- 
tachment from  his  squadron,  viz.  : 

DeKalb  (formerly  St.  Louis),  Lieutenant-Commander  Walker.  13  guns. 

Cincinnati,  Lieutenant  Bache 13    a 

Louisville,  Lieutenant-Commander  Owen 13    " 

Monarch,  Colonel  A.  W.  Ellet Ram. 

Black  Hawk,  Lieutenant-Commander  Breese 8  guns. 

Lexington,  Lieutenant-Commander  Shirk 7    " 

Rattler,  Lieutenant-Commander  Smith 6    " 

Glide,  Lieutenant  Woodworth 6    " 

66  guns. 

Fort  Hindman  was  a  four-sided  bastioned  work,  about  one 
hundred  yards  on  a  side,  built  on  a  bluff  about  twenty-five 
feet  above  the  river  level,  at  a  bend  of  the  river  where  it  had 
an  unobstructed  view  for  over  a  mile  in  either  direction  ;  it 
was  supplemented  by  a  line  of  trench  running  from  one 
angle  of  the  fort  in  a  direction  perpendicular  to  the  river  for 
about  a  mile,  where  it  terminated  in  an  impassable  bayou. 
About  a  mile  and  a  half  lower  down  the  river  were  some 
other  trenches  built  on  the  levee.  The  entire  armament 
consisted  of  two  9-inch  columbiads,  one  8-inch  columbiad, 
and  14  field  guns ;  the  garrison  numbered  about  5,000  men 
under  command  of  Brig. -Gen.  T.  J.  Churchill. 

McClernand's  expedition  proceeded  up  the  Arkansas  on 
January  9th,  the  gunboats  in  the  lead,  followed  by  Sher- 
man's corps,  and  then  Morgan's,  in  transports.  Late  in  the 
afternoon  they  halted  about  three  miles  below  the  fort,  and 
began  landing  during  the  night.     At  noon  of  the  10th,  Sher- 


THE   FIRST   MOVE  AGAINST  VICKSBURG. 


85 


man's  corps  began  the  march,  Steele's  division  in  the  lead. 
This  division  took  a  wrong  direction,  owing  to  ignorance  of 
the  roads,  and  was  recalled  during  the  afternoon,  but  did  not 
rejoin  its  corps  until  the  next  morning.  The  other  division, 
under  Stuart,  moved  along  the  river  bank,  and  found  the 
outer  defences  on  the  levee  abandoned,  they  being  completely 


^T¥ 


Arkansas  Post.     January  11,  1863. 


enfiladed  by  the  fire  of  the  gunboats.  Continuing  its  march, 
and  arriving  in  the  vicinity  of  the  fort,  Stuart's  division 
left  the  river,  and  moved  off  to  the  right.  Morgan's  corps, 
which  was  following,  came  in  on  its  left  next  to  the  river 
bank.  During  the  night,  Sherman's  corps  took  position 
about  one  thousand  yards  in  front  of  the  trenches,  with 
his  right   resting   on  the   bayou ;   Morgan,  with  three  bri- 


86  THE  MISSISSIPPI. 

gades,  being  on  his  left,  and  extending  to  the  river.  One  bri- 
gade (De  Courcy's)  of  Morgan's  corps  was  left  in  reserve  to 
guard  the  transports  at  the  point  of  landing,  and  another 
(Lindsay's),  with  four  guns,  had  been  landed  on  the  other 
bank  on  the  river,  marched  across  the  neck  of  the  bend,  and 
taken  position  above  the  fort,  so  as  to  cut  off  all  retreat  up 
the  river,  and  prevent  the  arrival  of  reinforcements  from  that 
direction.  During  the  evening,  the  gunboats  moved  up 
toward  the  fort,  and  opened  a  vigorous  fire,  which  did  great 
damage.  Their  superiority  in  artillery  was  so  great  that 
the  Confederates  were  entirely  unable  to  answer  the  fire. 
The  troops  passed  the  night  in  the  position  above  men- 
tioned. 

On  the  morning  of  the  11th  further  reconnoissances  were 
made  of  the  ground  in  front  of  the  enemy's  trenches,  and 
the  troops  were  slightly  moved  so  as  to  take  the  most  advan- 
tageous places  for  the  assault.  About  noon,  McClernand 
sent  word  to  Porter  that  everything  was  ready,  and  asked 
him  to  begin  the  bombardment  of  the  fort,  as  previously 
arranged.  The  gunboats  then  moved  up  the  river  to  within 
a  few  hundred  yards  of  the  fort,  and,  at  1  p.m.,  opened 
tire  with  their  66  pieces.  The  artillery  of  the  fort  was 
soon  silenced,  the  larger  guns  being  all  destroyed,  and  the 
bonibproofs  being  knocked  to  pieces.  As  soon  as  the  sound 
of  the  navy  guns  was  heard,  the  field  artillery,  numbering 
about  45  pieces,  which  was  disposed  in  the  intervals  of 
Sherman's  and  Morgan's  line,  immediately  opened  fire,  and 
'  kept  it  up  for  the  space  of  about  half,  an  hour.  The  ar- 
tillery then  ceased,  and  the  infantry  rushed  forward  to  the 
assault  along  the  whole  line.  They  had  a  distance  of  about 
four  hundred  yards  to  cross  in  order  to  reach  the  trenches, 
part  of  it  open  and  part  cut  up  by  gullies  and  depres- 
sions, which  afforded  a  certain  amount  of  shelter.     Their 


THE  FIRST  MOVE  AGAINST  VICKSBURG.  87 

progress  was  at  first  rapid,  but  they  soon  encountered  a 
withering  fire  from  behind  the  intrenchments,  which  stag- 
gered and  sobered  them,  and  retarded  their  progress.  About 
3  p.m.,  Sherman  sent  word  to  Morgan  that  his  left  was  very 
heavily  pressed,  and  Morgan  directed  A.  J.  Smith  to  send 
three  regiments  to  Sherman's  assistance,  and  sent  back  word 
for  De  Courcy's  brigade  to  come  up  and  join  him.  The 
firing,  meantime,  was  kept  up  without  any  relaxation,  and 
the  Union  troops  gradually  worked  their  way  forward  until 
they  were  within  less  than  one  hundred  yards  of  the  in- 
trenchments, and  were  preparing  for  a  final  assault,  when 
the  cry  ran  along  the  Confederate  line,  "Baise  the  white 
flag,  by  order  of  General  Churchill.  Pass  the  order  up  the 
line."  Churchill  and  his  brigade  commanders  all  deny  hav- 
ing given  any  authority  for  such  an  order,  and  the  origin  of 
it  cannot  be  traced.  But  the  flags  appeared  at  several 
places  at  the  same  moment,  and  both  Sherman  and  Morgan 
gave  orders  to  cease  firing,  and  sent  aides-de-camp  into  the 
work.  At  the  same  time  they  moved  their  troops  close  up  to 
the  parapet  in  order  to  be  prepared  for  any  emergency,  and 
Sherman  directed  Steele  to  move  along  the  bayou  around  the 
left  of  the  enemy's  line,  and  prevent  any  escape  in  that  direc- 
tion. Sherman  now  entered  the  trenches  in  his  front,  and 
Morgan  rode  into  the  fort,  and  both  demanded  a  surrender. 
An  awkward  moment  ensued,  as  one  of  the  brigade  com- 
manders opposed  to  Sherman  refused  to  surrender,  claiming 
that  the  white  flag  had  been  raised  without  authority.  A 
single  shot  might  have  produced  great  loss  of  life,  but,  for- 
tunately, before  any  accident  happened,  General  Churchill 
arrived,  and  told  this  officer  there  was  nothing  to  do  but 
surrender,  and  he  sullenly  ordered  his  men  to  stack  arms. 
Churchill  himself  surrendered  the  fort  to  McClernand  about 
4.30  p.m. 


88  THE  MISSISSIPPI. 

The  Confederates  lost  about  200  men  in  killed  and 
wounded,  and  the  number  of  their  prisoners  counted  and 
sent  North  on  the  following  day  was  4,791.  The  Union  loss 
was,  129  killed,  831  wounded,  and  17  missing;  total,  977, 
exclusive  of  31  killed  and  wounded  on  the  gunboats.  Their 
trophies  were  the  fort  and  everything  in  it,  including  17 
pieces  of  artillery,  large  and  small,  and  a  very  considerable 
amount  of  ammunition  and  subsistence  stores. 

McClernand  remained  at  Arkansas  Post  for  the  next  three 
days,  occupied  in  gathering  up  captured  property,  sending 
off  prisoners,  and  destroying  the  fortifications.  During  this 
time  he  was  in  some  doubt  as  to  his  future  movements.  On 
the  14th  he  had  consultations  with  Porter  and  Sherman,  and 
addressed  letters  to  them  stating  his  fixed  intention  to  as- 
cend the  Arkansas  to  Little  Rock,  and  thence  march  against 
a  force  stationed  at  Brownsville,  about  midway  between  the 
Arkansas  and  White  Rivers.  He  was  also  in  correspondence 
with  the  commanding  officer  at  Helena  for  the  purpose  of 
securing  his  co-operation  in  a  movement  to  the  interior  of 
Arkansas,  the  two  expeditions  to  act  as  a  diversion  for  the 
Union  troops  operating  in  Missouri.  But  McClernand  hesi- 
tated to  ascend  the  Arkansas  with  his  transports,  as  the 
river  was  falling  and  he  might  not  be  able  to  return.  In  the 
midst  of  his  doubts  a  peremptory  order  from  Grant  arrived 
on  the  evening  of  the  14th,  directing  him  to  return  forthwith 
to  the  Mississippi.  It  appears  that  on  January  8th,  while 
entering  the  AYhite  River  on  his  way  to  Arkausas  Post,  Mc- 
Clernand had  written  to  Grant  stating  his  movements  and 
the  reasons  for  them.  Besides  giving  the  perfectly  valid 
reason  that  the  Post  of  Arkansas  was  a  constant  menace  to 
the  navigation  of  the  Mississippi  he  hinted  vaguely  at  the 
possibility  of  co-operating  with  Curtis's  force  in  Arkansas 
and  creating  a  diversion  for  the  troops  in  Missouri.     Grant 


THE  FIRST  MOVE  AGAESTST   VICKSBURG.  89 

received  this  on  the  11th ;  he  at  once  feared  that  McCler- 
nand  might  become  involved  in  a  campaign  in  Arkansas 
which  it  might  require  weeks  to  complete,  and  meanwhile 
his  troops  would  be  detached  from  the  all-important  object 
of  capturing  Vicksburg.  He  therefore  wrote  on  the  11th  to 
McClernand,  disapproving  of  his  project,  which  might  an- 
swer for  some  of  the  purposes  suggested  but  would  have  no 
bearing  on  Vicksburg,  and  directed  him  to  return  at  once  to 
the  Mississippi  unless  he  was  acting  under  orders  from  su- 
perior authority.  At  the  same  time  he  telegraphed  Halleck 
that  "  McClernand  has  gone  on  a  wild-goose  chase  to  the 
Post  of  Arkansas,"  to  which  Halleck  replied  on  the  follow- 
ing day,  "You  are  hereby  authorized  to  relieve  General 
McClernand  from  command  of  the  expedition  against  Vicks- 
burg, giving  it  to  the  next  in  rank  or  taking  it  yourself." 
On  the  13th  Grant  received  a  report  from  McClernand  an- 
nouncing the  capture  of  Arkansas  Post,  to  which  Grant  re- 
plied directing  him  to  return  to  Milliken's  Bend  unless  he 
had  some  object  not  visible  from  a  distance.  McClernand 
received  this  on  the  15th,  and  thereupon  issued  orders  to  re- 
turn. Sherman  embarked  on  the  16th  and  Morgan  on  the 
17th,  and  all  united  at  Napoleon,  at  the  mouth  of  the  Ar- 
kansas, on  the  17th.  Here  they  were  joined  by  General 
Grant,  who  had  come  down  from  Memphis  to  gain  a  personal 
knowledge  of  the  course  of  affairs.  After  remaining  two  days 
he  returned  to  Memphis  to  complete  his  preparations  for  re- 
inforcing McClernand,  and  the  latter  descended  the  river  to 
Milliken's  Bend. 

Before  leaving  Arkansas  Post  on  the  16th,  McClernand  ad- 
dressed a  private  letter  to  the  President,  enclosing  his  cor- 
respondence with  Grant,  complaining  in  bitter  language 
that  "  my  success  here  is  gall  and  wormwood  to  the  clique 
of  West  Pointers  who  have  been  persecuting  me  for  months," 


90  THE  MISSISSIPPI. 

and  urging  that  his  army  "should  be  made  an  independent 
command,  as  both  von  and  the  Secretary  of  "War,  as  I  be- 
lieve, originally  intended."  It  is  doubtless  an  ungracious 
act  to  disapprove  a  man's  projects  at  the  very  moment  of  suc- 
cess ;  nor  can  there  be  any  doubt  that  the  utilization  of  Mc- 
Clernand's  force  by  a  prompt  move  on  Arkansas  Post  and  an 
immediate  return  was  a  judicious  project,  and  it  was  well 
executed.  But  the  correspondence  of  January  14th,  above 
quoted,  shows  conclusively  that  Grant's  perceptions  were 
perfectly  correct,  and  that  McClemand  did  not  intend  to 
stop  at  Arkansas  Post  but  to  initiate  an  independent  cam- 
paign in  Arkansas  by  going  to  Little  Rock  and  beyond ; 
which  would  have  been  indeed  a  "  wild-goose  chase,"  lead- 
ing to  various  complications  and  deranging  all  plans  against 
Vicksburg  by  the  abstraction  of  30,000  men.  It  was  fortu- 
nate that  such  a  scheme  was  nipped  in  the  bud. 


CHAPTER  IV. 

BAYOU    EXPEDITIONS. 

The  course  of  events,  as  narrated  in  the  last  chapter,  no 
less  than  his  instructions  from  Washington,  now  compelled 
Grant  to  direct  his  operations  against  Vicksburg  by  the  river 
route,  and  to  reduce  everything  east  of  Memphis  to  the  de- 
fensive. He  determined  to  take  command  of  the  river  expe- 
dition in  person,  as  authorized  by  Halleck,  and  to  reinforce 
it  with  all  available  troops,  as  directed  by  the  latter's  tele- 
gram of  January  7th.  Orders  of  the  War  Department,  dated 
December  18,  1862,  had  directed  the  troops  in  General 
Grant's  command  to  be  organized  into  four  army  corps,  to 
be  known  as  the  13th,  15th,  16th,  and  17th,  and  to  be 
commanded  respectively  by  Major-Generals  McClernand, 
Sherman,  Hurl  but,  and  McPherson.  This  organization 
was  now  effected.  McClernand's  and  Sherman's  corps  were 
already  down  the  river.  McPherson's  corps  was  formed 
of  the  divisions  of  McArthur,  Logan,  and  Quinby,  the  first 
of  which  was  sent  forthwith  down  the  river,  the  other 
two  being  directed  to  march  to  Memphis  and  hold  them- 
selves in  readiness  to  embark  on  transports  whenever  or- 
dered. The  remaining  troops  on  the  line  of  the  Memphis 
and  Charleston  Railroad,  and  in  rear  of  it  as  far  back  as 
Columbus,  composed  Hurlbut's  corps.  They  were  to  re- 
main in  observation  and  defend  the  points  where  they  were 
stationed.     The  troops  in   Helena  and  at  other  points  in 


92  THE  MISSISSIPPI. 

Arkansas  were  also  placed  under  Grant's  orders,  and  were 
assigned  to  McClernand's  corps.  A  brigade  under  Ewing, 
just  arrived  from  the  north,  was  sent  forward  to  Sherman. 

McClernand's  and  Sherman's  corps  meantime  moved  from 
the  mouth  of  the  Arkansas  to  Young's  Point,  oj)posite  Yicks- 
burg,  with  instructions  to  cut  a  canal  across  the  peninsula. 
Grant  had  visited  these  troops  at  Napoleon  on  January  17th, 
and  then  returned  to  Memphis  to  hasten  the  movements  of 
McPherson's  corps,  and  to  give  orders  for  the  guidance  of 
the  troops  along  the  Memphis  and  Charleston  Railroad. 
From  Memphis  on  January  20th  he  reported  to  Halleck  con- 
cerning the  condition  of  affairs  in  his  department  and  his 
plans  for  the  future.  From  his  conversation  at  Napoleon 
with  Porter,  McClernand,  and  Sherman,  he  had  formed  the 
opinion  that  the  work  of  reducing  Yicksburg  was  one  of  time 
and  would  require  a  large  force  in  the  final  struggle.  His 
first  inclination  would  have  been  to  strike  across  the  low 
lands  of  the  Yazoo  Delta  from  Milliken's  Bend,  and  come  to 
the  Yazoo  above  Haines's  Bluffs,  thus  turning  the  right  flank 
of  the  Confederate  position ;  but  this  plan  was  out  of  the 
question  at  the  present  time,  for  the  low  lands  in  the  Delta 
were  all  under  water.  He  therefore  considered  it  necessary 
to  get  below  the  city  in  order  to  use  his  troops  effectively, 
and  as  the  best  means  of  accomplishing  this  he  proposed  to 
cut  a  canal  across  the  peninsula  opposite  Yicksburg,  but  in- 
stead of  following  the  line  of  Williams's  canal,  he  intended  to 
start  the  head  of  it  higher  up  stream  at  a  point  where  the 
current  impinged  with  more  velocity,  and  to  have  the  lower 
end  of  it  debouch  below  the  bluffs  at  Yicksburg,  so  that  the 
canal  should  not  be  enfiladed  by  the  batteries.  By  the  aid 
of  this  canal  he  expected  to  go  past  Yicksburg  and  land  on 
the  east  bank  of  the  Mississippi. 

All  this  was  written  bv  Grant  before  he  had  ever  been  at 


BAYOU  EXPEDITIONS.  93 

Vicksburg.  The  canal  scheme  seemed  feasible  from  what 
he  had  heard,  and  the  authorities  in  Washington  approved 
highly  of  it.  Halleck  telegraphed  back  to  pay  particular 
attention  to  the  canal,  for  the  President  attached  much  im- 
portance to  it.  Grant's  views  of  the  value  of  the  canal, 
however,  changed  very  quickly  after  his  arrival  on  the 
ground. 

In  this  same  report  of  January  20th  he  announced  his  in- 
tention to  command  in  person  the  troops  on  the  river,  un- 
less otherwise  directed.  After  remaining  a  week  longer  at 
Memphis,  and  receiving  no  orders  to  the  contrary,  he  left 
for  Vicksburg  and  arrived  there  on  the  29th,  assuming  com- 
mand on  the  30th.  McClernand  protested  vigorously 
against  this,  but  Grant  had  ample  warrant  for  his  action 
and  merely  forwarded  his  protest  to  Washington,  whence 
nothing  more  was  heard  of  it.  On  his  arrival  at  Young's 
Point,  Grant  found  the  15th  Corps  stretched  across  the  penin- 
sula, working  hard  at  the  canal,  and  its  right  flank  resting 
on  the  river  below  Vicksburg ;  the  13th  Corps  and  one  divi- 
sion of  the  17th  were  on  the  left  of  the  15th.  Porter  was 
present  with  a  fleet  of  gun-boats.  Upon  examining  the  line 
of  the  canal  Grant  "  lost  all  faith  in  its  ever  leading  to  any 
practical  results."  It  was  on  the  same  line  that  had  been 
previously  excavated,  except  that  its  upper  end  had  been 
slightly  deflected  in  the  hope  of  catching  the  current.  It 
was  "  at  right  angles  with  the  thread  of  the  current  at  both 
ends,  and  both  ends  were  in  an  eddy,  the  lower  one  coming 
out  on  the  bluffs  completely  commanding  it.  Warrenton,  a 
few  miles  below,  was  capable  of  as  strong  defence  as  Vicks- 
burg," and  the  enemy  had  turned  his  attention  to  that  point. 
He  therefore  ordered  other  routes  to  be  prospected,  although 
the  troops  were  still  kept  employed  on  the  canal,  as  it  was 
not  yet  considered  advisable  to  abandon  it  entirely.     The 


94  THE  MISSISSIPPI. 

other  routes  were,1  first  by  way  of  Yazoo  Pass  (nearly  oppo- 
site Helena)  into  the  Colclwater,  Tallahatchie,  and  Yazoo 
Kivers,  so  as  to  get  at  the  enemy's  rear  beyond  his  right 
flank  at  Haines'  Bluff;  and  second  by  way  of  Lake  Provi- 
dence, on  the  Louisiana  shore  sixty  miles  above  Vicksburg, 
into  Bayou  Macon,  the  Tensas,  Washita,  Bed,  and  Mississippi 
Rivers,  by  which  the  enemy's  rear  might  be  reached  beyond 
his  left  flank  at  Warrenton. 

It  will  be  seen  that  Grant's  army  was  in  the  low  bottom 
lands  of  the  Mississippi,  the  roads  of  which  were  submerged 
in  places  to  such  an  extent  as  to  prevent  all  movements  over 
them.  Vicksburg,  in  his  front,  was  unassailable,  and  the 
problem  was  to  turn  its  flanks  by  means  of  canals,  creeks, 
and  bayous.  By  the  Vicksburg  Canal  and  the  Lake  Provi- 
dence route  it  was  intended  to  turn  the  enemy's  left  flank ; 
by  the  Yazoo  Pass  route  and  a  route  subsequently  attempted 
through  Steele's  Bayou  it  was  intended  to  turn  his  right 
flank.  The  efforts  of  the  army  throughout  the  months  of 
February  and  March  were  directed  with  unremitting  and  as- 
siduous labor  to  these  flanking  projects.  They  will  be  de- 
scribed in  turn. 

The  work  on  the  canal  was  prosecuted,  mainly  by  Sher- 
man's corps,  from  January  22d  to  March  7th.  Dredge-boats 
were  brought  to  assist  the  labors  of  the  troops,  and  it  was 
planned  to  excavate  a  canal  sixty  feet  wide  and  nine  feet 
deep.  The  excavation  was  nearly  completed  when,  on 
March  7th,  the  river  rose  suddenly,  broke  down  the  barrier 
at  the  upper  end,  and  flooded  the  whole  peninsula,  driving 
the  troops  on  to  the  levee  to  escape  drowning.  The  direc- 
tion of  the  canal  was  such,  however,  that  this  body  of  water 
simply  flooded  its  banks,  but  produced  no   scour  through 

1  See  map  on  page  57. 


BAYOU  EXPEDITIONS.  95 

it.  After  this,  work  was  continued  for  about  two  weeks  by 
the  dredge-boats,  but  the  Warrenton  batteries  soon  got  the 
range  of  the  latter  so  accurately,  that  they  were  driven  off, 
and  work  on  the  canal  was  then  abandoned.  The  canal 
scheme  was  a  failure. 

It  is  a  most  singular  fact  that  the  project  upon  which 
such  a  vast  amount  of  labor  was  unavailingly  expended  in 
the  midst  of  the  war,  has  since  been  substantially  accom- 
plished by  nature,  at  a  time  when  it  was  not  desired,  and  in 
a  manner  which  has  caused  great  disaster,  and  threatens  ab- 
solute destruction  to  the  town  of  Vicksburg.  "Grant's 
Canal "  can  still  be  traced  in  the  low  ground  opposite  Vicks- 
burg, in  a  narrow  ditch,  with  two  or  three  feet  of  stagnant 
water;  while  the  Mississippi  flows  through  the  peninsula, 
just  south  of  the  former  railway  terminus  called  De  Soto,  in 
a  channel  a  mile  wide,  and  at  times  one  hundred  feet  deep, 
leaving  Vicksburg  confronted  at  low  water  by  a  bar  of  mud, 
completely  cutting  off  all  access  to  the  river.  For  several 
years  after  the  war,  the  current  gradually  cut  away  the 
shore  of  the  peninsula  near  De  Soto,  until  it  was  finally  less 
than  one  hundred  yards  in  width  on  either  side  of  the  rail- 
road embankment.  On  the  afternoon  of  April  27,  1876,  this 
embankment  gave  way,  and  the  water  broke  through  the 
peninsula;  the  next  morning  a  steamboat  passed  through 
the  break,  and  the  next  year  the  break  was  the  main  channel. 
The  result  has  indicated  the  point  "where  the  current  im- 
pinged most  strongly,"  and  where  the  canal  should  have 
been  located  to  insure  success ;  but  it  was  a  point  where 
the  Confederate  batteries  had  such  complete  control  in  1863 
that  no  working  party  could  have  lived  under  them  for  a 
moment,  nor  could  any  transport  have  passed  through  had 
the  canal  been  completed. 

The  Lake  Providence  project  seemed  at  first  to  be  more 


96  THE  MISSISSIPPI. 

promising.  It  would  have  been  a  long  and  tedious  route, 
had  it  ever  been  used,  as  the  distance  from  Lake  Providence 
to  the  mouth  of  Red  River  is  over  200  miles,  and  from  there 
back  to  Vicksburg  by  the  Mississippi,  150  miles  more  ;  but 
it  might  have  been  useful  in  sending  reinforcements  to 
Banks,  had  such  a  movement  proved  feasible  or  advisable. 
With  the  navigation  of  the  Red,  Washita,  and  Tensas  Rivers 
there  was  no  difficulty,  nor  did  Bayou  Macon  offer  any  seri- 
ous obstacle  to  the  passage  of  boats.  But  between  Bayou 
Macon  and  Lake  Providence — a  distance  of  about  six  miles 
— the  only  connection  was  by  a  small  stream  known  as  Bayou 
Baxter,  which,  about  midway  of  its  course,  spread  out  into 
a  broad  cypress  swamp  in  which  the  stream  was  lost.  The 
operations  necessary  to  make  this  route  navigable  were  to 
clear  a  channel  through  this  swamp,  to  dig  up  the  stumps 
of  trees  with  which  it  was  filled,  and  to  cut  a  hole  in  the 
levee  opposite  Lake  Providence. 

Upon  his  arrival  at  Young's  Point,  Grant  had  immediately 
sent  an  officer  to  reconnoitre  this  route,  a  brigade  of  McAr- 
thur's  division  of  McPherson's  corps  accompanying  him. 
His  report  being  favorable  to  the  success  of  the  undertaking, 
Grant  went  to  Lake  Providence  in  person  on  February  5th, 
and  from  there  sent  orders  to  McPherson  at  Memphis  to 
bring  his  entire  corps  to  the  same  point  and  prosecute  this 
work  vigorously.  Lack  of  transports,  however,  delayed  Mc- 
Pherson for  nearly  three  weeks,  and  on  his  arrival  he  found 
the  work  of  clearing  a  channel  through  the  swamp  much 
more  serious  than  had  been  anticipated,  the  cutting  of 
stumps  below  the  surface  of  the  water  being  very  difficult  in 
the  absence  of  proper  tools.  McPherson  continued  to  work 
at  it  throughout  the  month  of  March.  The  levee  was  cut 
on  March  18th,  and  the  water  rushed  through  Bayou  Baxter, 
giving  a  very  good  channel  with  two  exceptions,  viz. :  there 


BAYOU   EXPEDITIONS.  97 

were  twelve  or  fifteen  stumps  under  water  which  could  only 
be  cut  by  a  sawing  machine,  and  there  was  a  shoal  at  the 
point  where  Bayou  Baxter  entered  Bayou  Macon,  which 
could  be  removed  in  a  few  days  by  dredging.  With  these 
obstacles  removed  the  route  would  be  navigable  for  boats 
having  a  draught  of  six  feet.  McPherson  so  reported  at  the 
end  of  March,  but  by  this  time  Grant  had  formed  plans  for 
moving  south  from  Milliken's  Bend  by  land.  The  Lake 
Providence  scheme  was  thus  of  no  avail. 

The  Yazoo  Pass  project  was  the  most  favorable  of  all,  and 
for  a  time  gave  promise  of  definite  results.  Nearly  opposite 
Helena  the  distance  from  the  Mississippi  to  the  Coldwater 
is  only  ten  miles  in  a  straight  line,  and  along  this  line  runs 
a  winding  bayou  called  the  Yazoo  Pass.  The  Coldwater, 
Tallahatchie,  and  Yazoo  Rivers  are  all  navigable  for  light- 
draught  boats,  and  through  this  Pass  in  former  times  was 
the  direct  route  from  Memphis  to  Yazoo  City.  The  bottom 
lands  being,  however,  lower  than  the  surface  of  the  Missis- 
sippi in  high  water,  some  years  prior  to  the  war  a  substan- 
tial levee,  nearly  100  feet  thick  and  18  feet  high,  had 
been  built  across  the  Yazoo  Pass  in  order  to  reclaim  the 
overflowed  land.  This  destroyed  the  use  of  this  Pass  as 
a  navigable  route;  it  was  now  desired  to  restore  it,  and 
the  problem  was  simply  to  cut  the  levee  and  allow  the 
water  to  resume  its  former  course.  Col.  Wilson  of  Grant's 
staff  had  been  sent  from  Young's  Point  on  February  1st  to 
cut  the  levee,  and  Gen.  Gorman,  commanding  at  Helena, 
Was  instructed  to  lend  him  any  assistance  required.  The 
levee  was  cut  by  exploding  a  mine  in  it  on  February  3d,  and 
the  water  immediately  rushed  through  in  a  torrent. 

On  the  7th  the  current  had  so  far  subsided  that  a  gun- 
boat was  able  to  enter  the  Pass,  when  it  was  discovered  that 
although  the  channel  was  deep  enough  it-  was  greatly  ob- 
VIII.  -5 


98  THE  MISSISSIPPI. 

structed  by  overhanging  trees,  large  numbers  of  which  had 
been  felled  by  the  Confederates  within  the  last  few  days. 
The  Pass  as  well  as  the  Coldwater  ran  through  a  dense  for- 
est, and  it  required  but  a  few  minutes'  labor  to  cut  down 
trees,  forming  obstructions  which  could  not  be  removed  in 
several  days.  Additional  troops  were  at  once  brought  over 
from  Helena  and  set  to  work  removing  these  obstructions, 
but  it  was  not  until  the  21st  that  they  were  sufficiently 
removed  to  allow  vessels  to  reach  the  Coldwater.  Mean- 
while, on  receiving  favorable  reports  from  Col.  Wilson,  Grant 
had  issued  orders  on  February  15th,  to  the  commanding 
officer  at  Helena  to  send  Boss'  division  through  the  Pass 
into  the  Coldwater,  Tallahatchie,  and  Yazoo  Bivers,  to  test 
its  availability  for  the  movement  of  a  large  body,  and  to 
destroy  the  railroad  bridges  on  the  Yallabusha  at  Gre- 
nada. Porter  had  sent  four  light-draught  gunboats,  two 
iron-clads,  and  one  ram  to  accompany  the  troops,  protect 
the  transports,  and  destroy  any  Confederate  boats  on  the 
rivers.  For  lack  of  proper  boats  Boss  did  not  leave  Helena 
until  the  23d.  It  required  six  days  for  his  men  to  force 
their  way  through  the  Pass,  but  they  entered  the  Coldwater, 
with  boats  more  or  less  damaged,  on  March  2d.  By  this 
time  Grant  had  received  a  further  report  from  Wilson, 
dated  February  24th,  announcing  the  Pass  as  open,  and 
navigable  for  vessels  under  180  feet  in  length  and  of  pro- 
portionate beam.  Grant  thereupon  determined  to  attempt 
to  utilize  this  route  for  a  large  force,  possibly  his  entire 
army,  in  order  to  effect  a  landing  above  Haines'  Bluff; 
and  on  March  5th  he  sent  orders  to  McPherson,  who  was 
nearest  to  the  Pass,  to  move  his  whole  corps  in  that  direc- 
tion as  soon  as  transports  could  be  obtained.  Quinby's  di- 
vision, just  arrived  at  Lake  Providence  from  Memphis  but 
not  yet  disembarked,  was  to  return  at  once  to  Yazoo  Pass ; 


BAYOU  EXPEDITIONS.  99 

the  large  transports  were  then  to  be  sent  back  to  bring 
Logan's  division  and  subsequently  McArthur's ;  and  J.  E. 
Smith's  division,  then  ready  to  embark  at  Memphis,  was  to 
be  stopped  at  Yazoo  Pass.  This  would  give  McPherson  five 
divisions,  or  about  30,000  men,  with  which  he  was  to  make 
his  way  down  the  Yazoo  and  effect  a  lodgment  at  Yazoo 
City.  Simultaneously  a  cavalry  division  was  to  move  east 
from  Helena,  and  another,  from  Hurlbut's  command,  south 
from  La  Grange,  to  break  up  the  enemy's  communications 
east  and  south  of  Grenada. 

While  these  preparations  had  been  making  by  the  Union 
army  and  navy,  the  Confederates  had  been  by  no  means  idle. 
Their  pickets  and  spies  along  the  river  gave  them  prompt 
and  accurate  information  of  each  departure  of  troops  from 
Memphis,  and  of  the  movements  of  transports  from  point  to 
point.  When  McClernand  returned  to  Young's  Point,  on 
January  22d,  they  feared  an  attack  upon  Warrenton,  and 
made  preparations  to  meet  it.  But  they  were  equally  vigi- 
lant in  regard  to  the  Yazoo.  As  early  as  January  23d,  troops 
were  sent  from  Grenada  to  obstruct  the  Yazoo  Pass;  this 
was  a  week  before  Grant  had  even  thought  of  this  route. 
At  Haines'  Bluff,  a  raft,  which  had  already  been  con- 
structed, was  considerably  enlarged  and  strengthened;  de- 
tachments were  also  sent  to  cut  the  levees  above  Young's 
Point,  and  flood  the  country  where  McClernand's  troops 
were  bivouacked.  Nothing  was  left  undone  to  obstruct  and 
hinder  the  enemy's  approach.  Not  only  Jefferson  Davis, 
but  several  of  Pemberton's  subordinate  commanders  were 
native  Mississippians,  personally  familiar  with  the  country 
they  were  defending,  and  their  knowledge  enabled  them  to 
anticipate  any  possible  plans  of  the  Union  commander. 

At  the  same  time  considerable  changes  were  made  in  the 
position  of  the  Confederate  troops,  which  about  this  time 


100  THE  MISSISSIPPI. 

were  disposed  as  follows,  viz.,  at  or  near  Yicksbnrg,  about 
25,000  men  (of  whom  20,856  were  reported  fit  for  duty), 
under  Stevenson,  guarding  the  defences  from  Haines'  Bluff 
on  the  right  to  Warrenton  on  the  left ;  at  Grenada,  about 
20,000  men  (15,590  for  duty),  under  Loring,  charged  with 
guarding  the  Yazoo ;  at  Jackson  and  other  points  were  de- 
tachments not  brigaded,  amounting  in  all  to  perhaps  4,000 
men,  making  a  total  effective  force  of  about  40,000  men. 
Johnston  had  returned  to  Chattanooga  during  the  latter  part 
of  January,  but  still  exercised  a  general  supervision  over 
affairs  on  the  Mississippi.  Pemberton  kept  his  headquarters 
at  Jackson,  whence  he  could  go  to  Yicksburg  or  Grenada,  as 
required,  in  a  few  hours  by  train.  Yan  Dom,  with  all  the 
effective  cavalry,  amounting  to  about  6,000  men,  had  been 
ordered  to  report  to  Bragg  in  Tennessee,  and  during  the 
month  of  February  he  marched  past  the  Union  left  at  Cor- 
inth to  Columbia,  Tenn. 

Constant  reports  were  received  by  Pemberton  of  the  prog- 
ress of  the  Federal  troops  and  boats  in  cutting  the  levee  at 
Yazoo  Pass,  and  removing  the  obstructions  in  the  Pass.  As 
soon  as  he  heard  that  boats  had  entered  the  Coldwater,  he 
sent  orders  to  Loring,  at  Grenada,  to  proceed  at  once  to  the 
mouth  of  the  Yallabusha,  taking  enough  troops  with  him  to 
defend  that  point.  A  few  heavy  guns  were  sent  by  boat  up 
the  Yazoo  to  assist  him  in  the  defence.  Loring  reached 
Greenwood  with  two  regiments  on  February  21st,  and  imme- 
diately approved  the  selection,  just  made  by  an  engineer 
officer,  of  a  site  for  a  fortification  at  a  point  about  five 
miles  below  the  mouth  of  the  Yallabusha.  At  this  point, 
the  Tallahatchie  and  Yazoo  Rivers  are  only  500  yards  apart, 
and  by  holding  the  narrow  neck  of  land  between  them,  all 
passage  down  the  Tallahatchie  would  be  prevented,  while 
the  Yazoo   and  Yallabusha   Bivers  remained  open   for  the 


BAYOU  EXPEDITIONS.  101 

Confederate  boats  carrying  supplies  to  Grenada.  The  con- 
struction of  a  line  of  works,  called  Fort  Pemberton,  was  at 
once  begun,  and  a  raft  was  prepared  to  block  the  navigation 
of  the  Tallahatchie.  Eeinforcements  and  artillery  also  ar- 
rived, and  on  March  10th  the  earth-and-cotton  parapets 
were  in  a  good  state  of  defence,  mounting  eight  guns,  and 
defended  by  about  2,000  men. 

The  Union  gunboats  and  transports  arrived  in  front  of 
this  position  on  the  11th.  The  troops  consisted  only  of 
Boss'  division,  numbering  about  4,000  men,  it  having 
been  impossible  to  obtain  transports  of  a  proper  size  to 
convey  any  of  McPherson's  corps.  The  journey  through 
the  Pass  and  down  the  Coldwater  and  Tallahatchie  had 
been  one  of  extraordinary  difficulty,  in  consequence  of  the 
overhanging  trees  and  other  obstructions  in  the  narrow 
channel,  and  the  fleet  moved  very  slowly — only  a  few  miles 
a  day.  All  opportunity  for  surprise  was  thus  lost.  The 
ground  in  front  of  Fort  Pemberton  was  overflowed  so  that 
the  troops  could  not  approach  the  fort.  It  could  only  be 
attacked  by  the  navy,  and  the  gunboats  moved  forward  and 
opened  tire  on  the  11th.  A  few  casualties  were  sustained 
on  either  side.  On  the  following  day  a  battery  was  con- 
structed on  a  piece  of  dry  land,  about  800  yards  from 
the  fort,  and,  on  the  13th,  the  bombardment  was  renewed. 
The  fleet  suffered  considerable  injury,  and  inflicted  almost 
none  upon  the  fort;  it  thus  became  evident  that  further 
progress  on  the  Yazoo  expedition  was  at  an  end,  and  in  a 
few  days  it  started  back  up  the  Tallahatchie.  On  the  21st, 
about  midway  between  Fort  Pemberton  and  the  mouth  of 
the  Coldwater,  it  was  met  by  Quinby  with  one  brigade  of 
his  division.  This  officer  had  arrived  at  Yazoo  Pass  from 
Lake  Providence  on  the  8th,  and  had  disembarked  his  divi- 
sion on  the  shore  near  Helena,   nearly  all   his   transports 


102  THE  MISSISSIPPI. 

being  too  large  to  enter  the  pass.  After  waiting  here  six 
days  and  despairing  of  receiving  a  sufficient  number  of 
small  boats  for  his  whole  division,  he  had  finally  taken  the 
few  boats  he  had  with  him  which  were  suitable  for  navigating 
the  Pass,  and  had  started  forward  on  the  14th  with  one  bri- 
gade. He  encountered  the  same  difficulties  that  had  delayed 
Eoss,  and  his  boats  were  equally  injured  in  this  extraordinary 
navigation.  On  meeting  Eoss,  Quinby  assumed  command, 
being  the  senior  officer,  and  at  once  turned  the  whole  expe- 
dition back  again  to  Fort  Pemberton,  arriving  there  on  the 
23d.  A  feeble  tire  was  opened  by  the  gunboats  on  the  same 
afternoon,  but  nothing  was  accomplished  by  it.  Quinby 
had  hoped  to  find  a  landing-place  for  his  troops  while  his 
transports  were  sent  back  for  the  rest  of  his  division,  but  in 
this  he  was  disappointed.  There  was  no  ground  suitable 
for  camping  or  moving  any  large  body  of  men.  He  then 
formed  a  plan  to  move  around  the  east  side  of  Fort  Pember- 
ton, crossing  the  Yallabusha  on  a  pontoon  bridge,  and  thus 
cutting  the  communications  of  the  fort  and  compelling  its 
surrender.  He  sent  a  boat  back  to  Helena  on  the  27th  to 
bring  the  bridge  materials,  but  it  was  met  on  the  way,  about 
April  1st,  by  another  boat  bringing  an  order  to  abandon 
the  whole  expedition  and  return  to  the  Mississippi  as 
quickly  as  possible.  Grant  had  found  that  it  would  be 
impossible  to  procure  the  necessary  number  of  light-draught 
boats  to  carry  a  large  force  into  the  Yazoo  by  this  route, 
and  had  notified  McPherson,  about  the  middle  of  March, 
to  send  no  more  troops  after  Quinby.  On  the  28th,  the 
Steele's  Bayou  expedition  having  returned  without  suc- 
cess, Grant  had  determined  to  bring  his  entire  force  to  Mil- 
liken's  Bend,  and  had  sent  orders  to  McPherson  to  recall 
Quinby  at  once.  Quinby's  entire  force  withdrew  from 
Fort  Pemberton  on  April  5th,  and  the  Yazoo  Pass  project 


BAYOU  EXPEDITIONS.  103 

thus  followed  the  fate  of  those  at  the  canal  and  at  Lake 
Providence. 

While  it  had  been  in  progress,  Grant  had  received  infor- 
mation that  the  Confederate  troops  at  Grenada  had  been 
sent  to  Yazoo  City  and  Greenwood,  and  that  these  troops 
were  being  reinforced  by  others  from  Vicksburg.  It  looked 
for  the  moment  as  if  Ross  might  be  surrounded  by  supe- 
rior forces,  his  precarious  line  of  water  communication 
barricaded,  and  his  entire  command  captured  before  as- 
sistance could  reach  him  over  the  same  route  that  he  had 
travelled.  It  therefore  became  necessary  to  take  prompt 
measures  to  relieve  him,  and,  in  reconnoitring  for  this  pur- 
pose, in  company  with  Porter,  Grant  discovered  a  route  by 
which  he  thought  he  could  not  only  relieve  Ross,  but  per- 
haps also  effect  a  landing  for  a  large  body  on  the  Yazoo. 
This  led  to  the  fourth,  and  last,  of  these  abortive  projects, 
which  was  known  as  the  Steele's  Bayou  Expedition. 

The  route  proposed  was  up  the  Yazoo  to  Steele's  Bayou, 
up  that  bayou,  about  forty  miles,  to  a  small  cross  creek, 
known  as  Black  Bayou,  through  that  into  Deer  Creek,  and 
up  Deer  Creek,  about  thirty  miles,  to  another  cross  creek, 
called  Rolling  Fork,  through  that  to  a  comparatively  large 
stream,  called  the  Sunflower,  and  thence,  down  that  stream, 
about  fifty  miles,  coming  into  the  Yazoo  about  midway  be- 
tween Haines'  Bluff  and  Yazoo  City.  The  entire  distance 
from  Young's  Point  to  Haines'  Bluff  by  this  route  would 
have  been  nearly  200  miles.  Porter  and  Grant  recon- 
noitred the  route  as  far  as  Black  Bayou,  and  were  con- 
vinced that  with  some  slight  cutting  of  trees,  it  would  be 
navigable  for  any  class  of  river  steamers.  There  wras  a 
depth  of  five  fathoms  of  water  in  Steele's  Bayou.  But  the 
difficulties  of  the  route  were  in  the  two  cross  bayous,  Black 
and  Rolling  Fork,  where  the  channel  was  not  wide  enough 


104  THE  MISSISSIPPI. 

for  a  boat  to  turn,  and  where  axemen  could  quickly  barri- 
cade the  channel  by  felling  trees  across  it.  It  was  hoped, 
however,  to  get  into  the  Sunflower  before  the  Confederates 
were  aware  of  their  approach.  Once  in  that  stream  nothing 
could  prevent  the  descent  of  the  gunboats. 

On  his  return  from  the  reconnoissance,  March  16th,  Grant 
ordered  Sherman  to  take  a  part  of  his  corps  and  thoroughly 
reconnoitre  this  route,  with  reference  to  its  adaptability  for 
moving  a  large  force.  Porter  was  to  accompany  him  with  a 
fleet  of  five  iron-clads,  four  mortar-boats,  and  two  tugs. 
Sherman  immediately  put  one  regiment,  the  8th  Mis- 
souri, many  of  whose  men  were  boatmen,  on  board  of  two 
boats,  which  were  placed  at  his  disposition,  and  sent  them 
into  Steele's  Bayou  to  remove  trees,  etc.,  while  he  ordered 
three  regiments  of  Stuart's  division  to  go  up  the  Missis- 
sippi, and  disembark  at  a  point  above  Milliken's  Bend, 
where  the  Mississippi  and  Steele's  Bayou  are  only  a  mile 
apart.  The  next  day,  17th,  Sherman  started  after  Porter  on  a 
tug,  and  overtook  him  just  after  he  had  passed  through  Black 
Bayou.  The  gunboats  had  been  greatly  delayed  at  this 
point  by  trees,  drift-wood,  etc.,  and  had  made  but  four  miles 
in  twenty-four  hours.  Porter  continued  his  movement,  and 
Sherman  returned  to  hasten  forward  his  troops ;  which  were 
brought  up  in  relays  by  the  two  boats  as  far  as  Black  Bayou, 
and  then  disembarked  to  move  forward  by  land.  Porter 
proceeded  at  the  rate  of  about  half  a  mile  an  hour  during 
the  17th  and  18th,  and  at  evening  of  the  latter  day  was 
within  a  few  miles  of  the  Piolling  Fork.  No  enemy  had  yet 
been  seen,  but  on  resuming  work  on  the  19th,  smoke  was 
seen  through  the  woods  in  the  direction  of  the  Sunflower, 
and  soon  afterward  shells  began  falling  from  the  same  direc- 
tion. Porter  landed  a  force  of  seamen  to  prevent  any  ad- 
vance against  him,  but  they  were  not  strong  enough  for  the 


BAYOU  EXPEDITIONS.  105 

purpose,  and  were  obliged  to  re-embark  that  evening.  Dur- 
ing that  day  and  the  next  sharpshooters  swarmed  through 
the  woods,  picking  off  any  men  who  showed  themselves  on 
the  boats  or  attempted  to  remove  obstructions,  cutting  down 
trees  in  front  and  in  rear  of  the  ships,  and  sinking  a  coal- 
barge  to  obstruct  the  channel.  Porter's  situation  now  be- 
came most  critical.  The  Confederates  had  heard  of  the  ex- 
pedition the  day  after  its  departure,  and  had  immediately 
dispatched  a  brigade  of  infantry,  and  several  pieces  of  artil- 
lery from  Haines'  Bluff  up  the  Sunflower.  These  had  ar- 
rived at  the  junction  of  the  Sunflower  and  Rolling  Fork, 
erected  a  battery  there,  and  were  preparing  to  pass  in  rear 
of  Porter,  completely  obstruct  the  channel,  and  capture  his 
entire  force.  Porter  realized  his  situation,  and  was  even 
meditating  the  destruction  of  his  vessels,  and  the  escape  of 
his  men  through  the  swamps  to  the  Mississippi ;  but  before 
doing  this  he  sent  a  negro  back  through  the  swamp  to  in- 
form Sherman  of  his  critical  condition,  and  to  ask  the  assist- 
ance of  his  troops  at  the  earliest  possible  moment.  Sher- 
man received  the  message  during  the  night,  and  immediately 
sent  forward  the  men  with  him,  about  800  in  number,  and 
then  went  back  alone  in  a  canoe  to  meet  the  remainder  and 
hurry  them  forward.  He  met  the  latter  on  boats  during 
the  same  night,  and  the  boats  immediately  increased  their 
speed,  and  came  crashing  forward  through  the  trees,  regard- 
less of  damages,  until  finally  their  progress  was  arrested 
in  Black  Bayou.  Here  Sherman  disembarked  his  men  and 
pushed  forward  by  land,  picking  his  way  through  the  cane- 
brake  by  lighting  candles.  Porter  was  already  in  retreat  on 
the  21st,  when  the  advance  column  came  to  his  relief ;  Sher- 
man, with  the  second  column,  was  but  a  few  miles  in  rear, 
when  at  noon  of  that  day  he  came  in  contact  with  a  force  of 
Confederates,  who  retreated  after  a  short  skirmish.  The 
5* 


10G  THE  MISSISSIPPI. 

latter  had  passed  around  Porter's  boats,  and  between  Sher- 
man's columns,  and  were  preparing  to  permanently  block 
the  channel,  in  accordance  with  the  plan  already  mentioned, 
when  Sherman  arrived  just  in  time  to  prevent  it.  Sherman 
now  went  forward  to  meet  Porter,  from  whom  he  learned 
the  state  of  affairs,  and  the  hopelessness  of  any  further 
efforts.  They  then  turned  back ;  but  the  gunboats  had  to 
back  out,  stern  foremost,  all  the  way  to  Steele's  Bayou — 
thirty  miles — and  they  were  three  days  in  passing  over  this 
distance.  Sherman's  troops  finally  regained  their  camps  op- 
posite Vicksburg  on  the  27th. 

Grant  was  greatly  disappointed  at  the  failure  of  this  his 
fourth  effort  to  find  some  way  to  reach  solid  ground  on  the 
flanks  of  the  Vicksburg  position.  Every  possible  route  by 
bayous  and  creeks  in  the  whole  bottom  land  between  Vicks- 
burg and  Memphis  had  now  been  tried,  and  all  without  suc- 
cess. He  therefore  issued  orders  to  McClernand  on  March 
29th  to  move  toward  the  little  hamlets  of  Richmond  and 
New  Carthage,  with  a  view  to  making  his  way  to  the  Missis- 
sippi at  some  point  below  the  batteries  at  Warrenton  and 
Grand  Gulf,  which  formed  the  left  flank  of  the  enemy's 
position  at  Vicksburg.  At  the  same  time  he  addressed  a 
letter  to  Porter,  stating  the  nature  of  this  movement,  and 
suggesting  that  the  gunboats  be  sent  past  the  batteries  at 
Vicksburg  to  act  against  those  at  Grand  Gulf,  and  cover  a 
landing  in  that  vicinity.  Porter  replied  at  once,  expressing 
his  entire  willingness  to  co-operate  in  any  possible  manner, 
but  stating  that  once  the  gunboats  were  below  Vicksburg  it 
would  be  impossible  for  them  to  return.  In  that  case  there 
would  not  be  enough  vessels  left  to  protect  a  landing  on  the 
Yazoo  near  Haines'  Bluff,  should  such  a  movement  become 
desirable.  Before  abandoning  all  efforts,  therefore,  to  reach 
hard  ground  by  way  of  the  Yazoo,  Grant  determined  to  make 


BAYOU   EXPEDITIONS.  107 

a  reconnoissance  of  the  position  at  Haines'  Bluff,  which  he 
did  on  a  gunboat  in  company  with  Porter  and  Sherman  on 
April  1st.  The  result  of  this  reconnoissance  was  thus  stated 
by  Grant,  in  a  letter  to  Porter  dated  April  2d  :  "  I  am  satis- 
fied that  an  attack  upon  Haines'  Bluff  would  be  attended 
with  immense  sacrifice  of  life,  if  not  defeat.  This,  then, 
closes  out  the  last  hope  of  turning  the  enemy  by  the  right. 
.  .  .  Having,  then,  fully  determined  upon  operating  from 
New  Carthage,  either  by  the  way  of  Grand  Gulf  or  "Warren- 
ton  .  .  I  renew  my  request  to  prepare  for  running  the 
blockade  at  as  early  a  day  as  possible." 

Grant  was  now  at  the  turning-point,  not  only  of  this  cam- 
paign but  of  his  whole  career.  He  had  not  then  the  world- 
renowned  fame  with  which  we  have  so  long  been  accus- 
tomed to  associate  his  name  ;  at  that  time  he  occupied  a  po- 
sition in  popular  estimation  similar  to  that  held  by  Hooker, 
Rosecrans,  and  Banks,  who  then  commanded  the  other  prin- 
cipal armies,  and  like  them  he  was  on  trial.  He  had  gained 
a  great  victory  at  Fort  Donelson,  and  he  had  fought  a  most 
desperate  battle,  which  was  not  a  defeat  yet  hardly  a  victory, 
at  Shiloh  in  the  previous  year.  But  for  twelve  months  he 
had  apparently  done  nothing,  the  defence  of  the  Memphis 
and  Charleston  Railroad  and  its  attendant  battles  of  Iuka 
and  Corinth  having  made  but  little  impression  on  the  pub- 
lic mind.  For  the  last  three  months  his  army  had  been  lost 
to  sight  in  the  overflowed  swamps  of  the  Mississippi,  whence 
came  rumors  of  abortive  expeditions,  camp  fevers,  and  dis- 
satisfaction. Many  people  were  beginning  to  believe  that 
Grant  belonged  to  the  same  dreary  class  of  failures  as  Mc- 
Clellan,  Burnside,  Fremont,  and  Buell,  and  they  importuned 
the  President  to  relieve  him.  It  was  a  gloomy  period.  The 
war  had  been  in  progress  for  two  full  years,  and  as  yet  the 
North  had  gained  no  really  decisive  victory  except  at  Fort 


108  THE  MISSISSIPPI. 

Donelson.  During  the  preceding  summer  the  Army  of  the 
Potomac  had  been  driven  back  into  Maryland,  and  the  Army 
of  the  Cumberland  to  the  Ohio  River.  Both  armies  had  par- 
tially regained  their  ground,  and  then  everything  had  come 
to  a  standstill  for  months;  in  trying  to  break  which  the 
•  Army  of  the  Potomac  had  only  incurred  renewed  defeat  and 
slaughter  at  Fredericksburg  and  Chancellorsville.  Such 
was  the  general  situation,  and  in  Grant's  particular  opera- 
tions the  prospect  was  as  unpromising  as  eveiywhere  else. 
He  was  on  a  wrong  trail — that  was  evident  to  every  one  ;  and 
it  would  not  have  been  difficult  to  prove  that  the  responsi- 
bility for  it  did  not  rest  upon  Grant.  But  Grant's  mind  did 
not  run  in  the  direction  of  arguing  responsibility  upon  other 
people's  shoulders.  He  was  accustomed  to  take  things  as 
they  were  and  to  devote  his  whole  energies  to  making  the 
best  of  them.  He  had  now  for  two  months  tried  every  con- 
ceivable plan  for  crossing  the  low  lands  of  the  Yazoo  Delta 
and  reaching  the  high  ground  beyond  the  enemy's  right 
flank.  They  had  all  failed.  What  should  now  be  done? 
Three  plans  only  were  possible.  First,  to  assault  the  enemy's 
batteries.  Second,  to  go  back  to  Memphis  and  recommence 
a  campaign  along  the  Mississippi  Central  Railroad.  Third, 
to  find  a  way  through  the  swamps  opposite  Vicksburg,  cross 
the  Mississippi  near  Grand  Gulf,  and  operate  against  the 
rear  of  Vicksburg,  trusting  to  victory  for  supplies. 

The  first  plan  would  lead  to  slaughter  and  almost  certain 
defeat.  The  second  was  the  only  plan  which  could  be  jus- 
tified by  general  military  principles.  It  was  urged  by  Sher- 
man in  a  well-known  letter,  quoted  at  length  in  his  memoirs, 
but  it  was  not  accepted  by  Grant  because  in  this  particular 
instance  those  j^olitical  necessities  which  always  override 
purely  military  reasons  demanded  an  advance  and  forbade 
anything  which  might  have  the  appearance  even  of  turning 


BAYOU  EXPEDITIONS.  109 

back.  The  third  plan  was  full  of  dangers  and  risks ;  lack 
of  success  in  it  meant  little  less  than  complete  destruction. 
If  it  did  succeed,  however,  the  success  would  be  complete 
and  decisive,  and  to  Grant's  mind  the  emergency  seemed  to 
be  one  which  warranted  the  risk,  though  he  was  well  aware 
of  its  desperate  nature,  which  nothing  but  success  would 
ever  justify.  The  third  plan  was  adopted ;  and  from  it  first 
Vicksburg,  and  then  Chattanooga  and  Appomattox  followed 
in  regular  succession. 

The  final  project  thus  determined  upon  was  to  or^en  up  a 
series  of  circuitous  bayous  running  from  Milliken's  Bend, 
and  also  from  the  vicinity  of  Young's  Point  past  Eichmond  to 
New  Carthage,  on  the  west  bank  of  the  Mississippi,  about 
thirty  miles  below  Vicksburg.1  Water  was  to  be  let  into 
this  system  by  cutting  a  canal  from  Duckport  near  Young's 
Point,  and  troops  and  supplies  were  to  be  forwarded  on  flat- 
boats  and  barges,  urgent  requisition  for  which  had  been 
made  on  the  Quartermaster  at  St.  Louis.  A  force  of  at 
least  30,000  men  was  thus  to  be  assembled  at  New  Car- 
thage, and  at  the  same  time  the  gunboats  and  a  number  of 
transports  were  to  be  run  past  the  batteries.  All  being 
assembled  at  New  Carthage  the  troops  were  to  be  embarked 
on  the  transports  and  flat-boats,  and  were  to  attack  Grand 
Gulf,  after  its  batteries  had  been  silenced  by  the  gunboats. 
Once  in  possession  of  Grand  Gulf,  the  whole  army  was  to  be 
brought  over  and  the  campaign  prosecuted  in  rear  of  Vicks- 
burg along  the  Big  Black. 

Orders  were  accordingly  given  to  begin  work  on  the  canal 
at  Duckport,  to  open  the  bayous,  reconnoitre  and  repair 
the  roads  along  them,  make  the  necessary  bridges,  collect 
supplies,  and  bring  McPherson's  corps  and  all  other  avail- 

1  See  Map  facing  page  135. 


110  THE  MISSISSIPPI. 

able  troops  to  Milliken's  Bend.  At  the  same  time  Steele's 
division  of  Sherman's  corps  was  sent  up  the  river  to  Green- 
ville, about  one  hundred  and  fifty  miles  above  Vicksburg, 
where  it  disembarked  and  marched  through  the  country 
along  Deer  Creek  as  far  down  as  Rolling  Fork,  collecting 
subsistence  for  its  own  use,  destroying  all  supplies  of  any 
value  to  the  enemy,  and  distracting  the  latter's  attention 
from  the  main  movement  toward  New  Carthage. 

"While  the  work  was  being  prosecuted  on  the  canal,  Oster- 
haus'  division  of  McClemand's  corps  was  gradually  feeling 
its  way  toward  New  Carthage.  Richmond  was  occupied  on 
March  31st,  and  New  Carthage  on  April  6th.  Osterhaus 
skirmished  on  the  way  with  a  small  detachment  of  cavalry, 
reinforced  on  April  4th  by  three  regiments  of  infantry  from 
Grand  Gulf,  which  did  little  or  nothing  to  retard  their  prog- 
ress. 

Between  April  12th  and  14th,  the  feasibility  of  this  route 
having  been  established,  the  remaining  divisions  of  McCler- 
nand's  corps  took  up  the  march  from  Milliken's  Bend  for  New 
Carthage,  but  owing  to  the  necessity  of  making  and  repair- 
ing roads  through  the  soft,  black  soil,  and  of  constructing  a 
large  number  of  bridges  over  various  minor  bayous,  the 
march  was  so  much  delayed  that  it  was  the  20th  of  April  be- 
fore the  corps  could  be  assembled. 

On  the  night  of  April  16th  the  gunboats  ran  past  the  bat- 
teries of  Vicksburg.  This  was  not  an  untried  experiment. 
On  the  morning  of  February  2d,  the  ram  Queen  of  the  West, 
commanded  by  Col.  Charles  R.  Ellet,  had  run  the  gaunt- 
let in  broad  daylight,  the  intention  to  run  by  just  before 
dawn  having  been  frustrated  by  some  accident  to  the  ma- 
chinery which  caused  a  slight  delay.  This  vessel  was  in  no 
way  armor-plated,  and  her  only  protection  was  found  in 
bales  of  cotton.     She  was  under  fire  for  fifty  minutes  and 


BAYOU  EXPEDITIONS.  HI 

was  struck  twelve  times,  had  one  gun  dismounted  and  de- 
stroyed, and  her  cabin  knocked  to  pieces,  but  she  sustained 
no  damage  impairing  her  efficiency.  On  the  way  she  at- 
tempted to  ram  the  Confederate  vessel  Vicksburg,  lying  at 
the  levee,  but  in  this  she  was  only  partially  successful.  She 
then  proceeded  down  the  Mississippi,  in  company  with  the 
transport  De  Soto,  to  the  mouth  of  Red  River  and  up  that 
river  for  some  distance,  capturing  several  transports  convey- 
ing Confederate  supplies. 

On  the  night  of  February  13th,  the  gunboat  Indianola, 
under  Lieut. -Com.  George  Brown,  also  ran  the  batteries 
with  perfect  success,  and  proceeded  down  the  river  to  assist 
the  Queen  of  the  West.  Just  after  passing  Natchez,  on  Feb- 
ruary 16th,  she  met  a  small  steamboat  carrying  Col.  Ellet 
and  a  portion  of  his  crew.  Ellet  reported  that  the  Queen 
of  the  West  had  engaged  a  Confederate  battery  in  Red  River 
on  the  14th,  and  in  the  midst  of  the  engagement  had  run 
aground  and  been  abandoned,  21  persons  of  her  crew  being 
captured.  With  the  rest  Ellet  had  at  first  escaped  in  the 
De  Soto,  but  this  boat  had  run  into  the  bank  in  a  fog,  and 
broken  off  her  rudder.  He  had  then  set  fire  to  her  and 
abandoned  her,  transferring  his  men  to  the  captured  boat 
New  Era,  and  with  her  making  good  his  escape.  In  the 
same  boat  he  proceeded  up  the  river,  running  past  the  bat- 
teries at  Grand  Gulf,  and  finally  reaching  the  vicinity  of 
Vicksburg. 

The  Indianola  remained  in  the  vicinity  of  Red  River  for  a 
few  days,  and  then  began  to  retrace  her  steps  up  the  river. 
The  Confederates  had  quickly  raised  and  repaired  the  Queen 
of  the  West,  and  with  this  vessel,  the  ram  Webb,  which  had 
been  for  some  time  in  Red  River,  and  two  smaller  boats 
protected  by  cotton — making  a  fleet  of  four  vessels  in  all — 
they  cautiously  followed  the  Indianola  from  point  to  point 


112  THE  MISSISSIPPI. 

1113  the  river,  and,  on  the  night  of  February  24th,  just  after 
passing  Grand  Gulf,  they  steamed  up  rapidly  to  the  attack. 
The  Indianola  was  encumbered  by  coal  barges,  but  imme- 
diately turned  to  meet  them,  and  a  very  severe  engagement 
followed,  lasting  an  hour  and  a  half.  The  Indianola  was 
superior  in  armament  to  all  the  other  vessels  combined,  but 
the  night  was  very  dark,  and  her  guns  could  not  be  used 
effectively.  The  Confederate  vessels  relied  upon  ramming, 
and  in  the  course  of  the  engagement  the  Indianola  received 
seven  severe  blows,  the  last  of  which  left  her  helpless  and 
in  a  sinking  condition.  Her  guns  were  then  thrown  over- 
board, and  she  was  run  ashore,  where  her  officers  and  crew 
were  surrendered. 

This  left  the  Confederates  again  in  command  of  the  river 
navigation  between  Vicksburg  and  Port  Hudson,  but  on  the 
night  of  March  14th,  Farragut  passed  the  batteries  at  Port 
Hudson — as  will  be  subsequently  described — with  the  Hart- 
ford and  a  small  vessel  called  the  Albatross,  with  which  he 
arrived  below  Vicksburg  on  March  19th.  He  considered 
these  two  vessels  insufficient  to  maintain  the  blockade  of 
Red  River,  and  he  therefore  desired  that  Porter  should  send 
one  iron-clad  and  two  rams  below  Vicksburg,  to  assist  him 
in  that  enterprise,  as  well  as  to  break  up  the  batteries  near 
Warrenton,  which  were  increasing  in  strength  at  that  time 
from  day  to  day.  Porter  was  then  absent  on  the  Steele's 
Bayou  Expedition,  but  Brig. -Gen.  A.  W.  Ellett,  commanding 
the  Marine  Brigade,  offered  to  assume  the  responsibility  of 
sending  two  rams.  These  vessels,  the  Lancaster  and  Switz- 
erland, started  to  run  past  the  Vicksburg  batteries  before 
daylight  on  March  25th.  Owing  to  delay — as  in  a  previous 
case — they  went  past  in  broad  daylight,  and  one  of  them, 
the  Lancaster,  was  blown  up  by  the  enemy's  shells  and  com- 
pletely destroyed,  while  the  Switzerland  was  very  seriously 


BAYOU  EXPEDITIONS.  113 

disabled.     Farragut  was  thus  obliged  to  return  to  the  Eed 
Eiver  without  the  assistance  of  any  of  Porter's  vessels. 

The  result  of  these  various  attempts,  successful  and  un- 
successful, justified  the  belief  that  suitable  vessels  could 
run  the  gauntlet  of  the  batteries  without  very  great  risk, 
provided  proper  precautions  were  taken  as  to  the  time  of 
passage,  and  the  protection  of  unarmored  boats  by  cotton. 
Porter,  therefore,  had  no  hesitation  in  determining  to  run 
past  with  his  iron- clad  fleet,  as  soon  as  Grant  had  decided 
that  it  would  not  be  necessary  for  them  to  return  up  stream. 
Preparations  were  made  to  undertake  the  passage  on  the 
night  of  April  16th.  At  ten  o'clock  on  that  night,  the  fleet 
cast  loose  from  its  moorings  at  the  mouth  of  the  Yazoo 
Eiver,  and  slowly  steamed  down  the  Mississippi.  Porter 
led  in  his  flag-ship,  the  Benton,  followed  at  short  distances 
by  the  Lafayette,  with  the  captured  vessel  Price  lashed  on 
the  starboard  side,  then  by  the  Louisville,  Mound  City, 
Pittsburg,  and  Carondelet.  Three  transports,  the  Forest 
Queen,  Silver  Wave,  and  Henry  Clay,  protected  by  cotton 
bales  and  loaded  with  army  supplies  and  ammunition,  fol- 
lowed next,  and  the  gunboat  Tuscumbia  brought  up  the  rear. 
Each  vessel  had  a  barge  in  tow,  carrying  ten  thousand 
bushels  of  coal.  The  Benton  rounded  the  point  at  Vicks- 
burg  a  few  minutes  after  eleven  o'clock,  and  was  almost  im- 
mediately discovered  by  the  Confederate  batteries,  which 
opened  fire  vigorously.  At  the  same  time  the  torch  was  ap- 
plied to  houses  and  other  inflammable  material  on  both 
banks  of  the  river,  thus  lighting  up  the  entire  scene  of  ac- 
tion. Each  vessel  was  under  fire  for  about  half  an  hour  at 
Vicksburg,  and  a  few  minutes  at  Warrenton,  the  entire  du- 
ration of  the  cannonade  being  about  an  hour  and  a  half; 
and  in  return  each  one  poured  its  broadside  into  the  streets 
of  Vicksburg  as  it  went  by  within  a  few  yards  of  the  shore. 


1U  THE  MISSISSIPPI. 

About  2  a.m.  the  fleet  pulled  up  and  anchored  at  New  Car- 
thage. It  was  found  that  every  vessel  had  been  struck  a 
number  of  times,  but  the  amount  of  real  damage  was  sur- 
prisingly small ;  a  few  coal  barges  had  been  sunk  or  lost  in 
the  melee,  and  the  transport  Henry  Clay  had  been  aban- 
doned by  her  crew  in  a  panic,  after  which  her  cotton  had 
taken  fire  from  a  bursting  shell,  and  she  had  burned  up. 
With  these  exceptions,  there  was  no  damage  done  that 
could  not  be  repaired  in  a  very  few  days.  The  only  casual- 
ties were  ten  or  twelve  men  slightly  wounded. 

Grant  had  gone  to  New  Carthage  on  the  17th,  and  having 
seen  that  the  passage  of  the  fleet  was  a  complete  success  he 
returned  to  Milliken's  Bend  to  hasten  the  movements  of  his 
army.  It  was  impossible  to  move  his  troops  by  barges  and 
flat-boats  through  the  system  of  bayous,  as  had  been  origin- 
ally intended,  partly  because  only  a  small  number  of  barges 
had  been  received,  and  partly  because  the  canal  and  bayous 
were  not  yet  ready  for  navigation.  Water  had  been  let  into 
the  canal,  near  Duckport,  on  April  13fch,  but  much  work  still 
remained  to  be  done  in  dredging  out  the  bottom,  trimming 
the  banks,  cutting  trees,  etc.  Grant,  therefore,  determined 
to  move  on  by  the  roads  until  the  canal  should  be  ready, 
but,  in  fact,  it  never  was  of  any  service.  On  the  22d,  it  had 
been  dredged  out  so  that  small  steamers  passed  through  it  as 
far  as  Kichmond,  but  a  day  or  two  later  there  was  a  sudden 
fall  of  several  feet  in  the  river,  and  it  was  rendered  totally 
useless.  The  troops  were,  therefore,  forced  to  make  the 
movement  by  land,  constructing  several  miles  of  corduroy 
roads  for  the  artillery  and  wagons;  and  the  supplies  were 
sent  partly  by  the  roads,  and  partly  by  transports  running 
past  the  batteries. 

On  April  20th,  the  final  orders  were  issued  for  the  move- 
ment  across   the    peninsula.      McClernand's   corps   formed 


BAYOU  EXPEDITIONS.  115 

the  right  wing,  McPherson's  the  centre,  and  Sherman's  the 
left  wing ;  and  the  troops  were  to  move  across  in  that  order, 
following  each  other  as  rapidly  as  the  narrow  road  would 
permit.  At  that  date,  McClemand's  corps  (four  divisions) 
was  assembled  along  the  road  near  New  Carthage  ;  two  divi- 
sions of  McPherson's  corps  were  already  at  Milliken's  Bend, 
and  the  third  was  on  the  way  down  the  river  from  Lake 
Providence ;  two  divisions  of  Sherman's  corps  were  near 
Duckport  and  Young's  Point,  and  the  other  division  (Steele's) 
was  under  orders  to  return  from  Greenville. 

McPherson's  leading  divisions  were  immediately  put  in 
motion  toward  Kichmond,  and  six  more  transports  were 
loaded  with  supplies,  and  protected  with  cotton  to  pass  the 
batteries.  They  took  twelve  barges  in  tow,  and  were  manned 
by  volunteers  from  the  army,  mainly  from  Logan's  division. 
They  made  the  passage  on  the  night  of  April  22d,  five  of 
them  getting  through  safely,  and  one,  loaded  with  hospital 
stores  and  appliances  for  the  wounded,  being  sunk.  Having 
seen  these  vessels  safely  started,  Grant  moved  his  headquar- 
ters, on  the  23d,  over  to  Smith's  plantation,  near  New  Car- 
thage, to  take  personal  control  of  the  movements  for  crossing 
the  river.  When  he  arrived  he  found  that  New  Carthage 
was  still  surrounded  by  water,  and  was  entirely  unsuitable 
for  concentrating  a  large  force.  McClemand  had  already 
been  reconnoitring  to  find  a  suitable  point  lower  down  the 
river,  and  had  discovered  a  road  leading  from  Smith's  plan- 
tation around  Bayou  Vidal  to  Perkins'  plantation,  about 
eight  miles  below  New  Carthage.  By  repairing  this  road, 
and  building  about  two  thousand  feet  of  bridges  over  cross 
bayous,  it  would  be  practicable  for  moving  the  army.  Or- 
ders were  at  once  given  for  putting  this  route  in  order. 
Porter  had  made  a  reconnoissance  of  the  batteries  at  Grand 
Gulf,  on  the  22d,  and  being  convinced  that  they  should  be 


116  THE  MISSISSIPPI. 

attacked  before  they  became  any  stronger,  he  had  called 
upon  McClernand  for  troops  for  this  purpose.  Osterhaus' 
division  had  accordingly  been  embarked  on  the  morning  of 
the  23d,  but  it  was  not  thought  that  this  was  sufficient,  and 
it  was  dermined  to  await  the  arrival  of  more  transports.  On 
the  24th,  Grant  made  a  reconnoissance  of  the  same  batteries 
in  company  with  Porter.  He  found  the  batteries  to  be  very 
strong,  and  the  distance  from  Perkins'  plantation  to  Grand 
Gulf  was  so  great  (over  twenty  miles)  that  with  his  limited 
transportation  he  did  not  feel  justified  in  attempting  an 
attack  from  his  present  position.  It  was  necessary  to  seek 
a  point  still  farther  down  the  river,  near  enough  to  Grand 
Gulf  to  enable  the  transports  to  make  frequent  and  rapid 
trips  in  ferrying  the  troops  across  the  river  when  a  landing 
should  be  effected.  McClernand  was,  therefore,  directed  to 
reconnoitre  in  search  of  a  road  to  such  a  point,  and  he  dis- 
covered one  leading  around  another  bayou,  called  Lake  St. 
Joseph,  to  a  hamlet,  called  Hard  Times,  just  above  the  bend 
on  which  Grand  Gulf  is  situated.  While  this  route  was 
being  examined,  work  on  the  bridges  between  Smith's  and 
Perkins'  plantations  was  prosecuted  with  the  utmost  vigor, 
so  that  on  the  27th  the  whole  of  McClernand's  corps  was 
assembled  at  Perkins'.  On  the  following  day,  two  divisions 
of  this  corps  were  moved  down  to  Hard  Times  by  the  river, 
the  transports  returning  at  once  for  the  other  two  divisions. 
At  the  same  time,  McPherson's  two  divisions,  Logan  in  the 
lead,  were  moving  by  the  land  route  from  Smith's  around 
Bayou  Vidal  to  Perkins',  and  from  Perkins'  around  Lake  St. 
Joseph  to  Hard  Times.  On  the  29th,  everything  was  in 
readiness  for  the  long-expected  crossing  of  the  river,  and  on 
that  day  an  attack  was  made  by  the  gunboats  upon  the  bat- 
teries at  Grand  Gulf. 

Before  describing  this,  it  will  be  necessary  to  refer  to  the 


BAYOU  EXPEDITIONS.  117 

course  of  events  on  the  Confederate  side  during  this  month 
of  April,  in  which  Grant's  army  had  been  so  laboriously 
threading  its  way  through  the  overflowed  lands  opposite 
Vicksburg.  On  the  last  day  of  March,  Pemberton's  return 
showed  the  paper  strength  of  his  command  to  be  82,318 
men,  of  whom  61,495  were  present,  and  48,829  fit  for  duty 
on  that  day.  This  effective  force  of  50,000  men,  in  round 
numbers,  was  divided  into  three  principal  commands.  The 
first,  consisting  of  about  22,000  effectives,  commanded  by 
Maj.-Gen.  C.  L.  Stevenson,  occupied  the  main  Vicksburg 
position,  extending  from  Haines'  Bluff  on  the  right  to 
Grand  Gulf  on  the  left.  The  second,  consisting  of  over 
16,000  effectives,  commanded  by  Maj.-Gen.  Frank  Gardner, 
garrisoned  the  fortifications  at  Port  Hudson.  The  third, 
consisting  of  7,000  effectives,  under  Maj.-Gen.  W.  W.  Lor- 
ing,  was  stationed  at  Fort  Pemberton,  Grenada,  and  other 
points  in  that  immediate  vicinity.  In  addition  to  these 
three  main  bodies  there  were  some  4,000  or  5,000  men  sta- 
tioned in  Northern  Mississippi,  in  observation  of  Hurlbut's 
troops  on  the  Memphis  and  Corinth  Eailroad.  The  distance 
from  Fort  Pemberton  to  Port  Hudson  is  two  hundred  miles 
in  a  straight  line,  and  this  was  certainly  a  long  line  for  fifty 
thousand  troops  to  hold,  even  when  well  fortified  ;  but  they 
had  some  advantages  in  being  on  dry  land,  with  railroad 
and  telegraph  facilities,  while  their  adversaries  were  in  the 
swamps,  depending  entirely  on  water  transportation.  The 
left  flank  of  the  Vicksburg  position  was  at  Grand  Gulf,  a 
point  about  thirty  miles  by  land  below  Vicksburg,  and  pos- 
sessed of  very  nearly  the  same  natural  features  as  that  city. 
Pemberton  had  given  orders  to  occupy  and  fortify  it  on 
March  5th,  at  a  time  when  it  seemed  very  probable  that 
Grant's  canal  would  prove  a  success.  The  troops  sent  for 
this  purpose  consisted  of  the  Missouri  brigade  of  six  regi- 


118  THE  MISSISSIPPI. 

ments  and  four  batteries,  numbering  in  all  about  2,500  men, 
and  commanded  by  Brig.-Gen.  J.  S.  Bowen.  When  McCler- 
nand's  troops  began  to  advance  from  Richmond  to  New 
Carthage,  skirmishing  with  a  small  detachment  of  cavalry, 
Bowen  sent  three  of  his  regiments  across  the  river  to  hold 
them  in  check,  or  at  least  observe  their  movements.  But 
neither  Bowen  nor  Pemberton  attached  much  importance 
to  this  operation  and  both  discredited  the  rumors  that  it 
was  being  conducted  by  a  large  force.  Pemberton's  atten- 
tion was  principally  directed  to  his  right  flank ;  the  Yazoo 
Pass  expedition  had  hardly  left  the  vicinity  of  Fort  Pem- 
berton before  Steele's  division  made  its  appearance  on  Deer 
Creek,  and  Pemberton  feared  a  renewal  of  the  attempts  to 
turn  his  right  flank.  Rumors  began  to  arrive,  moreover, 
from  Memphis  that  Grant  had  determined  to  abandon  his 
operations  against  Vicksburg  by  the  river,  and  was  about  to 
return  to  Memphis  and  thence  reinforce  Rosecrans  in  Ten- 
nessee, or  else  begin  another  campaign  southward  on  the 
high  land.  Pemberton,  in  fact,  was  very  much  in  doubt  as 
to  Grant's  intentions ;  his  telegraphic  report  of  April  9th  to 
the  Adjutant-General  in  Richmond  stated  that  the  enemy 
was  constantly  in  motion,  that  his  principal  efforts  were  ap- 
parently directed  against  Deer  Creek  on  his  right,  for  which 
provision  had  been  made,  and  that  there  were  rumors  of 
a  movement  across  the  peninsula  on  the  west  of  the  river, 
which  were  not  credited.  A  few  days  later  he  received  re- 
newed information  that  a  large  part  of  Grant's  army  had  gone 
up  the  river  (Ellet's  Marine  Brigade,  numbering  about  2,000 
men,  had  in  fact  been  ordered  to  the  Tennessee)  and  that 
steamers  had  been  sent  down  to  bring  the  rest.  Pemberton 
communicated  this  intelligence  as  a  certainty  to  Johnston, 
and  quickly  received  in  reply  an  order  to  send  reinforcements 
to  Chattanooga.     There  had  just  arrived  at  Jackson  two  bri- 


BAYOU  EXPEDITIONS.  119 

gades,  soon  consolidated  into  one,  numbering  4,000  men,  who 
had  been  ordered  from  Port  Hudson  to  Vicksburg,  on  receipt 
of  intelligence  that  Banks  had  gone  to  the  Eed  Biver  coun- 
try. These  troops  (Buford's  brigade)  were  immediately  put 
on  the  cars  for  Chattanooga,  via  Meridian  and  Mobile.  On 
the  next  day,  April  14th,  Johnston  ordered  more  troops  to 
be  sent  to  him,  and  Pemberton  designated  Vaughn's  bri- 
gade from  Vicksburg  and  Tilghman's  brigade  from  Gre- 
nada. This  force,  numbering  about  4,000  men,  was  or- 
dered to  proceed  via  Jackson  as  soon  as  transportation  could 
be  had.  Hardly  had  Pemberton  given  his  orders,  however, 
before  information  began  arriving  from  Vicksburg  that  the 
report  of  Grant's  return  up  the  river  was  a  mistake.  On  the 
15th,  therefore,  Tilghman's  brigade  was  halted  at  Jackson, 
and  Vaughn's  near  Vicksburg ;  the  other  two  brigades  were 
already  on  the  way.  Meanwhile  some  skirmishes  had  taken 
place  across  the  river,  and  Bowen  had  reported  from  Grand 
Gulf  that  the  movement  there  began  to  look  serious ;  but 
Stevenson,  who  was  in  command  at  Vicksburg,  was  of  a  dif- 
ferent opinion,  believing  that  the  attack  would  be  made  on 
the  Yazoo.  Pemberton  himself  was  at  Jackson,  fifty  miles 
from  the  river,  and  of  course  had  to  rely  upon  his  subordi- 
nates for  information.  On  the  17th,  however,  came  the  news 
of  the  passage  of  Porter's  fleet.  This  quickly  settled  the 
question  of  any  retreat  up  the  river,  and  Johnston  was  at  once 
appealed  to  for  the  return  of  the  troops  on  the  way  to  Ten- 
nessee. Green's  brigade  at  Edward's  Station  was  ordered  to 
reinforce  Bowen  at  Grand  Gulf,  and  Bowen  was  ordered 
to  withdraw  his  infantry  detachment  from  across  the  river 
immediately,  if  it  was  not  already  too  late.  It  succeeded  in 
crossing  the  river  that  night.  Johnston  ordered  the  Port 
Hudson  troops  back  to  Pemberton,  but  some  of  them  had 
already  reached  Chattanooga,  and  the  rest  were  strung  along 


120  THE  MISSISSIPPI. 

the  road  at  Atlanta,  Montgomery,  and  other  points.  It  was 
April  22d  before  they  reached  Meridian  on  their  return. 

By  this  time  fresh  complications  had  arisen,  in  conse- 
quence of  the  movement  of  Union  columns,  reported  to  be 
very  strong,  southward  from  the  Memphis  and  Charleston 
Kailroad.  Pemberton  was  at  this  time  very  deficient  in  cav- 
alry, nearly  all  of  that  arm  in  his  department  having  been 
sent,  under  command  of  Van  Dorn,  to  Tennessee,  where  they 
were  operating  in  conjunction  with  Bragg's  army.  Pember- 
ton's  requests  to  have  them  returned  had  all  been  answered 
to  the  effect  that  their  services  were  indispensable  in  Middle 
Tennessee.  Consequently,  he  was  unable  to  keep  track  of 
the  expeditions  which  were  now  reported  to  be  rapidly  ad- 
vancing southward  through  the  State. 

In  fact,  one  of  the  most  thoroughly  successful  cavalry 
raids  of  the  whole  war  was  now  in  progress.  It  was  com- 
manded by  Col.  B.  H.  Grierson,  of  the  6th  Illinois  Cavalry. 
With  his  own  and  two  other  regiments,  about  1,700  men  in 
all,  he  left  La  Grange  on  April  17th  and  moved  directly 
south.  Northern  Mississippi  was  at  that  time  garrisoned  by 
about  1,000  men,  under  Brig. -Gen.  Chalmers,  who  were 
posted  behind  the  Coldwater ;  and,  in  order  to  occupy  their 
attention  and  prevent  them  from  interfering  with  Grierson, 
a  small  force  of  infantry  was  sent  out  from  La  Grange  and 
another  from  Memphis. 

Grierson  thus  got  a  good  start,  and  moved  rapidly  through 
Kipley  and  Pontotoc,  following  the  roads  about  twenty 
miles  west  of  the  Mobile  and  Ohio  Bailroad.  On  the  21st, 
having  reached  a  point  midway  between  the  villages  of 
Houston  and  Starksville,  he  detached  one  regiment,  under 
Col.  Hatch,  to  break  up  the  railroad  between  Columbus 
and  Macon,  and  then  make  his  way  back  to  La  Grange. 
Columbus  was   garrisoned  by  more   than   2,000   men,   and 


BAYOU   EXPEDITIONS.  121 

Hatch  had  a  very  brisk  engagement  there,  losing  40  men ; 
after  which  he  retreated  up  the  railroad,  destroying  it  at 
Okolona  and  Tupelo,  thence  returning  through  Ripley, 
where  he  had  a  brush  with  Chalmers,  and  reaching  La 
Grange  on  April  26th.  Grierson  meanwhile  continued  his 
own  movements  without  any  delay,  striking  the  Vicksburg 
and  Meridian  Railroad,  at  Newton  Station,  on  April  24th, 
and  destroying  several  miles  of  it  west  of  Meridian.  Thence 
he  moved  to  the  southwest,  crossing  Pearl  River  at  George- 
town, and  destroying  the  Jackson  and  New  Orleans  Railroad 
at  various  points  between  thirty  and  forty  miles  south  of 
Jackson.  On  the  28th,  a  skirmish  took  place  with  a  small 
detachment  of  cavalry  sent  out  from  Grand  Gulf;  after 
this  had  been  driven  off,  Grierson  moved  rapidly  down  the 
New  Orleans  Railroad,  skirmished  with  some  of  the  troops 
sent  out  from  Port  Hudson,  but  avoided  the  main  body  of 
them,  and,  finally,  on  May  2d,  reached  the  Union  eanrp  at 
Baton  Rouge.  "With  a  force  numbering  barely  1,000  men 
(after  Hatch  had  been  detached),  he  had  ridden  entirely 
through  the  State  of  Mississippi,  marching  600  miles  in  16 
days,  had  destroyed  between  fifty  and  sixty  miles  of  railway 
and  telegraph,  and  a  large  amount  of  other  property,  had 
captured  a  number  of  horses  and  mules,  and  had  inflicted 
on  the  enemy  a  greater  loss  than  he  had  himself  suffered. 
But,  far  more  important  than  all  this,  he  had  distracted  the 
enemy's  attention  in  an  extraordinary  degree  at  a  most  criti- 
cal moment.  Grierson  had  been  in  motion  on  Pemberton's 
rear  at  the  very  time  that  Grant  was  making  the  final  pre- 
parations for  the  attack  or  crossing  at  Grand  Gulf,  i.e., 
during  the  last  ten  days  of  April.  Being  so  short  of  cav- 
alry, Pemberton  was  unable  to  keep  track  of  Grierson,  and 
the  most  exaggerated  rumors  were  current  of  his  presence 
in  a  dozen  places  at  once.  At  the  same  time,  the  slight  de- 
VIII.—  6 


122  THE  MISSISSIPPI. 

monstration  from  Memphis  against  Chalmers'  force  on  the 
Coldwater  was  magnified  by  rumor  into  an  advance  in  large 
force  in  the  direction  of  Grenada.  Pemberton  was  thus 
obliged  to  send  out  expeditions  in  all  directions  to  try  to  in- 
tercept this  handful  of  bold  troopers.  One  brigade  was  taken 
from  Fort  Pemberton  and  sent  toward  Grenada  ;  Tilghman's 
brigade,  which  had  been  stopped  at  Jackson  en  route  to 
Chattanooga,  was  also  sent  back  toward  Grenada ;  Buford's 
brigade,  which  had  just  reached  Meridian  on  its  return 
from  Chattanooga,  was  sent  up  toward  Columbus ;  Adams' 
brigade  was  sent  out  from  Port  Gibson  toward  Jackson ; 
Chalmers  was  sent  across  toward  Okolona,  with  the  idea  of 
intercepting  Grierson  when  he  should  return ;  finally,  a 
large  part  of  the  garrison  of  Port  Hudson  moved  out  and 
lay  in  wait  for  him.  Not  one  of  all  these  various  expedi- 
tions succeeded  in  coming  up  with  Grierson,  more  than  to 
exchange  a  few  shots  with  skirmishers ;  and  by  calling  out 
so  many  men,  and  by  cutting  the  railroad  west  of  those  at 
Meridian,  Grierson  assisted  very  materially  in  diverting  at- 
tention from  Grand  Gulf,  and  in  delaying  the  movement  of 
troops  to  that  place.  Pemberton,  however,  had  become 
convinced,  as  we  have  seen,  that  the  movement  in  that  di- 
rection was  serious,  and  he  had  ordered  Green's  brigade 
from  Edward's  Station  as  a  reinforcement.  On  April  28th, 
he  received  word  from  Bowen  that  "transports  and  barges 
loaded  down  with  troops  are  landing  at  Hard  Times."  On 
receipt  of  this,  Tilghman  was  immediately  recalled  from  the 
direction  of  Grenada  to  Jackson ;  Buford  was  directed  to 
march  around  the  break  in  the  railroad  at  Newton  Station, 
and  come  to  the  same  place ;  another  brigade  (Gregg's)  was 
ordered  up  from  Port  Hudson,  and  Stevenson  was  directed 
to  hold  5,000  men  in  readiness  to  move  at  a  moment's  notice 
to  Bowen's  assistance,  whose  force,  including  Green's  bri- 


BAYOU  EXPEDITIONS.  123 

gade,  numbered  about  4,700  men.  None  of  Stevenson's 
men  were,  however,  actually  sent,  for  Pemberton  did  not 
think  that  the  movement  was  yet  sufficiently  developed,  and 
was  not  entirely  convinced  that  it  was  not  a  feint  to  cover 
an  attack  in  the  direction  of  Haines'  Bluff.  This  was  the 
condition  of  affairs  on  the  Confederate  side  on  April  28th. 

At  7  a.m.,  on  April  29th,  Porter's  squadron  left  its  moor- 
ings at  Hard  Times,  and  slowly  steamed  down  toward  Grand 
Gulf.  Immediately  in  rear  of  it  were  all  the  transports 
and  flat-boats  available,  loaded  with  all  the  men  they  could 
carry,  which  was  three  divisions  of  McClernand's  corps. 
These  remained  just  out  of  range,  above  the  point  opposite 
Grand  Gulf.  Grant  was  on  a  tug  in  the  middle  of  the 
stream,  where  he  could  follow  closely  the  progress  of  the 
fight,  and  send  in  his  troops  whenever  the  favorable  mo- 
ment should  arrive.  Porter's  squadron  consisted  of  the 
following  vessels : 

Benton,   Lieutenant-Commander  J.A.Greer 16  guns. 

Lafayette,  Captain   H.  Walke , 10  " 

Louisville,  Lieutenant-Commander  E.  K.  Owen 13  " 

Tuscumbia,  Lieutenant-Commander   J.  W.  Shirk 3  " 

Mound  City,  Lieutenant-Commander   Byron  Wilson 13  " 

Carondelet,  Lieutenant  J.  M.  L.  Murphy 13  " 

Pittsburg,  Lieutenant  W.  R.  Hoel 13  " 

Total 81  guns. 

The  vessels  averaged  about  six  hundred  tons  each. 

Grand  Gulf  was  an  insignificant  village,  the  river  terminus 
of  a  few  miles  of  railway  running  to  Port  Gibson.  But  it 
was  situated  near  the  mouth  of  the  Big  Black  Biver,  which 
was  navigable  for  several  miles,  and  behind  it  rose  a  sharp 
line  of  bluffs,  attaining  a  height  of  something  over  a  hun- 
dred feet.     Just  above  the  village  these  bluffs  come  close  to 


124  THE   MISSISSIPPI. 

the  water's  edge.  They  were  fortified  by  a  strong  line  of 
earthworks,  forming  two  principal  sets  of  batteries,  one 
above  and  one  below  the  landing,  the  two  being  connected 
by  a  trench  or  covered  way  for  infantry  about  a  thousand 
yards  in  length.  Work  had  been  prosecuted  diligently  on 
the  batteries  during  the  seven  weeks  which  had  elapsed 
since  the  troops  had  occupied  this  point ;  they  were  now 
nearly  completed  but  were  only  partially  armed,  containing 
in  fact  only  thirteen  guns,  eight  of  which  were  of  the  cali- 
bre of  thirty -pounder  Parrots  or  less.  They  were  but  a  poor 
match  for  Porter's  eighty- one  pieces,  many  of  them  11 -inch 
Dahlgrens  or  9-inch  rifles.  The  cannonade  opened  about  8 
a.m.,  and  kept  up  furiously  and  without  intermission  until 
1  p.m.  By  that  time  the  Confederate  guns  were  silenced, 
and  their  batteries  were  somewhat  ploughed  up  by  the 
2,500  projectiles  which  Porter  had  sent  against  them.  But 
the  troops  had  lost  only  3  men  killed  (one  of  them  being 
Col.  Wade,  Chief  of  Artillery)  and  15  wounded.  On  the 
other  hand,  Porter  had  lost  19  killed  and  56  wounded,  and 
his  vessels  had  received  several  hundred  shots.  The  Tus- 
cumbia  had  been  hit  81  times,  many  of  the  shells  penetrat- 
ing her  thin  plating  and  bursting  inside ;  she  was  so  badly 
damaged  as  to  be  unfit  for  service  for  some  time.  The  Ben- 
ton had  been  struck  47  times  and  had  lost  26  men,  and  the 
other  vessels  had  received  minor  injuries. 

It  was  very  evident  that  although  the  few  Confederate 
guns  were  temporarily  silenced,  the  batteries  were  just  as 
capable  of  resisting  assault  as  before  the  bombardment  be- 
gan— their  guns,  in  fact,  resumed  firing  later  in  the  day — and 
the  infantry  parapet  was  practically  uninjured  for  defence. 
It  was  impossible  to  bring  frail  transports,  loaded  to  the 
gunwales  with  men,  in  front  of  batteries  which  had  held 
their  own  against  iron-plated  gunboats.     Grant,  therefore, 


BAYOU  EXPEDITIONS.  125 

determined  to  move  still  farther  down  the  river  and  effect  a 
landing  which  would  turn  the  flank  of  these  batteries ;  and 
as  soon  as  Porter  withdrew — about  2  p.m. — McClernand 
was  ordered  to  land  his  men  at  Hard  Times  and  march  them 
across  the  point  opposite  Grand  Gulf,  coming  out  on  the 
Mississippi  at  De  Shroon's  plantation,  about  three  miles  down 
the  river.  As  soon  as  it  was  dark,  Porter  was  requested  to 
renew  the  bombardment,  under  cover  of  which  the  trans- 
ports all  slipped  by  with  very  little  damage,  and  tied  up  at 
De  Shroon's.  McClernand's  entire  corps  was  in  that  vicin- 
ity at  daylight  the  next  morning. 

Grant  had  at  first  intended  to  move  down  as  far  as  Rod- 
ney, from  which  point  it  was  known  that  a  road  led  to  Port 
Gibson,  and  thence  to  the  various  points  in  rear  of  Vicks- 
burg,  but  during  the  night  he  learned  from  a  negro  that 
there  was  a  good  road  leading  to  Port  Gibson  from  a  land- 
ing-place called  Bruinsburg,  just  below  the  mouth  of  Bayou 
Pierre,  and  only  five  miles  below  De  Shroon's.  Grant  deter- 
mined to  effect  a  crossing  at  this  place.  At  daylight  on 
April  30th  the  transports  and  gunboats  were  all  brought 
into  requisition  to  ferry  the  troops  across,  and  by  noon  the 
whole  of  McClernand's  corps — four  divisions,  numbering 
over  18,000  men — were  on  the  east  bank.  There  were  no 
Confederates  in  sight,  and  it  was  most  important  to  get 
possession  of  the  bluffs,  which  are  here  about  three  miles 
back  from  the  river,  as  quickly  as  possible.  But  for  some 
unexplained  reason  rations  had  not  been  issued  to  McCler- 
nand's corps  before  landing;  their  wagons  had  been  left 
away  back  at  Perkins'  two  days  before,  and  it  was  known 
that  the  first  advance  beyond  the  river  would  necessarily 
be  made  without  them.  Nevertheless  the  usual  three  days' 
rations  in  haversacks  had  not  yet  been  issued,  and  a  delay 
of  four  hours  occurred  on  the  bank  just  after  landing  in 


126  THE  MISSISSIPPI. 

order  to  distribute  them.  This  delay  at  such  a  critical 
period  might  have  been  disastrous,  but  fortunately  it  was 
not  so  ;  and  at  four  o'clock  McClemand  took  up  his  line  of 
march,  Carr's  division  in  the  lead.  At  sunset  he  reached  the 
bluffs,  and  finding  no  enemy,  pushed  on  during  the  night 
toward  Port  Gibson.  About  one  o'clock  in  the  night  Carr's 
leading  brigade  met  the  enemy  about  ten  miles  from  Bruins- 
burg  and  four  from  Port  Gibson ;  a  slight  skirmish  ensued, 
af  ler  which  the  whole  division  lay  down  on  their  arms  until 
daylight  should  enable  them  to  reconnoitre  the  ground  and 
the  force  in  front  of  them. 

These  troops  were  a  portion  of  Green's  brigade,  which 
had  been  hastily  dispatched  from  Grand  Gulf  by  Bowen  on 
the  afternoon  of  the  30th.  Immediately  after  the  bombard- 
ment of  Grand  Gulf  on  the  29th,  Bowen  had  telegraphed 
the  result  to  Pemberton,  and  stated  the  urgent  necessity  for 
prompt  reinforcement.  The  wires  then  failed  to  work,  and 
nothing  more  was  heard  from  Bowen  until  the  afternoon 
of  the  30th.  Pemberton  became  alarmed  at  this,  and 
telegraphed  Stevenson  to  send  at  once  the  5,000  men  he 
had  previously  ordered  to  be  held  in  readiness.  These 
were  Tracy's  and  Baldwin's  brigades,  and  they  left  Yicks- 
burg  for  Grand  Gulf  late  on  the  afternoon  of  the  29th. 
Pemberton  also  ordered  Tilghman  to  collect  all  available 
troops  in  Jackson — about  a  brigade — and  proceed  to  Ed- 
ward's Station,  and  there  await  further  orders.  Pemberton 
was  at  first  somewhat  disconcerted  by  reports  from  Steven- 
son of  the  presence  of  Union  troops  at  Haines'  Bluff, 
where  Sherman  with  one  division  of  his  corps,  escorted  by 
eight  gunboats,  was  making  a  vigorous  demonstration,  in 
pursuance  of  orders  to  that  effect  given  by  Grant  on  the 
27th.  But  Stevenson  expressed  himself  as  being  ready  to 
meet  any  attack  at  that  point,  and  it  soon  became  evident 


BAYOU   EXPEDITIONS.  127 

that  the  important  move  was  at  Grand  Gulf.  Late  on 
the  afternoon  of  the  30th,  Pemberton  received  word  from 
Bowen  that  3,000  Union  troops  were  within  ten  miles  of 
Port  Gibson  at  3  p.m.  of  that  day,  and  that  more  were  still 
landing  at  Bruinsburg.  On  receipt  of  this,  Pemberton  gave 
orders  to  his  detachments  at  Grenada,  Columbus,  Meridian, 
and  other  points  to  come  at  once  to  Jackson ;  after  which 
he  took  the  train  for  Vicksburg.  Tracy's  brigade  reached 
Grand  Gulf  on  the  afternoon  of  April  30th,  and  Baldwin's 
brigade  came  in  during  the  night,  the  men  of  both  biigades 
in  a  jaded  condition  from  hurried  marching.  Green's  bri- 
gade, as  already  stated,  had  been  sent  from  Grand  Gulf  to 
Port  Gibson  on  the  afternoon  of  the  30th,  and  its  advance 
had  met  Carr's  division  on  the  road  to  Bruinsburg  soon  after 
midnight.  Tracy's  brigade  came  to  his  assistance  a  little 
before  daybreak. 

On  the  morning  of  May  1st,  the  Confederates  were  discov- 
ered posted  across  the  roads,  about  three  miles  west  of  Port 
Gibson.  At  this  point  the  road  from  Bruinsburg  divides 
into  two  roads,  which,  diverging  nearly  at  a  right  angle,  curve 
around  and  unite  at  Port  Gibson.  Green's  brigade  was 
posted  across  the  southern  road  and  Tracy's  across  the 
northern.  The  country  was  extremely  rough  and  unsuita- 
ble for  manoeuvres,  being  composed  of  short,  steep  hillsides, 
following  no  regular  system,  and  separated  from  each  other 
by  ravines,  filled  with  a  dense  growth  of  cane  and  under- 
brush. Carr's,  Osterhaus',  and  Hovey's  division  of  McCler- 
nand's  corps  were  all  on  the  ground  at  daylight,  and  A.  J. 
Smith's  division  was  so  close  behind  them  that  it  reached 
the  field  at  7  a.m.  Logan's  and  Quinby's  divisions  of  Mc- 
pherson's corps  were  crossing  at  Bruinsburg  during  the 
night  of  the  30th  and  the  following  morning,  so  that  it  was 
certain  they  could  be  relied  on  during  the  day,  if  necessary. 


123  THE  MISSISSIPPI 

There  was  an  abundance  of  force  present :  the  only  difficulty 
was  in  bringing  it  into  action  on  such  difficult  ground. 

At  5.30  a.m.,  McClernand  opened  the  battle  by  sending 
forward  Osterhaus'  division  on  the  left  along  the  northerly 
road.  His  leading  brigade  (Garrard's)  was  quickly  met  by  a 
hot  fire  from  Tracy's  Confederate  brigade,  and  its  advance  was 
checked.  The  other  brigade  (Sheldon's)  having  then  come 
to  its  assistance  the  Confederates  were  slightly  driven  back, 
but  soon  made  a  stand,  and  Osterhaus'  division  was  unable 
to  make  any  further  progress  until  late  in  the  afternoon.  On 
the  right,  Carr's  division  moved  forward  at  6.15  a.m.,  one 
brigade  (Benton's)  on  the  light  of  the  southerly  road,  and  the 
other  (Stone's)  on  the  left  of  it.  Their  routes  lay  through 
broken  country  covered  with  dense  underbrush  and  their 
progress  was  slow.  The  enemy  (Green's  brigade)  was  posted 
in  an  advantageous  position  on  a  commanding  ridge.  In 
advancing,  Benton's  and  Stone's  brigades  had  diverged  from 
each  other,  leaving  a  gap,  into  which  Hovey's  division  was 
ordered  about  7  a.m.  The  two  brigades  of  this  division 
worked  their  way  laboriously  forward  through  the  cane  and 
underbrush,  and  finally  came  within  one  hundred  and  fifty 
yards  of  the  Confederate  ridge,  where  a  battery  was  posted, 
well  supported  by  infantiy.  A  determined  assault  was  then 
made  by  Hovey's  division,  and  Benton's  brigade  of  Carr's 
division,  and  the  ridge  was  carried,  two  pieces  of  artillery, 
three  caissons,  and  400  prisoners  being  captured.  Green's 
brigade  then  fell  back  toward  Port  Gibson. 

Bowen  had  sent  a  short  report  to  Pemberton  from  Grand 
Gulf  early  in  the  morning,  stating  the  probability  of  an  en- 
gagement ;  after  which  orders  were  given  to  Baldwin  to 
move  his  brigade  to  Port  Gibson,  and  to  Cockrell  (tempo- 
rarily in  command  of  Bowen's  own  brigade  of  Missouri 
troops)  to  move  to  Port  Gibson  with  three  regiments,  leaving 


BAYOU  EXPEDITIONS.  129 

the  other  three  posted  respectively  at  Grand  Gulf,  at  Thomp- 
son's Bluff  on  the  Big  Black,  and  at  the  Grindstone  Ford 
on  Bayou  Pierre.  Bowen  then  rode  over  to  Port  Gibson, 
reaching  the  battle-field  at  some  time  before  9  a.m.  At  the 
latter  hour  Baldwin's  brigade  passed  through  Port  Gibson, 
and  about  a  half  hour  later  Green  was  driven  back,  as  already 
stated.  Baldwin  was  immediately  ordered  to  form  a  new 
line  about  a  mile  in  rear  of  Green's  first  position,  and 
Green's  brigade  was  re-formed  and  sent  over  to  the  assistance 
of  Tracy  on  the  northern  road.  Cockrell  arrived  about  noon, 
and  two  of  his  regiments  were  sent  to  support  Baldwin  and 
one  to  support  Tracy. 

Hovey's  and  Carr's  divisions  pushed  on  as  rapidly  as  the 
ground  would  permit  in  pursuit  of  Green's  brigade,  and  early 
in  the  afternoon  they  came  under  the  fire  of  Baldwin's  bri- 
gade and  a  very  severe  contest  ensued,  lasting  over  an  hour 
and  a  half.  While  this  was  in  progress  Bowen  took  two  of 
Cockrell's  regiments  and  made  a  desperate  effort  to  turn 
McClernand's  right  flank.  McClernand  called  up  one  bri- 
gade (Burbridge's)  of  A.  J.  Smith's  division  and  sent  it  to 
meet  this  attack,  and  at  the  same  time  Hovey  brought  four 
batteries  into  position  on  a  ridge  from  which  they  could  enfi- 
lade Cockrell's  regiments  moving  through  the  ravine  toward 
the  right.  Under  this  combined  fire  Cockrell's  attack  was 
defeated,  and  he  was  driven  to  and  across  the  southern  road, 
where  he  joined  Baldwin,  who  still  held  firm. 

The  other  brigade  (Landram's)  of  A.  J.  Smith's  division 
now  came  up  and  joined  Hovey's  division  and  Stone's  bri- 
gade of  Carr's  division  in  an  attack  on  Baldwin.  The  odds 
were  very  great,  even  with  the  advantages  of  ground,  and 
Baldwin  made  a  most  gallant  defence,  holding  his  ground 
until  after  the  brigade  on  his  right  had  been  driven  off  the 
field,  just  before  sunset,  and  then  covering  the  retreat. 
G* 


130  THE  MISSISSIPPI. 

Grant  had  left  Bruinsburg  early  in  the  morning  and  had 
reached  the  field  about  ten  o'clock,  just  as  Hovey's  and  Carr's 
divisions  had  carried  the  first  ridge  on  the  right.  Having 
examined  the  whole  field  on  the  right,  he  rode  over  to  the 
left  to  inspect  Osterhaus'  position,  and  he  remained  there 
with  the  intention  of  using  McPherson's  corps  on  that  flank 
as  soon  as  it  should  arrive.  Two  brigades  (J.  E.  Smith's  and 
Stevenson's)  of  Logan's  division  of  this  corps  were  put  in  mo- 
tion from  Bruinsburg  as  soon  as  they  landed,  on  the  morning 
of  the  1st.  Hearing  the  sound  of  the  battle,  they  marched  as 
rapidly  as  possible  through  the  heat,  McPherson  and  Logan 
both  being  with  the  advance,  and  came  on  the  field  about 
noon.  Owing  to  repeated  requests  for  reinforcements  from 
McClernand  (although  he  had  already  three  divisions  under 
him  opposed  to  about  a  brigade  and  a  half),  Grant  ordered 
McPherson  to  send  one  brigade  (Stevenson's)  to  McCler- 
nand, but  to  bring  the  other  one  (J.  E.  Smith's)  to  the  sup- 
port of  Osterhaus  on  the  left.  McPherson  accompanied  this 
brigade  in  person  and  was  ordered  by  Grant  to  move  it  in 
such  manner  as  to  turn  the  Confederate  right  flank.  As 
soon  as  the  ground  was  reconnoitred,  a  judicious  position 
was  selected  by  McPherson  from  which  this  movement 
could  be  effected,  but  owing  to  the  tangled  and  broken 
character  of  the  country  it  was  several  hours  before  the 
movement  could  be  accomplished.  Having  finally  got  into 
position  about  5  p.m.,  an  attack  was  made  by  J.  E.  Smith's  bri- 
gade in  line  on  the  enemy's  right  flank  at  the  same  time  that 
Osterhaus  renewed  his  front  attack  along  the  road.  The 
result  was  the  complete  defeat  of  the  enemy's  right,  soon 
followed  by  the  rest  of  his  line,  Baldwin's  brigade  in  the 
centre  bringing  up  the  rear.  Green  conducted  the  men 
from  the  right  (Tracy  having  been  killed  early  in  the  action) 
along  the  direct  road  to  Grand  Gulf,  burning  the  bridge  over 


BAYOU  EXPEDITIONS.  131 

Bayou  Pierre  as  soon  as  he  had  crossed,  and  taking  a  posi- 
tion on  the  hills  north  of  that  stream.  Baldwin  retreated 
through  Port  Gibson,  destroying  the  bridge  over  the  south 
fork  of  Bayou  Pierre.  The  retreat  was  conducted  in  good 
order,  every  foot  of  the  way  being  contested,  so  that  dark- 
ness closed  over  the  field  before  Grant's  troops  could  reach 
Port  Gibson.  Under  the  circumstances,  pursuit  was  impos- 
sible that  night.  Before  daylight  the  next  morning  Bald- 
win continued  his  retreat  to  the  Grindstone  Ford,  on  the 
north  fork  of  Bayou  Pierre,  crossed  the  bridge  at  that  point 
and  then  burned  it,  and  finally  rejoined  Bowen  and  Green 
by  way  of  Willow  Springs. 

Bowen's  force  engaged  in  this  action  numbered  about 
8,500  men,  according  to  the  latest  returns  prior  to  the  bat- 
tle. In  his  official  report,  made  three  months  later,  he  gave 
his  strength  at  5,500,  although  he  stated  to  Loring,  who 
joined  him  May  2d,  that  he  then  had  7,000  men,  after  de- 
ducting the  losses  in  the  battle.  It  is  hardly  necessary  to 
figure  down  his  strength ;  his  defence  was  most  gallant,  even 
with  8,500  men,  against  the  odds  of  a  whole  corps  and  two 
brigades  of  another,  numbering  in  all  23,000  men.  He  re- 
ported his  losses  as  follows  : 

Killed.  Wounded.  Missing. 

Cockrell's  brigade 13  97  96 

Green's           "        17  83  122 

Baldwin's       "        12  48  27 

Tracy's           "        18  112  142 

Total 60  340  387 

Aggregate 787 

According  to  the  Union  reports,  the  Confederates  lost  over 
GOO  in  prisoners  alone.     Grant's  losses  were  as  follows : 


132  THE  MISSISSIPPI. 

Killed.  Wounded.  Missing. 

Osterhaus1   division 37  171  5 

A.  J.  Smith's     "      2  16  0 

Hovey's  "      42  263  3 

Carr's  u      42  222  0 

Logan's  "      6  38  2 

Total 129  710  10 

Aggregate 849 

During  the  whole  of  this  day  Pemberton  had  been  in 
Vicksburg,  sending  telegrams  in  all  directions  for  the  pur- 
pose of  collecting  his  scattered  forces.  Loring,  who  was  in 
Meridian,  was  directed  to  come  by  rail,  via  Jackson,  to  Ed- 
ward's Station,  bringing  with  him  any  troops  that  were  ready 
to  move.  No  troops  were  ready  at  Meridian  or  Jackson ; 
but  at  the  railroad  bridge  over  Big  Black  River  there  were 
two  regiments  and  a  battery  of  Tilghman's  brigade,  which 
were  put  in  motion  during  the  day.  Loring  left  the  railroad 
at  the  Big  Black  and  proceeded  on  the  road  to  Port  Gibson, 
overtaking  these  troops  before  night.  They  did  not  arrive 
within  twenty  miles  of  the  field  that  day.  Finding  that  it 
would  be  impossible  for  Loring  to  arrive  in  time,  Pember- 
ton ordered  another  brigade  of  Stevenson's  division  to  move 
from  Vicksburg  to  Bowen's  relief.  This  brigade  (Reynolds') 
started  on  its  march  a  little  before  dark.  The  next  morning 
the  two  remaining  brigades  of  Stevenson's  division  (Barton's 
and  Taylor's)  started  for  Port  Gibson  with  Stevenson  in 
command. 

On  the  morning  of  May  2d,  the  Union  troops  entered 
Port  Gibson,  and  immediately  began  to  construct  a  bridge 
over  the  south  fork  of  Bayou  Pierre.  This  was  completed 
at  4  p.m.,  and  Crocker's  (formerly  Quinby's)  division  of  Mc- 
Pherson's  corps,  which  had  come  up  during  the  day  from 
Bruinsburg,  took  the  lead,  followed  by  Logan's  division  of 


BAYOU  EXPEDITIONS.  133 

the  same  corps.  They  advanced  as  far  as  the  north  fork  of 
Bayou  Pierre,  eight  miles,  where  the  bridge  was  found  still 
burning.  The  fire  was  put  out,  and  the  bridge  was  repaired 
during  the  night,  so  as  to  be  ready  for  use  at  daybreak  the 
next  morning. 

Loring  reached  Eocky  Springs  with  the  two  regiments 
and  battery  of  Tilghman's  brigade  on  the  morning  of  the 
2d,  and,  hearing  of  Bowen's  retreat  to  Grand  Gulf,  and  fear- 
ing that  he  might  be  cut  off  from  Vicksburg,  he  hastened 
Tilghman  forward  to  Grindstone  Ford  on  the  north  fork  of 
Bayou  Pierre,  with  instructions  to  hold  that  point  at  all 
hazards.  He  then  rode  on  himself  to  Grand  Gulf,  and, 
learning  the  condition  of  affairs  from  Bowen,  it  was  at  once 
determined  to  abandon  Grand  Gulf  and  retreat  across  the 
Big  Black.  One  regiment  was  left  in  Grand  Gulf  until 
night,  when  the  guns  were  dismounted,  magazines  blown 
up,  and  the  batteries  abandoned.  Porter's  gunboats  came 
up  and  took  possession  on  the  morning  of  May  3d.  Bowen 
retreated  in  the  direction  of  Hankinson's  Ferry,  where  he 
was  joined  by  the  three  brigades  of  Stevenson's  division 
which  had  left  Vicksburg  that  morning  and  the  previous 
evening.  The  total  Confederate  force  now  present  consisted 
of  the  whole  of  Stevenson's  division  (four  brigades),  and 
Bowen's,  Green's,  Baldwin's,  and  Tilghman's  brigades — in 
all,  about  17,000  men ;  but  the  men  were  worn  out  with 
sudden  and  long  marches  and  fighting,  and  were  somewhat 
demoralized.  The  retreat  across  the  Big  Black  was  begun 
at  Hankinson's  Ferry  on  the  evening  of  the  2d,  a  force 
being  left  behind  to  protect  the  crossing.  This  force  was 
attacked  by  Crocker's  division,  of  McPherson's  corps,  on 
the  morning  of  the  3d,  near  Willow  Springs,  but  it  stood 
firm,  contesting  its  ground,  and  retreating  very  slowly  until 
late  in  the  afternoon,  when  Logan's  division  came  upon  its 


134  THE  MISSISSIPPI. 

flank,  and  caused  it  to  hasten  its  progress  toward  the  ferry. 
The  Confederate  troops  all  crossed  safely,  but  McPherson's 
men  were  so  close  upon  them  that  they  were  unable  to  de- 
stroy the  boat  bridge. 

On  the  evening  of  the  3d,  Grant  took  a  dozen  cavalrymen, 
and,  otherwise  unattended,  rode  over  to  Grand  Gulf,  in 
order  to  establish  his  base  at  that  point,  and  make  prepara- 
tions for  a  speedy  advance.  Having  issued  the  necessaiy 
orders,  he  rejoined  his  troops  at  Willow  Springs  before  day- 
light of  the  4th.  McPherson's  corps  was  moved  forward  to 
Hankinson's  Ferry,  and  McClernand's  to  Willow  Springs, 
where  they  remained  in  bivouac  for  three  days,  awaiting  the 
arrival  of  Sherman's  corps,  and  of  rations  and  ammunition 
necessary  for  an  advance. 


134  THE  MISSISSIPPI. 

flank,  and  caused  it  to  hasten  its  progress  toward  the  ferry. 
The  Confederate  troops  all  crossed  safely,  but  McPherson's 
men  were  so  close  upon  them  that  they  were  unable  to  de- 
stroy the  boat  bridge. 

On  the  evening  of  the  3d,  Grant  took  a  dozen  cavalrymen, 
and,  otherwise  unattended,  rode  over  to  Grand  Gulf,  in 
order  to  establish  his  base  at  that  point,  and  make  prepara- 
tions for  a  speedy  advance.  Having  issued  the  necessary 
orders,  he  rejoined  his  troops  at  Willow  Springs  before  day- 
light of  the  4th.  McPherson's  corps  was  moved  forward  to 
Hankinson's  Ferry,  and  McClernand's  to  Willow  Springs, 
where  they  remained  in  bivouac  for  three  days,  awaiting  the 
arrival  of  Sherman's  corps,  and  of  rations  and  ammunition 
necessary  for  an  advance. 


Route  ofJUarch.  


Campaign  Against  Vicksburg,  1863. 


JV    \i 

'  V  WeRH°n 

P\ 

j&&^ 

v    I 

^*      \£/i>//y<ss  row 

« 

\                Y 

// 

\tedWHSlL.LE]' 

/              / 

$  / 

4 

^A 

%L TOMSrXt^t   >  i 

\CUNTON 

~y\ 

*^ 

Jackson't 

MAVI^.SgJf 

MK^^kson' 

J^AYMO/VO 

2&  \ 

Raymond  \ 

L^gSffiS  j  S  j£^»! 

v5 

J 

N> 

8 

/ 

8 

I     V 

of 

s-'i 

iff 

\    4 

out 

i     ' 

jSctttee 

r      «     ,»      (OMtLSS 

\\jL 



CHAPTER  V. 

THE  CAMPAIGN  IN  REAR  OF  VICKSBURG. 

Gkant's  army  was  at  last  on  hard  ground.  A  footing  had 
been  gained  on  the  east  bank  of  the  river,  the  enemy  had 
been  in  a  measure  surprised,  his  flank  had  been  turned,  and 
his  troops  were  scattered.  It  was  an  opportunity  to  strike 
hard  and  strike  quickly  in  order  to  gain  decisive  results — 
one  of  those  opportunities,  the  seizure  or  neglect  of  which 
marks  the  difference  between  a  great  and  an  incompetent 
leader.  It  was  no  longer  a  question  of  going  to  Banks' 
assistance,  or  of  diverting  troops  on  any  side  issue ;  the  op- 
portunity could  only  be  improved  by  a  prompt  movement 
between  the  enemy's  forces,  dividing  them  and  beating 
them  in  detail.  Grant  was  equal  to  the  emergency;  and 
eighteen  days  from  the  time  the  first  regiment  landed  at 
Bruinsburg,  the  Confederate  forces  at  Jackson  had  been  de- 
feated and  driven  off,  while  those  near  Vicksburg  had  been 
routed  and  shut  up  within  their  fortifications,  never  to  come 
out,  except  as  prisoners.  The  deeds  of  these  eighteen  days 
challenge  comparison  with  the  most  brilliant  campaigns  of 
history. 

Pemberton's  returns  for  the  last  day  of  March  showed  an 
effective  strength,  as  already  stated,  of  50,000  men.  This  in- 
cluded the  Port  Hudson  garrison,  all  of  which,  except  6,000 
effectives,  had  now  been  recalled  to  Vicksburg.  But  at 
Pemberton's  urgent  request,  Gist's  and  Walker's  brigades, 


136  THE  MISSISSIPPI. 

numbering  5,000  men,  from  Beauregard's  command,  in 
South  Carolina,  were  ordered  to  bis  relief  on  May  5th,  and 
3,000  cavalry,  from  Bragg's  army,  were  sent  from  Tennessee 
to  Northern  Mississippi.  He  thus  had  an  available  force  of 
over  50,000  men  for  the  defence  of  the  short  line  from 
Vicksburg  to  Jackson.  Grant's  return  for  the  month  of 
April  showed  the  effective  strength  of  the  force  operating 
against  Vicksburg  to  be  50,068.  These  numbers  were  not 
actually  present  on  the  east  bank  of  the  river.  McAr- 
thur's  division  of  McPherson's  corps  was  still  up  the  river, 
one  brigade  being  left  at  Lake  Providence  throughout  the 
campaign,  and  the  other  two  not  coming  up  in  time  to 
be  of  service  prior  to  the  assaults  at  Vicksburg.  Blair's 
division  of  Sherman's  corps  was  also  left  behind  to  guard 
the  roads  from  Milliken's  Bend,  but  rejoined  the  army  the 
day  before  the  battle  at  Edwards'  Station.  After  deducting 
these  divisions,  the  force  with  which  Grant  began  the  cam- 
paign was  about  41,000,  and  at  no  time  prior  to  the  siege 
had  he  over  45,000  available.  These  divisions  in  rear,  how- 
ever, being  occupied  in  guarding  his  communications,  it  is 
proper  that  they  should  be  counted  as  part  of  his  effective 
strength. 

The  numbers  were  therefore  practically  equal.  The  ad- 
vantages of  position  were  all  on  the  side  of  the  Confed- 
erates, they  being  in  their  own  countiy,  with  which  they 
were  perfectly  familiar,  and  which  afforded  admirable  op- 
portunities for  defence,  while  the  Union  forces  were  entirely 
ignorant  of  the  country,  and  were  dependent  for  supplies 
upon  seventy  miles  of  wretched  road,  through  overflowed 
lands,  passing  within  a  short  distance  of  the  Confederate 
position,  and  thus  open  to  attack  at  all  times.  On  the 
other  hand,  those  who  fought  for  the  Union  had  an  enor- 
mous advantage  in  their  naval  resources,  which  gave  them 


THE  CAMPAIGN  IN  REAR   OF  VICKSBURG.        137 

unquestioned  command  of  the  river  navigation,  and  without 
which  the  campaign  never  could  have  been  prosecuted  in 
the  manner  that  it  was  prosecuted.  At  the  time  of  the  Bat- 
tle of  Port  Gibson,  the  armies  on  both  sides  were  scattered, 
one  corps  of  Grant's  army  being  at  Milliken's  Bend,  seventy 
miles  from  Bruinsburg,  and  one-third  of  Pemberton's  being 
at  or  near  Jackson,  forty-four  miles  by  rail  from  Vicksburg. 

It  was  thus  about  an  even  thing  on  both  sides,  all  things 
considered,  except  the  quality  of  the  commanders.  Here 
the  difference  was  enormous.  On  the  Union  side  were  the 
foremost  chiefs — Grant,  Sherman,  and  McPherson — which 
the  Northern  armies  produced  throughout  the  whole  war. 
Johnston  and  Pemberton  belonged  to  a  different  category. 
Johnston's  abilities  were  undoubtedly  great,  and  it  is  univer- 
sally conceded  that  he  showed  great  ability  in  extricating 
an  army  from  a  dangerous  position ;  but  he  seldom  struck 
back,  and  he  lacked  that  divine  fire  which  gains  battles.  On 
the  Peninsula,  in  Mississippi,  in  Georgia,  and  in  North  Caro- 
lina, he  had  as  good  opportunities  as  ever  fell  to  Lee  or  Jack- 
son, but  he  never  dealt  any  such  blows  as  those  of  Gaines' 
Mill,  Chancellorsville,  Manassas,  and  the  Wilderness.  His 
mind  inclined  more  to  disputatious  writing  than  to  bold  and 
vigorous  movements  in  the  field,  and,  in  the  midst  of  his 
campaigns,  he  found  time  to  write  letters  of  interminable 
length,  for  the  purpose  of  showing  that  the  responsibility 
for  his  failures  rested  with  Jefferson  Davis,  or  with  some  one 
else,  but  not  with  himself. 

Pemberton  did  not  belong  to  the  grade  of  second-rate 
generals  even.  He  had  seen  no  active  service  in  the  Civil 
War  prior  to  his  assignment  in  Mississippi,  in  October,  1862, 
and  his  appointment  to  that  important  command  was  then  an 
anomaly;  his  conduct  of  that  command  made  the  anomaly  only 
more  striking,  and  he  was  never  again  employed  as  a  general. 


138  THE  MISSISSIPPI. 

On  the  evening  of  April  29th,  after  the  unsuccessful  naval 
attack  on  Grand  Gulf,  Grant  had  written  to  Sherman  that 
he  felt  confident  of  effecting  a  crossing  the  next  day,  and 
he  therefore  desired  Sherman  to  cease  his  demonstration 
against  Haines'  Bluff  and  join  him  as  quickly  as  possible 
with  two  divisions,  leaving  the  third  to  guard  the  road  for 
the  present.  Sherman  received  this  near  Haines*  Bluff, 
May  1st,  and  immediately  sent  back  orders  for  Steele's  and 
Tuttle's  divisions  at  Milliken's  Bend  to  take  up  their  march 
for  Hard  Times.  During  the  night  he  withdrew  down  the 
Yazoo  River  with  Blair's  division,  and  the  following  day 
reached  Milliken's  Bend.  Leaving  Blair's  division  to  guard 
the  road,  he  went  on  in  person,  overtook  his  other  two  divi- 
sions, and  reached  Hard  Times  on  the  6th.  While  on  the 
march  he  received  an  order  from  Grant,  dated  at  Grand  Gulf, 
May  3d,  directing  him  to  organize  a  train  of  120  wagons, 
bring  them  to  Perkins'  plantation  and  thence  ferry  them 
over  the  river  to  Grand  Gulf,  where  they  were  to  be  loaded 
with  100,000  rations  from  the  transports.  This  would  give 
five  days'  rations  for  Sherman's  corps  after  crossing  the  river, 
and  two  days'  for  McClernand  and  McPherson  in  addition 
to  the  three  days'  which  they  had  already  drawn.  These 
five  days'  rations  for  the  whole  command  were  all  that  they 
received  until  a  base  was  established  at  Chickasaw  Bayou 
nearly  three  weeks  later.  The  troops  virtually  lived  on  the 
country  until  Vicksburg  was  invested. 

In  order  to  avail  himself  of  the  services  of  McArthur's 
division  of  McPherson' s  corps  and  Blair's  division  of  Sher- 
man's corps,  orders  were  sent,  on  May  5th,  by  Grant  to  Hurl- 
but  at  Memphis  to  send  forward  Lauman's  division  of  the 
Sixteenth  Corps  to  Milliken's  Bend  as  soon  as  transports 
could  be  obtained. 

On  May  2d,  at  Port  Gibson,  Grant  received  a  letter  from 


THE   CAMPAIGN  IN  REAR   OF  VICKSBURG.        139 

Banks,  sent  by  Farragut  on  the  ram  Switzerland  from  the 
month  of  Red  River.  The  whole  subject  of  the  projected 
cooperation  between  Grant's  and  Banks'  armies  will  be 
fully  discussed  in  a  subsequent  chapter.  It  is  only  neces- 
sary to  say  here  that  when  Grant  determined  on  March  29th 
to  move  across  the  peninsula  from  Milliken's  Bend  and  turn 
the  Confederate  left  flank,  it  was  his  intention  to  prosecute 
a  campaign  along  the  Big  Black  against  Yicksburg  after 
crossing  the  river.  But  on  April  10th  he  received  a  letter 
from  Halleck,  dated  April  2d,  calling  special  attention  to  the 
necessity  of  co-operating  with  Banks.  Halleck  said:  "If 
he  cannot  get  up  to  co-operate  with  you  on  Vicksburg,  can- 
not you  get  troops  down  to  help  him  on  Port  Hudson  ?  "  This 
letter  caused  a  modification  of  Grant's  plans.  He  still  de- 
termined to  cross  the  river  at  or  near  Grand  Gulf,  but  once 
across  he  proposed  to  send  an  army  corps  down  the  east 
bank  of  the  river  to  Bayou  Sara,  near  Port  Hudson,  to  co- 
operate with  Banks  in  the  reduction  of  that  place.  McCler- 
nand  was  notified  on  April  12th  that  his  corps  would  make 
such  a  movement,  and  on  the  14th  a  despatch  was  sent  to 
Banks  informing  him  of  the  project.  But  Banks  did  not  re- 
ceive the  despatch  until  May  5th,  and  the  letter  which  was 
now  received  from  him,  and  which  was  dated  April  10th, 
was  not  in  answer  to  this  despatch,  but  to  a  previous  letter 
of  Grant's  dated  as  far  back  as  March  23d,  in  which  Grant 
had  proposed  sending  a  corps  by  the  Lake  Providence 
route,  which  at  that  time  seemed  to  be  favorable.  Banks 
stated  that  he  intended  to  return  to  Baton  Rouge  by  May 
10th,  in  order  to  co-operate  against  Port  Hudson,  and  that 
he  had  15,000  men  available  for  field  service.  It  was  now 
May  2d.  To  send  troops  to  co-operate  at  Port  Hudson  on 
the  10th  and  to  await  their  return,  even  if  successful,  was 
to  lose  a  month  at  least  in   exchange  for  a  reinforcement 


140  THE  MISSISSIPPI 

of  only  15,000  men.  It  was  to  wait  for  the  enemy  to  col- 
lect his  scattered  troops  and  to  draw  reinforcements  from 
other  points,  as,  according  to  rumors  which  Grant  received, 
he  was  already  doing.  To  have  carried  out  any  such  ar- 
rangement would  have  been  to  throw  away  an  opportunity 
which  Grant's  army  had  been  working  for  months  to  obtain, 
and  which  was  at  last  within  their  grasp.  There  could  be 
no  question  of  Grant's  duty  in  the  premises  ;  it  was  to  fol- 
low up  promptly  the  advantage  he  had  gained  at  Port  Gib- 
son, and  to  use  all  his  force  to  beat  the  enemy  nearest  to 
him.  All  idea  of  detaching  any  troops  at  present  to  Banks' 
assistance  was  therefore  abandoned. 

From  the  3d  to  the  6th  of  May  McClemand's  and  Mcpher- 
son's corps  lay  at  Willow  Springs  and  Hankinson's  Ferry, 
waiting  for  supplies  and  for  Sherman's  corps.  On  the  7th, 
Sherman  being  across  the  river,  the  advance  was  resumed. 
Reconnoitring  had  been  carried  on  during  the  last  three 
days,  but  nothing  definite  had  been  developed.  At  that  time, 
Grant's  information  as  to  the  enemy's  position  and  movements 
was  simply  that  the  force  at  Hankinson's  Ferry  had  retreated 
toward  Yicksburg ;  and  there  were  rumors  that  a  force  was 
being  collected  at  Jackson.  His  intention,  therefore,  was 
to  advance  along  the  line  of  the  Big  Black  toward  Ed- 
wards' Station,  midway  between  Vicksburg  and  Jackson, 
keeping  a  close  watch  of  the  ferries,  so  as  to  prevent  any 
attack  on  his  left  flank ;  he  would  thus  move  with  his  main 
body  between  the  enemy's  forces,  and  would  be  in  a  position 
to  attack  either  one  of  them  as  soon  as  their  presence  should 
be  developed.  But  while  keeping  his  main  force  in  the 
centre  of  the  theatre  of  operations,  McPherson  was  to  be 
thrown  out  somewhat  in  advance  on  his  right  flank,  so  that, 
without  getting  out  of  reach  of  supports,  he  could  reach 
Jackson  as  quickly  as  possible,  break  up  any  force  in  that 


THE   CAMPAIGN   IN   REAR   OF    VICKSBURa.         141 

vicinity,  destroy  the  railroad,  and  rejoin  the  main  body  be- 
tween Edwards'  Station  and  Bolton.  McPherson  was  there- 
fore ordered  to  take  the  road  from  Hankinson's  Ferry, 
through  Eocky  Springs,  Utica,  and  Eaymond,  to  Jackson. 
McClernand  was  to  follow  the  direct  road  to  Edwards'  Sta- 
tion, through  Rocky  Springs,  Cayuga,  and  Auburn  ;  one  divi- 
sion being  thrown  out  on  a  parallel  road  to  the  left,  nearer 
the  Big  Black.  Sherman  was  to  follow  McClernand,  and,  in 
case  the  roads  permitted,  to  come  up  abreast  of  him.  The 
troops  marched  forward  under  these  instructions,  halting 
for  the  nights  as  follows  : 

May  7th:  13th  Corps  (McClernand)  at  Eocky  Springs; 
15th  Corps  (Sherman)  at  Grand  Gulf;  17th  Corps  (McPher- 
son) at  Eocky  Springs. 

May  8th:  13th  Corps  at  Big  Sandy;  15th  Corps  at 
Hankinson's  Ferry ;  17th  Corps  at  Eocky  Springs. 

May  9th :  13th  Corps  at  Big  Sandy ;  15  th  Corps  at  Han- 
kinson's Ferry  ;  17th  Corps  7  miles  west  of  Utica. 

May  10th :  13th  Corps  at  Big  Sandy ;  15th  Corps  at  Big 
Sandy  ;  17th  Corps  at  Utica. 

May  11th :  13th  Corps  at  Five  Mile  Creek ;  15th  Corps 
at  Auburn ;  17th  Corps  5  miles  northeast  of  Utica. 

May  12th :  13th  Corps  at  Fourteen  Mile  Creek ;  15th 
Corps  at  Fourteen  Mile  Creek  ;  17th  Corps  at  Eaymond. 

On  the  night  of  the  11th  Grant  had  his  army  well  in  hand, 
and  the  orders  for  the  next  day  were  to  move  forward  into 
position  on  Fourteen  Mile  Creek,  about  seven  miles  south 
of  the  railroad,  McClernand  on  the  Telegraph  road  from 
Auburn  to  Edwards'  Station,  with  one  division  thrown  out 
to  the  Big  Black  at  Baldwin's  Ferry,  and  Sherman  on  the 
road  from  Auburn  to  Eaymond ;  McPherson  was  to  push  for- 
ward rapidly  into  Eaymond,  in  the  hopes  of  capturing  some 
commissary  stores  there,  the  army  being  in  need  of  rations. 


142  THE   MISSISSIPPI. 

McPherson  moved  out  accordingly  before  4  a.m.  on  the 
12th,  Logan's  division  in  the  lead,  followed  closely  by 
Crocker's.  The  enemy's  videttes  were  soon  seen  falling  back 
before  them,  and  about  9  a.m.  stronger  bodies  of  the  enemy 
were  encountered.  Logan  thereupon  formed  one  of  his  bri- 
gades (Dennis')  in  line  of  battle  across  the  road,  the  othor 
two  brigades  marching  by  the  flank  in  rear  of  it.  The  only 
cavalry  regiment  present  with  the  army  accompanied  Mc- 
Pherson's  command,  and  it  was  now  thrown  out  on  the 
flanks,  with  orders  to  explore  every  lateral  road  on  which 
the  enemy  might  be  posted.  In  this  formation  Logan  con- 
tinued his  advance  for  about  two  hours.  About  11  a.m.,  he 
came  to  a  small  stream  crossing  the  road,  about  two  miles 
from  Raymond,  and  on  the  hills  beyond  it  the  enemy  was 
discovered  in  force,  the  infantry  drawn  up  in  support  of  two 
batteries,  which  were  posted  in  a  position  to  enfilade  the 
road  and  the  bridge  over  the  stream.  A  halt  was  made,  and 
the  ground  was  reconnoitred.  It  was  evident  that  the  en- 
emy intended  to  dispute  the  passage.  Logan  was  at  once 
ordered  to  attack  him,  and  orders  were  sent  back  for  Crocker 
to  hasten  his  march  and  come  up  as  a  reserve.  The  enemy's 
force  consisted  of  Gregg's  brigade,  which  had  come  from 
Port  Hudson  to  Jackson,  in  pursuance  of  Pemberton's  orders 
of  April  28th,  and  had  moved  out  to  Raymond  to  cover  Jack- 
son, and  to  fall  upon  Grant's  flank  should  he  attack  Ed- 
wards' Station.  The  brigade  numbered,  including  some 
State  troops  picked  up  at  Jackson,  something  over  3,000 
men. 

Logan's  division  was  at  once  formed  by  deploying  J.  E. 
Smith's  brigade  on  the  right  of  Dennis',  and  placing  De- 
Golyer's  (8th  Michigan)  battery  on  the  road  in  the  centre. 
The  infantry  advanced,  preceded  by  skirmishers,  and  a  se- 
vere engagement  was  soon  in  progress.     Stevenson's  brigade 


THE  CAMPAIGN  IN  REAR  OF   VICKSBTJRG.        143 

was  then  deployed  on  the  right  of  Smith's,  and  the  line  con- 
tinued to  advance,  passing  over  some  open  ground,  and  gain- 
ing possession  of  a  piece  of  woods  across  the  creek,  in  close 
proximity  to  the  enemy's  position  on  the  hills.  The  fight 
continued  for  two  or  three  hours,  the  line  gradually  ad- 
vancing until,  during  the  afternoon,  the  leading  brigade  of 
Crocker's  division  came  up  and  deployed  in  support  of 
Dennis'  brigade.  The  enemy  then  abandoned  the  field 
and  retreated  rapidly  toward  Jackson.  Logan's  division 
followed  in  pursuit,  passing  through  Raymond  at  5  p.m., 
and  pursuing  the  enemy  for  some  distance  beyond  the  town, 
but  being  unable  to  overtake  them  the  men  were  halted 
and  went  into  camp  for  the  night.  Crocker's  division  was 
but  slightly  engaged  in  this  affair,  losing  but  two  men. 
Logan  lost  65  killed,  335  wounded,  and  32  missing ;  toial 
432.  Gregg's  loss,  according  to  his  own  report,  was  73 
killed,  229  wounded,  and  204  missing— total  505.  Two  dis- 
abled guns  were  captured. 

The  defence  made  by  the  enemy  at  Raymond  induced 
Grant  to  believe  that  their  force  in  the  vicinity  of  Jackson 
might  be  stronger  than  he  had  supposed  ;  reports  reached 
him  moreover  that  reinforcements  were  arriving  at  Jackson, 
and  that  Johnston  was  daily  expected  at  that  point  to  take 
command  in  person.  He  therefore  decided,  before  moving 
up  against  Edwards'  station,  to  make  sure  of  Jackson,  which 
would  be  a  dangerous  point  on  his  flank  or  rear  if  it  re- 
mained in  the  enemy's  possession ;  and  as  McPherson's 
corps  might  not  be  strong  enough  to  get  possession  of  it  at 
once,  single-handed — its  fortifications  being  reported  strong 
— he  determined  to  move  his  whole  force  in  that  direction. 
On  the  evening  of  the  12th,  therefore,  orders  were  given 
(countermanding  previous  orders  of  the  same  date,  to  move 
up  to  the  railroad)  for  McPherson  to  push  forward  at  day- 


144  THE  MISSISSIPPI. 

light  toward  Clinton  and  thence  to  Jackson ;  Sherman  to 
move  to  Baymond  and  thence  by  Mississippi  Springs  toward 
Jackson  ;  and  McClernand,  with  three  divisions,  to  follow 
Sherman  by  the  road  on  the  north  side  of  Fourteen  Mile 
•Creek,  sending  his  other  division  back  to  Auburn  to  meet 
and  escort  the  trains  which  were  coming  up  from  the  river 
at  Grand  Gulf.  The  sharp  skirmishing  which  both  Mc- 
Clernand and  Sherman  had  had  during  the  day  in  getting 
possession  of  the  crossings  of  Fourteen  Mile  Creek  on  their 
respective  roads  was  a  strong  confirmation  of  the  numerous 
reports  that  Pemberton  was  concentrating  his  Vicksburg 
troops  at  Edwards'  Station,  but  before  attacking  them  Grant 
desired  to  first  dispose  of  the  troops  at  Jackson  and  destroy 
the  railroad  at  that  point. 

Before  following  the  manner  in  which  the  movement  on 
Jackson  was  executed,  it  is  necessary  to  notice  the  Confed- 
erate movements  during  the  past  ten  days.  On  May  1st, 
Pemberton  telegraphed  to  Johnston,  then  with  Bragg's  army 
at  Tullahoma,  Tenn.,  that  Grant's  army  had  crossed  the  river, 
and  that  a  furious  battle  had  been  raging  all  day  at  Port 
Gibson.  Johnston  answered  on  the  following  day:  "If 
Grant  crosses,  unite  all  your  troops  to  beat  him.  Success 
will  give  back  what  was  abandoned  to  win  it."  Pemberton 
however,  was  on  the  ground  and  his  judgment  of  the  situa- 
tion was  different  from  Johnston's.  He  coincided  in  the 
opinion  expressed  by  Jefferson  Davis,  that  for  lack  of  sup- 
plies Grant's  army  could  not  live  more  than  a  few  days 
away  from  the  river  and  that  it  would  soon  return  toward 
Warrenton.  He  thought  it  probable,  however,  that  a  raid 
might  be  made  on  Jackson.  Acting  upon  this  judgment 
he  made  the  following  dispositions.  The  troops  arriv- 
ing from  Port  Hudson  and  any  reinforcements  that  might 
come  from  South  Carolina  were  to  stop  at  Jackson  and  de- 


THE  CAMPAIGN  IN  REAR  OF   VICKSBURG.        145 

fend  that  place.  The  three  divisions,  Bowen's,  Loring's, 
and  Stevenson's,  that  had  moved  ont  toward  Grand  Gulf 
were  to  retire  and  take  up  a  position  as  follows  :  Bowen's 
at  Bovina  Station  to  defend  the  railroad  bridge  ;  Loring's 
on  the  Hall's  and  Baldwin's  Ferry  roads,  to  defend  those 
ferries  ;  and  Stevenson's  from  the  Hall's  Ferry  road  to 
"Warrenton,  to  resist  an  attack  along  the  river.  These 
positions  were  taken  up  by  May  7th,  and  were  reported  to 
Johnston  and  to  Jefferson  Davis.  Grant's  movements  were 
watched  as  carefully  as  possible,  but  both  sides  were  so  re- 
markably deficient  in  cavalry  that  each  was  largely  in  the 
dark  as  to  the  other's  movements.  On  May  11th,  the  pres- 
ence of  a  considerable  Union  force  (one  of  McClernand's 
divisions)  at  Baldwin's  Ferry  convinced  Pemberton  that 
Grant  could  live  away  from  the  river,  and  led  him  to  believe 
that  Edwards'  Station  was  to  be  the  point  of  attack.  Pem- 
berton therefore  ordered  Bowen  to  advance  to  Edwards' 
Station,  and  Loring  and  Stevenson  to  move  up  and  join 
him.  Walker,  who  had  just  arrived  at  Jackson,  from  South 
Carolina,  was  ordered  to  advance  toward  Baymond  in  sup- 
port of  Gregg,  who  had  moved  there  the  previous  day.  If 
the  enemy  attacked  in  heavy  force  they  were  to  fall  back 
within  the  fortifications  of  Jackson ;  if  he  moved  toward 
Edwards'  Station  they  were  to  attack  his  flank  and  rear. 
Walker  did  not  leave  Jackson  until  the  12th,  and  on  that 
day  Gregg  was  entirely  overpowered  by  McPherson.  On  the 
same  day  there  was  considerable  skirmishing  on  Fourteen 
Mile  Creek,  only  five  miles  south  of  Edwards'  Station,  be- 
tween the  heads  of  column  of  McClernand's  and  Sherman's 
corps,  and  a  brigade  sent  forward  in  observation  by  Bowen. 
This  convinced  Pemberton  that  he  was  to  be  attacked  in 
force  the  next  morning  between  Fourteen  Mile  Creek  and 
Edwards'  Depot,  and  Loring  and  Stevenson  were  urged  on 
VIII.— 7 


146  THE  MISSISSIPPI. 

and  came  tip  with  Bowen,  forming  line  of  battle  south  of 
Edwards'  Station  on  the  morning  of  the  13th.  Instead  of 
attacking,  however,  Grant's  whole  force  moved  off  toward 
Kaymond  and  Jackson. 

While  these  events  were  in  progress  JohnstoD  had  received 
orders  from  Richmond  on  May  9th  to  "  proceed  at  once  to 
Mississippi  and  take  chief  command  of  the  forces  there." 
He  arrived  at  Jackson  on  the  evening  of  the  13th  and  found 
the  two  brigades  of  Gregg  and  Walker  just  returning  from 
Raymond.  Gist's  South  Carolina  brigade  and  Maxey's  Port 
Hudson  brigade  were  expected  to  arrive  the  next  day.  The 
total  strength  of  these  four  brigades  was  about  12,000  men. 
He  also  learned  that  Pemberton  was  at  Edwards'  Station  but 
that  a  large  Union  force  was  at  Clinton,  cutting  off  any 
communication  with  him.  He  hastened  to  telegraph  a  few 
words  to  Richmond  conveying  this  information,  and  adding, 
"  I  am  too  late."  He  seemed  to  foresee  disaster,  and 
desired  to  clear  himself  in  advance  of  any  responsibility  for 
it,  rather  than  to  bend  his  whole  energy  to  avert  it. 

Meanwhile,  in  pursuance  of  Grant's  orders  of  the  night  of 
May  12th,  already  referred  to,  McPherson  had  moved  from 
Raymond  to  Clinton  on  the  13th,  and  from  there  toward 
Jackson  on  the  14th.  Sherman  had  moved  through  Ray- 
mond to  Mississippi  Springs  on  the  13th,  and  thence  toward 
Jackson  on  the  14th,  communicating  with  McPherson  on  the 
other  road,  so  as  to  approach  Jackson  about  the  same  hour. 
McClernand  had  moved  to  Raymond  on  the  13th,  and  sent 
one  division  forward  as  far  as  Clinton  on  the  14th.  Sher- 
man and  McPherson  approached  Jackson  in  a  pouring  rain, 
about  10  a.m.  on  the  14th.  Hearing  of  their  approach  from 
his  vedettes,  Johnston  posted  one  brigade  on  each  road 
— Walker  toward  Clinton,  and  Gregg  toward  Raymond — in 
intrenchments  which  had  previously  been  constructed   on 


THE  CAMPAIGN  IN  REAR   OF   VICKSBURG.        147 

high  ground  commanding  the  approaches  over  open  fields. 
He  instructed  them  to  make  enough  of  a  defence  to  gain 
time  for  him  to  remove  stores  and  valuable  property  by  the 
railroad  leading  northward  toward  Canton. 

Gregg  made  but  a  feeble  resistance.  After  some  prelimi- 
nary artillery  firing,  Sherman  moved  a  portion  of  his  men 
around  the  enemy's  flank,  and,  at  1  p.m.,  they  reached  the 
enemy's  intrenchments  to  find  them  deserted.  About  250 
prisoners  were  taken,  together  with  all  their  artillery  (18 
guns),  and  much  ammunition  and  stores.  Sherman  lost  less 
than  30  men. 

Walker  made  more  of  a  fight.  He  occupied  a  fine  posi- 
tion on  the  crest  of  a  semi-circular  ridge,  his  flanks  pro- 
tected by  woods,  and  in  front  of  him  a  gently  sloping  open 
field  terminating,  about  one-third  of  a  mile  distant,  in  a 
boggy  creek  lined  with  thick  willows.  His  artillery  com- 
manded the  bridge  over  this  creek.  McPherson  arrived  in 
front  of  this  position  about  9.30  a.m.,  but  the  rain  fell  in 
such  torrents  that  his  attack  was  delayed  for  an  hour  and  a 
half  by  the  fear  of  spoiling  their  ammunition  if  the  men 
opened  their  cartridge-boxes  (this  was  before  the  days  of 
metallic  cartridges).  Crocker's  division  had  the  advance 
this  day,  and,  during  this  hour  and  a  half,  his  men  were 
moved  into  place,  the  three  brigades  being  deployed  in  line, 
with  one  brigade  of  Logan's  division  in  reserve.  At  11  a.m., 
the  rain  having  partially  ceased,  skirmishers  were  sent  for- 
ward, and  advanced  as  far  as  the  creek,  but  were  unable  to 
move  through  the  open  field  beyond  it.  They  were  then 
recalled,  and  a  charge  was  ordered.  The  whole  division 
moved  forward  in  a  superb  line,  driving  the  enemy's  skir- 
mishers out  of  the  creek,  and  advancing  under  fire  across 
the  field.  When  they  were  about  half  way  across  it,  the  en- 
emy broke  from  their  intrenchments  and  made  a  hasty  re- 


118  THE  MISSISSIPPI. 

treat.  They  were  pursued  about  a  mile  and  a  half,  during 
which  Crocker's  men  fell  somewhat  into  disorder,  and  were 
finally  brought  to  a  halt  by  some  artillery  posted  in  an  inner 
line  of  works  close  to  the  town.  While  they  were  re-form- 
ing, the  Confederates  made  their  escape  over  to  the  Canton 
road.  In  this  engagement  McPherson  lost  265  men,  and  he 
gives  the  enemy's  loss  at  845,  a  large  portion  of  whom  were 
prisoners,  and  17  guns.  The  Confederate  reports  make  their 
losses  a  little  less  than  400.  McPherson's  and  Sherman's 
troops  entered  Jackson  about  the  same  time,  between  3  and 
4  p.m.  Pemberton's  attempt  to  defend  Jackson  against  a 
"raid"  by  a  detachment  out  of  supporting  distance  had  led 
to  complete  disaster,  viz.  :  the  defeat  of  two  brigades  with 
heavy  loss,  the  loss  of  35  guns,  the  capture  of  Jackson,  and 
the  destruction  of  the  railroads  and  all  public  property  at 
that  place. 

Grant  entered  Jackson  with  Sherman's  troops,  and  there 
learned  that  Johnston  had  ordered  Pemberton  to  move  out 
to  attack  his  rear.  He  immediately  determined  to  attack 
Pemberton  before  Johnston,  circling  around  to  the  north, 
could  come  to  his  assistance.  His  troops  were  in  compact 
shape,  well  in  hand  for  such  a  movement.  McClernand  had 
two  divisions  at  or  near  Eaymond,  one  at  Clinton,  and  one 
on  the  road  between  Auburn  and  Eaymond,  bringing  up  the 
trains.  Blair's  division  of  Sherman's  corps  and  one  bri- 
gade of  McArthur's  division,  of  McPherson's  corps,  had 
come  up  with  these  trains  from  Grand  Gulf.  This  gave  five 
and  a  half  divisions,  all  within  ten  miles  of  the  railroad  be- 
tween Bolton  and  Edwards'  Station.  They  were  all  ordered 
to  move  on  converging  roads  toward  the  latter  point. 
McPherson  was  to  leave  Jackson,  at  daylight  on  the  15th,  for 
Bolton,  and  Sherman  was  to  complete  the  work  of  destruc- 
tion at  Jackson,  and  follow  McPherson  in  the  afternoon. 


THE   CAMPAIGN  IN  REAR   OF   VICKSBURG.        149 

On  the  same  day  that  Johnston's  troops  were  driven  out 
of  Jackson  (May  14th)  most  important  events  had  transpired 
in  Pember ton's  camp.  On  his  arrival  the  previous  evening 
Johnston  had  sent  a  somewhat  vague  despatch  to  Pemberton, 
referring  to  the  presence  of  Sherman's  [McPherson's]  corps 
at  Clinton,  stating  the  necessity  of  establishing  communica- 
tion between  their  forces,  and  saying:  "If  practicable,  come 
up  in  his  rear  at  once  ;  to  beat  such  a  detachment  would  be 
of  immense  value.  The  troops  here  could  co-operate." 
This  despatch  was  carried  by  an  officer  around  McPherson's 
flank,  and  delivered  to  Pemberton  at  Bovina  about  7  a.m.  on 
the  14th.  Pemberton  immediately  replied  :  "  In  directing 
this  move  I  do  not  think  you  fully  comprehend  the  position 
that  Vicksburg  will  be  left  in ;  but  I  comply  at  once  with 
your  order."  The  troops  were  ordered  forward  from  Ed- 
wards' Station.  Pemberton,  however,  continued  to  meditate 
on  the  order,  and  a  fatal  divergence  of  views  between  him- 
self and  Johnston  was  soon  developed.  Johnston's  idea  was 
that  eveiy  man  between  Jackson  and  Vicksburg  should  be 
united,  to  fight  a  battle  on  which  the  fate  of  Vicksburg 
would  depend,  believing  that  any  attempt  to  cover  Vicks- 
burg by  a  detachment  would  result  in  the  loss  of  Vicksburg 
and  detachment  both.  Pemberton' s  whole  idea  was  to  de- 
fend Vicksburg  to  the  last,  and  to  make  no  move  which 
would  uncover  that  place.  About  noon,  therefore,  before 
his  troops  had  got  in  motion,  under  his  orders  of  the  morn- 
ing, he  suspended  these  orders,  and  called  a  council  of 
war ;  read  Johnston's  letter  to  his  generals  and  asked  their 
views.  The  numerical  majority  of  them  were  in  favor  of 
Johnston's  proposition,  but  the  two  senior  generals  (Loring 
and  Stevenson)  preferred  a  movement  against  Grant's  com- 
munications in  rear  of  Raymond,  in  the  hope  of  cutting  off 
his  supplies  and  compelling  his  retreat.      Pemberton  per- 


150  THE  MISSISSIPPI. 

sonally  was  in  favor  of  making  no  movement  at  all,  but  of 
awaiting  an  attack  on  chosen  ground ;  but  as  his  officers 
were  "all  eager  for  an  advance,"  he  waived  his  judgment. 
But  the  movement  toward  Clinton  he  would  not  make,  for 
he  considered  that  "suicidal."  He  therefore  determined  to 
move  against  Grant's  communications.  As  Johnston  says  in 
his  "  Narrative,"  "  Although  averse  to  both  opinions,  Gen- 
eral Pemberton  adopted  that  of  the  minority  of  his  council, 
and  determined  to  execute  a  movement  which  he  disap- 
proved, which  his  council  of  war  opposed,  and  which  was  in 
violation  of  the  orders  of  his  commander."  It  was  an  awk- 
ward see-saw — Johnston  moving  out  of  Jackson  toward  the 
north  and  west  in  the  hope  of  joining  Pemberton,  and  Pem- 
berton moving  from  Edwards'  Station  toward  the  south  and 
east,  against  the  communications  of  an  army  that  was  living 
on  the  country.  Conflicting  plans  and  lack  of  leadership  had 
brought  things  to  a  bad  pass  for  the  Confederates,  on  this 
night  of  May  14th.  Pemberton  had  23,000  men  (his  report 
says  17,500,  but  his  last  previous  returns  give  23,701) — to  wit, 
Loring's,  Stevenson's,  and  Bowen's  divisions — at  Edwards' 
Station  ;  he  had  left  9,000 — Forney's  and  Smith's  divisions — 
at  Vicksburg,  defending  the  batteries  from  Snyder's  Bluff  to 
"Warrenton,  which  batteries  were  now  not  threatened,  nor  was 
this  force  strong  enough  to  defend  them  if  they  had  been 
seriously  attacked  ;  in  the  vicinity  of  Jackson  were  12,000 
men  under  Johnston,  part  of  them  just  defeated  in  two  en- 
gagements and  part  of  them  just  arriving  in  railroad  cars. 
Reinforcements  to  the  extent  of  5,000  additional  men  had 
just  been  ordered  from  the  East,  and  double  that  number 
were  promised  at  an  early  day.  Here,  then,  were  44,000  men 
(and  more  to  come)  scattered  over  a  territory  50  miles  long 
by  20  broad,  and  divided  into  three  detachments,  no  two  of 
which  were  in  supporting  distance.     Moreover,  the  enemy, 


THE  CAMPAIGN  IN  REAR   OF   VICKSBURG.        151 

with  an  equal  force  of  44,000  men,  all  within  a  few  hours' 
march  of  each  other,  was  between  the  two  principal  detach- 
ments, greatly  outnumbering  each  of  them,  though  not  more 
numerous  than  all  the  detachments  combined.  There  never 
was  a  more  striking  instance  of  the  wisdom  of  keeping  an 
army  united  and  the  folly  of  dividing  it  into  detachments  to 
defend  several  points  at  once. 

At  5.40  p.m.  on  May  14th  Pemberton  sent  a  despatch  to 
Johnston  by  an  officer,  stating  his  intention  to  move  against 
Grant's  communications.  The  orders  for  this  movement 
were  immediately  issued.  Loring's  division  was  to  form  the 
right,  Bowen's  the  centre  and  Stevenson's  the  left.  The 
troops  were  to  move  with  the  right  in  front,  preceded  by  a 
detachment  of  cavalry ;  they  were  to  follow  the  roads  lead- 
ing from  Edwards'  Station  toward  Raymond  as  far  as  Ellis- 
ton's  plantation  and  then  turn  south  so  as  to  strike  the  Au- 
burn and  Raymond  road  at  Dillon's.  Grant's  wagon  train 
was  in  fact  in  the  vicinity  of  Dillon's  on  this  day,  but  it  was 
well  guarded  by  McClernand's  and  Blair's  troops.  Pember- 
ton's  order  prescribed  that  the  movement  should  take  place 
in  the  morning  of  the  15th,  but  the  troops  were  not  in  mo- 
tion before  1  p.m.  A  considerable  delay  then  followed  in 
consequence  of  the  heavy  rain  of  the  day  previous.  The 
roads  were  muddy  and  the  ford  at  Baker's  Creek  on  the  di- 
rect road  to  Raymond  was  not  passable.  The  troops  were 
therefore  moved  up  the  creek  to  the  Clinton  road,  which 
crossed  the  creek  on  a  bridge-  Crossing  this  bridge  and 
moving  forward  about  two  miles  to  the  forks  of  the  road 
south  of  Champion's  Hill,  the  head  of  column  turned  to  the 
right  through  a  cross  road  which  brought  them  to  the  di- 
rect Raymond  road  near  Elliston's.  Along  this  cross-road 
Pemberton's  army  passed  the  night.  At  6.30  a.m.,  on  the 
16th,  a  courier  arrived  from  Johnston,  bringing  an  answer  to 


152  THE  MISSISSIPPI. 

Pernberton's  despatch  sent  after  the  council  of  war  on  the 
14th.  Johnston's  reply  was  dated  on  the  Canton  road,  ten 
miles  from  Jackson,  8.30  a.m.,  May  15th.  It  was  as  follows  : 
"Our  being  compelled  to  leave  Jackson  makes  your  plan 
impracticable.  The  only  mode  by  which  we  can  unite  is  by 
your  moving  directly  to  Clinton,  and  informing  me  that  we 
may  move  to  that  point  with  about  six  thousand."  This  was 
a  reiteration  of  the  previous  order  to  effect  a  junction  on  the 
north  of  the  railroad,  which  Pemberton  had  submitted  to  a 
council  and  had  decided  not  to  follow,  because  he  consid- 
ered it  "suicidal."  Having  moved  in  an  opposite  direction 
for  the  purpose  of  attacking  the  enemy's  rear,  and  having 
come  into  such  proximity  to  the  enemy  that  his  advance 
was  already  skirmishing,  Pemberton  now  determined  to 
obey  the  order !  Directions  were  given  to  get  his  trains  out 
of  the  road,  countermarch  his  columns  to  Edwards'  Station, 
and  there  take  the  road  to  Brownsville  in  order  to  join  John- 
ston. The  movement  was,  however,  impossible,  for  the 
enemy  was  already  upon  him. 

On  the  15th  McClernand's  divisions  had  moved  as  fol- 
lows :  Hovey's  from  Clinton  to  Bolton,  Osterhaus'  from  Bay- 
mond  to  the  cross  roads  half  way  to  Bolton,  Carr's  from 
Baymond  to  the  first  cross  roads  northwest  of  that  town,  A. 
J.  Smith's  (followed  by  Blair  s  of  Sherman's  corps)  from  Au- 
burn to  Baymond.  On  the  same  day  McPherson's  corps 
had  marched  from  Jackson  to  within  a  few  miles  of  Hovey's 
bivouac  at  Bolton.  On  the  night  of  May  15th,  therefore, 
Grant  had  seven  divisions,  about  32,000  men,  in  close  sup- 
porting distance  between  Bolton  and  Baymond,  occupying 
all  the  roads  which  converged  from  these  points  on  Edwards' 
Station.  Grant  in  person  reached  Clinton  from  Jackson  at 
4.45  p.m.  on  the  15th,  and  immediately  sent  orders  to  Mc- 
Clernand  to  move  forward  cautiously,  feeling  the  enemy  if 


154  THE  MISSISSIPPI. 

he  encountered  him,  but  not  to  bring  on  an  engagement  un- 
less he  felt  entirely  able  to  contend  with  him ;  also  to  order 
Blair  to  move  forward  with  him. 

Grant  passed  the  night  at  Clinton,  and  at  daylight  the 
next  morning  two  men,  employees  on  the  railroad,  who  had 
passed  through  Pemberton's  camp  the  day  before,  were 
brought  to  his  headquarters.  They  stated  that  Pemberton 
had  80  regiments,  estimated  at  25,000  men  in  all,  and  that 
he  was  moving  to  attack  Grant's  rear.  Grant  thereupon  sent 
a  courier  with  an  order  to  Sherman  to  bring  one  of  his 
divisions  with  the  utmost  possible  speed  to  Bolton,  and  to 
follow  with  the  other  as  soon  as  possible.  He  also  ordered 
McPherson  to  move  on  rapidly  beyond  Bolton  in  support  of 
Hovey,  and  McClernand  to  establish  communication  between 
the  divisions  of  Blair  and  Osterhaus,  and  keep  it  up,  moving 
forward  cautiously.     He  then  rode  to  the  front. 

It  will  be  seen  by  looking  at  the  map  that  from  the  direct 
road  from  Baymond  to  Bolton  (about  8  miles  long),  there 
are  three  roads  leading  to  Edwards'  Station.  They  were 
known  as  the  direct  Baymond  road,  the  middle  Baymond 
road,  and  the  Clinton  road.  The  first  diverges  about  one 
mile  out  from  Baymond,  and  leads  direct  to  Edwards'  Sta- 
tion, crossing  Baker's  Creek  at  a  ford ;  the  second  diverges 
about  two  miles  farther,  and  joins  the  third  on  the  southern 
side  of  Champion's  Hill ;  the  third  passes  half  a  mile  south  of 
Bolton,  and  is  the  direct  road  from  Clinton  to  Edwards'  Sta- 
tion. Champion's  Hill — then  a  portion  of  the  plantation 
of  a  Mr.  Champion — is  not  more  than  70  or  80  feet  in 
height,  but  it  is  quite  a  prominent  feature  in  an  other- 
wise flat  landscape.  Its  northern  side  is  abrupt,  cut  up 
with  steep  ravines,  and  heavily  wooded.  The  eastern  and 
southern  slopes  are  more  gentle  and  are  partly  open.  The 
Clinton   road,  coming  in  a  westerly  direction,  strikes  the 


THE  CAMPAIGN  IN  REAR  OF  VICKSBURG.        155 

northeast  slope  of  the  hill  near  the  point  where  Champion's 
house  then  stood,  then  turns  sharply  to  the  south,  passing 
around  the  eastern  slope  of  the  hill  till  it  meets  the  middle 
road,  then  turns  sharply  to  the  west  again  and  goes  on  to 
the  bridge  over  Baker's  Creek,  at  the  foot  of  the  western 
slope.  On  the  mornings  of  the  16th  the  position  was  as  fol- 
lows :  Hovey's  division  was  on  the  Clinton  road,  moving 
west  from  Bolton  to  Champion's  Hill,  with  McPherson's 
corps  a  few  miles  behind  them;  Osterhaus,  followed  by 
Carr,  was  on  the  middle  road,  moving  northwest  to  the  same 
point ;  and  A.  J.  Smith,  followed  by  Blair,  was  on  the  direct 
Baymond  road,  near  Elliston's,  moving  forward  toward  Ed- 
wards' Station.  On  the  Confederate  side  Loring  was  on  the 
Raymond  road  near  Elliston's,  skirmishing  with  A.  J.  Smith, 
Bowen  was  in  the  centre,  on  a  small  cross-road  leading  to 
Champion's  Hill,  and  Stevenson  was  on  the  left,  at  the  junc- 
tion of  the  Clinton  and  middle  roads.  All  three  were  under 
orders  to  countermarch  to  Edwards'  Station.  It  was  soon 
found,  however,  that  the  Union  troops  (McClernand's)  were 
pressing  their  rear  so  closely  that  the  order  to  countermarch 
could  not  be  carried  out.  It  was  necessary  to  stop  and  fight. 
Orders  were  therefore  given  to  form  line  of  battle  behind  a 
creek  running  in  front  of  the  cross  road  above  mentioned. 
This  position  was  assumed  between  9  and  10  a.m.  As  the 
skirmishing  and  artillery  firing  increased  in  amount  on  the 
Baymond  road  as  soon  as  the  enemy  made  a  stand,  Mc- 
Clernand  sent  word  to  Grant  at  9.45  a.m.  to  ask  if  he  should 
bring  on  a  general  engagement.  Grant  had  ridden  forward 
from  Clinton  early  in  the  morning,  and  near  Bolton  had 
found  McPherson's  corps  repairing  a  bridge,  and  the  road  in 
front  of  them  blocked  with  Hovey's  wagons.  These  were 
quickly  moved  out  of  the  way  and  McPherson's  corps  re- 
sumed its  advance.     Grant  came  up  with  Hovey's  division 


156  THE  MISSISSIPPI. 

not  far  from  Champion's  house  about  10  a.m.  Hcvey's 
skirmishers  were  already  in  contact  with  the  enemy,  and  he 
was  forming  his  men  in  readiness  to  bring  on  an  action  at 
any  moment,  but  Grant  directed  him  not  to  attack  until  he 
heard  from  McClernand. 

About  noon  McClernand's  9.45  a.m.  despatch  was  received, 
asking  if  he  should  bring  on  an  engagement.  From  the 
bearer  Grant  learned  that  McClernand  was  between  two  and 
three  miles  distant.  Grant  sent  a  written  reply  at  12.35  p.m., 
directing  McClernand  to  attack  the  enemy  in  force,  if  oppor- 
tunity occurred.  Subsequently  verbal  messages  were  sent, 
directing  him  to  push  forward  with  all  rapidity.  These 
orders  did  not  reach  McClernand  until  after  2  p.m.  He  im- 
mediately ordered  Smith  and  Osterhaus  to  "  attack  the  en- 
emy vigorously,  and  press  for  victory."  But  the  attack  was 
by  no  means  vigorous. 

On  the  other  flank,  McPherson's  corps  had  reached  the 
field  about  11  a.m.,  Logan's  division  in  the  lead,  with 
Crocker  a  short  distance  in  the  rear.  As  soon  as  Logan  ar- 
rived, Hovey's  two  brigades  were  deployed  on  the  left 
(southeast)  of  the  Clinton  road,  and  two  brigades  of  Lo- 
gan's division  formed  on  the  right  of  the  road,  the  third  bri- 
gade being  held  in  reserve.  Hovey's  men  immediately 
advanced,  and,  swinging  their  left  flank  forward,  they 
began  climbing  the  eastern  front  of  the  hill  under  a  heavy 
fire.  The  troops  opposed  to  them  were  two  brigades  of  Ste- 
venson's division.  While  Hovey  had  been  forming  his  men 
and  waiting  for  the  arrival  of  McPherson,  Stevenson  had  no- 
ticed the  concentration  on  his  left  flank,  and  had  taken  the 
brigade  (Barton's)  on  his  extreme  right  and  sent  it  in  rear 
of  his  line  to  the  extreme  left  to  take  position  in  the  woods 
on  Champion's  Hill  facing  north ;  the  other  two  brigades 
(Lee's  and  Cumming's)  had  been  marched  by  the  left  flank 


THE  CAMPAIGN  IN  REAR   OF   VIOKSBURG.        157 

along  the  road,  and  had  taken  position  around  the  northeast 
point  of  the  hill,  where  the  Clinton  road  ascends  it,  and 
from  there  to  the  left ;  his  fourth  brigade  (Reynolds')  had 
gone  back  "with  the  trains  toward  Edwards'  Station.  Ho- 
vey's  attack  led  against  the  right  flank  of  Stevenson's  new 
position,  and  the  men  gradually  fought  their  way  up  the 
hill,  driving  back  Cumming's  brigade  fully  600  yards,  and 
capturing  11  guns,  the  horses  of  which  had  nearly  all 
been  killed  by  the  well-directed  fire  of  Hovey's  batteries 
posted  near  Champion's  house.  While  Hovey  was  making 
this  attack,  two  brigades  (J.  E.  Smith's  and  Leggett's)  of 
Logan's  division  had  advanced  against  the  northern  slope  of 
the  hill  on  Hovey's  right.  They  gradually  and  steadily 
drove  the  enemy  before  them  as  they  climbed  the  wooded 
slope ;  and,  when  their  attack  was  well  advanced,  the  third 
brigade  (Stevenson's)  of  this  division,  which  had  been  kej)t 
in  reserve  for  about  an  hour,  was  brought  up  on  their  right 
and  sent  across  a  ravine,  penetratiug  between  Lee's  and 
Barton's  brigades,  cutting  off  the  latter  from  all  communi- 
cation with  the  rest  of  his  division,  and  capturing  7  guns. 

Hovey  maintained  his  position  until  about  2  p.m.,  when 
the  enemy  was  heavily  reinforced,  and  he  was  driven  back. 
In  moving  over  to  the  left  during  the  morning,  Stevenson, 
had  notified  Pemberton  that  the  main  attack  was  evidently 
to  be  on  his  left  flank,  and,  if  successful,  it  would  cut  off 
the  line  of  retreat  to  Edwards'  Station.  He  therefore  in- 
tended to  move  as  rapidly  as  possible  to  meet  it,  but,  in  so 
doing,  he  w7ould  necessarily  leave  a  gap  between  his  division 
and  Bowen's.  On  receipt  of  this,  Pemberton  ordered  Bowen 
to  follow  Stevenson,  and  keep  this  gap  closed.  Shortly 
after  2  p.m.  Bowen  closed  up  w7ith  Stevenson,  and  found 
Hovey's  men  in  possession  of  the  crest  of  the  hill  and  of  the 
captured  guns.     The  leading  brigade  (Cockrell's)  was  imme- 


158  THE  MISSISSIPPI. 

diately  sent  into  action  against  Hovey,  followed  quickly  by 
the  other  brigade  (Green's).  Overpowered  by  superior  num- 
bers, Hovey's  men  were  forced  to  give  way ;  they  fell  back 
slowly,  fighting  desperately  for  every  foot,  but  were  gradu- 
ally driven  down  the  hill,  and  back  through  the  open  fields 
around  Champion's  house,  losing  all  but  two  of  the  eleven 
guns  which  they  had  captured.  But  by  this  time  Crocker's 
division  had  come  up,  and,  on  an  appeal  from  Hovey  to 
Grant  for  reinforcements,  this  division  was  ordered  to  sup- 
port Hovey.  These  two  divisions  now  moved  forward  again, 
driving  the  Confederates  before  them,  and  for  the  third 
time  contesting  the  possession  of  the  slope  of  the  hill.  In 
sight  of  this  advance,  Cumming's  brigade,  of  Stevenson's 
division,  broke  and  fled;  Bowen's  Missouri  troops  made  a 
desperate  fight,  but  were  finally  forced  to  give  way,  losing 
five  of  the  guns  which  had  previously  been  lost  and  recap- 
tured. They  made  their  retreat  through  a  cross-road  near 
that  where  they  had  first  formed  in  the  morning,  and,  reach- 
ing the  direct  Raymond  road,  they  retreated  to  the  ford  over 
Baker's  Creek.  Stevenson's  division  was  completely  routed 
and  broken  up ;  Barton's  brigade  retreated  across  Baker's 
Creek  by  the  bridge  on  the  Clinton  road,  hotly  pursued  by 
Logan's  men,  and  Cumming's  and  Lee's  brigades  fled  in 
confusion  to  the  Raymond  road,  and  thence  to  the  ford. 

"When  the  attack  became  so  decided  on  the  left  flank, 
Loring  was  at  first  ordered  to  send  one,  and  then  a  second 
brigade  to  the  assistance  of  Stevenson  and  Bowen.  Buford's 
brigade  moved  first,  followed  by  Featherston's  with  Loring 
in  person;  the  third  brigade  (Tilghman's)  was  left  on  the 
lower  road  to  confront  Smith's  and  Blair's  divisions.  The 
two  brigades  did  not  reach  the  forks  of  the  Clinton  and 
middle  roads  before  the  entire  left  flank  was  routed.  Loring 
was  then  notified  to  form  his  men  between  the  Clinton  and 


THE  CAMPAIGN  IN  REAR  OF  VICKSBURG.        159 

Raymond  roads,  to  cover  the  retreat  of  Bowen's  division  and 
pick  up  some  of  Stevenson's  fugitives.  In  this  position  he 
was  attacked  by  Osterhans'  division  and  soon  gave  way. 
He  fell  back  again  to  the  Baymond  road,  and  there  met 
Tilghman's  brigade,  which  had  made  a  gallant  attack  against 
Smith's  division,  in  the  course  of  which  Tilghman  had  been 
killed ;  the  brigade  had  been  repulsed  and  was  now  falling 
back.  Loring  then  retreated  along  the  Raymond  road 
toward  the  ford  on  Baker's  Creek,  having  received  word  from 
Stevenson  and  Bowen  that  they  would  hold  the  ford  until 
he  arrived.  But  they  were  unable  to  keep  their  word,  for 
about  sunset,  a  portion  of  Carr's  division,  which  had  moved 
rapidly  forward  and  crossed  at  the  bridge  on  the  Clinton  road, 
began  taking  a  position  which  would  command  the  Baymond 
road.  Stevenson  and  Bowen  moved  off  hastily  while  there 
was  yet  time,  and  when  Loring  reached  the  ford  he  found  the 
Union  troops  on  the  opposite  bank.  He  then  turned  back 
in  search  of  another  ford  lower  down  the  creek,  and  wan- 
dered about  on  unknown  roads  during  several  hours  of  the 
night,  abandoning  all  his  artillery — only  to  learn  when  he  did 
find  a  ford  that  the  Union  troops  were  already  in  Edwards' 
Station,  thus  completely  cutting  him  off  from  the  rest  of  the 
army.  He  therefore  moved  off  to  the  south,  and  on  the  fol- 
lowing day  reported  to  Johnston  his  arrival,  "without  bag- 
gage, wagons,  or  cooking  utensils,"  at  Crystal  Springs,  on 
the  New  Orleans  Railroad,  25  miles  south  of  Jackson. 
Bowen's  division,  and  the  remnants  of  Stevenson's,  made 
their  way  back  to  the  Big  Black  River. 

The  rout  of  Pemberton's  army  was  complete.  But  if  Mc- 
Clernand  had  acted  with  the  energy  shown  by  McPherson, 
and  the  three  division  commanders  with  him,  Logan,  Hovey, 
and  Crocker,  every  man  in  Pemberton's  army  would  prob- 
ably have   been  captured.     Hovey's   and  Logan's  divisions 


160 


THE  MISSISSIPPI. 


brought  on  the  battle  by  an  energetic  attack,  and  when 
Pemberton  threw  his  whole  force  upon  them,  the  three 
together  bore  the  brunt  of  the  battle.  McClernand  had 
four  divisions — more  than  half  of  the  army — on  the  middle 
and  Eaymond  roads.  Had  he  thrown  his  men  in  with  the 
vigor  displayed  by  Hovey  and  Logan,  he  would  have  brushed 
aside  the  small  force  in  front  of  him,  and  cut  off  the  retreat 
by  the  Eaymond  road  to  the  ford,  in  the  same  manner  that 
Logan  cut  off  the  Clinton  road  to  the  bridge.  Pemberton 
would  then  have  been  confronted  with  superior  forces  on 
three  sides,  and  an  impassable  stream  on  the  fourth,  and  in 
the  demoralized  condition  of  his  men  that  evening,  he 
would  have  had  no  option  but  to  surrender.  That  these  four 
divisions  under  McOlernand's  command  were  not  energet- 
ically employed  is  abundantly  shown  by  the  following  table 
of  losses. 


Killed. 

Wounded. 

Missing. 

Total. 

211 

48 

123 

14 

1 

0 

0 

872 

326 

539 

76 

0 

24 

0 

119 

29 

0 

20 
2 
4 
0 

1,202 

403 

662 

Osterhaus'    "        

Carr's            "        

110 
3 

28 

0 

397 

1,837 

174 

2,408 

The  Confederate  losses  were  reported  as  follows : 


1 

Killed. 

Wounded. 

Missing. 

Total. 

Stevenson's  division 

233 

131 

16 

527 

430 

61 

2,091 

307 

43 

2,851 

868 

120 

380 

1,018 

2,441 

3,839 

THE  CAMPAIGN   IN   REAR   OF  VICKSBURG.        161 

But  if  Pemberton's  army  was  not  captured  it  was  very 
thoroughly  routed,  with  the  loss  of  24  pieces  of  artillery  ; 
its  wagons  were  saved,  owing  to  their  early  departure  during 
the  morning  under  the  orders  for  a  retrograde  movement  to 
join  Johnston. 

During  the  night  of  the  16th  the  demoralized  troops  kept 
arriving  at  the  railroad  bridge  over  the  Big  Black.  Rey- 
nolds' and  Barton's  brigades  went  through  Edwards'  Station, 
closely  pursued  by  Oarr's  division  of  McClernand's  corps, 
which  reached  that  point  at  8  p.m.,  and  passed  the  night 
there.  The  rest  of  Pemberton's  men  avoided  that  place  and 
moved  straight  from.  Baker's  Creek  Ford  to  the  railroad 
bridge.  Pemberton  was  already  there  when  they  arrived, 
and  directed  the  disordered  regiments  of  Stevenson's  divi- 
sion  to  move  on  as  far  as  Mt.  Alban's  Station ;  but  the  men 
gave  out  from  exhaustion  when  they  had  gone  as  far  as  Bo- 
vina,  and  they  were  halted  at  that  point  between  1  and  2 
o'clock  in  the  morning.  Bowen's  division  was  ordered  into' 
the  trenches  covering  the  bridge,  and  it  was  intended  that 
Loring's  division  should  form  on  the  west  bank.  But  Lor- 
ing  never  appeared. 

When  Pemberton  first  moved  out  from  Vicksburg  afhcr 
the  battle  of  Port  Gibson,  it  was  his  intention  to  defend  the 
line  of  the  Big  Black,  and  for  this  purpose  he  ordered  tetes-- 
de-pont  to  be  constructed,  covering  the  principal  ferries  and 
the  railroad  bridge.  Grant's  troops  arrived  at  the  ferries  so 
quickly  that  it  was  impossible  to  defend  them,  but  a  tete-de- 
pont  had  been  constructed  in  front  of  the  railroad  bridge. 
At  this  point  the  river  makes  a  wide  bend  in  the  form  of  a 
horseshoe,  the  distance  in  a  straight  line  across  the  loop  be- 
ing about  a  mile.  The  ground  on  the  concave  side  of  the 
bend  was  perfectly  flat  and  entirely  open,  excepting  some 
bunches  of  timber  hero  and  there ;  a  narrow  but  deep  ditch 


162  THE  MISSISSIPPI 

or  bayou  ran  across  this  ground  in  a  nearly  straight  line. 
On  the  other  side  of  the  river  the  bluffs  were  40  or  50  feet 
high,  and  the  ground  very  broken.  The  line  selected  for 
the  trenches  ran  straight  across  the  open  ground  behind  this 
ditch.  Work  was  begun  upon  it  on  the  12th  of  May  and 
finished  on  the  15th.  This  line  would  have  served  its  pur- 
pose as  a  tete-de-pont,  had  it  been  occupied  by  a  small  ad- 
vanced guard,  supported  by  the  main  body  in  strong  force, 
properly  posted  in  its  rear  on  the  west  bank.  Unfortunately 
for  Pemberton,  the  troops  (Loring's  division)  which  he  had 
intended  to  post  on  the  west  bank,  as  they  had  been  the 
least  engaged  at  Champion's  Hill,  were  cut  off  in  that  battle 
and  never  rejoined  him.  He  was  thus  caught  defending  a 
bridge  with  nearly  all  his  reliable  troops  in  the  tete-de-pont, 
and  nothing  in  support.  A  complete  stampede  was  the  re- 
sult. 

In  moving  forward  to  Edwards'  Station  on  the  13th  and 
14th  with  his  field  army,  Pemberton  had  called  up  two  bri- 
gades from  those  left  in  the  defences  of  Vicksburg,  and  had 
stationed  them  at  the  Big  Black  bridge  to  secure  that  point 
in  his  rear  against  surprise.  These  were  Vaughn's  and 
Baldwin's  brigades  of  Smith's  division,  the  former  of  which 
was  posted  in  the  trenches  on  the  east  bank,  and  the  latter 
at  Bovina,  a  few  miles  in  rear,  in  support.  During  the  night 
of  the  16th  Bo  wen's  division  was  halted  and  placed  in  the 
same  trenches,  Cockrell's  brigade  on  the  right  and  Green's 
brigade  on  the  left  of  Vaughn.  The  object  was  to  defend 
the  position  long  enough  to  cover  the  crossing  of  Loring's 
division  as  soon  as  it  should  arrive.  In  order  to  facilitate 
the  crossing,  the  ties  of  the  railroad  bridge  were  planked, 
and  a  second  bridge  was  improvised  by  taking  a  steamer 
which  haj)pened  to  be  there  and  mooring  it  athwart  the 
stream.     It  was  nearly  as  long  as  the  stream  was  wide,  and 


THE  CAMPAIGN  IN  REAR   OF  VICKSBURG.        163 

the  vacant  spaces  at  stein  and  stern  were  bridged  over  with 
plank. 

Grant's  army  passed  the  night  of  the  16th  between  the 
battlefield  and  Edwards'  Station,  with  the  exception  of  Sher- 
man's corps,  which  bivouacked  at  Bolton.  At  daylight  the 
next  morning  the  pursuit  was  resumed,  McClernand's  corps 
in  the  lead,  moving  toward  Big  Black  bridge,  followed  by 
MePhersou.  Sherman's  corps  moved  from  Bolton  direct  to 
Bridgeport,  in  order  to  turn  the  position  at  the  bridge.  Carr's 
division,  which  was  in  the  advance,  came  in  sight  of  the 
trenches  at  the  bridge  about  8  a.m.,  and  he  immediately  de- 
ployed his  two  brigades  on  the  right  of  the  road.  Osterhaus 
was  but  a  short  distance  behind  him,  and  as  soon  as  he  came 
up  his  division  was  deployed  on  the  left  of  the  road.  A  few 
batteries  were  brought  into  position  and  some  skirmishers 
sent  forward,  but  the  ground  to  the  left  of  the  road  was  com- 
pletely open,  and  it  was  not  deemed  advisable  to  assault  the 
works  across  such  ground  until  more  troops  should  come 
up.  On  the  right  of  the  road,  however,  there  was  a  clump 
of  woods  extending  nearly  to  the  river,  and  Carr  moved  his 
men  to  these  woods  in  order  to  gain  an  advantageous  posi- 
tion for  assault. 

On  the  Confederate  side  everything  was  at  odds  and  ends. 
There  seemed  to  be  no  one  in  command,  and  the  horses 
of  the  field  guns  that  had  been  placed  in  the  trenches 
had  been  removed  across  the  river ;  if  a  retreat  became 
necessary  the  guns  must  bo  abandoned.  The  distance 
from  the  point  where  the  trenches  crossed  the  road  to  the 
bridge  was  fully  three-quarters  of  a  mile  ;  it  was  perfectly 
open  ground,  and  there  was  no  supporting  force  on  the  other 
bank  of  the  river.  Under  such  circumstances,  in  case  of  a 
retreat  the  men  would  be  slaughtered.  There  were  not  more 
than  5,000  men  in  the  trenches,  and  fully  double  that  num- 


161  THE   MISSISSIPPI. 

ber  now  confronted  them,  with  the  prospect  of  more  to  ar- 
rive very  soon.  The  "  Missouri  division "  (Bowen's),  was 
renowned  for  hard  fighting,  both  before  and  after  this  affair, 
but  this  was  a  case  to  try  the  nerves  of  the  steadiest  veterans, 
for  every  man  felt  instinctively  that  he  was  in  a  position 
where  he  ought  never  to  have  been  placed.  As  they  ob- 
served the  movement  toward  the  woods  on  their  left  flank, 
many  of  them  slipped  off  one  by  one  to  the  bridge  in  rear. 

Meanwhile  brisk  firing  was  carried  on  opposite  the  centre 
for  about  half  an  hour,  during  which  Carr's  division  was 
moving  into  the  piece  of  woods  on  the  right,  and  A.  J. 
Smith's  division  was  coming  up  and  forming  on  Osterhaus' 
left.  Just  as  Smith's  division  was  coming  into  line  Carr's 
men  emerged  from  the  woods  with  a  loud  cheer,  and  rushed 
forward  upon  the  intrenchments.  Vaughn's  brigade  in  the 
centre  saw  that  they  were  cut  off  from  the  bridge  and  im- 
mediately turned  and  ran  at  full  speed.  Bowen's  division 
at  first  attempted  to  make  a  defence,  but  in  a  few  minutes 
saw  that  it  was  hopeless,  and  it  then  joined  in  the  attempt 
to  reach  the  bridge.  All  the  reports,  Union  and  Confeder- 
ate, speak  of  this  as  a  precipitate  flight,  every  man  for  him- 
self. The  18  pieces  of  artillery  were  all  abandoned,  over. 
1,400  small  arms  were  thrown  away,  and  one-third  of  the 
command  (1,751  men)  were  cut  off  and  made  prisoners.  The 
rest  reached  the  bridges  in  time,  and  immediately  after 
crossing  set  fire  to  them.  As  they  had  been  rjreviously  pre- 
pared for  this  purpose  by  scattering  loose  cotton  and  tur- 
pentine on  them,  they  were  quickly  consumed.  The  losses 
on  the  Federal  side  in  this  engagement  were  273  in  killed 
and  wounded,  all  but  30  of  which  were  in  Carr's  division. 
The  whole  affair  was  over  soon  after  9  o'clock  in  the  morn- 
ing. 

The  rest  of  the  day  and  the   night  were   consumed   in 


THE  CAMPAIGN  IN  REAR   OF   VICKSBURG.        163 

building  bridges.  One  was  constructed  near  the  site  of  the 
railroad  bridge  for  McClernand's  corps.  McPherson's  corps 
reached  the  river  about  three  miles  to  his  right  about  2  p.m., 
and  immediately  began  the  construction  of  two  bridges,  one 
of  solid  timber,  and  the  other  of  timber  cribs  filled  with 
cotton  bales  and  floored  with  planks  obtained  by  tearing- 
down  a  cotton  gin  in  the  vicinity.  Sherman's  corps  (re- 
joined on  this  day  by  Blair's  division)  reached  the  river  at 
Bridgeport  at  noon.  The  only  pontoon  bridge  train  ac- 
companying the  army  was  with  Sherman,  and  his  bridge 
was  ready  by  nightfall.  The  others  were  not  completed 
until  after  midnight. 

"When  the  engagement  opened  in  the  morning,  Peniber- 
ton,  who  was  at  Bovina,  telegraphed  to  Vicksburg  for  a  train 
of  cars ;  as  soon  as  it  arrived,  after  sending  a  note  by  a 
scout  to  Johnston  to  inform  him  of  the  disasters  of  the  pre- 
ceding and  present  day,  and  to  state  that  Haines'  Bluff  was 
now  untenable,  he  hastened  to  Yicksburg,  turning  over  the 
command  to  Stevenson  with  orders  to  bring  the  army  back, 
and  take  post  behind  the  fortifications.  The  delay  neces- 
sary to  construct  bridges  gave  the  Confederates  the  whole  of 
the  17th  in  which  to  effect  their  retreat  to  Vicksburg  (12 
miles)  unmolested.  On  his  arrival  at  the  latter  place,  Pem- 
berton  telegraphed  to  Haines'  Bluff,  directing  Hebert's 
brigade  of  Smith's  division,  which  formed  the  garrison  at 
that  point  to  return  forthwith  to  Vicksburg,  leaving  two 
companies  to  spike  the  guns  and  blow  up  the  magazines  on 
the  approach  of  the  enemy.  He  then  made  arrangements 
to  dispose  the  troops,  as  they  came  in,  for  the  defence  of 
Vicksburg.  Stevenson's  division  (four  brigades)  was  placed 
on  the  right,  holding  the  line  from  Warrenton  to  the  rail- 
road, about  five  miles  ;  Forney's  division  (two  brigades)  was 
in  the  centre,  from   the  railroad  to  the  graveyard  road,  a 


166  THE  MISSISSIPPI. 

distance  of  about  two  miles  ;  M.  L.  Smith's  division  (three 
brigades)  was  on  the  left,  from  the  graveyard  road  to  the 
river,  about  two  miles ;  Bo  wen's  division,  and  some  small 
detachments  that  had  been  called  in  from  Fort  Pemberton 
and  other  points,  were  placed  in  reserve.1  During  the  two 
weeks  since  he  left  Vicksburg  Pemberton  had  lost  the  whole 
of  Loring's  division,  8,700  men,  in  addition  to  the  killed, 
wounded,  and  missing  in  Stevenson's  and  Bowen's  divisions 
at  Champion's  Hill  and  Big  Black,  amounting  to  about 
5,300 ;  so  that  instead  of  35,000,  he  nowT  had  about  21,000 
effective  men  to  guard  his  trenches,  although  doubtless  his 
rolls  of  men  drawing  rations  at  this  time  numbered  over 
33,000.  His  troops  all  returned  from  the  Big  Black  during 
the  afternoon  of  the  17th  and  were  in  their  places  early  on 
the  18th.  They  had  the  whole  of  that  day  to  recover  their 
composure  before  their  pursuers  could  arrive. 

Sherman  crossed  two  divisions  at  Bridgeport  during  the 
night  of  the  17th,  followed  by  the  other  division  the  next 
morning.  At  break  of  day  his  leading  divisions  were  on 
the  road  to  Vicksburg.  McClernand's  corps,  with  the  excep- 
tion of  Hovey's  division,  which  was  left  at  Edwards'  Station 
and  Big  Black,  began  crossing  in  the  morning  of  the  18th 
and  was  on  the  march  by  noon.  He  followed  the  direct  road 
to  Vicksburg  until  after  passing  Mt.  Alban's  Station,  where 
he  turned  into  the  Baldwin's  Ferry  road  so  as  to  give  room 
for  McPherson  between  himself  and  Sherman.  McPherson's 
corps,  which  had  been  joined  on  the  evening  of  the  16th  by 
one  brigade  of  McArthur's  division,  crossed  in  the  morning 
and  moved  up  to  the  Bridgeport  road,  following  in  rear  of 
Sherman's  corps.  By  10  a.m.,  Sherman  had  reached  the 
Benton    road,   thus    interposing    between  Vicksburg  and 

1  See  map,  Siege  of  Vicksburg. 


THE  CAMPAIGN  IN  REAR  OP   VICKSBURG.        167 

Haines'  Bluff.  A  regiment  of  cavalry  was  immediately  sent 
to  take  the  batteries  at  the  latter  place  from  the  rear.  Sher- 
man halted  a  couple  of  hours  to  allow  his  men  to  close  up 
and  rest,  and  to  receive  instructions  from  Grant,  who  soon 
came  up.  Sherman  was  directed  to  form  the  right  of  the 
line,  and  at  noon  he  resumed  his  march.  About  two  miles 
outside  the  intrenchments  the  road  forked,  the  right  hand 
known  as  the  Graveyard,  and  the  left  hand  as  the  Jackson, 
road;  both  leading  into  Vicksburg.  Sherman  took  the 
right  hand  and  on  approaching  the  defences  moved  two  di- 
visions toward  the  right  along  the  ridge  extending  to  the 
Mississippi.  Only  one  brigade  of  McPherson's  corps  came 
up  that  night,  Logan's  and  Quinby's ]  divisions  being  halted 
a  few  miles  back  on  the  road  at  nightfall.  About  half  of 
Grant's  army  was  in  sight  of  the  fortifications  on  the  night 
of  the  18th.  The  cavalry  regiment  sent  to  Haines'  Bluff  by 
Sherman  arrived  in  rear  of  the  batteries  at  that  point  during 
the  afternoon.  The  two  Confederate  companies  left  behind 
to  destroy  the  guns  had  fled  without  accomplishing  their 
purpose,  and  the  cavalrymen  rode  in  without  opposition. 
Signal  was  made  to  a  gunboat  lying  in  the  Yazoo  and  it 
came  up  and  took  possession.  The  magazine  was  full  of 
ammunition  and  the  guns  were  all  in  good  order.  There 
were  14  of  them,  of  the  heaviest  calibre  of  that  period. 

The  note  which  Pemberton  had  sent  from  Bovina  on  the 
morning  of  the  17th  was  delivered  to  Johnston  during  the 
succeeding  night  at  a  point  on  the  road  between  Livingston 
and  Brownsville,  whither  he  had  moved  in  the  hope  of  join- 
ing Pemberton.  Johnston  immediately  answered  in  these 
words:    "If  Haines'  Bluff  is  untenable,  Vicksburg  is  of  no 

1  Quinby  had  been  on  leave  of  absence  since  May  1st,  in  consequence  of  severe 
illness,  but  rejoined  his  command  on  the  morning  of  the  17th.  During  his  ab- 
sence his  division  was  commanded  by  Crocker. 


1G8  THE  MISSISSIPPI. 

value  and  cannot  be  held.  If,  therefore,  von  are  invested 
in  Vicksburg,  you  must  ultimately  surrender.  Under  such 
circumstances,  instead  of  losing  both  troops  and  place,  we 
must,  if  possible,  save  the  troops.  If  it  is  not  too  late, 
evacuate  Vicksburg  and  its  dependencies,  and  march  to  the 
northeast."  This  was  received  by  Pemberton  at  noon  of  the 
18th.  On  reading  it  he  was  fairly  aghast.  He  says  in  his 
report  :  "The  evacuation  of  Vicksburg!  It  meant  the  loss 
of  the  valuable  stores  and  munitions  of  war  collected  for  its 
defence,  the  fall  of  Port  Hudson,  the  surrender  of  the  Mis- 
sissippi River,  and  the  severance  of  the  Confederacy.  These 
were  mighty  interests,  which,  had  I  deemed  the  evacuation 
practicable,  in  the  sense  in  which  I  interpreted  General 
Johnston's  instructions,  might  well  have  made  me  hesitate 
to  execute  them." 

Much  might  be  said  on  both  sides  of  Johnston's  proposi- 
tion, but  the  question  of  the  moment  was,  could  the  order 
be  obeyed  ?  Pemberton  called  a  council  of  war,  read  John- 
ston's note,  and  asked  the  opinion  of  his  generals  if  it  were 
practicable  to  comply  with  it.  Their  opinion  was  unani- 
mous, "  that  it  was  impossible  to  withdraw  the  army  from 
this  position  with  such  morale  and  material  as  to  be  of  fur- 
ther service  to  the  Confederacy."  While  the  council  was 
deliberating,  guns  were  heard  booming  outside  the  works. 
Sherman  already  held  the  road  leading  "to  the  northeast." 
Pemberton  wrote  a  note  to  Johnston,  stating  the  action  of 
the  council,  and  announcing  his  intention  to  hold  Vicksburg 
to  the  last,  as  he  "  conceived  it  to  be  the  most  important 
point  in  the  Confederacy."  Having  sent  this  by  a  scout,  he 
resumed  his  occupation  of  giving  orders  for  the  defence. 

A  portion  of  Smith's  division  had  occupied  the  ridge  be- 
yond Fort  Hill,  looking  down  into  the  Yazoo  bottom  on  the 
north  of  the  city.     Pemberton  thought  that  this  gave  too 


THE  CAMPAIGN   IN   REAR  OF  VICKSBURG.        169 

great  a  development  to  his  line  for  the  number  of  troops  on 
hand,  and  he  therefore  ordered  Smith  to  withdraw  to  the 
Fort  Hill  ridge  in  rear  of  it.  This  was  accomplished  quietly 
during  the  night.  Steele's  division,  of  Sherman's  corps, 
was  working  its  way  along  this  ridge  at  nightfall  on  the 
18th,  and  in  the  morning  he  took  possession  of  these  de- 
serted batteries,  and  extended  his  right  to  the  Mississippi 
River.  At  8  a.m.  on  the  19th  Sherman's  corps  was  in  posi- 
tion about  400  yards  from  the  enemy's  works,  on  the  same 
ground  it  occupied  throughout  the  siege — i.e.,  on  the  ridge 
beyond  Fort  Hill,  from  the  Mississippi  River  to  the  Grave- 
yard road;  Steele's  division  was  on  the  right,  Blair's  on  the 
left,  and  Tuttle's  in  reserve.  McClernand's  corps  came  into 
position  about  2,500  yards  from  the  enemy's  works  near 
the  Baldwin's  Ferry  road ;  Osterhaus's  division  on  the  left 
of  that  road,  A.  J.  Smith's  on  the  right,  and  Carr's  in  re- 
serve. McPherson's  corps  arrived  only  a  short  time  before 
noon,  and  took  position  on  the  Jackson  road,  between  Sher- 
man and  McClernand  ;  Logan's  division  on  the  right,  and 
Quinby's  on  the  left,  each  with  a  brigade  in  reserve.  Slier- 
man  was  so  close  to  the  enemy's  works  that  skirmishing 
had  been  going  on  during  the  whole  morning.  The  other 
corps  were  hardly  yet  in  position  to  attack,  but  Grant  relied 
upon  the  demoralization  of  the  enemy,  due  to  his  constant 
defeats  in  recent  battles,  and  he  therefore  ordered  a  general 
assault  at  2  p.m.  Sherman's  corps  made  a  vigorous  effort 
against  the  works  near  the  Graveyard  road,  and  his  men 
succeeded  in  reaching  the  ditch,  but,  being  unsupported 
by  the  other  corps,  they  were  repulsed.  McClernand  and 
McPherson  were  so  far  from  the  works,  that  they  had  suc- 
ceeded in  accomplishing  nothing  more  than  an  advance 
for  several  hundred  yards  under  a  heavy  fire,  when  dark- 
ness closed  in  upon  them.  The  troops  on  the  defence 
VIII.— 8 


170  THE  MISSISSIPPI. 

were  intelligent  veterans.  They  had  been  marched,  and 
countermarched,  and  fought,  with  very  little  plan  and  sys- 
tem for  the  last  two  weeks,  culminating  in  the  affair  at 
Black  River  bridge,  where  they  had  run  like  sheep.  But 
now  they  were  in  intrenchments  which  had  been  prepared 
long  before,  and  they  felt  at  home.  Their  demoralization 
was  all  gone,  and  they  stood  up  in  their  works,  and  poured 
out  such  a  fire  as  beat  back  Sherman's  troops  with  compara- 
tive ease.  It  was  evident  that  Vicksburg  was  not  to  be 
taken  by  a  mere  coup-de-main. 

It  was  now  eighteen  days  since  Grant  had  secured  a  foot- 
ing on  the  east  bank  of  the  Mississippi  by  the  battle  of  Port 
Gibson.  In  that  time  he  had  marched  about  200  miles,  and 
by  keeping  his  army  together  had  defeated  the  enemy's  scat- 
tered detachments  in  four  engagements,  at  Raymond,  Jack- 
son, Champion's  Hill,  and  Big  Black,  all  fought  within  six 
days ;  he  had  inflicted  a  loss  upon  them  of  8,000 !  in  killed, 
wounded,  and  missing,  had  captured  88  pieces  of  their  artil- 
lery, and,  finally,  had  driven  them  into  the  narrow  defences 
of  Vicksburg,  causing  their  outworks  at  Haines'  Bluff,  War- 
renton,  and  Grand  Gulf  to  be  abandoned,  and  establishing 
his  own  base  on  the  Yazoo  River  in  easy  and  safe  reach  of 
his  gunboats  and  transports.  He  had  not  only  prevented 
the  junction  of  the  enemy's  detachments,  but  had  still  fur- 
ther scattered  their  forces,  so  that  they  had  fully  14,000  less 
men  available  in  Vicksburg  at  the  close  of  this  period  than 
at  the  beginning.  During  these  eighteen  days  Grant's  men 
had  had  but  five  days'  rations,  having  lived  for  the  rest  on 
the  country ;  their  own  losses  had  been  a  little  less  than 
3,500.     We  must  go  back  to  the  campaigns  of  Napoleon  to 

1  At  Raymond,  800;  Jackson,  3,100;  Champion's  Hill,  4,100;  Big  Black,  2,000. 
The  number  of  prisoners  which  reached  Memphis,  May  29th,  on  their  way  North, 
was  reported  by  Hurlbut  at  4,500. 


THE  CAMPAIGN  IN   REAR  OF   VICKSBURG.        171 

find  equally  brilliant  results  accomplished  in  the  same  space 
of  time  with  such  small  loss. 

His  success  was  aided — as  was  Napoleon's  in  1796 — by  the 
incapacity  of  his  opponents.  There  can  be  little  question 
that  when  Grant  crossed  the  river,  the  proper  movement  for 
Pemberton  was  to  abandon  Jackson,  and  concentrate  his 
whole  force  for  a  decisive  battle.  Yet  such  a  movement 
involved  a  great  sacrifice,  for  Jackson  was  the  meeting-point 
of  railroads  by  which  reinforcements  were  arriving  and  were 
to  arrive,  and  this  sacrifice  Pemberton  was  not  prepared  to 
make. 

"When  Johnston  reached  Jackson  on  the  night  of  the  13th, 
he  was,  perhaps,  as  he  said,  "too  late."  The  situation  was 
certainly  full  of  danger,  which  he  clearly  foresaw.  Yet  a 
man  of  a  more  aggressive  nature  would  hardly  have  con- 
tented himself  with  accepting  the  situation,  and  sending  a 
vaguely  worded  order  by  a  messenger,  but  would  rather,  at 
any  risk  of  health,  have  joined  Pemberton  at  once — leaving 
his  detachments  to  follow — in  order  to  fully  understand  the 
condition  of  affairs,  and  issue  his  orders  advisedly.  He 
would  then,  at  least,  have  secured  compliance  with  his 
orders,  and  there  would  have  been  no  divided  responsibility. 
For  an  emergency,  such  as  then  existed,  a  man  of  Johnston's 
temperament  was  peculiarly  unsuited. 

Pemberton's  vacillation  in  first  declining  to  obey  John- 
ston's order  to  move  from  Edwards'  Station  to  Clinton,  and 
then  attempting  to  execute  it  when  in  the  presence  of  the 
enemy,  cannot  be  defended.  But  it  is  quite  possible  that 
the  effect  of  obeying  the  order  would  have  been,  as  he  says, 
"  to  abandon  Vicksburg  without  striking  a  blow  for  its  de- 
fence ; "  for  it  may  be  safely  said,  without  detracting  in  any 
way  from  Johnston's  skill  in  defensive  campaigns,  that  no 
decisive  battle  would  have  been  fought  under  his  command 


172  THE  MISSISSIPPI. 

after  the  junction.  It  would  have  been  "a  skilful  retreat" 
to  Meridian,  "owing  to  the  insufficiency  of  his  forces." 
Later,  when  Johnston  ordered  Pemberton  to  evacuate  Vicks- 
burg,  if  Haines'  Bluff  was  untenable,  and  march  to  the 
northeast,  there  is  much  to  justify  Pemberton's  idea  of  re- 
maining, even  had  the  evacuation  been  possible.  For  more 
than  a  year  the  Confederates  had  been  defending  Vicksburg, 
with  uniform  success ;  it  was  less  than  a  month  since  Grant 
was  still  cooped  up  in  the  swamps,  well-nigh  dismayed  at 
his  lack  of  success  in  the  various  bayous.  The  Confed- 
erate President  and  Secretary  of  War  had  congratulated 
Pemberton  on  his  success,  and  repeatedly  urged  him  to 
stand  firm,  the  possession  of  the  Mississippi  being  vital  to 
the  success  of  the  Confederacy.  The  Union  gunboats  had, 
indeed,  run  past  the  batteries,  but  the  river  was  still  closed 
as  a  line  of  commerce  and  communications,  so  long  as  the 
batteries  at  Vicksburg  were  intact.  As  Pemberton  says, 
"  these  were  mighty  interests ; "  and  to  secure  them,  provi- 
sions and  ammunition  had  been  forwarded  to  stand  a  siege, 
and  promises  had  been  held  out  that  every  available  man 
would  be  sent  to  raise  it.  Pemberton  knew  that  Johnston 
had  already  a  considerable  force  on  the  outside,  and  that  it 
would  rapidly  be  augmented  ;  he  had  every  reason  to  believe 
that  Johnston,  appreciating  the  vital  importance  of  prompt 
and  energetic  action,  would  quickly  strike  a  vigorous  blow 
for  his  relief.  The  whole  theory  of  the  Confederacy  was  not 
to  conquer  the  North,  but  to  prove  that  the  South  could  not 
be  conquered ;  to  remain  on  the  defensive,  beat  back  the 
Northern  armies,  and  prolong  the  war  until  the  North,  in 
despair,  should  agree  to  a  compromise.  To  hold  Vicksburg 
and  the  Mississippi  Kiver  to  the  last  was  probably  more  in 
accord  with  the  general  line  of  Confederate  policy  than  to 
abandon  it  in  the  vain  hope  of  regaining  it  after  a  battle. 


THE  CAMPAIGN  IN   REAR  OF  VICKSBURG.        173 

Finally,  the  anomalous  character  of  the  command  on  the 
Confederate  side  was  in  itself  a  direct  invitation  to  disaster, 
for  which  Jefferson  Davis  was  personally  responsible.  Pem- 
berton  commanded  the  Department  of  Mississippi  and  East 
Louisiana,  reporting  directly  to  the  authorities  in  Rich- 
mond and  receiving  orders  from  them.  Yet  Johnston  com- 
manded both  Pemberton's  and  Bragg's  armies,  without  the 
possibility  of  being  really  in  charge  of  either.  Hence  Pem- 
berton  regarded  himself  as  chiefly  responsible  for  Vicks- 
burg,  and  looked  upon  Johnston's  instructions  in  the  nature 
of  advice  rather  than  of  positive  orders. 

Opposed  to  such  divided  responsibility  and  confusion  of 
authority  there  was  a  united  army  with  a  single  general  in 
command,  who  had  clearly  defined  plans  and  was  in  the 
midst  of  his  troops  to  carry  them  out.  Fortunately,  he  was 
at  this  time  cut  off  from  all  communication  with  Washing- 
ton, for  on  May  11th  Halleck  telegraphed  him  to  unite  his 
forces  with  those  of  Banks  between  Vicksburg  and  Port 
Hudson.  Had  this  telegram  been  received  and  obeyed  the 
whole  campaign  would  have  been  wrecked.  Of  this  no  one 
was  more  convinced  than  Halleck  and  the  President,  both 
of  whom  were  enthusiastic  in  their  praises  of  the  campaign 
when  it  was  concluded. 


CHAPTER  VI. 

THE  SIEGE  AND  SURRENDER  OF  VICKSBURG. 

Vicksbueg  lies  upon  the  river  slope  of  a  range  of  bluffs 
which  extend  for  hundreds  of  miles  along  the  eastern  side 
of  the  alluvial  valley  of  the  Mississippi,  and  which  are  here 
washed  by  the  river  itself,  though  at  other  points  of  its 
winding  course  it  is  often  from  50  to  100  miles  distant  from 
them.  These  bluffs  are  about  250  feet  in  height  and  are 
composed  of  a  peculiarly  tenacious,  semi-indurated  clay, 
which  when  cut  vertically  for  roads  or  other  purposes  resists 
the  action  of  the  weather  and  retains  its  vertical  sides  for 
generations.  In  such  a  soil  the  action  of  running  water  in 
small  streams  has,  in  the  course  of  centuries,  resulted  in  cut- 
ting the  bluff  or  plateau  into  deep  ravines  with  remarkably 
steep  sides,  separated  by  very  narrow  ridges.  The  topog- 
raphy is  thus  extremely  broken  and  complicated,  and  is  of 
such  a  character  that  no  manoeuvres  of  troops  are  possible 
over  it.  On  the  other  hand  it  lends  itself  admirably  to  the 
purposes  of  fortification,  the  narrow  ridges  having  a  com- 
plete command  over  the  deep  ravines  in  front  of  them,  and 
their  sinuous  course  enabling  each  point  to  bring  a  cross 
fire  in  front  of  adjacent  points. 

A  careful  study  of  the  map  is  necessary  to  form  even  an 
approximate  idea  of  the  main  features  of  this  topography. 
It  will  be  noticed  that  from  the  northeast  corner  of  the 
town  a  ridge  runs  out  to  the  eastward,  on  which  is  the  Jack- 


CHAPTER  VI. 

THE  SIEGE  AND  SURRENDER  OF  VICKSBURG. 

Vicksburg  lies  upon  the  river  slope  of  a  range  of  bluffs 
which  extend  for  hundreds  of  miles  along  the  eastern  side 
of  the  alluvial  valley  of  the  Mississippi,  and  which  are  here 
washed  by  the  river  itself,  though  at  other  points  of  its 
winding  course  it  is  often  from  50  to  100  miles  distant  from 
them.  These  bluffs  are  about  250  feet  in  height  and  are 
composed  of  a  peculiarly  tenacious,  semi-indurated  clay, 
which  when  cut  vertically  for  roads  or  other  pur£>oses  resists 
the  action  of  the  weather  and  retains  its  vertical  sides  for 
generations.  In  such  a  soil  the  action  of  running  water  in 
small  streams  has,  in  the  course  of  centuries,  resulted  in  cut- 
ting the  bluff  or  plateau  into  deep  ravines  with  remarkably 
steep  sides,  separated  by  very  narrow  ridges.  The  topog- 
raphy is  thus  extremely  broken  and  complicated,  and  is  of 
such  a  character  that  no  manoeuvres  of  troops  are  possible 
over  it.  On  the  other  hand  it  lends  itself  admirably  to  the 
purposes  of  fortification,  the  narrow  ridges  having  a  com- 
plete command  over  the  deep  ravines  in  front  of  them,  and 
their  sinuous  course  enabling  each  point  to  bring  a  cross 
fire  in  front  of  adjacent  points. 

A  careful  study  of  the  map  is  necessary  to  form  even  an 
approximate  idea  of  the  main  features  of  this  topography. 
It  will  be  noticed  that  from  the  northeast  corner  of  the 
town  a  ridge  runs  out  to  the  eastward,  on  which  is  the  Jack- 


THE   SIEGE  AND   SURRENDER   OF  VICKSBURG.       175 

son  road ;  about  two  miles  from  the  outskirts  of  the  town, 
this  ridge  meets  another  ridge,  which  trends  off  to  the  south- 
west for  several  miles,  following  an  irregular  course,  but  hav- 
ing an  unbroken  crest  nearly  on  the  same  level  all  the  way. 
Between  the  Jackson  ridge  and  this  second  ridge  there  is  a 
collection  of  minor  valleys,  the  drainage  of  which  is  finally 
united  into  Stout's  bayou,  which  empties  into  the  Missis- 
sippi a  few  miles  lower  down,  but  is  here  separated  from  it 
by  another  ridge,  on  which  is  the  Warrenton  road.  The 
Confederate  line  began  on  the  Warrenton  ridge  about  three 
miles  south  of  town,  crossed  Stout's  Bayou,  and  then  fol- 
lowed the  ridge  without  a  break  for  five  miles  to  the  Jack- 
son road.  Here  the  ridge  turns  to  the  east  and  subse- 
quently to  the  north  and  west,  reaching  the  Mississippi  at 
the  point  of  the  bend ;  but  this  ridge  was  considered  as 
giving  too  long  a  development  to  the  line  of  defence,  and 
from  the  Jackson  road  the  line  ran  due  north,  to  a  ravine 
called  Glass'  Bayou,  fully  150  feet  deep,  with  precipitous 
sides,  and  filled  with  a  dense  growth  of  vines  and  cane ; 
crossing  this  it  continued  along  a  lateral  spur  to  the  Grave- 
yard road,  where  it  intersected  another  narrow,  level  ridge, 
running  due  west  about  two  miles  to  the  river  at  Fort  Hill.1 
This  line  had  been  selected  for  fortification  in  the  autumn 
of  1862,  and  during  the  winter  and  spring  it  had  been  most 
thoroughly  fortified.  At  the  salient  and  commanding  points 
of  the  ridge,  at  an  average  distance  of  perhaps  two  hundred 
yards  from  one  another,  batteries  were  constructed  for  artil- 
lery in  the   form  of  redans,  lunettes,  or,  in   some   places, 

1  The  reports  of  the  Engineer  and  other  officers  of  the  Seventeenth  Corps,  which 
held  the  line  at  the  Jackson  road,  speak  of  the  crest  of  the  ridge  on  that  road  as 
"Fort  Hill."  This  is  a  mistake;  Fort  Hill  overlooks  the  river  about  two  miles 
north  of  the  city  landing,  as  shown  on  the  accompanying  map.  It  was  so  named 
because  the  Spaniards  erected  a  fort  upon  it  as  a  defence  against  the  Indians, 
when  they  ascended  the  Mississippi,  and  it  has  retained  the  name  to  this  day. 


176  THE  MISSISSIPPI. 

closed  redoubts ;  the  parapets  of  these  batteries  were  25 
feet  thick  and  10  feet  high,  and  the  ditch  was  7  feet  deep, 
making  the  top  of  the  parapet  17  feet  above  the  bottom  of 
the  ditch.  Between  the  salient  points  there  ran  a  line  of 
intrenchments,  which  in  the  whole  eight  miles  of  line  was 
broken  only  at  two  points,  i.e.,  at  Stout's  Bayou  and  Glass' 
Bayou  ;  this  intrenchment  was  10  feet  thick  and  5  feet  high, 
and  the  ditch  in  front  of  it  was  4  feet  deep.  In  a  few  places, 
where  cross  spurs  jutted  out  from  the  main  ridge,  advanced 
batteries  were  constructed,  making  a  double  or  triple  line, 
but  in  general  there  was  only  a  single  line  of  works. 

They  were  defended  when  the  siege  began  by  128  pieces 
of  artillery,  36  of  which  were  siege  guns  and  the  rest  field 
pieces.  In  addition  to  these  land  defences,  the  circuit  was 
made  complete  by  a  series  of  water  batteries,  extending  from 
Fort  Hill  on  the  north,  through  the  town,  and  along  the 
Warrenton  ridge  till  they  met  the  land  batteries  on  the 
south.  They  mounted  31  pieces  of  siege  artillery  of  the 
heaviest  calibre,  and  13  pieces  of  field  artillery. 

The  troops  for  the  defence  numbered  about  20,000  effec- 
tive men,  divided  into  four  divisions,  under  Generals  Ste- 
venson, Forney,  Smith,  and  Bowen,  and  Waul's  "  legion." 
Stevenson's  division  held  the  right,  beginning  at  the  Warren- 
ton road  and  ending  at  the  railroad  ;  his  four  brigades  ware 
posted  in  the  following  order  from  right  to  left,  viz. :  Bar- 
ton, from  the  Warrenton  road  about  one  mile  north ;  Rey- 
nolds, from  Barton's  right  to  the  Hall's  Ferry  road ;  Cum- 
mings,  from  the  Hall's  Ferry  road  to  the  square  fort,  about 
three-quarters  of  a  mile  south  of  the  railroad  ;  Lee,  from 
the  square  fort  to  the  railroad. 

Forney's  division  came  next,  with  two  brigades  posted  as 
follows  :  Moore,  on  both  sides  of  the  Baldwin's  Ferry  road, 
his  right  extending  to  the  railroad,  and  his  left  nearly  to  the 


THE  SIEGE  AND  SURRENDER  OF  VICKSBURG.       177 

Jackson  road ;  Hebert  from  the  Jackson  to  the  Graveyard 
road,  his  troops  occupying  the  main  salients  on  both  roads. 

Smith  held  the  left,  with  three  brigades ;  Shoupe,  from 
the  Graveyard  road  about  a  mile  westward  ;  Baldwin  on  the 
left  of  Shoupe ;  and  Vaughn  on  the  extreme  left,  extending 
to  Fort  Hill. 

Bowen's  division  and  Waul's  legion  were  in  reserve. 

Having  failed  to  carry  the  works  by  a  coup-de-main  on  the 
19  th,  Grant  devoted  the  next  two  days  to  perfecting  his  com- 
munications with  the  Yazoo.  His  depot  was  established  be- 
tween Johnson's  and  Lake's  plantations  near  Chickasaw 
Bayou,  on  the  identical  ground  where  Sherman  had  landed 
and  made  his  assault  in  the  previous  month  of  December. 
From  this  point  roads  were  constructed  to  facilitate  the 
hauling  of  supplies,  and  the  army  was  firmly  established 
within  six  miles  of  a  base  of  supplies  entirely  secure  from  the 
enemy's  attacks.  On  the  21st,  the  troops  being  now  all  in 
position,  Grant  determined  to  make  a  vigorous  assault  on  the 
following  day.  Several  reasons,  the  force  of  which  cannot  be 
denied,  impelled  him  to  this  course.  First  of  all  he  felt  con- 
fident of  success.  Secondly,  the  troops  desired  the  assault ; 
they  were  flushed  with  an  unbroken  series  of  victories,  and 
felt  in  the  spirit  of  finishing  the  thing  then  and  there  ;  they 
were  in  no  mood  for  the  drudgery  of  pick  and  spade,  until 
they  had  tried  what  they  could  do  with  their  rifles.  A  third 
reason  was  found  in  Johnston's  presence  on  the  outside 
with  a  constantly  increasing  army,  the  sole  object  of  which 
would  now  be  to  raise  the  siege.  A  successful  assault  before 
Johnston  could  be  strong  enough  to  attack,  would  enable 
Grant  to  at  once  turn  on  Johnston  and  disperse  his  forces, 
and  then  send  a  detachment  against  Port  Hudson  ;  and  this 
without  drawing  any  more  troops  from  Memphis  or  other 
points.  If  a  siege  was  begun  reinforcements  must  be 
8*  8 


178  THE  MISSISSIPPI. 

brought,  to  make  sure  both  of  holding  Pemberton  in  Vicks- 
burg  and  driving  off  Johnston  on  the  outside.  The  orders 
were  consequently  issued  to  make  an  assault  at  10  a.m.  on 
the  22d,  artillery  fire  and  sharp-shooting  to  be  kept  up 
from  daylight.  Admiral  Porter  was  requested  to  bombard 
the  water  batteries  with  his  gunboats. 

The  investment  was  at  that  time  by  no  means  complete, 
there  being  a  gap  of  nearly  four  miles  between  McCler- 
nand's  left,  which  was  nearly  opposite  the  square  fort,  and 
the  river.  In  this  gap  there  were  no  troops,  although  one 
brigade  of  McArtkur's  division  of  the  17th  Corps,  which  had 
been  at  Grand  Gulf  throughout  the  campaign,  had  reached 
"Warrenton  on  the  night  of  the  21st,  and  was  to  move  for- 
ward on  the  "Warrenton  road  the  next  day.  Grant  had  not 
at  that  time  enough  troops  to  make  a  close  investment  of  the 
whole  line,  and  he  ran  no  risk  in  leaving  this  gap  on  the 
south,  because  had  Pemberton  left  his  works  and  attempted 
to  escape  in  this  direction  he  would  have  been  caught  in  the 
pocket  between  the  Big  Black  and  the  Mississij^pi,  and  his 
destruction  would  have  been  almost  certain.  The  bulk  of 
Grant's  troops  were  opposite  that  portion  of  the  line  be- 
tween the  square  fort  and  the  Graveyard  road,  and  the  three 
roads — Baldwin's  Ferry,  Jackson,  and  Graveyard — which  ran 
along  ridges,  were  the  only  practicable  lines  of  approach ; 
the  intermediate  country  being  filled  with  steep,  wooded 
ravines,  through  which  troops  could  not  advance  in  any  sort 
of  order.  It  was  along  these  roads  that  the  main  efforts 
were  made,  the  troops  moving  in  narrow  columns.  "Watches 
had  been  compared  so  as  to  insure  a  simultaneous  move- 
ment, and  at  precisely  ten  o'clock  the  three  columns  sprang 
forward. 

On  the  right,  Sherman  had  placed  Blair's  division  near 
the  Graveyard  road,  supported  by  Tuttle's,  leaving  Steele's 


THE  SIEGE  AND  SURRENDER  OF  VICKSBURG.       179 

division  to  make  an  assault  nearer  to  the  river.  A  storming 
party  of  150  volunteers  had  been  formed,  provided  with 
boards  and  poles  to  cross  the  ditch ;  Ewing's  brigade  was 
immediately  behind  these,  followed  by  Giles  Smith's  and 
Kilby  Smith's  brigades.  All  these  troops  were  sheltered  in 
a  ravine  which  led  up  to  the  road  about  200  yards  in  front 
of  the  bastion.  Four  batteries  had  been  placed  in  a  posi- 
tion from  which  their  fire  could  be  concentrated  on  the  bas- 
tion. At  ten  o'clock  the  signal  was  given ;  the  storming 
party  jumped  up  on  the  road,  and  ran  forward  at  full  sj)eed, 
with  Ewing's  brigade  just  behind  them.  Until  this  time 
not  a  man  had  been  seen  on  the  Confederate  parapet,  but  as 
these  troops  came  forward  in  full  view,  the  regiments  of 
Hebert's  brigade  and  a  portion  of  the  Missourians,  which 
garrisoned  this  part  of  the  lines,  stood  up,  and  the  parapet 
fairly  blazed.  Some  of  the  storming  party  reached  the 
ditch,  followed  it  a  short  distance,  climbed  the  parapet  and 
firinly  planted  their  flag;  it  waved  there  till  nightfall,  all 
efforts  of  the  Confederates  to  step  forward  and  seize  it  being 
frustrated  by  the  fire  of  the  assailants.  The  greater  part  of 
the  storming  party  were  killed,  and  their  bodies,  together 
with  those  of  the  troops  immediately  following,  soon  ob- 
structed the  narrow  road  so  as  to  make  it  almost  impas- 
sable. In  passing  over  them  under  the  terrible  fire,  Ewing's 
brigade  wavered,  halted,  and  sought  shelter  on  the  slope  of 
a  ravine  about  seventy  yards  from  the  works.  Giles  Smith's 
brigade,  which  came  next,  turned  down  this  ravine  to  the 
left,  and  deployed  opposite  a  point  of  the  works  about  three 
hundred  yards  south  of  the  road ;  Kilby  Smith's  brigade  fol- 
lowed it  in  the  same  direction  but  deployed  close  to  Ewing. 
The  troops  were  thus  partly  sheltered,  and  opened  a  wither- 
ing fire  upon  any  object  which  showed  itself  above  the 
parapet,  not  a  stone's  throw  distant ;   but  they  could  not 


180  THE  MISSISSIPPI. 

advance  an  inch.     Affairs  remained  in  this  condition  UDtil 
2  P.M. 

In  McPherson's  corps,  Eansom's  brigade  of  McArthur's 
division  was  on  the  right,  in  the  ravines  south  of  the  Grave- 
yard road ;  Logan's  division  in  the  centre,  on  the  Jackson 
road  ;  and  Quinby's  division  on  the  left,  between  the  Jackson 
and  Baldwin's  Ferry  roads.  Neither  Quinby  nor  Eansom 
was  in  a  position  to  do  more  than  make  a  strong  demonstra- 
tion, as  each  was  opposite  a  re-entrant  portion  of  the  line 
where,  in  an  advance,  they  would  be  mowed  down  under  a 
cross  fire  from  the  salients.  Logan's  division,  however,  was 
opposite  the  salient,  J.  E.  Smith's  brigade  on  the  Jackson 
road,  Stevenson  a  little  to  his  left,  and  Leggett  in  reserve. 
At  the  appointed  hour  two  brigades  rushed  forward,  Smith's 
by  the  road,  and  Stevenson's  up  the  slope  south  of  it,  both 
being  directed  against  the  main  fort  just  north  of  the  road. 
Smith's  troops  were  brought  to  a  halt  by  the  severe  fire 
across  the  road,  but  Stevenson's  pressed  on,  and  two  regi- 
ments reached  the  ditch  of  the  work,  where  the  colors  of 
the  7th  Missouri  were  planted,  and  six  standard-bearers 
killed  in  as  many  minutes.  These  regiments  were  unable 
to  maintain  themselves  in  this  position,  and  soon  withdrew 
to  find  shelter  about  200  yards  from  the  works,  where  they 
remained  until  ordered  to  withdraw  at  nightfall. 

In  McClernand's  corps,  Carr's  division  was  on  the  right 
with  one  brigade,  Benton's,  on  the  Baldwin's  Ferry  road,  and 
one,  Lawler's,  just  south  of  the  railroad  ;  A.  J.  Smith's  divi- 
sion was  in  his  rear,  one  brigade  in  support  of  each  of  Carr's 
brigades  ;  Osterhaus'  division  was  on  the  left,  opposite  a 
salient  about  half-way  between  the  railroad  and  the  square 
fort ;  and  Hovey,  with  one  brigade  of  his  division,  the  other 
being  at  Big  Black  Bridge,  was  on  the  left  of  Osterhaus. 
At  the  same  hour,  10  a.m.,  Benton's  and  Lawler's  brigades 


THE  SIEGE  AND   SURRENDER  OF  VICKSBURG.       181 

moved  forward.  Lawler's  attack  was  directed  against  a  fort 
on  a  very  prominent  hill  a  few  yards  south  of  the  railroad. 
Two  regiments  of  Lawler's  brigade,  the  22d  and  21st  Iowa, 
charged  up  this  hill  and  reached  the  ditch  of  the  fort,  where 
the  principal  part  of  them  were  brought  to  a  halt.  A  small 
body,  however,  led  by  Sergeant  Joseph  Griffith,  entered  the 
work  and  engaged  in  a  hand  to  hand  fight  with  the  de- 
fenders, in  which  nearly  all  but  the  sergeant  were  killed. 
This  work  was  for  a  short  time  deserted  by  the  Confed- 
erates, but  it  was  commanded  by  a  second  work  on  higher 
ground,  100  yards  in  rear,  which  prevented  the  Iowa  troops 
from  retaining  possession  of  its  interior.  The  colors  of  the 
22d  Iowa  were,  however,  planted  on  its  parapet,  and  re- 
mained there  for  nine  hours.  Landram's  brigade,  of  A.  J. 
Smith's  division,  followed  close  behind  Lawler's  brigade,  and 
the  77th  Illinois  came  up  and  planted  its  colors  alongside 
those  of  the  22d  Iowa.  The  main  body  of  these  two  bri- 
gades was  not  able  to  penetrate  the  work,  but  remained  in 
the  ditch,  where  hand-grenades  were  thrown  upon  them  by 
the  defenders,  causing  considerable  loss. 

On  the  Baldwin's  Ferry  road,  Benton's  brigade,  followed 
by  Burbridge's,  made  the  attack  in  the  same  gallant  style 
and  met  the  same  experience.  They  reached  the  ditch, 
planted  their  colors  on  the  parapet,  but  could  not  enter  the 
work.     The  enemy  used  hand-grenades  against  them  also. 

On  the  left,  Osterhaus'  and  Hovey's  men  moved  forward 
and  came  within  a  short  distance  of  the  works,  but  they  were 
subjected  to  a  heavy  cross-fire  from  the  square  fort  on  their 
left  and  were  unable  to  make  any  farther  advance. 

Within  half  an  hour  after  the  assault  began  the  condition 
of  affairs  was  substantially  the  same  at  all  three  of  the  prin- 
cipal points  of  assault ;  afc  each  of  these  points  the  Union 
flags  were  flying  on  the  works,  and  the  men  were  in  the 


182  THE  MISSISSIPPI. 

ditch,  but  unable  to  go  any  farther.  A  most  unfortunate 
misunderstanding  now  occurred,  which  resulted  in  a  large 
and  unnecessary  increase  of  the  loss  of  life.  Grant  had 
taken  a  position  in  the  morning  on  a  high  point  on  the 
Jackson  road,  from  which  he  had  a  clear  view  of  the  princi- 
j3al  points  of  assault ;  McPherson  was  a  few  hundred  yards 
in  his  front,  Sherman  less  than  a  mile  on  his  right,  and  Mc- 
Clernand  about  a  mile  and  a  half  to  his  left.  From  this 
point  he  had  observed  the  assaults,  had  witnessed  the  flags 
planted  on  the  parapets,  and  had  seen  the  men  halt  at  the 
ditches  under  the  terrible  fire.  By  half-past  eleven,  an  hour 
after  the  troops  had  first  reached  the  works,  it  became  ap- 
parent to  him  that  the  assault  could  not  succeed.  He  was 
just  starting  over  to  Sherman's  position  to  confer  with  him 
as  to  the  prospects  of  success  by  further  efforts,  when  he  re- 
ceived a  note  from  McClernand,  dated  11.15  a.m.,  saying  that 
he  (McClernand)  was  hotly  engaged  with  the  enemy,  who 
was  massing  on  his  right  and  left,  and  that  a  vigorous  blow 
by  McPherson  would  create  a  diversion  in  his  favor.  Grant 
answered  at  11.50  a.m.,  directing  him  to  strengthen  his  ad- 
vance by  drawing  from  his  reserves  or  from  other  parts  of 
the  line.  He  then  rode  over  to  Sherman.  Just  as  he  arrived 
there,  he  received  a  second  despatch  from  McClernand,  dated 
12  m.,  which  was  in  these  words :  "We  are  hotly  engaged 
with  the  enemy.  We  have  part  possession  of  two  forts,  and 
the  stars  and  stripes  are  floating  over  them.  A  vigorous 
push  ought  to  be  made  all  along  the  line."  Grant  answered  : 
"  Mc Arthur  advanced  from  "Warrenton  last  night ;  he  is  on 
your  left.  Concentrate  with  him  and  use  his  forces  to  the 
best  advantage."  He  also  showed  the  despatch  to  Sherman, 
who  immediately  ordered  a  renewal  of  the  attack.  Grant 
then  started  back  to  see  McPherson  and  order  him  to  make 
the  diversion  which  McClernand  desired.     While  on  his  way 


THE   SIEGE   AND  SURRENDER   OF   VICKSBURG.        183 

he  met  a  messenger  with  a  third  despatch,  written  about  1 
p.m.,  although  the  exact  hour  was  not  given.  It  was  as  fol- 
lows :  "  We  have  gained  the  enemy's  intrenchments  at  sev- 
eral points,  but  are  brought  to  a  stand.  I  have  sent  word  to 
McArthur  to  reinforce  me  if  he  can.  Would  it  not  be  best 
to  concentrate  the  whole  or  a  part  of  his  command  at  this 
point  ?  P.  S. — I  have  received  your  despatch.  My  troops  are 
all  engaged,  and  I  cannot  withdraw  any  to  reinforce  them." 

Grant  was  somewhat  doubtful  as  to  the  extent  of  these 
successes  of  McClernand,  as  he  had  seen  nothing  of  the 
kind  up  to  the  time  he  left  his  point  of  observation  on  the 
Jackson  road.  But  there  was  not  time  to  ride  over  to  con- 
sult with  McClernand,  it  being  already  after  two  o'clock,  and 
he  therefore  ordered  Quinby's  division  to  move  immediately 
to  McClernand's  support ;  he  also  showed  the  despatches  to 
McPherson,  and  directed  him  to  renew  the  assault. 

In  consequence  of  these  orders,  Sherman  sent  Tuttle's 
division  forward  to  the  assistance  of  Blair's  division,  which 
still  remained  in  the  position  it  had  gained  in  the  morning, 
and  directed  both  of  them  to  attack  with  vigor.  At  the 
same  time  Giles  Smith's  brigade  united  with  Ransom's  bri- 
gade of  McPherson's  corps  to  make  an  assault  between  the 
salient  on  the  Graveyard  road  and  Glass'  Bayou ;  Steele's 
division  on  the  right,  which  had  been  working  its  way  for- 
ward since  morning,  was  now  near  the  enemy's  works,  and 
assaulted  them  at  about  the  same  hour  as  Tuttle  and  Ran- 
som. The  result  was  simply  a  repetition  of  the  morning's 
experience ;  everywhere  the  troops  reached  the  enemy's 
works,  but  could  not  enter  them.  Logan's  division  on  the 
Jackson  road  also  moved  forward  again;  it  did  not  reach 
the  works,  but  suffered  heavy  loss.  McArthur  did  not 
arrive  from  Warrenton  until  the  next  morning.  Quinby's 
division  did  not  reach  McClernand's  position  until  a  short 


184  THE  MISSISSIPPI 

time  before  dark.  The  men  were  nearly  exhausted  with 
fighting  and  marching  through  difficult  ground  all  day,  but 
they  were  at  once  ordered  by  McClernand  to  attack  the  cur- 
tain of  trench  lying  between  the  two  salients  (Baldwin's 
Ferry  road  and  railroad),  where  his  men  had  been  since 
morning.  The  attack  was  made,  was  entirely  unsuccessful, 
and  resulted  in  heavy  loss,  Colonel  Boomer,  one  of  the  bri- 
gade commanders,  being  among  the  killed.  Just  at  dark  the 
Confederate  troops  occupying  the  redoubt  on  the  Baldwin's 
Ferry  road,  having  been  reinforced  by  a  portion  of  Bowen's 
division,  made  a  sortie  from  their  work  and  drove  off  the 
men  in  the  ditch.  About  the  same  time  McClernand's 
troops  near  the  railroad  also  retired  from  the  ditch  of  the 
work  where  they  had  been  since  morning. 

The  result  of  the  assault  was  therefore  unsuccessful  at  all 
points.  Of  the  40,000  infantry  present  for  duty  in  Grant's 
army  that  day  all  but  about  5,000  had  been  brought  into 
action.  The  length  of  line  assaulted  was  about  two  and  a 
half  miles,  and  it  was  held  in  the  morning  by  two  Confed- 
erate brigades  (Moore's  and  Hebert's),  and  by  parts  of  two 
others.  As  soon  as  the  attack  was  begun,  Bowen's  division 
and  a  part  of  Smith's  division  were  sent  to  the  threatened 
points,  Green's  brigade  going  to  the  Baldwin's  Ferry  road 
and  the  railroad,  Cockrell's  to  the  Jackson  road,  and 
Vaughn's  on  the  Graveyard  road.  The  entire  force  of  de- 
fenders actually  engaged  did  not  number  more  than  13,000, 
but  the  nature  of  the  ground  was  such  that  the  works  could 
only  be  approached  at  three  principal  points ;  these  points 
were  salients  which  covered  the  line  between  them  with 
cross-fires,  and  by  holding  them  the  entire  line  was  secure. 
A  force  of  4,000  men  at  each  of  these  points  was  all  that  the 
works  would  hold,  and  any  more  men  would  have  been 
superfluous.     The  Confederate  loss  is  not  known ;  it  prob- 


THE  SIEGE  AND  SURRENDER  OF  VICKSBURG.       185 

ably  did  not  much  exceed  500.  In  Forney's  division,  which 
bore  the  brunt  of  the  assaults  of  Sherman's  and  McPherson's 
corps,  the  loss  was  only  42  killed  and  95  wounded.  Grant's 
loss  in  the  two  assaults  of  May  19th  and  22d  were  over  4,000, 
as  follows,  more  than  three-fourths  of  them  being  on  the  22d  : 


Killed. 

Wounded. 

Missing. 

Total. 

Thirteenth  Corps  : 

Carr's  division 

109 

m 

35 

33 
52 
70 

173 
22 

559 

400 
233 

378 
295 
375 

708 
185 

57 
c,0 

1 

6 

2 

31 

9 

43 

725 

A.  J.  Smith's  division 

Osterhaus'               "       

Hovey's                  "       

Seventeenth  Corps  : 

Logan's  division 

499 

269 

50 

417 

Quinby's     "         

349 

476 

Fifteenth  Corps  : 

Blair's  division 

890 

Tuttle's       •«      

Steele's        "      

250 
150 

.... 

4,075 

In  his  official  report  Grant  blamed  McClernand  very 
severely  for  the  misleading  character  of  his  despatches, 
which  induced  him  to  renew  the  assault,  "  and  resulted  in 
the  increase  of  our  mortality  list  fully  50  per  cent.,  without 
advancing  our  position  or  giving  us  other  advantages."  Mc- 
Clernand wrote  a  long  reply,  dated  Springfield,  Illinois,  Sep- 
tember 25, 1863,  which  is  on  the  files  of  the  War  Department, 
and  will  be  published  with  the  records.  In  this  McCler- 
nand endeavored  to  show,  among  other  things,  that  his  des- 
patches were  less  glowing  as  to  his  success  than  those  he 
received  from  his  subordinates,  that  he  was  in  a  position  to 
see  clearly  what  took  place  in  his  front,  that  if  he  had  been 
reinforced  early  in   the  afternoon   he  would   have   broken 


186  THE   MISSISSIPPI. 

completely  through  the  enemy's  Line,  and  that  he  never 
wrote  that  "  he  was  in  possession  of,  and  still  held,  two  of 
the  enemy's  forts,"  as  stated  in  Grant's  report.  It  is  hardly 
necessary  to  follow  out  the  details  of  this  controversy. 
McClernand's  despatches  did  undoubtedly  mislead  his  com- 
manding general,  and  did  cause  the  latter  to  renew  the  as- 
sault at  heavy  sacrifice  and  without  success,  which  he  would 
not  have  done  had  he  been  distinctly  advised  as  to  the  actual 
state  of  affairs.  McClernand's  despatch  (previously  given) 
reads:  ""We  have  part  possession  of  two  forts."  Had  he 
said  plainly  that  his  men  were  in  the  ditch  but  could  not 
cany  the  works,  he  would  have  stated  the  exact  fact,  and 
there  would  have  been  no  second  assault. 

Il  was  now  apparent  to  every  one  that  the  Confederate 
troops  had  recovered  from  the  demoralization  of  Champion's 
Hill  and  the  Big  Black,  and  that  their  works  were  too  strong 
to  be  carried  in  open  assault.  A  regular  siege  was  unavoid- 
able, and  every  one  was  willing  to  perform  the  necessary 
labor  to  carry  it  on.  The  orders  for  beginning  the  siege 
were  issued  on  May  25th,  Captains  F.  E.  Prime  and  C.  B. 
Comstock,  of  the  Engineers,  being  in  succession  the  Chief 
Engineers  in  charge. 

It  was,  however,  important  to  guard  at  once  against  any 
attack  from  the  rear  by  Johnston.  Osterhaus'  division  of 
the  13th  Corps  had  been  sent  back  to  guard  the  Big  Black 
Bridge  immediately  after  the  assault  of  May  22d;  and  on  the 
26th,  an  expedition  was  formed,  to  consist  of  six  brigades, 
three  each  from  the  loth  and  17th  Corps,  the  whole  under 
command  of  Blair.  This  expedition  was  to  march  to  the 
northeast,  between  the  Yazoo  and  Big  Black  Bivers,  dis- 
cover what  force  Johnston  had  in  that  region,  and,  if  possi- 
ble, break  it  up.  Blair  reached  Mechanicsburg,  in  the 
vicinity  of  Liverpool,  on  the  28th,  where  he  had  a  slight 


THE  SIEGE  AND   SURRENDER  OF  VICKSBURG.       187 

skirmish  with  a  small  party  of  the  enemy,  but  he  reported 
that  he  was  satisfied  there  was  no  large  body  between  the 
Yazoo  and  the  Big  Black.  Johnston  was  said  to  be  organ- 
izing his  army  in  the  vicinity  of  Canton,  and  it  was  rumored 
that  A.  P.  Hill  had  joined  him  from  the  east,  and  that  their 
united  forces  numbered  45,000  men,  but  this  Blair  did  not 
credit.  Blair  then  returned  to  Haines'  Bluff,  by  way  of 
the  Yazoo  Valley,  destroying  all  supplies  that  could  be  of 
use  to  the  enemy.  A  gunboat  expedition  was  also  sent  up 
the  Yazoo  about  this  time,  as  far  as  Yazoo  City,  destroying 
all  boats  in  the  river. 

The  certainty  that  Johnston  was  organizing  as  large  a 
force  as  possible  in  his  rear,  induced  Grant  to  order  Hurl- 
but,  at  Memphis,  to  "  strip  his  district  to  the  lowest  possible 
standard,"  and  send  him  all  available  men.  Just  after  he 
crossed  the  river,  Grant  had  ordered  Hurlbut  to  send  him 
one  division  to  take  the  place  of  the  troops  that  had  been 
left  to  guard  the  road  from  Milliken's  Bend  to  Perkins's. 
Lauman's  division  had  accordingly  been  sent ;  it  had 
reached  Milliken's  Bend,  6,000  strong,  about  May  18th,  and 
had  been  moved  across  to  Grand  Gulf,  and  thence  up  to 
"Warrenton.  On  the  28th,  it  took  position  on  the  Hall's  Ferry 
road,  partially  filling  up  the  gap  between  McClernand's  left 
and  the  river.  On  receipt  of  the  further  call  from  Grant  for 
reinforcements,  Hurlbut  made  up  another  division  of  twelve 
regiments,  under  Brig. -Gen.  N.  Kimball,  and  sent  them  be- 
low ;  and  later  still,  a  third  division,  under  Brig. -Gen.  W.  S. 
Smith.  On  May  29th,  Grant  also  sent  a  telegram,  via  Mem- 
phis, to  Halleck,  stating  that  if  Banks  did  not  come  to  his 
assistance,  he  must  be  reinforced  from  elsewhere.  Halleck 
was  in  daily  communication  with  Hurlbut,  and  knew  exactly 
what  troops  he  had  sent.  On  receiving  Grant's  telegram  on 
June  2d,  Halleck  immediately  telegraphed  to  Schofield,  at 


188  THE  MISSISSIPPI. 

St.  Louis,  and  to  Bumside,  at  Cincinnati,  stating  Grant's 
situation,  and  asking  if  they  could  send  any  troops  to  his 
assistance ;  also  to  Bosecrans  in  Tennessee,  saying  that 
Johnston  was  reinforced  from  Bragg's  army,  and  if  he  (Bose- 
crans) could  do  nothing  himself,  a  portion  of  his  troops 
must  be  sent  to  Grant.  Bosecrans  replied  with  a  long  des- 
patch,  expressing  the  opinion  that  none  of  his  troops  should 
be  taken,  and  that  he  was  about  to  execute  a  movement. 
Burnside  and  Schofield  replied  that  they  could  spare  troops 
for  temporary  service,  and  two  divisions  of  the  9th  Corps, 
under  Ma j. -Gen.  J.  G.  Parke,  were  at  once  sent  from  Ohio, 
and  one  division,  under  Ma  j. -Gen.  F.  J.  Herron,  from  Mis- 
souri. 

The  result  of  these  prompt  measures  was  that  Grant  was 
reinforced  almost  as  rapidly  as  Johnston,  and  in  as  large 
numbers,  and  the  opportunity  when  Johnston  could  have 
attacked  was  soon  lost.  At  the  close  of  the  siege,  there 
were  17,000  men  from  Huiibut's  corps  present  at  Vicks- 
burg,  and  these,  with  Parke's  corps  and  Herron's  division, 
carried  the  total  strength  of  Grant's  army  to  71,141  men,  and 
248  guns,  on  June  30th. 

Kimball's  division  of  the  16th  Corps  arrived  on  June 
3d  and  was  sent  up  the  Yazoo  to  Haines'  Bluff,  and 
thence  along  the  Benton  road,  with  orders  to  destroy  the 
railroad  bridge  over  the  Big  Black  near  Canton.  Kimball 
found,  however,  on  arriving  at  Mechanicsburg  that  a  large 
force  was  in  front  of  him  at  Yazoo  City  and  Liverpool,  and 
as  the  Yazoo  Biver  on  which  he  depended  for  his  supplies 
was  rapidly  falling  he  returned  to  Haines'  Bluff,  where  he 
received  orders  to  fortify  a  position  and  hold  it  against  any 
force  coming  from  the  northeast. 

Herron's  division  arrived  on  June  8th  and  was  imme- 
diately marched  across  the  peninsula  and  ferried  over  the 


THE  SIEGE   AND  SURRENDER  OP  VICKSBURG.       189 

river  below  Warrenton.  He  came  up  on  the  south  side  of 
Vicksburg  and  took  post  on  the  Warrenton  road,  enabling 
Lauman  to  close  up  on  McClernand's  left.  The  investment 
on  the  south  side  was  thus  perfected.  Hitherto  it  had  been 
imperfect  on  account  of  the  insufficiency  of  Lauman's  force 
to  close  the  entire  gap  between  McClemand  and  the  river. 

W.  S.  Smith's  division  of  the  16th  Corps  began  arriving 
on  June  11th,  and  was  at  once  sent  to  Haines'  Bluff,  this 
and  Kimball's  division  being  united  under  command  of  Maj.- 
Gen.  C.  C.  Washburne. 

Parke's  9th  Corps  arrived  on  the  14th.  It  was  at  first  in- 
tended to  move  it  to  the  south  of  the  city  as  a  reserve  behind 
Lauman  and  Herron,  but  in  view  of  the  threatening  aspect  of 
affairs  along  the  Yazoo,  it  was  moved  to  Haines'  Bluff. 

Meanwhile  Johnston  was  slowly  organizing  an  army  at 
Canton.  The  difficulties  were  very  great,  for  Loring's 
troops  had  joined  him  without  guns,  wagons,  or  camp  equi- 
page, the  troops  arriving  by  rail  were  also  without  wagons, 
and  though  the  country  was  full  of  food,  there  were  no  sup- 
plies available,  Pemberton  having  moved  his  own  supplies 
to  Vicksburg ;  the  railroads  were  still  out  of  repair  from 
Grierson's  raid,  and  were  fully  occupied  at  present  in  bring- 
ing up  troops.  These  difficulties  could  only  have  been  sur- 
mounted, if  at  all,  by  a  man  of  extraordinary  energy,  bold- 
ness, and  resource.  In  spite  of  his  undoubted  abilities  in 
command  of  an  army  on  the  defensive,  Johnston  was  hardly 
the  man  for  such  an  emergency  as  that  in  which  he  was  now 
placed.  After  sending  the  order  to  Pemberton  to  march  to 
the  northeast  he  remained  in  the  vicinity  of  the  Big  Black 
until  he  received,  on  May  19th,  Pemberton's  answer  saying 
that  he  could  not  make  the  movement  ordered ;  he  then 
marched  back  to  Canton  in  order  to  assemble  and  organize 
his  army.     While  he  was  doing  this,  Grant  organized  a  still 


190 


THE  MISSISSIPPI. 


larger  force  to  use  against  him,  and  so  it  came  about  that 
Pemberton  lay  for  47  days  in  his  trenches,  before  he  finally 
gave  up  in  despair,  during  which  time  Johnston  organized 
an  army  of  over  31,000  men,  but  never  came  within  musket- 
shot  of  his  enemy. 

Johnston  arrived  at  Canton  on  May  20th,  and  the  next  day 
was  joined  by  Gist's  brigade  from  South  Carolina  and 
Ector's  and  McNair's  from  Chattanooga.  Loring's  division 
reached  Jackson  on  the  20th,  and  was  joined  by  Maxey's 
brigade  from  Port  Hudson  on  the  23d.  Between  that  date 
and  June  3d  there  arrived  in  addition,  Evans'  brigade  from 
South  Carolina,  Breckenridge's  division  from  Chattanooga, 
and  a  cavalry  division  from  Bragg's  army,  commanded  by 
W.  H.  Jackson,  one  of  the  most  energetic  cavalry  leaders  in 
the  South.  Johnston  organized  his  command  into  four 
divisions,  commanded  by  Loring,  Breckenridge,  W.  H.  T. 
Walker,  and  French.  There  was  subsequently  much  contro- 
versy between  himself  and  the  authorities  in  Bichmond  as 
to  the  strength  of  his  command,  and  therefore  the  following 
statement  is  given  in  full,  taken  from  the  return  signed  by 
himself  on  June  25th,  and  now  among  the  archives  of  the 
War  Department.  There  were  no  reinforcements  received 
between  June  3d  and  25th. 


Field  Betden. 

Present 
for  duty. 

Aggregate 
present. 

Present 
and  absent. 

6,451 
6,107 
8,049 
6,498 
3,606 
515 

7,427 
6,884 
9,571 
7,466 
4,373 
594 

13,375 

9,688 
13,452 

10,559 

Jackson's  cavalry 

6,797 

881 

Total 

31,226 

36,315 

54,747 

THE  SIEGE  AND  SURRENDER  OF   VICKSBURG.       191 

Constant  correspondence  was  maintained  between  John- 
ston and  the  Richmond  authorities  during  the  months  of 
May  and  June,  the  latter  urging  him  to  attack  at  almost  any 
risk,  as  the  disparity  in  numbers  would  probably  increase 
rather  than  diminish  with  time.  Johnston  at  first  replied 
(May  28th)  that,  although  he  would  have  only  23,000  men 
when  all  his  reinforcements  arrived,  he  must  try  to  beat 
Grant  with  that  number  if  no  more  could  be  sent.  But  on 
June  7th,  he  telegraphed  that  when  he  thought  of  trying  to 
accomplish  anything  in  aid  of  Pemberton  the  case  seemed 
"  desperate."  On  the  8th  the  Secretary  of  War  asked  if 
more  reinforcements  should  be  drawn  from  Bragg's  army. 
Johnston  replied  that  to  draw  more  troops  from  Bragg 
would  "  involve  yielding  Tennessee ;  the  Government  must 
decide  between  this  State  and  Tennessee."  On  the  15th  he 
telegraphed  that  he  considered  "  saving  Vicksburg  hope- 
less "  ;  and  on  the  16th  received  a  reply  that  "Vicksburg 
must  not  be  lost  without  a  desperate  struggle.  ...  If 
better  resources  do  not  offer,  you  must  hazard  attack.  It 
may  be  made  in  concert  with  the  garrison,  if  practicable, 
but  otherwise  without,  by  day  or  night  as  you  think  best." 
Johnston  answered  that  he  could  not  attack  Grant  because 
Grant  was  covered  by  the  Big  Black,  which  would  cut  off 
his  retreat  if  defeated.  The  Secretary  of  War  then  tele- 
graphed (June  21st),  reiterating,  in  the  most  urgent  language, 
his  orders  for  active  movements,  of  which  he  assumed  all  the 
responsibility,  and  suggesting  that  if  a  movement  against 
Grant's  army  was  not  feasible  it  might  be  possible  to  raise 
the  siege  of  Port  Hudson.  Johnston  replied  that  this 
would  involve  abandoning  Jackson  and  with  it  the  State  of 
Mississippi.  Johnston  saw  nothing  but  difficulties  which- 
ever way  he  turned  ;  to  save  Mississippi  was  to  lose  Tennes- 
see, and  to  save  Port  Hudson  was  to  lose  Mississippi ;  while 


192  THE  MISSISSIPPI 

be  was  still  meditating  on  the  dilemma  Vicksbnrg  surren- 
dered, followed  immediately  by  Port  Hudson  and  Jackson  ; 
and  thus  everything  was  lost. 

While  this  correspondence  was  in  progress  Johnston  had 
observed  the  movements  of  Osterhaus  near  Big  Black 
Bridge,  and  of  Blair  toward  Mechanicsburg,  in  the  last 
week  of  May,  and  he  had  sent  Walker's  division  to  Yazoo 
City,  and  Loring's  to  Benton.  These  troops  simply  re- 
mained in  observation,  and  were  confronted  by  a  larger 
number  of  Union  troops,  extending  from  Mechanicsburg  to 
the  Big  Black  Bridge.  On  June  14th  Johnston  sent  a  cou- 
rier to  Pemberton,  who  penetrated  the  lines  and  delivered 
his  letter  on  June  20th.  In  this  Johnston  said  to  Pember- 
ton that  the  utmost  that  both  armies  could  accomplish  was 
to  save  the  troops  at  Yicksburg ;  to  raise  the  siege  was  im- 
possible. He  therefore  asked  Pemberton  to  indicate  what 
point  should  be  attacked.  Pemberton  replied,  under  date 
of  the  21st,  proposing  that  Johnston  should  attack  on  the 
north  of  the  railroad,  while  he  (Pemberton)  cut  his  way  out 
to  Hankinson's  Ferry  on  the  south;  he  added,  "I  await 
your  orders."  On  the  22 d  Johnston  wrote  (in  answer  to  a 
despatch  of  the  15th  just  received),  saying  that  he  feared 
he  would  be  unable  to  accomplish  anything  with  his  small 
force,  and  suggesting  to  Pemberton  that,  in  the  last  ex- 
tremity, he  might  try  to  cross  the  river  and  join  the  Con- 
federate forces  operating  in  that  quarter.  This  was  the  last 
letter  received  by  Pemberton  from  Johnston  prior  to  the 
surrender  ;  no  definite  instructions  were  ever  received  in  an- 
swer to  the  former's  despatch  of  June  21st.  Johnston,  how- 
ever, received  one  further  letter  from  Pemberton,  dated 
June  23d,  suggesting  that  Johnston  should  propose  to  Grant 
the  surrender  of  Yicksburg,  but  not  of  the  troops.  John- 
ston's reply  did  not  reach  Pemberton.     It  was  to  the  effect 


THE  SIEGE  AND  SURRENDER  OF   VICKSBURG.       193 

that  any  such  propositions  must  be  made  by  Pemberton 
himself. 

On  June  28th,  Johnston  finally  considered  his  army  ready 
to  advance  ;  and  orders  to  that  effect  were  issued.  Walker's 
division  had  already  been  withdrawn  from  Yazoo  City  to 
Vernon;  and  Loring's  from  Benton  to  Canton.  Walker 
was  now  ordered  to  move  down  the  Big  Black,  while  Loring 
advanced  from  Canton,  and  French  and  Breckenridge  from 
Jackson.  On  July  1st,  Walker's,  Loring's,  and  French's 
divisions  were  at  Birdsong's  Ferry,  and  Breckenridge's  near 
Edwards'  Station.  Johnston  states  that  this  movement  "was 
not  undertaken  in  the  wild  spirit  that  dictated  the  des- 
patches from  the  War  Department  of  June  16th  and  21st." 
He  intended  simply  to  examine  the  enemy's  lines,  and  see  if 
there  was  any  prospect  of  breaking  them  in  order  to  save 
the  garrison ;  there  was  no  hope  of  saving  the  place.  Con- 
sequently he  devoted  July  2d,  3d,  and  4th  to  reconnois- 
sances,  which  convinced  him  that  no  attack  was  practicable 
north  of  the  railroad.  Such  was  unquestionably  the  fact, 
for  at  that  time  Sherman  had  been  detached  from  the  block- 
ading force,  and  placed  in  command  of  a  large  force  on  the 
outside.  These  consisted  of  Parke's  9th  Corps,  Washburne's 
two  divisions  of  the  16th  Corps,  Tuttle's  division  of  the  15th, 
McArthurs  of  the  17th,  and  Osterhaus'  of  the  13th.  This 
force  numbered  nearly  30,000  men,  and  another  division  of 
McPherson's  corps  was  in  readiness  to  move  at  once  on 
Sherman's  order.  These  troops  were  posted  from  Haines' 
Bluff  on  the  left  to  Black  River  Bridge  on  the  right ;  they 
had  fortified  and  barricaded  eveiy  road  in  the  interval  be- 
tween these  points,  and  were  ready  to  hold  them  against 
double  their  numbers. 

Having  found  no  opening  on  the  north  of  the  railroad, 
Johnston  intended  to  move  on  the  5th  by  Edwards'  Station 
VIII.—  9 


194  THE  MISSISSIPPI. 

to  the  south  of  the  railroad,  and  examine  the  prospect  in 
that  vicinity.  But  on  the  night  of  the  4th  he  received  the 
news  of  the  surrender.  He  countermarched  his  columns 
forthwith  toward  Jackson.  He  was  none  too  quick,  for 
Sherman  was  on  his  heels  in  pursuit  with  nearly  50,000  men, 
before  sunset  of  the  day  on  which  the  garrison  laid  down 
its  arms. 

While  the  negotiations  for  the  surrender  were  in  progress 
on  July  3d,  Grant  was  in  constant  telegraphic  communica- 
tion with  Sherman,  and  it  was  arranged  that  the  moment 
the  surrender  took  place,  Sherman  should  move  out  to  at- 
tack Johnston,  pursue  him  to  Jackson,  and  effectually  de- 
stroy the  railroads  north  and  south  of  that  point.  In 
addition  to  the  troops  already  mentioned,  the  remaining 
divisions  of  the  13th  and  15th  Corps  were  ordered  to  join 
Sherman,  so  that  his  force  consisted  of  the  9th,  13th,  and 
15th  Corps,  with  one  division  of  the  16th  attached  to  the 
9th,  and  one  of  the  17th  attached  to  the  15th.  The  other 
division  of  the  16th  was  left  with  Washburne  at  Haines' 
Bluff.  The  entire  force  under  Sherman's  orders  consisted 
of  12  divisions,  and  numbered  about  48,000  men,  over  two- 
thirds  of  the  whole  army  at  Yicksburg. 

Sherman  was  in  motion  on  the  afternoon  of  the  4th,  and 
the  additional  troops  from  Yicksburg  started  during  the 
night.  On  the  5th  they  all  approached  the  Big  Black,  Ord 
with  the  13th  Corps  at  the  railroad  bridge,  Steele  with  the 
15th  Corps  at  Messenger's  Ferry,  a  few  miles  above  Bridge- 
port, and  Parke  with  the  9th  Corps,  at  Birdsong's  Ferry,  on 
the  Brownsville  road.  Bridges  were  constructed  at  each  of 
these  points,  and  the  crossing  was  completed  on  the  6th. 
On  the  7th  the  advance  was  continued,  the  13th  and  15th 
Corps  reaching  Bolton  that  day,  and  the  9th  Corps  being 
slightly  in  rear. 


THE  SIEGE   AND  SURRENDER  OF   VICKSBURG.       195 

On  the  8th,  the  15th  Corps  reached  Clinton,  and  on  the 
9th,  passed  through  that  place  on  the  direct  Jackson  road, 
while  the  13th  Corps  went  through  Raymond,  and  the  9th 
on  a  road  north  of  the  railroad.  On  the  night  of  the  9th, 
the  troops  approached  Jackson,  skirmishing  with  the  en- 
emy's outposts,  and  on  the  morning  of  the  10th,  they 
closed  in  around  that  city.  Johnston,  as  we  have  seen,  had 
retreated  from  the  Big  Black  on  the  5th  and  reached 
Jackson  on  the  7th.  The  fortifications  of  that  place  ex- 
tended in  a  semicircle  on  the  west  of  the  town,  from  the 
Pearl  River  on  the  north  to  the  same  river  on  the  south. 
Loring's  division  was  placed  on  the  right,  on  the  Canton 
road ;  Walker's  and  French's  in  the  centre ;  and  Brecken- 
ridge's  on  the  left,  across  the  New  Orleans  Railroad.  Jack- 
son's division  of  cavalry  was  directed  to  observe  the  fords  on 
the  river  north  and  south  of  the  fortifications. 

As  Sherman  closed  in  on  the  10th  he  placed  Parke's  corps 
on  the  left,  Steele's  corps  in  the  centre,  and  Orel's  on  the 
right,  both  flanks  extending  to  the  river.  The  heat  and 
dust  had  been  intense  during  the  march,  and  the  troops 
were  fatigued ;  the  fortifications  were  strong,  and  Sherman 
determined  not  to  assault  them,  but  to  invest  the  place,  and 
throw  up  a  few  batteries  to  guard  against  any  sortie.  It 
was  not  probable  that  Johnston  had  enough  stores  to  stand 
a  siege,  and  he  would  soon  be  obliged  to  abandon  the  place, 
and  it  was  hoped  to  fall  upon  him  as  soon  as  he  left  his 
works.  Artillery  fire  was  opened  on  the  11th,  and  during 
the  following  day  one  of  the  divisions  of  the  13th  Corps, 
which  had  been  ordered  to  make  a  reconnoissance,  pressed 
closer  to  the  works  than  had  been  intended,  and  it  was 
driven  back  with  a  loss  of  nearly  600  men.  After  this  the 
siege  was  confined  to  artillery  firing.  Expeditions  were  sent 
out  on  either  flank  to  destroy  the  railroad  for  several  miles. 


196  THE  MISSISSIPPI. 

Johnston  sent  a  detachment  of  cavalry  to  break  Sherman's 
communications  near  Clinton,  but  it  was  intercepted  and 
driven  off  by  McArthur's  division. 

Johnston  had  hoped  and  expected  that  Sherman  would 
make  an  assault.  When  he  saw  that  preparations  were  mak- 
ing for  a  siege,  he  telegraphed  to  Richmond  (July  15th), 
that  he  had  no  provisions  for  a  siege,  and  that  it  would  be 
madness  for  him  to  make  an  attack.  He  therefore  issued 
orders  on  the  16th  to  withdraw  across  the  bridges  over  Pearl 
Eiver  within  his  own  lines,  and  during  the  night  this  move- 
ment was  skilfully  executed.  It  was  not  detected  until  6 
a.m.  of  the  17th,  by  which  time  he  was  well  on  his  way. 
Sherman  sent  a  detachment  in  pursuit,  but  his  instructions 
did  not  contemplate  an  advance  beyond  Jackson  in  any  force. 
He  telegraphed  to  Grant  for  further  instructions,  and  re- 
ceived orders  to  discontinue  the  pursuit,  complete  the 
thorough  destruction  of  the  railways,  and  then  return  to 
Vicksburg. 

Johnston  was  therefore  pursued  no  farther  than  Brandon 
Station,  a  dozen  miles  from  Jackson.  He  halted  at  Morton, 
on  the  railroad,  about  half  way  between  Jackson  and  Me- 
ridian, and  there  went  into  camp.  Sherman  returned  leis- 
urely to  Vicksburg,  arriving  there  between  the  25th  and 
27th  of  July.  His  losses  during  the  expedition  were  a  little 
over  1,100  men.  Johnston  reported  his  losses  as  71  killed, 
504  wounded,  and  only  25  missing — but  Sherman  captured 
and  sent  to  Vicksburg,  by  actual  count,  765  prisoners. 

Johnston's  efforts  for  the  relief  of  Vicksburg  thus  came  to 
an  end.  He  had  been  forestalled  by  his  enemy  in  every 
move.  The  railroads  at  Jackson,  the  point  he  considered 
essential  for  the  defence  of  the  State  of  Mississippi,  were  so 
thoroughly  destroyed  that  that  point  lost  all  its  strategic 
importance  for  the  rest  of  the  war. 


THE  SIEGE   AND  SURRENDER  OF   VICKSBURG.       197 

While  Grant  had  been  thus  active  in  guarding  against  any 
attack  in  his  rear,  he  had  prosecuted  the  siege  in  his  front 
with  equal  vigor.  Just  after  the  assault  of  May  22d,  it  was 
thought  that  by  bringing  gunboats  to  enfilade  the  batteries 
on  Fort  Hill,  that  position  might  be  carried.  At  Sherman's 
request  Porter  gave  the  necessary  orders,  and  on  the  morn- 
ing of  May  27th  the  Cincinnati  came  down  to  engage 
these  batteries ;  at  the  same  time  four  vessels  which  were 
below  the  town  engaged  the  batteries  near  the  Marine  Hos- 
pital. The  Cincinnati  was  shot  through  and  through  by  the 
plunging  fire  from  Fort  Hill,  and  in  less  than  half  an  hour 
five  of  her  guns  were  disabled,  and  she  was  in  a  sinking  con- 
dition. She  was  run  toward  the  shore  about  a  mile  north 
of  Fort  Hill,  and  sank  in  three  fathoms  of  water ;  36  of  her 
crew  were  killed,  wounded,  or  drowned.  After  this  the 
efforts  of  the  navy  during  the  siege  were  confined  to  bom- 
bardment, which  was  kept  up  almost  incessantly  from  the 
gunboats  and  from  mortar-boats.  Several  large  guns  were 
landed  from  the  vessels,  and  took  their  place  in  the  besiegers 
lines,  where  they  were  worked  by  naval  crews. 

As  soon  as  the  siege  was  ordered  lines  of  sap  were  begun 
at  various  points.  There  was  great  lack  of  engineer  officers 
to  direct  these  technical  works,  and  hence  they  did  not  pro- 
gress as  rapidly  as  would  otherwise  have  been  possible. 
The  labor  was  furnished  by  pioneer  companies,  by  the  troops, 
and  by  negroes  hired  in  the  vicinity.  Materials  for  fascines, 
gabions,  and  sap  rollers  were  found  in  abundance  in  the 
cane  and  underbrush  of  the  ravines.  Twelve  miles  of 
trenches,  and  89  batteries  were  constructed,  armed  at  the 
close  of  the  siege  with  220  guns,  all  but  12  of  which  were 
field  pieces. 

There  were  ten  lines  of  approach,  the  four  most  important 
being   on   the   Graveyard,  Jackson,    Baldwin's   Ferry,    and 


198  THE  MISSISSIPPI. 

Warrenton  roads.  These  apjDroaches  were  all  within  a  few 
yards  of  the  enemy's  works  when  the  place  fell.  Mining 
was  employed  on  the  Jackson  and  Graveyard  roads,  and  was 
met  by  countermining  on  the  part  of  the  besieged.  On  the 
Jackson  road  a  mine  was  exploded  on  June  25th,  under  the 
enemy's  parapet,  just  north  of  the  road.  It  was  loaded  with 
a  ton  of  powder,  and  fired  with  complete  success.  The  troops 
rushed  into  the  crater  and  held  it  for  twenty-four  hours,  but 
were  then  driven  out  by  hand-grenades  and  returned  to  their 
own  trenches.  A  second  gallery  was  then  run,  and  another 
mine  exploded  on  July  1st,  blowing  about  25  of  the  defenders 
into  the  air ;  but  no  attempt  was  made  to  occupy  the  crater, 
owing  to  the  failure  of  the  preceding  attempt.  Small  mor- 
tars were  improvised  by  shrinking  iron  bands  on  logs  of 
tough  wood  and  boring  out  the  core.  With  these,  shells 
were  constantly  thrown  across  the  small  space  separating 
the  two  lines.  When  the  lines  were  so  close  the  casualties 
on  each  side  were  from  10  to  100  each  day. 

On  July  1,  the  approaches  were  all  within  from  5  to  100 
yards  of  the  defenders'  works.  Any  farther  advance  by  dig- 
ging resulted  in  hand-to-hand  fighting.  The  time  had  come 
for  the  final  assault,  and  orders  were  issued  for  this  to  take 
place  on  July  6th.  The  approaches  were  to  be  widened  so 
that  troops  could  easily  move  in  columns  of  fours,  and  ar- 
tillery could  pass ;  planks,  and  sand-bags  stuffed  with  cot- 
ton, were  to  be  prepared  for  crossing  the  ditches.  The 
troops  were  to  be  assembled  in  the  approaches  during  the 
night,  and  at  daylight  were  to  rush  forward  across  the  few 
yards  separating  them  from  the  enemy's  works,  and  endeavor 
to  carry  the  place  at  every  point  of  approach.  The  assault, 
however,  was  unnecessary,  for  the  place  surrendered  on 
July  4. 

On  June  7th  an  attack  was  made  upon  a  detachment  of 


THE  SIEGE  AND  SURRENDER  OF   VICKSBURG.       199 

white  and  black  troops,  guarding  Milliken's  Bend,  by  J.  G. 
Walker's  division  numbering  4,000  men.  These  troops  had 
been  ordered  from  Arkansas  by  Gen.  E.  K.  Smith,  who  com- 
manded the  Trans-Mississippi  Department,  in  response  to 
urgent  requests  from  Johnston  that  he  would  come  to  the 
assistance  of  Vicksburg.  It  is  stated  that  the  object  of  this 
movement  was  to  throw  supplies  and  possibly  troops  into 
the  place ;  or,  failing  in  that,  to  cover  Pemberton's  escape 
across  the  river.  Of  this  Pemberton  was  not  informed,  so 
that  the  scheme  fell  through.  It  would  have  been  doomed 
to  almost  certain  failure  in  the  presence  of  Porter's  fleet  of 
gunboats.  Walker's  division  was  marched  down  to  Alexan- 
dria, where  it  reported  to  Maj.-Gen.  R.  Taylor,  commanding 
the  district  of  West  Louisiana.  It  was  then  placed  on  trans- 
ports and  carried  up  the  Washita  and  Tensas  Rivers  until 
abreast  of  Vicksburg,  where  it  was  disembarked  and  marched 
across  to  Richmond,  La.,  which  was  unoccupied  except  by 
an  outpost.  From  Richmond  the  attack  was  made  upon 
Milliken's  Bend.  The  troops  of  this  garrison  were  at  first 
driven  out  of  their  works  by  the  Confederates,  and  forced 
back  to  the  levee  on  the  river  bank.  But  here  two  gunboats 
came  to  their  assistance,  and  the  Confederates  were  in  turn 
driven  back  and  retreated  to  Richmond.  Mower's  brigade 
of  the  15th  Corps  was  sent  across  the  river  the  next  day,  and 
was  soon  reinforced  by  the  Marine  brigade  under  Ellet. 
These  troops  advanced  against  Walker's  division,  and  he 
then  retreated  along  the  Shreveport  Railroad  to  Monroe. 
This  expedition  had  no  effect  whatever  upon  the  course  of 
the  siege. 

On  June  18th,  Gen.  McClernand  was  relieved  from  the 
command  of  the  13th  Corps,  and  succeeded  by  Maj.-Gen. 
E.  O.  C.  Ord.  He  had  published  to  his  troops  a  vainglori- 
ous order,  filled  with  insinuations  against  the  troops  of  the 


200  THE  MISSISSIPPI. 

other  corps,  and  with  indirect  reflections  upon  the  Com- 
manding General.  A  copy  of  the  order  -was  published  in 
the  Memphis  papers,  and  thus  came  to  the  notice  of  Sher- 
man and  McPherson,  who  vigorously  protested  against  it. 
Grant  asked  McClernand  if  the  newspaper  slip  was  a  correct 
copy,  and  why  the  order  had  not  been  forwarded  to  his 
headquarters  as  required  by  the  regulations.  McClernand 
replied  that  the  newspaper  slip  was  a  correct  copy,  and  that 
he  was  "  prepared  to  maintain  its  statements ; "  it  was 
owing  to  the  carelessness  of  his  adjutant  that  a  copy  had 
not  been  forwarded.  On  receiving  this  reply,  Grant  issued 
an  order  directing  McClernand  to  repair  to  his  home  in  Illi- 
nois, and  assigning  Ord  to  the  command  of  the  13th  Corps, 
subject  to  the  President's  approval.  McClernand  complied 
with  the  order  under  protest,  and  appealed  thf>  case  to 
Washington,  but  without  success ;  although  in  the  following 
year  he  was  assigned  to  a  command  in  Texas,  where  he 
served  a  few  months  and  then  resigned. 

This  was  the  termination  of  a  long-standing  controversy, 
in  which  the  majority  of  his  officers  thought  that  Grant  had 
shown  more  patience  than  was  necessary  or  proper.  "What- 
ever McClernand's  talents  may  have  been,  he  was  certainly 
lacking  in  subordination,  and  his  relief  caused  no  dissatis- 
faction, to  say  the  least,  in  his  own  corps  or  in  other  parts 
of  the  army. 

As  the  month  of  June  wore  on,  Pemberton's  hopes  of  re- 
lief began  gradually  to  diminish,  and  then  to  disappear. 
His  men  were  on  reduced  rations,  but  were  not  at  starva- 
tion point ;  his  ammunition  was  deficient.,  but  it  had  been 
carefully  husbanded  during  the  siege,  and  he  had  enough 
for  a  battle.  Every  man  capable  of  doing  duty  was  in  the 
trenches,  and  many  of  those  previously  wounded  had  recov- 


HE  SIEGE  AND  SURRENDER  OF  VICKSBURG.       201 

ered,  so  that  their  numbers  now  amounted  to  nearly  22,000, 
as  shown  by  their  returns — a  little  more  than  when  the  siege 
began;  about  7,000  were  in  the  hospitals.  In  his  report 
Pemberton  vehemently  denies  that  either  lack  of  food  or  of 
ammunition  induced  his  surrender.  He  says  he  surrendered 
because  his  men  were  enfeebled  by  long  exposure  in  a 
cramped  position  in  trenches,  and  because  there  was  no 
prospect  of  relief.  It  is  probable  that  the  most  potent 
cause  of  surrender  was  the  temper  of  the  men.  They  were 
physically  exhausted  and  mentally  discouraged,  and  they 
saw  no  object  in  a  continuation  of  the  present  state  of  af- 
fairs, and  no  issue  from  it  except  in  surrender. 

It  has  already  been  stated  that  on  June  20th  Pemberton 
received  a  note  from  Johnston,  asking  for  suggestions  of  a 
plan  of  attack  by  which  he  might  be  enabled  to  cut  his  way 
out,  and  that  Pemberton  answered  on  the  next  day,  giving  a 
plan  for  such  an  attack.  It  is  a  singular  coincidence  that 
in  a  conversation  between  the  Union  and  Confederate 
pickets,  on  the  night  of  the  20th,  the  Confederate  said  that 
they  had  expected  an  assault,  and  were  prepared  for  it,  but 
as  it  had  not  been  made,  the  feelings  of  the  troops  had  been 
canvassed  to  see  if  they  could  be  induced  to  make  an  attack 
for  the  purpose  of  cutting  their  way  out.  The  troops  all  de- 
clined, and  some  of  them  threatened  to  mutiny  if  their  offi- 
cers did  not  surrender.  They  were  only  persuaded  to  con- 
tinue on  duty  by  the  assurance  that  there  were  enough 
supplies  to  last  a  week,  and,  by  that  time,  2,000  boats  would 
be  made  by  which  they  could  cross  the  river.  Houses  were 
being  torn  down — so  said  the  Confederate — to  make  the 
boats.  Three  days  after  this  canvassing,  i.e.,  on  June  23d, 
without  having  received  any  further  letters  from  Johnston, 
Pemberton  wrote  to  him  suggesting  that  he  propose  to 
Grant  a  surrender  of  Vicksburg. 
9* 


202  THE  MISSISSIPPI. 

On  the  28th  Pemberton  received  the  following  very  curi- 
ous document : 

Appeal  for  Help. 

In  Trenches  near  VicKSBrRG, 
June  28,  1863. 
Genl.  J.  C.  Pemberton 

Si)'.'  In  accordance  with  my  own  feelings  and  that  of  my  fellow 
soldiers  with  whom  I  have  conferred  I  submit  to  your  consideration  the 
following  note : 

We  as  an  army  have  as  much  confidence  in  you  as  a  Com'd'g.  Gen'l. 
as  we  perhaps  ought  to  have  ;  we  believe  you  have  displayed  as  much 
generalship  as  any  other  man  could  have  done  under  similar  circum- 
stances ;  we  give  you  great  credit  for  the  stern  patriotism  you  have 
evinced  in  the  defence  of  Vicksburg  during  a  protracted  siege — 

I  also  feel  proud  of  the  gallant  conduct  of  the  soldiers  uuder  your 
command  in  repulsing  the  enemy  at  every  assault,  and  bearing  with 
patient  endurance  all  the  privations  and  hardships  incident  to  a  siege 
of  forty  odd  days'  duration. 

Everybody  admits  that  we  have  all  covered  ourselves  with  glory, 
but  alas  !  alas  !  Gen'l.  a  crisis  has  arrived  in  the  midst  of  our  siege. 

Our  rations  have  been  cut  down  to  1  biscuit,  and  a  small  bit  of  ba- 
con per  day,  not  enough  scarcely  to  keep  soul  and  body  together,  much 
less  to  stand  the  hardships  we  are  called  upon  to  stand.  We  are  actu- 
ally on  sufferance,  and  the  consequence  is,  as  far  as  I  can  hear,  there  is 
complaining  and  general  dissatisfaction  throughout  our  lines.  We  are 
and  have  been  kept  close  in  the  trenches  day  and  night,  not  allowed  to 
forage  any  at  all,  and  even  if  permitted  there  is  nothing  to  be  had 
among  the  citizens. 

Men  don't  want  to  starve  and  don't  intend  to,  but  they  call  upon 
you  for  justice,  if  the  Commissary  Department  can  give  it,  if  it  cant 
you  must  adopt  some  means  to  relieve  us  very  soon.  The  emergency 
of  the  case  demands  prompt  and  decided  action  on  your  part. 

If  you  can't  feed  us,  you  had  better  surrender  us.  horrible  as  the 
idea  is,  than  suffer  this  noble  army  to  disgrace  themselves  by  desertion. 
I  tell  you  plainly  men  are  not  going  to  lie  here  and  perish ;  if  they  do 
love  their  country,  self-preservation  is  the  first  law  of  nature,  and 


THE  SIEGE  AND  SURRENDER  OF  VICKSBURG.       203 

hunger  will  compel  a  man  to  do   almost  anything.     You  had  better 
heed  a  warning  voice,  though  it  is  the  voice  of  a  private  soldier. 

This  army  is  now  ripe  for  mutiny  unless  it  can  be  fed. 

Just  think  of  one  small  biscuit  and  one  or  two  mouthf  uls  of  bacon 
per  day.  Genl.  please  direct  your  inquiries  in  the  proper  channel,  and 
see  if  I  have  not  stated  stubborn  facts.  whi:h  had  better  be  heeded  be- 
fore we  are  disgraced. 

From 

Many  Soldiers. 

This  document  was  preserved  by  Pemberton,  and  its  ex- 
istence was  probably  not  publicly  known  until  it  was  found 
among  the  "  Pemberton  papers  "  received  by  the  War  De- 
partment a  few  months  since.  How  much  or  how  little  im- 
portance he  attributed  to  it  no  one  can  say. 

The  above  facts  are  not  cited  for  the  purpose  of  reflecting 
in  any  way  on  Pemberton,  but  to  show  what  was  probably 
the  temper  of  his  men.  They,  as  well  as  himself,  knew  that 
the  case  was  hopeless,  and  that  he  had  but  two  alternatives, 
viz. :  to  surrender  or  to  make  a  vain  effort  to  cut  his  way 
out ;  in  other  words,  surrender  or  suicide.  He  chose  the 
former,  his  own  statement  of  the  case  being  as  follows : 
"  When  forty-seven  days  and  nights  had  passed,  with  the 
knowledge  I  then  possessed  that  no  adequate  relief  was  to  be 
expected,  I  felt  that  I  ought  not  longer  to  place  in  jeopardy 
the  brave  men  whose  lives  had  been  entrusted  to  my  care." 
Hoping  that  on  the  great  national  holiday  he  might  obtain 
the  most  favorable  terms,  he  opened  negotiations  on  the  eve 
of  the  Fourth  of  July. 

Before  taking  the  final  step,  however,  Pemberton  asked 
his  division  commanders,  by  circular  letter  dated  July  1st, 
their  opinion  as  to  the  ability  of  their  troops  "  to  make  the 
marches  and  undergo  the  fatigues  necessary  to  accomplish  a 
successful  evacuation."  Three  of  them — Forney,  Smith, 
and  Bowen — reported  unequivocally,  on  the  following  day. 


204  THE  MISSISSIPPI. 

that  their  troops  were  unable  to  undergo  such  fatigues  :  and 
two  of  these  advised  an  immediate  capitulation.  The  fourth 
— Stevenson — said  that  his  men  were  much  enfeebled,  but 
he  believed  that  the  most  of  them,  rather  than  be  captured, 
would  exert  themselves  to  the  utmost  to  accomplish  an 
evacuation.  Smith  stated  that  an  evacuation  was  almost 
impossible,  on  account  of  the  temper  of  his  troops.  The 
opinion  of  the  brigade  and  regimental  commanders  was  al- 
most unanimous  against  the  idea  of  cutting  their  way  out. 
After  receiving  these  answers,  Pemberton  assembled  his  four 
division  commanders  for  consultation.  The  minutes  of  the 
meeting  show  that  they  unanimously  advised  a  capitula- 
tion. 

On  the  morning  of  the  3d,  therefore,  Pemberton  sent  a  flag 
of  truce  by  Bowen,  with  a  letter  to  Grant,  proposing  that 
three  commissioners  be  appointed  on  each  side  to  arrange 
terms  for  capitulation.  Grant  replied  that  he  did  not  favor 
the  proposition  of  appointing  commissioners  ;  that  his  only 
terms  were  an  unconditional  surrender  of  the  city  and  gar- 
rison, and  that  Pemberton  might  feel  assured  that  men  who 
had  shown  so  much  endurance  and  courage  as  those  now  in 
Vicksburg  would  be  treated  with  all  the  respect  due  to 
prisoners  of  war.  Bowen  expressed  a  desire  to  converse 
with  Grant,  which  was  refused  ;  but  Grant  sent  word  that  if 
Pemberton  desired  to  see  him  he  would  meet  him  in  front 
of  the  lines  at  3  p.m.  At  that  hour  Grant,  with  his  two  corps 
commanders  then  present,  Ord  and  McPherson,  and  the 
division  commanders  nearest  that  part  of  the  line,  Logan 
and  A.  J.  Smith,  besides  several  members  of  his  staff,  went 
forward  to  a  point  just  south  of  the  Confederate  works  on 
the  Jackson  road.  Here  he  was  met  by  Pemberton,  Bowen, 
and  some  of  the  former's  staff.  Pemberton  asked  what 
terms  he  would  be  allowed,  and  Grant  answered  those  indi- 


THE  SIEGE   AND   SURRENDER  OF  VICKSBURG.       205 

eated  in  his  letter  that  morning.  Pemberton  replied  that 
then  the  conference  might  terminate,  and  hostilities  be 
resumed.  Grant  said  "  Veiy  well."  Some  further  conver- 
sation ensued,  when  the  proposition  was  made — by  whom  is 
a  matter  of  dispute — that  Bowen  and  A.  J.  Smith  should  re- 
tire for  consultation.  Grant  made  no  objection  to  this, 
except  that  he  would  not  consider  himself  bound  by  any- 
thing they  might  agree  upon.  These  officers  then  stepped 
to  one  side,  but  came  to  no  conclusion.  Finally  the  con- 
ference broke  up  with  the  understanding  that  Grant  would 
formulate  his  terms  in  detail,  and  send  them  to  Pemberton 
at  10  p.m. 

The  letter  which  Grant  sent  that  evening  conveyed  the 
same  idea  of  unconditional  surrender,  although  those  words 
were  not  used.  He  proposed  to  take  possession  of  the  city 
the  next  morning,  have  rolls  made  out  as  soon  as  possible, 
and  individual  paroles  signed  by  every  officer  and  man,  after 
which  the  Confederate  troops  were  to  march  out ;  the  rank 
and  file  taking  no  property  but  their  clothing,  and  officers 
retaining  their  side  arms  and  one  horse  for  each  mounted 
officer.  Thirty  wagons  and  any  desired  amount  of  rations 
could  be  taken  from  their  own  stores. 

These  terms  would  not  only  insure  a  complete  surrender, 
but  they  would  save  the  trouble  of  transporting  and  feeding 
the  prisoners  until  exchanged. 

Pemberton  accepted  these  terms  in  the  main  but  pro- 
posed that  he  should  first  march  out  with  his  colors  and 
arms,  before  Grant  took  possession ;  also  that  officers  should 
retain  their  personal  property  and  "  the  rights  and  property 
of  citizens  to  be  respected."  This  proposition  was  received 
after  midnight,  and  Grant  at  once  answered,  declining  to 
make  any  stipulations  about  citizens,  and  agreeing  to  the 
officers   retaining    their    private   baggage   and    side   arms, 


206  THE  MISSISSIPPI. 

which  was  already  included  in  his  first  letter.  As  to  the 
proposition  to  march  out  with  colors  and  arms,  he  had  no 
objection,  provided  that,  as  soon  as  the  arms  were  stacked, 
the  troops  marched  back  again  and  remained  within  the 
lines  until  duly  paroled.  Pemberton  was  notified  that 
unless  his  acceptance  of  these  terms  was  signified  by  9  a.m. 
they  would  be  regarded  as  rejected,  and  measures  taken  ac- 
cordingly.    He  immediately  replied  accej)ting  them. 

In  these  negotiations  Grant  had  waived  the  technical 
point  of  not  offering  any  terms  further  than  the  words  "  un- 
conditional surrender,"  as  in  his  position  of  conqueror  it  was 
very  easy  for  him  to  do.  But  he  had  kept  the  negotiations  in 
his  own  hands,  instead  of  delegating  them  to  commissioners, 
and  he  had  yielded  nothing  of  the  principle  for  which  he 
contended,  i.e.,  the  surrender  of  the  whole  force,  with  their 
arms  and  munitions,  as  prisoners  of  war,  not  to  take  arms 
again  until  properly  exchanged. 

At  10  a.m.  on  July  4th,  the  Confederate  troops  marched 
out,  each  division  in  front  of  its  works,  stacked  arms,  laid 
their  colors  upon  them,  and  then  returned  toward  the  town. 
Logan's  division  was  marched  in  to  take  possession.  Paroles 
were  made  out  and  signed  as  quickly  as  possible,  and  the 
prisoners  were  meanwhile  fed  from  the  Union  stores.  On 
July  11th,  they  marched  out  without  arms,  and  proceeded 
to  the  vicinity  of  Enterprise,  Miss.,  and  Demopolis,  Ala., 
where  they  remained  until  they  were  declared  exchanged  in 
the  following  month  of  September.1 


I  1  On  July  10th,  Jefferson  Davis  telegraphed  to  Pemberton  that  all  the  general 
[officers  had  been  exchanged,  and  were  released  from  their  parole  ;  and  that  they 

should  return  to  duty  at  once.  He  also  desired  to  know  what  portion  of  the  troops 
'  were  really  effective,  and  was  informed  that  Stevenson's,  and  Bowen's,  and  a  part 

of  Forney's  division  were  fit  for  service,  i.e.,  about  two-thirds  of  the  whole  force. 

On   September  11th,  the   Confederate   Agent  of   Exchange  notified  the  United 

States  Agent  that  on  the  following  clay  the  divisions  above  named  would  be  de- 


THE  SIEGE   AXD   SURRENDER   OF  VICKSBURG.       207 

The  number  actually  paroled,  as  certified  by  the  U.  S. 
Commissioner  of  Exchange,  to  whom  the  rolls  were  for- 
warded, was  29,391 — viz.,  2,166  officers,  and  27,225  men. 
In  addition,  790  refused  to  be  paroled,  and  were  sent  North 
as  prisoners  of  war,  and  several  hundreds  escaped,  or  died 
in  the  hospitals  before  they  could  be  paroled,  so  that  the 
total  force  surrendered  was,  in  round  numbers,  31,000.  The 
artillery  found  in  the  place  numbered  172  pieces,  67  of 
which  were  siege  guns,  and  the  rest  field  pieces. 

Grant's  losses  in  the  entire  campaign,  including  the  expe- 
dition against  Jackson,  were  a  little  less  than  10,000,  some 
of  which,  being  men  slightly  wounded,  were  only  temporary. 
Of  the  army  which,  on  Pemberton's  return  for  March,  num- 
bered 61,495  actually  present,  all  had  now  been  lost  except 
about  6,000  who  escaped  with  Loring  from  Champion's 
Hill,  4,000  who  were  operating  in  the  northern  and  eastern 

clared  exchanged,  and  on  the  12th  the  order  was  issued.  It  was  notorious  that 
at  this  time — just  prior  to  the  battle  of  Chickamauga — the  Confederates  were 
sorely  in  need  of  troops.  The  Confederate  agent  gave  no  statement  of  numbers, 
nor  any  description  of  the  Union  prisoners  against  whom  they  were  exchanged; 
but  merely  stated  "  I  have  in  my  possession  more  valid  paroles  of  your  officers 
and  men  than  would  be  an  equivalent  for  the  officers  and  men  herein  enumerated." 
It  was,  however,  an  unquestioned  fact,  which  had  been  the  subject  of  correspon- 
dence among  the  Confederate  authorities  at  this  very  time,  that  the  capture  of 
the  troops  at  Vicksburg  placed  the  balance  of  prisoners  largely  in  favor  of  the 
United  States.  Against  this  extraordinary  proceeding  the  United  States  agent 
at  once  protested,  but  without  avail,  and  some  of  the  paroled  Vicksburg  prisoners 
were  taken  in  arms  at  the  battle  of  Chattanooga  in  November  following.  Both 
sides  then  declared  all  paroled  prisoners  exchanged,  which  threw  the  subject  of 
exchanges  into  hopeless  confusion.  A  voluminous  correspondence  was  carried  on 
for  months  with  reference  to  the  subject,  during  which  the  Confederates  advanced 
the  proposition  that  the  paroles  at  Vicksburg  and  Port  Hudson  were  all  invalid  on 
technical  grounds.  This  was  submitted  to  General  Grant,  then  in  command  of 
all  the  armies,  in  April,  1S64,  and  he  directed  that  no  further  exchanges  be  made 
of  any  character  unless  the  paroles  at  Vicksburg  and  Port  Hudson  were  fully 
recognized.  In  consequence,  no  more  exchanges  were  made  during  the  war, 
except  in  special  cases  of  sickness.  It  was  not,  as  has  been  represented,  from  a 
desire  to  cripple  the  South  that  the  exchange  of  prisoners  was  stopped,  but  from 
a  belief  that  the  Confederate  authorities  had  deliberately  acted  in  bad  faith. 


208  THE  MISSISSIPPI. 

part  of  the  State,  and  7,000  from  Port  Hudson,  who  had 
joined  Johnston  at  Jackson.  The  losses  in  the  battle  of 
Raymond  and  the  two  battles  at  Jackson,  among  Johnston's 
troops,  were  about  2,000.  The  net  total  of  losses  to  the 
Confederates  was  therefore  over  46,000  men,  60,000  small 
arms,  and  260  cannon,  which  they  had  but  poor  means  of 
replacing ;  add  to  this  the  loss  of  the  Mississippi  River  and 
the  resources  of  the  fertile  region  beyond  it. 

The  events  of  July  4,  1863,  at  Vicksburg  and  Gettys- 
burg, sounded  the  death-knell  of  the  Confederacy.  There 
was  desperate  righting  thereafter,  but  it  was  without  hope ; 
it  was  the  fighting  of  men  who  saw  defeat  and  ruin  staring 
them  in  the  face,  but  were  determined  to  fight  until  nothing 
should  be  left,  and  in  their  downfall  to  create  as  much  havoc 
as  possible. 


CHAPTER  VH. 

PORT  HUDSON. 

In  the  month  of  November,  1862,  Ma]'. -Gen.  N.  P.  Banks 
sailed  from  New  York  with  a  force  of  between  15,000  and 
20,000  men.1  His  instructions,  conveyed  in  a  letter  from 
Halleck,  dated  November  9,  1862,  were  to  proceed  to  New 
Orleans,  relieve  General  Butler  in  command  of  the  Depart- 
ment of  the  Gulf  and,  uniting  the  forces  brought  with  him 
with  those  already  serving  on  the  Gulf,  advance  up  the  Mis- 
sissippi in  co-operation  with  General  Grant,  in  order  to  gain 
complete  possession  of  that  river ;  after  the  river  was  cleared 
he  was  to  advance  sufficiently  far  into  the  interior  to  hold 
an  unbroken  line  of  communication  by  land  from  New  Or- 
leans to  Vicksburg,  and  then,  turning  to  the  west  of  the  Mis- 
sissippi, he  was  to  occupy  the  Bed  River  country  as  a  jDro- 
tection  for  Louisiana  and  Arkansas  and  a  basis  of  future 
operations  against  Texas. 

Banks  arrived  at  New  Orleans  about  the  middle  of  De- 
cember, 1862,  and  assumed  command  on  the  16th  of  that 
month.  A  portion  of  his  command,  numbering  10,000 
men,  under  Brig.-Gen.  C.  Grover,  was  not  disembarked 
at  New  Orleans,  but  proceeded  directly  up  the  river  to 
Baton  Rouge.     Grover  reached   this  point  at  daylight   on 

1  The  War  Department  Records  contain  no  data  us  to  the  exact  strength  of 
this  force. 


210  THE   MISSISSIPPI. 

the  17th,  and  immediately  landed  and  took  possession, 
driving  off  a  small  force  of  Confederates  which  was  stationed 
there  as  an  outpost.  Baton  Eouge  is  but  twenty-five  miles 
by  land  south  of  Port  Hudson,  and  was  a  convenient  base  of 
operations  against  that  stronghold.  But  Grover  did  not  con- 
sider his  division  sufficiently  strong  to  make  any  advance  at 
that  time  ;  it  was  not  thoroughly  organized  and  equipped  for 
the  field,  the  troops  were  new — this  being  their  first  ser- 
vice— and  they  were  deficient  in  transportation  and  other 
essentials  for  active  service. 

The  entire  force  under  Banks'  command  consisted  of  56 
regiments,  nearly  one-half  of  which  were  enlisted  for  nine 
months  only,  numbering  in  all  31,253  officers  and  men  for 
duty,  out  of  a  total  of  36,508  present,  as  shown  on  his  re- 
turn of  December  31st.  They  occupied  positions  along  the 
Gulf,  stretching  from  Florida  to  Western  Texas,  and  up  the 
Mississippi  from  the  forts  below  New  Orleans  to  the  vicinity 
of  Port  Hudson.  It  was  necessary  to  hold  all  these  points, 
as  those  on  the  Gulf  were  of  material  assistance  in  main- 
taining the  blockade,  and  those  in  the  vicinity  of  New  Or- 
leans were  necessary  to  protect  that  city  from  capture,  either 
from  the  direction  of  Texas,  or  from  Mobile,  or  other  points 
in  Alabama.  Banks'  troops  were  designated  as  the  19th 
Army  Corps,  and  were  divided  into  four  divisions,  com- 
manded by  Maj.-Gen.  Augur  and  Brig. -Gens.  T.  W.  Sher- 
man, Emory,  and  Grover. 

Almost  immediately  after  Banks'  arrival,  his  attention 
was  directed  to  the  condition  of  Galveston,  which  had  been 
captured  in  the  previous  month  of  October,  and  was  now 
held  by  the  navy.  It  was  reported  to  be  threatened  by  a 
considerable  force  moving  against  it  from  the  north,  and, 
although  his  instructions  did  not  include  the  defence  of 
that  place,  yet  Banks  considered  it  of  such  importance  that, 


PORT  HUDSON.  211 

at  the  request  of  Admiral  Farragut  and  of  Brig. -Gen.  Hamil- 
ton, who  had  come  with  Banks  to  assume  the  duties  of  Mili- 
tary Governor  of  Texas,  he  sent  a  regiment  of  infantry  to  as- 
sist in  the  defence  of  the  place.  A  portion  of  this  regirnent 
reached  Galveston  on  December  28th,  just  in  time  to  be 
captured.  The  place  was  attacked  on  January  1st  by  a 
force  of  Confederates,  numbering  over  2,000  men,  under 
Magruder,  and  it  was  captured  with  its  little  garrison  and 
the  gunboat  Harriet  Lane,  whose  commander  (Wainwright) 
was  killed.  The  gunboat  Westneld  was  blown  up  to  escape 
capture. 

Galveston  remained  in  the  possession  of  the  Confederates 
from  this  time  until  the  close  of  the  war,  and  Banks  had  no 
farther  opportunity  for  efforts  in  this  direction. 

The  most  inrportant  duty  entrusted  to  Banks  by  his  in- 
structions was  an  advance  up  the  Mississippi  Biver  against 
Port  Hudson,  in  co-operation  with  Grant's  operations  against 
Vicksburg.  But  after  deducting  the  garrisons  of  all  the 
positions  before  referred  to,  he  found  that  he  could  not  take 
the  field  with  more  than  15,000  men.  The  garrison  of  Port 
Hudson,  according  to  the  information  which  Banks  received, 
numbered  18,000  men,  and  the  position  was  one  of  consider- 
able strength,  thoroughly  fortified  by  a  continuous  line  of 
works,  each  flank  of  which  rested  on  the  river.  Kumors 
even  reached  Banks  that  the  garrison  numbered  over  30,000 
men,  but  without  crediting  this  exaggerated  report  it  was 
evident  that  his  force  was  entirely  insufficient  to  assault 
the  works  at  Port  Hudson.  He  therefore  turned  his  atten- 
tion to  the  project  of  passing  it  or  reducing  it  by  other 
means. 

This  post,  as  well  as  Vicksburg,  drew  its  supplies  mainly 
from  Western  Louisiana  and  Texas,  by  way  of  the  Bed  Biver. 
If  this  river  could  be  reached  and  held,  these  supplies  could 


THE  MISSISSIPPI. 


PORT  HUDSON.  213 

be  cut  off  and  communication  opened  with  the  troops  under 
Grant  near  Vicksburg.  At  this  time  the  Confederate  forces 
in  Louisiana  consisted  of  about  4,000  men  under  Maj.- 
Gen.  B.  Taylor.  Their  principal  point  of  defence  was  at 
Alexandria,  but  their  outposts  extended  down  as  far  as 
the  railroad  from  New  Orleans  to  Brashear  City.  Just 
below  Alexandria  they  had  an  earthwork  called  Fort  de 
Eussy,  intended  to  block  the  passage  up  Eed  Eiver.  On 
the  Bayou  Teche,  at  Pattersonville,  a  few  miles  west  of 
Brashear  City,  they  had  another  work,  called  Fort  Bis- 
land,  extending  from  Grand  Lake  to  the  impassable  swamps 
south  of  the  Teche.  On  the  Atchafalaya  there  was  a  third 
work  at  Butte-a-la-Bose,  about  twenty  miles  north  of  Grand 
Lake. 

The  whole  country,  for  50  miles  west  of  the  Mississippi,  in 
this  region  is  alluvial  land  filled  with  countless  bayous,  lakes, 
rivers,  and  swamps,  crossing  and  connecting  with  each  other 
in  such  manner  that  the  country  is  almost  impassable  ;  but 
there  is  a  road  along  the  Teche  from  Brashear  City  through 
Opelousas  to  Alexandria;  and  in  high  water  the  Teche  is 
navigable  to  Opelousas,  and  the  Atchafalaya  to  Eed  Eiver. 
Along  these  two  streams,  therefore,  lay  the  routes  of  any  ad- 
vance to  the  Eed  Eiver.  The  Confederate  forts  were  in- 
tended to  defend  these  lines  of  approach,  and  Fort  Bisland 
was,  in  addition,  to  be  used  as  a  base  of  operations  against 
the  La  Fourche  and  New  Orleans. 

In  the  latter  part  of  January,  Banks  organized  two  expedi- 
tions, one  of  which,  consisting  of  4,000  men  under  Brig.- 
Gen.  Weitzel,  was  to  move  up  Bayou  Teche  from  Ber- 
wick, and  the  other,  of  3,000  men  under  Brig. -Gen.  Emory, 
was  to  leave  the  Mississippi  at  Plaquemine,  and  pass 
through  a  bayou  into  the  Atchafalaya.  The  two  columns 
were  then  to  unite  and  advance  upon  the  fort  at  Butte-a-la- 


214  THE  MISSISSIPPI. 

Rose,  after  taking  which  they  were  to  move  up  to  the  Red 
River.  This  expedition  came  to  nothing — beyond  a  small 
skirmish  on  the  Teche — because  it  was  found  impossible  to 
penetrate  through  Bayou  Plaquemine.  Before  it  had  been 
completely  abandoned,  information  was  received  of  the  cap- 
ture by  the  Confederates,  on  the  Red  River,  of  the  ram 
Queen  of  the  West,  and  the  gunboat  De  Soto,  which  had 
run  past  the  batteries  at  Vicksburg  and  descended  the 
river  early  in  February.  On  hearing  of  this,  Admiral  Farra- 
gut  determined  that  it  was  necessary  to  patrol  the  river  at 
once  above  Port  Hudson  with  his  vessels.  He  requested 
Banks  to  make  a  demonstration  with  his  troops  against 
Port  Hudson,  while  he  ran  past  the  batteries  for  this 
purpose. 

Banks  gave  his  assent,  and  immediately  withdrew  Emory 
from  the  west  bank  of  the  river,  and  taking  all  the  force  avail- 
able from  New  Orleans — excepting  Weitzel's  command  on  the 
Teche,  which  was  essential  for  the  defence  of  the  city  from 
that  direction — he  moved  to  Baton  Rouge  early  in  March. 
His  force  numbered  about  17,000  men.  A  delay  of  ten  days 
then  occurred,  owing  to  the  necessity  for  repairs  to  the  ma- 
chinery of  some  of  the  vessels,  but  on  March  13th  Farragut 
arrived  at  Baton  Rouge  with  his  fleet.  On  the  same  day 
Grover's  division  moved  out  from  Baton  Rouge  for  Port 
Hudson,  followed,  on  the  morning  of  the  14th,  by  Emory's 
and  Augur's  divisions.  These  troops,  whose  effective  strength 
was  reported  by  Banks  as  only  12,000 — a  considerable  force 
having  been  detached  to  guard  the  points  in  his  rear — took 
position  on  the  roads  east  of  the  Port  Hudson  works,  intend- 
ing to  make  a  demonstration  against  them,  and  to  advance 
close  enough  to  use  their  artillery  in  order  to  create  a  diver- 
sion during  the  passage  of  the  fleet.  The  time  for  this 
latter  had  been  fixed  at  a  little  before  dawn  on  the  15th,  but 


PORT  HUDSON.  215 

late  in  the  afternoon  of  the  14th  Banks  received  a  despatch 
from  Farragut  saying  that  he  found  it  more  favorable  to  pass 
during  the  evening,  and  he  intended  to  start  soon  after  dark. 
Banks'  advance  was  delayed  by  erroneous  maj)s  and  by  the 
necessity  of  constructing  some  bridges,  and  it  was  impossi- 
ble for  him  to  approach  near  enough  to  the  works  to  use 
his  artillery  with  any  effect.  Beyond  exchanging  a  few 
shots  with  the  enemy's  pickets,  his  troops  accomplished 
nothing  on  this  expedition.  He  was  still  engaged  in 
building  bridges  when,  at  11.30  p.m.,  on  the  14th,  the  noise 
of  Farragut's  guns  was  heard  from  the  direction  of  the 
river. 

Farragut  brought  with  him  from  New  Orleans,  for  the  pur- 
pose of  passing  Port  Hudson,  the  following  vessels  : 

Hartford,  Capt.  J.  S.  Palmer , 28  guns. 

Richmond,  Comdr.  James  Alden 25  " 

Monongahela,  Capt.  J.  P.  McKinstry 11  " 

Mississippi,  Capt.  Melancton  Smith 19  " 

Essex,  Comdr.  C.  H.  B.  Caldwell 7  " 

Albatross,  Lt.-Com.  J.  E.  Hart 7  " 

Genesee,  Comdr.  W.  H.  Macomb 8  " 

Kineo,  Lt.  -Com.  John  Waters 6  " 

Sachem,  Lt.  Amos  Johnston 5  " 

5  mortar-schooners 5  " 

Total 121  guns. 

The  first  four  were  sloops  of  war,  the  Essex  a  river  iron- 
clad, the  other  four  were  gunboats.  The  order  of  battle 
prescribed  that  each  of  the  large  vessels — except  the  Missis- 
sippi, which  was  a  side-wheeler — should  take  a  gunboat 
firmly  lashed  on  the  port  side,  away  from  the  batteries,  and 
that  they  should  proceed  up  the  river  in  the  order  named 
above,  the  Hartford  in  the  lead.     The  mortar-boats  were 


216  THE  MISSISSIPPI. 

anchored  near  the  east  bank,  about  a  mile  below  the  bat- 
teries. The  captains  were  reminded  that  the  object  of  the 
movement  was  to  pass  the  batteries  with  the  least  possible 
damage  to  their  vessels,  so  as  to  secure  as  efficient  a  force  as 
jDOSsible  for  patrolling  the  river  above.  The  vessels  were 
trimmed  by  the  head,  so  that  in  case  of  grounding  they 
would  not  swing  around  with  the  current. 

At  9  o'clock,  the  signal  was  made  for  the  ships  to  get  into 
line,  and  as  soon  as  this  was  accomplished,  the  Hartford 
slowly  steamed  ahead.  At  11.20  p.m.  two  rockets  were  fired 
on  the  east  bank,  and  almost  immediately  the  batteries 
opened  fire.  The  fleet  and  the  mortar  boats  immediately 
answered,  and  from  this  time  till  long  after  midnight,  the 
noise  of  150  guns  firing  as  rapidly  as  possible  was  inces- 
sant. 

The  fleet  moved  forward  steadily  under  the  fire.  As  the 
Hartford  reached  the  upper  batteries,  the  smoke  was  so 
dense  that  the  pilot  could  see  nothing,  and  the  firing  was 
ceased.  It  was  immediately  found  that  the  strong  current 
had  deflected  the  ship  from  her  course,  and  she  was  head- 
ing for  the  shore.  While  the  Albatross  backed,  the  Hart- 
ford's engines  drove  forward,  and  thus  the  two  ships  were 
turned  into  the  current  again,  the  Hartford  grounding  for  a 
moment  only.  Just  as  she  was  free,  the  Richmond  came 
upon  her  from  the  stern,  and  a  collision  was  barely  avoided. 
Once  in  the  right  direction,  the  Hartford,  and  her  consort, 
the  Albatross,  went  forward  at  full  speed,  and  were  soon  out 
of  range  above  the  bend,  where  they  came  to  anchor,  having 
been  under  fire  an  hour  and  ten  minutes. 

None  of  the  other  ships  were  able  to  follow.  Their  vari- 
ous mishaps  will  be  described  in  turn. 

The  Richmond  reached  the  bend  just  after  getting  clear 
of  the  Hartford,  and  then  received  a  shot  on  the  safety- 


PORT  HUDSON.  217 

valves,  upsetting  them,  and  allowing  the  steam  to  escape. 
Her  engines  were  thus  useless,  and  all  the  efforts  of  the 
Genesee,  her  consort,  were  insufficient  to  cany  both  ships 
forward  against  the  strong  current.  They  were  therefore 
forced  to  turn  back,  and  came  to  anchor  below  the  batteries. 

The  Monongahela  ran  too  close  to  the  west  shore,  and 
grounded  in  turning  the  point  at  11.20  p.m.  Her  consort, 
the  Kineo,  broke  adrift  with  the  shock,  and  went  ahead  a 
short  distance,  and  also  grounded.  Her  rudder  had  pre- 
viously been  destroyed.  Just  after  grounding,  the  bridge 
of  the  Monongahela  was  shot  away,  and  her  captain  thrown 
violently  to  the  deck,  injuring  him  so  that  he  was  unable  to 
take  further  part  in  the  action.  The  Kineo  having  floated, 
she  backed  to  the  Monongahela,  and  made  fast  again ;  both 
vessels  then  backed  with  all  steam,  and  finally  got  off  after 
being  aground  under  fire  for  twenty-five  minutes.  The 
Monongahela  then  started  up  stream  again,  but  in  a  few 
minutes  the  engine  stopped,  and  the  engineer  reported  that 
the  crank  pin  of  the  forward  engine  was  so  heated  that  he 
could  not  go  ahead.  The  ship  thus  became  unmanageable, 
and  drifted  down  below  the  batteries. 

The  Mississippi  also  grounded  at  12.30  a.m.  on  the  west 
bank  just  at  the  point  of  the  bend.  She  grounded  hard  and 
fast,  and  lay  there  for  thirty-five  minutes  under  fire,  firing 
her  .starboard  guns,  and  backing  her  engine  with  all  the 
steam  the  engineer  deemed  safe.  But  it  was  of  no  avail. 
The  captain  then  determined  to  abandon  the  ship ;  her  en- 
gine was  destroyed,  small  arms  thrown  overboard,  the  sick 
and  wounded  landed  on  the  shore,  and  fires  kindled  in  sev- 
eral parts  of  the  ship.  When  these  were  well  under  way 
the  captain  left  the  ship,  and  with  his  crew  in  oj)en  boats 
went  past  the  batteries  to  the  fleet  below.  The  Mississippi 
floated  at  3  a.m.  and  came  down  the  river  in  full  blaze.  At 
VIII.— 10 


218  THE  MISSISSIPPI. 

5.30  the  flames  reached  the  magazine  and  she  was  blown  to 
atoms. 

The  Essex  acted  in  connection  with  the  mortar  boats  at 
the  lower  batteries  and  did  not  come  up  to  the  bend.  At 
the  close  of  the  action  she  picked  up  the  boats  of  the  Mis- 
sissippi and  embarked  the  wounded  from  the  west  shore. 

Of  the  Mississippi's  crew  of  297  men,  64  were  missing  at 
the  close  of  the  action  and,  it  was  supposed  that  25  of  these 
were  killed.  The  casualties  on  the  other  ships  were  11 
killed  and  38  wounded ;  the  total  loss  was  thus  113.  One 
ship  had  been  destroyed,  four  had  been  disabled,  and  two 
had  succeeded  in  passing.  It  is  doubtful  if  the  Confeder- 
ates lost  a  dozen  men,  and  their  works  were  practically  un- 
injured. 

It  was  an  extremely  gallant  fight,  conducted  against  great 
odds  in  spite  of  the  naval  superiority  in  number  and  weight 
of  guns  ;  for  a  successful  shot  from  the  ships  merely  threw 
up  a  cloud  of  dirt,  while  a  successful  shot  from  the  shore 
destroyed  an  engine  or  a  rudder  and  rendered  a  ship  help- 
less if  it  did  not  sink  her.  The  object  of  the  fight  was  to 
pass  the  batteries  and  patrol  the  river  above,  especially  at 
the  mouth  of  the  Eed  River,  whence  the  Confederates  drew 
their  supplies.  Although  five  out  of  seven  of  Farragut's 
ships  met  with  disaster,  yet  he  fully  accomplished  his  pur- 
pose, and  the  Red  River  route  was  completely  blockaded 
from  this  time  forward.  This  object  may  seem  small  as 
compared  with  the  capture  of  a  great  city  like  New  Orleans, 
yet  it  was  a  most  important  object  in  the  operations  then  in 
progress. 

Banks  received  word  from  his  signal  officers  on  the  15th 
that  Farragut  had  passed  the  batteries  with  the  Hartford 
and  Albatross,  and  that  the  other  vessels  were  disabled.  The 
object  of  his  expedition  being  merely  to  make  a  demonstra- 


PORT  HUDSON.  219 

tion  while  the  vessels  were  passing,  his  men  at  once  re- 
turned to  Baton  Eouge.1  Leaving  Augur's  division  there, 
Banks  returned  in  person  to  New  Orleans,  giving  orders  for 
Emory  and  Grover  to  move  down  the  river  to  Donaldson- 
ville,  and  thence  march  across  to  Thibodeau,  on  the  railroad, 
in  order  to  join  Weitzel  at  Brashear  City,  and  resume  the 
movement  up  the  Atchafalaya  and  Teche,  which  had  been 
suspended  by  the  demonstration  against  Port  Hudson.  Lack 
of  transportation  both  on  the  river  and  on  land  delayed 
these  movements  so  that  it  was  the  10th  of  April  before  the 
troops  were  united  and  ready  for  action  at  Brashear  City. 
They  numbered  about  17,000  men. 

Banks  arrived  in  person  from  New  Orleans  on  the  8th,  and 
on  the  morning  of  the  11th  the  movement  began,  Emory's 
division  and  Weitzel's  brigade  crossing  Berwick's  Bay  and 
moving  forward  toward  Pattersonville,  and  Grover's  division 
moving  up  Grand  Lake  in  transports,  and  landing  opposite 
the  bend  in  Bayou  Teche,  just  above  Franklin,  so  as  to  cut  off 
the  enemy's  retreat.  On  the  13th  the  Confederates  were  met 
in  front  of  Pattersonville  and  driven  into  their  works  at  Fort 
Bisland  after  a  sharp  contest.  It  was  intended  to  make  an 
assault  on  the  following  morning,  but  during  the  night  the 
Confederates  evacuated  Fort  Bisland,  retreating  toward 
Opelousas.  Grover  reached  Franklin  on  the  following  day 
(14th),  having  been  greatly  delayed  in  disembarking  in  con- 
sequence of  shallow  water  extending  out  a  mile  from  the 
shore.  He  had  succeeded  in  landing  on  the  evening  of  the 
13th,  and  the  next  morning  was  attacked  by  a  detachment 
which  had  been  sent  against  him   from  Fort  Bisland,  in 

1  In  his  annual  report  for  1863,  Halleck  says:  "Had  our  land  forces  invested 
Port  Hudson  at  this  time,  it  could  easily  have  been  reduced,  as  its  garrison  was 
weak.11  In  this  Halleck  was  mistaken.  The  garrison  of  Port  Hudson  was  at 
its  maximum— 16,287  for  duty  out  of  20,388  present— at  this  time.  See  p.  227 
post. 


220  THE  MISSISSIPPI 

order  to  keep  open  the  line  of  retreat.  He  beat  off  this  de- 
tachment, but  was  unable  to  head  off  the  main  body  of  the 
Confederates,  who  made  good  their  retreat  to  Opelousas. 
During  the  affair  at  Fort  Bisland  the  ram  Queen  of  the 
West  was  finally  destroyed  by  the  gunboats  Estrella,  Ari- 
zona, Clifton,  and  Calhoun,  under  command  of  Lt.-Com. 
A.  P.  Cooke,  U.  S.  Navy.  Two  other  gunboats  were  blown 
up  by  the  Confederates  to  prevent  their  capture. 

Banks  followed  up  the  retreating  force  of  the  Confeder- 
ates and  occupied  Opelousas  on  April  20th.  On  the  same 
day  the  gunboats,  under  Lt.-Com.  Cooke,  after  a  short  en- 
gagement, captured  the  fort  at  Butte-a-la-Bose  on  the  Atcha- 
falaya,  with  its  garrison  of  60  men.  Bemaining  two  weeks 
at  Opelousas,  Banks  moved  forward  on  May  5th,  and  on  the 
9th  occupied  Alexandria,  the  Confederates  retreating  to- 
ward Shreveport.  The  vessels  of  Farragut's  fleet  above 
Port  Hudson,  reinforced  by  four  gunboats  under  Porter, 
who  had  come  down  from  Grand  Gulf  on  the  Mississippi, 
had  all  ascended  the  Bed  Biver  and  appeared  at  Alexandria 
simultaneously  with  the  troops.  In  these  operations  from 
Brashear  City  to  Alexandria,  Banks  had  captured  a  large 
number  of  prisoners  and  22  guns,  and  had  destroyed  three 
Confederate  gunboats  and  a  considerable  amount  of  prop- 
erty.    His  own  loss  had  been  about  600. 

It  was,  however,  nearly  five  months  since  Banks  had  ar- 
rived at  New  Orleans,  and  during  that  time  nothing  of  any 
importance  had  been  done  against  Port  Hudson  or  in  co-op- 
eration with  Grant.  For  this  Banks  was  sharply  called  to 
account  by  Halleck  as  soon  as  the  latter  heard  of  the  occu- 
pation of  Alexandria,  but  Banks  seems  to  have  been  per- 
fectly justified  in  his  movements  against  the  Bed  Biver 
forces  prior  to  any  action  against  Port  Hudson,  for  had  his 
troops  besieged  Port  Hudson  before  driving  back  Taylor's 


PORT  HUDSON.  221 

forces,  the  latter  would  possibly  have  been  able  to  capture 
New  Orleans,  the  safety  of  which  exceeded  in  importance 
all  other  considerations. 

During  the  months  of  March,  April,  and  May,  consider- 
able correspondence  took  place  between  Grant  and  Banks 
as  to  the  co-operation  of  their  forces,  which,  as  it  has  been 
much  quoted  and  misinterpreted,  is  given  in  full,  with  dates 
of  receipt,  in  the  Appendix.  The  first  letter  is  from  Banks 
to  Grant,  dated  March  13th,  the  day  before  the  passage  of 
the  batteries  at  Port  Hudson.  In  this  Banks  announced  his 
arrival  at  Baton  Kouge  with  17,000  men,  for  the  purpose  of 
making  a  demonstration,  while  Farragut  passed  the  bat- 
teries. After  this  he  hoped  to  communicate  with  Grant  as 
to  the  best  means  of  co-operation  between  the  two  armies 
under  their  respective  commands. 

Farragut  carried  this  up  the  river,  and  delivered  it  to 
Grant  on  March  20th.  A  few  days  later  Farragut  prepared 
to  go  down  the  river  again,  and  Grant  took  advantage  of  the 
opportunity  to  send  word  to  Banks.  He  wrote  him  a  des- 
patch, dated  March  23d,  explaining  the  condition  of  affairs 
at  Vicksburg,  and  his  various  attempts  to  reach  dry  land  on 
the  east  bank  of  the  river.  On  the  same  day  he  wrote  a  let- 
ter to  Farragut,  in  the  nature  of  a  postscript  to  the  letter  to 
Banks,  and  with  a  request  that  it  might  be  sent  to  that  of- 
ficer, saying  that  the  Lake  Providence  Canal  promised  suc- 
cess, and  that  he  had  sent  to  the  Ohio  River  for  light- 
draught  steamers.  If  they  arrived,  he  stated  that  he  could 
send  20,000  men  to  Banks  on  the  Red  River  by  that  route. 

Farragut  started  down  the  river  with  these  two  letters  on 
March  28th,  and  arrived  above  Port  Hudson  on  April  6th. 
Here  his  secretary,  Mr.  Gabaudan,  volunteered  to  slip  past 
the  batteries  in  a  skiff,  and  convey  the  letters  to  Banks. 
But  for  fear  of  accident  or  capture,  it  was  thought  best  not 


122  THE  MISSISSIPPI. 

to  take  the  letters  with  him  but,  to  commit  them  to  mem- 
ory. He  arrived  safely  at  Baton  Bouge  on  April  8th,  and 
thence  took  steamer  down  the  river,  and  reached  Banks' 
headquarters  at  Brashear  City  on  April  10th.  From  the 
verbal  message  which  he  conveyed,  Banks  gathered  the  in- 
formation that  Grant  positively  intended  to  send  20,000 
men  by  the  Lake  Providence  ronte.  The  contingency  of  re- 
ceiving suitable  transports  (which,  in  fact,  never  arrived) 
was  either  not  reported  or  not  noticed.  Banks  immediately 
wrote  Grant  in  reply  that  he  was  advancing  toward  Opelou- 
sas,  but  had  no  intention  of  remaining  west  of  the  Missis- 
sippi ;  that  he  would  return  to  Port  Hudson  by  May  10th, 
and  that  his  available  force  for  field  operations  was  15,000 
men.  Mr.  Gabaudan  took  this  letter,  returned  to  Baton 
Bouge,  and  made  his  way  across  the  wooded  swamp  oppo- 
site Port  Hudson,  reaching  the  Hartford  on  April  15th. 
Farragut  had  no  opportunity  to  forward  the  despatch  until 
May  1st.  On  that  day  he  sent  the  Switzerland  up  the  river 
with  the  letter,  which  reached  Grant  on  May  2d,  just  after 
he  had  crossed  at  Bruinsburg.  It  was  this  despatch  which 
has  previously  been  referred  to  as  convincing  Grant  that  he 
could  receive  no  co-operation  from  Banks  during  his  cam- 
paign behind  Vicksburg,  and  as  causing  him  to  retain  all 
his  own  troops  for  that  campaign  instead  of  sending  a  corps 
to  Port  Hudson  as  he  had  intended  before  crossing  the 
river.  Grant  wrote  Banks  to  that  effect  on  May  10th,  as 
will  be  subsequently  explained.  It  will  be  noticed  that  it 
took  40  days,  from  March  23d  to  May  2d,  for  Grant  to  re- 
ceive a  direct  answer  from  Banks,  and  in  the  course  of  that 
time  the  whole  condition  of  affairs  had  changed  around 
Vicksburg.  It  was  hopeless  to  effect  any  co-operation  be- 
tween two  armies  with  such  delay  in  communicating  intelli- 
gence. 


PORT  HUDSON.  223 

In  this  interval  several  other  despatches  had  been  sent  on 
both  sides,  crossing  each  other  on  the  road ;  they  had  but 
little  effect  on  the  campaign,  and  what  little  they  had  was 
in  the  direction  of  creating  confusion  rather  than  of  assist- 
ing in  co-operation. 

In  the  first  place,  the  two  letters  of  March  23d  from  Grant 
to  Banks,  which  Farragut  brought  down  the  river  with  him, 
were  sent  across  the  peninsula  opposite  Port  Hudson,  and 
delivered  to  General  Augur  at  Baton  Rouge,  who  forwarded 
them  by  an  officer  of  his  staff.  They  did  not  reach  Banks 
until  April  21st,  eleven  days  after  Mr.  Gabaudan  had  con- 
veyed his  verbal  message.  Banks  was  then  at  Opelousas. 
The  letters  themselves,  instead  of  conveying  the  positive  in- 
formation that  20,000  men  were  to  be  sent  by  Lake  Provi- 
dence, made  the  sending  of  them  depend  on  the  arrival  of 
light-draught  steamers.  The  letters  were  a  month  old 
when  received,  and  nothing  had  meantime  been  heard  of 
any  troops  coming  down  the  Tensas.  Banks  was  therefore 
uncertain  as  to  Grant's  intentions,  and  he  wrote  in  reply, 
asking  for  definite  information  as  to  the  method  and  time  of 
co-operation,  and  as  to  Grant's  facilities  for  supplying  any 
troops  he  might  send.  This  letter  was  sent  to  Farragut, 
who  received  it  on  the  evening  of  May  1st,  and  forwarded  it 
a  few  days  later.     It  reached  Grant  about  May  10th. 

Still  another  despatch  was  sent  by  Grant  from  Milliken's 
Bend,  April  14th.  At  that  time,  as  we  have  seen,  Grant  had 
just  received  a  despatch  from  Halleck,  urging  his  co-opera- 
tion at  Port  Hudson,  and  Grant  had  made  his  plans  for  such 
a  movement  as  soon  as  he  could  cross  the  river.  In  the  de- 
spatch Grant  communicated  these  plans,  said  he  would  send 
a  corps  to  Bayou  Sara  "  by  the  25th,"  and  asked  if  Banks 
would  send  troops  to  Vicksburg  after  Port  Hudson  had 
fallen.     The  despatch  was  delayed  in  transmission ;  it  did 


224  THE  MISSISSIPPI. 

not  reach  Banks  till  May  5th,  at  Alexandria.  It  was  for- 
warded from  New  Orleans  by  telegraph,  in  cipher  and  with- 
out date.  Banks  sujDposed  it  was  only  a  few  days  old,  and 
that  "  the  25th  "  meant  May  25.  He  replied  May  6th  in  the 
following  words :  "  By  the  25th,  probably,  by  the  1st,  cer- 
tainly, I  will  be  there."  This  referred  to  being  at  Port 
Hudson,  and  said  nothing  about  coming  to  Vicksburg. 
The  reply  reached  Grant  on  May  10th. 

Finally,  however,  Banks  received  a  despatch,  only  two 
days  old,  giving  him  information  which  caused  him  no  lit- 
tle disappointment,  but  at  least  enabled  him  to  form  defi- 
nite plans.  This  was  Grant's  despatch  of  May  10th,  dated 
at  Rocky  Springs.  In  this,  Grant  explained  to  Banks  the 
circumstances  under  which  the  campaign  had  opened  in 
earnest  behind  Vicksburg,  the  necessity  for  prompt  ac- 
tion, and  the  impossibility  of  detaching  any  troops  to 
go  down  the  river.  On  the  contrary,  Grant  asked  Banks 
to  come  to  Grand  Gulf  with  all  his  effective  force,  or  to 
send  such  portion  of  it  as  could  be  spared,  to  take  part 
in  the  operations  at  Vicksburg,  on  which  everything  on  the 
Mississippi  depended.  In  order  to  insure  safety  in  the  de- 
livery of  this  despatch,  Grant  sent  it  by  one  of  his  staff  on 
a  special  steamer,  and  by  chance  this  officer  met  one  of 
Banks'  staff  at  Natchez,  who  immediately  took  charge  of  it, 
and  delivered  it  to  Banks  at  Alexandria,  on  the  12th,  two 
days  after  it  was  written. 

Banks  was  greatly  disappointed  at  receiving  information 
that  no  reinforcements  would  come  to  him  from  Grant's 
army.  Under  these  circumstances,  he  deliberated  whether 
he  should  pursue  the  enemy  in  his  front  to  Shreveport,  or 
go  to  Vicksburg,  as  requested  by  Grant,  or  invest  Port  Hud- 
son with  such  troops  as  he  already  had.  Nothing  could  be 
gained  by  advancing  beyond  Alexandria,  for  the  enemy  was 


PORT  HUDSON.  225 

reported  to  have  already  dispersed.  To  go  to  Yicksburg 
would  consume  weeks  of  time,  for  lie  had  only  enough 
steamers  to  transport  a  few  regiments  at  a  trip ;  moreover 
such  a  movement  left  New  Orleans  comparatively  defence- 
less and  open  to  attack  from  the  forces  at  Port  Hudson 
should  he  be  detained  long  at  Vicksburg.  To  march  to 
Port  Hudson  was  the  only  feasible  plan,  and  orders  were  at 
once  issued  to  put  it  in  operation.  Two  days  later  (May 
14th),  Grover's  division  left  Alexandria,  for  Simsport,  on  the 
Atchafalaya,  followed  on  the  16th  by  Emory's  division,  and  a 
few  days  later  by  Weitzel's  brigade,  which  had  been  sent 
forward  on  a  reconnoissance,  nearly  seventy  miles  toward 
Shreveport,  but  was  now  recalled.  The  whole  force  was 
united  at  Simsport  on  the  19th,  crossed  the  Atchafalaya  at 
that  point  by  means  of  transports,  thence  marched  down 
the  west  bank  of  the  Mississippi  to  opposite  Bayou  Sara, 
where  it  was  ferried  across  the  river  by  the  same  boats,  and 
marched  to  the  vicinity  of  Port  Hudson.  It  arrived  there 
on  May  24th,  and  effected  a  junction  with  Augur's  division, 
which  meanwhile  had  moved  up  from  Baton  Bouge,  in  pur- 
suance of  orders  to  that  effect. 

It  has  already  been  narrated  in  the  first  chapter  how  the 
Confederates  came  to  select  Port  Hudson  for  a  fortified 
point,  after  their  unsuccessful  attack  upon  Baton  Bouge  in 
August,  1862.  Slave  labor  was  then  abundant  and  time  was 
not  pressing,  as  they  were  not  molested  for  several  months. 
In  that  interval  they  constructed  a  series  of  works  around 
Port  Hudson  of  remarkable  strength,  the  parapets  having 
an  average  thickness  of  20  feet,  and  the  depth  of  the  ditch 
below  the  top  of  the  parapet  being  not  less  than  15  feet. 
They  consisted  of  a  series  of  batteries,  in  all  mounting 
20  siege  guns,  along  the  bluff  at  an  elevation  of  about 
80  feet  above  the  river.  The  land  defences  consisted  of  a 
10* 


226 


THE  MISSISSIPPI. 


continuous  line  of  parapet  of  strong  profile,  beginning  at  a 
point  known  as  Ross's  Landings  about  one  mile  below  Port 
Hudson,  thence  running  eastwardly  through  a  slightly  broken 


Port  Hudson.    1S63. 

country  for  about  a  mile,  gradually  coming  into  a  broad 
l^lain,  dotted  here  and  there  with  clumps  of  trees  ;  thence 
the  line  turned  to  the  northward,  following  a  general  direc- 
tion  parallel   to   the    river,   and    finally  turning  westward 


PORT  HUDSON.  227 

through  a  rough  country  much  cut  up  by  ravines,  and  meet- 
ing the  river  bank  at  the  mouth  of  Thompson's  Creek,  about 
half  a  mile  north  of  Port  Hudson.  Near  Boss's  landing  on 
the  river  bank  the  line  began  in  an  enclosed  bastion  work ; 
at  the  southeast  salient  of  the  line  was  another  work  ;  a 
third  was  situated  at  the  forks  of  the  roads  leading  to  Baton 
Eouge  and  Bayou  Sara,  and  there  was  a  fourth  facing 
Thompson's  Creek.  The  entire  length  of  the  line  was  be- 
tween three  and  four  miles  ;  it  was  of  strong  profile  through- 
out, was  defended  by  about  30  pieces  of  field  artillery,  and 
the  ground  in  rear  of  it  afforded  admirable  facilities  for 
prompt  movement  of  troops  from  one  point  to  another. 

Brig. -Gen.  Beall  constructed  the  works,  and  commanded 
the  garrison,  which  gradually  increased  from  6,000  to  12,000 
men  during  the  autumn  of  1862.  Maj.-Gen.  Frank  Gard- 
ner succeeded  him  in  command  on  December  28,  1862,  and 
remained  in  command  until  the  surrender  of  the  jjlace.  In 
the  months  of  January  and  February,  rumors  of  Banks1  ar- 
rival with  a  large  force  at  New  Orleans  and  his  advance  to 
Baton  Eouge  were  communicated  by  Gardner  to  Pemberton 
with  the  request  for  reinforcements.  In  response  to  this,  on 
February  22d,  Pemberton  sent  Bust's  brigade,  which  carried 
the  total  strength  of  the  garrison  to  16,287  for  duty  and  20,- 
388  present  as  shown  by  the  returns  of  March  31st.  Subse- 
quently Pemberton  became  alarmed  for  the  safety  of  Vicks- 
burg,  and  on  April  5th,  he  ordered  Gardner  to  send  Bust's 
and  Buford's  brigades  back  to  him.  On  April  29th,  when 
Pemberton  heard  that  Grant  was  crossing  the  river,  he  or- 
dered Gardner  to  send  Gregg's  and  Maxey's  brigades  to 
Jackson,  and  the  garrison  was  then  reduced  to  4,652  effec- 
tive out  of  a  total  of  5,715  present,  as  shown  on  a  return 
dated  May  19th.  But  this  return  is  manifestly  erroneous, 
as  the  number  actually  paroled,  the  sick  not  paroled,  and 


228  THE  MISSISSIPPI 

the  acknowledged  losses  during  the  siege,  make  up  a  total 
of  a  little  over  7,000 ;  which  was  the  force  present  when 
Banks  arrived  in  front  of  the  place  on  May  24th.  On  May 
19th,  Johnston  sent  Gardner  an  order  to  evacuate  the  place 
and  bring  whatever  force  he  had  to  Jackson.  But  just  as 
the  courier  arrived  with  this  order  the  place  had  been  in- 
vested. 

Banks  brought  with  him  from  the  Bed  Biver  countiy  the 
divisions  of  Grover  and  Emory  (the  latter  under  command 
of  Brig.-Gen.  Win.  Dwight,  Emory  being  sick)  and  the  bri- 
gade of  "Weitzel.  He  was  joined  by  Augur's  division  and  a 
part  of  T.  W.  Sherman's  from  Baton  Bouge.  His  returns  for 
April  30th  and  June  30th,  show  a  force  of  33,000  men  for  duty 
out  of  over  40,000  present.1  Of  these  33,000  all  but  about 
2,300  appear  on  the  return  as  being  at  Port  Hudson.  The 
rest  were  at  New  Orleans,  Brashear  City,  or  elsewhere  in 
small  detachments. 

The  troops  were  all  united  on  the  road  a  few  miles  east  of 
Port  Hudson  on  May  25th,  and  after  some  skirmishing  with 
the  outposts,  the  j)lace  was  invested.  Preparations  were 
immediately  made  for  an  assault.  The  troops  of  Grover, 
Dwight,  and  Weitzel  were  on  the  right ;  Augur's  division 
was  in  the  centre ;  and  T.  W.  Sherman  was  on  the  left. 
Orders  were  issued  for  a  simultaneous  assault  along  the 
whole  line  early  in  the  morning.  Between  5  and  6  o'clock 
the  artillery  opened  briskly,  and  at  10  o'clock  the  troops 
on  the  right  moved  forward  to  the  assault.  The  ground 
was  very  broken  and  progress  was  difficult ;  severe  fight- 
ing was  kept  up  on  this  part  of  the  line  until  4  o'clock 


1  Banks'  final  report,  dated  April  (5,  1865,  states  that  his  effective  force  before 
Port  Hudson  was  "less  than  13,000,  including  Augur's  command."  His  official 
returns,  however,  are  as  above  given,  without  counting  Grierson's  cavalry,  which 
was  defending  his  rear  from  cavalry  raids  of  the  enemy. 


PORT  HUDSON.  229 

in  the  afternoon.  In  the  centre  and  on  the  left  there 
was  some  delay  in  the  assault,  which  did  not  take  place 
until  2  p.m.  It  was  then  made  with  great  determina- 
tion, and  the  troops  reached  the  ditch,  but  were  unable 
to  cross  the  parapet.  At  nightfall  they  were  withdrawn. 
The  assault  in  general  was  entirely  unsuccessful,  and  it 
entailed  a  loss  of  293  killed,  1,545  wounded,  and  157  mis- 
sing, total  1,995.  General  T.  W.  Sherman  was  severely 
wounded,  losing  a  leg  in  this  assault.  The  defenders  lost 
probably  less  than  300.  Some  siege  guns  were  then  brought 
up  and  constant  skirmishing  ensued  for  several  days,  during 
which  the  Union  troops  slightly  advanced  their  position, 
and  intrenched  their  line.  This  line  was  parallel  to  that  of 
the  Confederates,  and  between  seven  and  eight  miles  in 
length.  On  June  13th,  Banks  summoned  the  garrison  to  sur- 
render, and  this  being  refused,  another  assault  was  ordered. 
Dwight's  division  was  now  on  the  left,  and  it  was  ordered  to 
push  forward  at  daylight  under  cover  of  a  ravine,  and  attack 
the  large  bastion,  called  the  "  Citadel,"  while  the  main  at- 
tack was  made  on  the  right  by  Grover  and  Weitzel.  Neither 
columns  were  successful,  although  the  lines  were  advanced 
from  50  to  200  yards,  the  troops  intrenching  themselves  on 
the  new  ground  and  permanently  holding  it.  On  the  left 
an  eminence  was  gained,  from  which  an  approach  was  sub- 
sequently run  to  within  ten  yards  of  the  citadel.1 

In  this  assault  the  loss  was  203  killed,  1,401  wounded, 
and  201  missing — total  1,805.  Nearly  4,000  men,  therefore 
were  lost  in  the  two  assaults. 

The  usual  siege  operations  were  then  resumed  and  the 
approaches  were  carried  forward  within  a  short  distance  of 

1  The  War  Department  Records  contain  no  reports  of  division  commanders  for 
either  of  these  assaults.  The  above  account,  which  is  necessarily  very  meagre,  is 
taken  from  Banks*  reports. 


230  THE  MISSISSIPPI. 

the  defender's  works.  On  July  7tli  a  letter  was  received 
from  Grant  communicating  the  intelligence  of  the  surrender 
of  Vicksburg.  Salutes  were  fired  and  loud  and  prolonged 
cheers  were  given  along  the  Federal  lines.  The  news 
quickly  spread  among  the  Confederates,  and  in  the  after- 
noon of  that  day  Gardner  asked  Banks  to  give  him  an  official 
assurance  that  the  news  was  true.  Banks  replied  during 
the  middle  of  the  night,  sending  a  copy  of  Grant's  letter. 
Gardner  immediately  announced  his  willingness  to  sur- 
render, and  proposed  the  appointment  of  three  commission- 
ers on  each  side  to  arrange  the  details.  Banks  acceded  to 
this,  and  the  commissioners  met  at  9  a.m.  and  drew  up  the 
articles  of  capitulation,  by  which  the  entire  garrison  was 
surrendered  as  prisoners  of  war,  together  with  all  arms,  muni- 
tions, public  funds,  and  material  of  war  at  the  post.  The 
garrison  laid  down  its  arms  on  the  morning  of  the  9th,  and 
was  paroled  a  few  days  later.  The  number  actually  paroled 
was  5,953,  exclusive  of  about  500  sick  and  wounded  in  the 
hospitals.  The  losses  during  the  siege  of  45  days  were 
about  800.  The  artillery  numbered  51  pieces,  and  the  small 
arms  over  5,000 ;  there  were  also  large  quantities  of  ammu- 
nition, but  almost  no  commissary  stores,  the  defenders  hav- 
ing lived  on  mules  and  rats  for  several  days. 

While  the  siege  had  been  in  progress  a  small  body  of 
cavalry  had  been  hovering  in  the  rear  between  Clinton  and 
Camp  Moore,  but  they  were  easily  beaten  off  by  Grierson. 

A  very  serious  danger  had,  however,  arisen  in  the  return 
of  Taylor's  forces  from  Alexandria  to  the  lower  Teche  and 
La  Fourche  Bayous,  from  which  they  now  threatened  the  city 
of  New  Orleans  as  well  as  Banks'  communications  on  the 
river.  After  Banks  had  left  Alexandria  for  Port  Hudson  in 
May,  Taylor  had  been  ordered,  as  we  have  seen,  to  accompany 
Walker's  division  from  Arkansas  on  its  bootless  expedition 


PORT  HUDSON.  *  231 

against  Milliken's  Bend.  After  this  expedition  had  retired 
from  the  vicinity  of  Vicksburg  to  Monroe,  Taylor  had  asked 
to  take  this  division  to  Alexandria  and  unite  it  with  his 
own  troops,  which  would  give  hirn  a  force  of  between  7,000 
and  8,000  men.  With  these  he  proposed  to  move  down  the 
river  and  either  raise  the  siege  of  Port  Hudson  or  capture 
the  city  of  New  Orleans — according  to  the  disposition  of 
Banks'  forces.  In  this  plan  Taylor  was  overruled  by  Kirby 
Smith,  who  ordered  Walker's  division  to  remain  in  the 
vicinity  of  Vicksburg.  Taylor  then  returned  to  Alexandria 
alone  and  there  recruited  and  reorganized  his  own  forces, 
which  numbered  about  3,000  men.  He  divided  them  into 
two  detachments,  the  first  of  which,  consisting  of  the  in- 
fantry brigades  of  Mouton  and  Thomas  Green,  was  to  move 
down  the  Teche  to  its  mouth  and  attack  Brashear  City  in 
front ;  while  the  other  detachment,  consisting  of  three  cav- 
alry regiments  under  Col.  Major,  was  to  move  from  Opelou- 
sas  by  way  of  Plaquemine  and  Thibodeau  and  attack  Brashear 
City  in  the  rear.  Small  detachments  of  Union  troops  were 
at  this  time  posted  at  Plaquemine,  Donaldsonville,  and  New 
Orleans  on  the  river,  and  at  Brashear  City  and  Thibodeau 
on  the  Western  Railroad.  All  the  rest  of  Banks'  troops 
were  at  Port  Hudson. 

The  detachments  moved  as  ordered,  and  Major's  command 
reached  Plaquemine  on  June  18th,  capturing  its  little  gam- 
son  of  70  men  and  burning  two  steamers ;  thence  Major 
hurried  on,  avoiding  Donaldsonville,  to  Thibodeau,  where 
he  attacked  and  was  defeated  on  the  20th  and  21st ;  thence 
he  moved  westward  on  the  railroad  toward  Brashear  City. 
Mouton  and  Green  had  meanwhile  marched  down  the  Teche, 
and  near  its  mouth  had  collected  some  small  boats  and  rafts. 
With  these  they  crossed  Grand  Lake  on  the  22d,  and  at- 
tacked Brashear  City  simultaneously  with  Major's  command. 


232  THE  MISSISSIPPI. 

The  place  was  captured,  wifh  everything  in  it.  Taylor 
states  that  his  prisoners  numbered  1,700  and  the  captured 
guns  12  ;  Banks  gives  the  strength  of  the  garrison  as  "  about 
300,"  and  the  guns  lost  as  8.  Taylor  says  that,  with  this 
capture,  he  had  supplies  for  the  first  time  since  he  arrived 
in  Western  Louisiana,  which  is  not  disputed. 

Taylor  collected  his  captured  property  as  rapidly  as  pos- 
sible, and  on  the  24th  he  sent  Green  with  his  own  and 
Major's  men  to  Donaldsonville,  while  Mouton  moved  along 
the  railway  to  the  La  Fourche,  whence  he  sent  his  pickets  as 
far  as  Bayou  des  Allemands,  within  25  miles  of  New  Or- 
leans, creating  no  little  excitement  in  that  city,  which  was 
practically  without  defenders.  There  can  be  little  doubt 
that,  had  Walker's  division  been  sent  to  Taylor  as  he  re- 
quested, he  would  have  captured  New  Orleans,  though  he 
would  have  been  unable  to  hold  it  for  more  than  a  short 
time.  In  regaining  it,  however,  Banks  might  have  felt 
obliged  to  raise  the  siege  of  Port  Hudson.  It  was  still  two 
weeks  before  Port  Hudson  surrendered. 

Green  arrived  in  front  of  Donaldsonville  with  a  force  of 
about  1,400  men  on  the  afternoon  of  the  27th.  There  was  a 
small  earthwork  at  the  place,  garrisoned  by  180  men  of  the 
28th  Maine,  under  command  of  Maj.  J.  D.  Mullen.  At 
1.30  a.m.  of  June  28th  the  Confederates  assaulted  the  work, 
but  in  the  darkness  there  was  a  good  deal  of  confusion  in 
their  movements,  and  they  were  completely  defeated  by  the 
combined  action  of  the  little  garrison  and  of  three  gunboats 
in  the  river.  The  affair  lasted  until  daylight.  There  is 
the  usual  discrepancy  as  to  the  losses,  Taylor  stating  the 
Confederate  loss  at  97  in  all,  whereas  the  Union  reports 
speak  of  burying  69  Confederate  dead  and  taking  120  pris- 
oners. Being  repulsed  in  this  assault,  the  Confederates 
moved  down  the  river  a  few  miles,  and  there  erected  bat- 


PORT  HUDSON.  233 

teries  commanding  its  navigation.  The  situation  was  now 
very  serious,  one  force  of  Confederates  in  front  of  the  La 
Fourche  directly  threatening  New  Orleans,  and  another  on 
the  river  cutting  off  all  communication  by  transports  with 
Port  Hudson.  Gen.  Emory,  then  in  command  at  New  Or- 
leans, wrote  to  Banks,  on  July  4th,  that  he  must  come  to 
the  assistance  of  New  Orleans  at  once  or  it  would  be  lost ; 
that  the  choice  lay  between  New  Orleans  and  Port  Hudson. 
Banks,  however,  wisely  determined  to  remain  at  Port  Hud- 
son, as  he  felt  confident  it  must  fall  in  a  few  days,  when  he 
would  have  abundant  force  to  drive  Taylor  off. 

His  confidence  was  justified.  Port  Hudson  was  surren- 
dered on  the  morning  of  July  9th,  and  on  the  same  after- 
noon all  the  transports  available  were  loaded  with  Weitzel's 
and  one  of  Grover's  brigades  and  sent  down  to  Donaldson- 
ville,  where  they  arrived  the  same  afternoon.  Other  troops 
followed,  and  on  the  13th  Grover  attacked  Green's  force  on 
the  La  Fourche  and  a  sharp  engagement  followed,  which 
was  indecisive  in  its  results.  A  day  or  two  later,  however, 
Green  withdrew  to  Brashear  City,  and  Mouton  was  called  in 
to  the  same  point  from  the  Bayou  des  Allemands.  Banks 
overestimated  Taylor's  force,  and  did  not  pursue  vigorously, 
so  that  Taylor  had  a  week  longer  in  which  to  remove  all  the 
stores  for  which  he  had  means  of  transportation.  On  July 
21st  he  ran  all  the  captured  cars  and  heavy  guns  into  Ber- 
wick's Bay,  and  on  the  following  day  began  his  retreat  up 
the  Teche.  Banks'  troops  arrived  at  Brashear  City  on  the  22d 
but  did  not  continue  the  pursuit.  Taylor  retreated,  without 
molestation,  to  Opelousas,  where  he  remained,  skirmishing 
occasionally  on  the  Teche,  until  the  opening  of  Banks'  Bed 
River  campaign  in  the  spring  of  1864. 


CHAPTER  VUL 

CONCLUDING  OPERATIONS. 

As  soon  as  the  Richmond  authorities  learned  that  Pem- 
berton  had  been  invested  in  Vicksburg,  the  Confederate 
Secretary  of  War  sent  a  despatch  (May  25th)  to  Johnston 
suggesting  that  the  troops  in  the  Trans-Mississippi  Depart- 
ment should  advance  toward  Vicksburg,  in  order  to  make  a 
diversion  in  favor  of  Pemberton.  Johnston  forwarded  this 
to  E.  K.  Smith  on  May  31st,  with  a  letter  requesting  compli- 
ance with  this  suggestion.  The  first  result  was  the  fruitless 
expedition  of  Taylor  and  Walker  against  Milliken's  Bend, 
which  has  already  been  narrated.  After  this  had  failed 
Lt.-Gen.  T.  H.  Holmes,  who  commanded  the  District  of 
Arkansas  in  E.  K.  Smith's  department,  sent  the  following 
telegram,  dated  Little  Rock,  June  15th,  to  Smith  at  Shreve- 
port :  "I  believe  we  can  take  Helena ;  please  let  me  do  it." 
To  which  Smith  replied:  "Most  certainly  do  it."  Holmes 
then  had  in  his  entire  district,  according  to  his  returns  of 
May  1st,  31,933  men,  of  whom  11,508  were  "  estimated"  as  fit 
for  duty.  For  his  expedition  to  Helena  he  collected  about 
twenty  regiments,  consisting  of  Price's  and  Marmaduke's 
divisions  and  Fagan's  and  Walker's  brigades.  In  his  report 
Holmes  states  that  these  troops  numbered  7,646  men.  With 
their  officers  the  whole  force  was  probably  between  8,000 
and  9,000 ;  it  was  estimated  by  the  Union  officers  at  15,000. 

Holmes,  object  in  this  expedition  was  to  capture  Helena, 
by  which  he  hoped  to  raise  the  siege  of  Vicksburg,  or  if 


CONCLUDING  OPERATIONS. 


235 


Vicksbiirg  fell  to  still  keep  the  river  closed  and   perhaps 
make  a  new  Vicksburg  on  the  west  bank. 

Helena  had  been  occupied  by  the  Union  troops  ever  since 
Curtis  arrived  there  from  Western  Arkansas,  in  July,  1862. 
It  had  been  considerably  fortified  by  a  redoubt,  called  Fort 
Curtis,  just  west  of 
the  town,  and  by  four 
outlying  batteries — 
named  Batteries  A, 
B,  C,  and  D— which 
commanded  the  roads 
on  the  west  of  the 
town,  as  shown  on 
the  accompanying 
sketch. 

The  garrison  at  this 
time  consisted  of  Ross' 
division  of  the  13th 
Corps  (temporarily  in 
command  of  Brig.- 
Gen.  Salomon)  and  a 
brigade  of  cavalry. 
The  entire  force  num- 
bered 4,129  men,  and  was  commanded  by  Maj.-Gen.  B. 
Prentiss. 

Holmes  arrived  in  front  of  the  place  on  the  evening  of 
July  3d.  His  orders  were  to  assault  at  daylight,  Fagan's 
brigade  on  the  right  against  Battery  D,  Price's  division  in 
the  centre  against  Battery  C,  Marmaduke's  division  on  the 
left  against  Batteries  A  and  B,  and  "Walker's  cavalry  brigade 
covering  the  extreme  left.  Prentiss  was  expecting  an  attack, 
and  his  troops  were  under  arms  all  night  in  order  to  be  pre- 
pared for  it. 


Helena.     July  4,  1863. 


M. 


236  THE  MISSISSIPPI. 

At  daylight  Fagan  and  Marmaduke  moved  forward.  The 
latter's  attack  was  feebly  made,  and  was  not  supported  by 
Walker's  cavalry  on  his  left  as  had  been  ordered.  It  ac- 
complished nothing  all  day.  Fagan,  however,  attacked  with 
great  determination  and  carried  all  the  outer  intrenchments 
in  front  of  Battery  D,  but  was  unable  to  enter  that  work. 
His  men  were  subjected  to  a  severe  cross-fire  from  the  other 
batteries,  and  were  forced  to  fall  back ;  the  four  regiments 
of  this  brigade  lost  over  400  men.  Price  also  made  a  most 
vigorous  assault,  although  he  did  not  come  into  action  until 
an  hour  later  than  Fagan.  He  carried  all  the  intrenchments 
in  his  front  and  Battery  C  also.  He  then  ordered  one  bri- 
gade to  move  forward  toward  the  town  and  the  other  to  as- 
sault Battery  D  in  rear.  But  there  was  a  great  deal  of  con- 
fusion among  his  men,  and  the  orders  were  not  obeyed.  In 
the  midst  of  the  delay  he  was  energetically  attacked  by  the 
Union  troops,  and  Battery  C  was  recajDtured.  Seeing  that 
his  attack  had  no  chance  of  success,  Holmes  gave  the  order 
to  withdraw  at  10.30  a.m.  His  troops  returned  to  Little 
Rock  without  molestation,  Prentiss  having  too  small  a  force 
to  attempt  a  pursuit. 

The  Confederate  losses,  as  stated  by  Holmes,  were  173 
killed,  687  wounded,  and  776  missing,  making  a  total  of 
1,636.  Prentiss  certifies  that  he  buried  400  dead,  paroled 
108  wounded,  and  sent  North  993  prisoners,  about  one-fourth 
of  whom  were  wounded,  making  a  total  of  1,501  left  in  his 
hands.  The  Union  loss  was  57  killed,  127  wounded,  and  36 
missing  ;  total,  230. 

This  battle  of  Helena  was  the  last  expiring  effort  on  the 
part  of  the  Confederates  to  retain  control  of  the  MississijDiDi 
River ;  and  it  was  a  hopeless,  and  to  some  extent  a  discredit- 
able defeat,  the  mortification  at  which  is  not  concealed  in 
their  reports.     It  occurred  on  the  same  day  that  Yicksburg 


CONCLUDING  OPERATIONS.  237 

fell,  and  was  followed  in  a  few  days  by  the  fall  of  Port  Hud- 
son ;  the  last  hostilities  at  various  points  on  the  river  being 
thus  almost  simultaneous.  The  great  river  was  finally  free, 
and  free  forever.  On  July  16th  the  steamer  Imperial  ar- 
rived at  New  Orleans  direct  from  St.  Louis,  thus  showing 
that  the  Mississippi  was  once  more  a  highway  of  commerce. 
Garrisons  were  retained  until  the  end  of  the  war  at  vari- 
ous points  between  Cairo  and  New  Orleans,  and  the  banks 
were  infested  by  partisan  and  guerilla  bands,  supplemented 
now  and  then  by  a  cavalry  raid  of  larger  proportions.  But 
no  serious  effort  was  ever  made  to  again  bring  the  Mississippi 
within  Confederate  control  or  to  permanently  blockade  it 
against  commerce.  These  cavalry  raids  were  of  importance, 
because  they  occupied  the  attention  of  a  large  force  of  Union 
troops,  but  they  accomplished  no  other  purpose  ;  they  would 
have  been  long  since  forgotten  but  for  the  indelible  stain 
left  by  Forrest  when  he  slaughtered  the  captive  negro  gar- 
rison of  Fort  Pillow,  in  April,  1864. 

The  Union  armies  on  the  Mississippi  turned  their  atten- 
tion to  other  fields.  Banks'  troops  assembled  at  New  Or- 
leans, and  afterward  operated  on  the  Bed  Kiver  and  in  the 
direction  of  Texas.  Grant's  army  was  broken  up,  the  9th 
Corps  returning  to  Ohio  and  Herron's  division  to  Missouri ; 
the  13th  Corps  was  sent  to  Texas,  and  the  15th,  followed 
eventually  by  the  17th  and  part  of  the  16th,  to  Chatta- 
nooga. Grant  remained  at  Vicksburg  until  October,  1863, 
when  he  was  assigned  to  the  command  of  all  the  troops  in 
the  West  and  ordered  to  Chattanooga  to  retrieve  the  defeat 
at  Chickamauga,  and  to  prepare  the  way  for  the  eventual 
advance  to  Atlanta  and  thence  through  the  heart  of  the 
Confederacy. 


APPENDIX    A. 


SUMMARY  OF  PRINCIPAL  EVENTS. 

1861. 

May  10th.  Capture  of  Camp  Jackson,  near  St.  Louis,  by  U.  S.  Troops. 

July  28th.  New  Madrid,  Mo.,  occupied  by  C.  S.  Troops. 

Aug.  Fort  Henry,  Tenn.,  occupied  by  C.  S.  Troops. 

Aug.  Fort  Donelson,  Tenn.,  occupied  by  C.  S.  Troops. 

Sept.  1st.  Cairo,  111.,  occupied  by  TJ.  S.  Troops. 

Sept.  4th.  Columbus,  Ky.,  occupied  by  C.  S.  Troops. 

Sept.  6th.  Paducah,  Ky.,  occupied  by  U.  S.  Troops. 

Sept.  18th.  Bowling  Green,  Ky.,  occupied  by  C.  S.  Troops. 

Nov.  7th.  Engagement  at  Belmont,  Mo. 

1863. 

Feb.  6th,  Fort  Henry  captured  by  U.  S.  Troops. 

Feb.  15th.  Bowling  Green  evacuated  by  C.  S.  Troops. 

Feb.  16th.  Fort  Donelson  surrendered  by  C.  S.  Troops. 

Mar.  M.  Columbus,  Ky.,  evacuated  by  C.  S.  Troops. 

Mar.  8th.  Chattanooga  occupied  by  C.  S.  Troops. 

April  6th,  7th.  Battle  of  Pittsburg  Landing. 

April  24th.  Battle  of  Forts  St.  Philip  and  Jackson  below  New  Orleans. 

April  25th.  New  Orleans  captured  by  U.  S.  Navy. 

May  1st.  New  Orleans  occupied  by  U.  S.  Troops. 

May  10th.  Naval  Engagement  at  Fort  Pillow,  Tenn. 

May  12th.  Vicksburg  occupied  by  C.  S.  Troops. 

May  18th.  Farragut's  fleet  arrives  at  Vicksburg. 

May  29th.  Farragut's  fleet  returns  to  New  Orleans. 

May  30th.  Corinth  evacuated  by  C.  S.  Troops. 

June  4th.  Fort  Pillow  evacuated  by  C.  S.  Troops. 

June  5th.  Memphis  evacuated  by  C.  S.  Troops. 

June  6th.  Naval  engagement  near  Memphis,  Tenn. 

June  10th.  BuelPs  army  moves  from  Corinth  toward  Chattanooga. 

June  25th.  Farragut's  fleet  arrives  at  Vicksburg. 


240  THE  MISSISSIPPI. 

June2Sth.    Farragut's  fleet  passes  the  batteries  at  Vicksburg  and  joins  Davis' 

flotilla  above. 
July  24th.     Bragg's  army  moves  from  Tupelo,  Miss  ,  toward  Chattanooga. 
July  29th.     Farragut's  fleet  returns  to  New  Orleans,  and  Davis1  to  Helena. 
Aug.  5th.      Battle  of  Baton  Rouge,  La. 
Aug.  7th.       Port  Hudson,  La.,  occupied  by  C.  S.  Troops. 
Aug.  21st.     Baton  Rouge,  La.,  evacuated  by  U.  S.  Troops. 
Sept.  19th.    Battle  of  luka,  Miss. 
Oct.  3d,  4th.  Battle  of  Corinth,  Miss. 
Oct.  5th.        Engagement  on  Hatchie  River,  Miss. 
Nov.  24th.     Grant's  army  moves  southward  into  Mississippi. 
Dec.  11th  to  Jan.  3d.  Forrest's  raid  into  Western  Tennessee. 
Dec.  14th.     Banks1  expedition  arrives  at  New  Orleans. 
Dec.  17th.     Baton  Rouge  reoccupied  by  TJ.  S.  Troops. 
Dec.  20th.     Grant's  depot  at  Holly  Springs  destroyed  by  Van  Dora. 
Dec.  20th.     Sherman's  river  expedition  leaves  Memphis. 
Dec.  28th.     Grant's  army  returns  to  Tennessee. 
Dec.  29th.     Battle  of  Chickasaw  Bluffs. 


1863. 

Jan.  1st.        Capture  of  Galveston  by  C.  S.  Troops. 

Jan.  11th.      Capture  of  Arkansas  Post  by  U.  S.  Troops. 

Jan.  11th  to  Feb.  2Sth.  Expedition  on  Bayou  Teche. 

Jan.  16th.     McClernand's  river  expedition  returns  to  vicinity  of  Vicksburg. 

Jan.  20th  to  March  7th.  Work  on  canal  opposite  Vicksburg. 

Jan.  29th.      Grant  takes  command  of  river  expedition. 

Feb.  1st  to  April  5th.  Yazoo  Pass  expedition. 

Feb.  5th  to  Mar.  18th.  Work  on  Lake  Providence  project. 

Mar.  14th.     Farragut's  fleet  passes  the  batteries  at  Port  Hudson. 

Mar.  16th  to  Mar.  27th.  Steele's  Bayou  expedition. 

Mar.  25th  to  May  14th.  Expedition  on  Bayou  Teche. 

Mar.  29th  to  April  30th.  Movement  from  Milliken's  Bend  to  Bruinsburg. 

April  12th.  Engagement  at  Fort  Bisland,  La. 

April  14th.  Engagement  at  Franklin,  La. 

April  20th.  Capture  of  Butte  a.  la  Rose,  La. 

April  29th.  Engagement  at  Grand  Gulf. 

April  30th.  Grant's  army  crosses  the  Mississippi. 

May  1st.        Battle  of  Port  Gibson. 

May  2d.  Evacuation  of  Grand  Gulf. 

May  7th.        Occupation  of  Alexandria,  La. 

May  12th.      Battle  of  Raymond. 

May  14th.      Battle  of  Jackson. 

May  16th.      Battle  of  Champion's  Hill. 

May  17th.      Battle  of  Big  Black  Bridge. 

May  19th.      Assault  at  Vicksburg. 

May  19th.      Evacuation  of  Haines'  Bluff. 


APPENDIX  A.  241 


May  22d.       Assault  at  Vicksburg. 

May  22d  to  July  4th.    Siege  of  Vicksburg. 

May  24th  to  July  9th.     Siege  of  Port  Hudson. 

May  27th.      Assault  at  Port  Hudson. 

June  14th.    Assault  at  Port  Hudson. 

June  23d.      Capture  of  Brashear  City  by  C.  S.  Troops. 

June  2Sth.    Engagement  at  Donaldsonville,  La. 

July  4th.       Battle  of  Helena. 

July  4th.      Surrender  of  Vicksburg. 

July  9th.      Surrender  of  Port  Hudson. 

July  9th  to  15th.  Investment  of  Jackson,  Miss. 

July  13th.     Engagement  at  Donaldsonville,  La. 

July  16th.    Evacuation  of  Jackson,  Miss. 

July  22d.       Recapture  of  Brashear  City  by  U.  S.  Troops. 


DEPARTMENTS   AND  COMMANDERS. 

At  the  outbreak  of  the  war.  the  territory  between  the  Mississippi  River  and  the 
Rocky  Mountains  constituted  the  Military  Department  of  the  West.  Brig. -Gen. 
W.  S.  Harney  was  in  command  until  May  31,  1861,  when  he  was  succeeded  by 
Brig.-Gen.  N.  Lyon.  On  July  3,  1S61,  the  title  was  changed  to  Western  Depart- 
ment, the  boundaries  remaining  substantially  the  same,  with  the  addition  of  Illinois, 
and  Ma j. -Gen.  J.  C.  Fremont  was  assigned  to  the  command.     On  November  9, 

1861,  this  department  was  discontinued,  and  a  new  department  constituted,  con- 
sisting of  the  States  of  Missouri,  Iowa,  Minnesota.,  Wisconsin,  Illinois.  Arkansas, 
and  Western  Kentucky.  This  was  styled  the  Department  of  the  Missouri,  and 
Maj.-Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck  was  assigned  to  the  command.  On  the  same  date  the 
Department  of  Kansas  was  formed,  consisting  of  that  State  and  the  neighboring 
territories  under  Maj.-Gen.  D.  Hunter;  and  the  Department  of  Ohio,  consisting 
of  the  States  of  Ohio,  Michigan ,  Indiana,  Tennesseeyand  Eastern  Kentucky,  under 
Brig.-Gen.  D.  C.  Buell.  On  March  11,  1S62,  these  three  departments  were  consol- 
idated into  one,  styled  the  Department  of  the  Mississippi,  and  General  Halleck 
was  assigned  to  the  command.  The  three  field  armies  within  the  department 
were  the  Army  of  the  Tennessee,  under  Maj.-Gen.  U.  S.  Grant ;  the  Army  of  the 
Ohio,  under  Maj.-Gen.  D.  C.  Buell,  and  the  Army  of  the  Mississippi,  under  Maj.- 
Gen.  John  Pope.  These  three  armies  were  united  at  Corintb,  and  separated  again 
in  June,  1862,  into  two  armies,  under  Generals  Grant  and  Buell,  the  Army  of  the 
Mississippi  being  divided  between  them  :  one  army  acting  on  the  line  of  the  Mis 
sissippi,  and  the  other  on  the  line  from  Nashville  to  Chattanooga. 

General  Halleck  was  appointed  General-in-Chief,  July  11,  1862.  but  no  successor 
was  appointed  to  the  command  of  his  department.     In  September  and  October, 

1862,  this  department  was  gradually  broken  up,  and  four  new  departments 
formed  out  of  it,  viz.,  Department  of  the  Missouri,  under  Maj.-Gen.  S.  R.  Curtis, 
succeeded  in  May,  1S63,  by  Maj.-Gen.  J.  M.  Schofield;  Department  of  the  Ten- 
nessee, under  Maj.-Gen.  U.  S.  Grant;  Department  of  the  Cumberland,  under 
Maj.-Gen.  W.  S.  Rosecrans ;  and  Department  of  the  Ohio,  under  Maj.-Gen.  H.  G. 


242  THE  MISSISSIPPI. 

"Wright,  succeeded  in  1863  by  Ma j. -Gens.  A.  E.  Burnside  and  J.  G.  Foster,  and  fn 
1864  by  Maj.-Gen.  J.  M.  Schofield. 

These  four  departments  remained  independent  until  October  16,  1863,  when  the 
three  which  were  east  of  the  Mississippi  (Tennessee,  Cumberland,  and  Ohio)  were 
grouped  into  the  Division  of  the  Mississippi,  and  General  Grant  was  assigned  to 
the  command.  This  division  continued  in  existence  until  August,  1866,  General 
Sherman  succeeding  General  Grant  on  March  18,  1864,  when  the  latter  was  placed 
in  command  of  all  the  armies. 


On  the  Confederate  side,  the  Mississippi  Valley  was  divided  at  the  outbreak  of 
war  into  two  departments,  known  as  Departments  No.- 1  and  No.  2.  The  first 
embraced  the  State  of  Louisiana  and  the  lower  part  of  Mississippi,  and  was  com- 
manded by  Maj.-Gen.  D.  E.  Twiggs  from  May  27th  to  October  7,  1861,  and  then 
by  Maj.-Gen.  Mansfield  Lovell.  The  capture  of  New  Orleans  virtually  abolished 
the  Department,  and  it  was  merged  into  Department  No.  2,  on  June  25,  1862. 
Department  No.  2,  sometimes  called  the  Western  Department,  comprised  the  Mis- 
sissippi Valley  north  of  Louisiana.  Maj.-Gen.  L.  Polk  was  assigned  to  the  com- 
mand on  June  25,  1S61,  and  was  succeeded  by  General  A.  S.  Johnston  on  Septem- 
ber 10, 1861.  At  his  death,  April  6, 1862.  the  command  devolved  on  General  G.  T. 
Beauregard,  who  was  succeeded  on  June  17,  1862,  by  General  Braxton  Bragg.  In 
May,  1862,  that  portion  of  this  department  which  was  west  of  the  Mississippi  was 
formed  into  a  new  department,  called  the  Trans-Mississippi  Department,  which 
was  commanded  by  Maj.-Gen.  T.  H.  Holmes  until  February  9,  1S63,  when  he  was 
succeeded  by  Lt.-Gen.  E.  K.  Smith,  who  retained  the  command  until  the  close  of 
the  war.  In  October,  1862,  still  another  department  was  formed  from  a  portion 
of  the  original  No.  2.  It  was  called  the  Department  of  Mississippi  and  East 
Louisiana,  and  embraced  the  territory  named  in  its  title.  Lt.-Gen.  J.  C.  Pem- 
berton  was  assigned  to  the  command,  and  retained  it  until  the  surrender  of  Yicks- 
burg. 

The  various  armies  and  districts  which  were  embraced  in  these  departments 
have  been  indicated  in  the  text. 


APPENDIX  B. 


Abstract  from  Returns  of  the  Armies  of  the  Mississippi  and  of  the  Ten- 
nessee, and  of  the  District  of  the  Ohio,  Major-General  H.  W. 
Halleck  Commanding,  for  May  31  and  June  1,  1862. 


Present  for  Duty. 

s  . 

m 

COMMA2TDS. 

| 

o 

1 

ni 

if  «  22 

Army  of  the  Mississippi  (Pope) : 

525 

527 

114 

6 

71 

10.356 
10.317 

2.408 
105 

1,736 

24.922 

13,050 
12,544 

3,153 
762 

2,033 

16,018 
15,S18 
4.135 

S65 

2,228 

Total 

1.243 

31,542 

38,564 

Army  of  the  Tennessee—Right  wing  (Thomas): 

2S3 
290 
344 
255 
368 

5.246 

5.629 
6.060 
5.401 

7,066 

6.745 
7,094 
7,S67 
6.0S9 
8,305 

10.343 

4th       "       (Hurlbut) 

5th       "       (W.T.Sherman) 

9,861 
11,873 

6th       "       (McKean) 

10,251 

7th       "       (T.  W.  Sherman)i 

11,306 

Total 

1.540 

29.402 

30,950 

53,634 

Reserve  Corps  (McCiernand): 

1st  Division  ( Judah) 

3d         "         (Wallace) 

319 
264 

5.537 
5,540 

11,077 
65,401 

7.159 
7,029 

11.355 
9,370 

Total 

583 
3,366 

14,188 

20,725 

Total  Armies   of  the   Tennessee   and 
Mississippi 

82,680 

112,923 

District  of  the  Ohio  (Buell) : 

2d  Division  ( McCook) 

370 
339 
299 
199 
349 
442 
134 
110 
95 
90 
17 
13 
119 
227 

7,785 
6.072 
6.212 
3.400 
6.220 
8.240 
2.027 
2.411 
1.683 
1.7&8 
453 
315 
2.419 
5.157 

9,225 

8.612 
7,611 
4.298 
7,458 
10,154 
3,820 
2,853 
2.019 
2,379 
490 
364 
2,841 
6,067 

11.902 

3d         "       (Mitchel)2 

4th       "       (Nelson) 

11.687 
10,693 

5th       "       (Crittenden) 

6th       "       (Wood) 

7th       "       (Morgan)3 

6,556 
10,455 
12,730 

7th  Brigade  (NegTey )  4 

4,223 

23d       *'       (Lester) 

Dumont's  command 

Cavalry  (Jackson) 

3,367 
2,447 
3,151 

Artillery  reserve  (Barnett) 

Unattached  artillery 

564 
437 

cavalry 

infantry 

3.405 
7,019 

Total 

2.803 

55.152 

67,781 

88,636 

Grand  Total 

6,169 

120.523 

150,461 

201.559 

i  Formerly  1st  Division  (Thomas).  Army  of  the  Ohio. 

2  In  Northern  Alabama.  3  At  Cumberland  Gap.  4  At  Nashville. 

All  of  Buell's  troops,  except  those  commanded  by  Mitchel,  Morgan,  and  Negley, 
were  at  or  near  Corinth. 

Notk.— The  above  was  compiled  in  the  War  Records  Office,  and  will  appear  oa 
page  235  of  Vol.  X.,  Part  II..  of  the  Records  of  the  War  of  the  Rebellion. 


5- a 

a  ^. 


CO!    _ 
C13 

R? 

01 

Si* 

^ 

3  cr^ 

1=1 

l 

o§.«i 

Pi 

0  £» 

ffstS 

Ss3 

3  ™  0 

s-li 

&     a* 

C  —  M 

12  B 

re  OF* 

0  g  _ 

-~ls. 

3?tr 

0  3  re 

a§-2 

^2 

»$?* 

33ji 

5^8 

,__, 

bd 

Hi 

S 

0 

a2o 
53  0 

3 

js&a 

Cfq  a- 

en 

|$"M 

P 

»PO 

© 

"2  5«* 

Fffg" 

s 

»  M 

3r? 

6 

u 

J? 

r-§ 

§ 

d-m 

^a 

5 

■  frss 

S2- 

g! 

c 


II       l?l 

9  3t?  IS  s.  3  SS 
I  E-l  aa£  I  &a£ 


(t  v5  «~ 
R 


03        —JO 


Officers. 


•ji  1    50  io 


81  8£ 


Enlisted 
Men. 


B  I  wis  I 


S         Officers. 


00      4-i->  ,    o  — 


Enlisted 
Men. 


=5  :  »^§       j  Officers. 


Enlisted 
Men. 


W 


. 

1! 

•  • 

l« 

»e 

Officers. 

p 
3  1—1 

S3 

g 

1- 

k->k-> 

Is 

-0 

000 

Enlisted 
Men. 

io 

w.3 

|s 

fSJB 

CO-1 

00  ot 

Effective  total. 

0 
s 

§5j 

a'i 

1  8 
1 

Total. 

io     00  oa     as  S 
«5  .  eo*>  ,  H-00 


Aggregate. 


03  1   00 


0 

*. 

iOCi 

iO   1           M 

at     00^ 

1  Officers. 

1 

0  — 

si 

*"  1  j-'.to 

CO       C-.  -.} 

80     ^  — 

Enlisted 
!      men. 

ft) 

2 

§?«= 

:  00 

I'll 

Officers. 

II 

p  3- 

to 

1 

3J2 

to 

COtO 

1     il 

:  Enlisted 
1      men. 

1 

Si-1 

'      M 

g1  £8 

Officers. 

3?  S: 

OS 

-3  s» 

05  *8 

CO  :          fO 
*».       CJOO 

Enlisted 
i      men. 

?  2 

Officers. 


£    g>§     S£ 


<j»        COO        JO 


Enlisted 
men. 


at  I  « *o  I   c  — 
^§1     11 


8    «?§ 


Total. 


<S      I   jo 


jc    pa    23  — 


<o& 


Aggregate. 


^ 


tog 


APPENDIX   D. 


COEEESPONDENCE  WITH  EEFEEENCE  TO  THE 
DISPEESION  OF  HALLECK'S  AEMY  AFTEE 
THE  CAPTUEE   OF   COEINTH. 

No.  1. 
Lincoln  to  Halleck. 

Washington,  June  5, 1862—9.30  p.m. 
I  have  received  the  following  despatch  from  General  McClellan,  which  I  trans- 
mit for  your  consideration : 

"McCleixan's  Headquarters.  June  5, 1862 — 4  p.m. 
"May  I  again  invite  your  Excellency's  attention  to  the  great  importance  of  occu- 
pying Chattanooga  and  Dalton  by  our  Western  forces?     The  evacuation  of  Cor- 
inth would  appear  to  render  this  very  easy.     The  importance  of  this  move  in  force 
cannot  be  exaggerated." 


No.  2. 
Halleck  to  Lincoln. 

Corinth,  June  7, 1862. 

Your  telegram  of  yesterday  just  received.  Preparations  for  Chattanooga  made 
five  days  ago,  and  troops  moved  in  that  direction.  Mitcbel's  foolish  destruction 
of  bridges  embarrassed  me  very  much,  but  I  am  working  night  and  day  to  remedy 
the  error,  and  will  very  soon  reinforce  him. 

[Note.— Mitchel  had  written  orders  from  Buell  to  destroy  the  bridges  referred 
to.-F.  V.  G.] 

No.  3. 

Halleck  to  Stanton. 

Corinth,  June  9,  1862. 
.     .    .    General  Buell,  with  four  divisions,  has  been  directed  to  move  East, 
to  form  a  junction  with  Mitchel.     .     .     .     It  is  absolutely  necessary  to  reinforce 
General  Curtis.     I  hope  the  navy  will  assist  me  in  supplying  him  by  White  River. 
I  am  pushing  forward  troops  and  opening  the  road  to  Memphis. 


246  THE  MISSISSIPPI. 

No.  4. 

Stanton  to  Halleck. 

Washington,  June  9,  1862. 
Your  despatch  of  this  date  has  just  been  received,  and  your  proposed  plan  of 
operations  is  cordially  approved.     I  suppose  you  contemplate  the  occupation  of 
Vicksburg  and  clearing  out  the  Mississippi  to  New  Orleans.     If  it  should  in  any 
contingency  become  necessary,  can  you  lend  a  hand  to  Butler? 

No.  5. 

Stanton  to  Halleck. 

Wak  Department,  June  28,  1862. 
The  enemy  have  concentrated  in  such  force  at  Richmond  as  to  render  it  abso- 
lutely necessary,  in  the  opinion  of  the  President,  for  you  immediately  to  detach 
25,000  of  your  force,  and  forward  it  by  the  nearest  and  quickest  route  by  way  of 
Baltimore  and  Washington  to  Richmond.     .     .    . 

No.  6. 

Halleck  to  Stanton. 

Cortnth,  June  30,  1862. 
Your  telegram  of  28th  is  just  received  .  .  .  and  measures  will  be  immediately 
taken  to  carry  it  out.  ...  I  think,  under  the  circumstances,  the  Chattanooga 
expedition  better  be  abandoned,  or  at  least  be  diminished.  If  not  I  doubt  our 
ability  to  hold  West  Tennessee  after  detaching  so  large  a  force  as  that  called 
for.     .     .     . 


No.  7. 

Stanton  to  Halleck. 

Wab  Department,  June  30,  1862. 
Your  telegram  of  this  date  just  received.  The  Chattanooga  expedition  must 
not  on  any  account  be  given  up.  The  President  regards  that  and  the  movement 
against  East  Tennessee  as  one  of  the  most  important  events  of  the  war.  and  its 
occupation  nearly  as  important  as  the  capture  of  Richmond.  .  .  .  He  directs 
that  no  force  be  sent  here  if  you  cannot  do  it  without  breaking  up  the  operations 
against  East  Tennessee.     .     .     . 


No.  8. 

Lincoln  to  Halleck. 

Washington,  June  30,  1862. 
Would  be  very  glad  of  25,000  infantry— no  artillery  or  cavalry ;  but  please  do 
not  send  a  man  if  it  endangers  any  place  you  deem  important  to  hold,  or  if  it 
forces   you  to  give  up,   or  weaken,   or  delay  the    expedition  against  Chatta- 
nooga.    .    .     . 


APPENDIX  D.  247 

No.  9. 
Halleck  to  Stanton. 

Corinth,  July  1, 1862. 
Telegram  suspending  orders  for  troops  is  received.     If  order  had  been  carried 
out  we  should  have  been  either  defeated  or  forced  to  retreat.    No  forces  can  be 
spared  at  present.    .     .     . 


No.  10. 
Halleck  to  Lincoln. 

Cobinth,  July  1,  1862. 
Your  telegram  just  received  saves  Western  Tennessee.     ...     If  these  troops 
had  been  sent  East  we  should  have  been  defeated  or  forced  to  retreat. 


At  the  time  this  correspondence  took  place,  McClellan  was  withdrawing  his 
army  to  the  James  River,  and  his  secret  service  agents  were  reporting  that  the 
Confederate  army  in  front  of  Richmond  numbered  180,000,  its  actual  strength 
being  under  80,000.     See  Vol.  III.  of  this  Series,  page  1S2. 


APPENDIX  E. 


ORGANIZATION  OF  THE  ARMY  OF  THE  TEN- 
NESSEE, 

Commanded  by  Major-General  U.   S.  GRANT,  as  shown 
on  the  Return  dated  Apbil  30,  1863. 

THIRTEENTH  ARMY  CORPS. 
Major-General  J.  A.  McCLERNAND. 

Escort — 3d  Illinois  Cavalry,  Co.  L. 
NINTH  DIVISION  (OSTERHAUS). 


First  Brigade  (Garrard). 
49th  Indiana. 
69th  Indiana. 
120th  Ohio. 
118th  Illinois. 
7th  Kentucky. 
ArtiUery. 
1st  Wisconsin  Battery. 
7th  Michigan  Battery. 

TENTH   DIVISION  (A.  J 


Second  Brigade  (Sheldon). 
16th  Ohio. 
42d  Ohio. 
114th  Ohio. 
54th  Indiana. 
22d  Kentucky. 
Cavalry. 
3d  Illinois  Cavalry,  Co.\s  A,  E,  and  K. 

SMITH). 


Second  Brigade  (Landram). 
19th  Kentucky. 
77th  Illinois. 
97th  Illinois. 
108th  Illinois. 
130th  Illinois. 
48th  Ohio. 
Cavalry. 
4th  Indiana  Cavalry,  Company  C. 


First  Brigade  (Burbridge). 

16th  Indiana. 

60th  Indiana. 

67th  Indiana. 

83d  Ohio. 

96th  Ohio. 

23d  Wisconsin. 
Artillery. 
Chicago  Mercantile  Battery. 
17th  Ohio  Battery. 

TWELFTH  DIVISION  (A.  P.  HOVEY). 
First  Brigade  (McGinnis).  Seco?id  Brigade  (Slack).  Artillery. 

11th  Indiana.  47th  Indiana.  2d  Illinois,  Battery  A. 

24th  Indiana.  24th  Iowa.  2d  Ohio  Battery. 

34th  Indiana.  28th  Iowa.  ltith  Ohio  Battery. 

46th  Indiana.  56th  Ohio.  1st  Missouri,  Battery  A. 

29th  Wisconsin. 

Cavalry. 
1st  Indiana  Cavalry,  Company  O. 


APPENDIX  E. 


249 


THIRTEENTH   DIVISION  (ROSS). 
First  Brigade  (Salomon).  Second  Brigade  (Fisk). 


43d  Indiana. 
35th  Missouri. 
28th  Wisconsin. 


29th  Iowa. 
33d  Iowa. 
36th  Iowa. 
33d  Missouri. 


Artillery. 
3d  Iowa  Battery. 


FOURTEENTH  DIVISION  (CARR). 
First  Brigade  (Benton). 
1st  United  States. 
8th  Indiana. 
18th  Indiana. 
33d  Illinois. 
99th  Illinois. 

Artillery.  Cavalry. 

1st  Indiana  Battery.  3d  Illinois  Cavalry,  Co.  G 

1st  Iowa  Battery. 

SECOND   DIVISION,   CAVALRY  (BUSSEY). 


Second  Brigade  (Lawleb). 
11th  Wisconsin. 
21st  Iowa. 
22d  Iowa. 
23d  Iowa. 


First  Brigade  (Wiley).  Second  Brigade  (Clayton). 
5th  Illinois  Cavalry.  2d  Arkansas  Cavalry. 

1st  Indiana  Cavalry.  3d  Iowa  Cavalry. 

5th  Kansas  Cavalry. 


2d  Illinois  Cav.  (5  Co.'s). 
Kentucky  Infantry,  Patter- 
son's Co. 
6th  Missouri  Cav.  (7  Co.'s). 


FIFTEENTH  ARMY  CORPS. 
Major-General  W.  T.  SHERMAN. 


ELEVENTH  [FIRST]  DIVISION  (STEELE). 


First  Brigade 

(Manteb). 
13th  Illinois. 
27th  Missouri. 
29th  Missouri. 
30th  Missouri. 
31st  Missouri. 
32d  Missouri. 

Artillery. 

2d  Missouri,  Battery  F. 

4th  Ohio  Battery. 


Second  Brigade 
(C.  R.  Woods). 

25th  Iowa. 

31st  Iowa. 

3d  Missouri. 

12th  Missouri. 

17th  Mis-ouri. 

76th  Ohio. 


Third  Brigade 
(Thayer). 
4th  Iowa. 
9th  Iowa. 
26th  Iowa. 
30th  Iowa. 


Cavalry. 
Kane  Co.  Illinois  Cavalry. 
3d  Illinois  Cavalry,  Co.  D. 


FIFTH  [SECOND]  DIVISION  (BLAIR). 


First  Brigade 
(G.  A.  Smith). 

6th  Missouri. 

8th  Missouri. 

113th  Illinois. 

116th  Illinois. 

13th  United  States. 


Second  Brigade 
(T.  K.  Smith). 
55th  Illinois. 
127th  Illinois. 
54th  Ohio. 
57th  Ohio. 
83d  Indiana. 


Third  Brigade 
(Ewing). 
30  th  Ohio. 
37th  Ohio. 
47th  Ohio. 
4th  West  Virginia. 


Artillery. 
Battery  A,  1st  Illinois  Artillery. 
Battery  B,  1st  Illinois  Artillery. 
Battery  H,  1st  Illinois  Artillery. 


Cavalry. 
Thielemann's  Cavalry. 
10th  Missouri  Cavalry,  Co.  0. 


250 


THE  MISSISSIPPI 


EIGHTH  [THIRD]  DIVISION  (TUTTLE). 
First  Brigade  (Buckland).  Second  Brigade  (Mower).  Third  Brigade  (Matthies). 
72d  Ohio. 


95th  Ohio. 
114th  Illinois. 
93d  Indiana. 


2d  Iowa  Battery. 


47th  Illinois. 
5th  Minnesota. 
11th  Missouri. 
8th  Wisconsin. 


8th  Iowa. 
12th  Iowa. 
35th  Iowa. 


Artillery. 


1st  Illinois  Artillery,  Battery  E. 


SEVENTEENTH  ARMY  CORPS. 
Major-General  J.  B.  McPHERSON. 

Escort — 4th  Co.  Ohio  Cavalry. 


First  Brigade 
(J.  E.  Smith). 
20th  Illinois. 
31st  Illinois. 
45th  Illinois. 
124th  Illinois. 
23d  Indiana. 


THIRD  DIVISION  (LOGAN). 
Second  Brigade 
(Dennis). 
30th  Illinois. 
20th  Ohio. 
68th  Ohio. 
7bth  Ohio. 


Third  Brigade 
(J.  D.  Stevenson). 
8th  Illinois. 
Slst  Illinois. 
7th  Missouri. 
32d  Ohio. 


Artillery. 


1st  Illinois  Artillery,  Co.  D. 
2d  Illinois  Artillery,  Co.  G. 

3d  Ohio  Battery. 

Cavalry. 

2d  Illinois  Cavalry,  Company  A. 


2d  Illinois  Artillery,  Co.  L. 
8th  Michigan  Battery. 


SIXTH   DIVISION   (McARTHUR). 


First  Brigade  (Reid). 
17th  Illinois. 
95th  Illinois. 
1st  Kansas. 
16th  Wisconsin. 


2d  Illinois  Artillery,  Co. 
1st  Minnesota  Battery. 


Second  Brigade  (Ransom) 
11th  Illinois. 
72d  Illinois. 
14th  Wisconsin. 
17th  Wisconsin. 
18th  Wisconsin. 
Artillery. 
F.  1st  Missouri  Artillery,  Co.  C. 

10th  Ohio  Battery. 


Third  Brigade  (Hall). 
11th  Iowa. 
13th  Iowa. 
15th  Iowa. 
16th  Iowa. 


Cavalry. 
11th  Illinois  Cavalry,  Company  G. 

SEVENTH  DIVISION  (QUINBY). 
First  Brigade  Second  Brigade  (Holmes).  Third  Brigade  (Boomee). 

(Alexander).  5Rth  Illinois.  93d  Illinois. 

48th  Indiana.  17th  Iowa.  5th  Iowa. 

69th  Indiana.  10th  Missouri.  10th  Iowa. 

4th  Minnesota.  24th  Missouri,  Co.  E.  26th  Missouri. 

80th  Ohio. 


1st  Missouri  Artillery,  Co.  M. 
11th  Ohio  Battery. 

'2d  Illinois  Cavalry,  Co.  E. 


Artillery. 


Cavalry. 


6th  Wisconsin  Battery. 
12th  Wisconsin  Battery. 

5th  Missouri  Cavalry,  Co.  C. 


APPENDIX  E  251 

SIXTEENTH  ARMY  CORPS. 

Major-General  S.  A.  HURLBUT. 
FIRST   DIVISION  (W.  S.  SMITH). 
First  Brigade  (Loomis).  Second  Brigade  (Hicks). 

26th  Illinois.  40th  Illinois. 

90th  Illinois.  103d  Illinois. 

12th  Indiana.  6th  Iowa. 

100th  Indiana.  46th  Ohio. 

Third  Brigade  (Cockerell).  Fourth  Brigade  (Sanford). 
97th  Indiana.  48th  Illinois. 

99th  Indiana.  49th  Illinois. 

53d  Ohio.  119th  Illinois. 

70th  Ohio.  15th  Michigan. 

Artillery. 

1st  Illinois  Artillery,  Co's.  F,  I,  and  M.  4bh  Indiana  Battery. 

2d  Illinois  Artillery,  Co.  D.  1st  Missouri  Artillery,  Co.  K. 
Cavalry. 

7th  Illinois  Cavalry,  Co.  B.  2d  West  Tennessee  Cavalry. 

DISTRICT   OF   CORINTH   (DODG-E). 

First  Brigade  (Sweeny).  Second  Brigade  (Merst). 

52d  Illinois.  9th  Illinois. 

2d  Iowa.  12th  Illinois. 

66th  Iowa.  122d  Illinois. 

81st  Ohio. 

Third  Brigade  (Bane).  Fourth  Brigade  (Fuller). 

7th  Illinois.  37th  Ohio. 

50th  Illinois.  39th  Ohio. 

57th  Illinois.  63d  Ohio. 

39th  Iowa. 
18th  Missouri. 

Artillery. 
1st  Missouri  Artillery,  Co.  B.  2d  TJ.  S.  Artillery,  Co.  F. 

Siege  Batteries. 

Cavalry  (Cornyn). 
1st  Alabama  Cavalry.  10th  Missouri  Cavalry. 

15th  Illinois  Cavalry.  5th  Ohio  Cavalry  (3d  Battalion). 

THIRD  DIVISION   (KIMBALL). 

First  Brigade  (Brayman).  Second  Brigade  (Richmond).  Third  Brigade  (True), 
43d  Illinois.                                  ISth  Illinois.  62d  Illinois. 

61st  Illinois.  54th  Illinois.  27th  Indiana. 

106th  Illinois.  126th  Illinois.  50th  Indiana. 

12th  Michigan.  22d  Ohio.  1st  West  Tennessee. 

Artillery. 

3d  Illinois  Artillery,  Co.  A.  14th  Ohio  Battery. 

14th  Indiana  Battery.  7th  Wisconsin  Battery. 

Cavalry  (Mizner). 

11th  Illinois  Cavalry.  3d  Michigan  Cavalry. 

,1st  West  Tennessee  Cavalry. 


152 


THE  MISSISSIPPI. 


FOURTH  DIVISION  (LAUMAN). 


First  Brigade  (Pugh). 
41st  Illinois. 
5-2d  Illinois. 
3d  Iowa. 
33d  Wisconsin. 


Second  Brigade  (Hall). 
14th  Illinois. 
15th  Illinois. 
4tjth  Illinois. 
76th  Illinois. 


Third  Brigade  (Eryant). 
28th  Illinois. 
33d  Illinois. 
53d  Indiana. 
12th  Wisconsin 


Artillery. 
2d  Illinois  Artillery,  Co's.  E  and  K.  7th  Ohio  Battery. 

5th  Ohio  Battery.  15th  Ohio  Battery. 

Cavalry. 
Detachment  15th  Illinois  Cavalry. 


DISTRICT   OF   MEMPHIS   (VEATCH). 


63d  Illinois. 
64th  Illinois. 
66th  Illinois. 
87th  Illinois. 
117th  Illinois. 


Infantry. 
120th  Illinois. 
131st  Illinois. 
25th  Indiana. 
89th  Indiana. 


1st  United  States. 
15th  United  States. 
32d  Wisconsin. 
Convalescents. 


Cavalry. 


1  st  Missouri  Cavalry. 
5th  Ohio  Cavalry. 


3d  U.  S.  Cavalry. 

2d  Wisconsin  Cavalry. 


Artillery. 
Hurlbut  Battery. 


DISTRICT   OF   COLUMBUS  (ASBOTH). 


Columbus,  Ky. 
Detachment  16th  U.  S. 
21st  Wisconsin. 
25th  Wisconsin. 
34th  Wisconsin. 
Det.  2d  Illinois  Cavalry. 
Det.  15th  Kentucky  Cav. 
Det.  4th  Missouri  Cav. 
Det.  3d  U.  S.  Cavalry. 
Det.  9th  Indiana  Battery. 

Hickman,  Ky. 
Det.-  13th  Wisconsin. 
Det.  15th  Illinois  Cav. 


Clinton,  Ky. 

23d  Missouri. 

Det.  2d  Illinois  Cav. 

Det.  4th  Illinois  Cav. 

Cairo,  111. 
128th  Illinois. 
35th  Iowa. 


Paducah 

40th  Iowa. 
24th  Wisconsin. 
Det.  15th  Kentuck 


Ky. 


Cav. 


Island  No.  10. 
Det.  15th  Wisconsin. 

Fort  Heiman,  Ky. 
111th  Illinois. 
3d  Minnesota. 
Det.  15th  Kentucky  Cav. 
Det.  9th  Indiana  Battery. 

Fort  Pillow,  Tenn. 
Det.  52d  Indiana. 
Det.  32d  Iowa. 
Det.  2d  Illinois  Cavalry. 


FIRST  CAVALRY  DIVISION  (WASHBURNE). 

First  Brigade  (G-rierson).  Second  Brigade  (McCrillis). 

6th  Illinois  Cavalry.  3d  Illinois  Cavalry. 

7th  Illinois  Cavalry.  4th  Illinois  Cavalry. 

2d  Iow-a  Cavalry.  7th  Kansas  Cavalry. 


APPENDIX  E. 


253 


Abstract  from  Return,  showing  strength  of  Troops  in  the  Department 
of  the  Tennessee,  commanded  by  Major-General  U.  S.  Grant, 
for  the  month  of  April,  1863. 


Present  for  duty. 

bn  a 

"•9 

Commands. 

I 

o 

a 

3 

i 

Thirteenth  Army  Corps — Major-Gen. 

J.  A.  McClernand 

9th  Div.,  Brig.-Gen.  P.  J.  Osterhaus. 
10th  Div.,  Brig. -Gen.  A.  J.  Smith  ... 
12th  Div.,  Brig.-Gen.  A.  P.  Hovey  .  . . 
14th  Div.,  Brig.-Gen.  E.  A.  Carr 

11 

195 
225 
293 
209 

'  4. 024 
3,928 
5.565 
3,795 

11 

6,182 
6,521 
7,015 
4,662 

14 
8.583 
9.558 
8,269 
6,224 

» 

12 

26 
12 

Total  Thirteenth  Army  Corps  . . . 

933 

17,312 

24,391 

32,648 

62 

Fifteenth  Army  Corps— Major-Gen. 

W.  T.  Sherman 

11th  Div.,  Major-Gen.  Fred.  Steele. .. 
5th  Div.,  Maj.-Gen.  P.  P.  Blair,  Jr... 
8th  Div.,  Brig.-Gen.  J.  M.  Tuttle 

6 
339 
315 
233 

'  5,787 
5,531 
3.764 

6 

8,319 
6,916 
3,997 

8 

11,272 

10,(101 

6,135 

10 
18 

8 

Total  Fifteenth  Army  Corps 

893 

15,082 

19,238 

27,416 

36 

Seventeenth  Army  Corps  —  Major- 
Gen.  J.  B.  McPherson 

9 
362 
244 
293 

'6,136 
3,959 

4,845 

9 

7.076 
4,582 
5,815 

11 

9,160 
5,829 
8,154 

3d  Div.,  Major-Gen.  J.  A.  Logan 

6th  Div.,  Brig.-Gen.  J.  McArthur 

7th  Div.,  Brig.-Gen.  J.  F.  Quinby  . . . 

24 
16 

20 

Total  Seventeenth  Army  Corps  . . 

908 

14,940 

17,482 

23,154 

60 

Aggregate  of  troops  near  Vicksburg. 

3,734: 

47,334 

61,111 

83,318 

158 

District  of  Eastern  Arkansas — Ma- 
jor-Gen. B.  M.  Prentiss 

13th  Div.,  Brig.-Gen.  L.  F.  Ross 

2d  Cavalry  Div.,  Col.  Cyrus  Bussey.. 

' '  "178 

189 

27 

'  3,502 

3,094 

310 

*  4,731 

4,721 
400 

5,574 

5,910 

584 

6 
12 

Total  District  Eastern  Arkansas  . 

394 

6,906 

9,853 

13,068 

18 

Sixteenth  Army  Corps— Major-Gen. 
S.  a  .  TTnmvRrrT 

9 

433 
679 
365 
320 
297 
392 
153 
52 

29 
7,530 
12.168 
6,466 
5,824 
4,939 
6,990 
2,827 
1.186 

38            38 

1st  Div.,  Brig.-Gen.  W.  S.  Smith  .... 
Dist.of  Corinth, Brig.-Gen.  G.M.Dodge 

3d  Div.,  Brig.-Gen.  N.  Kimball 

4th  Div.,  Brig.-Gen.  J.  G.  Lauman  .. 
Dist.  of  Memphis,  Bg.-Gen.  J.C.Veatch 
Dist.  of  Columbus,  Bg.-Gen.  A.  Asboth 
1st  Cav.  Div. .  Bg.-Gen .  C.  C.  Washburn 

9,427 
15.484 
8,227 
7,002 
7,614 
9,026 
3,873 
1,238 

11,312 
17,970 
9,8  7 
8,350 
8,691 
10,200 
4,628 
1,543 

7 

is 

22 

lis 

' 

Total    Sixteenth    Army   Corps — 
(Tennessee  and  Kentucky) 

1 
3,700  47,959 

61,939 

73,569 

254 


THE  MISSISSIPPI 

RECAPITULATION. 


For  duty. 

Present. 

Present 
and  absent. 

50,068 

7,800 

50,659 

61,111 

9,852 

61,929 

83  218 

12,068 
72,569 

In  Tennessee  and  Kentucky 

Aggregate  in  the  Department 

108,037 

133,893 

167,855 

Note. — The  above  figures  are  taken  from  the  monthly  return  for  the  month  of 
April,  1863.  The  tri-monthly  return  for  April  30,  1863,  gives  substantially  the 
same  figures  for  totals  in  the  Department,  but  different  figures  for  the  three  corps 
near  Vicksburg,  as  follows : 

13th  Corps 18,623 

15th  Corps 17,210 

17th  Corps 18,393 

Total 54,236 

In  the  War  Records  Office  the  monthly  return  is  generally  adopted,  in  cases 
of  discrepancy,  as  being  the  more  accurate.  I  have  therefore  used  the  figures  of 
that  return  in  the  text. 


APPENDIX   F. 


ORGANIZATION  OF  TEOOPS  IN  THE  DEPARTMENT 
OF  THE   MISSISSIPPI  AND   EAST   LOUISIANA, 

Commanded  by  Lieut. -General  J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 

FOR   THE   MONTH   OF   APRIL,    1863. 

FIRST  MILITARY  DISTRICT,  Brig.-Gex.  D.  RUGGLES. 

(Headquarters  at  Columbus,  Miss.) 

Rice's  Tennessee  Heavy  Artillery.  Gillelyn's  Mississippi  Cavalry. 

Thrall's  Arkansas  Light  Artillery.  Martin's  Cavalry  Company. 

Owen's  Arkansas  Light  Artillery.  Johnson's  Cavalry  Company. 

13th  Alabama  Rangers.  2d  Tennessee  Cavalry. 

3d  Mississippi  State  Troops.  Warren's  Partisan  Rangers. 
5th  Mississippi  State  Troops. 


SECOND  MILITARY  DISTRICT,  Ma j. -Gen.  C.  L.  STEVENSON. 

(Headquarters  at  Vicksburg,  Miss.) 

STEVENSON'S  DIVISION  (Major-Gen.  C.  L.  STEVENSON). 

First  Brigade  (Barton).  Second  Brigade  (Tract).  Third  Brigade  (Taylor). 

40th  Georgia.  20th  Alabama.  34th  Georgia. 

41st  Georgia.  23d  Alabama.  36th  Georgia. 

42d  Georgia.  30th  Alabama.  39th  Georgia. 

43d  Georgia.  31st  Alabama.  56th  Georgia. 

52d  Georgia.  46th  Alabama.  57th  Georgia. 

43d  Tennessee. 

Fourth  Brigade  (Reynolds).  Artillery. 

3d  Tennessee.  Waddell's  Light  Battery. 

31st  Tennessee.  Cherokee  Light  Battery. 

69th  Tennessee.  Botetourt  Light  Battery. 

3d  Maryland  Battery. 
Vandyke's  Cavalry. 


256 


THE  MISSISSIPPI. 


SMITH'S  DIVISION  (Major-Gen.  M.  L.  SMITH). 
First  Brigade  (Baldwin).  Second  Brigade  (Vaughn).  Third  Brigade  (S.  D.  Lee). 


17th  Louisiana. 

31st  Louisiana. 

4th  Mississippi. 

46th  Mississippi. 

Co.  E.  Mississippi  Lt.  Art. 

Smith's  Partisan  Rangers. 


79th  Tennessee. 

80th  Tennessee. 

81st  Tennessee. 

Co.  A,  Ward's  Artillery. 

Co.  B,  Ward's  Artillery. 

Co.  I,  Wither's  Artillery. 


26th  Louisiana. 

27th  Louisiana. 

28th  Louisiana. 

1st  Louisiana  Heavy  Art. 

8th  Louisiana  Heavy  Art. 

23d  Louisiana  Heavy  Art. 

1st  Tennessee  Heavy  Art. 


FORNEY'S   DIVISION  (Majob-Gen.  J.  H.  FORNEY). 
First  Brigade  (Hebert).  Second  Brigade  (Moobe). 

3d  Louisiana.  2d  Texas. 

36th  Mississippi.  35th  Mississippi. 

37th  Mississippi.  .        40th  Mississippi. 

38th  Mississippi.  37th  Alabama. 

43d  Mississippi.  42d  Alabama. 

Hogg's  Battery.  Bledsoe's  Battery. 

Sengstak's  Battery.  Tobin's  Battery. 

McNally's  Battery. 
Adam's  Cavalry. 

BOWEN'S  DIVISION  (Brig.-Gen.  J.  S.  BOWEN). 


First  Brigade  (Cockeell). 
1  st  Missouri. 
2d  Missouri. 
3d  Missouri. 
4th  Missouri. 
5th  Missouri. 
6th  Missouri. 
Wade's  Battery. 
Landis's  Battery. 
Guiber's  Battery. 


Second  Brigade  (Gbeen). 
1  st  Missouri  Cavalry,  dismounted. 
3d  Missouri  Cavalry,  dismounted. 
12th  Arkansas. 
15th  Arkansas. 
19th  Arkansas. 
20th  Arkansas. 
1st  Arkansas  Cavalry. 
Western  Rangers. 
Lowe's  Battery. 
Dawson's  Battery. 

LORING'S  DIVISION  (Majob-Gen.  W.  W.  LORING). 

First  Brigade  (Tilghman).  Second  Brigade  (Featherston). 

20th  Mississippi.  Waul's  Legion. 

23d  Mississippi.  Pioneer  Company. 

26th  Mississippi.  Point  Coupee  Battery. 

54th  Alabama.  1st  Tennessee  Cavalry. 
8th  Kentucky. 
McLendon's  Battery. 


THIRD  MILITARY  DISTRICT,  Ma j.  -Gen.  FRANK  GARDNER. 


First  Brigade  (Maxet). 
42d  Tennessee. 
46th  Tennessee. 
48th  Tennessee. 
49th  Tennessee. 
53d  Tennessee. 
55th  Tennessee. 
4th  Louisiana. 
30th  Louisiana. 
Texas  Sharpshooters. 
Fenner's  Battery. 
Robert's  Battery. 


Second  Brigade  (Beall). 
11th  Arkansas. 
12th  Arkansas. 
14th  Arkansas. 
15t'-i  Arkansas. 
16th  Arkansas. 
17th  Arkansas. 
18th  Arkansas. 
23d  Arkansas. 
1st  Mississippi. 
39th  Mississippi. 
3  Co's.  1st  Miss.  Art. 


Third  Brigade  (Gbegg). 

3d  Tennessee. 

10th  Tennessee. 

30th  Tennessee. 

41st  Tennessee. 

50th  Tennessee. 

51st  Tennessee. 

7th  Texas. 

1st  Tennessee  Battery. 

1st  Missouri  Battery. 

9th  Louisiana  Battery. 

Brook  Haven  Battery. 


APPENDIX   F. 


Fourth  Brigade  (Rust). 
9th  Arkansas. 
12th  Louisiana. 
15th  Mississippi. 
6th  Mississippi. 
35th  Alabama. 
1st  Conf .  Battery. 
Hudson's  Battery. 
Point  Coupee  Artillery. 


Fifth  Brigade  (Buford). 
3d  Kentucky. 
7th  Kentucky. 
10th  Arkansas. 
4th  Alabama. 
27th  Alabama. 
49th  Alabama. 
6th  Alabama. 
Watson  Battery. 


Unattached. 
1st  Alabama  Artillery. 
12th  Louisiana  Battery. 
9th  Tennessee  Cavalry. 
9th  Louisiana  Cavalry. 
Gantt's  Cavalry. 
Garland's  Cavalry. 
Miller's  Cavalry. 


FOURTH  MILITARY  DISTRICT,  Brig. -Gen.  JOHN  ADAMS. 


3d  Brier.  Miss.  State  Troops. 
14th  Mississippi. 
1st  Choctaw  Indians. 


1st  Mississippi  State  Troops. 
Bolen's  Cavalry  Company. 
Terry's  Cavalry  Company. 


FIFTH  MILITARY  DISTRICT,  Brig.-Gen.  J.  R.  CHALMERS. 

1st  Mississippi  Rangers.  ISth  Mississippi  Rangers. 

Blythe's  Battalion.  Martin's  Battalion. 

Six  companies  State  Trcops. 


Abstract  from  Return,  shoioing  strength  of  Troops  above  named,  for  the 
month  of  March,  1863. 


Present 
for  Duty. 

4* 

a 

o 

CO 

03 
H 

a 
"3 
o 
H 

>d 

Commands. 

2 

e 

o 

a 

o 

C  o 

g    5! 

P4 

152 

681 
402 
342 
395 
405 
1,366 
53 
82 

1,809 

9,795 

4.656 

.    3.660 

4.169 

4,783 

14,921 

378 

780 

2,262 

13,268 

7,112 

5,254 

5,499 

6,241 

20,388 

535 

936 

61,495 

3,031 

16,70S 

Second  Military  District — 

Smith's  Division 

9,156 

8,409 

6,954 

8,880 
26.";  28 

Third  Military  District  (Gardner) 

Fourth  Military  District  (Adams) 

980 
1,472 

Total 

3,878 

44,951 

82,318 

APPENDIX    G. 


CORRESPONDENCE  BETWEEN  GENERAL  GRANT 
AND  GENERAL  BANKS  RELATIVE  TO  THE  CO- 
OPERATION OF  THEIR  ARMIES. 

No.  1. 

Banks  to  Grant. 

Baton  Rouge.  March  13,  1862. 
(Received  March  20th.) 

Anticipating  the  success  of  Admiral  Farragut's  proposed  attempt  to  ran  the 
enemy's  batteries  at  Port  Hudson  and  to  open  communication  with  you,  I  will 
avail  myself  of  the  opportunity  to  give  you  a  statement  of  our  position,  forces, 
and  intentions. 

We  have  at  Baton  Rouge  a  force  of  about  17,000  effective  infantry,  and  one 
negro  regiment ;  one  regiment  of  heavy  artillery  with  six  light  batteries,  one  20- 
pounder  battery,  a  dismounted  company  of  artillery,  and  ten  companies  of  cav- 
alry, of  which  eight  are  newly  raised  and  hardly  to  be  counted  on.  Of  this,  three 
regiments  of  infantry,  the  heavy  artillery  manning  the  siege  traiu,  the  dismounted 
artillery,  and  one  company  of  cavalry,  will  remain  at  Baton  Rouge.  Leaving  this 
force  to  hold  the  position  of  Baton  Rouge,  we  march  to-day  upon  Port  Hudson  by 
the  Bayou  Sara  road  to  make  a  demonstration  upon  that  work  for  the  purpose  of 
co-operating  in  the  movement  of  the  fleet.  The  best  information  we  have  of  the 
enemy's  force  places  it  at  25.000  or  30,000 ;  this  and  his  position  precludes  the 
idea  of  an  assault  on  our  part,  and  accordingly  the  main  object  of  the  present 
movement  is  a  diversion  in  favor  of  the  navy,  but  we  shall,  of  course,  avail  our- 
selves of  any  advantage  which  occasion  may  offer. 

Should  the  Admiral  succeed  in  his  attempt,  I  shall  try  to  open  communication 
with  him  on  the  other  side  of  the  river,  and  in  that  event  trust  I  shall  hear  from 
you  as  to  your  position  and  movements,  and  especially  as  to  your  views  of  the 
most  efficient  mode  of  co-operation  upon  the  part  of  the  forces  we  respectively 
command. 

No.  2. 
Grant  to  Banks. 

Before  Vicksburg,  Miss.,  March  23,  1863. 
(Received  at  Opelousas,  April  21st.) 
Your  communication  of  the  13th  instant,  per  Admiral  Farragut,  was  duly  re- 
ceived.    The  continuous  high  water  and  the  nature  of  the  country,  almost  pre- 


APPENDIX  G.  259 

eluding  the  possibility  of  landing  a  force  on  the  east  bank  of  the  Mississippi  any- 
where above  Vicksburg  has  induced  the  hope  that  you  would  be  able  to  take  Port 
Hudson  and  move  up  to  Black  River.  By  the  use  of  your  transports  I  could  send 
you  all  the  force  you  would  require.     .     .     . 

The  best  aid  you  can  give,  if  you  cannot  pass  Port  Hudson,  will  be  to  hold  as 
many  of  th'j  enemy  there  as  possible.  If  they  could  be  sent  I  could  well  spare  one 
army  corps  to  enable  you  to  get  up  the  river.  My  effective  force,  including  all 
arms,  will  be  between  60,000  and  70,000,  if  I  bring  all  from  Memphis  that  can  be 
spared  in  an  emergency.  An  attack  on  Haines1  Bluff  cannot  possibly  take  place 
under  two  weeks,  if  so  soon.  My  forces  are  now  scattered,  and  the  difficulty  of 
getting  transportation  is  very  great. 


No.  3. 
Grant  to  Farragut. 

March  23,  1863. 
(Received  by  Banks  April  21st.) 
In  the  various  notes  I  have  written,  including  the  despatch  for  General  Banks, 
I  have  not  mentioned  that  soon  after  taking  command  there  in  person  I  collected 
my  surplus  troops  at  Lake  Providence,  and  directed  the  commanding  officer  to 
effect  a  passage  through  from  the  Mississippi  River  to  Bayou  Macon.  This  will 
give  navigable  water  through  by  that  route  to  the  Red  River.  This  is  now  re- 
ported practicable  for  ordinary  Ohio  River  steamers.  I  sent  several  weeks  ago 
for  this  class  of  steamers,  and  expected  them  before  this.  Should  they  arrive, 
and  Admiral  Porter  gets  his  boats  out  of  the  Yazoo,  so  as  to  accompany  the  expe- 
dition, I  can  send  a  force  of  say,  20,000  effective  men,  to  co-operate  with  General 
Banks  on  Port  Hudson. 

This  force  certamly  would  easily  reduce  Port  Hudson  and  enable  them  to  come 
on  up  the  river  and  maintain  a  position  on  high  land  near  enough  to  Vicksburg, 
until  they  could  be  reinforced  from  here  sufficiently  to  operate  against  the  city. 

Please  inform  the  General  of  the  contents  of  this,  and  much  oblige  your  obedient 
servant. 


No.  4. 

Banks  to  Grant. 

Camp  at  Brashear  Cur,  La.,  April  10,  1863. 
(Received  at  Port  Gibson,  May  2.) 

The  secretary  of  Admiral  Farragut,  Mr.  Gabaudan,  called  upon  me  at  Brashear 
City  this  morning  and  gave  me  the  substance  of  your  despatch.  We  have  15,000 
men  that  can  be  moved  with  facility.  The  artillery  is  strong,  the  cavalry  weak, 
but  we  hope  to  strengthen  the  cavalry  without  delay,  as  one  of  the  results  of  this 
expedition. 

We  shall  move  upon  the  Bayou  Teche  to-morrow,  probably  encounter  the  en- 
emy at  Pattersonville,  and  hope  to  move  without  delay  upon  Iberia,  to  destroy  the 
salt- works,  and  then  upon  Opelousas.  This  is  the  limit  proposed.  We  do  not  in- 
tend to  hold  any  portions  of  this  country,  as  it  weakens  our  force,  but  will  at  once 


260  THE  MISSISSIPPI 

return  to  Baton  Rouge  to  co-operate  with  you  against  Port  Hudson.  I  can  be 
there  easily  by  May  10th. 

There  are  now  4,500  infantry  at  Baton  Rouge,  with  three  regiments  of  colored 
troops  and  two  companies  of  cavalry,  three  batteries  of  artillery,  with  several 
heavy  guns  in  position,  and  five  gunboats  and  six  mortars.  The  land  force  is 
under  command  of  Major-General  Augur;  the  fleet  under  Captain  Alden,  of  the 
Richmond. 

We  shall  endeavor  to  establish  communication  with  Admiral  Farragut  near 
Bayou  Sara,  but  the  opening  of  the  levee  opposite  Port  Hudson  may  make  it  im- 
possible. If  so,  we  will  communicate  with  you  freely,  by  the  way  of  New  York, 
as  to  our  progress.  I  shall  be  very  glad  if  you  will  communicate  with  us  in  the 
same  manner.     To  avoid  delays  by  mail,  I  will  send  my  despatches  by  an  officer. 


No.  6. 

Banks  to  Grant. 

Opelousas.  La.,  April  23,  1863 
(Received  about  May  10th.) 

I  have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  despatches,  dated  at  head- 
quarters, before  Vicksburg,  March  23,  1S63,  on  the  21st,  by  the  hand  of  Lieuten- 
ant Tenney,  of  General  Augur's  division  at  Baton  Rouge.  On  April  10th,  Mr.  Ga- 
baudan,  private  secretary  of  Admiral  Farragut,  commanding  the  Hartford  at  the 
mouth  of  Red  River,  reported  at  my  headquarters,  at  Brashear,  and  gave  me  ver- 
bally the  substance  of  your  despatches,  which  he  said  he  had  read,  but  did  not 
bring  with  him  in  the  dangerous  passage  which  he  was  compelled  to  make  of  the 
batteries  of  Port  Hudson. 

The  information  received  from  Mr.  Gabaudan  differs  somewhat  from  your 
despatches.  I  understand  from  him  that  it  was  your  intention  to  send  a  force  by 
the  way  of  Lake  Providence  and  the  Black  River,  passing  through  the  interme- 
diate bayous  to  the  mouth  of  the  Black  River,  on  the  Red  River,  and  that  this 
force  would  probably  reach  the  Red  River  by  May  1st,  proximo,  to  co-operate 
with  my  command  against  Port  Hudson.     .     .     . 

I  was  disappointed  in  learning,  from  the  perusal  of  your  despatches,  that  at 
their  date  it  was  undetermined  whether  you  can  send  a  force  to  the  Red  River  or 
not,  on  account  of  the  deficiency  of  your  transportation.  It  is  a  grief  on  my  part 
that  I  cannot  aid  you  in  this  respect.  Our  transportation  is  lamentably  deficient. 
I  had  but  one  steamer  with  which  to  pass  two  divisions  of  my  corps  over  Ber- 
wick's Bay  in  this  campaign.  The  route  is  open,  but  I  can  reach  Red  River  only 
by  forced  marches.  It  is  six  days'  march  to  Alexandria,  and  four  or  five  to  Sims- 
port,  at  the  mouth  of  the  Atchafalaya,  but  until  we  can  hear  from  you  I  shall 
make  Washington,  on  the  Courtableau,  my  base  of  operations. 

We  can  co-operate  with  you  in  any  manner  you  suggest  by  a  junction  on  the 
Red  River,  or  by  an  attack  from  Baton  Rouge,  joining  your  forces  on  the  Bayou 
Sara,  in  the  rear  of  Port  Hudson.  My  belief  is  that  this  is  the  best  method,  as 
the  passage  of  the  Mississippi  from  the  Red  River  is  very  difficult  with  our  short 
transportation,  and  will  require  a  landing,  and  places  us  between  the  armies  of 


APPENDIX  G.  261 

Vicksburg  and  Port  Hudson  ;  but  we  shall  not  hesitate.  I  wait  anxiously  to  hear 
from  you  upon  these  points,  viz.: 

First. — When  can  you  be  at  the  mouth  of  the  Black  or  Red  River  ? 

Ser.ond. — In  what  manner  shall  my  forces  co-operate  with  you  ? 

T..ircl. — Canyon  furnish  transportation  for  your  passage  to  Port  Hudson;  or 
do  you  rely  upon  us  ? 

Fourth.— Can  you  supply  your  troops :  or  will  you  rely  upon  nsf 

Fifth. — Is  it  not  practicable  for  your  force  to  join  us  by  the  Atchafalaya? 

It  is  doubtful  if  we  can  supply  your  forces  from  New  Orleans  in  operating  above 
Port  Hudson,  on  account  of  our  deficient  transportation.  My  belief  is  that  the 
best  junction  is  by  the  Atchafalaya.  We  can  reach  Baton  Rouge  by  the  Grand 
River  and  the  Plaquemine  without  transshipment,  and  our  forces  united,  make  the 
reduction  of  Port  Hudson  certain.     My  own  command  is  insufficient. 

Waiting  anxiously  your  response,  and  with  full  confidence  in  your  judgment  and 
earnest  co-operation,  I  am,  very  truly  yours. 


No.  7. 

Grant  to  Banks. 

Milliken's  Bend,  April  14,  1863. 
(Received  at  Alexandria  May  5th.) 
Am  concentrating  my  forces  at  Grand  Gulf.     Will  send  an  army  corps  to 
Bayou  Sara  by  the  25th  to  co  opsrate  with  you  on  Port  Hudson.     Can  you  aid  me 
and  send  troops  after  the  reduction  of  Port  Hudson  to  assist  me  at  Vicksburg  ? 

No.  8. 

Banks  to  Grant. 

Alex4ndria,  May  6,  1863. 
(Received  about  May  10th.) 
By  the  25th,  probably  ;  by  the  1st,  certainly,  I  will  be  there. 

No.  9. 

Grant  to  Banks. 

Rocky  Springs,  Miss.,  May  10,  1863. 
(Received  at  Alexandria  May  12th.) 

My  advance  will  occupy  to-day  Utica,  Auburn,  and  a  point  equally  advanced 
toward  the  Mississippi  Southern  Railroad,  between  the  latter  place  and  the  Big 
Black.  It  was  my  intention,  on  gaining  a  foothold  at  Grand  Gulf,  to  have  sent  a 
sufficient  force  to  Port  Hudson  to  have  ensured  the  fail  of  that  place  with  your  co- 
opei-ation,  or,  rather,  to  have  co-operated  with  yon  to  secure  that  end. 

Meeting  the  enemy,  however,  as  I  did,  south  of  Port  Gibson,  I  followed  him  to 
the  Big  Black,  and  could  not  afford  to  retrace  my  steps.  I  also  learned,  and  be- 
lieve the  information  to  be  reliable,  that  Port  Hudson  is  almost  entirely  evac- 
uated. This  may  not  be  true,  but  it  is  the  concurrent  testimony  of  deserters  and 
contrabands. 


'202  THE  MISSISSIPPI. 

Many  days  cannot  elapse  before  the  battle  will  begin  which  is  to  decide  the  fate 
of  Vicksburg,  but  it  is  impossible  to  predict  how  long  it  may  last.  I  would  ur- 
gently request,  therefore,  that  you  join  me,  or  send  all  the  force  you  can  spare  to 
co-operate  in  the  great  struggle  for  opening  the  Mississippi  River. 

My  means  of  gaining  information  from  Port  Hudson  are  not  good,  but  I  shall 
hope,  even  before  this  reaches  Baton  Rouge,  to  hear  of  your  forces  being  on  the 
way  here. 

Grierson's  cavalry  would  be  of  immense  service  to  me  now,  and,  if  at  all  practi- 
cable for  him  to  join  me,  I  would  like  to  have  him  do  it  at  once. 

For  fear  of  this  accidentally  falling  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy  I  will  not  com- 
municate to  you  my  force. 


No.  10. 

Banks  to  Grant. 

Alexandria,  La.,  May  12, 1863—8  a.m. 
(Received  about  May  15th.) 

Your  despatch  of  the  10th  instant  I  received  by  the  hand  of  Captain  Effers,  this 
morning  at  6.30.  I  regret  to  say  that  it  is  impossible  for  me  to  join  you  at  Vicks- 
burg in  time,  or  with  force  to  be  of  service  to  you  in  any  immediate  attack.  I 
have  neither  water  nor  land  transportation  to  make  the  movement  by  river  or  by 
land.  The  utmo.-t  I  can  accomplish  is  to  cross  for  the  purpose  of  operating  with 
you  against  Port  Hudson.  I  couJd  cross  my  infantry  and  artillery  without  trans- 
portation, receiving  supplies  from  Baton  Rouge,  in  the  rear  of  Port  Hudson. 
That  is  the  utmost  I  can  accomplish  on  the  other  side  of  the  Mississippi,  above 
Port  Hudson.  Were  it  within  the  range  of  human  power  I  should  join  you.  for  I 
am  dying  with  a  kind  of  vanishing  hope  to  see  two  armies  acting  together  against 
the  strong  places  of  the  enemy.  But  I  must  say,  without  qualifications,  that  the 
means  at  my  disposal  do  not  leave  me  a  shadow  of  a  chance  to  accomplish  it.  I 
have  been  making  preparations  to  join  your  corps  at  Bayou  Sara,  and  though 
this  would  have  laid  all  my  trains  and  supplies  open  to  the  enemy's  cavalry,  I 
should  have  risked  it. 

We  believe  that  a  force  of  about  7,000  of  the  enemy  has  left  Arkansas  River  to 
join  Kirby  Smith  at  Shreveport,  leaving  the  Washita  at  Pine  Bluff,  near  Monroe  ; 
then  to  come  down  the  Red  River  to  Grand  Ecore,  above  Natchitoches,  where 
they  are  fortifying  in  strong  position.  There  is  undoubtedly  a  Texan  column  on 
the  road  to  join  them.  My  advance  is  now  sixty  miles  above  Alexandria.  The 
only  course  for  me,  failing  in  co-operation  with  you,  is  to  regain  the  Mississippi 
and  attack  Port  Hudson,  or  to  move  against  the  enemy  at  Shreveport.  Port  Hud- 
son is  reduced  in  force,  but  not  as  you  are  informed.  It  has  now  10,000  men  and 
is  very  strongly  fortified.  This  is  the  report  of  Admiral  Farragut,  whose  fleet  is 
above  and  below  the  works. 

I  regret  very  much  my  inability  to  join  you.  I  have  written  Colonel  Grierson 
that  you  desire  him  to  join  you,  and  have  added  my  own  request  to  yours.  Cap- 
tain Effers  goes  to  Baton  Rouge  to  communicate  with  him. 

Wishing  you  all  possible  success,  and  feeling  that  yon  have  all  the  prayers  of  our. 
people,  I  have  the  honor  to  be,  with  sincere  respect,  your  obedient  servant. 


APPENDIX  H. 


ONION  LOSSES  IN  THE  VICKSBURG  CAMPAIGN. 

The  statements  of  losses  in  the  foregoing  pages  are  invariably  taken  from  the 
official  reports  made  at  the  time.  Since  these  pages  were  sent  to  press  the 
following  statement  of  Union  loss-es  in  the  Vicksburg  campaign  has  been  com- 
piled with  great  care  in  the  Adjutant-General's  office.  The  numbers  differ  very 
slightly  from  those  given  in  the  text,  but  as  they  form  the  final  official  statement 
in  the  matter  they  are  here  published. 


Killed. 

Wounded. 

Missing. 

Total. 

131 
66 
42 

410 
39 

45 
157 

501 
1U0 

20 

719 

389 

251 

1.844 

237 

194 
777 
2,551 
419 
65 

25 

37 

7 

187 

3 

2 

8 
147 

7 
30 

875 

Raymond,  May  12th  .    

442 

300 

2,441 

Big  Black  Bridge,  May  17th 

Skirmishes  at  Vicksburg,  May  18th, 
2Uth.  and  21st 

279 

241 

Assault  of  Vicksburg,  May  19th 

Assault  of  Vicksburg,  May  22d 

942 

3,199 

526 

Various  skirmishes 

115 

Total 

1,511 

7,396 

453 

9  £60 

INDEX 


Note. — Regiments,  batteries,  etc.,  are  indexed  tender  the  names  of 
their  States,  excepting  batteries  called  by  their  captain's  or  by  some 
other  special  name.     These  are  indexed  under  Batteries. 


Abbeville,  Miss.,  58,  62 
Adams,  Brig. -Gen.  D.  W.,  brigade 

of,  122 
Albatross,  the,  212,  215  et  seq.,  218 
Alden,  Comdr.  James,  215 
Alexandria,  La.,  199,  213,  220,  224, 

230  et  seq. 
Allen,  Col.  Robert,  73 
Antietam,  54 
Appomattox,  2,  109 
Arizona,  the,  220 
Arkansas  Post,  83  et  seq. 
Arkansas,  the,  23  et  seq. 
Armstrong,  Brig.-Gen.   F.  C,  37, 

45 
Atlanta,  Ga.,  2,  31,  120 
Auburn,  Miss.,  141,  144,  148,  151, 

152 
Augur,  Maj.-Gen.  C.  C.,  210,  214, 

219,  223,  225,  228 
Autry,  Col.  J.  L.,  20 

Bache,  Lieut.  G.  M.,  84 
Baldwin,  Brig. -Gen.  W.  E.,  brigade 
of,  126  et  seq.,  133,  162,  177 

VIII.— 12 


Baldwin's  Ferry,  145,  166,  169, 
176,  178,  180  et  seq.,  197 

Baldwyn,  Miss. ,  42  et  seq. 

Banks,  Maj.-Gen.  N.  P.,  82 et  seq., 
96,  107,  119,  135,  139,  140, 173, 
187,  209  et  seq.,  218  et  seq.; 
Port  Hudson  surrenders  to, 
230  et  seq. 

Barton,  Brig. -Gen.  S.  M.,  brigade 
of,  132,  156  et  seq.,  161,176 

Baton  Rouge,  La.,  19,  21,  23  et  seq. , 
25  et  seq.,  36,  44,  82,  121,  139, 
209  et  seq. ,  214,  219,  221  et  seq. 

Batteries  :  De  Golyer's,  142 ;  Phil- 
lips', 48,  51;  Powell's,  48  et 
seq.  ;  Robinett's,  48  et  seq. ; 
Williams',  48 

Baxter  Bayou,  97 

Beall,  Brig.-Gen.  W.  N.  R,  62,  227 

Beauregard,  Gen.  G.  T.,  10;  asks 
for  reinforcements,  11,  13,  20, 
29etseq.,  32  et  seq.,  136 

Beauregard,  the,  15  et  seq. 

Benton,  Brig.-Gen.  W.  P.,  brigade 
of,  128,  180  et  seq. 


266 


INDEX. 


Benton,  Miss.,  166,  188,  192  et  seq. 

Benton,  the,  8,  15  et  seq.,  18,  113, 
123  et  seq. 

Berwick,  La.,  213 

Big  Black  River,  109,  123,  129, 
132  et  seq.,  139  et  seq.,  159, 
161  et  seq.,  166,  170,  178,  180, 
186  et  seq.,  192  et  seq. 

Birdsong's  Ferry,  193  et  seq. 

Bird's  Point,  5 

Bisland,  Fort,  213,  219  et  seq. 

Black  Bayou,  103  et  seq. 

Black  Hawk,  the,  84 

Blair,  Maj.-Gen.  F.  P.,  Jr.,  divi- 
sion of,  4,  78  et  seq.,  136, 
138,  148,  151  et  seq.,  154  et 
seq.,  158,  160,  165,  169;  at  the 
siege  of  Vicksburg,  178,  183, 
185  et  seq.,  192 

Bolivar,  Tenn.,  34,  36,  38,  43  et 
seq.,  52  et  seq. ,  56,  71 

Bolton,  Miss.,  141,  148,  152,  154 
et  seq.,  163,  194 

Boomer,  Col.  G.  B.,  killed,  184 

Bovina  Station,  Miss.,  145,  149, 
161  etseq.,  165,  167 

Bowen,  Maj.-Gen.  J.  S.,  43  et  seq., 
118  et  seq.,  122,  126  et  seq., 
133,  145  et  seq.,  150  et  seq., 
155, 157 et  seq.,  166  ;  at  Vicks- 
burg, 176  et  seq.,  184,  203  et 
seq. 

Bowling  Green,  Ky.,  10, 13 

Bragg,  Gen.  Braxton,  2,  13,  19,  21, 
33  et  seq.,  37  et  seq.,  44  et 
seq.,  53  et  seq.,  62,  66  et  seq., 
100,  120,  136,  144,  173,  188, 
190  et  seq. 

Bragg,  the,  15  et  seq. 

Brandon  Station,  Miss.,  196 

Brashear  City,  La.,  213,  219  et 
seq.,  222,  228,  231,  233 


Breckenridge,     Maj.-Gen.    J.    C, 

corps  of,  21,   24  et  seq.,  43  et 

seq.,  190,  193,  195 
Breese,  Lieut.-Comdr.  K.  R.,  84 
Bridgeport,  163,  165  et  seq.,  194 
Brown,  Lieut.-Comdr.  Geo.,  Ill 
Brownsville,   Ark.,    88,    152,    167, 

194 
Bruinsburg,  Miss.,  81.  125  et  seq., 

130,  132,  135,  137,  222 
Buell,  Maj.-Gen.  D.  C,  13,  29,  33 

et  seq.,  37  et  seq.,  43,  45,  54  ; 

superseded  by  Rosecrans,  55, 

107 
Buford,  Brig. -Gen.    A.,  119,   122, 

158,  227 
Bull  Run,  2 

Burbridge,  Brig. -Gen.    S,    G.,  bri- 
gade of,  129,  181 
Burnside,  Maj.-Gen.   A.   E.,   107, 

188 
Burnsville,  Miss.,  39 
Butler,  Gen.  B.  F.,  18  et  seq.,  82, 

209 
Butte-a-la-Rose,  La.,  213,  220 

Cabell,  Brig. -Gen. W.  L.,  brigade 

of,  50  et  seq. 
Cairo,  111.,  5  et  seq.,  11  et  seq.,  14, 

18,  27,  29,  60,  73,  81,  237 
Cairo,  the,  8,  15 
Caldwell,  Comdr.  C.  H.  B.,  215 
Camp  Moore.     See  Moore,  Camp. 
Canton,  Miss.,  147, 152, 187  et  seq., 

193,  195 
Carondelet,  the,  8,  15,  17  et   seq., 

113,  123 
Carr,  Brig.-Gen.  E.  A.,  division  of, 

125,  127  et  seq.,  152,  155,  159 

et  seq.,  163  et  seq.,  169,  180, 

185 
Cayuga,  Miss.,  141 


INDEX. 


267 


Chalmers,  Brig. -Gen.  J.  R.,  120  et 

seq. 
Champion,    plantation  of,  154  et 

seq. 
Champion's  Hill,  Miss.,  158  et  seq. , 

162,  166,  170,  186,  207 
Chancellorsville,  Va.,  108,  137 
Chattanooga,  Term.,  2,  11,  29  et 

seq.,  33  et  seq.,  66  et  seq.,  75, 

109,  118  et  seq.,  177,  190,  207 

(note),  237 
Chewalla,  Tenn.,  43,  45,  47,  52 
Chickamauga,   Tenn.,   207  (note), 

237 
Chickasaw  Bayou,  Miss.,  138,  177 
Chickasaw  Bluffs,  Miss.,  71  et  seq., 

76 
Churchill,  Gen.  T.  J.,  84,  87 
Cincinnati,  O.,  8,  31,  88 
Cincinnati,  the,  8,  14,  84,  197 
Clark,  Brig. -Gen.  Charles,  27 
Clifton,  Tenn.,  67  et  seq. 
Clifton,  the,  220 
Clinton,  La.,  230 
Clinton,  Miss.,  144,  146, 148 et  seq., 

171,  196 
Cockrell,  Col.  F.  M.,  brigade  of, 

128  et  seq.,  157,  162,  184 
College  Hill,  Miss.,  63,  66 
Columbia,  Tenn.,  67,  1C0 
Columbus,   Ky.,   6  et  seq.,  10  et 

seq.,  13,  27,  32,  34,  55,  61,  63, 

66etseq.,  70,  72,  91 
Columbus,  Miss.,  120,  122, 127 
Comstock,  Capt.  C.  B.,  186 
Conestoga,  the,  9,  17 
Cooke,  Lieut. -Comdr.  A.  P.,  220 
Corinth,  Miss.,   11,   13,  20,   28  et 

seq.,  55  et  seq.,  61  et  seq.,  64, 

67etseq.,  72,  81,  100,  107 
Crocker,  Brig.  -Gen.  M.  M. ,  brigade 

of.  47,  182  et  seq.,  142  et  seq., 


147  et  seq.,  156,  15S  et  seq., 
167  (note) 
Crum's  Mill,  Miss.,  52 
Crystal  Springs,  Miss.,  159 
Cumberland  Gap,  Tenn.,  30 
Cumming,  Brig. -Gen.  Alfred,  bri- 
gade of,  156  et  seq.,  176 
Curtis,  Fort,  Ark.,  234 
Curtis,  Maj.-Gen.  S.  R.,  17etseq., 
30,  35,56,  61,  64,  88,  235 

Davie s,  Brig. -Gen.  T.  A,  division 

of,  46  et  seq. 
Davis,  Commodore  C.   H,  14  et 

seq.  ;  Memphis  surrenders  to, 

17  et  seq.,  23  et  seq. 
Davis,  Jefferson,  4,  53,  66  et  seq., 

99,  137, 144  etseq.,  172  et  seq., 

206  (note) 
Davis'  Mills,  Miss.,  52,  71 
Decatur,  Ala.,  36 
De  Courcy,  Col.  J.  F. ,  brigade  of, 

78  et  seq.,  86 et  seq. 
De  Golyer,  Capt.  S.,  battery  of,  142 
De  Kalb,  the,  84 
Demopolis,  Ala.,  206 
Dennis,  Brig. -Gen.  E.  S.,  brigade 

of,  142  et  seq. 
De  Russy,  Fort,  La.,  213 
Des  Allemands,  Bayou,  La.,  232  et 

seq. 
De  Shroon,  plantation  of,  125 
De  Soto,  La.,  95 
DeSoto,  the,  111,214 
Dodge,  Brig. -Gen.  G.  M.,  55,  68  et 

seq. 
Donaldsonville,  La.,   219,   231  et 

seq. 
Donelson,  Fort,  10,  13  et  seq.,  19, 

109  et  seq. 
Dresden,  Tenn.,  68 
Duckport,  La.,  109,  113,  115 


268 


INDEX. 


D wight,  Brig-Gen.  Wm„  22S  et 
seq. 

Eads,  Capt.  J.  B.,  8 

Ector,  Brig. -Gen.  M.  D.,  brigade 

of,  190 
Edward's  Station,  Miss.,   119,  122, 

126,  132,  136,  140  et  seq.,  118 

et  seq.,  166,  171,  193 
Ellet,  Col.  Chas.,  9,  15,  17,  llOet 

seq. 
Ellet,  Brig. -Gen.  Alfred  W.,  9,  84, 

112, 118,  199 
Elliston's  plantation,  151,  155 
Emory,  Brig. -Gen.  W.  H.,  210,  213 

et  seq.,  219,  225,  228,  233 
Enterprise,  Miss.,  206 
Essex,  the,  8,  26,  215,  218 
Estrella,  the,  220 
Evans,  Brig. -Gen.  N.  G.,  brigade 

of,  190 
Ewing,  Brig. -Gen.   Hugh,  brigade 

of,  92, 179 

Fagan,  Maj.-Gen.  J.  F.,  brigade 

of,  234  et  seq. 
Farragut,   Admiral  D.  G.,   18  et 

seq.;  report  of,  21  et  seq.,  2S, 

112  et  seq.,   139,  211,  214  et 

seq,  218,  220  et  seq. 
Featherston,    Brig. -Gen.    W.    S., 

brigade  of,  158 
Fitch,  Col.  G.  N.,  17 
Fontaine,  Col.  Edw.,  19 
Foote,  Commodore  A.  H,  10,  12, 

14 
Force,  Gen.  M.  F.,  29 
Forney,  Maj.-Gen.  J.  H.,  division 

of,  150,  165,  176,  185,  203,  206 

(note) 
Forrest,  Gen.  N.  B.,  66  et  seq.,  74, 

237 


Forest  Queen,  the,  S3,  113 
Fort  Bisland.     See  Bisland,  Fort. 
Fort  Curtis.     See  Curtis,  Fort. 
Fort  De  Russy.     See  De  Russy, 

Fort. 
Fort    Donelson.       See    Donelson, 

Fort. 
Fort  Henry.     See  Henry,  Fort. 
Fort  Hill.     See  Hill,  Fort. 
Fort    Hindman.      See   Hindman, 

Fort. 
Fort  Pemberton.     See  Pemberton, 

Fort. 
Fort  Pillow.     See  Pillow,  Fort. 
Fort  Randolph.      See   Randolph, 

Fort. 
Fort  Sumter.     See  Sumter,  Fort. 
Franklin,  La.,  219 
Fredericksburg,  Va.,  108 
Fremont,  Gen.  J.  C,  5  et  seq.,  8, 

1C7 
French,  Maj.-Gen.  S.  G.,  division 

of,  190,  193,  195 
Fulton,  Miss.,  39,  41  et  seq. 

Gabaudan,  Mr.  E.  A.,  secretary 

to  Farragut,  221  et  seq. 
Gaines1  Mill,  Va.,  137 
Galveston,  Tex. ,  210  et  seq. 
Gardner,    Maj.-Gen.  Frank,    117, 

227  et  seq.,  230 
Garrard,  Brig. -Gen.  T.  T.,  brigade 

of,  128 
Genesee,  the,  215,  217 
Georgetown,  Miss.,  121 
Gettysburg,  Pa.,  208 
Girardeau,  Cape,  Mo.,  5  et  seq. 
Gist,  Brig. -Gen.  S.  R.,  brigade  of, 

135,  146,  190 
Glass'  Bayou,  175  et  seq. ,  183 
Glide,  the,  S4 
Goldsboro',  N.  C,  2 


INDEX. 


269 


Gorman,  Brig. -Gen.  W.  A.,  97 

Grand  Gulf,  Miss.,  21,  23,  28,  106 

et  seq.,  109  et  seq.,  121  etseq., 

138,   141,    148,    170,   178,  187, 

220,  224 

Grand  Junction,  Tenn.,  43,  56,  61, 

63,  70  et  seq. 
Grant,  Maj.-Gen.  U.  S.,  5  et  seq.; 
Fort  Donelson  surrenders  to, 
10,  13,  27 ;  in  command  of 
troops  in  the  West,  34  et  seq., 
38  et  seq. ,  51,  53  ;  takes  the  of- 
fensive, 55  et  seq. ;  his  plans  for 
attacking  Vicksburg,  64  et  seq. ; 
his  communications  cut  off,  70 
et  seq. ,  81  et  seq. ;  his  orders 
to  McClemand,  88  et  seq.;  his 
troops  organized  into  four 
army  corps,  91  et  seq.;  he 
abandons  the  canal  project,  95; 
goes  to  Lake  Providence,  96  et 
seq. ;  abandons  the  Yazoo  Pass 
project,  101  et  seq.;  failure  of 
the  fourth  project,  106  et  seq., 
113  et  seq.;  at  Grand  Gulf, 
123  et  seq;  strength  of  his 
forces  before  Vicksburg,  136  et 
seq.;  enters  Jackson,  148  et 
seq.;  at  Clinton,  152  et  seq., 
161,  163, 167,  169  et  seq. ;  at  the 
siege  of  Vicksburg,  177 et  seq.; 
losses  of,  185  et  seq.,  200; 
treats  with  Pemberton,  204  et 
seq.,  220  etseq.,  230,  237 
Green,  Brig. -Gen.  Martin  E.,  49. 
119,  122,  126  et  seq.,  158,  162, 
184 
Green,  Brig. -Gen.  Thos.,   brigade 

of,  231  et  seq. 
Greenville,  Miss.,  110,  115 
Greenwood,  Miss.,  100,  103 
Greer,  Lieut. -Comdr.  J.  A.,  123 


Gregg,    Brig. -Gen.  John,    brigade 

of,  122,  142  et  seq.,  145 et  seq., 

227 
Grenada,  Miss.,  21,  56,  61  et  seq., 

70  et  seq.,  74,  98  et  seq,  119, 

122,  127 
Grierson,  Brig. -Gen.  B.  H.,  120 et 

seq.,  189,  228  (note),  230 
Griffith,  Sergt.  Joseph,  181 
Grover,  Brig. -Gen.  C.,  209  et  seq., 

214,  219,  225,  228  et  seq.,  233 

Hackleman,  Brig. -Gen.  P.  A.,  53 

Haines'  Bluff,  Miss.,  74  et  seq.,  80 
et  seq.,  92,  94,  98  et  seq.,  106 
et  seq.,  117,  123,  120,  13S,  165, 
169  et  seq.,  172,  187  et  seq., 
193  et  seq. 

Halleck,  Maj.-Gen.  H.  W.,  10,  12  ; 
assumes  command  at  Shiloh, 
13  et  seq.,  20,  28  et  seq.,  31  et 
seq.  ;  his  lack  of  energy,  33  ; 
made  General-in-Chief,  34  et 
seq.,  38,  54  et  seq.  ;  opposes 
McClernand's  course,  61  et 
seq.,  72,  81  et  seq.,  88  et  seq., 
139,  173,  187,  209,  219  (note), 
220,  223 

Hall's  Ferry,  Miss.,  145,  187 

Hamilton,  Brig. -Gen.  C.  S.,  di- 
vision of,  40  et  seq.,  46  et  seq., 
52,  55  etseq.,  61,  210 

Hankinson's  Ferry,  Miss.,  133  et 
seq.,  140  et  seq.,  192 

Hardee,  Lt.-Gen.  W.  J.,  4  et  seq., 
13,  36 

Hard  Times,  La.,  116  et  seq.,  138 

Harriet  Lane,  the,  211 

Harris,  Capt.  D.  B.,  20 

Hartford,  the,  112,  215,  218,  222 
j  Hart,  Lieut.-Comdr.  J.  E.,  215 

Hatch,  Col.  Edward,  120  et  seq. 


270 


INDEX. 


Hebert,  Brig. -Gen.  Louis,  division 

of,  45,  49,  165,  177,  179,  184 
Helena,  Ark.,  IS,  28,  38,  56,  61  et 

seq.,  73,  88,  91,  94,  97  et  seq., 

234  et  seq. 
Helm,  Brig.-Gen.  B.  H,  27 
Henry  Clay,  the,  113  et   seq. 
Henry,  Fort,  7,  10,  13,  29,  45,  68, 

81 
Herron,  Maj.-Gen.   F.   J.,    188  et 

seq.,  237 
Hill.  Fort,  168  et  seq.,  175  etseq., 

197 
Hill,  Lt.-Gen.  A.  P.,  187 
Hindman,  Fort,  83  et  seq. 
Hoel,  Lieut.  W.  R,  123 
Holly  Springs,    Miss.,   36   et  seq., 

42,  52,  58  et  seq.,  61  et  seq.,  70 

et  seq.,  81 
Holmes,  Lieut. -Gen.  T.  H.,  63,  234 

et  seq. 
Hood,  Lt.-Gen.  J.  B.,  2 
Hooker,  Maj.-Gen.  J.  E.,  107 
Houston.  Miss.,  120 
Hovey,  Brig.-Gen.   A.  P.,  62,  127 

etseq.,  152,   154  et  seq.,  166, 

180  et  seq. 
Humboldt,  Tenn.,  11,  43,  68  et  seq. 
Huntington,  Tenn.,  69 
Hunts ville,  Ala.,  29 
Hurlbut,  Maj.-Gen.  S.  A.,  division 

of,   34,  38,  43,  52,  55;    given 

command  of  16th  Army  Corps, 

91  et  seq.,   99,   117,   138,    170 

(note),  187  et  seq. 

Illinois,  regiments  of :  6th  Cav- 
alry, 120  ;  77th  Infantry,  181 

Indiana,  regiment  of :  46th  In- 
fantry, 17 

Indianola.  the,  111  et  seq. 

Ingersoll,  Col.  Robert  G.,  68 


Iowa,  regiments  of  :  4th  Infantry, 
79;   21st    Infantry,    18;    22d, 
Infantry,  181 
Island  No.  10,  7,  11  et  seq.,  20 
Iuka,  Miss.,  35  et  seq.,  1U7 

Jacinto,  Miss.,  39  et  seq. 

Jackson,  Gen.  W.  H.,  4,  37,  45, 137, 
190,  195,  207 

Jackson,  Gov.  C.  F.,  5 

Jackson,  Miss.,  24,  27,  30,  36,  53, 
64,  67,  74,  81,  99,  118  et  seq., 
122,  126 et  seq.,  132, 135 etseq., 
140  et  seq.,  159,  167,  169  et 
seq.,  174  et  seq.,  178  et  seq., 
190  etseq.,  208,  277  etseq. 

Jackson,  Tenn.,  10,43  et  seq.,  51, 
55,  62,  67  et  seq. ,  70,  75 

Jefferson  City,  Mo.,  5 

Johnson,  plantation  of,  75  et  seq., 
177 

Johnston,  Gen.  Albert  Sydney,  12 
et  seq. 

Johnston,  Gen.  J.  E. ,  66  et  seq. , 
75,  100,  118  et  seq.,  137,  143 
et  seq.,  159,  161,  165,  167  et 
seq.,  174  etseq.,  177  et  seq., 
186  et  seq.,  189  et  seq.  ;  re- 
treats to  Jackson,  195  et  seq., 
208,  228,  234 

Johnston,  Lieut.  Amos,  215 

Kimball,   Brig.-Gen.    N.,  187  et 

seq. 
Kineo,  the,  215,  217 
Knoxville,  Tenn.,  30,  32,  36 

Lafayette,  the,  113,  123 

La  Fourche,  Bayou,  La.,  213,  230, 

232  et  seq. 
La  Grange,  Tenn.,  56,   99,   120  et 

seq. 


INDEX. 


271 


Lake,  plantation  of,  177 

Lancaster,  the,  15  et  seq.,  112 

Landram,  Brig. -Gen.  W.  J.,  bri- 
gade of,  129,  181 

Lauman,  Brig. -Gen.  J.  G.,  division 
of,  138,  187,  189 

Lawler,  Brig. -Gen.  M.  K.,  bri- 
gade of,  180  et  seq. 

Leadbetter,  Brig. -Gen.  D.,  30 

Lee,  Gen.  Robert  E.,  2,  54,  137 

Lee,  Brig. -Gen.  S.  D.,  79,  156, 176 

Lee,  Comdr.  S.  P.,  19 

Leggett,  Brig. -Gen.  M.  D.,  bri- 
gade of,  157,  180 

Lenthall,  Naval  Constructor,  8 

Lexington,  Tenn.,  67,  69 

Lexington,  the,  9,  17,  84 

Lincoln,  Pres.  Abraham,  32,  59  et 
seq.,  65,  82,  89,  93,  107,  173, 
200 

Lindsey,  Col.  D.  W.,  brigade  of, 
78,  86 

Little,  Brig. -Gen.  Henry,  40  et 
seq. ;  death  of,  42,  45 

Little  Rebel,  the,  15  et  seq. 

Little  Rock,  Ark.,  17,  88,  90,  234 

Liverpool,  Miss.,  186,  188 

Livingston,  Miss.,  167 

Logan,  Maj.-Gen.  J.  A.,  division 
of,  91,  99,  115  et  seq.,  127,  130, 
132  et  seq.,  142  et  seq.,  147, 
156  et  seq.,  169,  180,  183,  185, 
204  ;  takes  possession  of  Vicks- 
burg,  205 

Loring,  Maj.-Gen.  W.  W.,  100, 
117,  131  et  seq.,  145,  149  et 
seq.,  155,  158  et  seq.,  166,  189 
et  seq.,  192  et  seq.,  195,  207 

Louisville,  Ky.,  10,  31,  34,  45,  54 

Louisville,  the,  8,  15,  18,  84,  113, 
123 

Lovell,  Maj.-Gen.  M.,  18  et  seq.; 


superseded  by  Van  Dorn,  21, 

30,  43etseq.,  51,  62 
Lovell,  the,  15  et  seq. 
Lowe,  Brig. -Gen.  W.  W.,  68 
Lyon,  Nathaniel,  4 

Mc Arthur,  Brig. -Gen.  J.,  47,  91, 
96,  99,  136,  138,  118,  166;  at 
the  siege  of  Vicksburg,  178  et 
seq.,  182  et  seq.,  193,  196 

McClellan,  Maj.-Gen.  Geo.  B.,  32 
et  seq.,  107 

McClernand,  Maj.-Gen.  John  A., 
division  of,  34,  58etseq.,  66,  72 
et  seq.,  80,  83;  assumes  com- 
mand of  Army  of  Mississippi, 
83  et  seq. ,  86  et  seq.  ;  Port 
Hindman  surrendered  to,  87 
et  seq.  ;  given  command  of 
13th  Army  Corps,  91  etseq., 
99,  106,  110,  114  et  seq.,  118, 
123,  125  et  seq.;  reinforced  by 
Stevenson,  130  et  seq.,  138  et 
seq.,  152,  154  et  seq.,  159  et 
seq.  ;  pursues  the  enemy,  163 
et  seq. ,  166,  169 ;  at  the  siege 
of  Vicksburg,  178  et  seq. ;  des- 
patches from,  1S2  et  seq.  ; 
blamed  by  Grant,  185  et  seq., 
189  ;  relieved  from  command, 
199  et  seq. 

McCown,  Maj.-Gen.  J.  P.,  division 
of,  66 

McCullough,  Brig. -Gen.  H.  E.,  4 

McKean,  Brig. -Gen.  T.  J.,  division 
of,  46  et  seq. ,  52 

McKinstry,  Capt.  J.  P.,  215 

McNair,  Brig.  -Gen.  E. ,  brigade  of, 
190 

Macomb,  Comdr.  N.  H.,  215 

Macon,  Bayou,  97 

Macon,  Miss.,  120 


272 


INDEX. 


McPherson,  Maj.-Gen.  J.  B.,  51  et 
seq.,  56,  58,  61,  72  ;  given  com- 
mand of  17th  Army  Corps,  91 
et  seq.,  96  et  seq.,  109,  115  et 
seq.,  127,  130,  132  et  seq.;  be- 
fore Vicksburg,  136  et  seq. ; 
losses  of,  148,  152,  154  et  seq. , 
159  ;  pursues  the  enemy,  1 63  et 
seq.,  166  et  seq.,  169;  at  the 
siege  of  Vicksburg,  180  et  seq. , 
193.  200,  204 

Maine,  regiment  of  :  28th  Inf  an  try, 
232 

Magruder,  Maj.-Gen.  J.  B.,  211 

Major,  Col.  J.  P.,  231  et  seq. 

Manassas,  Va.,  137 

Maps  :  Memphis  to  Iuka,  35  ;  Iuka, 
40  ;  Corinth,  46  ;  Memphis  to 
Vicksburg,  57 ;  Chickasaw 
Bluff,  76 ;  Arkansas  Post,  85  ; 
Champion's  Hill,  153 ;  Opera- 
tions in  Louisiana,  212;  Port 
Hudson,  226 ;  Helena,  235 

Marmaduke,  Maj.-Gen.  J.  S.,  divi- 
sion of,  234  et  seq. 

Maury,  Maj.-Gen.  D.  H.,  40,  45, 
47,  49etseq.,  75 

Maxey,  Brig. -Gen.  S.  B.,  brigade 
of,  146,  190,  227 

Mechanicsburg,  Miss.,  186,  188, 
192 

Meigs,  Brig. -Gen.  M.  C,  8 

Memphis,  Tenn.,  5  et  seq  ,  9,  11, 
13  et  seq.,  28  et  seq.,  31,  33  et 
seq.,  38,  43  et  seq.,  55  et  seq., 
58  et  seq.,  71  et  seq.,  80  et  seq., 
89,  91  et  seq.,  96  et  seq.,  106, 
108, 118, 120, 122, 138, 177, 187, 
200 

Meridian,  Miss.,  119  et  seq.,  127, 
132,  172,  196 

Messenger's  Perry,  Miss.,  194 


Michigan,  8th  Battery,  142 

Middleburg,  Tenn.,  71 

Milliken's  Bend,  La.,  73,  80,  83, 
89,  92,  101,  104,  109  et  seq., 
136  et  seq.,  187,  199,  223,  231, 
234 

Mississippi,  the,  215,  217  et  seq. 

Missouri,  regiments  of :  6th  In- 
fantry, 79 ;  7th  Infantry,  180 ; 
8th  Infantry,  104 

Mitchel,  Brig. -Gen.  O.  M.,  29  et 
seq.,  33 

Mizner,  Col.  J.  K.,  71 

Mobile,  Ala.,  13,  21,  31,  36,  81,  119, 
210 

Monarch,  the,  15  et  seq.,  84 

Monongahela,  the,  215,  217 

Monroe,  La.,  199,  231 

Montgomery,  Ala.,  120 

Montgomery,  Commodore  J.  E. ,  14 

Moore,  Brig. -Gen.  J.  C,  brigade 
of,  50,  176,  184 

Moore,  Camp,  24  et  seq.,  27,  230 

Moore,  Gov.  T.  O  ,  19 

Morgan,  Brig. -Gen.  G.  W.,  30,  73, 
77etseq.,  83  et  seq.,  89 

Morton,  Miss.,  196 

Mound  City,  the,  8,  14,  17  et  seq., 
113,  123 

Mt.  Albans  Station,  Miss.,  161, 166 

Mouton,  Brig. -Gen.  Alfred,  bri- 
gade of,  231  et  seq. 

Mower,  Brig. -Gen.  J.  A.,  brigade 
of,  199 

Mullen,  Maj.  J.  D.,  232 

Murfreesboro',  Tenn.,  13 

Murphy,  Col.  R.  C,  70 

Murphy,  Lieut.  J.  M.  L.,  123 

Napoleon,  Ark.,  89,  92 
Nashville,  Tenn.,  10, 13,  31,  33,  37, 
67 


INDEX. 


273 


Natchez,  Miss.,  19,  21,  28,  111,  224 
New  Carthage,  La.,  106  et  seq.,  109 

et  seq. 
New  Era,  the,  111 
New  Madrid,  Mo.,  5  et  seq.,  11  et 

seq. 
New  Orleans,  La.,  7,  9,  18  et  seq., 

21,  24,  27,  44,  59  et  seq,  82, 

159,  195,  209  et  seq.,  214,  218 

et  seq. 
Newton  Station,  Miss,  121  et  seq. 
New  York,  N.  Y.,  82,  209 

Oglesby,  Brig. -Gen.  R.  J.,  53 

Okolona,  Miss.,  121  et  seq. 

Oneida,  the,  19 

Opelousas,  La.,  213,  219  et  seq., 
222  et  seq,  231,  233 

Ord,  Maj.-Gen.  E.  O.  C,  division 
of,  38  et  seq. ,  42  et  seq. ,  52 ; 
severely  wounded,  194  et  seq.  ; 
supersedes  McClernand,  199  et 
seq,  204 

Osterhaus,  Brig. -Gen.  P.  J.,  divi- 
sion of,  110,  116,  127  et  seq., 
152,  154  et  seq.,  159  et  seq, 
163  et  seq.,  169,   180  et  seq, 

192  et  seq. 

Owen,  Lieut.-Comdr.  E.  K,  84, 123 
Oxford,  Miss.,  62  et  seq.,  68,  72 

Padtjcah,  Ky.,  6,  11 

Palmer,  Capt.  J.  S.,  215 

Panola,  Miss.,  62 

Parke,  Maj.-Gen.  J.  G. ,  188 et  seq. , 

193  et  seq. 

Parker's  Cross  Roads,  Tenn.,  69 
Parsons,  Capt.  L.  B.,  73 
Pattersonville,  La.,  219 
Pea  Ridge,  Ark.,  17 
Pemberton,  Fort,  100  et  seq.,  117, 
119,  122,  166 

12* 


Pemberton,  Lt.-Gen.  J.  O,  53, 
61  et  seq,  65  et  seq,  74,  81,  99 
et  seq,  117  et  seq.,  121  et  seq, 
126  et  seq. ;  strength  of,  135, 
137,  142,  144  et  seq,  148  et 
seq. ,  154,  157  ;  rout  of,  159  et 
seq.  ;  calls  a  council  of  war, 
168, 171  et  seq. ,  178, 189  et  seq. , 
199  et  seq.  ;  sends  reinforce- 
ments to  Gardner,  227,  234 

Pensacola,  Fla.,  13,  19  et  seq. 

Perkins,  plantation  of,  115  et  seq., 
125,  138,  1S7 

Perry ville,  Ky.,  54 

Phifer,  Brig. -Gen.  C.  W.,  brigade 
of,  50 

Pierre,  Bayou,  125,  129  et  seq. 

Pillow,  Fort,  7,  11  et  seq.,  20,  44, 
237 

Pillow,  Brig. -Gen.  Gideon  J.,  5  et 
seq. 

Pittsburg  Landing,  Tenn.,  13 

Pittsburg,  the,  8,  113,  123 

Plaquemine,  Bayou,  La.,  213  et 
seq,  231 

Pocahontas,  Ark.,  4  et  seq. 

Pocahontas,  Term.,  39,  43  et  seq., 
52 

Polk,  Maj.  -Gen.  L. ,  5  et  seq. ,  10  et 
seq,  13,  27 

Pontotoc,  Miss.,  120 

Pope,  Maj.-Gen.  John,  12  et  seq., 
34,  35 

Porter,  Admiral  D.  D.,  65,  72,  80, 
83  et  seq. ,  86,  88,  92  et  seq.,  98, 
103  et  seq.;  Grant's  letter  to, 
107,  112  et  seq.,  119  ;  at  Grand 
Gulf,  123  et  seq.,  178,  197, 199, 
220 

Porter,  Comdr.  D.  D.,  21,  26 

Port   Gibson,   Miss.,    122   et  seq., 


137,  138  et  seq.,  141,  161,  170 


274 


INDEX. 


Port  Hudson,  La.,  2,  27,  28,  37  et 
seq.,  44,  62,  82,  112,  117,  119, 
121  et  seq.,  135,  139,  142,  16S, 
173, 177, 190  et  seq.,  207  (note), 
208  et  seq.,  219  et  seq. 

Prentiss,  Maj.-Gen.  B.  M.,  235  et 
seq. 

Price,  Maj.-Gen.  Sterling,  division 
of,  4,  36  et  seq ;  losses  of,  42, 
53,  62,  75,  234  et  seq. 

Price,  the,  15  et  seq.,  113 

Prime,  Capt.  F.  E.,  186 

Queen  of  the  West,  the,  15  et 
seq.,  110  et  seq.,  214,  220 

Quinby,  Brig. -Gen.  I.  F. ,  division 
of,  91,  9S,  101  et  seq,  127,  132, 
167,  169,  180,  183, 185 

Raleigh,  N.  C.,  2 
Randolph,  Fort,  7,  13 
Ransom,  Brig.-Gen.  T.  E.  G.,  bri- 
gade of,  180,  183,  185 
Rattler,  the,  84 
Raymond,  Miss.,  141  efc  seq.,  170, 

195,  208 

Reynolds,  Brig.-Gen.  A.  W.,  bri- 
gade of,  132,  157, 161,  176 

Richmond,  La.,  106,  109,  110,  114 
et  seq.,  118,  199 

Richmond,  the,  215  et  seq. 

Richmond,  Va.,  2,  10,  31  et  seq, 
62,  67,  72,  146,  173, 190  et  seq., 

196,  233 

Rienzi,  Miss.,  34,  37  et  seq. 
Ripley,  Miss.,  43  et  seq.,  52,  57,  71, 

120  et  seq. 
Rocky  Springs,  Miss.,  133,141,  224 
Rodgers,  Comdr.  John,  8 
Rodney,  Miss.,  125 
Rogers,  Col. ,  death  of,  50 
Rosecrans,  Maj.-Gen.  W.  S.,  35  et 


seq.;  losses  of,  42  et  seq.,  45, 
48  et  seq.;  victory  and  losses 
of,  53  et  seq. ;  supersedes  Buell, 
55,  67,  107,  118,  188 

Ross,  Brig.-Gen.  L.  F.,  division  of, 
98,  101  et  seq.,  235 

Ross'  Landing,  La.,  226  et  seq. 

Ruggles,  Brig.-Gen.  D.,  command 
of,  21,  25,  27 

Rust,  Brig.-Gen.  Albert,  43,  227 

Sachem,  the,  215  et  seq. 

Salomon,  Brig.-Gen.  Fred.,  235 

Sara,  Bayou,  La.,  139,  223,  225,  227 

St.  Charles,  La.,  17  et  seq. 

St.  Louis,  Mo.,  2,  4  et  seq.,  11,  56, 
72,  109,  188,  237 

St.  Louis,  the,  8,  15,  17  et  Beq. 

Savannah,  Ga.,  2 

Schofield,  Maj.-Gen.  J.  M.,  187  et 
seq. 

Scott,  Lt.-Gen.  Winfield,  27 

Sheldon,  Col.  L.  A.,  brigade  of,  78, 
12S 

Sherman,  Maj.-Gen.  W.  T.,  12, 
31,  43,  55  et  seq. ;  leaves  Mem- 
phis, 61  et  seq.  ;  discusses 
plans  with  Grant,  64  et  seq. , 
71  ;  his  movements  down  the 
Mississippi,  72  et  seq.  ;  his 
letter  to  Halleck,  83  et  seq.  ; 
given  command  of  15th  Army 
Corps,  91  et  seq.  ;  at  Steele's 
Bayou,  104  et  seq.,  108,  110, 
115,  126,  134;  before  Vicks- 
burg,  136  et  seq. ;  at  Jackson, 
148  et  seq.,  163  et  seq. ;  at  siege 
of  Vicksburg,  177  et  seq.  ; 
pursues  Johnston  to  Brandon 
Station,  193  et  seq.,  200,  210, 
228  et  seq. 

Shiloh,  Tenn.,  13  et  seq.,  20,  107 


INDEX. 


275 


Shirk,  Lieut. -Comdr.  J.  W.,  84, 123 

Shoupe,  Brig. -Gen.  F.  A.,  brigade 
of,  177 

Shreveport,  La.,  220,  224  efc  seq., 
234 

Silver  Wave,  the,  113 

Simsport,  La.,  225 

Smith,  Brig. -Gen. W.  S.,  reinforces 
Grant,  187,  189 

Smith,  Capt.  Melancton,  215 

Smith,  Brig. -Gen.  A.  J.,  73,  77  et 
seq.,  83,  87,  127,  129,  132,  152, 
155  et  seq.;  losses  of,  160,164, 
169,  180  et  seq. ,  204  et  seq. 

Smith,  Lt.-Gen.  E.  K,  30,  36, 
199,  231,  234 

Smith,  Maj.-Gen.  Martin  L.,  20, 
22,  30,  62,  79,  150, 162,  165  et 
seq.,  168  et  seq.,  176  et  seq., 
184,  203  et  seq. 

Smith,  Brig. -Gen.  Morgan  L. ,  66, 
73,  77  et  seq. ,  83 

Smith,  Brig. -Gen.  Giles  A.,  bri- 
gade of,  179,  1S3 

Smith,  Brig. -Gen.  J.  E.,  division 
of,  99,  130,  142  et  seq.,  157  et 
seq.,  180 

Smith,  Lieut. -Comdr.  W.,  84 

Smith,  plantation  of,  115  et  seq. 

Smith,  Brig. -Gen.  T.  Kilby,  bri- 
gade of,  179 

Snyder's  Bluff,  Miss.,  150 

Springfield,  111.,  66,  185 

Stanley,  Brig. -Gen.  D.  S.,  division 
of,  40  et  seq..  46  et  seq.,  50,  52 

Stanton,  Sec.  Edwin  M.,  9,  59  et 
seq.,  90 

Starksville,  Miss.,  120 

Steele's  Bayou,  Miss.,  75-102  et 
seq.,  106,  112 

Steele,  Maj.-Gen.  F.,  66,  73,  77  et 
seq.,  83,  85,  87,  110,  115,  118, 


138,  169,  178,  183,  185,  194  et 
seq. 

Stevenson,  Brig. -Gen.  J.  D.,  bri- 
gade of ,  130, 142, 157,  180 

Stevenson,  Maj.-Gen.  C.  L.,  di- 
vision of,  66,  75,  100,  117,  119, 
122  et  seq.,  126,  132  et  seq., 
145,  149  et  seq.,  155  et  seq., 
165;  at  Vicksburg,  176,  204, 
206  (note) 

Stone,  Col.  W.  M.,  brigade  of,  128 
et  seq. 

Stout's  Bayou,  Miss.,  175  et  seq. 

Stuart,  Brig. -Gen.  D.,  division  of, 
83,  85,  104 

Sullivan,  Brig. -Gen.  J.  C,  50,  68 
et  seq. 

Sumter,  the,  15  et  seq. 

Sumter,  Fort,  2 

Switzerland,  the,  15  et  seq.,  112, 
138,  222 

Taylor,  Brig. -Gen.  T.  H.,  brigade 

of,  132 
Taylor,   Maj.-Gen.   R,    199,    213, 

230  et  seq. 
Teche,  Bayou,  La.,    213   et    seq, 

219,  230  et  seq.,  233 
Thayer,  Brig. -Gen.  J.  M.,  brigade 

of,  78  et  seq. 
Thibodeau,  La.,  219,  231 
Thompson,  M.  Jeff.,  4  et  seq.,  12 
Thompson's  Bluff,  Miss.,  128 
Thompson,  the,  15  et  seq. 
Tilghman,  Brig. -Gen.  L,  53,  119, 

122, 126,  132  etseq  ,  158  et  seq. 
Totten,  Brig. -Gen.  J.  G,  8 
Tracy,  Brig. -Gen.  E.   D.,  brigade 

of,  126  etseq.,  130 
Trenton,  Tenn.,  69 
Tullahoma,  Tenn.,  144 
Tupelo,  Miss.,  30,  36,  64,  70,  121 


276 


INDEX. 


Tuscumbia,  Ala.,  36,  38 
Tuscumbia,  the,  113,  123  et  seq. 
Tuttle,  Brig. -Gen.   J.  M.,  division 
of,  138,  169,  178,  183,  185,  193 
Tyler,  the,  9 

Union  City,  Tenn. ,  68 

Utica,  Miss.,  141 

VanDokn,  Maj.-Gen.  Earl,  11, 13, 
20 ;  supersedes  Lovell,  21,  24, 
27,  36  et  seq.,  42  et  seq.;  de- 
feat of,  53  et  seq.,  62  et  seq., 
70,  74,  100 

Van  Dorn,  the,  15  et  seq. 

Vaughn,  Brig. -Gen.  J.  C,  brigade 
of,  60,  75,  119,  162,  164,  177, 
184 

Vernon,  Miss.,  193 

Vicksburg,  Miss.,  2,  7,  14,  18  et 
seq,  30  et  seq,  37,  44,  54  et 
seq,  100,  103,  106,  108  et  seq, 
110,  111.  112,  113,  117  et  seq, 
125,  126,  132  et  seq,  161  et 
seq.  ;  surrender  of,  192  et  seq. 

Vicksburg,  the,  111 

Vidal,  Bayou,  La.,  115,  116 

Villepigue,  Brig. -Gen.  J.  B.,  43  et 
seq. 

Wade,  Col.  Wm.,  124 

Wain wright,  Comdr.  J.  M.,  211 

Walke,  Capt.  H.,  123 

Walker,  Maj.-Gen.  J.  G.,  division 

of,  199 
Walker,  Brig. -Gen.  L.   M.,  230  et 

seq. ,  234  et  seq. 


Walker,  Brig. -Gen.  W.  H.  T.,  bri- 
gade of,  135,  145  et  seq. 

Walker,  Maj.-Gen.  W.  H.  T.,  di- 
vision of,  190,  192  et  seq. 

Walker,  Lieut. -Comdr.  J.  G.,  84 

Wallace,    Brig. -Gen.    L.,    division 
of,  34  et  seq. 

Walnut  Hills,  Miss.,  73  et  seq. 

Warrenton,  Miss.,  93  et  seq.,  99  et 
seq,  106,  107,  112,  113,  144  et 
seq,  150,  165,  170,  175  et  seq., 
1S2,  187,  189,  19S 
i  Washburne,  Maj.-Gen.  C.  C,  62, 
189,  193  et  seq. 

Washington,  D.  C,  35.  59  et  seq, 
63,  70,  72,  82,  91,  93,  173,  200 

Waul,  Col.  T.  N.s  legion  of,  176  et 
seq. 

Webb,  the,  111 

Weitzel.  Brig.  -Gen.  G. ,  213  et  seq., 
219,  225,  22S  et  seq.,  233 

Westfield,  the,  211 

Wilderness,  battle  of  the,  137 

Williams,  Brig. -Gen.  Thos.,  19,  21 
et  seq.  ;  death  of,  26  et  seq. 

Willow  Springs,  Miss.,  133  et  seq., 
110 

Wilson,  CoL  J.  H.,  97  et  seq. 

Wilson,  Lieut. -Comdr.  Byron,  123 

Woodworth,  Lieut.  S.  E.,  84 

Wyatt,  Miss.,  62 

Yazoo  City,  Miss.,  99,  103,  187 

et  seq.,  192  et  seq. 
Yazoo  Pass,  Miss.,  97  et  seq,  118 
Young's  Point,  La.,  18,  92  et  seq., 

97,  99,  103,  109,  115 


MESSRS.    CHARLES    SCRIBNER'S    SONS 

are  publishing,  under  the  general  title  of  THE 

Campaigns  of  the  Civil  War, 

a  series  of  volumes,  contributed  at  their  solicitation  by  a 
number  of  leading  actors  in  and  students  of  the  great  conflict 
of  1861-65,  with  a  view  to  bringing  together,  for  the  first 
time,  a  full  and  authoritative  military  history  of  the  suppres- 
sion of  the  Rebellion. 


The  final  and  exhaustive  form  of  this  great  narrative,  in  which  every 
doubt  shall  be  settled  and  every  detail  covered,  may  be  a  possibility 
only  of  the  future.  But  it  is  a  matter  for  surprise  that  twenty  years 
after  the  beginning  of  the  Rebellion,  and  when  a  whole  generation 
has  grown  up  needing  such  knowledge,  there  is  no  authority  which  is 
at  the  same  time  of  the  highest  rank,  intelligible  and  trustworthy,  and 
to  which  a  reader  can  turn  for  any  general  view  of  the  field— for  a 
strong,  vivid,  concise  but  truly  proportioned  story  of  the  great  salient 
events. 

The  many  reports,  regimental  histories,  memoirs,  and  other  materi- 
als of  value  for  special  passages,  require,  for  their  intelligent  reading, 
an  ability  to  combine  and  proportion  them  which  the  ordinary  reader 
does  not  possess.  There  have  been  no  attempts  at  general  histories 
which  have  supplied  this  satisfactorily  to  any  large  part  of  the  public. 
Undoubtedly  there  has  been  no  such  narrative  as  would  be  especially 
welcome  to  men  of  the  new  generation,  and  would  be  valued  by  a  very 
great  class  of  readers;— and  there  has  seemed  to  be  great  danger  that 
the  time  would  be  allowed  to  pass  when  it  would  be  possible  to  give 
to  such  a  work  the  vividness  and  accuracy  that  come  from  personal 
recollection.     These  /acts  led  to  the  conception  of  the  present  work. 


From  every  department  of  the  Government,  from  the  officers  ot  the 
army,  and  from  a  great  number  of  custodians  of  records  and  special 
information  everywhere,  both  authors  and  publishers  have  received 
every  aid  that  could  be  asked  in  this  undertaking ;  and  in  announcing 
the  issue  of  the  work  the  publishers  take  this  occasion  to  convey  the 
thanks  which  the  authors  have  had  individual  opportunities  to  express 
elsewhere. 


The  volumes  of  the  series  will  be  duodecimos  of  about  250 
pages  each,  illustrated  by  maps  and  plans  prepared  under 
the  direction  of  the  authors.  They  will  appear,  as  far  as 
possible,  in  the  chronological  order  of  the  Campaigns  of 
which  they  treat;  and  by  their  preliminary  and  concluding 
chapters  will  be  so  far  connected  that  the  completed  work 
will  practically  cover  the  entire  field  of  the  war. 

The  price  of  each  volume  will  be  $1.00. 


The  following  volumes  are  now  ready  : 

I.— THE  OUTBREAK  OF  REBELLION.  By  John  G. 
Nicolay,  Esq.,  Private  Secretary  to  President  Lincoln;  late 
Consul-General  to  France,  etc. 

A  preliminary    volume,  describing   the  opening  of  the  war.  and   covering  the 
period  from  the  election  01  Lincoln  to  the  end  of  the  first  battle  of  Bull  Run. 


II.— FROM  FORT  HENRY  TO  CORINTH.  By  the  Hon. 
M.  F.  Force,  Justice  of  the  Superior  Court,  Cincinnati ;  late 
Brigadier-General  and  Bvt.  Maj.  Gen'l,  U.S. V.,  commanding 
First  Division,  17th  Corps:  in  1862,  Lieut.  Colonel  of  the 
20th  Ohio,  commanding  the  regiment  at  Shiloh ;  Treasurer  of 
the  Society  of  the  Army  of  the  Tennessee. 

The  narrative  of  events  in  the  West  from  the  Summer  of  1861  to  May,  1862 : 
covering  the  capture  of  Fts.  Henry  and  Donelson,  the  Battle  of  Shiloh,  etc.,  etc. 


III.—THE  PENINSULA.  By  Alexander  S.  Webb,  LL.D., 
President  of  the  College  of  the  City  of  New  York ;  Assistant 
Chief  of  Artillery,  Army  of  the  Potomac,  1861-62;  Inspector 
General  Fifth  Army  Corps ;  General  commanding  2d  Div. , 
2d  Corps ;  Major  General  Assigned,  and  Chief  of  Staff,  Army 
of  the  Potomac. 

The  history  of  McCellan's   Peninsula  Campaign,  from  his  appointment  to  the 
end  of  the  Seven  Days'  Fight. 

IV.— THE  ARMY  UNDER  POPE.  By  John  C.  Ropes, 
Esq.,  of  the  Military  Historical  Society  of  Massachusetts,  the 
Massachusetts  Historical  Society,  etc. 

From  the  appointment  of  Pope  to  command  the  Army  of  Virginia,  to  the  appoint- 
ment of  McClelian  to  the  general  command  in  September,  1862. 


V.— THE    ANTIETAM    AND    FREDERICKSBURG.      By 

Francis  Winthrop  Palfrey,  Bvt.  Brigadier  Gen'l,  U.S.V., 
and  formerly  Colonel  20th  Mass.  Infantry ;  Lieut.  Col.  of  the 
20th  Massachusetts  at  the  battle  of  the  Antietam  ;  Member  of 
Military  Historical  Society  of  Massachusetts,  of  the  Massachu- 
setts Historical  Society,  etc. 

From  the  appointment  of  McClelian  to  the  general  command,  Sept.  1862,  to  the 
end  of  the  battle  of  Fredericksburg. 


VI.— CHANCELLORSVILLE  AND  GETTYSBURG.     By 

Abner   Doubleday,    Bvt.    Maj.    Gen'l,    U.S.A.,    and   Maj. 

Gen'l,  U.  S.V.  ;    commanding  the  First  Corps  at  Gettysburg, 

etc. 

From  the  appointment  of  Hooker,  through  the  campaigns  of  Chancellorsville  and 
Gettysburg,  to  the  retreat  of  Lee  aftei  the  latter  battle. 


VII.— THE  ARMY  OF  THE  CUMBERLAND.  By  Henry 
M.  Cist,  Brevet  Brig.  Gen'l  U.S.V.;  A.A.G.  on  the  staff  of 
Major  Gen'l  Rosecrans,  and  afterwards  on  that  of  Major  Gen'l 
Thomas;  Corresponding  Secretary  of  the  Society  of  the  Army 
of  the  Cumberland. 

From  the  formation  of  the  Army  of  the  Cumberland  to  the  end  of  the  battles  at 
Chattanooga,  November,  1863. 


IX.— THE  CAMPAIGN  OF  ATLANTA.  By  the  Hon. 
Jacob  D.  Cox,  Ex-Governor  of  Ohio ;  late  Secretary  of  the 
Interior  of  the  United  States;  Major  General  U.S.V.,  com- 
manding Twenty-third  Corps  during  the  campaigns  of  Atlanta 
and  the  Carolinas,  etc.,  etc. 

From  Sherman's  first  advance  into  Georgia  in  May,  1864,  to  the  beginning  of 
the  March  to  the  Sea. 

X.— THE  MARCH  TO  THE  SEA— FRANKLIN  AND 
NASHVILLE.     By  the  Hon.  Jacob  D.  Cox. 

From  the  beginning  of  the  March  to  the  Sea  to  the   Surrender  of  Johnston — 
including  also  the  operations  of  Thomas  in  Tennessee. 


The  following  volumes,  now  preparing  for  early  publica- 
tion, will  complete  the  series  : 

VIII.— THE    MISSISSIPPI.      By  Francis  Vinton  Greene, 

Lieut,  of  Engineers,  U.  S.  Army  ;  late  Military  Attache  to  the 

U.  S.  Legation  in  St.  Petersburg;    Author  of  "the    Russian 

Army  and  its  Campaigns  in  Turkey  in  1877-78,"  and  of  "Army 

Life  in  Russia." 

An  account  of  the  operations — especially  at  Vicksburg  and    Port   Hudson — by 
which  the  Mississippi  River  and  its  shores  were  restored  to  the  control  of  the  Union. 

XL— THE  SHENANDOAH  VALLEY  in  1864.  The  Cam- 
paign of  Sheridan.  By  George  E.  Pond,  Esq.,  Associate 
Editor  of  the  Army  and  Navy  Journal. 

XII.— THE   CAMPAIGNS    OF   GRANT    IN   VIRGINIA. 

By   Andrew   A.    Humphreys,    Brigadier  General  and  Bvt. 
Major  General,   U.S.A.;    late   Chief  of  Engineers  ;   Chief  of 
Staff,  Army  of  the   Potomac,  1863-64;    commanding  Second 
Corps,  1 864-' 65,  etc.,  etc. 
Covering  the  Virginia  Campaigns  of  1864  and  '65,  to  Lee's  surrender. 


***  The  above  books  for  sale  by  all  book  sellers,  or  will  be  sent, post-paid,  vffl* 
receipt  0/ price  by 

CHARLES    SCRIBNER'S    SONS, 

743  and  745  Broadway,  New  York. 


1)1.2003.  ojv.  osisi 


