UNIVERSITY 
OF  FLORIDA 
LIBRARIES 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 

in  2010  with  funding  from 

University  of  Florida,  George  A.  Smathers  Libraries 


http://www.archive.org/details/armyofcumberOOcist 


THE    ARMY 


THE    CUMBERLAND 


CAMPAIGNS  OF   THE   CIVIL    WAR.-VW. 


THE    ARMY 


OF 


THE    CUMBERLAND 


HENRY    M.    CIST, 

BREVET  BR.GADIEB-GENERAL  D.8.T.  J  A.  A.  G.  ON  t7e  STAFF  OF  MAJOR-GENERA, 
ROSECKANS.  AND  THE  STAFF  OF  MAJ0R-CENERAL  THci"^,™ 
OF  THE  SOCIETY  OF  THE  AEMY  OF  THE  CUMBERLAND. 


NEW  YORK 
CHARLES    SCHIBNER'S    SONS 

1882 


373.74IG 
C573a_ 


COPYRIGHT    BY 

CHARLES   SCRIBNER'S  SONS 


Trovv's 

Printing  and  Bookbinding  Company 

201-213  East  \ith  Street 

NEW   YORK 


PKEFACE. 


The  scope  of  this  work  precluded  the  entering  into  de- 
tails as  to  the  minor  operations  of  the  troops  in  the  com- 
mands named.  It  has  even  been  impossible  to  give  the 
movements  of  troops  on  the  battlefields  in  lesser  organiza- 
tions than  brigades.  The  rosters  of  the  several  armies  given 
in  full  in  the  appendices  will  enable  those  interested  to  trace 
the  movements  of  the  minor  commands. 

The  subject  is  too  great  a  one  to  be  fully  and  justly  treated 
within  the  limitations,  both  of  time  and  space,  which  have 
necessarily  been  imposed  here.  Still,  with  the  hope  that  the 
future  student  of  history  may  glean  something  of  value  in 
this  volume  not  found  elsewhere,  it  is  sent  forth  for  the 
favorable  consideration  of  its  readers. 

■  To  the  many  friends  who  have  kindly  aided  me  in  various 
ways,  I  return  my  sincere  thanks.  To  Col.  E.  N.  Scott, 
U.S.A.,  I  am  under  special  obligations  for  data  furnished. 

The  maps  for  this  volume  were  prepared  by  permission 
from  those  of  Captain  Euger  in  Van  Home's  "  History  of  the 
Army  of  the  Cumberland,"  published  by  Robert  Clarke  &  Co., 
Cincinnati. 


H.  M.  C. 


2U5J78 


CONTENTS. 


PAGT5 

List  of  Maps, ix 

CHAPTER  I. 
Early  Movements, 1 

CHAPTER   II. 
Mill  Springs, 9 

CHAPTER  III. 
Concentration  at  Nashville, 21 

CHAPTER  IV. 
Morgan's  and  Forrest's  Raids, 31 

CHAPTER  V. 
Bragg' s  Advance  into  Kentucky 48 

CHAPTER  VI. 
Battle  of  Perryville, 61 

CHAPTER   VII. 
Tiie  Advance  to  Murfreesroro, 87 


viii  CONTENTS. 

CHAPTER  VIII. 

PAGE 

The  Battle  op  Stone's  River, 102 

CHAPTER  IX. 
In  Murfreesboro, .  13G 

CHAPTER  X. 
The  Advance  on  Tullahoma, 154 

CHAPTER  XI. 
The  Movement  to  Ciiickamauga,    .        .        .        .        .173 

CHAPTER  XII. 
TnE  Battle  op  Chickamauga, 193 

CHAPTER  XIII. 
TnE  Siege  of  Chattanooga, 230 

CHAPTER  XIV. 

Chattanooga,    Lookout    Mountain,    and    Missionary 
Ridge  Battles, 243 

Appendix, 263 

Index, 273 


LIST    OF   MAPS. 


General  Map  op  the  Campaign, 

Mill  Springs,      . 

Battle  op  Perry ville, 

Battle-Map  Stone's  River, 
Chickamauga  Campaign, 
Battle  op  CHrcKAMAUGA,  . 
Battlefield  op  Chattanooga, 


page 
.   1 

.  15 

.  64 

.  103 

.  172 

.  194 

•  343 


THE  ARMY  OF   THE   CUMBERLAND. 


CHAPTER  I. 

EARLY  MOVEMENTS. 


In  Kentucky,  during  the  spring  of  1861,  every  shade  of 
opinion  prevailed,  from  the  most  pronounced  Union  senti- 
ment to  the  most  ultra  secession  sympathy. 

The  Government  at  Washington  wished  to  enlist  Ken- 
tucky heartily  in  support  of  the  Union,  while  every  effort 
was  made  by  the  rebel  leaders  to  secure  the  secession  of  the 
State  from  the  Union,  and  to  have  it  join  its  fortunes  to 
those  of  the  South.  These  several  efforts  enlisted  the  active 
support  of  those  in  the  State  in  sympathy  with  them,  and  Ken- 
tuckians  became  ultimately  divided  into  two  sharply  defined 
parties.  Under  the  peculiar  doctrine  of  "  armed  neutrality  " 
adopted  by  the  local  authorities,  no  serious  infraction  of 
the  peace  of  the  State  was  had  until  the  fall.  With  the  invi- 
tation given  General  Anderson  to  take  command  in  Kentucky, 
by  the  State  Legislature,  the  doctrine  of  "  armed  neutrality  " 
came  to  an  end.  While  it  at  times  restrained  prompt  action 
on  the  part  of  the  Union  men  of  Kentucky  during  the  first 
six  months  of  the  war,  and  hampered  the  Federal  Govern- 
ment in  the  movement  of  troops  in  the  State,  still  in  the  end 
it  was  of  immense  benefit  to  the  cause  of  the  Union,  and 
VII.— 1 


2  THE   ARMY    OF   THE   CUMBERLAND. 

enabled  those  in  support  of  it  in  Kentucky  to  unite  and 
perfect  their  plans  in  comparative  peace,  unmolested  by  the 
rebels  from  Tennessee  and  their  own  State.  Under  cover  of 
"armed  neutrality  "  the  Union  men  remained  quiet  until  the 
time  had  arrived  for  prompt  and  decided  action,  with  men, 
and  arms  for  their  support,  in  the  measures  they  adopted  to 
retain  Kentucky  in  the  Union. 

In  accordance  with  a  general  plan  of  operations  adopted 
by  General  Albert  Sidney  Johnston,  on  September  18th, 
General  Buckner  broke  camp  with  the  rebel  forces  at  Camp 
Boone,  Tenn.,  near  the  Kentucky  line,  and  marching  north, 
occupied  Bowling  Green,  throwing  out  his  advance  as  far  as 
Elizabethtown. 

On  receipt  of  reliable  information  as  to  Buckner's  move- 
ments, General  Anderson  sent  General  W.  T.  Sherman, 
second  in  command,  to  Camp  Joe  Holt,  with  instructions  to 
order  Colonel  Bousseau  with  his  entire  command  to  report 
at  once  in  Louisville.  The  "  Home  Guards "  were  also 
ordered  out,  and  they  assembled  promptly  in  large  force, 
reporting  at  the  Nashville  depot,  and  by  midnight  they  were 
started  to  the  front  by  train.  Bousseau's  command  followed 
at  once,  General  Sherman  being  in  command  of  the  entire 
force,  amounting  to  some  three  thousand  men.  The  advance 
by  train  was  stopped  at  the  Boiling  Fork  of  Salt  Biver, 
about  thirty-one  miles  south  of  Louisville,  at  which  point 
the  railroad  bridge  had  been  burned  by  the  rebels.  During 
the  following  day  the  troops  under  Bousseau  forded  the 
stream,  and  pressing  forward  occupied  Muldraugh's  Hills  with 
its  two  trestles  and  a  tunnel  over  fifteen  hundred  feet  long. 
The  Home  Guards  were  left  in  camp  at  Lebanon  Junction, 
some  two  or  three  miles  in  the  real',  where  Lieuteuant- 
Colonel  B.  "W.  Johnson  of  the  Third  Kentucky  Cavalry 
reported  later  in  the  day  with  some  additional  companies  of 


EARLY   MOVEMENTS.  3 

Home  Guards,  and,  by  order  of  General  Anderson,  assumed 
command  of  this  camp. 

This  disposition  of  the  troops  caused  Buckner  to  retire 
with  his  entire  command  to  Bowling  Green,  where  he 
strongly  fortified  his  position. 

The  Kentucky  State  troops  were  under  orders  for  ten 
days'  service  only,  and  their  place  was  then  filled  by  several 
regiments  from  the  States  immediately  north  of  Kentucky. 
These  troops  were  placed  in  camp,  and  there  received  in- 
struction in  drill,  discipline,  and  camp  regulations,  waiting 
orders  for  the  advance. 

General  Johnston,  under  his  general  plan  of  creating  a  de- 
fensive line  from  Columbus  on  the  west,  running  through 
Bowling  Green  east  to  some  point  to  be  determined  on, 
early  in  September  sent  General  Zollicoffer  with  a  force 
numbering  several  thousand  men  to  make  an  advance  into 
Eastern  Kentucky  by  way  of  Knoxville,  East  Tennessee, 
through  Cumberland  Gap  to  Cumberland  Ford,  threaten- 
ing Camp  Dick  Bobinson.  On  the  19th  of  that  month  thf 
advance  of  Zollicoffer's  command  had  a  spirited  skirmish 
with  the  "  Home  Guards  "  at  Barboursville  Bridge.  These 
troops  were  compelled  to  retire,  which  they  did,  to  Bock 
Castle  Hills,  where  they  were  reinforced  by  two  Kentucky 
regiments  under  Colonel  T.  T.  Garrard,  of  the  Seventh 
Kentucky  Infantry,  who  had  received  instructions  from 
General  Thomas  to  obstruct  the  roads  and  to  hold  the  rebels 
in  check.  Garrard  established  his  force  at  Camp  Wildcat, 
behind  temporary  breastworks,  where,  on  October  21st,  he 
was  attacked  by  Zollicoffer  with  7,000  troops.  Shortly  after 
the  attack  General  Schoepff,  with  five  regiments  of  infantry, 
one  of  cavalry,  and  a  battery  of  artillery,  reinforced  Garrard, 
and  after  a  severe  fight  the  enemy  was  repulsed. 

After  Buckner's    retreat   to   Bowling   Green,   Zollicoffer 


4  THE  ARMY  OF  THE  CUMBERLAND. 

fell  back  to  Mill  Springs,  on  the  southern  bank  of  the  Cum- 
berland Eiver,  and  soon  afterward  crossed  the  river  to  the 
opposite  bank  at  Beech  Grove,  fortifying  this  encampment 
with  extensive  earthworks. 

During  the  month  of  September,  General  George  H. 
Thomas,  who  with  General  Win.  T.  Sherman  had  been 
ordered  to  report  to  General  Anderson  for  duty  in  Ken- 
tucky— at  General  Anderson's  personal  request  of  the  Presi- 
dent— was  placed  in  command  of  Camp  Dick  Robinson,  re- 
lieving General  Nelson.  The  latter  then  established  Camp 
Kenton  in  Mason  County,  three  miles  from  Maysville,  near 
the  spot  where  Simon  Kenton's  station  was  erected  in  1785. 

On  the  7th  of  October  General  Anderson,  on  account  of 
ill-health,  relinquished  the  command  of  the  department, 
and  General  W.  T.  Sherman  on  the  following  day  succeeded 
him.  At  the  same  time  General  A.  McD.  McCook  was  placed 
in  command  of  the  force  that  been  ordered  to  the  front  un- 
der Sherman. 

During  the  month  of  October  the  rebel  Colonel  J.  S. 
Williams  was  organizing  a  force  of  some  two  thousand 
troops  at  Prestonburg,  on  the  Big  Sandy  Eiver,  intending  to 
operate  in  Central  Kentucky  through  McCormick's  Gap. 
General  Nelson  early  in  the  month  started  with  all  the 
troops  of  his  command  to  drive  the  rebels  out  of  their  en- 
campment. Nelson  ordered  the  Second  Ohio  under  Colonel 
L.  A.  Harris  to  move  from  Paris,  and  the  Twenty-first  Ohio 
under  Colonel  Norton  to  advance  from  Nicholasville  to  Olym- 
pia  Springs,  where  the  entire  command  was  concentrated. 
From  here  he  advanced  to  McCormick's  Gap,  and  then  di- 
vided his  command,  sending  the  Second  Ohio,  a  section  of 
Captain  Konkle's  battery,  and  a  company  of  Ohio  cavalry 
under  Captain  McLaughlin — all  under  the  command  of  Col- 
onel Harris — through  West  Liberty  to  unite  with  the  com- 


EARLY  MOVEMENTS.  5 

mand  at  Salyersville.  Nelson  then  moved  forward  with 
three  regiments  of  infantry,  two  detachments  of  Kentucky 
troops,  and  two  sections  of  Konkle's  battery,  with  a  bat- 
talion of  cavalry,  on  the  road  to  Hazel  Green.  On  the  23d 
Harris  occupied  West  Liberty,  after  a  brisk  skirmish.  The 
command  united  at  Salyersville  and  followed  the  enemy  to 
Prestonburg.  At  this  point  Nelson  sent  the  Thirty-third 
Ohio,  with  the  Kentucky  troops  and  a  section  of  Konkle's 
battery  under  Colonel  Sill,  by  a  detour  to  the  right  to 
flank  the  rebel  position  at  Ivy  Mountain.  Nelson  on  the 
next  day  then  advanced  with  his  command  on  the  direct 
road  to  Piketon,  and  encountered  the  enemy  in  ambush  on 
the  mountain  at  Ivy  Creek.  Pushing  forward  at  once  with 
the  force  under  his  immediate  command,  Nelson  attacked  the 
enemy,  and  after  a  brisk  engagement,  lasting  over  an  hour, 
routed  them  from  their  cover  and  drove  them  in  full  retreat. 

Sill  occupied  Piketon  on  the  9th  without  much  opposi- 
tion. Genei*al  Nelson  arrived  there  on  the  10th,  when  the 
rebels  leaving  the  State  and  retreating  through  Pound  Gap, 
he  was  ordered  to  report  with  his  command  to  General 
Buell  at  Louisville. 

On  the  retirement  of  General  Anderson,  as  the  ranking 
officer  in  the  department,  General  Sherman  assumed  the 
command.  On  the  9th  of  November,  by  general  order  from 
the  headquarters  of  the  army,  No.  97,  the  Department  of 
the  Ohio  was  created,  "  to  consist  of  the  States  of  Ohio, 
Michigan,  Indiana,  that  portion  of  Kentucky  east  of  the 
Cumberland  River,  and  the  State  of  Tennessee,  and  to  be 
commanded  by  Brigadier-General  D.  C.  Buell,  headquarters 
at  Louisville  ;  "  and  General  Sherman  was  relieved  from 
command  at  his  own  request. 

Nelson's  command  being  ordered  out  of  East  Kentucky, 
the  rebel  forces  again   entered,  and  in   small  bands  were 


6  THE  ARMY   OF   THE  CUMBERLAND. 

depredating  on  Union  people  in  the  Big  Sandy  Valley. 
The  Fourteenth  Kentucky  under  Colonel  L.  P.  Moore  was 
ordered  to  move  from  Catlettsburg  and  advance  up  the  val- 
ley. General .  Buell  finding  that  the  rebel  force  had  been 
largely  reinforced  by  the  advance  of  General  Humphrey 
Marshall,  one  of  the  ablest  rebel  generals  in  that  part  of  the 
country,  ordered  the  Twenty-second  Kentucky  under  Colonel 
Lindsay  from  Maysville  to  join  the  Fourteenth,  and  Lindsay 
was  placed  in  command  of  the  two  regiments.  Marshall 
was  a  graduate  of  "West  Point ;  he  had  served  in  the  Black 
Hawk  war  and  had  seen  service  in  Mexico  as  a  colonel  of 
Kentucky  cavalry,  winning  distinction  at  Buena  Vista.  He 
had  now  entered  the  State  from  Virginia  through  Pound 
Gap,  and  had  reached  a  strong  natural  position  near  Paint- 
ville,  where  he  was  rapidly  increasing  his  army,  with  the 
intention  of  raising  a  sufficient  force — already  some  five 
thousand — to  operate  on  General  Buell's  flank  and  to  re- 
tard his  advance  into  Tennessee.  The  Forty-second  Ohio,  just 
'organized,  was  in  a  camp  of  instruction  near  Columbus,  Ohio, 
under  its  colonel,  James  A.  Garfield.  While  there,  in  Decern  - 
ber,  he  was  ordered  by  General  Buell  to  move  his  regiment 
at  once  to  Catlettsburg,  at  the  mouth  of  the  Big  Sandy  River, 
and  to  report  in  person  to  Louisville  for  orders. 

Starting  his  regiment  eastward,  from  Cincinnati,  Garfield, 
on  the  19th  of  December,  reported  to  General  Buell,  who 
informed  him  that  he  had  been  selected  to  command  an  ex- 
pedition to  drive  Marshall  and  his  forces  from  Kentucky. 
That  evening  Garfield  received  his  orders,  which  organized 
the  Eighteenth  Brigade  of  the  Army  of  the  Ohio,  and  placed 
him  in  command.  General  Buell  with  these  orders  sent 
a  letter  of  instruction,  giving  general  directions  as  to  the 
campaign,  leaving  all  matters  of  detail  and  the  fate  of  the 
expedition,  however,  largely  to  the  discretion  of  the  brigade 


EARLY  MOVEMENTS.  7 

commander.  The  latter  reached  his  command  on  the  24th 
of  December,  at  Louisa,  some  twenty-eight  miles  up  the  Big 
Sandy.  He  then  proceeded  to  concentrate  his  troops,  the 
main  body  consisting  of  his  own  regiment — the  Forty-second 
Ohio — the  Fourteenth  Kentucky,  and  a  battalion  of  Ohio 
cavalry  under  Major  McLaughlin,  which  was  with  him ;  but 
these  gave  only  some  fifteen  hundred  men  for  duty. 

The  next  largest  portion  of  his  command  was  stationed 
at  Paris,  Kentucky,  under  Colonel  Cranor,  with  his  regi- 
ment, the  Fortieth  Ohio,  800  strong.  Cranor  was  ordered 
to  join  the  main  body  as  expeditiously  as  possible,  and  to 
bring  with  him  that  portion  of  Colonel  Wolford's  Ken- 
tucky cavalry  stationed  at  Stanford,  consisting  of  three 
small  battalions  under  Lieutenant-Colonel  Letcher,  and  to 
report  at  Prestonburg.  The  Twenty-second  Kentucky  was 
ordered  from  Maysville,  and  some  three  hundred  men  of  that 
command  reported  before  Garfield  reached  Paintville.  He 
was  also  joined  by  a  battalion  of  West  Virginia  cavalry 
under  Colonel  Bolles.  After  a  toilsome  march  in  mid-win- 
ter, Garfield's  command,  on  the  7th  of  January,  drove  Mar- 
shall's forces  from  the  mouth  of  Jenny's  Creek,  and  occu- 
pied Paintville.  On  the  morning  of  the  9th,  Cranor  reported 
with  his  command,  footsore  and  exhausted,  after  a  march 
of  over  one  hundred  miles  through  the  mountains  of  East- 
ern Kentucky.  At  noon  of  the  9th  Garfield  advanced  his 
command  to  attack  Marshall  with  his  cavalry,  pressing  the 
rebels  as  they  fell  back.  Beaching  Prestonburg  some  fif- 
teen miles  from  Paintville,  he  learned  that  Marshall  was 
encamped  and  fortified  on  Abbott's  Creek.  Pushing  on  to 
the  mouth  of  the  creek,  some  three  miles  below  Prestonburg, 
he  there  encamped  for  the  night,  a  sleety  rain  adding  to 
the  discomfort  of  the  men.  Intending  to  force  the  enemy 
to  battle,  he  ordered  up  his  reserves  under  Colonel  Sheldon 


8  THE  ARMY  OF  THE  CUMBERLAND. 

from  Paintville,  with  every  available  man.  As  soon  as  the 
morning  light  enabled  the  command  to  move,  Garfield 
advanced,  and  soon  engaged  the  rebel  cavalry,  which  was 
driven  in  after  a  slight  skirmish,  falling  back  on  the  main 
body  some  two  miles  in  the  rear,  strongly  posted  on  high 
ground,  between  Abbott's  Creek  and  Middle  Creek,  at  the 
mouth  of  the  latter  stream.  It  was  impossible  to  tell  what 
disposition  Marshall  had  made  for  his  defence,  owing  to  the 
formation  of  the  ground  at  this  point  concealing  his  troops 
until  our  forces  drew  his  fire.  Throwing  several  detachments 
forward,  the  entire  command  was  soon  actively  engaged. 
The  engagement  lasted  for  some  four  hours,  commencing  at 
about  twelve  o'clock.  At  4  p.m.,  the  reserves  under  Sheldon 
reached  the  field  of  battle,  and  the  enemy  was  driven  from 
his  position.     Night  coming  on  prevented  pursuit. 

Marshall's  command  fled  down  the  valley,  set  fire  to 
their  stores,  and  pressed  forward  in  rapid  retreat  to  Abing- 
ton,  Va.  Garfield  with  his  command  returned  to  Paintville, 
where  it  could  receive  supplies.  In  February  he  received 
orders  from  Buell,  directing  him  to  advance  to  Piketon, 
and  drive  the  rebels  from  that  place,  which  he  did,  and 
later  from  Pound  Gap.  This  freed  Eastern  Kentucky  of 
rebel  troops,  and  relieved  the  Union  men  of  that  section  of 
the  depredations  that  had  been  committed  on  them  by  the 
roving  bands  of  the  enemy.  The  services  of  Garfield's  com- 
mand were  recognized  by  Buell,  and  the  thanks  of  the 
Commanding  General  extended  to  Garfield  and  his  troops. 
Shortly  after  this  Garfield  received  his  commission  as 
Brigadier-General  of  Volunteers,  to  date  from  the  "  Battle 
of  Middle  Creek." 

In  the  latter  part  of  March  General  Garfield  was  ordered 
to  leave  a  small  force  in  the  Big  Sandy  Valley,  and  to  report 
with  the  rest  of  his  brigade  to  General  Buell  at  Louisville. 


CHAPTEE   II. 

MILL  SPRINGS. 

On  September  10,  1861,  General  Albert  Sidney  Johnston, 
who  had  resigned  the  colonelcy  of  the  Second  United  States 
Cavalry  to  engage  in  the  service  of  the  Confederacy,  was  as- 
signed to  the  command  of  the  Department  of  the  West,  em- 
bracing, with  a  large  number  of  the  Western  States,  the 
States  of  Kentucky  and  Tennessee.  On  the  18th  Johnston 
directed  Buckner  to  occupy  Bowling  Green,  and  ordered 
Zollicoffer  to  advance  from  Knoxville  to  Cumberland  Gap. 
The  rebels,  under  General  Polk,  occupied  Columbus,  Ky., 
September  7th,  and  the  line  of  operations  of  the  Confeder- 
ates, under  General  Johnston,  as  then  formed,  had  the  Mis- 
sissippi River  at  its  extreme  left,  Cumberland  Gap  at  its 
extreme  right,  with  Bowling  Green  as  the  centre.  With  the 
force  at  his  command,  no  point  in  advance  of  Bowling  Green 
could  have  been  safely  taken  by  the  Confederate  general, 
owing  to  the  disposition  of  the  Union  troops  in  Kentucky 
at  that  time. 

As  we  have  seen,  Zollicoffer  with  his  command  was 
driven  from  Bock  Castle  Hills  and  Wildcat,  and  taking  a 
new  position  nearer  Bowling  Green,  encamped  at  Beech 
Grove,  where  he  fortified  his  position. 

General  Zollicoffer  was  a  civilian  appointment,  without 
military  training  of  any  kind.  He  had  been  editor  of  a 
Nashville  paper,  had  held  a  number  of  minor  State  offices, 
1* 


10  THE  ARMY   OF  THE  CUMBERLAND. 

and  served  two  terms  in  Congress  prior  to  the  war.  John- 
ston, in  ordering  Zollicoffer  to  the  Cumberland  River  at 
Mill  Springs,  intended  that  he  should  occupy  a  position  of 
observation  merely  until  he  should  be  reinforced,  or  his 
troops  be  incorporated  in  the  main  command.  He  could 
not  have  been  located  farther  west  without  inviting  the 
advance  of  the  Federal  forces  into  East  Tennessee  or  to 
Nashville,  flanking  Bowling  Green.  Zollicoffer  had  no  abil- 
ity as  a  soldier  to  handle  troops,  and  General  George  B. 
Crittenden,  of  Kentucky,  a  graduate  of  "West  Point,  who  had 
seen  service  in  the  Mexican  War,  and  who  held,  at  the  out- 
break of  the  rebellion,  a  commission  as  Lieutenant-Colonel 
in  the  regiment  of  Mounted  Riflemen,  was,  in  November, 
assigned  to  the  command  of  the  district  as  Major-General, 
with  headquarters  at  Knoxville.  Great  expectations  were 
entertained  in  regard  to  Crittenden's  military  abilities  ;  and 
about  the  first  of  the  year  1862  he  assumed  command  in  person 
of  the  rebel  forces  at  Beech  Grove.  The  fact  that  Zollicof- 
fer had  established  his  camp  on  the  north  side  of  the  Cum- 
berland, "  with  the  enemy  in  front  and  the  river  behind," 
was  known  to  Johnston,  and  information  given  by  him  to 
Crittenden.  General  Johnston  had  written  Zollicoffer  that 
the  interests  of  the  service  required  him  simply  to  watch 
the  river,  and  that  he  could  do  this  better  from  Mill  Springs 
without  crossing  it. 

Zollicoffer,  however,  had  crossed  the  river  before  he  heard 
from  Johnston,  and  replied  that,  while  from  this  letter  he 
inferred  that  he  should  not  have  done  so,  it  was  now  too 
late,  as  his  means  of  recrossing  were  so  limited  that  he 
could  hardly  accomplish  it  in  the  face  of  the  enemy.  On 
his  reaching  the  Cumberland  with  his  command,  he  had 
sent  forward  his  cavalry  to  seize  the  ferryboats  at  Mill 
Springs.     In  this  they  failed,  and  the  crossing  was  effected 


MILL  SPRINGS.  11 

on  one  ferry-boat,  seized  lower  down,  and  barges  built  by 
his  troops. 

General  Thomas  was  ordered  in  November  to  concentrate 
his  command  in  order  to  be  prepared  for  any  movement 
Zollicoffer  might  make,  and,  if  necessary,  to  attack  him  in 
his  camp.  General  Carter  with  his  brigade  was  stationed  at 
London,  Colonel  Hoskins  was  near  Somerset,  and  Colonel 
Bramlette  at  Columbia,  all  watching  Zollicoffer's  move- 
ments, and  reporting  them  to  General  Thomas,  who  endeav- 
ored to  stop  his  advance  at  the  Cumberland  Eiver.  Five 
hundred  of  Wolford's  Cavalry  were  ordered  from  Columbia 
to  reinforce  Colonel  Hoskins ;  and  General  Schoepff,  with 
the  Seventeenth  Ohio,  the  Thirty-eighth  Ohio,  and  Stan- 
dart's  battery,  to  take  position  on  the  Cumberland  Eiver  at 
Waitsborough,  where  he  could  command  the  crossing. 
Here  he  was  to  fortify  and  guard  the  river  at  this  point  and 
above  and  below,  to  prevent  the  enemy  from  crossing,  or 
from  obtaining  the  means  for  doing  so. 

On  December  2d,  Zollicoffer,  while  building  his  ferries, 
sent  some  troops  to  shell  General  Schoepff' s  camp.  A  brisk 
cannonading  was  kept  up  for  some  time,  when  the  rebels 
withdrew.  Schoepff  regarding  this  as  a  feint,  and  anticipat- 
ing a  movement  of  Zollicoffer's  troops  to  cross  the  river, 
ordered  two  companies  of  cavalry  under  Captain  Dillon  to 
guard  the  ford  and  to  give  timely  notice  of  any  attempt  to 
effect  a  crossing.  He  also  ordered  the  Seventeenth  Ohio 
with  three  pieces  of  artillery  and  another  company  of  cavalry, 
all  under  the  command  of  Colonel  Connell,  to  support  the 
cavalry  under  Dillon.  The  latter  proved  wholly  incompe- 
tent, and  failed  to  comply  with  his  orders  in  any  particular. 
He  went  into  camp  two  miles  in  the  rear  from  where  he  was 
ordered,  and  neglected  even  to  post  his  men  to  guard  the 
ford,  whereby  Zollicoffer  was  enabled  to  occupy  the  north 


12  THE   ARMY   OF   THE   CUMBERLAND. 

bank  of  the  Cumberland  without  opposition  and  without 
Dillon's  even  knowing  that  the  movement  had  been  made. 
This  was  only  discovered  on  the  4th,  when  the  rebels  drove 
back  the  Federal  cavalry  and  attacked  Connell,  who  was  ad- 
vancing on  a  reconnoissance.  Connell,  in  ignorance  of  the 
movement  of  the  enemy,  had  reached  the  vicinity  of  the  ford 
and  found  himself  confronted  by  a  strong  force  of  rebels, 
who  had  crossed  the  river,  and  who  being  rapidly  reinforced 
rendered  his  situation  one  of  extreme  peril.  He  withdrew 
under  cover  of  the  night  beyond  Fishing  Creek,  without 
being  molested.  Schoepff,  finding  that  the  advance  of  the 
rebels  was  supported  by  reinforcements  and  that  Zollicof- 
fer's  entire  force  was  slowly  crossing,  which  would  make  the 
enemy's  force  in  his  front  largely  exceed  his  own,  asked  Gen- 
eral Carter  at  London  to  reinforce  him.  He  also  ordered 
Colonel  Coburn  with  the  Thirty-third  Indiana  to  move  from 
Crab  Orchard  to  his  support ;  and  on  the  6th  established  his 
camp  in  a  strong  position  three  miles  north  of  Somerset, 
where  he  was  able  to  command  both  the  Stanford  and  the 
Crab  Orchard  roads.  Here  Carter  reported  with  two  regi- 
ments on  the  9th,  Colonel  Vandeveer's  regiment,  the  Thirty- 
fifth  Ohio,  with  Captain  Hewitt's  battery  having  already  ar- 
rived. On  the  8th,  the  rebel  cavalry  crossed  Fishing  Creek 
and  reconnoitred  the  Federal  camps.  They  were  fired  on  by 
Wolford's  cavalry,  which  then  fell  back ;  and  after  a  brisk 
skirmish  with  the  Thirty-fifth  Ohio  they  were  driven  back 
with  a  loss  of  two  or  three  men  on  each  side. 

General  Buell  had  ordered  Thomas  to  keep  his  immedi- 
ate command  at  Columbia,  and  had  directed  him  not  to  send 
any  more  troops  to  Schoepff  at  Somerset,  considering  that 
the  latter  had  sufficient  force  to  drive  the  rebels  across  the 
Cumberland.  Thomas  was  also  directed  to  hold  himself  in 
readiness  to  make  an  immediate  movement,  when  ordered, 


MILL  SPRINGS.  13 

from  Columbia  on  the  rebel  General  Hindman,  who  with 
some  seven  thousand  troops  was  operating  in  that  vicinity, 
throwing  out  his  cavalry  far  in  advance  of  his  main  column, 
and  feeling  the  position  of  the  Federal  forces.  Hindman 
had  been  ordered  by  General  Johnston  to  make  a  diversion 
in  favor  of  Zollicoffer ;  and  when  Thomas  from  Columbia 
checked  Hindman's  advance,  the  latter  reported  that  the 
force  under  Thomas  had  not  been  weakened  to  reinforce 
Schoepff,  or  to  strengthen  the  main  command  at  Bowling 
Green,  and  that  Zollicoffer  was  in  no  immediate  danger. 

Schoepff  with  his  entire  command  on  the  18th  made  a  re- 
connoissance  to  determine  the  location  and  purposes  of  the 
rebel  force.  Pushing  his  command  forward  he  drove  their 
cavalry  pickets  in  and  found  that  Zollicoffer  had  been  in- 
trenching his  camp,  his  line  of  fortifications  extending  from 
the  river  to  Fishing  Creek  and  his  camp  being  in  the  angle 
formed  by  the  junction  of  this  stream  with  the  Cumberland. 
Having  accomplished  this,  and  not  intending  to  bring  on  an 
engagement,  Schoepff  returned  with  his  command  to  their 
encampment  north  of  Somerset. 

Buell  now  finding  that  the  only  rebel  force  encamped  in 
Eastern  Kentucky  was  that  under  Zollicoffer,  and  deeming 
it  important  that  he  be  driven  from  the  State,  modified  his 
previous  order  to  Thomas,  and  on  December  29th  directed 
him  to  advance  against  Zollicoffer  from  Columbia  and  attack 
on  his  left  flank.  He  also  ordered  Schoepff  to  attack  him 
in  front.  Two  days  later  Thomas  started  from  Lebanon  with 
the  Second  Brigade,  under  command  of  Colonel  Manson,  and 
two  regiments  of  Colonel  McCook's  brigade,  Kinney's  bat- 
tery of  artillery,  and  a  battalion  of  Wolf ord's  cavalry.  Heavy 
rains,  swollen  streams,  and  almost  impassable  roads  impeded 
the  movement  of  the  troops  so  that  it  was  not  until  the 
17th  of  January  that  they  reached  Logan's  Cross  Boads,  ten 


14  THE  ARMY   OF   THE  CUMBERLAND. 

miles  from  the  rebel  encampment.  At  this  point  Thomas 
halted  his  command  and  awaited  the  arrival  of  the  Fourth 
and  Tenth  Kentucky,  the  Fourteenth  Ohio,  and  the  Eigh- 
teenth United  States  Infantry,  detained  in  the  rear  by  the 
condition  of  the  road.  He  communicated  at  once  with 
Schoepff,  and  the  same  day  the  latter  reported  in  person. 
General  Thomas  directed  Schoepff  to  send  him  Standart's 
battery,  the  Twelfth  Kentucky  and  the  First  and  Second 
Tennessee  regiments,  which  were  to  strengthen  the  com- 
mand on  the  immediate  front  until  the  arrival  of  the  regi- 
ments in  the  rear.  Thomas  placed  the  Tenth  Indiana,  AYol- 
ford's  cavalry,  and  Kinney's  battery  on  the  main  road  lead- 
ing to  the  enemy's  camp.  The  Ninth  Ohio  and  the  Second 
Minnesota  were  posted  three-quarters  of  a  mile  to  the  right 
on  the  Robertsport  road.  Strong  pickets  were  thrown  out 
on  the  main  road  in  the  direction  of  the  enemy,  with  cavalry 
pickets  beyond.  Our  pickets  were  fired  on  and  had  a  skir- 
mish with  the  rebel  pickets  on  the  night  of  the  17th.  On 
the  18th,  the  Fourth  Kentucky,  a  battalion  of  the  Michigan 
Engineers  and  Wetmore's  Battery  also  reported  to  Thomas. 

Crittenden,  on  learning  that  Zollicoffer  had  crossed  the 
Cumberland,  had  sent  at  once  an  order  by  courier,  post 
haste,  directing  him  to  recross;  but  on  his  arrival  at  Mill 
Springs  he  found  Zollicoffer  still  on  the  north  bank,  waiting 
his  arrival  before  retiring.  Crittenden  gave  orders  at  once 
for  the  construction  of  boats  to  take  his  command  across  the 
river ;  but  they  were  not  ready  when  he  heard  of  the  ap- 
proach of  General  Thomas  on  January  17th. 

On  the  18th,  Crittenden  reported  to  General  Johnston  that 
he  was  threatened  by  a  superior  force  of  the  enemy  in  his 
front,  and  that  as  he  found  it  impossible  to  cross  the  river, 
he  should  have  to  make  the  fight  on  the  ground  he  then  oc- 
cupied. 


MILL  SPRINGS. 


15 


Mill  Springs. 


15  THE  ARMY  OF  THE  CUMBERLAND. 

His  weekly  reports  showed  eight  infantry  regiments,  fonr 
battalions  (seventeen  companies)  of  cavalry,  and  two  com- 
panies of  artillery,  making  an  aggregate  of  9,417  men.  His 
circular  order  of  the  18th,  directing  the  order  of  march  in 
his  advance  to  attack,  shows  that  his  army  was  on  the  day 
of  battle  composed  of  the  same  companies,  and  that  his  force 
was  about  the  same. 

At  midnight,  on  January  18th,  in  a  heavy  winter  rain,  the 
Confederate  army  marched  out  to  battle  with  Bledsoe's  and 
Saunders's  independent  cavalry  companies  in  advance.  Zol- 
licoffer's  brigade  of  four  regiments,  with  Butledge's  battery 
of  artillery,  followed.  Then  came  General  Carroll's  brigade 
of  four  regiments,  one  in  reserve,  with  McClung's  battery  of 
artillery,  Brauner's  battalion  of  cavalry  on  the  right,  and 
McClellan's  battalion  of  cavalry  on  the  left,  with  Cary's  bat- 
talions in  the  rear.  After  a  six  hours'  march  through  the 
rain  and  mud,  the  advance  struck  our  cavalry  pickets  at  six 
o'clock,  in  the  early  gray  of  a  winter  morning,  two  miles  in 
front  of  the  Federal  camp.  Wolford's  cavalry  slowly  fell 
back,  reporting  the  enemy's  advance  to  Manson,  who  im- 
mediately formed  his  regiment — the  Tenth  Indiana — and 
took  position  on  the  road  to  await  the  attack.  Manson  then 
ordered  the  Fourth  Kentucky,  Colonel  Speed  S.  Fry,  to  sup- 
port him ;  and  reported  to  Thomas,  in  person,  the  advance 
of  the  rebels  in  force,  and  the  disposition  he  had  made  of 
his  troops  to  meet  the  attack.  General  Thomas  directed  him 
to  return  to  his  brigade  immediately,  with  orders  to  hold  the 
enemy  in  check  until  the  other  troops  could  be  brought  up. 
Orders  were  given  to  the  other  commanders  to  form  immedi- 
ately, and  in  ten  minutes  they  were  all  marching  to  the  bat- 
tle-field, except  the  battalion  of  Michigan  Engineers  and  a 
company  of  the  Thirty-eighth  Ohio,  detailed  to  guard  the 
camp. 


MILL  SPRINGS.  17 

The  rebels,  in  their  advance,  opened  the  attack  with  Walt- 
hall's Mississippi  and  Battle's  Tennessee  regiments,  which 
as  they  moved  forward,  forming  the  right  of  the  rebel  line, 
encountered  the  Fourth  Kentucky  and  the  Tenth  Indiana, 
formed  on  the  first  line  to  resist  their  attack  in  the  edge  of 
the  woods  to  their  front.  The  Tennessee  regiment  endeav- 
ored to  flank  the  Fourth  Kentucky  on  the  left,  while  the 
latter  regiment  was  resisting  the  rebel  attack  on  the  front, 
in  a  most  obstinate  manner.  Carter's  Tennessee  brigade 
was  ordered  up  in  position  to  meet  this  flanking  movement 
with  a  section  of  Kinney's  battery  ;  and  the  attempt  of  Bat- 
tle's regiment  was  checked. 

Orders  were  sent  to  Colonel  McCook  to  advance  with  the 
Ninth  Ohio  and  the  Second  Minnesota  regiments.  These 
regiments  coming  up  occupied  the  position  of  the  Fourth 
Kentucky  and  Tenth  Indiana,  who  by  that  time  were  out  of 
ammunition.  As  soon  as  this  disposition  of  these  troops 
had  been  made  the  enemy  opened  a  most  determined  and 
galling  fire,  pressing  our  troops  at  all  points.  General 
Thomas's  command  returned  the  fire  with  spirit,  and  hold- 
ing their  position  the  contest  was  maintained  for  half  an 
hour  on  both  sides  most  obstinately. 

At  this  time,  General  Zollicoffer,  being  in  the  rear  of 
the  Nineteenth  Tennessee  regiment  of  his  command,  be- 
came convinced  that  the  Fourth  Kentucky  (Federal)  regi- 
ment was  a  part  of  his  brigade,  ordered  the  Tennessee  regi- 
ment to  cease  firing,  as  they  were  shooting  their  own  troops. 
He  then  rode  to  the  front,  where  he  met  Colonel  Fry, 
the  commanding  officer  of  the  Fourth  Kentucky.  Zolli- 
coffer stated  to  Fry  that  both  commands  belonged  to  the 
same  side,  and  that  firing  should  stop.  To  this  Fry  assented 
and  started  to  order  the  Fourth  Kentucky  to  cease  firing, 
when  one  of  Zollicoffer's  aids  coming  up,  seeing  that  Fry 


18  THE  ARMY   OF   THE  CUMBERLAND. 

was  a  Federal  officer,  opened  fire  upon  liirn  with  a  revolver, 
wounding  his  horse.  Fry  returned  the  fire,  shooting  Zolli- 
coffer  through  the  heart. 

Shortly  after,  the  First  and  Second  East  Tennessee  regi- 
ments of  Carter's  brigade  and  Hoskins's  Kentucky  regi- 
ment were  placed  on  the  left  of  the  Second  Minnesota 
regiment,  and  opening  a  heavy  fire  on  the  right  flank  of  the 
rebel  line  caused  it  to  give  way.  The  Second  Minnesota 
regiment  kept  up  a  galling  fire  in  the  centre,  while  the 
Ninth  Ohio  charged  the  enemy  with  fixed  bayonets  on  the 
left,  turned  that  flank,  and  drove  them  from  the  field.  The 
whole  rebel  line  then  gave  way,  retreating  in  the  utmost  con- 
fusion and  disorder  to  their  intrenchments  at  Beech  Grove. 
Thomas  ordered  an  immediate  advance,  after  supplying  his 
troops  with  ammunition,  driving  the  rebels  into  their  in- 
trenchments. As  these  were  approached  they  were  invest- 
ed by  the  division  deployed  in  line  of  battle.  Cannonading 
was  kept  up  until  dark,  firing  being  in  the  direction  of  the 
fei'iy  to  defeat  a  crossing.  During  the  night  preparations 
were  made  for  an  assault  on  the  intrenchments  on  the  follow- 
ing morning.  The  Fourteenth  Ohio,  Colonel  Steedman, 
and  the  Tenth  Kentucky,  Colonel  Harlan,  reported  after  the 
fight,  were  placed  in  the  front  of  the  advance,  and  were  the 
first  to  enter  the  intrenchments.  Schoepff' s  brigade  joined 
the  command  during  the  evening,  and  was  placed  in  posi- 
tion for  the  attack. 

At  midnight  Crittenden  abandoned  everything,  and  be- 
tween that  hour  and  daylight  escaped  across  the  river  by 
means  of  a  steamer  and  some  barges  at  the  landing,  which 
he  burned,  leaving  behind  him  his  badly  wounded,  all  of 
his  cannon — twelve  pieces — with  their  caissons  packed  with 
ammunition,  a  large  amount  of  small  arms,  with  ammunition 
for  the  same,  over  one  hundred  and  fifty  wagons,  and  more 


MILL  SPRINGS.  19 

than  one  thousand  horses  and  mules,  with  a  large  amount  of 
tools,  stores,  camp  and  garrison  equipage. 

As  all  the  boats  were  destroyed,  it  was  impossible  for 
Thomas  to  cross  his  command  in  pursuit.  General  Thomas 
in  his  official  report  of  the  engagement  says  :  "  Their  com- 
mand was  completely  demoralized  and  retreated  with  great 
haste  and  in  all  directions,  making  their  capture  in  any 
number  quite  doubtful  if  pursued.  There  is  no  doubt  but 
that  the  moral  effect  produced  by  their  complete  dispersion 
will  have  a  more  decided  effect  in  re-establishing  Union  sen- 
timents than  though  they  had  been  captured." 

The  rebels  suffered  terribly  by  heavy  marching  through 
the  rain,  mud,  and  cold,  with  insufficient  food  ;  frequently 
with  nothing  but  parched  corn  to  sustain  life.  Crittenden 
finally  took  position  at  Chestnut  Mound,  within  reach  of 
relief  from  Nashville. 

In  the  life  of  Albert  Sidney  Johnston,  speaking  of  Crit- 
tenden's retreat,  the  author  says  :  "  During  his  retreat  his 
army  became  much  demoralized,  and  two  regiments,  whose 
homes  were  in  that  neighborhood,  almost  entirely  abandoned 
their  organization  and  went  every  man  to  his  own  house. 
A  multitude  deserted,  and  the  tide  of  fugitives  filled  the 
country  with  dismay." 

The  battle  fought  at  Logan's  Cross  Roads,  called  by  the 
rebels  the  Battle  of  Fishing  Creek,  and  by  the  Federals  the 
Battle  of  Mill  Springs,  was  most  disastrous  to  the  enemy, 
and  inflicted  the  most  severe  blow  they  had  up  to  that  time 
experienced.  The  victory  for  the  Federal  forces  was  the 
first  complete  success  of  the  war,  and  was  hailed  everywhere 
with  joy  and  hope.  An  order  was  issued  by  the  President 
congratulating  the  troops  on  their  success,  and  the  general 
in  command  conveyed  his  thanks  to  General  Thomas  and 
troops  for  their  brilliant  victory. 


20  THE  ARMY   OF   THE  CUMBERLAND. 

Thomas's  command  lost  in  the  engagement  39  killed,  and 
207  wounded.  He  reported  the  rebel  loss  at  122  killed,  and 
the  total  loss  at  349.  The  large  proportion  of  killed  to  the 
wounded  indicates  heavy  fighting  at  close  quarters,  and  also 
a  superiority  of  either  the  arms  of  the  Federal  troops  or 
their  firing. 

The  body  of  General  Zollicoffer  was  treated  with  great  re- 
spect. General  Thomas  had  it  embalmed  and  carried  around 
by  Lebanon.  It  was  then  sent  by  General  Buell  through 
his  lines  under  a  flag  of  trace.  Zollicoffer's  death  was  a 
very  depressing  event  to  the  Tennesseeans.  He  was  their 
most  popular  leader,  and  his  death  was  felt  by  the  people  of 
Tennessee  as  a  personal  bereavement. 

Crittenden's  attack  and  defeat  were  a  great  surprise  to 
Johnston.  This  force  had  been  ordered  to  Mill  Springs  to 
maintain  that  point  of  the  general  military  line  as  a  corps 
of  observation  merely.  With  the  attack  and  defeat  John- 
ston found  his  line  broken,  his  position  at  Bowling  Green 
liable  to  be  turned  on  that  flank,  and  an  army  on  which  ho 
counted  demolished.  This  with  his  losses  on  his  left  in 
Western  Kentucky  and  at  Fort  Henry  compelled  his  main 
command  at  Bowling  Green  to  abandon  that  place,  and 
retire  into  Tennessee.  Thomas,  after  the  battle  of  Mill 
Springs,  concentrated  his  command  at  Somerset,  awaiting 
orders.  He  was  ordered  to  Mumfordsville,  February  15th, 
to  take  part  in  the  general  advance  against  Bowling  Green. 
These  orders  were  countermanded  by  reason  of  the  evacua- 
tion of  that  place,  on  the  14th  ;  and  on  the  22d,  Thomas  was 
ordered  with  his  division  to  proceed  by  forced  marches  to 
Louisville,  and  there  embark  for  Nashville.  The  command 
arrived  at  Nashville  on  the  2d,  3d,  and  4th  days  of  March. 


CHAPTER  m. 

CONCENTRATION  AT  NASHVILLE. 

Don  Caelos  Buell,  who  was  placed  in  command  of  the 
Department  of  the  Ohio  on  Sherman's  request  to  be  re- 
lieved, had  been  serving  from  the  early  summer  of  1861 
as  Assistant  Adjutant-General  on  the  staff  of  Brigadier- 
General  E.  V.  Sumner,  U.S.A.,  in  command  of  the  De- 
partment of  the  Pacific.  He  had  been  promoted  to  the 
rank  of  lieutenant-colonel  in  the  adjutant-general's  depart- 
ment, May  11,  1861.  His  appointment  as  brigadier-general  in 
the  volunteer  force  was  made  May  17,  1861.  General  Buell 
was  a  graduate  of  West  Point,  and  had  been  in  the  army 
all  his  life.  He  was  a  thoroughly  trained  soldier,  with  great 
pride  in  his  profession,  a  man  of  great  integrity,  with  abili- 
ties of  the  first  order,  animated  by  high  principle.  His 
long  training  in  the  adjutant-general's  department,  added  to 
his  natural  faculty,  made  him  a  first-class  .organizer  of  an 
army.  Under  his  direction  the  soldiers  of  the  Army  of  the 
Ohio  received  their  training  in  the  drill  of  the  camp,  the 
discipline  of  the  march,  and  learned  endurance  under  fire  in 
the  skirmishes  and  engagements  during  his  command.  For 
all  the  soldierly  qualities  that  the  troops  of  the  later  organi- 
zation—  the  Army  of  the  Cumberland — possessed,  they  were 
indebted  in  large  measure  to  their  first  commander  in  the 
field,  General  Buell.  He  was  constant  in  his  endeavors  for 
the  care  of  the  troops,  and  insisted  on  their  camps  being 


22  THE   ARMY    OB1   THE   CUMBERLAND. 

carefully  selected  and  well  drained.  His  highest  aim  was 
to  make  good  soldiers  of  his  command,  and  everything  that 
detracted  from  this,  as  straggling,  pillaging,  disobedience 
of  orders,  he  regarded  as  unworthy  of  a  soldier,  and  merit- 
ing prompt  and  stern  punishment  at  his  hands.  In  the  ear- 
lier days  of  the  war,  with  the  lack  of  the  knowledge  that 
the  stricter  the  obedience  to  orders  the  better  for  the  soldier, 
General  Buell  seemed  at  times  harsh  and  severe.  But  as 
time  brought  hard  campaigns  and  heavy  fighting  to  the 
Army  of  the  Cumberland,  the  older  soldiers  who  were  under 
Buell  saw  that  he  was  actuated  solely  for  their  good  and 
the  good  of  the  service  in  all  he  did. 

The  organization  of  the  troops  into  brigades  and  divisions 
first  engaged  Buell's  attention  on  assuming  command.  On 
December  2d,  an  order  was  issued  creating  this  organization 
and  designating  it  the  "  Army  of  the  Ohio,"  consisting  of 
six  divisions.  The  brigades  were  numbered  consecutively 
throughout  the  army,  and  not  as  they  were  formed  in  the 
divisions.  General  G.  H.  Thomas  was  assigned  to  the  com- 
mand of  the  First  Division,  consisting  of  four  brigades. 
The  entire  force  of  the  First  Division  was  at  Nashville  on 
March  4th. 

The  Second  Division  was  organized  at  Camp  Nevin,  a 
camp  established  by  General  Bousseau,  when  left  by  Sher- 
man in  command  after  the  latter  assumed  the  command  of 
the  department.  General  Alexander  McD.  McCook,  who 
had  relieved  Bousseau  October  14,  by  order  of  Sherman,  was 
assigned  to  the  command  of  this  division,  which  consisted 
also  of  four  brigades. 

The  Third  Division  was  placed  under  the  command  of 
General  O.  M.  Mitchel,  who  had  been  in  Cincinnati  in  com- 
mand of  the  "Military  Department  of  Ohio,"  and  who  was 
relieved  November    19th,  after  two    months'  service  there, 


CONCENTRATION  AT   NASHVILLE.  23 

superintending  the  forwarding  of  troops  to  the  armies  in 
the  field.     This  division  consisted  of  three  brigades. 

General  William  Nelson,  on  reporting  at  Louisville  after 
his  Eastern  Kentucky  campaign,  was  placed  in  command  of 
the  Fourth  Division,  consisting  of  three  brigades. 

The  Fifth  Division,  consisting  of  three  brigades,  was 
placed  under  the  command  of  General  Thomas  L.  Crit- 
tenden, a  son  of  John  J.  Crittenden. 

In  January,  1862,  General  Buell  organized  the  Sixth  Di- 
vision, and  relieving  General  T.  J.  Wood  from  the  command 
of  the  Fifth  Brigade,  assigned  him  as  commander  of  this  di- 
vision, which  consisted  of  three  brigades. 

To  each  brigade  was  attached  a  battery  of  artillery. 

In  this  organization  of  the  "Army  of  the  Ohio,"  as  the 
new  regiments  from  the  North  reported,  additional  brigades 
and  divisions  were  formed  from  time  to  time.  Thus  organ- 
ized, the  army  under  Buell,  in  the  early  spring  entered  upon 
its  first  campaign.  There  had  been  some  slight  skirmishing 
during  the  winter  with  portions  of  the  command.  A  de- 
tachment of  the  Thirty-ninth  Indiana,  under  Lieutenant- 
Colonel  Jones,  met  a  body  of  the  rebel  cavalry  a  few  miles 
beyond  Camp  Nevin,  and  routed  it  with  slight  loss  to  the 
enemy. 

On  December  10th,  General  B.  W.  Johnson  moved  onward 
his  brigade,  and  occupied  Mumfordsville,  sending  a  detach- 
ment of  the  Thirty-second  Indiana  to  Green  Kiver,  where  a 
temporary  bridge  was  constructed.  On  the  17th,  four  com- 
panies of  this  regiment,  under  Lieutenant-Colonel  Von  Tre- 
bra,  crossed  and  took  position  at  Bowlett's  Station.  Gen- 
eral A.  S.  Johnston  had  sent  Hindman  with  his  brigade  from 
Bowling  Green,  with  instructions  to  destroy  the  railroad  as 
far  north  as  Green  River.  On  the  same  day  that  the  Thirty- 
second  Indiana  crossed  the  river,  Hindman  reached  Wood- 


24  THE  ARMY  OF  THE  CUMBERLAND. 

sonville.  On  the  approach  of  Hindinan,  Von  Trebra  threw 
ont  two  companies  as  skirmishers.  The  enemy  fell  back 
with  the  purpose  of  decoying  the  Federals  to  the  point 
where  his  main  command  of  infantry  and  artillery  was 
posted.  The  cavalry — a  squadron  of  the  "  Texas  Bangers  " 
under  Colonel  Terry — made  a  spirited  attack.  The  skir- 
mishers rallied  by  fours  to  receive  this  charge.  After  re- 
peated charges  from  the  cavalry,  which  were  resisted  by  the 
Thirty-second — in  one  of  which  Colonel  Terry  was  killed — 
Colonel  Willich  reinforced  Von  Trebra  with  four  additional 
companies.  After  maintaining  their  position  under  fire  for 
an  hour  and  a  half,  the  Indiana  troops  repulsed  the  enemy 
in  every  charge,  and  Hindman's  force  then  withdrew.  Col- 
onel Willich  had  in  the  engagement  only  the  eight  com- 
panies of  his  command,  with  Cotter's  battery.  The  enemy 
attacked  with  a  force  of  1,100  infantry,  250  cavalry,  and  4 
pieces  of  artillery.  The  Thirty-second  Indiana  lost  8  men 
killed  and  ten  wounded.  After  the  fall  of  Bowling  Green, 
the  Second  Division  reached  Nashville  on  March  3d. 

The  Third  Division  in  February  was  ordered  to  make 
a  demonstration,  moving  by  forced  marches  against  the 
enemy's  position  at  Bowling  Green,  to  prevent  troops  being 
sent  from  there  to  reinforce  Fort  Donelson.  The  rebels 
had  commenced  their  retreat  from  this  place  to  Nashville 
prior  to  the  arrival  of  Mitchel's  command,  but  the  shells 
thrown  by  his  artillery  on  the  14th  into  the  city  hastened 
the  movements  of  the  rear  guard  of  Johnston's  army.  Be- 
fore their  retreat,  the  enemy  burned  both  bridges  over  Bar- 
ren River,  and  set  fire  to  a  large  quantity  of  military  stores, 
railroad  cars,  and  other  property.  Turchin's  brigade,  captur- 
ing a  small  ferryboat,  crossed  over  the  river,  swollen  above 
high-Abater  mark  by  the  heavy  rains,  entered  the  city  at  five 
o'clock  the  next  morning,  and  succeeded  in  extinguishing 


CONCENTRATION  AT  NASHVILLE.  25 

the  fire  and  saving  a  portion  of  the  railroad  cars.  During 
the  succeeding  week  Mitchel  crossed  the  greater  part  of  his 
command  over  the  river,  and,  without  bis  wagons,  reached 
Edgefield  opposite  Nashville  on  the  evening  of  the  24th,  at 
the  same  time  that  General  Buell  arrived  by  rail,  the  latter 
using  some  of  the  cars  captured  at  Bowling  Green.  At 
Edgefield  Mitchel  found  both  of  the  bridges  into  Nashville 
destroyed,  and  his  crossing  was  effected  on  the  steamers 
that  brought  Nelson's  division  to  that  place. 

The  Fourth  Division  was  ordered  in  February  to  reinforce 
the  Federal  troops  at  Fort  Donelson.  Nelson,  with  two  bri- 
gades, moved  from  Camp  AVickliffe  to  the  Ohio  River  on 
February  13th,  and  there  took  steamer  for  the  Cumberland 
River.  On  his  arrival  at  Fort  Donelson,  he  found  it  in  pos- 
session of  the  Federal  troops,  and  he  then  proceeded  by  the 
boats  with  his  command  to  Nashville,  arriving  there  on  the 
25th.  Nelson's  Third  Brigade  reported  a  few  days  later, 
having  marched  direct  from  Bowling  Green. 

General  Thomas  L.  Crittenden's  command,  organizing 
at  Owensboro,  had  a  skirmish  with  a  force  of  500  rebels 
at  Woodland.  Colonel  Burbridge  was  sent  with  some  three 
hundred  troops  of  his  own  command  and  a  small  force  from 
Colonel  McHenry's  regiment.  Attacking  the  enemy,  they 
routed  him,  inflicting  a  loss  of  some  fifty  killed,  wounded, 
and  prisoners.  On  the  24th,  the  rebel  General  Breckinridge 
made  a  demonstration  with  4,000  men  at  Rochester,  occupy- 
ing Greenville  with  his  cavalry.  Crittenden  made  such  dis- 
position of  his  troops  that  the  enemy,  without  risking  an 
attack,  returned  to  Bowling  Green.  Early  in  February  Gen- 
eral Buell  ordered  Crittenden  to  send  Colonel  Craft  with 
his  brigade  to  report  to  General  Grant.  Craft,  however, 
reached  Fort  Henry  after  the  surrender,  but  his  brigade  was 
incorporated  into  Grant's  army,  and  rendered  effective  ser- 
VI  J.—  2 


26  THE  ARMY   OF   THE  CUMBERLAND. 

vice  in  the  reduction  of  Fort  Donelson.  Later,  the  brigade 
■was  transferred  to  General  Halleck.  Crittenden,  soon  after 
this,  proceeded  by  boat  with  the  balance  of  his  division, 
and  reported  at  Nashville,  arriving  there  at  the  same  time 
as  Nelson's  division. 

The  Sixth  division,  after  aiding  in  the  repair  of  the  rail- 
road, arrived  at  Nashville  March  6,  1862. 

General  A.  S.  Johnston,  at  no  time  prior  to  his  retreat 
had  sufficient  force  to  meet  or  to  resist  the  advance  of  the 
Federal  forces.  His  long  line,  extending  from  Columbus 
to  Knoxville,  invited  attack,  and  wherever  the  attack  was 
made  his  troops  were  not  able  to  successfully  resist  it. 
Concentrating  his  command  at  Bowling  Green,  after  Mill 
Springs  and  the  fall  of  Fort  Henry,  he  found  that,  to  save 
Nashville,  it  was  necessary  to  make  a  determined  stand  at 
Fort  Donelson,  and  this  he  reinforced  with  all  his  available 
troops.  The  fall  of  Donelson  compelled  the  evacuation  of 
Nashville.  To  the  Southern  people  these  reverses  were  a 
bitter  blow  to  their  high  hopes  and  boasting  threats  that 
the  war  was  to  be  carried  into  the  North,  and  peace  was  to 
follow  the  first  victories  to  their  arms.  Duke,  in  his  "His- 
tory of  Morgan's  Cavalry,"  says :  "No  subsequent  reverse, 
although  fraught  with  far  more  real  calamity,  ever  created 
the  shame,  sorrow,  and  wild  consternation  that  swept  over 
the  South  with  the  news  of  the  surrender  of  Fort  Donelson. 
To  some  in  the  South  these  reverses  were  harbingers  of  the 
final  defeat  and  overthrow  of  the  Confederacy." 

With  the  fall  of  Donelson,  after  detaching  the  troops  at 
Columbus,  Johnston's  force  was  reduced  to  a  little  over  one- 
half  of  his  total  effective  strength  as  reported  by  him  at 
Bowling  Green.  In  a  report  to  Richmond,  he  gave  the  total 
of  his  command  as  barely  forty-three  thousand  men. 

General  Buell's  armv  amounted  to  over  seventv  five  thou- 


CONCENTRATION   AT    NASHVILLE.  27 

sand  men,  not  all  of  these  available  for  field  duty,  as  a  very 
large  proportion  of  the  command  "was  needed  to  maintain 
his  line  of  supplies,  and  the  farther  his  advance  the  greater 
the  drain  on  his  command  for  railroad  guards. 

With  the  fall  of  Donelson,  Johnston  modified  his  plans 
of  operations,  and  then  determined  to  relinquish  the  defen- 
sive, and  to  concentrate  all  available  forces  of  the  Confed- 
eracy in  the  southwest  for  offensive  operations.  He  had,  as 
early  as  January,  1862,  contemplated  the  possibility  of  the 
disasters  that  had  taken  place,  and  the  retreat  consequent 
upon  them,  and  at  that  time  indicated  Corinth,  Miss.,  as  be- 
ing the  proper  place  to  concentrate  the  troops. 

On  January  3d  General  Buell  wrote  at  length  to  General 
Halleck,  proposing  a  joint  campaign  against  the  enemy  in 
"  a  combined  attack  on  its  centre  and  flanks,"  moving  the 
troops  by  water  under  protection  of  the  gunboats,  striking 
for  the  railroad  communications  of  the  enemy,  and  destroy- 
ing his  bridges  over  the  Cumberland  and  Tennessee  Rivers, 
both  of  which  were  protected  by  batteries,  the  first  at 
Dover — Fort  Donelson — and  the  other  at  Fort  Henry,  re- 
spectively thirty-one  and  eighteen  miles  below  the  bridges. 
To  this,  on  the  6th,  General  Halleck  replied  that,  situated  as 
he  was,  he  could  render  no  assistance  to  Buell's  forward 
movement  on  Bowling  Green,  and  advised  the  delay  of  the 
movement,  if  such  co-operation  by  troops  sent  to  Cairo 
and  Paducah  should  be  deemed  necessary  to  the  plan  of 
the  campaign,  of  which  he  knew  nothing,  and  then  adds : 
"  But  it  strikes  me  that  to  operate  from  Louisville  and 
Paducah  or  Cairo,  against  an  enemy  at  Bowling  Green,  is  a 
plain  case  of  exterior  lines,  like  that  of  McDowell  and  Pat- 
terson, which,  unless  each  of  the  columns  is  superior  to  the 
enemy,  leads  to  disaster  ninety-nine  times  in  a  hundred." 

On  the  30th  of  January,  Buell  received  a  despatch  from 


28  THE   ARMY   OF   THE   CUMBERLAND. 

Halleck,  without  particulars,  saving  that  he  had  ordered  an 
expedition  against  Fort  Henry.  On  the  15th  of  February 
Halleck  telegraphed  Buell  "  to  move  from  Bowling  Green 
to  Nashville  is  not  good  strategy.  Come  and  help  me  take 
and  hold  Fort  Donelson  and  Clarksville,  then  move  to 
Florence,  cutting  the  railroad  at  Decatur,  and  Nashville 
must  be  abandoned  precisely  as  Bowling  Green  has  been." 
After  the  fall  of  Fort  Donelson,  and  the  occupation  of  Nash- 
ville, General  Halleck  directed  a  column  of  the  troops 
under  General  C.  F.  Smith  to  proceed  up  the  Tennessee 
River  by  steamer,  and  to  operate  as  occasion  presented, 
either  on  Corinth,  Jackson,  or  Humboldt,  destroying  the  rail- 
road communications  at  these  points.  At  this  time  Halleck 
had  no  thought  of  the  subsequent  movement  of  the  com- 
mand, that  Johnston  would  concentrate  at  Corinth,  or  that 
the  Armies  of  the  Ohio  and  Tennessee  should  unite  at  Pitts- 
burg Landing.  On  the  15th  General  Smith  dropped  down 
the  river  to  Pittsburg  Landing,  and  there  placed  his  troops 
in  camp.  On  the  11th  of  March,  President  Lincoln,  by  War 
Order  No.  3,  created  the  Department  of  the  Mississippi, 
consolidating  the  three  departments  under  Generals  Hal- 
leck, Hunter,  and  Buell,  and  placed  General  Halleck  in 
command.  Halleck  at  once  ordered  Buell  to  march  his 
army  to  Savannah,  and  to  execute  the  movements  that  had 
already  been  agreed  on  by  them. 

Buell  immediately  gave  his  attention  to  the  preparation 
of  his  command  to  carry  out  these  orders.  He  directed 
O.  M.  Mitchel  to  march  south,  strike,  and  hold  the  Mem- 
phis and  Charleston  Railroad.  Organizing  the  seventh  divi- 
sion of  his  army,  Buell  assigned  General  George  W.  Mor- 
gan to  this  command.  This  division  was  formed  of  four 
brigades,  out  of  a  number  of  regiments  gathered  up  from 
different    points   in    Kentucky.       General   Morgan    concern 


CONCENTRATION   AT  NASHVILLE.  29 

trated  his  entire  command  at  Cumberland  Ford,  being 
directed  to  take  Cumberland  Gap  if  possible  and  to  occupy 
East  Tennessee  if  able  to  enter.  If  not,  then  to  resist  any 
advance  of  the  rebels. 

General  E.  Dumont  was  placed  in  command  of  Nashville. 
The  Twenty-third  Brigade  under  Colonel  Duffield,  composed 
of  four  regiments,  was  ordered  from  Kentucky  to  garrison 
Murfreesboro,  and  protect  the  road  from  Shelbyville  to 
Lavergne. 

Buell  designated  the  First  Division  under  Thomas,  the 
Second  under  McCook,  the  Fourth  under  Nelson,  the  Fifth 
under  Crittenden,  and  the  Sixth  under  Wood,  to  constitute 
the  army  under  his  personal  command,  which  was  to  join 
Halleck  in  the  operations  against  the  enemy's  position  at 
Corinth.  These  divisions,  with  cavalry  and  artillery  attached, 
made  a  force  of  37,000  effective  troops.  In  addition  to  these, 
Buell  had  under  his  command  36,000  effective  men  to  defend 
his  communications,  maintain  his  line  of  supply,  enforce 
order  within  his  lines,  and  to  perform  any  special  duty  as- 
signed to  them.  The  muster-rolls  of  his  army  showed  that 
he  had  at  this  time  92  regiments  of  infantry — not  including 
those  sent  to  Halleck  under  Croft.  These  regiments  aggre- 
gated 79,334  men.  He  had  11  regiments,  1  battalion,  and  7 
detached  companies  of  cavalry,  making  a  total  of  11,496 
men,  and  28  field,  and  2  siege  batteries,  with  3,935  men. 
The  grand  total  was  94,765  men.  His  effective  force,  how- 
ever, was  73,487  men,  comprising  60,882  infantry,  9,237 
cavalry,  and  3,368  artillery. 

Buell's  army,  after  crossing  Duck  River,  pressed  rapidly 
forward.  The  day  before  Nelson's  arrival  at  the  Tennessee 
River  he  was  informed  by  General  Grant,  to  whom  he  had 
reported  his  movements  by  courier,  that  he  need  not  hasten 
his  marches,  as  he  could  not  cross  the  river  before  the  follow- 


30  THE   ARMY   OF  THE  CUMBERLAND. 

.    a.  ■..'•■*"-■  iSiV 

ing  Tuesday,  the  8th.  Nelson's  entire  division,  with  forced 
marches,  reached  Savannah  April  5th,  the  other  division 
closely  following.  Ammen's  brigade  of  Nelson's  division 
crossed  the  river  on  the  afternoon  of  the  6th,  and  reported  to 
Buell,  and  was  engaged  in  the  battle  of  that  day,  aiding  in 
resisting  the  final  attack  of  Chalmers  on  the  left  of  Grant's 
command.  Crittenden's  and  McCook's  divisions  arrived  on 
the  field  during  the  night  of  the  6th,  and  took  an  active  part 
in  the  fighting  of  the  next  day.  The  rest  of  the  command 
arrived  on  the  field  after  the  battle. 

The  movements  of  the  troops  of  the  "  Army  of  the  Ohio  " 
in  the  battle  of  Shiloh  and  in  the  operations  against 
Corinth  are  treated  in  Volume  II.  of  this  series,  and  it  is 
not  within  the  purview  of  this  volume  to  enter  further  into 
the  narrative  of  their  service  than  to  give  a  few  brief  facts  as 
to  the  disposition  of  the  troops,  in  order  to  follow  the  sub- 
sequent events  in  which  the  Army  of  the  Ohio  was  the  main 
actor. 


CHAPTEK  IV. 

MORGAN'S  AND  FORREST'S  RAIDS. 

On  April  11th,  Halleck  arrived  at  Pittsburg  Landing  and 
at  once  reorganized  the  troops  in  his  command,  designating 
the  divisions  of  his  army  as  the  right  wing,  centre,  left  wing, 
reserves,  and  cavalry  under  Major-Generals  George  H. 
Thomas,  D.  C.  Buell,  John  Pope,  and  J.  A.  McClernand  and 
Brigadier-General  A.  J.  Smith  respectively.  Thomas's  com- 
mand comprised  four  divisions  of  the  "  Army  of  the  Tennes- 
see," and  his  old  division  of  the  "Army  of  the  Ohio."  The 
remainder  of  that  army  was  under  the  command  of  Buell. 
After  the  fall  of  Corinth,  the  enemy  breaking  his  large  force 
into  several  smaller  commands  rendered  necessary  a  similar 
disposition  of  the  Federal  forces.  Buell  was  ordered  with 
his  command  to  enter  into  a  campaign  looking  to  the  occu- 
pation of  East  Tennessee.  One  division  of  his  army  under 
O.  M.  Mitchel  left  Nashville  about  the  middle  of  March 
under  orders  to  proceed  to  Murfreesboro  and  repair  the 
railroad  bridges  burned  by  Johnston  on  his  retreat.  On 
Colonel  Duffield's  reporting  with  the  Twenty-third  brigade, 
Mitchel  pressed  forward  to  Shelbyville  and  from  there  by 
a  rapid  movement  on  the  7th  of  April  he  occupied  Hunts- 
ville,  Ala.,  with  Turchin's  brigade,  Kennett's  Ohio  cavaby, 
and  Simonson's  battery,  capturing  170  prisoners,  15  locomo- 
tives, and  150  passenger  and  freight  cars,  and  a  large  amount 
of  army  stores.     On  the  8th,  Mitchel    ordered  Sill  with  his 


32  THE  ARMY  OF  THE  CUMBERLAND. 

brigade  to  proceed  east  along  the  line  of  the  railroad  to 
seize  Stevenson,  the  junction  of  the  Nashville  and  Chatta- 
nooga, and  Memphis  and  Charleston  Railroads,  and  directed 
Turchin  with  his  command  to  move  west  and  take  possession 
of  Decatur  and  Tuscumbia.  This  was  successfully  done, 
and  Mitchel  was  in  possession  of  over  one  hundred  miles 
of  this  inrportant  link  connecting  Corinth  with  Richmond  in 
the  heart  of  the  enemy's  territory.  He  then  posted  his 
troops  at  the  more  prominent  points,  ready  to  move  to  any 
place  threatened  by  the  enemy. 

On  April  29th,  Mitchel,  hearing  of  the  advance  of  the 
force  under  Kirby  Smith  from  Bridgeport  against  the  com- 
mand beyond  Stevenson,  moved  as  rapidly  as  possible  by 
rail  from  Huntsville  to  resist  him.  He  found  the  enemy 
had  attacked  the  detachment  posted  five  miles  west  of 
Bridgeport,  and  that  his  troops  had  driven  the  enemy's  ad- 
vance back  across  Widow's  Creek.  The  bridge  over  this 
creek  had  been  burned  by  the  enemy  on  their  retreat. 
Mitchel  strengthened  the  detachment  and  engaged  the  at- 
tention of  the  enemy  by  an  apparent  effort  to  cross  this 
creek,  while  with  his  main  force  he  advanced  on  Bridgeport 
by  a  detour  by  the  left  and  drove  that  portion  of  the  enemy 
in  the  town  across  the  Tennessee  River.  In  their  retreat 
the  enemy  set  fire  to  the  bridge  reaching  from  the  west 
bank  of  the  river  to  the  Island.  This  bridge  Mitchel  suc- 
ceeded in  saving,  but  the  bridge  east  of  the  Island  was 
completely  destroyed.  General  Mitchel  then  turned  his  at- 
tention to  that  part  of  the  enemy's  force  at  Widow's  Creek, 
which  he  succeeded  in  capturing,  taking  in  all  some  three 
hundred  and  fifty  prisoners.  Early  in  May,  Mitchel,  who 
had  been  placed  in  command  of  all  the  troops  between  Nash- 
ville and  Huntsville,  ordered  General  Negley  with  the 
Seventh  Brigade,  belonging  to  McCook's  division — who  had 


MORGAN'S  AND  FORREST'S  RAIDS.  33 

been  left  at  Columbia  on  tbe  advance  of  the  main  army 
upon  Savannah — to  make  an  advance  against  General  Adams 
with  a  brigade  of  troops  at  Bogersville,  Ala.  At  the  same 
time  Mitchel  sent  Colonel  Lytle  from  Athens,  Ala.,  to  co- 
operate with  Negley.  On  the  13th,  the  enemy  learning  of 
the  approach  of  the  Federal  forces,  retreated  across  the 
Tennessee  Eiver.  This  placed  Mitchel  in  complete  posses- 
sion of  that  portion  of  Alabama  north  of  that  river.  On 
May  29th,  Mitchel  concentrated  Negley's  command  from 
Columbia,  Turchin's  brigade  from  Huntsville,  and  the 
Eighteenth  Ohio  under  T.  E.  Stanley  from  Athens  at  Fay- 
etteville  for  an  expedition  against  Chattanooga  under  the 
command  of  Negley.  These  troops  passed  through  Win- 
chester, Cowen,  and  University  Place  to  Jasper.  Advanc- 
ing upon  the  latter  place,  the  head  of  his  column,  under 
Colonel  Hambright,  encountered  a  brigade  of  the  enemy's 
troops  under  General  Adams.  The  enemy  was  driven  from 
the  place  after  a  sharp  engagement,  leaving  his  supply  and 
ammunition  trains.  His  loss  was  18  killed,  20  wounded,  and 
12  prisoners.  Leaving  Jasper,  Negley  arrived  on  the  north 
bank  of  the  Tennessee,  opposite  Chattanooga,  on  the  7th. 
Negley,  on  the  evening  of  that  day  and  the  morning  of  the 
next,  bombarded  Chattanooga,  and  made  a  demonstration  of 
crossing  the  river  and  attacking  the  town.  General  Duke 
says:  "The  commandant  of  the  place,  General  Leadbetter, 
had  two  or  three  guns  in  battery  and  replied,  when  the 
gunners,  who  were  the  most  independent  fellows  I  ever  saw, 
chose  to  work  the  guns.  The  defence  of  the  place  was  left 
entirely  to  the  individual  efforts  of  those  who  chose  to  de- 
fend it,  and  nothing  prevented  its  capture  but  the  fact  that 
the  enemy  could  not  cross  the  river.'' 

Negley   then  withdrew  and   encamped   his   command  at 
Shelbyville. 


34  THE   ARMY   OF   THE  CUMBERLAND. 

General  G.  Vv\  Morgan,  under  orders  from  Buell,  assumed 
command  of  the  forces  in  Eastern  Kentucky  early  in  April. 
Acting  under  his  orders  he  proceeded  to  Cumberland  Ford 
and  commenced  operations  at  once  against  Cumberland  Gap. 
This  gap  is  situated  in  the  Cumberland  range  on  the  boun- 
dary line  between  Kentucky  and  Tennessee,  near  the  Western 
Virginia  line,  is  a  deep  depression  in  the  mountain  range, 
making  a  natural  roadway  through  it,  and  is  the  centre  of  all 
the  roads  in  that  section  of  country.  It  is  a  stronghold  pro- 
tected by  nature  with  abrupt  slopes  on  the  mountains,  fre- 
quently so  steep  as  to  be  almost  perpendicular,  with  the 
ranges  much  broken  by  spurs,  knobs,  and  ravines,  protected 
by  parallel  ranges  of  less  height  in  close  proximity  on  the  east 
and  west.  Morgan,  after  encountering  the  enemy  in  several 
skirmishes,  determined  either  to  compel  him  to  fight  or  re- 
treat. He  sent  General  Spears  with  three  brigades  to  Pine 
Mountain,  on  the  road  to  Big  Creek  Gap.  General  Kirby 
Smith,  commanding  the  enemy's  forces  in  East  Tennessee, 
placed  General  Barton's  command  of  two  brigades  of  in- 
fantry in  Big  Creek  Gap,  and  then  advanced  with  some 
eight  thousand  men  under  his  immediate  command  to  cut 
Spears  off,  and  to  threaten  the  Federal  forces  at  Cumberland 
Ford.  Morgan,  under  orders,  withdrew  Spears,  but  learning 
a  few  days  later  from  Buell  of  the  operations  of  Negley's 
command  before  Chattanooga,  and  that  Kirby  Smith  had 
proceeded  with  a  part  of  his  command  to  the  relief  of 
that  place,  resumed  the  advance.  Negley's  movements  had 
caused  Smith  to  suspend  his  operations,  but  when  he 
heard  of  Negley's  withdrawal  he  proceeded  at  once  to  exe- 
cute his  plans  against  Morgan.  On  June  18th,  the  latter, 
finding  that  Kirby  Smith  had  taken  his  entire  command 
away  from  Cumberland  Gap,  marched  his  troops  up  Pow- 
ell's Valley  and  late  in  the  evening  of  that  day  reached  the 


MORGAN'S  AND   FORREST'S  RAIDS.  35 

fortifications,  found  the  Gap  empty,  and  took  possession. 
This  natural  stronghold  had  been  extensively  fortified  by 
the  rebels,  who  regarded  the  position  of  their  troops  such 
as  to  prevent  the  success  of  any  attempt  on  the  part  of 
the  Federal  forces  to  obtain  possession  without  a  battle. 
The  enemy  were  completely  out-manoeuvred,  and  General 
Morgan  had  the  satisfaction  of  occupying  this  fortress  with- 
out the  loss  of  any  of  his  command. 

In  the  early  part  of  May,  the  rebel  Colonel  John  H.  Mor- 
gan's command  of  some  five  hundred  men,  in  the  neighbor- 
hood of  Pulaski,  Tenn.,  captured  a  wagon  train  with  about 
four  hundred  Federal  troops,  mostly  convalescents  going  to 
Columbia.  On  the  night  of  the  5th,  Morgan  reached  Leba- 
non and  quartered  his  entire  force  in  houses  in  the  town. 
On  the  evening  of  the  6th,  Dumont  with  his  command  from 
Nashville,  joined  by  that  of  Duffield  from  Murfreesboro, 
surprised  and  attacked  Morgan's  troopers,  completely  rout- 
ing them  after  a  severe  engagement.  Morgan  with  a  few 
men  under  his  immediate  command  escaped  after  a  chase 
of  twenty-one  miles  from  Lebanon,  crossing  the  Cumber- 
land Eiver  on  a  ferry.  Dumont  had  with  him  detach- 
ments of  Wynkoop's  Seventh  Pennsylvania  cavalry,  of  Wol- 
ford's  First  Kentucky  cavalry  and  of  Green  Clay  Smith's 
regiment  of  Kentucky  cavalry.  Morgan's  loss  was  150  men 
captured,  with  the  same  number  of  horses.  The  balance 
of  his  command  was  dispersed.  Wolfcrd  and  Smith  were 
both  wounded,  and  the  Federals  lost  6  killed  and  25 
wounded.  On  the  11th,  Morgan  with  his  men  that  had 
escaped,  and  two  new  companies,  made  a  raid  on  the 
Louisville  and  Nashville  Eailroad  at  Cave  City,  captured 
a  freight  train  of  forty-eight  cars  and  burned  it.  He  also 
captured  a  passenger  train,  which  had  a  few  Federal  officers 
on  it.     His  object  was  to  rescue  the  men  of  his  command 


36  THE  ARMY   OP  THE  CUMBERLAND. 

taken  prisoners  at  Lebanon,  but  in  this  lie  failed,  as  they  had 
been  sent  North  by  boat. 

From  this  place  Morgan  reported  with  his  command  at 
Chattanooga  to  refit,  preparatory  to  his  first  extended  raid 
into  Kentucky.  Here  he  was  joined  by  two  full  companies 
of  Texan  cavalry  under  Captains  R.  M.  Gano  and  John  Huff- 
man, both  native  Kentuckians,  who,  on  reporting  at  Corinth, 
had  asked  to  be  ordered  on  duty  with  Morgan  and  his 
command,  enlarged  from  a  squadron  to  a  full  regiment. 
After  he  had  obtained  all  the  recruits  he  could  at  Chatta- 
nooga he  set  out  for  Knoxville,  to  further  increase  his  com- 
mand and  to  re-arm.  It  was  at  this  place  that  he  received 
the  two  mountain  howitzers  which  were  used  so  effectively  in 
the  first  raid  into  Kentucky,  and  which  just  before  his  com- 
mand started  on  the  Ohio  raid  were  taken  from  it  by 
Bragg's  ordnance  officers.  This  came  near  raising  a  mutiny, 
and  the  only  consolation  that  Morgan's  men  had  was  that 
Bragg  lost  the  guns  within  two  weeks  after  they  were  taken 
away  from  them.  In  the  latter  part  of  June,  Colonel  Hunt, 
of  Georgia,  reported  at  Knoxville  with  a  regiment  of  "Par- 
tisan Rangers,"  nearly  four  hundred  strong,  ordered  to  ac- 
company Morgan  on  his  contemplated  raid,  making  the 
strength  of  his  entire  command  876  effective  men. 

Morgan  set  out  from  Knoxville  on  the  morning  of 
July  4,  1862,  taking  the  road  to  Sparta,  one  hundred  and 
four  miles  due  west  from  Knoxville,  which  was  reached  on 
the  evening  of  the  third  day  of  this  march.  The  Union  men 
of  East  Tennessee  frequently  gave  these  raiders  medicine  of 
their  own  prescription,  lying  in  wait  for  them  and  firing 
npon  them  from  the  bushes.  This  was  a  new  experience  for 
these  Ereebooting  troopers,  who  wherever  they  went  in  the 
South  were  generally  made  welcome  to  the  best  of  every- 
thing, being  regarded  as  the  beau-ideals  of  Southern  chiv- 


MORGAN'S  AND  FORREST'S  RAIDS.        37 

ahy.  On  the  8th,  Morgan's  command  reached  the  Cumber- 
land River  at  the  ford  near  the  small  village  of  Celina, 
eighteen  miles  from  Tonipkinsville,  where  a  detachment  of 
the  Ninth  Pennsylvania,  250  strong,  was  encamped  under 
command  of  Major  Jordan.  Morgan  learned  at  Knoxville 
the  fact  that  a  Federal  force  was  at  this  point,  and  was 
told  the  particulars  of  it  on  his  arrival  at  Celina,  and  he 
now  wished  to  surprise  and  capture  the  entire  command. 
Sending  a  detachment  under  Gano  by  the  right  to  cut  off 
Jordan's  retreat,  at  five  o'clock  on  the  morning  of  the  9th 
Morgan  moved  to  the  attack.  Jordan  posted  himself  on  a 
thickly  wooded  hill  and  fired  several  volleys  at  the  rebels 
as  they  advanced  over  an  open  field,  but  being  outnumbered 
was  routed  with  a  loss  of  four  killed,  six  wounded,  and 
nineteen  prisoners.  The  enemy's  loss  was  several  wounded, 
among  them  Colonel  Hunt,  who  died  a  few  days  later  from 
the  effects  of  his  wound.  Morgan  paroled  the  prisoners  and 
then  left  for  Glasgow,  reaching  there  at  one  o'clock  that 
night,  where  they  were  received  with  open  arms  by  the 
citizens,  breakfast  cooked  for  the  entire  command,  and  three 
days'  rations  prepared  for  them.  From  here  the  command 
marched  all  night,  and  at  eleven  o'clock  next  morning  was 
within  a  short  distance  of  Lebanon.  Morgan,  preparatory 
to  an  attack,  despatched  one  of  his  companies  to  destroy  the 
railroad  north  of  the  town  to  prevent  the  arrival  of  reinforce- 
ments. The  company  struck  the  railroad  at  New  Hope 
Church,  and  had  just  commenced  their  work  of  destruction 
when  a  train  came  up  with  a  number  of  Federal  troops  on 
it,  who  drove  the  rebels  off  in  confusion,  but  for  some  un- 
known cause  the  train  then  returned  to  Louisville,  leaving 
Morgan  unmolested  at  Lebanon,  who  advanced  to  the  at- 
tack and  drove  in  the  pickets.  After  a  slight  skirmish 
the  place  was  surrendered  by  Lieutenant-Colonel  Johnson 


38  THE  ARMY   OF  THE  CUMBERLAND. 

of  the  Twenty-eighth  Kentucky,  with  a  small  detachment 
of  that  command.  Morgan  destroyed  some  fifty  thousand 
dollars'  worth  of  Government  stores.  He  left  Lebanon  at 
two  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  passed  through  Springfield, 
without  halting  the  command,  and  pushed  on  for  Harrods- 
burg,  reaching  there  at  nine  o'clock  on  Sunday  morning. 
Here  he  sent  Gano  with  his  squadron  around  Lexington 
to  burn  the  railroad  bridges  on  the  Kentucky  Central 
Railroad,  in  order  to  prevent  troops  being  sent  there 
from  Cincinnati.  Another  detachment  was  sent  to  destroy 
the  bridge  on  the  Louisville  and  Lexington  Railroad, 
cutting  off  reinforcements  from  Louisville.  Morgan's  de- 
sign was  to  make  it  appear  that  he  intended  to  attack 
Frankfort,  then  turn  suddenly  to  the  right  and  attempt  the 
capture  of  Lexington.  He  had  given  out  everywhere  in 
Kentucky  that  he  was  marching  on  the  State  Capital  with 
a  force  five  thousand  strong,  and  had  succeeded  in  spread- 
ing the  utmost  alarm.  On  the  15th  Morgan  reached  Mid- 
way, captured  the  telegraph  operator  and  installed  his  own 
operator  at  the  instrument,  sent  despatches  in  the  name  of 
Federal  Generals,  and  changed  the  orders  for  the  move- 
ment of  troops.  He  telegraphed  in  all  directions,  without 
the  slightest  regard  for  truth,  and  succeeded  in  creating 
the  utmost  confusion  and  alarm  at  Cincinnati,  Louisville, 
Lexington,  and  Frankfort.  The  command  left  Midway  late 
in  the  afternoon  and  started  for  Georgetown,  which  place 
they  reached  at  sundown,  where  they  met  a  small  force  of 
Home  Guards,  who  were  driven  out  of  town.  From  here 
Morgan  sent  a  force  to  burn  the  bridges  on  the  Kentucky 
Railroad  between  Lexington  and  Paris.  Then  learning  how 
strongly  Lexington  was  garrisoned,  he  gave  up  all  thought 
of  attacking  it,  and  finding  that  the  Federal  forces  were 
closing  in  on   him  commenced  his   return   south.    On  the 


MORGANS  AND  FORREST'S  RAIDS.  39 

18th,  Morgan  attacked  Cynthiana,  which  was  garrisoned  by 
some  five  hundred  men,  under  the  command  of  Lieutenant- 
Colonel  John  J.  Landrum,  of  the  Eighteenth  Kentucky. 
The  fighting  continued  for  two  hours,  when  the  Federal 
force  was  driven  from  the  town  and  nearly  all  captured. 
Landrum  and  a  few  of  his  command  escaped.  The  Federals 
lost  16  killed  and  40  wounded,  and  14  of  the  enemy  were 
killed  and  42  wounded.  The  rebels  claimed  to  have  cap- 
tured 420  prisoners,  who  were  at  once  paroled.  The  depot, 
with  a  large  amount  of  Government  stores,  was  burned. 
Morgan  then  left  for  Paris,  where  he  arrived  late  in  the 
evening  and  rested  there  that  night.  About  eight  o'clock 
in  the  morning  his  command  was  driven  out  of  this  place 
by  the  troops  under  General  Green  Clay  Smith,  numbering 
some  twelve  hundred  men,  who  killed  2,  wounded  six,  and 
captured  several  prisoners.  Morgan  pushed  through  Win- 
chester, reaching  that  point  about  twelve  o'clock,  crossed 
the  Kentucky  River  just  at  dark,  and  arrived  at  Richmond 
at  four  o'clock  in  the  morning.  Here  he  rested  his  com- 
mand twelve  hours,  then  marched  toward  Crab  Orchard, 
arriving  about  daybreak  the  next  morning.  It  had  been 
his  intention  to  make  a  stand  at  Richmond,  but  there 
were  too  many  troops  marching  to  attack  him.  Besides 
General  Smith's  command,  which  was  following  him  closely, 
Colonel  Wolford  was  collecting  forces  in  the  southern  part 
of  Kentucky  to  intercept  him,  and  troops  were  en  route  from 
Louisville  to  aid  in  the  pursuit.  Morgan  left  Crab  Orchard 
at  eleven  o'clock  the  same  morning,  and  reached  Somerset 
about  sunset.  At  these  two  places  he  captured  130  wagons, 
with  large  quantities  of  Government  stores,  of  which  he 
loaded  as  much  into  wagons  for  the  use  of  his  command  as 
he  wanted,  and  burned  the  rest.  From  Somerset  he  marched 
to   Stagall's  Ferry  on  the   Cumberland   River,   and  there 


40  THE  ARMY  OF   THE  CUMBERLAND. 

crossed,  reaching  Monticello,  twenty-one  miles  from  the 
river,  that  night,  when  all  pursuit  ended. 

Morgan's  object  in  making  this  raid  was  to  obtain  recruits 
and  horses,  to  equip  and  arm  his  men,  and  to  prepare  for  his 
fall  raiding  trip.  In  his  official  report  he  says:  "I  left 
Knoxville  on  the  4th  day  of  this  month  with  about  nine 
hundred  men,  and  returned  to  Livingston  on  the  28th  inst. 
with  nearly  twelve  hundred,  having  been  absent  just  twenty- 
four  days,  during  which  time  I  have  travelled  over  a  thou- 
sand miles,  captured  seventeen  towns,  destroyed  all  the 
Government  supplies  and  arms  in  them,  dispersed  about  fif- 
teen hundred  Home  Guards,  and  paroled  nearly  twelve 
hundred  regular  troops.  I  lost  in  killed,  wounded,  and 
missing,  of  the  number  that  I  carried  into  Kentucky,  about 
ninety." 

When  Buell  received  his  orders  to  open  the  campaign 
in  East  Tennessee,  the  key  to  that  part  of  the  State  was 
Chattanooga,  and  this  was  the  objective  point  of  his  cam- 
paign. With  the  concentration  of  the  Southern  forces  in 
Mississippi,  both  Halleck  and  Buell  thought  that  a  favorable 
time  had  arrived  for  this  movement,  anticipating  that  no 
advance  of  the  enemy's  forces  would  be  made  to  dispute 
the  occupancy  of  those  portions  of  Kentucky  and  Tennes- 
see already  held  by  the  Federal  forces.  The  great  prob- 
lem with  Buell  was  to  furnish  supplies  to  his  army,  now 
some  three  hundred  miles  away  from  its  base  at  Louisville, 
dependent  during  the  greater  part  of  the  year  on  one  line  of 
road,  which  was  subject  to  being  raided  at  any  time,  bridges 
burned,  the  roadbed  destroyed,  and  the  entire  road  ren- 
dered useless  for  months.  To  continue  this  line  the  many 
miles  through  the  enemy's  country,  subject  to  increased 
risks  before  Chattanooga  could  be  reached,  was  a  matter 
that  required  a  great  amount  of  careful  thought  and  delib- 


MORGAN'S   AND   FORREST'S  RAIDS.  41 

eration.  Buell  bad  tried  infantry  in  stockades  at  bridges,  and 
was  satisfied  tbat  tbis  was  not  the  proper  solution  of  tbe 
problem.  He  tben  made  earnest  and  repeated  application  for 
more  cavahy,  to  protect  bis  communications  and  to  meet  and 
repulse  tbe  enemy's  raiding  parties  before  tbey  could  reacb 
bis  line  of  communication.  If  be  was  to  move  with  bis  com- 
mand into  East  Tennessee,  be  regarded  tbe  line  from  Nash- 
ville  to  Cbattanooga  as  tbe  proper  road  on  which  be 
should  depend  for  bis  supplies,  and  to  which  he  should  give 
his  care  and  attention  for  this  purpose. 

Halleck  considered  the  line  from  Memphis  to  Chattanooga 
the  one  over  which  the  supplies  for  Buell's  army  should  pass. 
The  latter  objected  to  this,  by  reason  of  that  road  crossing 
the  Tennessee  River  twice,  thus  giving  two  long  bridges  to 
rebuild  and  protect,  instead  of  one,  and  for  tbe  additional 
reason  tbat  this  road  ran  for  a  considerable  distance  paral- 
lel with  tbe  front  of  the  enemy,  and  thus  invited  raiding 
parties.  While  the  risks  attending  the  other  road  were 
great  enough,  Buell  regarded  the  Memphis  and  Charles- 
ton road  far  the  more  objectionable.  Besides,  be  wished 
to  move  through  Middle  Tennessee  to  McMinnville,  and 
thence  to  Chattanooga,  with  Nashville  as  his  depot  of  sup- 
plies. In  this  Halleck  overruled  him  and  directed  that  he 
march  his  command  on  the  line  of  tbe  Memphis  road,  re- 
pairing the  track  as  be  advanced. 

"While  this  matter  was  under  consideration  by  the  Federal 
commanders,  Bragg,  who  had  been  appointed  to  the  position 
of  General  made  vacant  by  the  death  of  General  Johnston, 
and  who  had  succeeded  Beauregard  in  the  command  in  tho 
West,  put  his  columns  in  motion  eastward  to  occupy  Chat- 
tanooga. Johnston,  on  the  retreat  from  Nashville,  sent  all 
surplus  army  stores  to  Chattanooga,  and  Bragg  now  regarded 
tbat  point  as  the  proper  place  to  refit  his  command,  and 


42  THE   ARMY   OF   THE   CUMBERLAND. 

from  which  to  assume  the  offensive,  and  open  the  campaign 
he  had  planned  to  free,  for  a  time  at  least,  Tennessee  from 
the  control  of  the  Federal  forces. 

With  the  start  thus  made  by  both  commands  for  Chatta- 
nooga, everything  was  in  favor  of  Bragg,  whose  movements 
were  uninrpeded,  as  his  route  was  south  of  the  Tennessee, 
through  his  own  territory,  with  his  lines  of  communication 
open  when  he  arrived  at  that  place.  With  Buell,  the  repairs 
of  the  railroad  retarded  his  progress,  and  the  advance  weak- 
ened his  command  by  the  increased  number  of  detachments 
required  to  guard  his  line  as  it  lengthened. 

McCook's  and  Crittenden's  commands  were  started  east- 
ward, the  first  from  Corinth,  and  the  latter  from  Booneville. 
McCook  reached  Florence  on  the  15th  of  June,  where  ferry- 
boats had  been  provided  by  Mitchel  for  the  crossing  of  his 
division.  A  delay  was  occasioned  here  by  the  report  that 
Nelson  had  been  attacked,  but  this  was  found  to  be  false  ; 
and,  on  the  26th,  the  divisions  of  McCook,  Crittenden,  and 
Nelson  crossed,  and  started  at  once  for  Athens,  which  place 
they  reached  on  the  29th.  On  the  same  day  Buell  estab- 
lished his  headquarters  at  Huntsville,  Ala.,  and  gave  per- 
sonal supervision  to  the  repair  of  the  railroads,  now  ex- 
tremely urgent.  He  placed  his  troops  by  division  upon  the 
different  sections  of  the  line,  under  orders  to  push  repairs 
with  all  possible  expedition.  These  troops,  as  repairs  were 
made,  advanced  from  time  to  time,  concentrating  on  the 
line  of  the  Nashville  and  Chattanooga  road.  The  repairs 
to  this  railroad  were  completed  on  July  28th,  and  on  the 
Nashville  and  Decatur  road  on  August  3d.  During  the  lat- 
ter part  of  July  the  last  division  of  Buell's  army,  under 
Thomas,  crossed  the  Tennessee  River,  being  relieved — on 
the  line  of  the  Memphis  and  Charleston  Railroad — by 
troo2)s   from  Grant's  araiv.     Thomas  established  his  head- 


MORGAN'S  AND   FORREST'S   RAIDS.  43 

quarters  at  Dechard.  It  was  on  this  march  with  his  brigade 
that  General  Robert  L.  McCook  was  murdered  by  guerillas. 
He  was  riding  in  an  ambulance,  ill  at  the  time,  and  unarmed. 
Nelson's  division  had  been  sent  to  Murfreesboro  about 
the  middle  of  July,  to  drive  Forrest,  who,  with  his  cavalry, 
on  the  13th,  attacked  the  Federal  garrison  in  the  town. 
The  post  was  under  the  command  of  General  T.  T.  Critten- 
den, and  the  troops  composing  the  Twenty-third  Brigade 
were  under  the  command  of  Colonel  Duffield.  There  was, 
unfortunately,  a  disagreement  between  the  ranking  officers 
at  the  post  that  led  to  the  most  unfortunate  results.  Col- 
onel Lester,  of  the  Third  Minnesota,  during  the  absence  of 
Duffield,  commanding  the  brigade,  had,  by  reason  of  the 
unpleasant  relations  existing  between  portions  of  the  com- 
mand, widely  distributed  them  in  different  parts  of  the 
town.  On  the  return  of  Crittenden  and  Duffield  on  July 
11th,  neither  of  them  assumed  command,  and  their  action 
made  it  appear  as  if  they  were  standing  on  their  dignity, 
thinking  more  of  their  own  personal  importance  than  the 
good  of  the  service.  "With  no  one  in  command,  there  was 
no  unity  or  proper  esprit  de  corps  among  the  troops,  and 
no  disposition  for  defence  when  Forrest  made  his  at- 
tack. The  latter  had  advanced  through  McMinnville  from 
Chattanooga,  with  about  two  thousand  men,  and  arrived 
at  Murfreesboro  about  five  o'clock  on  the  morning  of  the 
13th,  captured  the  pickets,  and  made  disposition  of  his 
forces  for  immediate  attack.  Forming  his  entire  command 
into  columns  of  fours,  with  the  Eighth  Texas  in  front,  For- 
rest moved  forward  on  a  trot  until  he  reached  the  Federal 
encampments,  which  Colonel  Wharton,  with  two  regiments, 
charged.  The  Second  Georgia  dashed  into  the  town,  cap- 
tured the  provost  guard  and  all  Federal  officers  and  men 
on  the  streets,  seized  and  secured  the  supplies. 


44  THE  ARMY  OF   THE  CUMBERLAND. 

Major  Smith  with  the  Kentucky  troops  was  sent  to  the 
rear  of  the  Federal  command  to  cut  off  the  retreat.  The 
Texans  charged  into  the  camp  of  the  Ninth  Michigan,  and 
reaching  the  tents,  roused  some  of  the  men  from  sleep.  A 
portion  of  that  regiment,  however,  rallied  by  the  officers, 
made  a  handsome  stand  and  drove  the  Texans  off.  Duffield 
was  wounded  while  rallying  his  men.  The  Second  Georgia 
charged  into  the  public  square  and  surrounded  the  Coiirt 
House,  occupied  by  a  company  of  the  Ninth  Michigan,  who 
twice  repulsed  the  attacking  force.  Reinforcements  being 
brought  forward,  the  doors  of  the  building  were  battered 
down  and  the  company  was  forced  to  surrender.  Forrest 
now  attacked  the  Third  Minnesota  on  the  east  bank  of 
Stone's  River,  about  a  mile  and  a  half  from  town,  which 
had  just  left  their  camp  to  join  the  force  in  the  town,  when 
Forrest  with  three  regiments  moved  to  the  attack. 

Colonel  Lester  formed  his  command  in  line  of  battle,  with 
nine  companies  of  infantry  and  four  pieces  of  artillery, 
and  opened  fire  on  the  rebels  as  they  advanced.  Forrest 
attempting  to  get  to  the  rear  of  this  force,  encountered  the 
camp  guard  of  some  hundred  men  left  by  Lester  to  pro- 
tect his  camp,  posted  behind  a  strong  barricade  of  wagons 
and  some  large  ledges  of  rocks,  difficult  to  carry.  Forrest 
at  once  ordered  a  charge  which  was  twice  made  and  re- 
pulsed. Leading  his  men  the  third  time,  he  succeeded  in 
driving  the  guard  from  their  position  to  the  main  command, 
posted  some  six  hundred  yards  away.  It  was  now  one 
o'clock,  and  beyond  the  skirmishes  between  the  commands 
but  little  had  been  accomplished. 

Forrest's  officers  urged  him  to  withdraw  with  the  results 
obtained  up  to  that  time.  This  he  refused  to  do,  and  made 
disposition  of  his  command  for  further  attack  on  the  Federal 
forces  occupying  the  camp  of  the  Ninth  Michigan,  which 


MORGAN'S  AND  FORREST'S  RAIDS.  45 

consisted  of  this  regiment  and  a  company  of  the  Second 
Kentucky  cavalry.  He  dismounted  two  of  his  regiments  and 
threw  forward  skirmishers,  directed  them  to  open  brisk  fii*- 
ing,  and  sent  the  Second  Georgia  dismounted  to  attack  on 
the  left.  After  this  he  brought  up  the  Eighth  Texas  and 
placed  them  in  positiou  to  charge  on  the  left. 

Having  made  this  disposition  of  his  forces,  he  sent  forward, 
under  a  flag  of  truce,  a  written  demand  for  the  surrender 
of  Duffield's  command,  which  was  complied  with  at  once. 
After  this,  Forrest  demanded  the  surrender  of  the  Third 
Minnesota,  which  Lester,  after  an  interview  with  Duffield 
and  a  consultation  with  his  own  officers,  made,  surrendering 
some  five  hundred  infantry  of  his  regiment  and  two  sec- 
tions of  Hewitt's  battery  of  artillery.  The  entire  forces 
surrendered  were  seventeen  hundred  troops  with  four 
pieces  of  artillery.  Forrest  captured  about  six  hundred 
horses  and  mules,  and  a  very  large  quantity  of  stores  and 
Government  supplies,  part  of  which  he  carried  away  and  the 
rest  he  destroyed,  to  the  value  of  nearly  a  million  of  dollars. 

This  loss  occurred  the  day  after  the  opening  of  the  road 
from  Nashville  south,  and  very  seriously  interfered  with  the 
movements  at  the  front.  Nelson  endeavored  to  intercept 
Forrest,  but  could  not  successfully  "  chase  cavalry  with  in- 
fantry." Forrest  on  Nelson's  approach  withdrew  to  McMinn- 
ville,  and  from  there  made  a  dash  on  Lebanon,  some  fifty 
miles  distant,  where  he  expected  to  find  a  force  of  five  hun- 
dred Federal  cavalry.  This  force  escaped  him,  and  he  then 
swept  around  to  the  south  of  Nashville,  captured  150  bridge 
guards  and  burned  four  bridges.  Learning  that  Nelson  was 
again  in  pursuit  of  him,  Forrest  returned  to  McMinnville. 

From  this  point  he  made  repeated  raids  on  the  line  of 
road  south  of  Nashville,  leaving  Morgan  to  operate  against 
the  Louisville  and  Nashville  Railroad.     These  raiders  were 


46  THE   ARMY  OF  THE   CUMBERLAND. 

able  to  move  almost  without  opposition,  as  Buell  was  without 
sufficient  cavalry  to  cope  with  them.  The  latter  had  been 
compelled  to  divide  his  cavalry  into  small  bands  to  run 
down  the  guerillas  that  had  been  operating  on  his  line  of 
railroad.  Now  that  Forrest's  and  Morgan's  commands  had 
become  so  formidable,  he  was  compelled  to  organize  his 
cavalry  into  united  bodies  for  better  defensive  movements 
against  these  raiders.  The  Second  Indiana,  Fourth  and 
Fifth  Kentucky,  and  Seventh  Pennsylvania  cavalry  regi- 
ments he  formed  into  one  brigade,  and  on  August  11th, 
he  sent  it  under  General  E.  W.  Johnson  against  Morgan, 
who  had  been  ordered  by  Bragg  to  break  the  railroad 
between  Louisville  and  Nashville,  in  order  to  retard  Buell's 
movement  north  to  Louisville  as  much  as  possible,  and  who 
was  operating  about  Gallatin,  Tennessee,  which  he  had  cap- 
hired  with  200  prisoners.  Colonel  Boone  was  in  command 
of  the  Federal  forces  at  this  point.  Morgan  hearing  that 
Boone  slept  in  the  town  away  from  the  camp,  sent  a  small 
force  to  capture  him,  which  was  done,  just  as  he  had  dressed 
and  was  starting  to  camp.  Morgan  then  destroyed  a  rail- 
road bridge  south  of  Gallatin,  and  the  tunnel  six  miles 
north,  the  roof  of  which  was  supported  with  large  beams  on 
upright  timbers.  Running  some  freight  cars  into  the  tun- 
nel, they  were  set  on  fire  and  some  eight  hundred  feet  of  it 
destroyed,  the  roof  caving  in. 

Johnson  sought  to  attack  Morgan  before  he  could  unite 
with  Forrest,  who  was  on  his  Lebanon  raid  at  that  time,  but 
Morgan  hearing  that  Johnson  had  infantry  and  artillery  sup- 
ports, endeavored  to  avoid  an  engagement.  Johnson  forced 
the  fight,  engaged  Morgan  with  spirit,  and  although  re- 
pulsed three  times,  after  the  first  and  second  repulse  formed 
promptly  and  renewed  the  attack.  After  the  third  repulse  the 
Federal  forces  commenced  retreating,  when  Morgan  followed, 


MORGAN'S  AND  FORREST'S  RAIDS.  47 

attacked  Johnson's  retreating  forces  and  drove  the  Federals 
some  three  miles.  Johnson  reformed  his  lines  twice,  but 
the  enemy  broke,  and  drove  them  each  time.  He  then  re- 
formed the  remnant  of  his  command  and  fought  the  enemy 
dismounted,  when  the  latter  charged  again,  and  Johnson, 
seeing  that  the  greater  part  of  his  command  had  scattered, 
surrendered.  The  force  that  was  with  him  at  this  time  was 
only  a  small  band  of  some  twenty-five  soldiers  and  a  few 
officers.  His  loss  was  20  killed  and  42  wounded.  Duke, 
in  his  "History  of  Morgan's  Cavalry," says :  "A great  deal  of 
censure  was  at  the  time  cast  upon  these  men  " — Johnson's 
command — "and  they  were  accused  of  arrant  cowardice 
by  the  Northern  press.  Nothing  could  have  been  more 
unjust.  They  attacked  with  spirit  and  without  hesitation, 
and  were  unable  to  close  with  us  on  account  of  their  heavy 
loss  in  men  and  horses.  I  have  seen  troops  much  more 
highly  boasted  than  these  were  before  their  defeat,  behave 
not  nearly  so  well."  And  of  Johnson,  Duke  says  :  "  His  at- 
tack was  made  promptly  and  in  splendid  style  ;  his  disposi- 
tions throughout  the  first  fight  were  good,  and  he  exhibited 
fine  personal  courage  and  energy." 


CHAPTEE  V. 

BRAGG'S  ADVANCE  INTO  KENTUCKY. 

After  Nelson's  pursuit  of  Forrest  on  his  raid  around 
Nashville,  he  was  ordered  by  General  Buell  to  McMinn- 
ville.  Crittenden  and  McCook  with  their  divisions  were  at 
Battle  Creek,  Thomas  and  Wood  were  on  the  line  of  the 
Nashville  and  Chattanooga  Railroad,  and  Mitchel's  division, 
under  the  command  of  Rousseau,  on  the  line  of  railroad 
from  Decatur  to  Columbia.  Bragg  had  so  well  concealed 
bis  intention  as  to  his  advance,  that  Buell  was  compelled  to 
be  in  readiness  to  meet  him  in  the  event  of  one  of  three 
movements,  which  it  was  supposed  he  would  make  if  he 
moved  before  Buell  was  ready  to  advance  upon  him. 

The  latter  thought  Bragg  would  either  move  by  the  left, 
pass  around  into  Northern  Alabama,  cross  at  Decatur,  and 
press  north  for  Nashville.  This  he  regarded  as  the  most 
likely  movement.  Or,  second,  move  direct,  crossing  the 
mountains,  pass  through  McMinnville,  and  so  on  to  Nash- 
ville. Or,  third,  to  move  by  way  of  Knoxville  into  Eastern 
Kentucky.  The  latter,  up  to  the  first  of  September,  Buell 
regarded  as  hardly  a  possibility,  supposing  Bragg's  move- 
ments all  indicated  an  advance  on  Nashville.  Thomas  was 
ordered  to  assume  command  of  the  troops  at  McMinnville,  to 
repair  the  railroad  from  Tullahoma  to  that  point  as  he  went, 
ami  to  establish  posts  of  observation  with  signal  stations  on 
the  mountains  to  watch  Bragg's  movements.  Thomas  assumed 


BRAGG'S  ADVANCE  INTO  KENTUCKY.  49 

command  at  McMinnville  on  the  19th  of  August,  on  the  same 
day  that  Bragg  sent  a  column  of  three  or  four  thousand 
troops  across  the  river  at  Chattanooga.  Buell,  in  anticipa- 
tion of  this  being  the  advance  of  Bragg's  entire  amry  en 
route  for  Nashville,  despatched  Wood  to  the  vicinity  of  Mc- 
Minnville, to  aid  in  resisting  his  advance.  He  then  ordered 
McCook  to  move  from  Battle  Creek  to  the  Thennan  road, 
where  he  was  to  hold  the  enemy  in  check  until  reinforced 
by  Thomas.  Crittenden's  division  was  sent  up  the  valley 
through  Tracy  City,  by  the  Altamont  roach  to  be  within 
supporting  distance  of  McCook,  and  to  watch  the  road 
from  there  to  Chattanooga.  Thomas  was  directed  to  hold 
his  command  in  readiness  to  move  at  a  moment's  notice, 
either  on  the  Therman  or  Dunlap  road.  On  the  22d,  Buell 
learned  that  Bragg's  whole  army  was  north  of  the  Tennes- 
see, and  he  then,  further  to  concentrate  his  command, 
moved  his  supplies  from  the  depot  at  Stevenson  to  Dechard. 
Thomas  on  the  same  day  telegraphed  from  McMinnville  to 
Buell  that  he  believed  Bragg's  movements  meant  an  ad- 
vance of  his  entire  army  into  Kentucky.  Thomas  recon- 
noitred thoroughly  the  front  of  his  position,  and  ascertained 
that  the  enemy  was  not  there  and  not  as  yet  even  in  Sequat- 
chie Valley.  This  he  reported  to  Buell,  and  suggested  that 
Wood's  division  be  posted  at  Sparta,  to  intercept  Bragg's 
advance,  if  made  through  that  place  ;  that  another  division 
be  left  at  Dechard,  to  watch  any  movement  in  that  direc- 
tion, and  that  the  remaining  portions  of  the  command  be 
concentrated  at  McMinnville,  ready  to  offer  battle  to  Bragg's 
army  if  it  should  advance  on  that  front.  Thomas  regarded 
Bragg's  advance  either  on  Nashville  or  Louisville  as  possi- 
ble only  through  McMinnville  or  Sparta,  and  he  proposed  to 
attack  before  Bragg  could  reach  either.  On  the  next  day 
Buell,  under  advices  that  he  regarded  as  reliable,  ordered 
VII.— 3 


50  THE  ARMY  OF  THE  CUMBERLAND. 

the  First,  Second,  Fourth,  Fifth,  and  Sixth  Divisions  to  con- 
centrate at  Altamont,  intending  there  to  offer  battle.  He 
sent  detailed  instructions  to  Thomas,  in  charge  of  the  move- 
ment, as  to  the  disposition  of  his  command,  with  orders  in 
the  event  of  defeat  to  fall  back,  keeping  his  force  between 
the  enemy  and  Nashville.  On  the  25th,  Thomas  reached 
Altamont,  and  finding  no  enemy  nearer  than  the  Sequatchie 
Valley,  and  regarding  Bragg's  advance  by  way  of  Altamont 
improbable,  owing  to  the  bad  condition  of  the  roads,  and 
lack  of  forage  and  water,  returned  to  McMinnville  with  the 
Fourth  and  Sixth  Divisions.  On  the  30th,  Buell  gave  orders 
concentrating  his  entire  command  at  Murfreesboro,  still 
under  the  impression  that  Bragg  expected  to  strike  for 
Nashville.  The  latter's  movements  wex*e  so  well  guarded, 
and  Buell  had  as  yet  so  little  reliable  information  in  regard 
to  them,  that  he  hesitated  even  after  the  order  was  issued, 
and  the  next  day  asked  Thomas's  advice  in  regard  to  it,  in 
the  light  of  any  further  information  as  to  the  movements 
of  *the  enemy.  Thomas  advised  that  the  movement  proceed, 
having  been  commenced,  and  gave  a  plan  of  battle  in  the 
movement  from  Murfreesboro.  Thomas,  on  the  30th,  cap- 
tured a  despatch  that  Bragg,  on  the  27th,  had  sent  to  Van 
Dorn,  in  command  in  Mississippi,  conveying  to  him  in  full  his 
plans  in  regard  to  his  advance  into  Kentucky,  and  informed 
him  that  Kirby  Smith,  reinforced  with  two  divisions  from 
his  army,  had  turned  Cumberland  Gap,  and  was  marching 
on  Lexington,  Kv. 

Buell's  army  at  Murfreesboro  consisted  of  five  divisions 
miller  his  immediate  command,  the  troops  being  then  on 
the  line  of  the  railroad.  In  addition  he  had  two  divisions 
sent  to  him  from  the  Army  of  the  Tennessee — General  J.  C. 
Davis's  division,  under  General  R.  B.  Mitchell,  which  ar- 
rived at   Murfreesboro  on  the  'id  of    September,  and  Gen- 


BRAGG'S  ADVANCE  INTO  KENTUCKY.  51 

eral  E.  A.  Paine's  division,  under  the  command  of  General 
J.  M.  Palmer,  which  reached  Nashville  on  the  10th.  This 
concentration  of  the  army  at  Murfreesboro  of  course  with- 
drew all  troops  from  the  mountains,  leaving  Bragg  unham- 
pered in  the  selection  of  his  route,  either  west  to  Nashville, 
or  north  to  Louisville.  He  made  choice  of  the  latter,  and 
pushed  down  the  valley  of  the  Cumberland  to  Carthage, 
where  he  crossed,  moving  through  Scottsboro  and  Glasgow, 
to  strike  the  Louisville  and  Nashville  Railroad.  Bragg  en- 
tered Kentucky  with  five  divisions,  making  an  army  of  some 
thirty-five  thousand  men,  divided  between  Generals  Polk 
and  Hardee.  While  at  Murfreesboro  Buell  first  learned 
definitely  of  Bragg's  movements,  and  of  his  intended  ad- 
vance into  Kentucky.  The  news  of  the  movements  of  Kirby 
Smith  and  of  Nelson's  defeat  also  reached  him  here. 

On  August  16th,  Buell  had  ordered  Nelson  to  assume  com- 
mand in  Kentucky,  and  to  make  such  dispositions  of  his 
troops  as  would  resist  any  movement  by  Kirby  Smith,  then 
threatening  Cumberland  Gap.  The  plan  of  the  rebels  in 
their  campaign,  which  was  intended  to  free  the  soil  of  the 
South  from  the  Northern  armies  by  carrying  the  war  into  the 
North,  was  for  Kirby  Smith  to  move  through  Eastern  Ken- 
tucky to  Lexington  and  thence  to  Cincinnati,  and  for  Bragg 
to  push  through  Central  Kentucky  to  Louisville.  With  these 
two  cities  in  the  possession  of  their  armies  it  woiild  be  a 
short  step  to  enter  upon  the  rich  fields  of  the  Northern 
States,  and  with  the  large  number  of  new  recruits  gained 
en  route  their  armies  could  resist  any  Northern  troops  that 
would  be  brought  against  them.  This  had  been  Sidney 
Johnston's  plan  to  be  worked  out  after  he  had  achieved  the 
victory  he  contemplated  at  Shiloh,  and  Bragg  as  his  successor 
endeavored  to  cany  out  Johnston's  plan  of  campaign.  One 
was  as  much  a  success  as  the  other,  and  in  both  the  hour  of 


52  THE  ARMY  OF  THE  CUMBERLAND. 

defeat  trod  so  quickly  on  their  apparent  victory  that  the 
campaign  in  each  instance  ultimately  resulted  in  failure. 
So  far  as  the  advance  of  Bragg  and  Kirby  Smith  into  Ken- 
tucky was  concerned,  by  it  the  South  suffered  a  loss  in- 
stead of  a  gain,  and  was  compelled  from  that  time  on  to  act 
upon  a  steadily  lessening  line  of  defence.  Bragg's  report 
shows  that  he  took  a  smaller  command  out  than  he  took  into 
the  State. 

On  the  same  day  that  Nelson's  orders  were  dated,  Steven- 
son appeared  with  his  division  before  Cumberland  Gap. 
George  W.  Morgan  in  command  there  immediately  sent  out 
cavalry  to  the  adjoining  gaps  to  watch  for  further  movements 
of  the  enemy.  When  a  short  distance  from  Boger's  Gap  the 
cavalry  struck  the  head  of  Kirby  Smith's  army  on  its  ad- 
vance to  Kentucky.  Smith's  forces  were  those  of  his  own 
command  in  East  Tennessee,  re-enforced  by  the  divisions  of 
McCown  from  Mississippi,  sent  him  by  Bragg,  and  also  the 
two  fine  brigades  of  Cleburne  and  Preston  Smith,  ordered 
to  report  to  him  from  Chattanooga.  Kirby  Smith  moved 
with  his  main  command  to  Barboursville,  and  ordered  Mc- 
Cown to  Cumberland  Ford  with  a  large  force,  which  cut 
off  Morgan,  in  the  Gap,  from  his  base  of  supplies  in  that  di- 
rection. Leaving  Stevenson  in  Morgan's  front  to  engage  his 
attention,  Kirby  Smith  with  his  entire  force  advanced  into 
Kentucky,  thus  entirely  cutting  off  re-enforcements  and  sup- 
plies to  Morgan's  command.  The  latter  failing  in  his  efforts 
to  bring  on  an  engagement,  placed  his  command  on  half  ra- 
tions, and  after  a  council  of  war  abandoned  the  Gap,  dis- 
mounting his  siege  guns  and  destroying  what  stores  and  am- 
munition he  could  not  remove,  marched  out  with  his  entire 
command,  to  the  east  of  Kirby  Smith's  force,  to  the  Ohio 
Kiver.  John  Morgan's  cavalry  annoyed  the  command  for 
some  days,  without  inflicting  any  material  loss. 


BRAGG'S  ADVANCE  INTO   KENTUCKY.  53 

When  Nelson  reached  Kentucky  he  found  that  a  new  de- 
partment had  been  created,  with  General  H.  G.  Wright  in 
command,  embracing  that  pari  of  the  State  east  of  Louisville 
and  the  line  of  the  Nashville  Bailroad,  taken  from  under 
Buell's  command.     Wright  ordered  Nelson  to  proceed  to 
Lexington  and  assume  command  of  all  the  troops  in  that 
locality,  nearly  all  of  them  new  regiments,  principally  from 
Ohio   and    Kentucky,    hastily   gathered   together,   without 
drill  or   discipline.     Nelson  concentrated   these  troops  at 
Lexington,  and  organized  them  into  a  division  with  Generals 
M.  D.  Manson,  J.  S.  Jackson,  and  Charles  Craft  as  brigade 
commanders.     On  August  23d,  Nelson  sent  a  detachment  of 
the  Seventh  Kentucky  cavalry  and  Colonel  Child's  battalion 
of  Tennessee  cavahy,  under  Colonel  Metcalfe's  command,  to 
Big  Hill  to  resist  the  advance  of  the  enemy.     These  troops 
being  attacked  by  a  greatly  superior  force  the  Seventh  Ken- 
tucky broke  and  fled,  leaving,  however,  about  one-fourth 
of  the  command  with  the  Tennessee  battalion,  which,  after 
fighting  bravely,  was  compelled  to  retire.     Metcalfe  rallied 
his  men,  but  on  the  approach  of  the  enemy  they  again  broke 
and  ran,  leaving  the  Tennesseeans  to  resist  the  attack,  which 
they  so  far  succeeded  in  doing  as  to  secure  a  safe  retreat  to 
Richmond     The  enemy  pushed  forward  and  demanded  the 
surrender  of  the  town,  but  learning  that   re -enforcements 
had  arrived,  retired.     Nelson   then   ordered  Manson's  and 
Craft's  brigades,  under  the  command  of  the  former,  to  pro- 
ceed to  Bichmond.     On  arriving  there  Manson  went  into 
camp  south  of  the  town  and  threw  out  his  pickets.     The 
cavalry,  on  the  29th,  reported  an  advance  of  the  enemy  in 
large  numbers,  and  that  a  heavy  force  of  infantry  was  driving 
in  the  pickets.     Manson  advanced  to  their  support  with  his 
own  brigade,  leaving  Craft  with  his  command  at  Bichmond. 
Moving   forward  with  his  troops   he   drove   the  attacking 


54  THE  ARMY   OF  THE  CUMBERLAND. 

party  back  and  formed  his  line  of  battle  on  each  side  of  the 
road  some  two  miles  from  the  town.  Tha  enemy  attacked 
with  infantry,  artillery,  and  cavalry,  but  was  driven  back 
with  the  loss  of  one  field  piece  and  several  men  captured. 
Manson  then  occupied  Rogersville,  where  he  remained  in 
camp  all  night.  In  the  morning  he  ordered  Cruft  to  join 
him,  and  moved  out  beyond  the  town  to  meet  the  enemy's 
advance.  After  heavy  fighting  for  over  an  hour  the  left  of 
Hanson's  command  was  fiercely  assaulted,  which  being  rein- 
forced, the  right  began  to  give  way  in  confusion. 

The  troops  were  rallied  on  a  new  line  a  mile  to  the  rear, 
but  as  this  was  badly  posted  for  defence,  the  command  was 
withdrawn  from  this  position  to  the  line  occupied  the  day 
before,  and  from  this — the  enemy  attacking  in  heavy  force 
— the  Federal  troops  were  again  routed  and  driven  back  to 
their  camps,  where  the  last  stand  was  made  and  the  heaviest 
fighting  took  place.  Nelson,  arriving  on  the  ground,  as- 
sumed command  and  endeavored  to  stem  the  tide  of  defeat. 
The  enemy  advanced  in  such  overwhelming  numbers  upon 
the  position  of  the  Federal  forces  that  they  were  driven  in 
complete  disorder  at  all  points  from  the  field.  Nelson  was 
twice  wounded,  but  was  able  to  reach  Louisville  with  several 
detachments  of  his  routed  troops.  Here  he  assumed  command 
and  bent  every  energy  to  the  organization  of  new  troops, 
forming  the  citizens  in  commands  for  the  defence  of  that 
city.  Nelson's  losses  in  the  engagement  at  Richmond  were 
two  hundred  and  twenty-five  killed,  six  hundred  wounded, 
and  over  two  thousand  captured.  He  also  lost  nine  guns. 
His  entire  command  consisted  of  some  seven  thousand  troops. 
The  enemy's  force  was  twelve  thousand  men  and  thirty-six 
pieces  of  artillery,  and  he  lost  over  nine  hundred  killed  and 
wounded.  Kirby  Smith  then  pushed  his  command  north, 
occupying  Lexington,  and  sent  out  detachments  threatening 


BRAGG'S   ADVANCE   INTO   KENTUCKY.  55 

Louisville  and  Cincinnati.  On  tlie  6th  of  September,  Gene- 
ral Heth  with  some  six  thousand  troops  advanced  and  took 
position  a  few  miles  south  of  Covington.  He  was  ordered 
by  Kirby  Smith  not  to  attack,  but  to  hold  his  command  in 
readiness  to  move  at  a  moment's  notice  to  form  a  junction 
with  Bragg,  then  marching  north  through  Kentucky. 

Smith,  while  waiting  to  form  a  junction  with  Bragg,  was 
actively  employed  in  gathering  supplies  for  his  army  in  the 
richest  part  of  the  State.  He  also  sought  to  obtain  recruits 
for  his  command,  but  recruiting  for  the  infantry  service  did 
not  prove  a  success.  During  the  entire  period  the  rebel 
army  was  in  Kentucky  not  one  entire  infantry  regiment  was 
raised.  Individual  enlistment  was  constantly  going  on,  but 
the  leading  officers  of  that  army  estimated  their  entire  gain 
was  not  over  five  thousand  men,  including  three  regiments  of 
cavalry  recruited  under  Buford.  Heth's  advance  alarmed 
the  three  cities  of  Covington,  Newport,  and  Cincinnati, 
spreading  consternation  among  all  classes.  Martial  law  was 
proclaimed,  and  all  able-bodied  citizens  were  ordered  to  re- 
port for  work  on  the  fortifications  south  of  Covington. 
These  works  were  manned  by  the  population  of  the  sur- 
rounding country,  coming  to  Cincinnati  to  defend  that 
city  from  pillage.  Begiments  of  "  Squirrel  Hunters  "  were 
formed,  and  a  show  of  force  was  kept  up  until  veteran  troops 
could  be  brought  forward  to  take  their  place.  Heth  wished 
to  attack,  but  Kirby  Smith  would  not  permit  this,  as  he  an- 
ticipated a  battle  with  Buell,  and  that  Bragg  would  have  to 
fight  his  entire  army,  in  which  event  he  would  need  every 
available  man.  Heth  fell  back  in  a  few  days  and  on  Oc- 
tober 4th  Smith  reported  with  his  command  to  Bragg  at 
Frankfort. 

Bragg's  movements  became  clearly  apparent  to  Buell 
while   the   latter  was   concentrating  at  Murfreesboro.     On 


56  THE  ARMY   OF  THE  CUMBERLAND. 

September  7th,  Buell  started  with  Ammen's,  Crittenden's, 
McCook's,  Wood's,  Rousseau's,  and  Mitchell's  divisions  in 
the  race  between  the  opposing  armies  for  Louisville.  If 
Bragg  moved  energetically  and  with  the  intent  of  taking 
Louisville  without  fighting  a  battle  in  Kentucky  before 
he  reached  that  city,  his  start  in  the  race  and  the  shorter 
line  he  was  moving  on  gave  him  the  decided  advantage  in 
the  movement.  Buell's  object  was  to  overtake  Bragg,  and, 
if  necessary,  force  the  fighting.  This  would  compel  the 
latter  to  move  his  army  so  closely  on  the  one  road  open 
to  him  that  his  movements  would  be  necessarily  slow. 
Failing  in  this,  Buell's  plans  were  to  press  Bragg  so  hard 
that  if  he  refused  to  fight  in  Kentucky  he  must  leave  the 
State  in  possession  of  the  Federal  forces  before  he  could 
gain  anything  by  his  advance. 

Buell,  after  reaching  Nashville,  crossed  the  river  there 
at  once  and  pushed  on  with  all  possible  speed.  He  left 
Thomas's,  Palmer's,  and  Negley's  divisions,  with  Thomas  hi 
command,  as  the  garrison  at  this  place.  So  important  did 
Buell  regard  the  holding  of  Nashville,  that  he  determined  to 
weaken  his  immediate  command  and  leave  this  strong  force 
under  his  most  trusted  subordinate,  to  retain  possession  of 
that  point.  He  considered  his  army  in  pursuit  of  Bragg 
of  sufficient  strength  to  make  the  fight  for  the  possession 
of  Kentucky,  and  in  the  event  Bragg  was  driven  from  that 
State  he  would  then  concentrate  in  the  vicinity  of  Nash- 
ville, where  the  battle  for  that  important  position  with  Mid- 
dle Tennessee  would  yet  have  to  be  fought.  In  the  happen- 
ing of  the  latter  event  it  was  an  absolute  necessity  that  the 
Federal  army  should  hold  Nashville  as  a  point  at  which  to 
concentrate  and  move  to  the  attack.  IS.  the  result  of  the 
movement  in  Kentucky  should  be  the  defeat  of  Buell,  then 
it  was  important  that  the  general  in  command  of  the  forces 


BRAGG'S  ADVANCE  INTO  KENTUCKY.  57 

at  Nashville  should  be  an  officer  of  experience,  to  save  the 
troops  left  there,  in  their  retreat  to  rejoin  the  main  army. 
Buell  regarded  the  holding  of  Nashville  by  our  forces  as 
second  only  to  the  safety  of  Kentucky,  and  made  the  dispo- 
sition of  his  command  accordingly.  With  this  view,  on  the 
12th,  he  ordered  E.  B.  Mitchell's  division  to  return  to  Nash- 
ville and  form  part  of  the  garrison  of  that  place.  Bragg,  on 
the  8th,  had  reached  the  railroad,  where  he  burned  the 
bridge  at  Salt  Biver,  and  for  some  days  in  his  northward 
march  was  engaged  in  tearing  up  the  railroad  as  he  ad- 
vanced. On  the  13th,  his  cavalry  reached  Munfordsville  be- 
yond Green  Biver. 

Buell,  on  the  10th,  learning  that  additional  forces  of 
Bragg's  command  were  crossing  the  Cumberland  at  Gaines- 
ville, at  once  countermanded  the  order  to  Mitchell,  and 
directed  Thomas  to  place  Negley  in  command  of  Nash- 
ville, and  if  he  regarded  it  best  to  do  so,  to  leave  Paine's 
division  *  with  Negley's  to  hold  that  place.  If  Paine  could 
be  spared,  then  Thomas  was  to  move  forward  by  forced 
marches  with  his  division  and  Paine's,  and  unite  his  com- 
mand with  the  main  army.  Thomas,  knowing  that  Bragg 
had  left  a  large  force  to  threaten  Nashville,  ordered  Paine's 
division  to  remain  there,  and  started  at  once  with  the  first 
division  to  report  to  Buell. 

Bragg,  to  reach  Munfordsville,  had  only  sixty-eight  miles 
to  march  from  his  crossing  of  the  Cumberland  Biver,  while 
Buell  had  one  hundred  and  five  miles  to  travel  before  he 
could  intercept  him  at  that  place.  Bragg's  advance  had 
reached  and  attacked  Munfordsville  before  Buell's  army 
had  arrived  at  Bowling  Green.  On  Bragg's  advance  under 
General  Chalmers,  arriving  at  Munfordsville,  his  cavalry  en- 
gaged the  attention  of  the  garrison  there  under  Colonel  John 
T.  Wilder,  while  the  artillery  and  infantry  were  being  placed 

*  Palmer  in  command. 


58  THE  ARMY  OF   THE  CUMBERLAND. 

in  position.  On  the  13th,  demand  was  made  of  Wilder  to 
surrender.  This  he  refused  to  do.  "With  the  early  light  of 
the  next  day  an  assault  was  made  by  the  enemy,  which  was 
repulsed  with  heavy  loss.  Two  detachments  reported  during 
the  day,  reinforcing  Wilder's  command.  One  of  them  was 
•under  Colonel  Dunham  from  Louisville,  who,  being  Wilder's 
senior  in  rank,  assumed  command.  On  the  following  day  a 
second  demand  for  surrender  was  made  by  Chalmers,  who 
represented  his  command  sufficiently  large  to  capture  the 
place.  Dunham  refused  to  comply  with  this  demand,  and  . 
the  enemy  then  withdrew,  going  north.  Two  days  later  the 
■ebels  made  another  attack  on  the  works  and  were  again  re- 
pulsed. In  the  afternoon  Bragg  appeared  in  person  before 
the  town,  and  sent,  under  a  flag  of  truce,  another  demand 
/or  the  surrender  of  the  command,  as  the  garrison  of  the 
place  was  surrounded  by  his  entire  army,  and  to  assault 
would  only  be  a  needless  sacrifice  of  human  life.  This  was 
declined,  but  with  the  request  from  Colonel  Dunham  that 
Bragg  suspend  hostilities  to  give  time  for  consultation. 
This  Bragg  agreed  to  do  until  nine  o'clock  in  the  evening. 
Dunham,  who  hod  succeeded  in  opening  communication 
with  General  Gilbert  at  Louisville,  telegraphed  him  the 
facts,  and  added  that  he  feared  he  would  have  to  surrender. 
Gilbert  telegraphed  back  an  order  placing  Dunham  in 
arrest,  and  ordering  Wilder  to  assume  command.  At  the 
Council  of  War  that  was  held  by  Wilder  it  was  determined 
that  the  place  should  not  be  surrendered  without  personal 
inspection  by  the  commanding  officer  that  Bragg's  state- 
ments as  to  his  force  and  situation  were  true.  Wilder, 
under  Gilbert's  orders,  assumed  command  at  seven  o'clock 
in  the  evening,  and  notified  Bragg  of  the  result  of  the  con- 
sultation, proposing,  with  Bragg's  permission,  to  satisfy  him- 
self of  the  truth  of  his  statements.     Remarkable  as  it  ap- 


BRAGG'S  ADVANCE  INTO  KENTUCKY.       59 

pears,  this  proposition  was  agreed  to  by  Bragg,  and  Wilder, 
under  escort,  investigated  the  enemy's  lines  prepared  for  as- 
sault, and  counting  forty-five  cannon  in  position,  supported 
by  25,000  men,  he  concluded  it  was  impossible  to  further 
successfully  defend  the  place.  He  reported  the  facts  to 
the  Council  of  War,  and  the  demand  for  the  surrender  was 
acceded  to  at  two  o'clock  in  the  morning  of  the  17th. 
Under  the  terms  of  the  capitulation  the  troops  marched  out 
with  the  honors  of  war  at  daylight,  retained  their  sidearms 
and  private  property,  and  were  at  once  paroled.  This  attack 
on  Munfordsville  by  Bragg  established  the  fact  that  it  was 
not  his  intention  to  press  on  to  Louisville,  and  the  advan- 
tage Buell  derived  from  the  delay  attending  this  attack  was 
in  a  measure  some  compensation  for  the  loss  of  the  place. 

Bragg  then  took  position  at  Prewitt's  Knob,  where  Buell 
moved  with  his  entire  army,  Thomas  having  reported  on 
the  20th.  The  two  armies  confronted  each  other  at  this 
point  for  three  days,  and  disposition  was  made  for  battle. 
On  the  21st,  while  the  troops  were  being  placed  in  position 
by  Thomas,  under  order  of  Buell,  the  enemy  retreated, 
marching  for  a  short  distance  toward  Louisville,  then 
turned  to  the  right,  and  took  position  at  Bardstown.  Bragg 
claimed  in  his  official  report  that  after  manoeuvring  unsuc- 
cessfully for  four  days  to  draw  General  Buell  into  an  engage- 
ment, he  found  himself  with  only  three  days'  rations  on 
hand  for  his  troops  "  and  in  a  hostile  country,"  that  even  a 
successful  engagement  would  materially  cripple  him,  and 
as  Buell  had  another  route  to  the  Ohio,  to  the  left,  he  con- 
cluded to  turn  to  the  right,  send  to  Lexington  for  supplies 
to  meet  him  in  Bardstown,  and  commenced  the  movement 
to  that  place.  This  gave  Buell  an  open  road  to  Louisville, 
of  which  he  immediately  availed  himself,  and  on  the  29th, 
the  last  division  of  the  Army  of  the  Ohio  reached  that  city. 


60  THE   ARMY   OF   THE   CUMBERLAND. 

The  place  was  under  the  command  of  Gilbert,  who  had 
nothing  but  new  levies  of  inexperienced  troops.  These 
Bnell  incorporated  with  the  brigades  of  his  Army  of  the 
Ohio,  and  on  the  morning  of  the  30th,  after  furnishing  his 
command  with  needed  supplies,  moved  his  army  out  of 
Louisville  against  the  enemy.  The  movement  was  delayed  a 
day,  by  Halleck's  order  relieving  Buell  and  placing  Thomas 
in  command.  The  latter  remonstrated  against  this  order, 
and  at  his  request  it  was  withdrawn.  The  next  day  Buell 
again  assumed  command,  with  Thomas  announced  in  Gen- 
eral Orders  as  second  in  command,  and  commenced  the  ad- 
vance movement  of  his  army  in  five  columns. 


CHAPTER  VI. 

BATTLE  OP  PERRYVILLB. 

The  main  portion  of  the  army  Lad  been  organized  into 
three  corps,  designated  the  First,  Second,  and  Third,  under 
McCook,  Crittenden,  and  Gilbert,  respectively.  General 
Sill,  in  command  of  two  divisions,  was  ordered  to  move  on 
the  left  toward  Frankfort,  to  hold  in  check  the  force  of  the 
enemy  under  Kirby  Smith  at  that  place.  The  other  col- 
umns marched  by  different  routes  upon  roads  converging 
upon  Bardstown,  through  Shepardsville,  Mount  Washing- 
ton, Fairfield,  and  Bloomfield.  Each  column  engaged  the 
enemy's  cavalry  and  artillery  in  a  series  of  skirmishes 
from  within  a  short  distance  of  Louisville.  As  the  army 
approached  Bardstown  the  resistance  constantly  increased, 
retarding  Buell's  advance,  and  enabling  Bragg  to  effect 
his  withdrawal  from  that  place,  which  was  accomplished 
eight  hours  before  the  arrival  of  Buell's  army.  A  sharp 
cavalry  engagement  occurred  at  this  place  between  Buell's 
advance  and  Bragg's  rear-guard,  when  the  whole  of  Bragg's 
command  retired,  taking  the  road  to  Springfield.  At 
Bardstown  Buell  received  information  that  a  junction  of 
Bragg's  and  Kirby  Smith's  commands  would  be  made  at 
Danville.  He  ordered  McCook  to  advance  from  Bloomfield 
on  the  Harrodsburg  road,  and  directed  Thomas  to  move 
with  Crittenden's  corps  on  the  Lebanon  road,  which  passes 
four  miles  south  of  Perryville,  with  a  branch  to  the  latter 


62  THE  ARMY  OF  THE  CUMBERLAND. 

place,  while  he  accompanied  Gilbert's  corps,  which  moved 
on  the  direct  road  to  Perryville.  After  leaving  Bardstown, 
Buell  learned  that  Kir  by  Smith's  force  had  crossed  to  the 
west  side  of  the  Kentucky  River,  near  Salvisa,  and  that 
Bragg  was  concentrating  either  at  Harrodsburg  or  Perry- 
ville. He  at  once  ordered  McCook  to  change  his  line  of 
march  from  the  former  road,  and  to  proceed  direct  to 
Perryville.  On  the  afternoon  of  October  7th,  Buell,  with 
Gilbert's  corps,  arrived  in  front  of  the  rebels  in  strong  force 
three  miles  from  Perryville,  where  he  immediately  drew  his 
troops  up  in  line  of  battle.  Advancing  the  cavalry  and  artil- 
lery, supported  by  two  regiments  of  infantry,  the  rear  guard 
of  the  enemy  was  pressed  to  within  two  miles  of  the  town, 
when  it  was  discovered  that  the  rebels  were  concentrating 
for  battle.  Orders  were  sent  by  Buell  to  Crittenden  and 
McCook  to  march  at  3  o'clock  on  the  morning  of  the  8th, 
and  for  them  to  take  position  as  early  as  possible  on  the 
left  and  right  of  the  centre  corps  respectively,  the  com- 
manders themselves  to  report  in  person  their  arrival,  for 
orders,  the  intention  being  to  make  the  attack  that  day  if 
possible. 

McCook  did  not  receive  this  order  until  2.30  o'clock,  and 
was  on  the  march  at  five.  Owing  to  the  difficulty  of  finding 
water  for  Ins  command  where  the  troops  were  expected  to 
encamp,  Thomas,  on  the  night  of  the  7th,  moved  off  the 
direct  line  of  march  some  six  miles  and  was  delayed  sev- 
eral hours  in  reaching  his  position  on  the  field.  During 
the  night  some  pools  of  water  were  discovered  in  a  small 
creek  about  two  miles  and  a  half  from  Perryville.  Col- 
onel Dan  McCook  with  the  Thirty-sixth  Brigade  was  or- 
dered forward,  and,  after  a  sharp  engagement,  secured 
^sion  of  the  pools,  and  a  supply  of  bad  water  for  Gil- 
bert's troops  was  obtained. 


BATTLE   OP   PERRYVILLE.  63 

On  Octobei  1st,  Bragg,  leaving  Polk  in  command  at 
Bardstown,  under  orders  to  slowly  retire  to  Bryantsville, 
started  for  Lexington.  Here  he  ordered  Kirby  Smith 
with  all  his  forces  to  Frankfort,  to  assist  in  the  installation 
services  of  the  rebel  Provisional  Governor  of  Kentucky  at 
the  capital  of  the  State.  At  Lexington,  on  the  2d,  learn- 
ing of  Buell's  movements  from  Louisville,  Bragg  ordered 
Polk  in  writing — sending  two  copies  to  him — to  advance  at 
once,  "  with  his  whole  available  force,  by  way  of  Bloomfield, 
toward  Frankfort,  to  strike  the  enemy  in  flank  and  rear." 
Polk  was  informed  in  the  order  that  Kirby  Smith  would  at 
the  same  time  attack  in  front. 

On  the  3d,  Polk  received  the  orders,  and,  submitting  them 
to  a  council  of  war,  decided  not  to  obey  them,  but  to  move 
as  originally  ordered.  Of  this  Bragg  was  notified  in  time 
to  prevent  the  attack  on  Buell's  front  with  Smith's  com- 
mand alone.  Giving  orders  for  the  supplies  that  had  been 
accumulated  at  Lexington  to  be  sent  to  Bryantsville,  Bragg, 
on  the  6th,  proceeded  to  Harrodsburg,  where  he  met  Polk 
at  the  head  of  his  column  that  had  left  Bardstown  on  the 
3d.  On  the  7th,  Bragg  ordered  Polk  to  move  Cheatham's 
division  back  to  Perryville,  and  to  proceed  to  that  point  him- 
self, to  attack  the  Federal  force,  immediately  rout  them,  and 
move  rapidly  to  join  Kirby  Smith.  These  orders  were  given 
under  the  impression  that  Buell's  command  was  so  separated 
that  his  right  and  left  were  sixty  miles  apart.  Bragg  also 
sent  Wither's  division  to  Kirby  Smith  at  Frankfort,  who  re- 
ported himself  threatened  by  a  large  force  on  his  front — the 
troops  under  Sill. 

Early  on  the  morning  of  the  8th  an  attempt  was  made  by 
the  enemy  to  drive  Colonel  McCook  from  his  position  at  the 
creek.  He  was  supported  by  Mitchell's  and  Sheridan's  divi- 
sions, which  were  ordered  up  and  directed  to  hold  the  posi- 


64 


THE  ARMY  OF  THE  CUMBERLAND. 


tion  until  the  entire  army  was  prepared  to  attack.  The 
assault  was  made  with  great  spirit  on  Colonel  McOook,  but 
the  enemy  was  handsomely  repulsed.  Buell  anticipated  an 
attack  on  Gilbert's  corps  in  its  isolated  position  in  the  early 


\    WaHciiuf  j 

■    .,,...    _-,TJ;\^-.,,r^-'"^  ■..•-■—.J'    - 

■  -       ;^~^^ 

*•  <'.'.il„:t,„.    ::•■{■  ■-,        -      .---^       •.*',,  ,  .-.    \ 

llr. Goodman  :    U 


Gen. Gilbert')  Oorpi  tvnng  Oct."! ti.1862,  -— : 
Troo/ton  theSth.otfore  action. 

Jroo/.son  Hit  SlLu/iilt  engaged. 
Trooj,)  after  dark  inning  of  the  8  th. 


Battle  of  Perryville. 


morning,  but  nothing  occurred  until  after  the  arrival  of 
McCook's  corps  on  the  Maxville  road,  between  10  and  11 
o'clock,  when  he  at  once  formed  his  command,  of  Rous- 
seau's  and  Jackson's  divisions,  in  line  of  battle  on  the  left  of 
Gilbert,  Rousseau  on  the  right,  and  sent  his  cavalry  to  the 
front  to  make  a  reconnoissance  toward  Perryville.     Thomas 


BATTLE  OF  PERRYVILLE.  65 

arrived  and  took  position  with  Crittenden's  corps  about 
twelve  o'clock. 

On  McCook  getting  his  command  into  position,  he  re- 
ported to  General  Buell  in  person,  who  ordered  him  to  send 
out  a  force  to  the  Chaplin  River,  and  find  out  the  position 
of  the  enemy  in  his  front.  During  McCook's  absence  Rous- 
seau had  advanced  the  right  of  his  line  a  half  mile  to  obtain 
a  supply  of  water,  for  which  the  troops  were  suffering.  On 
seeing  this,  the  rebels  opened  a  heavy  fire  with  some  twenty 
pieces  of  artillery.  Rousseau  moved  his  other  troops  to  sup- 
port his  right,  and,  posting  Simonson's  and  Loomis's  batter- 
ies, returned  the  enemy's  artillery  fire. 

When  McCook  returned  to  his  command,  seeing  that  a  good 
position  on  high  ground  could  be  occupied  by  our  troops 
on  the  left  and  front  of  Rousseau's  new  line  and  near  the 
river,  he  at  once  sent  skirmishers  into  the  woods  at  that 
point,  to  find  out  if  the  enemy  held  the  position.  He  also 
directed  Jackson  to  form  a  new  line  of  battle  with  his  divi- 
sion nearer  the  stream,  and  sent  the  skirmishers  forward 
to  the  river  as  soon  as  this  was  done,  where  they  obtained 
the  needed  supply  of  water.  On  the  formation  of  the  new 
line,  as  no  heavy  force  of  the  enemy  had  been  encountered, 
McCook,  at  about  half-past  one  o'clock,  rode  to  the  right 
of  his  line.  About  half  an  hour  later,  Hardee,  in  command 
of  three  divisions,  under  Cheatham,  Buckner,  and  Ander- 
son, some  sixteen  thousand  strong,  advanced  to  the  attack 
on  McCook,  driving  back  the  skirmishers,  first  striking 
those  posted  in  the  woods.  McCook  had  formed  his  line  of 
battle,  with  Rousseau's  right  near  a  barn  on  the  right  of 
the  Maxville  road,  extending  to  the  left  and  across  that 
road  on  a  ridge  through  a  cornfield  to  the  woods  where  the 
skirmishers  were.  The  right  of  Jackson's  line  was  holding 
a  wooded  elevation,  running  off  to  the  left  in  rear  of  Chaplin 


66  THE  ARMY   OF   THE  CUMBERLAND. 

River,  while  his  left,  north  of  Maxville  road,  was  thrown 
back  in  a  northwesterly  direction,  forming  an  obtuse  angle, 
deflected  about  thirty  degrees  along  broken  heights  from 
their  centre  and  right,  the  point  of  the  angle  being  near 
where  the  Maxville  road  crosses  Doctor's  Creek.  The 
enemy  considered  the  key  of  McCook's  position  to  be  at 
this  crossing,  and  directed  their  main  attack  on  that  point. 
McCook  had  posted  Starkweather's  brigade  in  the  rear  of 
the  left  as  support  to  Jackson,  with  Stone's  and  Bush's  bat- 
teries of  Rousseau's  division,  and  had  placed  "Webster's 
brigade  of  Jackson's  division  in  rear  of  Rousseau's  line. 
The  enemy  opened  the  attack  on  the  extreme  left  of  the 
Federal  force  posted  in  the  angle.  This  was  a  very  strong 
position,  by  reason  of  the  character  of  the  ground,  which 
enabled  these  troops  to  sweep  their  front  with  a  heavy  fire. 
The  troops  here  were  protected  by  being  posted  behind 
stone  fences,  and  were  supported  by  batteries  in  the  rear. 
In  the  attack  on  the  left  Jackson  was  killed  by  the  first 
fire.  Ten-ill's  troops — nearly  all  new — were  driven  back, 
and  McCook's  left  turned.  In  falling  back,  Terrill  endeav- 
ored to  rally  his  command  near  the  batteries  posted  in  his 
rear.  While  gallantly  doing  so,  he  fell,  mortally  wounded, 
and  died  in  a  few  hours.  McCook  sent  to  Sheridan,  asking 
him  to  protect  his  right,  and  sent  to  Gilbert  for  reinforce- 
ments. 

The  advance  of  the  enemy  was  checked  by  Starkweathei's 
brigade,  with  Stone's  and  Bush's  batteries,  all  well  posted 
to  meet  the  assault  after  Terrill's  brigade  had  been  driven 
back.  The  enemy  made  repeated  assaults  with  fresh  troops 
at  this  point,  but  was  driven  back  each  time  with  heavy  loss 
until  the  troops  and  batteries  were  out  of  ammunition,  when 
they  fell  back  to  the  original  line,  and  obtaining  a  supply 
renewed  the  fight. 


BATTLE  OF  PERRYVILLE.  67 

On  the  right  in  Eousseau's  front  the  enemy  under  Ander- 
son made  a  vigorous  charge  on  Lytle's  and  Harris's  bri- 
gades, attacking  in  greatly  superior  numbers.  They  were 
however  handsomely  repulsed.  After  fighting  until  their 
ammunition  was  exhausted,  these  troops  retired  on  the  line 
with  Starkweather's  command.  The  rebels  then  pushing  for- 
ward under  a  heavy  fire  from  then-  batteries  drove  Lytle's 
brigade  from  the  new  line.  Sloan's  battery  getting  into 
position  opened  on  the  rebels  with  canister  and  checked 
their  advance.  Colonel  Gooding's  brigade  from  Mitchell's 
division  of  Gilbert's  corps,  with  Penney's  Fifth  Wisconsin 
Battery,  was  ordered  up,  and  after  a  brisk  engagement  the 
enemy  was  driven  back  and  the  original  line  of  battle  re- 
occupied.  Steedman's  brigade  of  Schoepff's  division  also 
came  up,  and  attacking  the  enemy  aided  in  the  final  re- 
pulse. 

When  the  heaviest  attack  was  made  on  Rousseau  the  ene- 
my assaulted  Sheridan's  division  in  the  advanced  position 
which  he  occupied  after  forcing  back  their  line  earlier  in  the 
day.  He  now  withdrew  his  troops,  and  posting  them  in 
more  favorable  position  on  the  original  Line,  opened  on 
the  rebels  with  heavy  musketry  fire  and  canister.  The  ene- 
my pressing  him  very  hard  at  this  point,  he  called  on  Gil- 
bert for  support,  who  reinforced  him  with  Carlin's  brigade 
from  Mitchell's  division.  As  the  enemy  moved  forward 
in  strong  force  to  the  attack,  Carlin  immediately  ordered 
his  troops  to  charge,  which  they  did,  and  drove  the  rebels 
before  them  through  Perryville,  capturing  in  the  town  two 
caissons,  fifteen  wagons  loaded  with  ammunition,  and  a  guard 
of  138  men  under  command  of  three  officers.  Sheridan  also 
drove  the  enemy  for  some  distance,  but  did  not  consider  it 
prudent  to  advance  too  far,  leaving  McCook's  right  exposed. 
He  then  directed  his  artillery  fire  on  the  enemy  at  his  left, 


68  THE  ARMY   OF   THE  CUMBERLAND. 

and  aided  in  cheeking  the  advance  in  that  quarter.  "Wag- 
ner's brigade  of  Wood's  division  became  engaged,  and  did 
good  service  on  the  right  of  Mitchell's  division.  The  rest 
of  Crittenden's  corps  was  not  engaged  in  the  action. 
Thomas,  on  arriving  on  the  battlefield  with  this  corps, 
was  directed  to  take  position  in  the  line  of  battle  on  the 
right  and  wait  for  orders.  Here  he  waited  during  the  entire 
day,  and  received  none.  Only  part  of  Gilbert's  corps  was 
engaged  in  the  fight,  the  heavy  blow  striking  McCook's, 
which  he  failed  to  report  to  Buell  until  after  two  hours', 
fighting.  The  battle  was  closed  by  night  coming  on,  and  a 
general  engagement  was  anticipated  the  next  day.  Thomas 
was  directed  to  move  Crittenden's  and  Gilbert's  corps  for- 
ward in  the  morning  at  six  o'clock,  and  attack  the  enemy's 
front  and  left  flank. 

Buell  ordered  McCook  during  the  night  to  close  the  open- 
ing between  his  right  and  Gilbert's  left.  His  orders  for  the 
following  day  were  to  hold  his  position  and  take  advantage 
of  any  opportunity  that  the  events  of  the  day  might  present, 
the  main  attack  to  be  made  by  the  other  corps.  On  the  fol- 
lowing morning,  the  advance  being  made  in  accordance  with 
these  orders,  it  was  discovered  that  the  enemy's  main  body 
had  retired  during  the  night,  and  was  falling  back  on  Har- 
rodsburg,  with  indications  that  he  would  there  make  a  stand. 
Bragg  left  his  dead  and  wounded  on  the  field,  but  retired 
leisurely  and  in  good  order. 

Buell  reported  the  strength  of  his  command  before  the 
engagement  at  58,000  effective  men.  Of  these  he  claimed 
22,000  were  raw  troops,  not  drilled,  and  undisciplined.  Less 
than  one-half  of  this  entire  force  was  in  the  action.  His 
reports  show  a  loss  of  4,348,  being  916  killed,  2,943  wounded, 
uiid  189  missing.  Nearly  all  the  losses  were  from  McCook's 
command,   which   bore  the   brant  of   the  heavy   fighting. 


BATTLE  OF  PERRYVILLB.  69 

Bragg  referring  to  his  loss  in  his  official  report  says  :  "  In 
such  a  conflict  our  own  loss  was  necessarily  severe,  probably 
not  less  than  2,500  killed,  wounded,  and  missing."  During 
the  campaign  General  Buell  captured  nearly  five  thousand 
prisoners. 

The  enemy's  troops  engaged  in  the  battle  were  under  the 
immediate  command  of  General  Polk.  Bragg  had  been  with 
Kirby  Smith  at  Frankfort,  where  these  active  operations 
found  him  engaged  in  superintending  "  the  ceremony  of  in- 
stalling the  Provisional  Governor  into  office." 

In  his  official  report  of  the  battle  of  Perry ville,  made  from 
Bryantsville,  October  12,  1862,  Bragg  says  :  "  After  consult- 
ing with  the  General  (Polk)  and  reconnoitring  the  ground 
and  examining  his  dispositions,  I  declined  to  assume  the 
command,  but  suggested  some  changes  and  modifications  of 
his  arrangements,  which  he  promptly  made."  In  a  subse- 
quent report  of  Perryville,  made  while  he  was  at  Shelby- 
ville,  of  date  May  20,  1863,  he  reflects  very  severely  upon 
Polk's  movements  at  Perryville.  He  says  that  he  ordered 
the  attack  to  be  made  by  Polk  on  Gilbert  early  in  the  morn- 
ing of  the  8th,  that  he  waited  until  10  a.m.,  and  hearing  no 
firing  started  to  see  Polk  and  have  an  explanation  of  the 
delay.  Here  he  was  "  informed  that  it  was  determined  not 
to  attack,  biit  to  assume  the  '  defensive  offensive.' "  Bragg 
gave  orders  for  some  changes  in  the  line  of  battle,  restoring 
certain  portions  of  the  command  that  had  been  withdrawn, 
and  again  ordered  Polk  to  bring  on  the  engagement.  The 
execution  of  this  order  was  delayed  by  Polk,  and  Bragg, 
becoming  "  impatient  at  the  delay  after  this  order,"  "  des- 
patched a  staff  officer  to  repeat  it  to  the  General,  and  soon 
thereafter  followed  in  person  and  put  the  troops  in  motion. 's 

Bragg's  intention  was  not  to  fight  a  general  engagement 
at  Perryville,  but  merely  to  check  the  advance  of  Buell'a 


70  THE   ARMY   OF   THE   CUMBERLAND. 

army,  thereby  gaining  time  to  gather  his  supplies  and 
men  together  and  leave  the  State.  Bragg  had  been  urged, 
by  leading  Kentuckians  in  his  command  and  others,  to  un- 
dertake the  campaign  in  Kentucky  with  the  promise  of  im- 
mense numbers  of  recruits  and  large  quantities  of  supplies. 
He  anticipated  that  his  coming  would  be  hailed  as  that  of  a 
deliverer,  and  that  the  young  men  of  the  State  would  flock 
to  his  banners  and  fill  up  his  army,  so  that  he  could  attack 
Buell  at  any  point.  Bragg's  entire  command  in  Kentucky 
was  estimated  at  thirty-five  to  forty  thousand.  He  antici- 
pated enlisting  twenty  thousand  recruits,  and  took  arms 
to  Kentucky  for  that  number  of  new  troops.  Buell's  com- 
mand, with  his  losses  and  the  garrison  at  Nashville  was  less 
than  this,  but  at  Louisville  he  received  some  twenty  two 
thousand  new  troops.  The  number  of  infantry  recruits  for 
Bragg's  army  was  very  small,  for  he  says  in  his  first  official 
report  of  the  battle  of  Perryville — when  he  at  that  time  was 
preparing  to  leave  the  State — "  with  ample  means  to  arm 
twenty  thousand  men  and  a  force  with  that  to  fully  redeem 
the  State,  we  have  not  yet  issued  half  the  arms  left  us  by 
casualties  incident  to  the  eanrpaign." 

General  Buell  waited  for  Sill  to  join  him  with  his  division, 
leaving  Dumont  at  Frankfort.  On  the  march  Sill's  advance 
was  attacked  by  a  portion  of  Kirby  Smith's  command,  which 
he  repulsed  and  arrived  at  Perryville  on  the  11th.  Buell 
then  moved  forward,  expecting  Bragg  to  give  battle  at  Har- 
rodsburg,  and  throwing  out  a  strong  force  to  reconnoitre, 
discovered  the  enemy  in  force  some  three  miles  south  of 
that  place.  During  the  day  Bragg  continued  his  march 
south,  his  rear  guard  being  driven  out  of  the  jdace  with 
flu:  loss  of  considerable  stores  and  about  twelve  hundred 
prisoners,  in  the  main  sick  and  wounded.  On  the  next  day 
Buell    made  a   strong   reconnoissance    to    the    crossing   of 


BATTLE   OF   PERRYVILLE.  71 

Dick's  Eiver,  and  there  ascertained  that  Bragg  had  crossed 
his  entire  army. 

Learning  on  the  13th  that  the  enemy  was  retreating 
south,  Buell  ordered  pursuit  to  be  made  immediately,  for 
the  purpose  of  overtaking  Bragg,  or  of  intercepting  him  if 
he  should  attempt  to  pass  toward  Somerset.  Wood's  divi- 
sion marched  at  midnight,  and  engaged  the  enemy  at  Stan- 
ford at  daylight  next  morning.  The  rest  of  Crittenden's 
and  McOook's  corps  followed  on  the  same  road ;  Gilbert 
marching  on  the  Lancaster  road.  The  enemy  was  steadily 
pressed  on  the  road  to  Cumberland  Gap,  but  could  not  be 
brought  to  an  engagement.  McCook's  and  Gilbert's  corps 
were  halted  at  Crab  Orchard,  while  Crittenden,  with  W.  S. 
Smith's  division,  was  sent  in  pursuit  as  far  as  London  on  the 
direct  road  to  the  Gap.  It  now  appearing  that  Bragg  did 
not.  intend  to  fight  in  the  State,  and  the  country  beyond 
Crab  Orchard  being  extremely  barren  and  rough — no  sup- 
plies existing  in  it — the  pursuit  was  discontinued,  and  the 
Army  of  the  Ohio  was  turned  toward  Bowling  Green  and 
Glasgow,  preparatory  to  the  advance  to  Nashville.  McCook's 
and  Gilbert's  corps  were  concentrated  at  the  former  place, 
and  Crittenden's  at  the  latter.  This  movement  of  the  troops 
was  made  by  Buell,  who  was  confident  that  Bragg  would 
concentrate  in  the  vicinity  of  Nashville,  and  seek  to  recover 
that  place,  and  to  fight  his  great  battle  for  the  possession 
of  Kentucky. 

The  military  affairs  of  the  nation  at  this  time  were  unfor- 
tunately in  charge  of  General  Halleck,  who  had  been  called 
to  Washington  as  Commander-in-Chief.  On  the  retreat  of 
Bragg  from  Kentucky,  Halleck  insisted  that  Buell  should 
make  a  campaign  into  East  Tennessee,  a  distance  of  two 
hundred  and  forty  miles,  over  mountain  and  river,  without 
any  communication  to  the  rear,  except  by  wagon  train,  over 


72  THE  ARMY  OF  THE  CUMBERLAND. 

almost  impassable  roads,  tlie  advance  to  be  made  in  the  face 
of  the  enemy,  who,  operating  on  his  line  of  communications 
could  move  his  entire  command  to  defeat  our  advance  in 
detail.  Buell  reported  to  the  War  Department  that  it  was 
impossible  to  make  the  campaign  as  ordered,  and  knowing 
the  necessity  of  protecting  Nashville,  he  directed  the  con- 
centration of  his  troops  on  the  line  of  the  railroad  to  that 
place.  That  road  had  been  repaired  up  to  Bowling  Green, 
after  the  destruction  of  two  months  before,  and  here  the 
troops  received  their  needed  supplies.  On  the  30th  of  Oc- 
tober, Buell  was  relieved  of  the  command  of  the  Department 
of  the  Ohio,  and  Major-General  William  S.  Bosecrans  was, 
by  the  direction  of  the  General-in-Chief,  assigned  to  the 
command  of  the  troops.  The  designation  of  the  command 
being  changed  to  that  of  the  Department  of  the  Cumber- 
land. 

It  is  a  somewhat  singular  fact,  that  the  campaign  in  Ken- 
tucky should  have  caused  the  most  intense  feeling  in  the 
opposing  armies  against  their  respective  commanders.  In 
the  Federal  army,  after  Buell  allowed  Bragg  to  move  north 
from  Munfordsville  without  an  engagement,  the  expressions 
of  the  troops  against  their  commanding  general  were  open, 
bitter,  and  almost  universal,  from  the  lowest  to  the  highest. 
However,  there  was  one  who  never  for  a  moment  lost  faith, 
soldierly  trust,  and  esteem  for  his  commander,  and  he  was 
of  all  persons  in  the  command  most  competent  to  judge. 
This  was  General  Thomas.  He  knew  the  great  difficulties 
of  Buell's  position,  how  his  plans  had  been  interfered  with 
by  Halleck,  under  whose  command  it  was  his  misfortune 
early  in  the  year  to  be ;  and  later,  how  he  was  made  to  feel 
the  power  of  this  same  man  as  a  personal  matter.  Halleck, 
invested  by  the  Administration  with  supreme  powers, 
planned  a  campaign  into  East  Tennessee,  on  paper  in  Wash- 


BATTLE  OF  PERRYVILLE.  73 

ington,  and  ordered  Buell  to  execute  it.  This,  the  latter, 
with  full  knowledge  of  the  situation,  refused  to  do,  and 
quietly  ordering  his  troops  to  the  line  of  the  railroad  from 
whence  they  could  be  moved  with  the  least  delay,  as 
needed,  waited  for  the  order  he  knew  was  pending  for  his 
removal. 

General  Buell  was  right  in  refusing  to  attack  Bragg  at 
Munfordsville,  or  in  fact  at  any  time  until  he  had  placed 
his  army  north  of  the  enemy,  and  received  his  own  rein- 
forcements from  Louisville.  Then  this  point  was  safe,  and 
Nashville  could  not  be  imperilled  by  the  defeat  of  our 
army.  Buell  made  three  dispositions  for  an  engagement 
during  the  Kentucky  campaign,  but  each  time  Bragg  drew 
off  except  at  Perryville,  and  here  there  was  no  design  of  the 
latter  to  fight,  beyond  checking  Buell's  advance,  and  gain- 
ing time  for  his  troops  to  make  their  retreat  from  the  State 
with  all  stores  and  material.  Bragg,  from  his  closing  re- 
marks in  his  first  report  of  the  battle  of  Perryville,  cer- 
tainly did  not  consider — so  far  as  the  Confederacy  was  con- 
cerned— that  the  State  was  worth  fighting  for.  Had  he  re- 
ceived the  20,000  new  troops  he  was  promised,  instead  of 
General  Buell  having  his  army  increased  by  that  number, 
then  he  would  have  struck  quick  and  sharp.  He  left  the 
State  deeply  disgusted  with  Kentucky,  and  took  eveiy  occa- 
sion after  that  to  show  it.  The  account  was  even,  however, 
as  Bragg  was  not  a  favorite  in  that  State. 

At  Perryville  Buell  labored  under  the  same  disadvantage 
in  the  organization  of  his  command  that  made  itself  felt  on 
the  first  two  great  battlefields  of  the  Army  of  the  Cumber- 
land. That  was  the  inefficiency  of  his  corps  commanders. 
Of  Gilbert  it  is  only  necessary  to  say,  that  a  worse  appoint- 
ment as  a  corps  commander  was  not  made  during  the  war. 
Fortunately,  the  battle  of  Perryville  was  his  first  and  only 
VII.— 4 


74  THE  ARMY  OF  THE  CUMBERLAND. 

appearance  in  that  position.  Buell,  after  expressing  Lis 
thanks  for  MeCook's  sendees  on  that  field  and  in  the  cam- 
paign, in  his  official  report  says:  "It  is  true  that  only  one 
serious  battle  has  been  fought,  and  that  was  incomplete,  and 
less  decisive  than  it  might  have  been.  That  this  was  so  is 
due  partly  to  unavoidable  difficulties  which  prevented  the 
troops,  marching  on  different  roads,  from  getting  on  the 
ground  simultaneously,  but  more  to  the  fact  that  I  was  not 
apprised  early  enough  of  the  condition  of  affairs  on  my  left. 
I  can  find  no  fault  with  the  former,  nor  am  I  disposed  at  this 
time  to  censure  the  latter,  though  it  must  be  admitted  to 
have  been  a  grave  error.  I  ascribe  it  to  the  too  great  confi- 
dence of  the  general  commanding  the  left  corps  (Major-Gen- 
eral McCook),  which  made  him  believe  that  he  could  manage 
the  difficulty  without  the  aid  or  control  of  his  commander." 
Buell  was  not  notified  of  any  attack  by  the  enemy  on  his 
left  until  over  two  hour-s  after  the  engagement  was  begun. 
He  then  hurried  to  the  field,  and  sent  the  necessary  sup- 
ports forward,  at  once  checking  the  enemy,  and  made  dispo- 
sition of  his  troops  for  battle. 

With  a  willingness  to  lay  down  command  that  character- 
ized all  the  commanders  of  the  Army  of  the  Cumberland 
when  the  authorities  in  Washington  regarded  the  good  of 
the  service  as  requiring  it,  Buell  placed  the  new  com- 
mander in  full  possession  of  all  plans  and  information  that 
he  possessed,  and  without  a  word  left  the  troops  that  were 
to  win  undying  fame  on  other  battle-fields,  largely  by  reason 
of  the  training  he  had  given  them  during  the  period  of  his 
command,  half  a  month  less  than  one  year. 

The  Comte  de  Paris,  in  his  "  History  of  the  Civil  War  in 
America,"  in  writing  on  the  battle  of  Shiloh,  where  he  re- 
fers to  the  massing  of  the  artillery  by  Grant's  Chief  of  Staff, 
Colonel  Webster,  says  :  "  The  fate  of  the  day  depends  upon 


BATTLE   OF   PERRYVILLE.  75 

the  preservation  of  these  heights,  whence  the  enemy  could 
have  commanded  Pittsburg  Landing,"  and  on  the  following 
page  adds,  "  Nevertheless,  at  the  sight  of  the  enemy's  bat- 
talions advancing  in  good  order,  the  soldiers  that  have  been 
grouped  together  in  haste,  to  give  an  air  of  support  to  Web- 
ster's battery,  become  frightened  and  scatter.  It  is  about 
to  be  carried,  when  a  new  body  of  troops  deploying  in  the 
rear  of  the  guns,  with  as  much  regularity  as  if  they  were  on 
the  parade-ground,  receives  the  Confederates  with  a  fire 
that  drives  them  back  in  disorder  into  the  ravine.  This 
was  the  brigade  of  Ammen,  belonging  to  Nelson's  division, 
that  rushed  forward  so  opportunely."  In  speaking  of  the 
second  day's  fight  he  gays  :  "  At  a  signal  given  by  Buell,  his 
three  divisions,  under  Nelson,  Crittenden,  and  McCook,  put 
themselves  in  motion  at  the  same  time.  The  soldiers  of  the 
Army  of  the  Ohio,  constantly  drilled  for  the  year  past  by  a 
rigid  disciplinarian,  and  trained  by  their  long  marches 
across  three  States,  are  distinguished  by  their  discipline 
and  their  fine  bearing.  The  readiness  with  which  they 
march  against  the  enemy  wins  the  admiration  of  generals 
who,  like  Sherman,  have  had  to  fight  a  whole  day  at  the  head 
of  raw  and   inexperienced  troops." 

The  greatest  service  that  General  Buell  rendered  to  his 
country  was  as  the  organizer  and  disciplinarian  of  the  mass 
of  the  raw,  undrilled  troops  that  were  hurried  to  the  front 
under  the  need  of  the  hour,  and  who,  unaccustomed  to  mili- 
tary or  other  restraint,  had  all  the  freedom  that  character- 
izes the  American  sovereign  both  in  speech  and  action.  To 
take  these  troops  by  the  thousands  and  make  an  army  of 
fifty  to  seventy-five  thousand  trained  skilled  soldiers,  who, 
in  later  days,  were  to  do  as  splendid  fighting  as  the  world 
ever  saw,  was  a  stupendous  undertaking.  General  Buell 
not  only  did  this,  but  accomplished  his  task  in  time  to  bring 


76  THE  ARMY  OF   THE  CUMBERLAND. 

some  of  these  soldiers  that  he  was  justly  proud  of  to  the 
field  of  Shiloh,  where,  under  his  eve,  they  met  the  enemy 
like  veterans.  Buell's  military  training  and  habits  of  life 
led  him,  however,  into  one  error.  He  was  so  good  a  soldier 
himself,  and  so  anxious  that  his  army  should  be  thorough 
soldiers,  that  he  failed  to  recognize  the  distinction  between 
the  regular  soldier  in  garrison  during  times  of  peace  and  the 
thinking  volunteer  during  the  active  campaigns  of  the  re- 
bellion. The  latter  could  not  and  would  not  be  made  the 
mere  machine  the  former  becomes,  and  Buell's  failure  to . 
appreciate  this  caused  great  ill-feeling  against  him  at  the 
time  in  his  army.  Then,  again,  Buell's  earlier  military 
training  in  the  bureau  office  he  held  so  many  years  unfitted 
him  for  the  handling,  on  the  battle-field,  of  the  large  num- 
ber of  troops  which  composed  his  command.  But  very  few 
generals  during  the  rebellion  were  able  to  successfully  han- 
dle on  the  battle-field  as  large  an  army  as  was  under  Buell. 
In  fact,  the  general  who  has  sufficient  talent  as  a  good  or- 
ganizer and  drill-master  to  enter  into  the  details  necessaiy 
to  bring  an  army  out  of  raw  troops,  has  not  the  military 
genius  required  to  handle  a  large  army  in  fighting  and  win- 
ning great  battles.  But  Buell  rendered  many  valuable  ser- 
vices, in  the  camp  and  on  the  field,  to  his  country.  It  was 
Buell  who  planned  the  Fort  Henry,  Fort  Donelson,  and 
Nashville  campaign,  which  Halleck  put  under  his  hat,  and 
proceeded  to  cany  out  as  his  original  idea,  being  careful  to 
say  nothing  in  regard  to  his  plans  until  they  were  so  far 
executed  as  to  render  any  action  on  the  part  of  Buell  and 
his  command  simply  that  of  a  supporting  column.  Then  to 
Buell  is  due  the  credit  of  the  second  day's  fight  at  Shiloh. 
That  day's  battle  was  the  fight  of  the  Army  of  the  Ohio  with 
Lewis  Wallace's  division,  General  Grant  giving  Buell  largely 
his  discretion  in  the  movements  of  the  troops.     Whitelaw 


BATTLE  OF  PERRYVILLE.  77 

Eeid  says  of  him,  in  "Ohio  in  the  War,"  "He  came  into 
that  action  when,  without  him,  all  was  lost.  He  redeemed 
the  fortunes  of  the  field,  and  justly  won  the  title  of  the 
'  Hero  of  Pittsburg  Landing.' " 

The  order  placing  Rosecrans  in  command — General  Order 
No.  168,  War  Department,  of  date  October  24,  1862 — created 
the  Department  of  the  Cumberland,  embracing  that  portion  of 
the  State  of  Tennessee  lying  east  of  the  Tennessee  River,  and 
such  portion  of  Georgia  and  Alabama  as  should  be  occupied 
by  the  Federal  troops.  The  troops  in  the  field  were  desig- 
nated in  the  same  order  as  the  "Fourteenth  Army  Corps." 

General  Rosecrans  assumed  command  on  October  30th  at 
Louisville.  On  November  2d  he  arrived  at  Bowling  Green, 
and  on  the  7th  he  announced,  in  General  Orders,  the  divi- 
sion of  his  army  organization  into  "the  Right  Wing." 
"the  Centre,"  and  "the  Left  Wing,"  under  the  command 
respectively  of  McCook,  Thomas,  and  Crittenden,  with  five 
divisions  in  the  centre  and  three  in  each  wing.  He  in- 
structed Thomas  to  advance  Fry  and  Dumont's  divisions  to 
Gallatin,  and  to  push  rapidly  forward  the  repairs  of  the  rail- 
road to  Nashville. 

Up  to  this  time  the  movements  of  Bragg's  army  remained 
undeveloped,  and  no  disposition  of  the  Federal  forces  could 
be  safely  made  without  the  knowledge  of  what  Bragg's  plan 
of  operations  would  be.  That  he  would  ultimately  attenrpt 
the  capture  of  Nashville  or  force  a  battle  for  it  there  could 
be  but  little  doubt.  Not  to  fight  for  Nashville  was  the 
abandonment  of  Tennessee.  Kentucky  surrendered  without 
a  blow  produced  such  demoralization  in  Bragg's  command 
that  to  have  given  up  Tennessee  without  a  struggle  would 
have  either  compelled  a  change  in  the  commanding  officer 
of  that  army  or  a  disbandment  of  it,  so  far  as  the  Kentucky 
and  Tennessee  troops  were  concerned. 


78  THE  ARMY  OF   THE  CUMBERLAND. 

General  Halleck's  brilliant  paper  campaign  into  East  Ten- 
nessee again  was  produced  and  aired  "with  a  show  of  the 
most  profound  wisdom,  based  on  the  extreme  of  ignorance  of 
the  situation  and  surroundings.  Buell's  forethought  in  con- 
centrating the  army  within  supporting  distance  of  Nashville 
became  apparent  on  the  appearance  of  the  advance  of  Bragg's 
army  at  Murfreesboro,  reinforcing  Breckinridge's  command, 
which  had  been  left  in  Tennessee  to  enforce  the  "blockade 
of  Nashville."  This  was  another  grievance  the  Kentucky 
troops  had  against  Bragg.  All  the  Kentucky  infantry  troops 
under  Bragg  were  in  Breckinridge's  command,  and  they  were 
exceedingly  anxious  to  return  to  the  State  with  Bragg's 
army  to  visit  their  friends  and  relatives  and  aid  in  recruiting 
that  army.  Bragg's  distrust  of  these  troops  was  such  that 
he  refused  to  allow  them  this  privilege,  and  his  action  in 
holding  them  in  Tennessee,  just  out  of  Kentucky,  did  not 
materially  increase  his  popularity  with  them.  Breckinridge 
had  established  his  headquarters  at  Murfreesboro  and  as- 
sumed chief  command,  with  about  ten  thousand  troops  under 
him,  over  one-third  of  which  were  cavalry  under  Wheeler 
and  Forrest.  With  this  force  Breckinridge  endeavored  to 
enforce  the  siege  of  Nashville,  using  his  cavalry  to  prevent 
the  gathering  of  forage  and  supplies  by  our  troops  from  the 
surrounding  country.  These  foraging  parties  were  con- 
stantly sent  out,  going  as  far  at  times  as  ten  miles  on  these 
expeditions.  The  main  deprivation  the  garrison  suffered 
during  the  six  weeks  of  the  siege  was  in  having  nearly  all 
communication  cut  off  from  their  friends  at  the  North,  and 
while  they  received  nothing,  they  embraced  every  oppor- 
tunity of  sending  letters  by  citizens  returning  north.  The 
garrison  was  not  willing  to  remain  entirely  on  the  defensive. 
Besides  the  numerous  raiding  parties  sent  out  for  forage 
which  were  uniformly  successful,  on  the  night  of  the  6th 


BATTLE  OF  PERRYVILLE.  79 

of  October,  Negley  sent  Palmer  with  some  twenty-eight 
hundred  troops  to  attack  General  S.  R.  Anderson,  who  had 
established  his  camp  at  Lavergne  with  some  three  thousand 
men,  principally  new  recruits.  Palmer  with  the  artillery  and 
about  four  hundred  infantry  to  support  it,  moved  directly 
on  Lavergne,  some  fifteen  miles  from  Nashville,  while  Col- 
onel John  F.  Miller  with  about  twenty-four  hundred  men 
in  his  command  moved  on  the  road  to  the  right  to  make  the 
attack  on  the  rear  of  the  enemy.  Miller  marched  his  com- 
mand during  the  night,  captured  the  enemy's  pickets  at  day- 
light and  moved  on  the  encampment.  Palmer  opened  with 
artillery  as  soon  as  he  heard  Miller's  musketry  firing  and  the 
latter,  pushing  his  troops  rapidly  forward,  after  an  engage- 
ment lasting  half  an  hour,  had  the  enemy  in  full  retreat  on 
the  road  to  Murfreesboro  with  a  loss  of  80  killed  and 
wounded,  and  175  prisoners.  He  also  captured  three  pieces 
of  artillery,  and  the  regimental  colors  of  the  Thirty-second 
Alabama.  Palmer's  command  then  returned  to  Nashville. 
During  the  siege  of  Nashville  skirmishing  between  our 
pickets  and  the  scouting  parties  of  the  enemy  was  constantly 
occurring,  and  the  garrison  of  Nashville  was  indebted  for  its 
safety  to  the  services  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Von  Schrader  of 
the  Seventy-fourth  Ohio,  Inspector  of  Negley's  division,  as 
much  as  any  one  thing.  Von  Schrader  was  an  educated 
Prussian  officer  and  a  thorough  soldier.  He  established  a 
system  of  pickets,  strongly  posted,  with  block  houses  for 
their  protection,  and  then  gave  his  personal  attention  to  it 
that  the  pickets  performed  their  entire  duty.  There  was 
no  determined  assault  on  the  place  at  any  time  during  the 
siege.  The  only  appearance  of  an  attack  in  force  was  on  the 
6th  of  November,  by  a  body  of  some  eight  thousand  troops, 
equally  divided  between  cavalry  and  infantry,  under  General 
Roger  Hanson.     Forrest,  knowing  that  the  Federal  force  at 


80  THE  ARMY   OP  THE  CUMBERLAND. 

Nashville  was  not  a  very  strong  one  and  that  by  the  pursuit 
of  Bragg  by  Buell's  army,  Nashville  was  completely  cut  ofi 
from  any  immediate  support  or  relief,  obtained  General 
Breckinridge's  permission  to  make  an  attack  with  his  cav- 
alry, numbering  over  four  thousand  men,  in  concert  with  the 
infantry  under  Hanson,  numbering  a  little  less  than  Forrest's 
command.  The  enemy's  cavalry  moved  in  columns  on  the 
Charlotte,  Franklin,  and  Nolinsville  turnpikes  from  the 
south,  while  Forrest  in  person  with  1,000  cavalry  and  Han- 
son's infantry,  pushed  rapidly  forward  on  the  Murfreesboro 
pike,  arriving  at  the  Lunatic  Asylum,  six  miles  from  Nash- 
ville, by  daylight.  Our  pickets  and  cavalry  were  driven  in, 
and  Hanson  was  in  readiness  to  make  the  attack  with  the 
infantry  when  a  peremptory  order  from  Breckinridge  was 
received,  directing  further  operations  to  cease,  under  ex- 
press orders  from  Bragg.  After  skirmishing  with  his  cav- 
alry around  the  city  at  the  different  outposts,  Forrest  with- 
drew, greatly  incensed  at  being  ordered  to  desist  from  the 
attack  when  confident  of  success. 

Bragg  in  leaving  a  large  number  of  men  in  middle  Ten- 
nessee merely  to  watch  the  post  of  Nashville— thus  crippling 
his  army  to  that  extent — committed  a  great  mistake.  He 
needed  every  available  man  in  his  army  to  make  the  Ken- 
tucky campaign  a  success.  With  these  10,000  troops,  if 
Buell  had  left  Negley's  and  Paine's  divisions  as  garrisons  at 
Nashville,  Bragg's  force  would  have  outnumbered  Buell's 
command  before  he  reached  Louisville  three  to  two.  With 
'  the  defeat  of  Buell,  Nashville  would  have  been  worse  than 
worthless,  proving  an  incumbrance  instead  of  a  benefit. 
On  the  other  hand,  with  Bragg  driven  out  of  Kentucky,  and 
opening  the  struggle  for  that  State  in  Tennessee,  the  pos- 
session of  Nashville  as  a  second  base  of  supplies  for  our 
army  was  an  absolute  necessity.     Bragg,  however,  was  cor- 


BATTLE  OF   PERRYVILLE.  81 

rect  in  refusing  to  allow  the  place  to  be  attacked  by  For- 
rest, for  even  in  the  event  of  success  the  non-combatants 
and  sympathizing  friends  of  the  South  would  have  suffered 
in  person  and  property  to  an  extent  far  beyond  what  the 
temporary  occupation  of  the  city  by  the  Southern  forces 
would  have  compensated. 

Nashville  was  reinforced  by  the  arrival  of  the  advance  of 
the  army  concentrating  there  on  the  17th  of  November,  and 
a  few  days  after  Bosecrans  arrived  and  established  his 
headquarters  in  that  city.  The  first  thing  that  demanded 
the  attention  of  the  new  commander  was  that  which  had 
given  the  most  serious  trouble  to  General  Buell,  viz.  :  the 
safety  of  his  communications  in  the  rear  to  his  base  of  sup- 
plies. The  repairs  to  the  tunnel  just  south  of  Mitchellville 
occupied  a  large  force  several  weeks  to  complete.  During 
this  time  all  supplies  for  troops  at  Nashville  were  with  the 
greatest  labor  hauled  thirty-five  miles  by  wagon  train.  The 
railroad  from  Louisville  to  Nashville  was  re-opened  on  the 
26th  of  November,  and  for  one  month  every  effort  was  made 
to  forward  supplies,  so  the  troops  could  have  new  clothing 
issued  to  tkein,  and  that  they  could  be  provided  with  am- 
munition. The  depots  at  Nashville  were  filled  with  needful 
supplies  to  provide  against  the  interruption  of  communica- 
tion arising  from  raids  on  the  railroad  by  rebel  cavalry. 
Since  the  middle  of  November  Bragg  had  been  concen- 
trating his  forces  at  Murfreesboro,  and  anticipating  that  the 
Federal  forces  would  go  into  winter  quarters  at  Nashville,  had 
placed  his  troops  in  quarters  for  the  winter  in  the  vicinity  of 
the  former  place.  He  had  sent  nearly  all  of  his  cavalry  to  raid 
on  the  lines  of  the  Federal  communication — Morgan  into  Ken- 
tucky and  Wheeler  into  West  Tennessee.  With  this  knowl- 
edge, Bosecrans,  on  the  26th  of  December,  ordered  his  army 
to  move  out  of  Nashville  to  attack  the  enemy  on  his  front. 
4* 


82  THE  ARMY   OF  THE  CUMBERLAND. 

While  the  army  was  being  refitted  at  Nashville,  Morgan's 
cavalry  was  raiding  the  surrounding  country.  On  the  7th 
Morgan's  command  captured  the  Thirty-ninth  Brigade  under 
Colonel  A.  B.  Moore,  at  Hartsville,  where  he  had  been  posted 
by  Thomas  to  guard  the  ford  of  the  Cumberland  Biver,  and 
to  watch  the  enemy  on  the  Lebanon  road.  The  brigade ' 
consisted  of  three  infantry  regiments,  a  battalion  of  cavalry, 
and  a  section  of  artillery,  making  a  force  of  about  two  thou- 
sand effective  men.  The  command  was  badly  posted,  and  the 
commanding  officers  of  the  infantry  regiments  failed  to  co- 
operate, or  to  obey  orders.  It  was,  in  the  main,  a  repetition 
of  the  disgraceful  affair  at  Murfreesboro,  when  Forrest  cap- 
tured that  place  during  the  previous  summer.  Moore  was 
surprised  in  his  camp  early  in  the  morning.  No  warning 
was  given  by  the  pickets,  and  before  any  disposition  could 
be  made  of  the  troops,  Morgan's  men  were  upon  them. 
Morgan's  command  consisted  of  his  cavalry,  and  two  regi- 
ments of  infantry.  Moore  threw  out  a  skirmish  line  to 
resist  the  advance  of  Morgan's  infantry  and  dismounted 
cavalry  in  line.  The  rebels  pressed  steadily  forward  to  a 
ravine  at  the  foot  of  the  hill  on  which  Moore  had  formed 
his  line,  and  under  shelter  of  this  poured  such  a  destructive 
fire  upon  the  Federal  troops,  that  he  ordered  a  new  line 
to  be  formed  in  the  rear.  In  this  movement  the  whole  line 
was  thrown  into  confusion,  and  being  attacked  on  their  right 
and  rear  by  the  rebel  cavalry,  who  had,  up  to  this  time  not 
been  engaged,  Moore's  command  was  crowded  one  on  the 
other  into  a  narrow  space  where  the  fire  of  the  enemy  proved 
terribly  effective.  Moore's  troops  being  unable  to  return 
the  fire,  and  he  not  being  able  to  make  another  disposi- 
tion of  them,  the  white  flag  was  raised,  and  the  entire  com- 
mand surrendered.  Colonel  Tafel,  in  command  of  the  One 
Hundred   and   Sixth  Ohio,   becoming   separated   from   the 


BATTLE  OF   PERRYVILLE.  83 

other  troops,  made  some  further  resistance,  but,  being  over- 
powered, he  also  surrendered.  The  contest  only  lasted  a  lit- 
tle over  an  hour.  Moore's  loss  was  150  killed  and  wounded, 
his  entire  command  captured,  with  all  army  and  camp  equip- 
ment, trains,  and  two  pieces  of  artillery.  Morgan's  loss  was 
125  killed  and  wounded. 

General  D.  S.  Stanley,  on  reporting  to  Eosecrans  from  the 
Army  of  the  Tennessee,  had  been  assigned  to  the  position 
of  Chief  of  Cavalry  to  the  Commanding  General.  On  the 
12th  he  attacked  and  drove  the  enemy  out  of  the  town  of 
Franklin,  killing  five  and  capturing  twelve  men,  with  a  large 
number  of  horses  and  stores.  He  destroyed  the  mills  at 
that  place,  with  a  great  quantity  of  valuable  property. 

After  the  capture  of  Hartsville  by  Morgan,  his  services 
were  recognized  by  his  superiors  to  the  extent  that  Mr. 
Davis,  who  was  on  a  visit  to  Murfreesboro  shortly  after  this 
engagement,  signed  and  handed  him  his  commission  as 
Brigadier-General.  General  Hardee  urged  that  the  ap- 
pointment be  made  as  Major-General,  but  this  was  refused. 
Morgan's  command  had  increased  so  that  it  was  unwieldy  as 
one  body,  and  he  decided  to  form  it  into  two  brigades.  His 
command  consisted  now  of  seven  regiments, — an  aggre- 
gate force  of  over  four  thousand  men.  This  he  divided, 
placing  three  regiments  under  Colonel  Basil  W.  Duke,  in 
the  first  brigade,  with  a  battery  of  four  guns.  The  second 
brigade  was  placed  in  command  of  Colonel  W.  C.  P.  Breck- 
inridge, and  was  composed  of  four  regiments,  with  'one 
three-inch  Parrot  gun  and  the  two  mountain  howitzers. 
This  force,  trained  as  it  had  been,  had  no  superior  for  the 
work  it  was  ordered  to  do — raiding  in  the  rear,  destroying 
bridges,  trestleworks,  and  capturing  bridge-guards.  So  ac- 
customed had  they  become  to  hardships  of  every  nature, 
that  it  was  almost  incredible  the  amount  of  rough  riding, 


84  THE  ARMY  OF  THE  CUMBERLAND. 

scant  fare,  and  loss  of  sleep  these  men  endured.  Proud  of 
their  past  success,  and  emboldened  by  it  to  the  belief  that 
they  were  able  to  defeat  any  force  that  could  overtake  them, 
they  at  last  found  the  country  south  of  the  Ohio  too  con- 
fined for  them,  and,  aiming  at  grander  feats,  they  passed 
north  of  that  river,  and,  entering  upon  an  entirely  different 
kind  of  warfare,  met  with  complete  disaster. 

On  the  morning  of  the  22d  the  command  of  Morgan  took 
the  road  again  for  Kentucky.  Bragg  ordered  the  railroad 
in  Rosecrans's  rear  to  be  broken,  and  his  communication 
with  Louisville  destroyed.  Morgan  and  his  men  were  in 
most  excellent  spirits  at  the  prospect  of  another  raid  into 
that  State.  He  had  with  him  the  pick  of  the  youth  of  the 
State  of  Kentucky.  On  the  24th  Morgan's  command  had 
their  first  skirmish  with  a  battalion  of  Michigan  troops, 
which  resulted  in  the  loss  to  Morgan  of  seventeen  of  his 
men  and  two  of  his  officers.  On  the  25th  Colonel  Hobson 
had  an  engagement  with  Johnson's  regiment  near  Mun- 
fordsville,  in  which  the  rebels  suffered  a  loss  of  some  fifty 
men  killed  and  wounded.  Morgan  then  attacked  the  stock- 
ade at  Bacon  Creek,  held  by  a  force  of  100  men,  who  made 
a  most  stubborn  and  determined  resistance,  inflicting  severe 
loss  upon  the  attacking  party,  and  demonstrating  the  worth 
of  a  stockade  properly  built  and  efficiently  manned.  These 
stockades  were  built  with  heavy  upright  timber  ten  or 
twelve  feet  high.  They  were  surrounded  by  ditches  and 
pierced  for  musketry.  Assailants,  when  right  at  the  base, 
were  still  far  from  taking  them.  It  was  supposed  that  they 
would  not  resist  artillery,  and,  in  fact,  they  were  not  built 
with  the  expectation  of  doing  so.  If  the  garrison  of  the 
stockade  succeeded  in  driving  off  the  guerilla  parties  that 
swarmed  through  the  country,  it  fully  accomplished  its  pur- 
pose.    This  stockade  successfully  resisted  the  heavy  artil- 


BATTLE   OF  PERRYVILLE.  85 

lery  firing  brought  to  bear  upon  it,  even  when  a  number  of 
shells  exploded  within  the  work.  After  making  such  a  brave 
defence,  it  is  to  be  regretted  that  they  did  not  hold  out  to 
the  last,  and  refuse  to  surrender  at  all.  The  commanding 
officer  had  rejected  a  number  of  demands  made  on  him  to 
surrender ;  when  Morgan  came  up  in  person,  and  in  his  own 
name  offering  them  liberal  terms,  they  surrendered.  Mor- 
gan then  burnt  the  bridge  across  Bacon  Creek,  and  pressed 
on  to  Nolin,  fourteen  miles  beyond,  where  the  stockade  was 
surrendered  'without  a  fight.  The  bridge  here  also  was  de- 
stroyed. Morgan's  division,  on  the  27th,  captured  Eliza- 
bethtown,  after  a  severe  engagement  with  the  command  of 
Lieutenant-Colonel  Smith — a  detachment  of  some  six  hun- 
dred infantry.  Smith  sent  Morgan  a  demand  for  him  to 
surrender,  which  Morgan  declined,  and  returned  the  com- 
pliment by  making  the  same  demand  on  Smith,  who  also 
declined.  After  an  engagement  lasting  some  six  hours, 
Morgan's  artillery  rendered  the  building  Smith's  command 
was  fighting  in  untenable,  and  he  then  surrendered.  The 
next  day  Morgan,  moving  along  the  railroad,  destroyed  it 
thoroughly.  The  principal  object  of  the  expedition  was  the 
great  trestleworks  at  Muldraugh's  Hills,  only  a  short  distance 
apart.  The  garrison  defending  the  lower  trestle,  600  strong, 
was  captured  by  the  Second  Brigade.  The  First  Brigade 
captured  the  garrison  at  the  upper  trestle — 200  strong. 
These  trestles  were  respectively  80  and  90  feet  high,  and 
each  of  them  500  feet  long.  They  were  thoroughly  de- 
stroyed. Thus  was  accomplished  the  objects  of  the  raid, 
but  the  destruction  of  these  bridges — trestle  and  railroad — 
did  not  accomplish  the  design  contemplated  by  Bragg. 
Rosecrans's  prompt  movement  from  Nashville  on  the  rebels 
encamped  at  Murfreesboro,  and  the  result  of  that  campaign, 
rendered  Morgan's  raid  a  failure  in  the  main,  as  Bvagg  in- 


86  THE   ARMY  OF  THE  CUMBERLAND. 

tended  the  road  should  be  so  thoroughly  destroyed  as  to 
prevent  the  further  occupation  of  Nashville  by  our  army. 
The  loss  to  the  Federals  was  an  exceedingly  severe  one,  and 
had  Rosecrans  remained  at  Nashville  inactive  all  the  winter 
of  1862,  Bragg's  designs  would  have  met  with  a  greater  de- 
gree of  success. 

On  the  29th,  Colonel  Harlan  with  his  brigade  attacked 
and  routed  Morgan's  troopers  at  Rolling  Fork  of  Salt  River, 
and  drove  them  to  Bardstown.  While  Morgan  was  moving 
around  Lebanon,  Colonel  Hoskins's  command  attacked  him 
and  captured  150  men.  Morgan  passed  between  the  forces 
sent  against  him,  showing  again  that  it  is  impossible  to 
catch  cavalry  with  infantry.  Morgan  then  commenced  his 
retreat  from  the  State.  On  the  morning  of  January  1,  1863, 
as  his  command  was  passing  Columbia,  115  miles  in  an  air- 
line from  Murfreesboro,  his  men  reported  hearing  distinctly 
the  roar  of  heavy  cannonading  in  that  direction.  On  the  2d 
Morgan  crossed  the  Cumberland,  and  felt  safe  once  more 
from  all  pursuit. 

On  December  21st,  General  Carter  moved  with  three  regi- 
ments of  cavalry  toward  East  Tennessee,  from  Lebanon,  Ky., 
to  raid  on  the  rebel  line  of  communication.  Crossing  the 
Cumberland  mountains  forty  miles  northeast  of  Cumberland 
Gap,  he  passed  through  Southwestern  Virginia  and  Tennessee 
to  Carter's  station,  destroying  the  Holston  and  Watauga 
bridges  and  several  miles  of  railroad.  He  then  leisurely 
returned  to  Kentucky  by  the  same  route  he  had  advanced. 


CHAPTER  VII. 

THE  ADVANCE  TO  MURFREESBORO. 

On  December  22d,  General  Thomas  moved  his  headquarters 
from  Gallatin  to  Nashville,  and  there  concentrated  the  divi- 
sions of  Rousseau  and  Negley,  and  Walker's  brigade  of  Fry's 
division.  Of  the  five  divisions  composing  the  Centre,  that  of 
J.  J.  Reynolds  was  guarding  the  Louisville  and  Nashville  Rail- 
road ;  and  on  the  same  duty  were  the  remaining  two  brigades 
of  Fry's  division.  R.  B.  Mitchell  was  assigned  to  the  com- 
mand of  Nashville  with  his  divisiou  as  the  garrison.  This 
left,  under  the  immediate  command  of  Thomas,  the  two  di- 
visions and  the  brigade  as  above,  as  his  only  available  force. 
McCook  with  three  divisions  under  Johnson,  Davis,  and  Sheri- 
dan, and  Crittenden,  also  with  three  divisions  under  Wood, 
Palmer,  and  Van  Cleve,  were  in  camp  in  front  of  Nashville, 
on  "the  Franklin,  Nolinsville,  and  Murfreesboro  turnpikes. 

The  position  of  the  enemy  under  Bragg  was  fully  known 
to  Rosecrans.  Two  corps  under  Polk  and  Kirby  Smith  were 
at  Murfreesboro  with  strong  outposts  at  Stewart's  Creek 
and  Lavergne.  The  corps  under  Hardee  was  on  the  Shelby- 
ville  and  Nolinsville  pike,  between  Triune  and  Eaglesville, 
with  an  advance  guard  at  Nolinsville.  Rosecrans,  on  the 
morning  of  the  26th,  directed  the  advance  movement  to 
commence  in  the  following  order.  McCook  was  to  move 
his  command  of  three  divisions  direct  on  the  Nolinsville 
pike  to  Triune.     Thomas  was  to  advance  his  command  of 


88  THE  ARMY   OP  THE  CUMBERLAND. 

two  divisions  and  a  brigade  on  McCook's  right  by  the  Frank- 
lin and  Wilson  pikes,  threatening  Hardee's  left,  and  on  his 
falling  back  was  then  to  cross  over  on  country  roads  and 
occupy  Nolinsville.  Crittenden  was  ordered  to  move  his 
command  direct  on  the  Murfreesboro  pike.  On  the  arrival 
of  Thomas  at  Nolinsville,  and  being  in  a  position  to  support, 
McCook  was  to  attack  Hardee  at  Triune,  and  if  the  latter 
was  reinforced  and  McCook's  advance  resisted,  Thomas  was 
to  go  to  his  aid.  If  Hardee  fell  back  to  Stewart's  Creek, 
five  miles  south  of  Lavergne,  and  the  enemy  made  a  stand 
there,  then  Crittenden  was  to  attack  him  at  once,  and 
Thomas  was  to  come  in  on  his  left  flank,  while  McCook 
was  to  bring  his  forces  in  supporting  distance  of  Thomas 
and  Crittenden  as  needed,  after  sending  a  division  to  watch 
Hardee  and  to  pursue  him  if  retreating. 

Davis  took  the  advance  of  the  Eight  Wing  with  the  First 
Division.  He  moved  from  camp  at  6  a.m.  on  the  Edmonson 
pike,  on  which  he  was  ordered  to  move  to  Prim's  black- 
smith shop,  from  whence  he  was  to  march  direct  on  a  coun- 
try road  to  Nolinsville.  The  Third  Division  under  Sheri- 
dan moved  on  the  Nolinsville  pike,  followed  by  the  Second 
under  Johnson.  The  advance  of  both  these  columns  en- 
countered the  cavalry  pickets  of  the  enemy,  within  two  miles 
of  the  Federal  picket  line.  As  these  commands  advanced, 
there  was  constant  skirmishing  until  the  heads  of  each  of 
these  columns  reached  Nolinsville.  About  one  mile  south 
of  the  town  the  enemy  made  a  determined  stand  in  a  defile, 
and  upon  the  hills  through  which  the  pike  ran  at  this  place, 
known  as  Knob's  Gap.  This  was  a  favorable  position  for  the 
rebels,  well  guarded  by  their  artillery,  which  opened  fire  at 
long  range  upon  Carlin's  lines.  Davis  then  brought  up  two 
butteries  and  opened  fire  upon  the  enemy,  while  Carlin 
charged  their  position,  capturing  two  guns  and  several  prison- 


THE  ADVANCE  TO  MURFREESBORO.       89 

ers.  Davis's  other  brigades  carried  the  enemy's  position  on 
the  right  and  left.  His  division  then  "bivouacked  for  the 
night.  McCook's  loss  that  day  was  about  seventy-five  killed 
and  wounded. 

Early  on  the  morning  of  the  27th,  McCook's  command 
pressing  forward,  encountered  the  enemy  in  force.  A  dense 
fog  prevailed  at  the  time,  endering  it  hazardous  in  the  ex- 
treme to  open  an  engagement  at  that  time,  as  McCook's 
troops  could  not  distinguish  friend  from  foe  at  one  hundred 
and  fifty  yards,  and  his  cavalry  had  been  fired  on  by  his  in- 
fantry. On  learning  that  Hardee  was  in  position  and  had 
been  in  Line  of  battle  since  the  night  before,  McCook  ordered 
a  halt  until  the  fog  lifted.  This  it  did  about  noon,  when 
Johnson's  division  was  pushed  rapidly  forward,  followed  by 
that  of  Sheridan.  As  the  command  approached  Triune  they 
found  the  enemy  had  burned  the  bridge  across  Wilson's 
Creek  and  retired,  leaving  a  battery  of  six  pieces  with  cav- 
alry supports  to  hold  the  crossing.  As  the  skirmishers  of 
Johnson's  command  advanced,  the  battery  withdrew,  and 
with  the  cavalry  moved  off  rapidly  on  the  Eaglesville  road. 
Johnson's  division  then  repaired  the  bridge,  crossed  and  went 
into  carnp  beyond  Wilson's  Creek. 

On  Sunday  the  28th,  there  was  no  general  movement  of 
the  troops.  McCook,  however,  sent  Willich's  brigade  out  on 
a  reconnoissance,  to  learn  whether  the  enemy  had  retired  to 
Murfreesboro  or  Shelbyville.  Willich  went  several  miles 
on  the  Shelbyville  road  and  found  that  the  force  in  his  front 
had  turned  to  the  left  and  moved  toward  the  former  place. 
Stanley  with  the  cavalry  also  made  a  reconnoissance,  and  re- 
ported that  Hardee  had  retreated  to  Murfreesboro. 

On  the  29th,  McCook,  leaving  Baldwin's  brigade  at  Triune 
to  cover  the  extreme  right,  moved  forward  with  the  re- 
mainder of  his  command  on  a  country  road  known  as  the 


90  THE   ARMY   OP  THE  CUMBERLAND. 

Bole  Jack  road  toward  Murfreesboro.  The  command  did 
not  reach  their  encampment  until  late  in  the  evening,  when 
from  the  movements  of  the  enemy  it  was  concluded  that 
he  intended  to  give  battle  at  Murfreesboro,  and  every  dis- 
position of  the  troops  was  made  with  reference  to  this. 
That  night  McCook's  command  was  encamped  in  line  of 
battle  with  two  brigades  of  Johnson's  division  watching  the 
right,  Woodruff's  brigade  guarding  the  bridge  at  Overall's 
Creek,  Davis  on  the  right  of  the  "Wilkinson  pike,  with 
Sheridan  on  the  left  of  that  road.  The  brigade  that  Mc- 
Cook  had  left  at  Triune  was  ordered  up  and  assumed  its 
position  with  the  troops  on  the  30th.  McCook's  entire  com- 
mand on  the  morning  of  that  day  advanced  down  the  Wil- 
kinson turnpike  until  the  head  of  the  column  encountered 
the  enemy's  pickets.  The  line  of  battle  was  at  once  formed 
with  the  divisions  deployed  in  a  line  running  to  the  right  in 
a  southeast  direction  with  the  left  of  Sheridan  upon  the  Wil- 
kinson pike  immediately  on  Negley's  right.  Davis's  division 
was  at  once  thrown  into  line  of  battle  with  his  left  resting  on 
Sheridan's  right,  and  Johnson's  held  in  reserve.  Covering 
the  front  with  a  strong  line  of  skirmishers,  McCook  moved 
his  line  slowly  forward,  the  enemy  stubbornly  contesting 
every  foot  of  ground.  McCook's  skirmishers  soon  became 
sharply  engaged  with  those  of  the  rebels.  The  ground  was 
very  favorable  to  the  enemy,  they  being  under  cover  of  heavy 
woods  and  cedar  thickets.  At  12  o'clock  part  of  the  enemy's 
line  of  battle  was  determined,  McCook's  skirmishers  being 
then  about  five  hundred  yards  from  it.  The  resistance  to 
Davis's  advance  was  especially  stubborn,  and  the  losses  of 
the  day  footed  up  seventy-five  in  Sheridan's  division  and 
some  two  hundred  in  Davis's.  Shortly  before  sunset  the 
rebel  position  was  plainly  discernible  from  Davis's  front,  and 
was  formed  running  diagonally  across  the  old  Murfreesboro 


THE  ADVANCE  TO  MURFREESBORO.       91 

and  Franklin  road.  In  the  afternoon,  McCook  learned  from 
a  citizen  "who  had  seen  the  enemy's  line  of  battle  and  the 
position  of  his  troops,  that  they  were  posted  with  the  right 
of  Cheatham's  division  resting  on  the  Wilkinson  pike ; 
Withers's  division  on  Cheatham's  left,  with  his  left  resting 
on  the  Franklin  road ;  the  entire  of  Hardee's  corps  to  the  left 
of  that  road  extending  toward  the  Salem  pike.  This  forma- 
tion of  the  enemy's  line  placed  the  right  of  McCook's  line  as 
then  formed  directly  in  front  of  the  enemy's  centre.  In- 
formation was  at  once  sent  to  Eosecrans,  and  McCook  in- 
formed his  three  division  commanders  of  this  fact  and  then 
placed  two  brigades  of  the  reserve  division  under  Willich 
and  Kirk — two  of  the  best  and  most  experienced  brigade 
commanders  in  the  army — on  the  right  of  Davis,  to  protect  the 
right  flank  and  guard  against  surprise — that  of  Kirk  with 
his  left  resting  on  Davis's  right,  with  his  right  refused,  "Wil- 
lich on  Kirk's  right  and  in  a  line  nearly  perpendicular  to  the 
main  line,  thus  covering  the  right  flank.  The  third  brigade 
of  Johnson's  division  was  held  as  reserve.  McCook's  line  of 
battle  as  thus  formed  was  broken  in  several  points.  The 
.  general  direction  of  Sheridan's  line  was  to  the  east  and  south, 
facing  nearly  at  right  angles  with  Negley,  that  of  Davis  was 
to  the  west,  facing  south,  nearly  at  right  angles  to  Sheridan, 
Kirk's  brigade  to  Davis's  right  faced  more  to  the  east,  while 
Willich's  faced  due  south.  The  general  direction  of  Mc- 
Cook's line,  however,  conformed  to  the  line  of  the  enemy  in 
its  front,  except  the  latter  had  no  breaks  in  the  line  and  that 
its  left  division  under  McCown  had  its  left  extended  due 
south.  The  main  portion  of  the  enemy's  battle-line  faced 
northwest.  Breckinridge  on  the  right  of  the  line  was  facing 
nearly  north  while  McCown  on  the  left  faced  due  west.  The 
enemy  awaiting  attack — acting  on  the  defensive — had  as  far 
as  practicable  located  its  line  in  the  cedars,  with  open  ground 


92  THE  ARMY   OF   THE  CUMBERLAND. 

in  the  front.  McCook  considered  his  line  a  strong  one,  with 
"open ground  in  the  front  for  a  short  distance."  Rosecrans, 
on  being  informed  by  McCook  of  the  location  of  his  line  of 
battle,  expressed  himself  against  it,  saying:  "I  don't  like  the 
facing  so  much  to  the  east,  but  must  confide  that  to  you,  who 
know  the  ground.  If  you  don't  think  your  present  the  best 
position,  change  it."  At  six  o'clock  in  the  evening  McCook 
received  an  order  from  Eosecrans  to  have  large  and  extended 
camp-fires  made  on  the  right,  extending  far  beyond  the  right 
of  the  line,  to  deceive  the  enemy  and  make  him  believe  that 
troops  were  being  massed  there.  Fires  were  built  extending 
nearly  a  mile  beyond  the  right  of  McCook's  line.  In  this 
position  the  right  wing  rested  in  the  cedars  the  night  be- 
fore the  battle.  The  troops,  cutting  cedar  boughs  for  beds, 
and  officers  and  men,  wrapping  themselves  in  their  blankets, 
slept  in  the  frosty  night  air  with  the  silent  stars  looking 
down. 

On  the  26th,  Thomas's  command,  "the  Centre,"  with  Neg- 
ley's  division  in  the  advance,  moved  out  promptly  to 
Brentwood  on  the  Franklin  pike,  and  from  there  turned  to 
the  left  and  advanced  on  the  Wilson  pike  to  Owen's  store, 
where  the  troops  were  to  encamp  for  the  night.  But  on 
arriving  here,  Negley  left  his  train  and  pushed  on  at  once 
with  his  troops  to  Nolinsville,  from  whence  the  sound  of 
Davis's  guns  had  reached  him,  to  his  support.  Negley  en- 
camped at  Nolinsville,  Rousseau  at  Owen's  store,  and 
Walker's  brigade  at  Brentwood.  A  very  heavy  rain  during 
the  night  rendered  the  country  roads  almost  impassable, 
and  it  was  not  until  the  night  of  the  27th  that  Rousseau's 
command  reached  Nolinsville.  On  the  morning  of  the 
27th,  Negley's  train  coming  up,  his  division  moved  to  the 
east,  over  an  extremely  rough  by-road,  to  the  right  of  Crit- 
tenden   on    the   Murfreesboro     pike,    taking    position    at 


THE  ADVANCE  TO  MURFREESBORO.       93 

Stewartsboro.  Walker  was  sent  back  by  Thomas  from 
Brentwood,  to  take  the  direct  Nolinsville  pike.  On  the 
28th,  Rousseau,  under  orders,  marched  to  Stewartsboro, 
where  he  joined  Negley's  division.  On  the  29th  Negley 
crossed  Stewart's  Creek  at  the  ford  southwest  of,  and  two 
miles  above  the  turnpike  bridge,  and  marched  in  supporting 
distance  of  the  head  of  Crittenden's  command  on  the  Mur- 
freesboro  pike.  Rousseau  was  ordered  to  remain  in  camp 
at  Stewartsboro,  detaching  Starkweather's  brigades  with  a 
section  of  artillery  to  the  Jefferson  pike,  to  watch  the 
movements  of  the  enemy.  Negley's  division  moved  eight 
miles  that  day  and  took  position  within  three  miles  of 
Murfreesboro.  Walker  reached  Stewartsboro  from  the 
Nolinsville  pike  about  dark.  Early  in  the  morning,  Crit- 
tenden's command  moved  into  line  of  battle  on  the  left, 
under  a  brisk  fire,  while  Negley's  division,  by  an  oblique 
movement  to  the  right,  took  position  on  the  right  of  Palmer's 
division,  and  was  then  advanced  through  a  dense  cedar 
thicket  several  hundred  yards  in  width  to  the  Wilkinson 
cross  roads,  driving  the  enemy's  skirmishers  steadily,  and 
with  considerable  loss.  Rousseau's  division,  with  the  ex- 
ception of  Starkweather's  brigade,  was  ordered  up  from 
Stewartsboro,  reached  the  front,  and  bivouacked  on  the 
Murfreesboro  pike  in  the  rear  of  the  centre.  Thomas  dur- 
ing the  night  ordered  Walker's  brigade  to  take  a  strong 
position  near  the  bridge  over  Stewart's  Creek,  and  to  de- 
fend it  against  any  attempt  of  the  enemy's  cavalry  to  de- 
stroy it.  Rousseau  was  ordered  to  take  position  in  rear  of 
Negley's  division,  with  his  left  on  the  Murfreesboro  pike, 
and  his  right  extending  into  the  cedar  thicket  through 
which  Negley  had  marched  to  take  position.  The  troops 
held  every  foot  of  ground  that  had  been  won  from  the  ene- 
my, and  remained  in  line  of  battle  during  the  night. 


94  THE  ARMY   OF  THE  CUMBERLAND. 

The  "  Left  Wing "  under  Crittenden  advanced  on  the 
26th  to  Lavergne,  Palmer's  division  in  the  front.  He  was 
engaged  in  a  short  time  with  heavy  skirmishing,  which  in- 
creased as  the  command  moved  south.  The  advance  of  this 
column  was  over  a  rough  country,  intersected  with  forests 
and  cedar  thickets.  Crittenden  was  ordered  to  delay  his 
movements  until  McCook  reached  Triune,  in  order  to  de- 
termine the  direction  in  which  Thomas  should  move  as 
support ;  Crittenden's  command  encamped  that  night  four 
miles  north  of  Lavergne.  On  the  27th  Wood's  division  was 
placed  in  the  advance  of  Crittenden's  column.  Hascall's 
brigade  drove  the  enemy  from  Lavergne  with  a  loss  of 
twenty  men  wounded,  and  pushing  rapidly  on,  forced  them 
south  of  Stewart's  Creek,  five  miles  beyond.  At  this  place 
the  enemy  set  fire  to  the  bridge,  which  Hascall's  advance 
reached  in  time  to  save.  Hazen's  brigade  of  Palmer's  divi- 
sion was  sent  down  the  Jefferson  pike  to  seize  the  bridge 
over  Stewart's  Creek  at  the  crossing  of  that  road.  That 
night  the  "  Left  Wing "  went  into  camp  at  Stewartsboro, 
and  remained  there  over  the  next  day,  Sunday.  On  the 
29th,  Crittenden's  command  crossed  Stewart's  Creek  by  the 
Smyrna  bridge,  and  the  main  Murfreesboro  pike,  and  ad- 
vanced that  day — Palmer's  division  leading — to  within  two 
miles  of  Murfreesboro,  driving  back  the  enemy  after  several 
severe  skirmishes,  saving  two  bridges  on  the  route,  and 
forcing  the  enemy  into  his  intrenchments. 

Rosecrans,  about  three  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  received  a 
signal  message  from  Palmer  at  the  front,  that  he  was  in 
sight  of  Murfreesboro,  and  that  the  enemy  was  running. 
Rosecrans  then  sent  an  order  to  Crittenden  to  send  a  divi- 
sion to  occupy  Murfreesboro,  camping  the  other  two  out- 
side. Crittenden  received  this  order  as  he  reached  the 
head  of  his  command,  where  Wood  and  Palmer  were  gather- 


THE  ADVANCE  TO  MURFREESBORO.       95 

ing  up  their  troops  preparatory  to  encamping  for  the  night. 
These  divisions  were  in  line  of  battle, — Wood  on  the  left 
and  Palmer  on  the  right, — with  the  rebels  in  sight  in  such 
heavy  force  that  it  was  evident  that  they  intended  to  dis- 
pute the  passage  of  the  river,  and  to  fight  a  battle  at  or  near 
Murfreesboro.  On  receipt  of  the  order,  Crittenden  gave 
the  command  to  advance.  Wood  was  ordered  to  occupy 
the  place,  and  Palmer  to  advance  in  line  of  battle  until  the 
passage  of  the  river  had  been  forced.  Wood  on  receiving 
the  order  objected  greatly  to  carrying  it  out,  saying  that 
it  was  hazarding  a  great  deal  for  very  little,  to  move  over 
unknown  ground  in  the  night,  instead  of  waiting  for  day- 
light, and  that  Crittenden  ought  to  take  the  responsibility 
of  disobeying  the  order.  This  the  latter  refused  to  do. 
After  Wood  and  Pahner  had  issued  their  orders  to  advance, 
they  both  insisted  that  the  order  should  not  be  earned  out. 
The  order  was  then  suspended  for  an  hour,  so  that  Eose- 
crans  could  be  heard  from.  During  this  interval  the  gen- 
eral himself  came  to  this  portion  of  the  front,  and  approved 
of  the  action  of  Crittenden,  as  the  order  had  been  issued  on 
the  report  that  the  enemy  had  evacuated  Murfreesboro. 
Under  the  order,  before  it  was  suspended,  Harker  with  his 
brigade  had  crossed  the  river  at  a  ford  on  his  left,  where  he 
surprised  a  regiment  of  Breckinridge's  division,  and  drove 
it  back  on  its  main  lines,  not  more  than  five  hundred  yards 
distant,  in  considerable  confusion.  He  held  this  position 
until  it  was  dark,  with  Breckinridge  in  force  on  his  front, 
when  Crittenden  ordered  his  return.  Hascall's  command 
was  fording  the  river,  advancing,  when  the  order  was  sus- 
pended. Harker  succeeded  in  recrossing  the  river  in  the 
face  of  this  strong  force  of  the  enemy  without  any  serious 
loss.  Crittenden  placed  Van  Cleve's  division,  which  had  re- 
ported marching  from  the  Jefferson  turnpike  to  the  Murfrees- 


96  THE  ARMY  OF  THE  CUMBERLAND. 

boro  road,  in  reserve  behind  Wood.  During  the  30th  there 
was  but  little  change  in  the  position  of  the  Left  Wing,  while 
the  other  troops  were  moving  into  position  on  the  line  of 
battle.  Palmer's  division  was  advanced  a  short  distance,  the 
enemy  contesting  stubbornly. 

The  pioneer  brigade  had  prepared  the  banks  at  three 
places  for  the  fording  of  the  river.  Wood's  division  cov- 
ered two,  and  the  pioneer  brigade,  under  Captain  St.  Clair 
Morton,  covered  the  lower  one.  At  night  Crittenden's  corps 
with  Negley's  division  bivouacked  in  order  of  battle,  being 
only  seven  hundred  yards  from  the  enemy's  intrenchments. 
The  left  of  Crittenden's  command  extended  down  the  river 
some  five  hundred  yards. 

The  first  movement  of  Rosecrans's  advance  was  made 
known  to  Bragg  as  soon  as  it  had  reached  a  point  two  miles 
beyond  the  Federal  picket-line,  where  the  heads  of  the  sev- 
eral columns  encountered  the  rebel  cavalry  pickets.  For 
all  Bragg  had  placed  his  army  in  winter  quarters,  and  pre- 
sumed that  Rosecrans  had  done  the  same,  his  experience  in 
the  matter  of  a  surprise  to  an  army  led  him  to  be  well  pre- 
pared to  know  and  take  advantage  of  the  slightest  change 
in  his  immediate  front.  By  the  night  of  the  26th  Bragg 
knew  that  Rosecrans's  entire  army  was  moving  out  to  force 
him  to  fight  or  compel  his  retreat.  He  at  once  selected  his 
line  of  battle  at  Stone's  River,  and  directed  his  three  cavalry 
brigades,  under  Wheeler,  Wharton,  and  Pegram,  supported 
by  three  brigades  of  infantry  with  artillery,  to  check  the 
advance  of  the  several  columns  until  he  could  unite  his 
army.  He  then  gave  the  necessary  orders  for  the  concen- 
tration of  his  command  and  the  formation  of  his  line  of 
battle. 

Murfreesboro  is  situated  on  the  railroad  to  Chattanooga, 
thirty  miles  southeast  of  Nashvilie,  in  the  midst  of  the  great 


THE  ADVANCE   TO  MTTRFREESBORO.  97 

plain  stretching  from  the  base  of  the  Cumberland  Moun- 
tains toward  the  Cumberland  River,  and  is  surrounded  by  a 
gently  undulating  country,  exceedingly  fertile  and  highly 
cultivated.  Leading  in  every  direction  from  the  town  are 
numerous  excellent  turnpikes.  Stone's  River — named  after 
an  early  settler — is  formed  here  by  the  middle  and  south 
branches  of  the  stream  uniting,  and  flows  in  a  northerly 
direction  between  low  banks  of  limestone,  generally  steep 
and  difficult  to  cross,  emptying  into  the  Cumberland.  At  the 
time  of  the  battle  the  stream  was  so  low  that  it  could  be 
crossed  by  infantry  everywhere.  The  Nashville  Railroad 
crosses  the  river  about  two  hundred  yards  above  the  turn- 
pike bridge.  At  some  five  hundred  yards  beyond,  it  intersects 
the  Nashville  turnpike  at  a  sharp  angle,  then  runs  some 
eight  hundred  yards  between  the  pike  and  the  river,  when 
the  stream  turns  abruptly  to  the  east  and  passes  to  the  north. 
Open  fields  surrounded  the  town,  fringed  with  dense  cedar 
brakes.  These  afforded  excellent  cover  for  approaching  in- 
fantry, but  were  almost  impervious  to  artillery. 

The  centre  of  Bragg's  army  was  at  Murfreesboro,  under 
Polk.  The  right  was  at  Readyville,  under  McCown,  and 
the  left  at  Triune  and  Eaglesville,  under  Hardee.  Polk's 
command  consisted  of  Cheatham's  and  Withers's  divisions. 
These  divisions  and  three  brigades  of  Breckinridge's  divi- 
sion of  Hardee's  corps  were  at  Murfreesboro.  Cleburne's 
division  and  Adams's  brigade  of  Breckinridge's  division 
were  under  the  immediate  command  of  Hardee,  near  Eagles- 
ville, about  twenty  miles  west  of  Murfreesboro.  McCown's 
division  of  Kirby  Smith's  corps  was  at  Readyville,  twelve 
miles  east  of  Murfreesboro.  Each  of  the  two  divisions 
of  Hardee's  corps  consisted  of  four  brigades  of  infantry. 
To  this  corps  Wheeler's  brigade  of  cavalry  was  attached. 
The  brigade  of  T.  R.  Jackson — which  was  in  the  rear,  guard- 
VII. —5 


98  THE  ARMY  OF  THE  CUMBERLAND. 

ing  the  railroad  from  Bridgeport  to  the  mountains — Bragg 
also  ordered  up.  On  Sunday,  the  28th,  Bragg,  formed  his 
line  of  battle,  placing  Breckinridge's  division  on  his  ex- 
treme right,  across  Stone's  River,  to  protect  that  flank  and 
cover  the  town.  Adams's  brigade  rested  on  the  Lebanon 
road,  about  a  mile  and  a  half  from  town.  Breckinridge's 
division  formed  the  first  line,  facing  north,  and  was  posted 
in  the  edge  of  the  forest,  with  Cleburne's  division  in  the 
second  line,  800  yards  to  the  rear.  To  the  left  of  Adams  the 
line  was  broken  by  an  intervening  field,  about  three  hun- 
dred yards  in  width,  which  was  apparently  left  unoccupied, 
but  was  covered  by  the  Twentieth  Tennessee  and  Wright's 
battery,  of  Preston's  brigade,  which  swept  it  and  the  fields 
in  front.  The  remainder  of  Preston's  brigade  rested  with 
its  right  in  the  woods,  and  extended  along  the  edge  with  its 
left  toward  the  river.  On  the  left  of  Preston,  Palmer's  bri- 
gade was  formed,  and  on  his  left  Hanson's  completed  that 
portion  of  the  line.  Jackson's  brigade  reported  to  Breckin- 
ridge, and  was  placed  on  the  east  side  of  the  Lebanon  road, 
on  commanding  ground,  a  little  in  the  advance  of  the  right 
of  Adams.  On  the  other  side  of  the  river  the  right  of 
Withers's  division  rested  at  the  bank,  near  the  intersection 
of  the  turnpike  with  the  railroad,  and  was  slightly  in  ad- 
vance of  Hanson's  right.  It  extended  southwardly  across 
the  Wilkinson  pike  to  the  Triune  or  Franklin  road,  in  an 
irregular  line  adapted  to  the  topography  of  the  country. 
In  the  rear  of  Withers's  division  that  of  Cheatham  was  posted 
as  a  supporting  force.  McCown's  division  was  placed  in  the 
rear  of  these  divisions  as  the  reserve.  This  was  Bragg's 
first  disposition  of  his  troops  for  battle.  On  Monday,  the 
29th,  no  change  of  importance  was  made,  the  troops  remain- 
ing in  line  of  battle.  In  the  evening,  when  Harker's  bri- 
gade crossed  the  river,  Bragg  thought  this  was  a  movement 


THE  ADVANCE  TO  MURFREESBORO.       99 

to  occupy  a  hill  situated  about  six  hundred  yards  in  front  of 
Hanson's  centre.  This  commanded  the  ground  sloping  to 
the  river  south  and  west,  and  from  it  the  right  of  "Withers's 
division  across  the  river  could  be  enfiladed.  Hanson's  bri- 
gade was  sent  out,  and,  on  Harker's  return,  the  hill  was  oc- 
cupied by  the  batteries  of  the  enemy.  On  Monday  Bragg, 
finding  that  Kosecrans  was  extending  his  line  on  his  right, 
— as  Bragg  supposed  to  operate  on  that  flank — threw  his  re- 
serve division  under  McCown  on  Withers's  left.  Hardee  was 
ordered  to  take  command  of  McCown's  division,  and  to  move 
Cleburne  from  the  second  line  in  the  rear  of  Breckinridge, 
and  place  him  on  the  left  as  support  to  McCown.  Cleburne 
was  brought  forward  and  placed  five  hundred  yards  in 
rear  of  the  latter.  Bragg's  main  line  of  battle  was  in  the 
edge  of  the  woods,  with  open  ground  to  the  front.  His 
troops  were  formed  in  two  lines,  the  first  line  protected 
by  intrenchments,  and  his  second  line  formed  some  six  hun- 
dred yards  to  the  rear.  He  awaited  the  attack  of  Bosecrans 
on  the  30th,  and  not  receiving  it,  on  Tuesday  made  his  ar- 
rangements for  an  advance  and  attack  in  force  on  the  morn- 
ing of  the  31st.  His  troops  remained  in  line  of  battle,  ready 
to  move  with  the  early  dawn  of  the  coming  day.  The  two 
armies  were  now  arrayed  only  some  five  hundred  yards  apart, 
facing  each  other,  and  eager  for  the  conflict  of  the  morrow. 

At  nine  o'clock  on  the  evening  of  the  30th,  the  corps  com- 
manders met  at  Bosecrans's  headquarters,  in  the  cedars  near 
the  Murfreesboro  pike,  to  receive  their  final  instructions 
and  to  learn  the  details  of  the  plan  of  battle  for  the  next 
day.  McCook  was  directed  with  his  three  divisions  to  oc- 
cupy the  most  advantageous  position,  refusing  his  right  as 
much  as  practicable  and  necessary  to  secure  it,  to  await  the 
attack  of  the  enemy,  and  in  the  event  of  that  not  being 
made,  to  himself  engage  and  hold  the  force  on  his  front. 


100       THE  ARMY  OF  THE  CUMBERLAND. 

Johnson's  division  held  the  extreme  right  of  his  line ;  on 
Johnson's  left  was  Davis's  division,  and  on  Davis's  left 
Sheridan's  was  posted.  Thomas  was  instructed  to  open  with 
skirmishing  and  engage  the  enemy's  centre  with  Negley's 
division  of  his  command  and  Palmer's  of  Crittenden's  corps, 
Negley's  right  resting  on  Sheridan's  left,  and  Palmer's  right 
on  the  left  of  Negley,  Rousseau  being  in  reserve.  Crittenden 
was  ordered  to  move  Van  Cleve's  division  across  the  river  at 
the  lower  ford,  covered  and  supported  by  the  pioneer  bri- 
gade and  at  once  advance  on  Breckinridge.  Wood's  divi- 
sion was  to  follow — crossing  at  the  upper  ford  and  joining 
Van  Cleve's  right — when  they  were  to  press  everything  before 
them  into  Murfreesboro.  This  gave  a  strong  attack  from 
two  divisions  of  Federal  troops  on  the  one  of  Breckinridge's, 
which  was  known  to  be  the  only  one  of  the  enemy's  on  the 
east  of  the  river.  As  soon  as  Breckinridge  had  been  dis- 
lodged from  his  position,  the  artillery  of  "Wood's  division 
was  to  take  position  on  the  heights  east  of  the  river  and 
open  fire  on  the  enemy's  lines  on  the  other  side,  which  could 
here  be  seen  in  reverse,  and  dislodge  them,  when  Palmer 
was  to  drive  them  southward  across  the  river  or  through 
the  wood.  Sustained  by  the  advance  of  the  Centre  under 
Thomas  crashing  their  right,  Crittenden  was  to  keep  ad- 
vancing, take  Murfreesboro,  move  rapidly  westward  on  the 
Franklin  pike,  get  on  their  flank  and  rear  and  drive  them 
into  the  country  toward  Salem,  with  the  prospect  of  cutting 
off  their  retreat  and  probably  destroying  their  army.  Rose- 
crans  called  the  attention  of  the  corps  commanders  to  the 
fact  that  this  combination,  which  gave  to  him  such  a  superi- 
ority on  the  left,  depended  for  its  success  upon  McCook's 
maintaining  his  position  on  the  right  for  at  least  three 
hours,  and  if  compelled  to  fall  back  that  he  should  do  so  in 
the  same  manner  he  had  advanced  the  day  before,  slowly 


THE  ADVANCE  TO  MURFREESBORO.  101 

and  steadily,  refusing  his  right.  McCook  was  asked  if  he 
could  hold  his  position  for  three  hours,  and  replied  that  he 
thought  he  could.  The  importance  of  doing  so  was  again 
impressed  upon  him,  and  the  officers  then  separated. 

As  will  be  seen,  the  plan  of  battle  as  formed  by  Rosecrans 
contemplated  a  feint  attack  by  his  right,  which  in  the  event 
of  a  repulse  was  to  fall  back  slowly,  contesting  the  ground 
stubbornly,  while  the  main  attack  was  to  be  made  by  the 
forces  on  the  left,  followed  up  by  the  advance  of  the  centre, 
the  right  to  be  temporarily  sacrificed  for  the  success  of  the 
general  plan.  Rosecrans  knew  that  Bragg  had  weakened 
his  right  to  support  his  left,  looking  to  offensive  movements 
on  his  part,  and  that  the  vital  point  in  his  own  plan  was  the. 
ability  of  McCook  to  hold  the  enemy  in  check  on  his  front, 

During  the  30th,  Bragg  formed  his  plan  of  battle,  which- 
singular  as  it  appears,  was  the  exact  counterpart  of  that  of 
the  Federal  commander.  Hardee  on  the  left,  with  McCown's 
and  Cleburne's  divisions,  was  to  advance  against  the  Federal 
right,  which  being  forced  back,  Polk  with  "Withers's  and 
Cheatham's  divisions  were  then  to  push  the  centre.  The 
movement  to  be  made  by  a  steady  wheel  to  the  right  on  the 
right  of  Polk's  command  as  a  pivot.  Bragg's  plan  was  to 
drive  our  right  and  centre  back  against  our  left  on  Stone's 
River,  seize  our  line  of  communication  with  Nashville,  thus 
cutting  us  off  from  our  base  of  operations  and  supplies,  and 
ultimately  securing  the  objective  of  his  campaign,  Nashville. 
Bragg's  plan  was  equally  as  bold  as  that  of  his  opponent  — 
whose  command  was  slightly  inferior  in  strength  to  the  rebel 
force — and  the  success  of  either  depended  very  largely  on 
the  degree  of  diligence  in  opening  the  engagement.  Rose- 
crans's  orders  were  for  the  troops  to  breakfast  before  day- 
light and  attack  at  seven  o'clock.  Bragg  issued  orders  to 
attack  at  daylight. 


CHAPTER  VHL 

THE  BATTLE  OP   STONE'S  RIVER. 

"With  early  light,  on  the  morning  of  the  31st,  the  move- 
ment in  each  army  began.  Bosecrans  had  established  his 
headquarters  in  the  rear  of  the  left,  in  order  to  direct  in  per- 
son the  forward  movement  of  that  portion  of  his  army  which 
was  to  cross  Stone's  River,  sweep  all  resistance  before  it, 
and  swing  into  Murfreesboro.  The  command  was  given, 
and  at  once  Van  Cleve  advanced  two  brigades,  making  the 
crossing  of  the  river  at  the  lower  ford  without  opposition. 
Wood's  division  had  reached  the  river  bank  prepared  to 
make  the  crossing  and  support  Van  Cleve.  Everything  on 
the  left  appeared  to  be  working  satisfactorily,  when  the 
opening  sounds  of  the  enemy's  attack  on  the  right  reached 
the  left.  This  was  as  intended,  and  went  to  show  that  if 
Bragg' s  left  was  fully  occupied  he  then  could  give  the  less 
attention  to  his  right,  engaged  by  our  army.  With  high 
hopes  the  troops  then  pressing  forward  continued  to  cross 
the  river.  Within  an  hour  after  the  opening  of  the  battle, 
one  of  McCook's  staff  officers  reported  to  Bosecrans  that 
the  Bight  Wing  was  heavily  pressed  and  needed  assistance. 
Bosecrans  was  not  told  of  the  rout  of  Johnson's  division,  nor 
of  the  rapid  withdrawal  of  Davis,  made  necessary  thereby. 
Bosecrans,  sending  word  to  McCook  to  make  a  stubborn 
fight,  continued  his  own  offensive  movement.  Everything 
was  working  well  as  far  as  he  knew.     His  strong  force  on  the 


THE  BATTLE   OF  STONE'S  RIVER. 


105 


Battle-Map  Stone's  River. 


104       TEE  ARMY  OF  THE  CUMBERLAND. 

left  was  not  yet  engaged.  This  he  could  hurl  at  the  enemy's 
line  of  communications  and  strike  on  the  flank  Bragg's  army 
that  was  flanking  him.  Soon  after  another  staff  officer  from 
McCook  arrived  and  reported  that  the  entire  Eight  Wing  was 
being  driven,  a  fact  that  manifested  itself  by  the  troops  from 
the  broken  divisions  pouring  forth  from  the  cedars  in  alarm- 
ing numbers,  and  by  the  rapid  movement  of  the  noise  of 
battle  to  the  north.  Then  Eosecrans  saw  the  necessity  of 
abandoning  his  own  movement,  of  recalling  the  left,  and  of 
proceeding  at  once  to  the  right  to  save  what  was  left  of  that 
corps  as  speedily  as  possible.  He  ordered  back  his  left  from 
across  the  river,  and  calling  on  his  staff  to  mount,  rode  full 
gallop  over  to  the  right  to  reform  that  command  on  a  new 
line  and  save  his  army.  Now  that  he  was  on  the  defensive, 
after  McCook's  disaster,  it  was  impossible  to  carry  out  his 
original  plan  of  battle. 

On  the  30th,  McCown  in  posting  his  division  placed 
Ector's  and  Eains's  brigades  in  the  first  line,  and  McNair's 
brigade  in  the  second.  Hardee  ordered  McCown  at  once  to 
change  this  so  as  to  bring  McNair  on  the  front  line.  This 
order  was  not  obeyed  until  the  morning  of  the  31st,  when 
the  movement  was  made,  causing,  however,  some  delay  in 
the  advance  of  Hardee's  command  on  our  right.  At  half 
past  six  o'clock,  McCown's  division  in  the  front  line  with 
Cleburne's  division  in  the  second  swinging  around  by  a  con- 
tinuous change  of  direction  to  the  right,  advanced  on  to  the 
right  of  McCook.  McCown  did  not  properly  execute  the 
movement  as  intended,  and  was  earned  so  far  to  the  west 
as  to  leave  a  large  gap  in  the  rebel  front  between  Withers's 
left  and  McCown's  right.  Into  this  gap  Cleburne  immedi- 
ately threw  his  division,  and  advanced,  filling  the  interval 
in  the  front  line  between  McCown  and  Polk.  This  gave 
Hardee  double  the  length  of  front  originally  contemplated, 


THE  BATTLE   OF  STONE'S  RIVER.  105 

and  made  it  a  single  line  instead  of  a  double  with  divi- 
sion front.  These  two  divisions  thus  formed  then  struck 
McCook's  right  flank — Johnson's  division.  McCook's  line 
was  very  weak  and  poorly  posted.  It  was  thin  and  light, 
without  reserves,  with  neither  the  troops  nor  the  command- 
ing officers  in  their  places,  as  they  should  have  been,  under 
Kosecrans's  orders  of  the  evening  before. 

Every  soldier  on  that  field  knew  when  the  sun  went  down 
on  the  30th  that  on  the  following  day  he  would  be  engaged 
in  a  struggle  unto  death,  and  the  air  was  full  of  tokens  that 
one  of  the  most  desperate  of  battles  was  to  be  fought.  In 
the  face  of  all  this,  Johnson,  the  commander  of  the  First 
Division  on  the  right,  was  not  on  the  line  nor  near  enough 
to  his  troops  to  give  orders  to  them,  his  headquarters  being 
a  mile  and  a  half  in  the  rear.  General  "Willich,  the  com- 
mander of  the  Second  Brigade,  which  had  been  posted  for 
the  express  purpose  of  protecting  the  extreme  right  of  our 
army,  was  absent  from  his  command  at  division  headquar- 
ters. His  brigade  was  not  even  in  line,  as  they  had  been 
ordered  to  get  their  breakfast.  The  batteries  of  the  divi- 
sion were  not  properly  posted,  and  in  some  cases  the  horses 
were  away  from  the  guns  to  the  rear  for  water.  All  this 
was  criminal  negligence — a  failure  in  the  performance  of 
duty — for  which  some  one  should  have  suffered.  To  the 
faulty  position  of  the  line  and  to  the  unprepared  condition 
of  the  troops  is  to  be  attributed  the  almost  overwhelming 
disaster  that  overtook  our  army  on  that  day.  As  the  two 
divisions  of  the  enemy  advanced,  Kirk  threw  forward  the 
Thirty-fourth  Illinois  to  support  the  skirmish  line,  and  called 
on  Willich's  brigade  for  help.  This  brigade  being  without 
an  immediate  commander,  no  effort  was  made  to  support 
Kirk.  The  contest  was  too  unequal  to  be  maintained  for 
any  great  length  of  time,  and  Johnson's  division,  after  a  sharp 
5* 


106  THE   ARMY  OP  THE  CUMBERLAND. 

and  spirited  but  fruitless  contest,  crumbling  to  pieces,  was 
driven  back  with  a  loss  of  eleven  guns.  Kirk  was  mortally 
wounded  and  Willich  was  captured,  returning  to  Ms  com- 
mand as  it  was  driven  back.  Kirk's  brigade  lost  473  killed 
and  wounded,  and  had  342  captured.  Willich's  brigade  had 
a  few  less  killed  and  wounded,  but  more  than  twice  that* 
number  captured. 

Baldwin  in  reserve  near  headquarters  was  too  far  from 
the  front  to  aid  in  supporting  either  of  the  other  brigades  of 
Johnson's  division.  Stragglers  from  Kirk's  and  Willich's 
brigades  gave  the  first  information  to  Baldwin  of  the  dis- 
aster on  the  right.  Hastily  forming  his  troops,  he  had  barely 
time  to  post  them  in  line  of  battle  before  the  enemy  in  im- 
mense masses  appeared  on  his  front  at  short  range,  their  left 
extending  far  beyond  the  extreme  right  of  his  line.  Open- 
ing at  once  a  destructive  fire  upon  their  dense  masses  with 
his  infantry  and  artillery,  Baldwin  succeeded  in  checking 
their  advance  in  his  front,  but  their  left  continued  to  swing 
around  on  his  right.  Here  four  pieces  of  Simonson's  battery 
posted  near  the  woods  in  the  rear  of  the  first  position  opened 
with  terrible  effect.  The  enemy  came  on  in  such  overwhelm- 
ing numbers,  that  after  half  an  hour's  stubborn  resistance 
Baldwin  was  compelled  to  retire,  not  however  until  the 
enemy  had  flanked  his  right  and  were  pouring  in  an  enfilad- 
ing fire.  As  it  was  he  barely  made  his  escape,  since  in  a 
moment  longer  his  entire  command  would  have  been  sur- 
rounded and  captured.  At  the  edge  of  the  woods  Baldwin 
endeavored  to  make  another  stand,  but  before  he  could 
form  his  line  he  was  again  forced  back.  Eetiring  slowly, 
with  several  halts  in  the  cedars,  Baldwin  with  his  brigade 
reached  the  railroad  where  the  rest  of  the  division  was  being 
reformed. 

The  right  flank  being  driven  from  its  position  by  the  left 


THE  BATTLE  OF  STONE'S  RIVER.  107 

of  the  enemy,  Davis's  division  then  felt  the  full  force  of 
the  victorious  sweep  of  the  rebel  troops,  flushed  with  suc- 
cess and  aided  by  the  forces  immediately  in  his  front. 
Davis,  as  soon  as  the  disaster  on  his  right  had  fully  de- 
veloped, at  once  changed  front  and  formed  a  new  line,  with 
his  right  brigade  under  Post  nearly  at  right  angles  to  its 
former  position,  and  made  all  necessary  disposition  of  his 
troops  to  receive  the  attack.  Baldwin's  brigade  had  hastily 
taken  position  and  had  already  felt  the  force  of  the  enemy's 
concentrated  attack.  Still  the  advancing  lines  of  the  enemy 
greatly  overlapped  the  extreme  right  of  Baldwin.  Hardly 
had  the  troops  been  placed  in  this  position  before  the 
enemy  swept  down  in  heavy  masses  upon  both  the  flank  and 
front,  charging  with  the  rebel  yell.  The  two  divisions  of 
McCown's  and  Cleburne's  troops  which  had  driven  John- 
son, hurled  themselves  upon  Baldwin's  and  Post's  brigades, 
'while  the  fresh  troops  of  Withers's  division,  composed  of 
Manigault's  and  Loomis's  brigades,  rushed  upon  those  of 
Davis,  under  Carlin  and  Woodruff,  and  upon  that  on  the 
right  of  Sheridan's  line  under  Sill.  The  change  of  posi- 
tion of  Post's  brigade  gave  to  the  two  remaining  brigades 
of  Davis's  division,  and  Sill's  brigade  of  Sheridan's  com- 
mand, the  length  of  division  front,  and  on  this  the  enemy 
made  a  united  attack.  After  Baldwin  had  been  compelled 
to  retire,  Post  repulsed  the  attack  on  his  brigade,  and  Car- 
lin, Woodruff,  and  Sill  in  the  front  drove  back  the  assaulting 
column  of  the  rebels  with  heavy  loss.  The  enemy  then  re- 
formed his  lines,  strengthened  them  with  his  reserves  under 
Vaughan  and  Maney  of  Cheatham's  division  and  once  more 
pressed  forward.  Again  these  heavy  lines  struck  Carlin, 
Woodruff,  and  Sill,  and  were  again  handsomely  repulsed ; 
Sill  gallantly  charging  the  rebels  and  driving  them  into  their 
line   of  intrenchments.     In  this   charge,   General  Sill  was 


108  THE  ARMY   OF   THE   CUMBERLAND. 

killed.  His  brigade  then  slowly  retired  and  formed  anew 
in  line  of  battle.  Cleburne  at  the  same  time  charged  down 
on  Post's  brigade,  and  he  too  was  a  second  time  repulsed. 

The  formation  of  the  battle-front  of  Dam's  two  left  bri- 
gades under  Carlin  and  Woodruff  was  almost  perpendicular 
to  that  of  Sheridan's  division,  and  the  left  of  Woodruffs 
with  the  right  of  Sill's  brigade  formed  the  apex  of  a  right 
angle.  This  position  was  at  once  observed  by  the  enemy, 
who  saw  that  if  he  could  take  this  extreme  point  of  the 
angle  he  would  then  be  in  position  to  enfilade  both  lines  at 
once.  For  the  possession  of  this  point  every  effort  was 
made,  and  a  third  attack  was  ordered  upon  it  with  four 
brigades,  under  the  immediate  command  of  Cheatham,  in 
double  lines.  Hardee  had  gathered  his  command  together 
again  for  another  attack  on  Post's  position.  Pressing  for- 
ward with  the  victorious  troops  of  McCown's  and  Cleburne's 
divisions— the  troops  that  had  swept  Johnson  from  the  field 
— he  enveloped  both  flanks  of  Post's  brigade,  and  compelled 
him  to  fall  back,  with  the  loss  of  one  gun,  to  the  Nashville 
pike,  where  he  also  reformed  his  command. 

On  the  withdrawal  of  Post's  brigade,  Carlin's  right  was 
left  exposed  to  the  enemy,  who  with  renewed  vigor  pressed 
forward  in  overwhelming  numbers  on  converging  lines, 
massing  as  they  advanced.  Circling  around  on  their  right 
the  rebels  swept  down  on  the  remaining  brigades  of  Davis's 
division  in  dense  columns.  In  the  previous  charge  the  at- 
tack had  been  so  heavy  upon  the  angle  formed  by  Wood- 
ruff's left  and  Sill's  right,  that  in  the  new  formation — after 
the  second  repulse — the  line  at  this  point  was  somewhat 
broken,  and  after  Sill's  death  the  right  of  the  brigade  was 
reformed  somewhat  to  the  rear  of  the  former  line,  the  better 
to  support  the  battery  attached  to  it.  In  the  heavy  fight- 
ing of  the  morning  the  position  of  all  the  brigades  had 


THE   BATTLE   OF   STONE'S  RIVER.  109 

been  more  or  less  changed,  and  in  several  instances  the  com- 
manding officer  of  each  brigade  considered  his  command 
as  being  without  support  on  either  flank.  On  the  third  as- 
sault both  Carlin  and  Woodruff  thought  this  to  be  the  case 
with  their  commands,  and  in  the  attack  then  made  upon 
their  brigades  they  became  almost  surrounded.  Carlin  stub- 
bornly resisted  every  effort  to  drive  him  from  his  position 
until  by  his  remaining  longer  the  loss  of  his  entire  brigade 
became  imminent.  His  regiment  on  the  left  gave  way  and 
he  then  retreated  across  open  fields  in  the  rear  to  the 
edge  of  the  woods,  where  Davis  was  attempting  to  reform 
his  line,  having  placed  Hotchkiss's  battery  just  within  the 
timber.  Woodruff  then  fell  back,  but  being  closely  pressed, 
turned  and  with  a  determined  charge  sent  the  enemy  beyond 
his  original  position.  Being  unsupported  he  was  compelled 
to  retire  into  the  cedars.  Before  Woodruff  reached  the  new 
lines  that  Davis  was  trying  to  form,  Carlin's  troops  opened 
fire  on  the  advancing  enemy,  when  he  was  informed  that 
Davis  had  ordered  a  farther  withdrawal.  He  then  fell 
back  across  the  Wilkinson  pike,  where  he  rallied  his  men, 
who  however,  on  the  advance  of  the  enemy,  fired  one  volley 
and  broke  to  the  rear  without  orders.  Carlin  then  went 
with  them  through  the  lines  of  reserves,  halting  at  the  rail- 
road, where  he  reformed  his  command.  After  reaching  the 
cedars  Woodruff  charged  a  second  time,  and  compelled  the 
enemy  to  fall  back,  but  his  ammunition  giving  out,  his 
troops  passed  to  the  rear,  resisting  every  effort  to  rally  them 
until  they  reached  the  Murfreesboro  pike. 

Davis's  division  had  up  to  this  time  protected  Sheridan's 
right,  and  these  divisions  unitedly  had  resisted  two  assaults. 
After  the  charge  of  the  enemy  that  broke  Davis's  division 
and  sent  it  through  the  cedars,  Sheridan  was  compelled  to 
change  his  line  and  to  protect  the  right  flank  of  his  command 


110       THE  ARMY  OF  THE  CUMBERLAND. 

from  the  enemy,  now  pressing  that  part  of  his  position,  as 
well  as  his  front,  in  increasing  numbers,  as  the  line  became 
shortened.  Hastily  withdrawing  Sill's  brigade,  with  the 
reserves  sent  it  as  support,  he  directed  Roberts,  with  the 
left  brigade,  which  had  changed  front  and  formed  in  column 
of  regiments,  to  charge  the  enemy  in  the  cedars  from  which 
he  had  withdrawn  Sill's  brigade  and  the  reserves.  This 
charge  was  at  once  made  by  Roberts,  and  the  enemy's  ad- 
vance checked  sufficiently  to  give  Sheridan  time  to  form 
his  troops  on  the  new  line,  which  he  at  once  did  by  placing 
Sill's  and  Shafer's  brigades  on  a  line  at  right  angles  to  his 
first  one,  and  ordered  Roberts  to  return  and  form  his  com- 
mand on  this  same  line.  Sheridan  now  attempted  to  form 
the  broken  troops  of  the  other  division  on  the  right  of  his 
new  line,  but  in  this  he  was  not  successful.  After  mak- 
ing a  gallant  fight  with  his  division,  finding  the  right  of  his 
new  line  turned,  Sheridan  was  directed  by  McCook  to  ad- 
vance to  the  front  and  reform  his  troops  to  the  right  of 
Negley's  division  of  the  Centre  under  Thomas.  Throwing 
forward  his  left  to  join  Negley's  right,  he  placed  Roberts's 
brigade  in  position  at  right  angles  to  Negley's  line,  facing 
south,  and  then  placed  his  two  other  brigades  in  the  rear, 
and  at  right  angles  to  Roberts,  so  as  to  face  westward  and  to 
cover  the  rear  of  Negley's  lines.  In  the  angle  of  these  lines 
on  the  right  of  Negley,  he  placed  his  artillery.  Here  he 
was  again  fiercely  assaulted  by  the  enemy,  and  one  of  the 
fiercest  and  most  sanguinary  contests  of  the  day  ensued. 
Massing  the  four  divisions  of  Hardee's  and  Polk's  corps — 
each  of  four  brigades — Bragg  hurled  them  against  the  di- 
visions of  Sheridan  and  Negley,  and  at  the  same  time  the 
enemy  opened  fire  from  the  intrenchments  in  the  direction 
of  Murfreesboro.  Here  the  fighting  was  terrific.  Five 
batteries   were  posted  with   these  two   divisions,  the  artil- 


THE  BATTLE  OF  STONE'S  RIVER.  HI 

lery  range  of  the  respective  forces  being  not  to  exceed  two 
hundred  yards.  Three  times  in  dense  masses  the  enemy 
charged  on  these  divisions,  and  three  times  were  they  re- 
pulsed. Here  Colonel  Roberts  was  killed.  Sheridan's 
troops  having  now  exhausted  their  ammunition — Shafer's 
brigade  being  entirely  out  and  nearly  all  his  horses  killed — 
then  gave  way,  after  over  four  hours  of  some  of  the  hottest 
fighting  of  the  day.  Sheridan  lost  in  falling  back  from  this 
position  eight  guns.  Nearly  all  the  remainder  of  his  artil- 
lery was  drawn  by  his  men  through  the  cedars.  On  arriving 
at  the  Murfreesboro  pike,  Sheridan  reformed  his  command 
in  an  open  space  near  the  right  of  Palmer. 

Before  assisting  in  the  gallant  fight  on  the  right  of  the 
centre  with  Sheridan  in  his  new  position,  Negley's  division, 
after  repelling  all  assaults  made  on  it,  had  been  engaged  in 
heavy  fighting  on  its  front  since  the  middle  of  the  morning. 
On  the  withdrawal  of  Sheridan,  Negley's  division  found 
themselves  surrounded  by  the  enemy  in  swarms.  Rous- 
seau's division  in  reserve,  and  Palmer's  on  the  left,  had  re- 
tired to  the  rear  of  the  cedars,  to  form  a  new  line.  Falling 
back  through  the  cedar  brakes  in  the  rear  of  the  division, 
under  a  concentrated  fire  of  musketry  and  artillery  at  short 
range,  the  rebels  were  driven  back  in  front  and  checked  in 
the  rear.  Miller's  and  Stanley's  brigades  on  reaching  the 
woods  reformed  their  lines,  faced  to  the  rear  and  fired  sev- 
eral volleys  into  the  enemy,  then  advanced  over  the  open 
fields  across  which  these  brigades  had  just  retired.  In  pass- 
ing through  the  cedars  the  enemy  pressed  so  closely  on 
the  division  that  in  some  parts  of  Miller's  brigade  the  lines 
of  the  opposing  armies  seemed  commingled.  The  division 
then  reformed  on  the  new  line,  as  directed  by  Thomas,  near 
the  Nashville  pike. 

Early  in  the  day,  with  the  breaking  up  and  retreat  of  the 


112       THE  ARMY  OF  THE  CUMBERLAND. 

two  fine  divisions  of  McCook's  corps,  the  extent  of  the  dis- 
aster to  the  right  was  forced  upon  Eosecrans  with  terrible 
earnestness.  Realizing  at  once  that  upon  him  devolved  the 
task  of  making  such  disposition  of  his  command  as  would 
ensure  the  safety  of  his  army,  he  immediately  gave  the  ne- 
cessary orders  for  the  movement  of  the  troops.  Hurriedly 
galloping  to  the  centre,  where  he  found  Thomas,  he  at  once 
ordered  Rousseau's  division — held  as  reserve  heretofore — to 
be  sent  to  the  support  of  what  was  left  of  McCook's  line  into 
the  cedar-brakes  to  the  right  and  rear  of  Sheridan.  Eose- 
crans then  ordered  Crittenden  to  suspend  Van  Cleve's  move- 
ment across  the  river  on  the  left,  to  cover  the  crossing  with 
one  brigade,  and  to  move  the  other  two  brigades  westward 
across  the  fields  toward  the  railroad  for  a  reserve.  He  also 
directed  Wood  to  suspend  his  preparations  for  his  crossing, 
and  for  him  to  move  at  once  to  the  new  line  on  the  right 
and  hold  Hascall  in  reserve.  Up  to  this  time  Eosecrans 
had  hoped  that  McCook,  notwithstanding  the  disaster  to  the 
right,  might  stay  the  onset  with  his  own  troops.  With  the 
volume  of  stragglers  and  the  detachments  from  the  broken 
commands  swarming  to  the  rear  through  the  cedars  Eose- 
crans soon  became  satisfied  that  McCook  was  routed.  He 
then  ordered  Van  Cleve  to  be  sent  in  to  the  right  of  Eous- 
seau,  and  Wood  to  send  Colonel  Harker's  brigade  farther 
down  the  Murfreesboro  pike  with  orders  to  go  in  and  attack 
the  enemy  on  the  right  of  Van  Cleve.  The  pioneer  brigade 
had  been  posted  ou  the  knoll  of  ground  west  of  the  Nash- 
ville pike  and  about  four  or  five  hundred  yards  in  the  rear  of 
Palmer's  centre,  supporting  Stokes's  battery.  On  Negley's 
division  being  compelled  to  retire,  Thomas  ordered  him  with 
Eousseau  to  form  their  divisions  along  a  depression  in  the 
open  ground  in  rear  of  the  cedars,  as  a  temporary  line,  until 
the  artillery  could  be  posted  on  the  high  ground  near  to  and 


THE  BATTLE   OP  STONE'S  RIVER.  113 

west  of  the  Murfreesboro  pike.  Rousseau's  division,  cutting 
its  way  through  the  enemy  in  falling  back  from  the  cedars, 
took  position  on  this  temporary  line  with  all  its  batteries 
posted  on  the  knoll  a  short  distance  to  the  rear.  Here  the 
severest  engagement  of  this  day  of  heavy  fighting  was  had, 
almost  hand  to  hand.  At  this  point  the  new  line  had  open 
ground  in  front  of  it  for  some  four  or  five  hundred  yards. 
Rousseau,  while  his  batteries  were  unlimbering,  requested 
Van  Cleve  to  move  with  Colonel  Samuel  Beatty's  brigade  of 
his  division  to  form  on  his  right,  check  the  rebel  advance  and 
drive  it  back.  Van  Cleve  instantly  moved  his  troops  on  the 
double  quick  and  reached  the  desired  position  in  good  sea- 
son. Upon  these  troops  in  this  new  line  the  rebels  charged 
in  dense  masses,  flushed  with  the  victory  of  the  early  morn- 
ing and  elate  with  the  hope  of  continued  success  to  the  end. 
They  had  swept  everything  before  them  thus  far,  and  felt 
that  with  renewed  effort  the  successful  issue  of  the  battle 
was  within  their  grasp.  Emerging  from  the  cedars  with 
yell  after  yell,  firing  as  they  came,  they  rushed  forward  four 
lines  deep  in  the  attempt  to  cross  the  open  field  and  drive 
back  this  new  line  that  stood  in  their  pathway  to  final 
victory.  At  once  Rousseau's  division  and  Beatty's  brigade 
opened  fire  upon  the  advancing  columns,  while  Guenther's 
and  Loomis's  batteries  added  effect  to  it  by  sending  double 
shotted  canister  into  their  thick  ranks.  The  rebels  moved 
on  for  a  time,  but  the  fire  proved  too  terrible  and  they  were 
driven  back  with  great  slaughter.  On  reaching  the  cedars 
these  troops  were  rallied  by  their  officers,  and  with  fresh 
troops  as  supports  they  advanced  once  more,  with  a  deter- 
mined effort  to  carry  our  position  at  this  point.  But  again 
they  were,  after  a  most  desperate  straggle,  driven  back. 
Again  and  again  they  returned  to  the  assault,  in  four  deliber- 
ate and  fiercely  sustained  efforts,  each  time  to  meet  with  a 


114  THE  ARMY  OF  THE  CUMBERLAND. 

repulse.  The  brigade  of  regulars  under  the  command  of 
Colonel  Shepherd  sustained  the  heaviest  blows  of  this  as- 
sault. They  had  the  efficient  support  of  Scribner's  and  John 
Beatty's  brigades,  of  Loomis's  and  Guenther's  batteries,  and 
of  the  pioneer  brigade  under  Captain  St.  Clair  Morton,  with 
Stokes's  battery.  Sheppard's  command  lost  in  killed  and 
wounded  in  this  short  and  severe  contest,  26  officers  and 
611  enlisted  men,  making  a  total  loss  of  637  out  of  1,566 
effectives.  The  centre  succeeded  in  driving  back  the  enemy 
from  its  front,  gallantly  holding  its  ground  against  over- 
whelming odds,  while  the  artillery  concentrating  its  fire  on 
the  cedar  thickets  on  their  right  drove  the  enemy  far  back 
under  cover  of  the  woods. 

While  the  right  and  centre  had  been  thus  actively  en- 
gaged, the  left  had  also  borne  its  full  share  of  the  heavy 
fighting  of  the  day.  Palmer's  division  was  posted  in  line  of 
battle  with  his  right  resting  on  Negley's  left.  His  line  was 
formed  with  Craft's  brigade  on  the  right,  connecting  with 
Negley,  and  his  left  extending  across  a  point  of  woods  to 
the  right  of  Hazen's  brigade,  which  was  formed  in  two  lines 
with  his  left  resting  on  the  Nashville  pike,  while  Grose's 
brigade  was  in  reserve  some  two  hundred  yards  to  the  rear, 
formed  in  two  lines  nearly  opposite  the  interval  between  the 
brigades  in  line  of  battle.  On  the  withdrawal  of  the  troops 
of  the  left  from  across  the  river,  Wood  ordered  Wagner  with 
his  brigade  to  hold  his  position  in  the  woods  on  the  left  of 
the  Murfreesboro  pike  at  all  hazards,  this  being  an  exceed- 
ingly important  point,  protecting  our  left  front  and  flanks 
and  securing  command  of  the  road  leading  to  the  rear. 
Hascall's  and  Harker's  brigades  were  withdrawn,  and  the 
latter,  under  an  order  from  Bosecrans,  was  moved  to  the 
right  and  rear.  In  the  heavy  fighting  of  the  general  move- 
ment on  the  right  and  centre,  the  left  gradually  became  en- 


THE  BATTLE  OF  STONE'S  RIVER.  115 

gaged,  and  with  this  Haseall  was  ordered  by  Wood  to  take 
position  between  Wagner  and  Hazen  on  Wagner's  right. 
With  the  general  advance  of  the  enemy,  moving  on  the  right 
of  Polk's  corps  as  a  pivot,  Palmer  and  the  two  brigades 
of  Wood's  division  on  the  left  became  engaged.  Craft 
early  in  the  morning  had  been  ordered  by  Palmer  to  ad- 
vance, keeping  in  line  with  Negley,  the  latter  having  sent 
word  to  Palmer  that  he  intended  to  advance  his  division  to 
attack  the  enemy.  Craft  was  advanced  in  two  lines,  two 
regiments  in  each  line  with  Miller's  brigade  of  Negley's  di- 
vision on  the  right  and  Hazen's  brigade  on  his  left.  After 
Craft  had  advanced  abont  a  hundred  yards,  Palmer  discov- 
ered that  Negley  had  thrown  back  his  right  so  that  his  line 
was  almost  perpendicular  to  Craft's  and  to  his  rear.  After 
Craft  had  driven  the  enemy's  skirmishers  in,  the  rebels 
advanced  in  great  force  in  four  ranks  with  double  lines, 
Chalmers  in  the  front  line  with  Donelson's  brigade  follow- 
ing. This  charge  Craft  repulsed,  inflicting  severe  loss  on 
the  enemy.  Chalmers  was  so  severely  wounded  by  the  burst- 
ing of  a  shell  as  to  disqualify  him  for  further  duty  on  the 
field.  Advancing  once  more,  the  rebels  again  attacked 
Craft's  line,  when  a  very  severe  engagement  ensued,  and 
after  some  thirty  minutes'  firing  the  enemy  was  again  re- 
pulsed. When  Negley's  division  went  back  through  the 
cedars,  Cruft  was  left  without  support  on  his  right  and  he 
then  withdrew  to  the  wood,  the  enemy  following  him  closely 
and  pressing  him  hard.  While  Cruft  was  thus  engaged  on 
the  front,  Palmer  found  that  the  right  and  centre  had  been 
driven  from  the  first  line,  and  that  the  enemy  in  Negley's 
front  was  forcing  his  way  into  the  open  ground  to  his  rear. 
He  then  changed  Grose  from  front  to  rear,  retired  his  new 
left  so  as  to  bring  the  rebels  under  the  direct  fire  of  his  line, 
and  opened  on  them  with  great  effect,  holding  his  ground 


116  THE  ARMY  OF  THE  CUMBERLAND. 

until  the  enemy  was  driven  back.  Hazen  was  ordered  to 
fall  back  from  the  advanced  position  lie  then  held,  and  to 
occujry  the  crest  of  a  low  wooded  hill  between  the  pike  and 
the  railroad,  and  there  resist  the  attack.  This  was  about 
eleven  o'clock,  and  all  of  Palmer's  command  was  engaged 
with  the  enemy — Hazen  on  the  railroad,  one  or  two  de- 
tached regiments  to  the  right,  Cruft  still  farther  to  the 
right,  actively  engaged,  while  Grose  to  the  rear  was  fight- 
ing heavy  odds.  Grose  shortly  after  this  changed  to  the 
front  again,  the  enemy  being  driven  back  from  his  rear,  and 
moved  to  the  left  to  co-operate  with  Hazen.  After  aiding  in 
the  repulse  of  the  troops  that  struck  Graft's  lines,  Hazen 
with  constant  firing  maintained  his  position  on  his  left  at 
the  railroad,  retiring  his  right  to  place  his  troops  behind 
the  embankment  at  that  place.  General  Palmer  had  ordered 
Grose  to  co-operate  with  Hazen,  and  part  of  Grose's  troops 
reporting  to  him,  they  were  placed  in  position  on  the  front. 
Here  was  held  what  was  considered  by  the  enemy  to  be  the 
key  to  our  position,  known  as  the  "Round  Forest."  This 
was  attacked  by  the  right  of  Donelson's  brigade,  but  the  at- 
tack was  met  with  a  fire  that  mowed  down  half  its  number, 
one  regiment  losing  207  out  of  402.  In  another  regiment 
the  loss  was  306  out  of  425.  Polk  finding  that  his  troops 
had  been  so  severely  punished  that  they  were  not  able  to 
renew  the  attack  on  the  extreme  left  of  our  line,  and  that 
the  new  line  on  the  right  as  formed  by  Rosecrans  resisted 
every  attack,  applied  for  an  order  from  Bragg  directing  four 
brigades  from  Breckinridge's  command  to  be  sent  to  him  to 
drive  our  left  from  its  line,  and  especially  to  dislodge  us  from 
our  position  in  the  "  Round  Forest."  These  brigades  were 
sent  to  him,  arriving  in  two  detachments  of  two  brigades 
each.  Adams  and  Jackson's  brigades  first  reported,  under 
Breckinridge  in  person.     Those  of  Preston  and  Palmer  re- 


THE  BATTLE  OF  STONE'S  RIVER.  117 

ported  about  two  hours  later.  About  two  o'clock  in  the  af- 
ternoon Adams  and  Jackson's  brigades  assailed  our  left 
with  determined  energy,  but  after  a  severe  contest  they 
were  compelled  to  yield  and  fall  back.  They  were  rallied 
by  Breckinridge,  but  were  too  badly  cut  up  to  renew  the 
attack.  About  four  o'clock,  on  the  arrival  of  the  brigades 
of  Preston  and  Palmer,  the  assault  on  the  left  was  renewed 
and  again  repulsed,  when  the  enemy  withdrew  and  made  no 
further  attack  upon  that  position.  When  this  last  attack 
was  made,  Rosecrans,  anxious  as  to  this  vital  point  of  his 
lines,  hurried  there  with  his  staff  to  assist  in  the  repulse. 
It  was  here  that  a  shell  grazing  the  person  of  Rosecrans 
carried  off  the  head  of  his  chief  of  staff,  the  lamented 
Garesche. 

The  new  line  formed  by  Rosecrans  to  protect  his  com- 
munication extended  from  Hazen  on  the  Murfreesboro  pike 
in  a  northwesterly  direction,  Hascall  supporting  Hazen, 
Rousseau  filling  the  interval  to  the  pioneer  brigade,  Negley 
in  reserve,  Van  Cleve  west  of  the  pioneer  brigade,  McCook's 
corps  refused  on  his  right  and  slightly  to  the  rear  on  the 
Nashville  pike,  with  the  cavalry  at  and  beyond  Overall's 
Creek.  After  the  formation  had  been  completed  later  in 
the  afternoon,  with  a  wild  yell  the  enemy  debouched  from 
the  cedar  thickets,  and  forming  into  line,  advanced  as  if  to 
charge  once  more.  At  once  a  terrific  fire  of  artillery  and 
infantry  opened  on  them,  and  their  broken  ranks  went  back 
over  the  fields  driven  in  great  confusion  ;  the  batteries  Rose- 
crans had  placed  on  the  commanding  ground  near  the  rail- 
road inflicting  a  heavier  loss  on  Polk's  brigade  than  it  had 
suffered  in  all  the  previous  fighting  of  the  day.  This  attack 
was  in  the  main  repulsed  by  Van  Cleve's  division,  aided  by 
Harker's  brigade,  and  the  cavalry  under  General  Stanley. 
This  was  the  last  assault  on  the  right  and  centre,  and  with 


118  THE  ARMY  OF  THE  CUMBERLAND. 

the  repulse  of  Breckinridge's  command  on  the  left,  the 
fighting  for  the  day  was  over;  and  on  the  field  where  death 
had  reaped  such  a  heavy  harvest,  on  the  last  day  of  1862, 
the  troops  slept  on  their  arms,  waiting  for  what  the  next 
day  might  bring  forth.  The  night  was  clear  and  cold.  The 
armies  maintained  their  relative  positions,  with  some  picket 
firing  occurring  during  the  night.  Rosecrans  gave  orders 
that  all  the  spare  ammunition  should  be  issued,  and  it  was 
found  that  there  was  enough  for  another  battle,  the  main 
question  being  where  the  battle  was  to  be  fought.  During 
the  night  Rosecrans,  in  order  to  complete  the  new  formation 
of  his  lines,  withdrew  the  left  from  the  advanced  position  it 
occupied,  and  placed  it  in  line  some  two  hundred  and  fifty 
yards  in  the  rear,  on  more  advantageous  ground,  the  extreme 
left  resting  on  Stone's  River  above  the  lower  ford  and  extend- 
ing to  the  railroad.  Late  in  the  afternoon  the  brigades  under 
Colonels  Starkweather  and  Walker,  that  had  been  on  duty  in 
the  rear,  arrived  at  the  front  and  were  posted  in  reserve  on 
the  line  of  battle,  the  former  in  rear  of  McCook's  left,  and 
Walker  in  rear  of  the  left  of  Sheridan's  division  near  the 
Murfreesboro  pike.  On  the  morning  of  the  1st  they  were 
placed  in  the  front  line,  relieving  Van  Clevc,  who  then  re- 
turned to  his  position  on  the  left. 

Tbe  extent  of  the  disaster  on  the  right  was  appalling  and 
seemed  at  one  time  about  to  envelop  the  entire  army.  As 
the  storm  of  battle  passed  down  the  line  it  reached  Thomas, 
who  cool,  calm,  and  self-sustained,  stood  the  test  of  one  of 
the  fiercest  contests  of  the  war.  It  was  to  him  that  Rose- 
crans first  turned  in  the  hour  of  disaster  and  in  him  he 
trusted  most.  The  commander  of  the  army,  too,  was  sorely 
tried.  He  had  come  to  win  victory,  but  in  place  of  it  defeat 
seemed  almost  inevitable.  Reforming  his  lines  and  bravely 
fighting,  he  had  hurled  back  Bragg's   army  before  it  had 


THE  BATTLE   OF  STONE'S   RIVER.  119 

achieved  any  decisive  success.  Bosecrans  knew  that  his 
losses  had  been  extremely  heavy,  but  those  of  the  enemy  had 
been  still  more  severe.  He  felt  that  on  a  question  of  endur- 
ance his  army  would  come  out  first,  although  the  dash  and 
onset  of  the  rebels  had  at  the  opening  been  able  to  sweep 
all  before  them.  In  the  face  of  an  earnest  effort  on  the  part 
of  some  of  his  general  officers  to  persuade  him  to  fall  back 
to  Nashville  and  then  throw  up  works  and  wait  for  reinforce- 
ments, Bosecrans  determined  to  await  the  attack  of  the 
enemy  in  the  positions  of  his  lines  late  Wednesday  after- 
noon. He  sent  for  the  provision  trains,  ordered  up  fresh 
supplies  of  ammunition,  and  decided  that  if  Bragg  should 
not  attack  before  these  arrived,  that  he  himself  would  then 
resume  offensive  operations. 

During  the  morning  of  January  1,  18G3,  the  rebels  made 
repeated  attempts  to  advance  on  Thomas's  front  in  the  cen- 
tre, but  were  driven  back  before  emerging  from  the  woods. 
Crittenden  was  ordered  to  send  Van  Cleve's  division  across 
the  river,  to  occupy  the  position  opposite  the  ford  on  his  left, 
his  right  resting  on  high  ground  near  the  river  and  his  left 
thrown  forward  perpendicular  to  ifc.  The  rebel  right,  under 
Polk,  kept  up  a  brisk  skirmish  fire  on  their  front.  Chal- 
mers's brigade  was  ordered  to  occupy  the  ground  in  front  of 
the  "Bound  Forest."  Bragg,  anticipating  an  attack  on  his 
right  under  Breckinridge  on  the  morning  of  the  1st,  during 
the  night  ordered  two  brigades  of  that  division  to  recross  to 
the  east  side  of  the  river.  But  none  was  made.  About  two 
o'clock  in  the  afternoon  the  enemy  showed  signs  of  move- 
ment, by  massing  large  numbers  of  his  troops  on  our  right 
at  the  extremity  of  an  open  field  a  mile  and  a  half  from  the 
Murfreesboro  pike.  Here  the  rebels  formed  in  lines  six 
deep,  and  massed  thus  heavily,  remained  without  advancing 
for  over  an  hour.     Gibson's  brigade  and  a  battery  occupied 


120       THE  ARMY  OF  THE  CUMBERLAND. 

the  woods  near  Overall's  creek,  while  Negley's  was  placed 
as  support  on  McCook's  right.  The  evident  design  of  Bragg 
during  the  day  was  simply  to  feel  the  lines  of  our  army  to 
find  out  if  Rosecrans  was  retreating.  Satisfied  of  this,  he 
felt  that  while  he  could  maintain  his  position  he  was  not  in 
condition  to  attack,  after  the  heavy  hammering  his  army  had 
received  the  day  before. 

At  daylight  the  next  day  Bragg  gave  orders  to  his  corps 
commanders  to  feel  our  lines  and  ascertain  Rosecrans' s  posi- 
tion. Fire  was  opened  from  four  batteries  on  the  centre, 
and  a  demonstration  in  force  was  made  by  his  infantry,  fol- 
lowed by  another  on  McCook ;  but  at  all  points  meeting 
with  a  heavy  artillery  fire,  he  concluded  that  our  army  still 
occupied  the  battlefield  in  force.  Bragg  ordered  Wharton's 
and  Pegram's  brigades  of  cavalry  to  cross  to  the  right  bank 
of  Stone's  Biver  immediately  in  Breckinridge's  front.  Soon 
after  this  a  number  of  his  staff  officers  discovered  for  the 
first  time  that  Van  Cleve's  troops,  sent  over  the  day  before, 
had  quietly  crossed  unopposed,  and  had  established  them- 
selves on  and  under  cover  of  an  eminence  from  which  Polk's 
line  was  commanded  and  enfiladed.  It  was  an  evident  ne- 
cessity either  to  withdraw  Polk's  line  or  to  dislodge  Van 
Cleve's.  The  first  alternative  was  not  to  be  entertained 
until  the  failure  of  an  attempt  to  accomplish  the  latter. 
Polk  was  at  once  ordered  to  send  over  to  Breckinridge  the 
remaining  brigades  belonging  to  his  division  still  with 
Polk,  and  Breckinridge,  reporting  to  Bragg,  received  his 
orders.  The  attack  was  to  be  made  with  the  four  brigades 
of  Breckinridge's  command,  the  cavalry  protecting  his  right 
and  co-operating  with  him.  The  crest  of  ground  near  the 
river,  where  Van  Cleve's  division  was  in  position,  was  the 
point  against  which  the  main  attack  was  to  be  directed. 
This  taken,  Breckinridge  was  to  bring  up  his  artillery  and 


THE   BATTLE   OF  STONE'S  RIVER.  121 

establish  it  on  the  high  ground,  so  as  to  enfilade  our  lines 
on  the  other  side  of  the  river.  Polk  was  to  open  with  a 
heavy  fire  on  our  left  as  Breckinridge  commenced  Ms  ad- 
vance. The  signal  for  the  attack  was  to  be  one  gun  from 
the  centre,  and  four  o'clock  was  the  hour  set  for  the  firing 
of  this  gun. 

Breckinridge  drew  up  his  division  in  two  lines,  the  first 
in  a  narrow  skirt  of  woods,  the  other  some  two  hundred 
yards  in  rear.  General  Pillow,  after  the  first  day's  fighting, 
reporting  for  duty,  was  assigned  to  the  command  of  Palmer's 
brigade.  Pillow's  and  Hanson's  brigades  formed  the  first 
line,  Preston's  and  Adams's  brigades  the  second.  The  artil- 
lery was  placed  in  rear  of  the  second  line,  and  in  addition 
to  that  of  his  brigade,  ten  Napoleon  guns — 12-pounders — 
were  sent  to  aid  in  the  attack. 

Van  Cleve's  division  was  under  the  command  of  Colonel 
Samuel  Beatty,  with  Price's  brigade  on  the  right  next  to 
the  river,  Fyffe's  brigade  on  the  left.  Grider's  brigade 
formed  Beatty's  support,  while  a  brigade  of  Palmer's  divi- 
sion was  plaeed  in  position  on  the  extreme  left  to  protect 
that  flank.  Drury's  battery  was  posted  in  the  rear.  In  front 
of  Breckinridge's  line  was  an  open  space  some  six  hundred 
and  fifty  yards  in  width,  with  a  gentle  ascent  which  it  was 
necessary  for  his  troops  to  cross  before  reaching  our  lines. 
Several  hundred  yards  in  the  rear  of  the  latter  was  the  rive'r, 
increasing  the  distance  as  it  flowed  beyond  our  left. 

General  Bosecrans  had  ordered  Crittenden  to  send  Beatty's 
division  across  the  river  as  protection  to  the  troops  on  the 
left  and  centre,  as  from  the  high  ground  hear  the  river  the 
enemy,  by  an  enfilading  fire,  could  sweep  these  portions  of 
our  line.  During  the  morning  of  the  2d  Negley's  division 
was  ordered  from  the  right,  and  placed  in  position  on  the 
west  bank  of  the  river,  in  the  rear  of  Beatty's  division,  as 
VII.— 6 


122       THE  ARMY  OF  THE  CUMBERLAND. 

reserves,  being  here  on  the  left  of  Hazen's  and  Craft's  bri- 
gades of  Palmer's  division. 

As  soon  as  Breckinridge's  command  entered  the  open 
ground  to  his  front,  the  artillery  massed  on  the  west  bank 
of  the  river  by  order  of  Crittenden,  consisting  of  all  the 
guns  of  the  left  wing,  together  with  the  batteries  belong- 
ing to  Negley's  division  and  Stokes's  battery,  making  58 
guns  in  position,  opened  a  heavy,  accurate,  and  destructive 
fire.  Large  numbers  of  the  enemy  fell  before  they  reached 
Beatty's  infantry  lines.  Pressing  forward  without  waiting 
to  throw  out  a  skirmish  line,  Breckinridge's  command 
swept  onward,  reckless  of  the  artillery  fire  and  that  of  the 
infantry,  and  struck  Price's  and  Grider's  brigades,  broke 
their  lines,  drove  them  from  their  position  on  to  their  sup- 
port in  the  rear,  which  also  gave  way,  when  the  entire  divi- 
sion retreated  in  broken  ranks  across  the  river,  taking  refuge 
behind  the  line  of  Negley's  division,  and  there  reforming. 
Breckinridge  reports  that  he  "after  a  brief  but  bloody  con- 
flict routed  both  the  opposing  lines,  took  400  prisoners  and 
several  flags,  and  drove  their  artillery  and  the  great  body  of 
their  infantry  across  the  river."  His  success,  however,  was 
exceedingly  short-lived.  Colonel  John  F.  Miller,  command- 
ing the  right  brigade  of  Negley's  division,  had,  in  the  ab- 
sence of  Negley  in  the  rear,  ordered  the  troops  of  his  divi- 
sion to  lie  down  under  cover  of  the  bluff  of  the  river  bank, 
and  hold  their  fire  until  our  troops  from  the  other  side 
crossed  over  and  moved  to  the  rear.  As  soon  as  the  last  of 
Beatty's  men  had  passed  through  Miller's  lines,  he  com- 
manded the  division  to  rise  and  open  fire  on  Breckinridge's 
troops.  Miller's  fire  was  so  effectively  given  as  to  cause  the 
enemy  at  once  to  recoil,  Breckinridge's  command  being  also 
under  the  artillery  fire  on  the  left,  enfilading  his  ranks.  His 
division  soon  wavered,  and  then  began  falling  back.     At 


THE  BATTLE  OF  STONE'S   RIVER.  123 

this  Miller — Negley  still  not  appearing — ordered  the  divi- 
sion to  charge  across  the  river,  and  to  drive  the  enemy  to 
their  line  of  intrenchments,  which  they  did.  While  cross- 
ing, Miller  received  word  from  Palmer  not  to  cross  his  com- 
mand, but  as  the  greater  part  of  his  troops  were  over  the 
river  driving  the  enemy,  Miller  pressed  on  in  person,  and 
hurried  the  troops  last  to  cross,  up  to  the  support  of  those 
in  the  advance.  He  was  then  ordered  by  Palmer  to  recross 
the  river,  and  to  support  the  artillery  on  the  hill  on  the 
west  bank.  The  troops  under  Miller  were  then  advancing 
through  the  cornfield,  driving  the  enemy,  and  as  his  right 
flank  was  fully  protected,  he  had  no  inclination  to  turn 
back,  and  he  ordered  the  troops  forward.  One  of  the  en- 
emy's batteries  was  posted  in  a  wood  just  beyond  the  corn- 
field to  the  front.  It  was  keeping  up  a  brisk  fire  on  Miller's 
advance,  when  he  ordered  his  men  to  charge  this  battery, 
which  they  did,  capturing  three  guns.  At  the  time  of  the 
charge  the  Twenty-sixth  Tennessee  was  supporting  the  bat- 
tery. This  regiment  was  broken  by  the  assault,  a  large 
number  of  them  captured,  with  the  colors  of  the  command. 
Sending  the  prisoners,  guns,  and  colors  to  the  rear,  Millei- 
reformed  his  line  so  as  to  hold  the  ground  until  relieved  by 
other  troops.  These  being  crossed  over  the  river  under 
Hazen,  together  with  Davis's  division,  Miller's  command  re- 
turned to  the  west  bank  of  the  river  and  there  reformed  the 
division  in  line,  and  took  position  for  the  night.  Negley 
himself  was  not  across  the  river  with  the  command  during 
the  engagement. 

Bragg  was  deeply  chagrined  at  the  failure  of  Breck- 
inridge's movement.  In  his  report  of  the  action  he  says, 
"  The  contest  was  short  and  severe,  the  enemy  were  driven 
back  and  the  eminence  gained,  but  the  movement  as  a 
whole  was  a  failure,  and   the   position   was  again  yielded. 


124       THE  ARMY  OP  THE  CUMBERLAND. 

Our  forces  were  moved,  unfortunately,  to  the  left  so  far  as  to 
throw  a  portion  of  them  into  and  over  Stone's  River,  where 
they  encountered  heavy  masses  of  the  enemy,  while  those 
against  whom  they  were  intended  to  operate  had  a  destruc- 
tive enfilade  on  our  whole  line.  Our  reserve  line  was  so 
close  to  the  front  as  to  receive  the  enemy's  fire,  and  return- 
ing it  took  their  friends  in  the  rear.  The  cavalry  force  was 
left  entirely  out  of  the  action."  Bragg  immediately  sent 
Anderson's  brigade  across  the  river,  which  formed  in  line  on 
the  front  of  Breckinridge's  command,  and  remained  there  in 
position  during  the  night.  He  also  sent  Cleburne's  divi- 
sion over,  and  placed  Hardee  in  command  of  that  side  of  the 
river.  Rosecrans  ordered  Davis  to  take  and  hold  the  line 
occupied  by  Beatty's  division.  Later,  all  the  troops  of  Crit- 
tenden's corps  crossed  the  river  and  occupied  the  crests,  in- 
trenching themselves  in  this  position. 

During  the  morning  of  the  3d  Bragg  ordered  a  heavy  and 
constant  picket  firing  to  be  kept  up  on  his  front,  to  deter- 
mine whether  our  army  still  confronted  him.  At  one  point 
in  the  wood  to  the  left  of  the  Murfreesboro  pike  the  rebel 
sharpshooters  had  all  day  annoyed  Rousseau,  who  requested 
permission  to  dislodge  them  and  their  supports,  covering  a 
ford  at  that  place.  About  six  o'clock  in  the  evening  two 
regiments  from  John  Beatty's  brigade  of  Rousseau's  divi- 
sion, co-operating  with  two  regiments  of  Spear's  brigade  of 
Negley's  division,  under  cover  of  a  brisk  artillery  fire,  ad- 
vanced on  the  woods  and  drove  the  enemy  not  only  from 
their  cover,  but  also  from  their  intrenchments  a  short  dis- 
tance from  the  rear. 

At  noon  Bragg,  on  consultation  with  his  generals,  decided 
to  retreat,  leaving  the  field  in  possession  of  his  opponent. 
At  12.15  of  the  night  of  the  2d,  after  Breckinridge's  failure, 
Cleburne  and  Withers  had  sent  a  communication  to  Bragg's 


THE   BATTLE    OP   STONE'S   RIVER.  125 

headquarters,  through.  Polk,  stating  that  there  were  but 
"three  brigades  that  are  at  all  reliable,  and  even  some  of 
these  are  more  or  less  demoralized  from  having  some  bri- 
gade commanders  who  do  not  possess  the  confidence  of 
their  commands."  They  expressed  their  fears  of  great  dis- 
aster which  should  be  avoided  by  retreat.  This  was  en- 
dorsed by  Polk  at  12.30  a.m.,  January  3d,  "  I  send  you  the 
enclosed  papers  as  requested,  and  I  am  compelled  to  add 
that  after  seeing  the  effect  of  the  operations  of  to-day,  ad- 
ded to  that  produced  upon  the  troops  by  the  battle  of  the 
31st,  I  very  greatly  fear  the  consequences  of  another  engage- 
ment at  this  place  on  the  ensuing  day.  We  could  now  per- 
haps get  off  with  some  safety,  and  with  some  credit  if  the 
affair  was  well  managed;  should  we  fail  in  the  meditated 
attack,  the  consequences  might  be  very  disastrous." 

By  11  p.m.  the  whole  of  Bragg's  army,  except  his  cavalry, 
was  in  retreat  in  good  order  to  a  position  behind  Duck  River. 
His  cavalry  held  the  front  at  Murfreesboro  until  Monday 
morning,  when  they  fell  back  and  covered  Bragg's  imme- 
diate front.  Sunday  the  4th  was  spent  in  burying  the  dead, 
and  the  cavalry  was  sent  to  reconnoitre.  On  the  5th  Thomas's 
entire  command,  preceded  by  Stanley's  cavalry,  marched  into 
Murfreesboro,  and  encamped  on  the  Manchester  and  Shelby- 
ville  road. 

The  cavalry  under  Stanley  rendered  very  efficient  service 
on  the  advance  from  Nashville.  Dividing  these  troops  into 
three  columns  he  sent  the  first  brigade  under  Colonel 
Minty  with  Crittenden's  corps ;  the  second  brigade  under 
Colonel  Zahm  moved  to  the  right,  protecting  McCook's 
right  flank  ;  the  reserve  Stanley  commanded  in  person,  and 
moved  with  the  head  of  McCook's  command  on  the  Nolins- 
ville  pike.  Colonel  John  Kennett,  in  command  of  the  cav- 
alry division,  commanded  the  cavalry  on  the  Murfreesboro 


126  THE   ARMY   OP   THE   CUMBERLAND. 

pike.  There  was  constant  skirmishing  between  the  enemy's 
cavalry  and  artillery  and  each  of  the  columns  up  to  the 
31st,  as  the  army  advanced,  getting  into  position.  At  mid- 
night on  the  30th,  Stanley  moved  with  part  of  his  command 
to  Lavergne,  where  the  enemy's  cavalry  was  interfering  with 
the  trains.  At  9.30  he  was  ordered  by  General  Rosecrans  to 
hasten  to  the  right  and  cover  McCook's  flank.  On  reach- 
ing there  he  found  McCook's  new  line  formed  on  the  Nash- 
ville road,  when  the  enemy's  skirmishers  advanced  and 
drove  Stanley's  dismounted  cavalry  out  of  the  woods  to  the 
open  field.  Here  he  was  reinforced,  and  charging  the 
rebels  routed  them,  driving  them  back  to  their  lines.  On 
the  1st  Zahm's  brigade  was  sent  to  Lavergne  to  protect  the 
wagon  trains  being  sent  to  Nashville.  He  had  several  skir- 
mishes with  Wheeler,  but  finally  secured  the  safety  of  the 
train  and  repulsed  every  attack  of  the  rebel  cavalry. 

On  the  2d  and  3d  of  January  the  cavalry  was  engaged  in 
watching  the  flanks  of  our  position.  On  the  4th  Stanley  dis- 
covered that  the  enemy  had  fled.  Collecting  his  cavalry  he 
moved  to  the  fords  of  Stone's  River,  in  readiness  to  cross, 
and  on  the  5th,  preceding  Thomas,  they  entered  Murfrees- 
boro.  Zahm's  command  went  out  on  the  Shelbyville  pike 
six  miles,  meeting  with  no  opposition.  Stanley  with  the  rest 
of  his  cavalry  marched  down  the  Manchester  pike,  encoun- 
tering the  enemy's  cavalry  strongly  posted  at  Lytle's  Creek 
in  heavy  force.  Fighting  here  until  sundown,  the  rebels 
were  driven  from  one  cedar-brake  to  another  until  Spear's 
brigade  came  up,  when  they  were  driven  from  their  last 
stand  in  disorder.  The  cavalry  returned  and  camped  at 
Lytle's  Creek  to  recuperate,  after  nine  days  of  active  cam- 
paigning. During  this  time  the  saddles  were  only  taken 
off  the  horses  to  groom  them,  and  were  immediately  re- 
placed. 


THE  BATTLE  OF  STONE'S  RIVER.  127 

Bragg  in  his  retreat  left  in  his  hospitals  all  his  wounded 
in  Murfreesboro.  By  this  some  2,500  prisoners  fell  into  oui* 
bauds  to  be  cared,  for. 

Thus,  after  seven  days'  battle,  the  Army  of  the  Cumberland 
rested  in  Murfreesboro.  having  achieved  the  object  of  the 
winter  campaign.  The  final  battle  for  Kentucky  had  been 
fought  by  Bragg  and  lost.  Nashville,  too,  was  now  beyond 
his  hopes,  and  for  the  great  victory  of  the  31st,  which  he 
claimed,  Bragg  had  but  little  to  show. 

In  the  heavy  skirmishing  prior  to  the  31st,  success  at- 
tended every  movement  of  the  Federal  army.  The  heavy 
fighting  of  the  early  part  of  the  31st  was  all  in  Bragg's 
favor  up  to  the  time  his  advance  was  checked  by  our  cen- 
tre and.  the  new  line  on  the  right.  From  that  time  to  the 
occupation  of  Murfreesboro  every  movement  resulted  in 
favor  of  the  army  under  Rosecrans,  and  the  retreat  of  Bragg 
after  the  defeat  of  Breckinridge  gave  the  halo  of  victory  to 
our  army  as  the  result  of  the  campaign.  In  his  retreat 
Bragg  admitted  that  he  had  gained  nothing  but  a  victory 
barren  of  results,  at  the  cost  to  him  of  10,125  killed, 
wounded,  and  missing,  9,000  of  whom  were  killed  and 
wounded,  over  twenty  per  cent,  of  his  command.  Bragg's 
field  return  of  December  10,  1862,  shows  an  effective  total 
of  51,036,  composed  of  39,304  infantry,  10,070  cavalry,  and 
1,662  artillery.  By  reason  of  Morgan  and  Forrest  being 
absent  on  their  raids,  Bragg's  cavalry  was  reduced  to  5,638. 
This  gave  an  effective  force  of  46,604,  which  was  the  strength 
of  the  army  with  which  Bragg  fought  the  battle. 

Bosecrans's  force  on  the  battle-field  was  :  Infantry,  37,977  ; 
artillery,  2,223  ;  cavalry,  3,200  ;  total,  43,400.  His  loss  was  : 
killed,  1,553 ;  wounded,  7,245.  The  enemy  captured  about 
2,800  men.  Making  his  total  loss  about  twenty-five  per  cent, 
of  his  force  in  action.     Rosecrans  lost  twenty-eight  pieces  of 


128       THE  ARMY  OF  THE  CUMBERLAND. 

artillery  and  a  large  portion  of  his  wagon  train.    Bragg  lost 
three  pieces  of  artillery. 

Why  did  Rosecrans's  plan  of  battle  miscarry  so  fatally  and 
Bragg's  come  so  near  absolute  success  ?  The  fault  was  not 
in  the  plan  as  conceived  by  the  former.  The  near  success  of 
the  latter  proved  a  vindication  of  that.  The  originator  of 
the  plan  was  not  at  fault  personally,  for  at  no  time  during 
the  battle  did  he  falter  or  prove  unequal  to  his  command. 
When  called  on  to  give  up  his  plan  of  the  offensive  and  as- 
sume the  defensive  to  save  his  army,  the  wonderful  power 
of  Bosecrans  as  a  general  over  troops  was  never  displayed 
to  a  greater  advantage.  With  the  blood  from  a  slight 
wound  on  his  cheek,  in  a  light  blue  army  overcoat,  through 
the  mud  and  rain  of  the  battle-field,  he  rode  along  the  line 
inspiring  his  troops  with  the  confidence  he  felt  as  to  the 
final  result.  To  Bosecrans  there  was  but  one  outcome  to 
the  battle  at  Stone's  River,  and  that  was  victory.  When 
some  of  his  general  officers  advised  retreat  to  Nashville,  not 
for  an  instant  did  he  falter  in  his  determination  to  "  fight  or 
die  right  here."  The  demoralization  of  one  of  his  division 
commanders  was  so  great,  that  on  Thursday  afternoon,  when 
the  rebels  were  massing  on  Rosecrans's  right,  this  general, 
commanding  a  division,  announced  to  his  brigade  command- 
ers that  in  the  event  of  the  anticipated  assault  resulting  dis- 
astrously, he  proposed  to  take  his  division  and  cut  his  way 
through  to  Nashville.  To  his  troops — the  greater  part  of 
whom  had  never  seen  Rosecrans  under  the  enemy's  fire — when 
on  their  return  from  the  cedars,  they  formed  anew  in  front 
of  the  Nashville  pike — seeing  the  Commanding  General  of  the 
army  riding  fearlessly  on  the  extreme  front,  in  the  heat  of 
battle,  cool  and  collected,  giving  orders  and  encouraging  his 
men — his  mere  presence  was  an  inspiration.  His  personal 
bravery  was  never  more    fully  shown   than  when  he  rode 


THE  BATTLE  OP  STONE'S  RIVER.  129 

down  to  the  "  Bound  Forest "  with  his  staff,  under  fire,  at  the 
time  Garesche  was  killed  by  a  shell  that  only  missed  the 
chief  by  a  few  inches.  In  this  ride  Bosecrans  had  three 
mounted  orderlies  shot  dead  while  following  him.  When  the 
entire  extent  of  McCook's  disaster  in  its  crushing  force  was 
revealed  to  him,  he  felt  the  full  burden  of  his  responsibility, 
and  rising  to  the  demands  of  the  hour  he  was  superb.  Dash- 
ing from  one  point  to  another,  quick  to  discern  danger  and 
ready  to  meet  it,  shrinking  from  no  personal  exposure,  dis- 
patching his  staff  on  the  gallop,  hurrying  troops  into  posi- 
tion, massing  the  artillery  and  forming  his  new  lines  on 
grounds  of  his  own  choosing,  confident  of  ultimate  success, 
and  showing  his  troops  that  he  had  all  confidence  in  them,  it 
was  worth  months  of  an  ordinary  life-time  to  have  been  with 
Bosecrans  when  by  his  own  unconquered  spirit  he  plucked 
victory  from  defeat  and  glory  from  disaster. 

But  if  the  plan  was  not  at  fault,  what  was  ?  Bosecrans 
started  from  Nashville  for  an  offensive  campaign,  and  before 
his  plan  of  battle  had  met  the  test,  he  was  compelled  to 
abandon  it,  and  assume  the  defensive.  Where  was  the  fault 
and  who  was  to  blame  ?  The  fault  was  McCook's  defective 
line,  and  in  part  Bosecrans  was  responsible  for  it.  He  oiight 
never  to  have  trusted  the  formation  of  a  line  of  battle  so  im- 
portant to  the  safety  of  his  whole  army  to  McCook  alone, 
and  he  certainly  knew  this.  Bosecrans  gave  his  personal 
attention  to  the  left,  but  he  should  at  least  have  ordered  the 
change  his  quick  eye  detected  as  necessary  in  McCook's  line, 
and  not  trusted  to  chance  and  McCook's  ability  to  withstand 
the  attack  with  his  faulty  line.  No  one  who  saw  him  at 
Stone's  Biver  the  31st  of  December  will  say  aught  against 
the  personal  bravery  and  courage  of  McCook  under  fire. 
All  that  he  could  do  to  aid  in  repairing  the  great  disaster 
of  that  day  he  did  to  the  best  of  his  ability.  He  stayed  with 
(i* 


130  THE   ARMY  OF   THE  CUMBERLAND. 

Davis's  division  under  fire  as  long  as  it  held  together,  and 
then  gave  personal  directions  to  Sheridan's  troops,  in  the 
gallant  fight  they  made  against  overwhelming  odds.  As 
Eosecrans  himself  says  in  his  official  report  of  McCook,  "  a 
tried,  faithful,  and  loyal  soldier,  who  bravely  breasted  the 
battle  at  Shiloh  and  Perry  ville,  and  as  bravely  on  the  bloody 
field  of  Stone's  River."  But  there  is  something  more  than 
mere  physical  bravery  required  in  a  general  officer  in  com- 
mand of  as  large  a  body  of  troops  as  a  corps  d'armee.  As  an 
instructor  at  West  Point,  McCook  maintained  a  high  rank. 
As  a  brigade  and  division  commander  under  Buell,  there  was 
none  his  superior  in  the  care  and  attention  he  gave  his  troops 
on  the  march,  in  camp,  or  on  the  drill -ground.  His  division 
at  Shiloh  as  it  marched  to  the  front  on  the  second  day  did 
him  full  credit,  and  in  his  handling  of  it  on  that  field  he  did 
credit  to  it  and  to  himself.  What  McCook  lacked  was  the 
ability  to  handle  large  bodies  of  troops  independently  of  a 
superior  officer  to  give  him  commands.  This  was  his  expe- 
rience at  Perryville,  and  it  was  repeated  at  Stone's  River. 
With  the  known  results  of  Perryville,  McCook  ought  never 
to  have  been  placed  in  command  of  the  "  right  wing." 
Rosecrans  at  Stone's  River,  of  necessity  was  on  the  left,  and 
being  there  he  should  have  had  a  general  in  command  of  the 
right  with  greater  military  capacity  than  McCook.  Rose- 
crans's  confidence  was  so  slight  in  his  commander  of  the 
left  that  he  felt  his  own  presence  was  needed  there  in  the 
movement  of  the  troops  in  that  part  of  the  plan  of  battle. 

Rosecrans  in  his  report  repeatedly  speaks  of  "  the  faulty 
line  of  McCook's  formation  on  the  right."  But  he  knew  of 
this  on  the  30th,  and  told  McCook  that  it  was  improperly 
placed.  McCook  did  not  think  so.  Rosecrans  told  him 
that  it  faced  too  much  to  the  east  and  not  enough  to  the 
south,  that  it  was  too  weak  and  long,  and  was  liable  to  be 


THE   BATTLE   OF   STONE'S   RIVER.  131 

flanked.  Knowing  all  this  and  knowing  McCook's  pride  ol 
opinion,  for  MeCook  told  him  he  "  did  not  see  how  he  could 
make  a  better  line,"  or  a  "better  disposition  of  my  troops," 
it  was  the  plain  duty  of  Bosecrans  to  reform  the  line,  to 
conform  to  what  it  should  be  in  his  judgment.  The  order 
to  MeCook  to  build  camp  fires  for  a  mile  beyond  his  right 
was  another  factor  that  brought  about  the  combination 
that  broke  the  line  on  the  right.  Eosecrans  was  correct  in 
the  conception  of  this,  in  order  to  mislead  Bragg  and  cause 
him  to  strengthen  his  left  at  the  expense  of  his  right.  Had 
Bragg  awaited  Bosecrans's  attack,  this  building  of  fires  was 
correct — if  it  took  troops  away  from  the  right  to  reinforce 
the  left ;  but  this  it  did  not  do.  Bragg  moved  McCown  and 
Cleburne's  divisions  from  his  right  to  his  left  on  Tuesday, 
but  after  this  Bragg  brought  none  of  his  forces  across  the 
river  until  Wednesday  afternoon.  The  building  of  the  fires 
caused  Bragg  to  prolong  his  lines,  lengthening  them  to  the 
extent  that  before  Hardee  struck  Kirk's  and  Willich's  bri- 
gades, he  thought  our  line  extended  a  division  front  to  their 
right.  Finding  this  not  to  be  the  case,  he  whirled  his  left 
with  all  the  force  of  double  numbers  on  to  the  right  of  Me- 
Cook. The  rebels  then  swinging  around  threw  themselves  in 
the  rear  of  Johnson's  division  before  they  struck  any  troops 
on  their  front.  Of  course  it  is  mere  guess-work  to  say  just 
what  the  outcome  might  have  been  of  any  other  formation  of 
the  line,  but  it  is  safe  to  say  that  had  the  left  instead  of  the 
centre  of  Hardee  struck  the  right  of  MeCook,  there  would 
have  been  a  better  chance  for  the  troops  on  the  extreme  right 
of  his  line  to  have  shown  the  spirit  that  was  in  them,  before 
they  were  overpowered  by  mere  superiority  of  numbers. 

Then  there  were  some  minor  mistakes  that  aided  in  a 
great  degree  the  bringing  about  of  that  mishap  which  im- 
perilled the  safety  of  the  entire  army.     Even  granting  that 


132       THE  ARMY  OF  THE  CUMBERLAND. 

Johnson  was  not  in  any  way  responsible  for  the  position  oc- 
cupied by  bis  troops  on  the  front  line  of  battle,  still  it  is 
bard  to  find  any  excuse  or  even  explanation  for  a  general 
officer  in  command  of  a  division  wbo,  knowing  the  enemy 
was  in  force  on  his  front,  and  intending  to  attack  his  com- 
mand at  daylight  the  next  morning,  would  place  his  head- 
quarters a  mile  and  a  half  in  the  rear.  This  too,  when  he 
knew  that  the  post  of  honor  and  responsibility  for  the  safety 
of  the  entire  army  had  been  committed  to  his  keeping. 
What  then  shall  be  said  for  him  when  it  appears  by  the 
report  of  the  commanding  officer  of  his  reserve  brigade 
that  when  it  returned  from  the  support  of  a  cavalry  recon- 
noissance,  the  general  commanding  the  division  ordered 
this  brigade,  on  the  eve  of  battle,  to  take  position  in  the 
woods,  "near  the  headquarters  of  the  division,"  instead  of  in 
supporting  distance  of  the  front  line  ?  He  could  not  have 
thought  that  the  division  headquarters  needed  the  support 
of  the  reserve  more  than  the  line  of  battle.  It  is  safe  to  say 
that  had  the  line  of  Johnson's  division  been  properly  formed, 
so  as  to  give  the  most  strength  to  the  command — short  and 
well  centred,  with  a  good  brigade  like  that  of  Baldwin's  in 
reserve,  with  all  officers  in  their  places — these  troojjs  would 
have  given  a  very  different  account  of  themselves  when  the 
blow  struck  the  right.  There  was  no  commanding  officer  in 
the  front  with  Johnson's  division,  of  greater  command  than 
a  regiment — save  General  Kirk.  The  troops  of  Willich's 
brigade  on  the  right  flank  refused  to  come  to  his  assistance, 
because  there  was  no  one  to  give  them  orders.  Johnson 
says  in  his  official  report  that  "  In  consultation  with  Major- 
General  McCook,  late  in  the  afternoon  of  December  30th,  he 
in  formed  me  that  he  had  reliable  information  to  the  effect 
that  the  centre  of  the  rebel  line  of  battle  was  opposite  to 
our  extreme  right,  and  that  we  would  probably  be  attacked 


THE  BATTLE  OF  STONE'S  RIVER.  133 

by  the  entire  rebel  army  early  on  the  following  morning." 
Johnson  then  coolly  adds:  "His  prediction  proved  true." 
Yet  with  these  facts  staring  them  in  the  face,  McCook  and 
Johnson  made  no  other  efforts  to  strengthen  the  right  of  the 
line,  and  Johnson,  on  the  arrival  of  his  reserve  brigade  later, 
posted  it  in  the  woods  a  mile  and  a  half  from  his  front  "near 
his  headquarters."  General  Kirk  was  mortally  wounded  in 
the  attack  on  his  command,  but  lived  long  enough  after  the 
battle  to  make  a  report  of  the  part  taken  in  the  engagement 
by  his  brigade.  He  states  in  his  report,  that  he  suggested 
to  Johnson  to  send  his  reserve  brigade  to  support  the  main 
lines,  and  that  Johnson  declined  to  do  so. 

The  location  of  Johnson's  headquarters,  and  Johnson  be- 
ing there,  makes  him  responsible  for  the  capture  of  Wil- 
lich,  and  the  breaking  up  of  that  fine  brigade.  Willich  had 
been  on  the  line  for  an  hour  before  daylight  with  his  bri- 
gade under  arms,  and  from  what  he  heard  of  the  movements 
of  the  enemy  in  his  front,  he  was  satisfied  that  a  change 
should  be  made  in  the  position  of  the  division,  and  started 
to  Johnson's  headquarters  to  communicate  with  him.  Be- 
fore he  could  return  to  his  troops,  the  enemy  was  upon 
them,  and  drove  them  from  the  position  they  held,  without 
their  making  a  stand.  Being  without  either  division  or 
brigade  commander,  they  drifted  to  the  rear.  Willich  had 
a  horse  shot  under  him,  and  was  captured  without  giving  an 
order,  before  he  reached  his  command. 

When  the  artillery  was  posted  in  line  of  battle  on  the 
30th,  roads  were  cut  through  the  cedars  to  allow  the  bat- 
teries to  reach  the  front  line.  The  heavy  loss  of  gnns,  re- 
ported by  Bosecrans,  was  occasioned  by  these  batteries  being 
unable  to  reach  the  roads  through  the  cedar  thickets  in  the 
retreat,  and  in  many  instances  guns  were  abandoned  in  the 
woods,  through  which  it  was  impossible  to  haul  them. 


134=  THE  ARMY  OF  THE  CUMBERLAND. 

Bragg  alleges  in  his  official  report  that  our  troops  were 
surprised,  and  cites  the  fact  that  his  men  passed  through 
the  camps  where  breakfast  was  being  prepared.  He  was 
right  as  to  his  fact,  but  wrong  in  his  deduction.  "Willich's 
brigade  was  the  only  one  that  was  not  through  the  morning 
meal,  and  this  was  by  reason  of  his  troops  being  under  arms 
for  nearly  two  hours  prior  to  this  time,  after  which  Willich 
gave  them  orders  to  prepare  their  meal.  Kirk's  brigade  had 
been  under  arms  since  five  o'clock  in  the  morning,  ready  for 
action  an  hour  before  the  battle  commenced,  and  in  Post's 
brigade  the  men  were  in  order  of  battle  for  an  hour  before 
the  first  dawn  of  light.  The  front  of  all  these  brigades  was 
covered  with  heavy  picket  lines  well  thrown  out.  General 
Sill  reported  to  General  Sheridan  at  two  o'clock  in  the  morn- 
ing, "  great  activity  on  the  part  of  the  enemy  immediately  in 
his  front,  with  movements  of  troops  to  their  left,"  and  from 
four  o'clock  in  the  morning  until  seven,  Sheridan's  troops 
were  standing  under  arms,  and  the  cannoneers  were  at  their 
places. 

It  is  difficult  to  determine  which  to  admire  the  more,  the 
heavy,  quick,  decided  onset  of  the  rebels,  as  with  ranks  well 
closed  up,  without  music,  and  almost  noiselessly,  they  moved 
in  the  gray  light  of  the  early  December  morning,  out  of  the 
cedars,  across  the  open  fields,  hurling  the  full  weight  of 
their  advancing  columns  upon  our  right,  with  all  the  dash 
of  Southern  troops,  sweeping  on  with  rapid  stride,  and  wild 
yells  of  triumph,  to  what  appeared  to  them  an  easy  final  vic- 
tory ;  or,  later  in  the  afternoon,  when  our  troops  that  had 
been  driven  from  the  field  early  in  the  morning,  were  re- 
formed under  the  eye  of  the  commanding  general,  met  and 
threw  back  from  the  point  of  the  bayonet,  and  from  the  can- 
non mouth,  the  charge  after  charge  of  the  same  victorious 
troops  of  the  earlier  portion  of  the  day.     One  was  like  the 


THE  BATTLE   OF   STONES  RIVER.  135 

resistless  sweep  of  a  whirlwind  in  its  onward  course  of  de- 
struction, the  other  the  grand  sturdy  resistance  of  the  rocky 
coast,  which  the  waves  only  rush  upon  to  be  dashed  to 
pieces.  In  each  of  these,  the  two  armies  displayed  their 
distinctive  feature  to  the  best.  Under  Thomas,  the  Centre 
of  the  army  evinced,  in  a  marked  degree,  the  staying  quali- 
ties of  that  commander,  which  afterward  were  shown  so  con- 
spicuously at  Chickamauga. 


CHAPTER  IX. 

IN  MURFREESBORO. 

Duking  the  first  six  months  of  1863,  the  military  opera- 
tions of  the  Army  of  the  Cumberland  were  of  a  minor 
character.  The  exhaustion  attending  the  severe  fighting  of 
the  last  week  of  the  previous  year,  kept  that  army  in  camp 
for  some  time  to  restore  the  losses  of  arms  and  material,  to 
reclothe  the  army,  to  recruit  the  strength  of  the  troops,  to 
forward  the  needed  supplies,  and  to  build  the  necessary 
'  works  to  fortify  Murfreesboro  as  a  new  base.  The  rebuild- 
ing of  the  Muldraughs  Hills'  trestleworks,  and  the  heavy  re- 
pairs elsewhere  needed  on  the  railroad  north  of  Nashville, 
together  with  having  the  road  from  Nashville  to  Murfrees- 
boro placed  in  proper  order,  all  required  time  and  were  ne- 
cessary to  be  done,  to  supply  the  wants  of  the  army  in  the 
immediate  present.  But  the  future  was  what  demanded  the 
greatest  thought  and  most  careful  planning.  The  prob- 
lem that  gave  Buell  the  greatest  trouble  to  solve— the  pro- 
tection of  his  lines  of  communication  and  supplies— was  now 
forced  upon  Rosecrans.  The  enemy  with  more  than  one- 
half  his  cavalry  force  absent  during  the  battle  of  Stone's 
River,  under  Morgan  in  Kentucky  and  Forrest  in  West 
Tennessee,  outnumbered  that  arm  of  the  service  in  the  Ar- 
my of  the  Cumberland  during  the  battle  almost  two  to  one. 
These  troopers  were  nearly  all  old  veterans,  accustomed 
to  the  severest  hardships   of  service,  and  it  was  wonder- 


IN  MURFREESBORO.  137 

ful  the  rapidity  with  which  they  got  over  ground  and  the 
amount  of  fatigue  they  could  undergo.  To  afford  perfect 
protection  to  his  line  supplying  the  army  from  its  base  at 
Louisville,  as  against  these  raiding  bands,  if  infantry  was  to 
be  employed,  Eosecrans's  entire  force  was  needed,  posted 
by  brigades  at  the  vulnerable  points.  To  make  an  advance 
and  thus  lengthen  his  lines,  simply  increased  the  present 
difficulties.  "Without  making  the  necessary  preparation  to 
protect  his  line  of  supplies,  Bosecrans  would  hamper  his 
forward  movement  and  retard  and  cripple  his  advance  when 
commenced.  The  only  proper  force  to  meet  the  enemy's 
troopers  was  cavalry.  In  the  early  days  of  the  Army  of  the 
Ohio,  under  Buell,  a  number  of  unsuccessful  attempts  were 
made  to  chase  and  fight  cavalry  with  infantry,  and  in  every 
instance  the  effort  was  crowned  with  failure,  the  only  result 
being  the  discomfort  and  complete  exhaustion  of  the  march- 
ing troops. 

The  repair  of  the  most  complete  wrecking  the  Louisville 
road  ever  suffered,  demanded  Eosecrans's  attention  the  first 
thing  after  the  Battle  of  Stone's  River.  When  the  army 
left  Nashville,  on  the  advance  to  meet  Bragg,  the  supplies 
in  that  city  were  very  limited.  With  the  disabling  of  the 
road  it  was  impossible  at  that  time  to  forward  sufficient 
supplies  to  meet  the  wants  of  the  command,  and  for  the 
first  few  weeks  while  the  army  remained  at  Murfreesboro 
the  troops  were  on  half  rations,  and  many  of  the  articles 
constituting  the  "ration"  entirely  dispensed  with,  leaving 
but  three  or  four  on  the  list.  The  surrounding  country  for 
miles  was  scoured  for  forage  and  provisions.  Everything  of 
that  kind  was  gathered  in  by  raiding  parties,  not  leaving  suf- 
ficient for  the  actual  necessities  of  the  inhabitants.  To 
such  an  extent  did  this  go,  that  to  the  officers  with  means  to 
purchase  such  provisions  as  were  to  be  had,  potatoes  and 


138  THE  ARMY   OF  THE  CUMBERLAND. 

onions  became  luxuries.  The  whole  army  was  threatened 
with  scurvy. 

The  number  and  extent  of  these  raids,  and  the  damage 
sustained  by  the  Louisville  and  Nashville  Eailroad  during 
the  year  from  July  1,  1862,  is  concisely  set  forth  in  the  re- 
port of  the  superintendent  of  that  road.  His  report  shows 
that  during  this  time  "  the  road  has  been  operated  for  its 
entire  length  only  seven  months  and  twelve  days  ;  "  "  all  the 
bridges  and  trestleworks  on  the  main  stem  and  branches, 
with  the  exception  of  the  bridge  over  Barren  River  and 
four  small  bridges,  were  destroyed  and  rebuilt  during  the 
year.  Some  of  the  structures  were  destroyed  twice  and  some 
three  times.  In  addition  to  this,  most  of  the  water  stations, 
several  depots,  and  a  large  number  of  cars  were  burnt,  a 
number  of  engines  badly  damaged,  and  a  tunnel  in  Tennes- 
see nearly  filled  up  for  a  distance  of  eight  hundred  feet." 

By  reason  of  this  condition  of  things,  Rosecrans  determined 
to  increase  the  cavaby  arm  of  his  army,  so  that  he  could 
meet  the  ten  or  twelve  thousand  cavalry  of  the  enemy  in 
their  detached  raids  on  more  of  an  equal  footing.  From  the 
commencement  of  operations  in  Tennessee  under  Buell,  the 
enemy's  cavalry  had  been  steadily  increasing  in  numbers 
and  in  efficiency,  until  at  this  time  it  was  a  greater  problem 
how  to  meet  this  arm  of  the  enemy's  force  than  his  infantry. 
Rosecrans  made  repeated  urgent  applications  to  the  De- 
partnient  at  Washington  for  additional  cavalry ;  for  horses 
and  improved  arms  for  those  already  under  his  command. 
He  detailed  infantry  to  be  mounted  and  armed  as  cavalry, 
organizing  a  brigade  of  "mounted  infantry  "  under  Colonel 
John  T.  Wilder. 

On  Bragg's  retreating  from  Murfreesboro,  he  took  position 
with  a  portion  of  his  army  and  established  his  headquarters 
at  Shelbyville.     He  then  ordered  part  of  his  command  to 


IN  MURFREESBORO.  139 

move  to  Tullalioma,  and  there  intrench,  throwing  up  ex- 
tensive earthworks  and  fortifications.  Later,  he  placed  his 
troops  in  winter  quarters.  In  addition  to  the  cavalry  that 
had  formerly  been  under  Bragg,  Van  Dorn  in  February  re- 
ported to  him  with  his  command  of  three  brigades  of  cav- 
alry, about  five  thousand  effective  troops.  Bragg  placed 
Van  Dorn  and  Wheeler  to  protect  the  front  and  flanks  of 
his  army,  assigning  the  former  to  the  left,  with  his  head- 
quarters at  Columbia,  and  directing  the  latter  to  take  posi- 
tion on  the  right,  constituted  each  command  a  corps.  To 
Wheeler's  command  he  assigned  Morgan's,  Wharton's,  and 
Martin's  divisions.  Forrest's  command  was  assigned  to  Van 
Dorn.  Some  important  events  took  place  during  the  first 
six  months  of  1863,  that  had  a  bearing  on  the  fortunes  of 
the  Army  of  the  Cumberland. 

On  January  9th,  in  recognition  of  the  services  of  that 
army,  by  General  Order  No.  9  of  War  Department,  that  com- 
mand was  reorganized,  and  the  Centre,  Right,  and  Left  were 
constituted  corps  d'armee,  with  the  designation  of  Four- 
teenth, Twentieth,  and  Twenty-first  Corps,  under  the  same 
commanders,  who  were  thus  advanced  to  this  higher  com- 
mand. During  this  month,  Steedman,  in  command  of  Fry's 
old  division,  was  ordered  from  Gallatin  to  the  front,  and 
posted  at  Triune  and  La  Vergne.  Reynolds's  division  was 
ordered  from  Gallatin  to  Murfreesboro.  A  slight  change 
was  also  made  in  the  boundaries  of  the  Department.  On 
the  25th,  by  order  of  the  War  Department,  the  commands 
of  Fort  Henry  and  Fort  Donelson  were  transferred  from  the 
department  under  Grant,  to  that  under  Rosecrans,  and  later 
Fort  Heiman.  To  Rosecrans  was  then  committed  the  care 
and  control  of  the  Cumberland  River,  his  second  and  second- 
ary line  of  communication  and  supplies  connecting  his  two 
principal  depots. 


140       THE  ARMY  OF  THE  CUMBERLAND. 

On  January  26th,  Bragg  ordered  Wheeler  on  an  expedition 
to  capture  Fort  Donelson.  Wheeler  directed  Forrest  to 
move  his  brigade  with  four  guns  on  the  river  road,  via  the 
Cumberland  Iron  Works,  to  the  vicinity  of  Dover,  which 
was  the  real  position  occupied  and  fortified  by  the  Federal 
forces,  and  not  the  old  site  of  Fort  Donelson,  while  Wheeler 
with  Wharton's  command  of  some  twenty-five  hundred 
men  moved  on  a  road  to  the  left.  Rosecrans,  hearing  from 
his  scouts  that  this  movement  was  contemplated,  ordered 
Davis  in  command  of  his  division  and  two  brigades  of  cav- 
alry under  Minty,  to  march  by  the  Versailles  road,  and  take 
Wheeler  in  the  rear.  Steedman  was  directed  to  watch 
Wheeler's  movements  by  way  of  Triune.  Davis  despatched 
Minty  to  move  with  his  cavalry  around  by  way  of  Union- 
ville  and  Eover,  while  he  moved  with  the  infantry  direct  to 
Eaglesville.  At  Rover,  Minty  captured  a  regiment  of  some 
three  hundred  and  fifty  men.  Davis  and  Steedman's  forces 
united  at  Franklin,  the  latter  marching  by  way  of  Nolins- 
ville.  Wheeler,  advancing  rapidly,  passed  between  the 
troops  in  pursuit,  and,  on  February  3d,  his  entire  force  at- 
tacked the  post  at  Dover,  occupied  by  Colonel  Harding  with 
the  Eighty-third  Illinois,  some  six  hundred  men  in  the 
command.  The  rebels  opened  fire  at  once,  and  made  a  vig- 
orous assault  in  force  upon  Harding's  position.  His  little 
command  repulsed  the  enemy  with  heavy  loss.  Again  they 
advanced,  making  a  more  determined  assault  than  before, 
but  again  they  were  driven  back  with  still  greater  loss.  In 
this  last  repulse  Harding  ordered  his  men  to  charge  beyond 
his  works,  which  they  did  with  great  gallantry,  capturing 
forty-two  of  the  rebels.  Wheeler  then  withdrew  with  a  total 
loss  of  one  hundred  and  fifty  killed,  four  hundred  wounded, 
and  one  hundred  and  fifty  captured.  Colonel  Harding  lost 
sixteen  killed,  sixty  wounded,  and  fifty  captured.     Efforts 


IN   MURFREESBORO.  141 

were  made  to  cut  off  the  retreat  of  Wheeler's  force  by 
Davis's  command,  reinforced  by  five  hundred  cavalry,  which 
went  as  far  west  as  Kinderhook  and  Bon  Aqua  Springs,  but 
Wheeler  took  the  road  through  Centreville,  where  he  crossed 
Duck  River. 

In  the  latter  part  of  the  engagement  at  Dover,  Harding 
was  aided  by  the  fire  from  six  gunboats  which  were  acting 
as  convoys  for  a  fleet  of  transports  conveying  reinforcements 
to  Rosecrans's  command,  consisting  of  eighteen  regiments 
of  infantry,  with  four  batteries  of  artillery  that  had  been 
serving  in  Kentucky  under  the  command  of  General  Gordon 
Granger.  The  troops  forming  this  column  were  under  the 
immediate  command  of  Crook,  Baird,  and  Gilbert.  After 
the  danger  at  Dover  had  passed,  the  fleet  steamed  up  to 
Nashville,  and  there  the  troops  disembarked.  During  Feb- 
ruary Crook  was  sent  with  his  command  to  take  post  at  Car- 
thage, on  the  Cumberland  River,  and  watch  the  movements 
of  the  enemy  from  there  to  Rome,  and  Gilbert  was  ordered 
to  proceed  with  his  brigade  to  Franklin. 

On  March  4th,  Gilbert  at  Franklin  ordered  Colonel  Coburn, 
with  five  regiments  of  infantry,  four  detachments  of  cavalry 
under  Colonel  Jordan,  and  Aleshire's  battery,  the  whole 
command  nearly  three  thousand  strong,  to  proceed  south 
from  Franklin  with  a  wagon-train  of  one  hundred  wagons, 
ostensibly  on  a  foraging  expedition,  but  also  to  reconnoitre 
the  enemy's  front  toward  Columbia.  Coburn's  command, 
some  twelve  miles  south  of  Franklin,  was  to  meet  a  force 
moving  from  Murfreesboro  toward  Columbia,  and  these  com- 
mands were  to  co-operate  and  determine  the  position  of  the 
enemy.  Unknown  to  Gilbert,  Van  Dorn,  on  assuming  com- 
mand at  Columbia,  in  February,  determined  to  establish  out- 
posts and  picket-lines  within  sight  of  Franklin  and  Triune, 
and  to  move  his  headquarters  north  of  Duck  River  to  Spring 


142       THE  ARMY  OF  THE  CUMBERLAND. 

Hill.  Jordan's  cavalry  struck  the  enemy  only  three  miles 
from  town,  formed  in  line  of  battle.  Opening  with  artillery, 
Jordan  advanced,  and,  after  a  sharp  conflict,  the  enemy  re- 
treated to  Spring  Hill.  That  night  Cobttrn  notified  Gilbert 
that  he  was  confronted  by  a  largely  superior  force,  and  sug- 
gested that  he  fall  back.  Gilbert,  however,  ordered  him 
to  advance.  Proceeding  next  morning,  the  column  met  the 
enemy  drawn  up  in  line  of  battle  a  short  distance  from 
Thompson's  Station.  -Forrest's  command  occupied  the  ex- 
treme right,  with  a  battery  of  artillery  on  the  left  of  this, 
and  some  paces  retired  was  Armstrong's  brigade.  On  the 
left  of  his  command  and  in  line  with  it  was  the  Texan  bri- 
gade under  Whitfield,  with  two  guns  on  each  side  of  the 
Columbia  turnpike,  making  a  force  of  10,000  men  under 
Van  Dorn.  It  was  about  half-past  nine  o'clock  in  the 
morning  when  Coburn  struck  these  troops  in  line.  He 
immediately  deployed  his  infantry  across  the  pike  and  to 
the  right,  and  ordered  his  command  to  advance.  The 
enemy's  battery  posted  at  the  pike  opening  fire,  Coburn's 
troops  charged  on  it  handsomely,  his  entire  command 
moving  in  line  of  battle  down  the  pike.  When  within 
one  hundred  and  fifty  yards,  Armstrong's  and  "Whitfield's 
brigades  sprang  forward  and  opened  a  destructive  fire.  Co- 
burn's  troops  held  their  lines  for  over  half  an  hour  under 
heavy  fire,  replying  with  the  same,  when  he  ordered  his 
command  to  fall  back.  Finding  this  large  force  in  his 
front,  he  directed  Jordan  with  his  cavalry  to  cover  his  re- 
treat. Van  Dorn  now  advanced  his  line,  pressed  forward 
his  right  and  left  to  surround  Coburn  and  capture  the  en- 
tire force.  Jordan  formed  two  detachments,  dismounted 
behind  a  stone  fence  to  check  the  advance  of  Forrest  and 
enable  the  artillery  to  escape.  Forrest  made  two  sustained 
attempts  to  dislodge  these  detachments  from  their  position, 


IN   MURFREESBORO.  143 

but  he  was  repulsed  each  time ;  on  a  third  attempt  they 
were  surrounded  and  captured.  The  regiment  in  charge  of 
the  train  with  the  artillery  and  cavalry  now  moved  off  rap- 
idly on  the  pike  to  Franklin,  and  Coburn,  being  surrounded 
by  the  rebels  in  overwhelming  numbers,  and  finding  his 
ammunition  exhausted,  surrendered.  His  loss  was  40  killed, 
and  150  wounded,  and  2,200  prisoners,  including  his  wound- 
ed. The  enemy's  loss  was  35  killed  and  140  wounded.  The 
rebels  lost  heavily  in  officers,  several  of  the  most  valued  of 
Forrest's  falling  in  the  repulses  of  his  command. 

The  surrender  of  Coburn  weakened  the  forces  at  Franklin, 
and  revealed  the  enemy  in  such  strong  force  on  the  imme- 
diate front,  that  Gordon  Granger  at  once  ordered  Baird  to 
proceed  by  rail  to  Franklin,  and  moving  his  own  headquar- 
ters there,  assumed  the  command  in  person. 

On  the  7th,  Sheridan's  division  was  ordered  to  the  front 
to  reconnoitre  the  enemy's  position.  He  reached  Franklin, 
and  the  force  at  that  place  was  further  increased  by  the  ar- 
rival of  a  brigade  from  Nashville.  On  the  9th,  Minty's  bri- 
gade of  cavalry  also  reported,  and  on  the  day  following, 
Granger  with  his  troops  advanced  from  there  upon  Van 
Dorn's  encampment  at  Spring  Hill.  In  support  of  Gran- 
ger's movement  on  Van  Dorn,  Eosecrans  ordered  Davis  to 
move  with  his  division  from  Salem  to  Eaglesville,  with  R.  S. 
Granger's  brigade  in  supporting  distance,  posted  at  Ver- 
sailles. Gordon  Granger  drove  Van  Dorn  from  Spring  Hill, 
and  the  next  day  compelled  his  entire  command  to  retire 
south  of  Rutherford's  Creek.  On  account  of  the  high  water 
the  pursuit  was  not  continued  farther. 

During  March  the  rebel  cavalry  under  Morgan  met  with 
one  of  the  most  decisive  repulses  yet  experienced  by  that 
command.  On  the  18th  of  March  Colonel  Hall  with  his 
command,  the  second  brigade  of  Reynolds's  division,  was 


1J4       THE  ARMY  OP  THE  CUMBERLAND. 

sent  from  Murfreesboro  after  Morgan.  Starting  northeast 
from  that  place  lie  advanced  beyond  Statesville,  when  hear- 
ing that  Morgan  was  advancing  on  him  he  retired  toward 
Milton,  posted  his  command  on  some  high  ground  near  that 
place  and  awaited  the  attack.  Morgan  endeavored  first  to 
turn  the  right  and  then  the  left  of  Hall's  command,  but  in 
each  of  these  attempts  he  was  driven  off  with  heavy  loss. 
He  then  dismounted  the  main  portion  of  his  command  and 
ordered  an  attack  to  be  made  on  the  front.  A  vigorous  as- 
sault was  at  once  made  with  a  heavy  force,  but  this  was  also 
repulsed,  Morgan  losing  a  large  number  of  men.  After  an 
engagement  lasting  some  four  hours,  in  which  Hall's  bri- 
gade fought  with  the  utmost  determination,  Morgan's  com- 
mand, being  repulsed  at  all  points  and  in  every  assault,  with- 
drew from  the  field  with  a  loss  of  some  ninety-five  killed, 
three  hundred  and  fifty  wounded,  and  twenty  prisoners. 

Early  in  April,  Morgan's  troopers  were  defeated  with  great 
loss.  On  the  2d  of  April  Stanley  advanced  with  his  cavalry 
to  Liberty,  where  Morgan  met  them  with  his  entire  com- 
mand. The  two  forces  encamped  within  two  miles  of  each 
other.  On  the  morning  of  the  3d,  Stanley  advanced,  intend- 
ing to  engage  Morgan's  command  at  once,  but  found  that 
he  had  retreated  to  what  he  regarded  as  a  very  strong  posi- 
tion at  Snow  Hill.  Morgan,  however,  had  left  a  strong  force 
at  Liberty  to  watch  Stanley's  movements.  As  Stanley  ad- 
vanced, he  struck  this  force  and  quickly  drove  them  back  on 
to  their  main  body,  and  then  dashed  upon  it  with  part  of 
his  command,  sending  a  portion  around  to  the  right,  which 
turned  the  enemy's  left  flank.  Pressing  Morgan's  command 
from  both  positions,  it  soon  gave  way  at  all  points,  and  was 
in  full  retreat.  Morgan's  officers  tried  to  rally  their  men, 
but  the  latter  were  thoroughly  demoralized  and  had  no 
fight   in  them.     The  teamsters   became  panic-stricken  and 


IN   MURFREESBORO.  145 

added  to  the  general  rout.     It  was  two  weeks  before  Mor- 
gan succeeded  in  getting  his  men  together  again. 

Early  in  April,  Rosecrans  ordered  Colonel  Streight  to  the 
command  of  a  brigade  he  had  organized  for  the  purpose  of 
making  a  raid  on  the  lines  of  communication  of  the  rebels, 
and  to  move  through  the  country  south  and  southeast,  de- 
stroying as  he  went  all  property  of  use  to  them.  Streight's 
command  started  from  Nashville,  partially  mounted,  going 
by  way  of  Clarksville  to  Fort  Henry,  at  which  place  he  took 
steamer  for  Eastport,  Miss.  En  route  to  Fort  Henry  his 
command  secured  as  many  animals  as  they  could,  but  only 
four-fifths  of  the  men  were  mounted,  and  they  poorly.  The 
animals  were  nearly  all  mules,  and  very  few  of  them  were 
fit  for  the  service  required.  It  was  expected  that  the  com- 
mand would  capture  enough  good  animals  to  carry  the  ex- 
pedition successfully  through,  but  this  was  not  realized. 
Leaving  Eastport  on  the  21st,  he  passed  through  Tuscumbia 
three  days  later,  and  reached  Moulton  on  the  26th.  From 
here  on  the  28th  he  pressed  forward  through  Day's  Gap  on 
Sand  Mountain,  in  the  direction  of  Blountsville.  In  the 
gap  their  rear  guard  was  overtaken  and  attacked  on  the 
30th  by  the  enemy's  cavalry  under  Forrest,  who  had  pressed 
forward,  riding  night  and  day.  Selecting  the  best  mounted 
of  his  men,  he  pushed  at  once  to  Streight's  camp.  Here  com- 
ing upon  the  rear  of  Streight's  force  as  it  was  leaving  camp, 
Forrest  opened  with  artillery  firing.  Dismounting  his  men, 
Streight  formed  his  command  on  the  crest  of  a  hill  on  each 
side  of  the  road  and  awaited  the  enemy's  attack.  As  For- 
rest advanced,  Streight  ordered  a  charge  to  be  made  which 
drove  the  enemy  at  all  points,  capturing  their  two  pieces 
of  artillery.  Forrest  lost  in  killed  and  wounded  seventy- 
five  men,  a  large  percentage  of  whom  were  killed.  Streight's 
loss  was  twenty-one  killed  and  wounded.  A  good  many  of 
VII.— 7 


146  THE  ARMY   OF  THE  CUMBERLAND. 

horses  were  captured  from  the  enemy,  on  which  Streight 
mounted  a  number  of  his  men.  On  the  same  afternoon  the 
enemy  attacked  again,  but  was  driven  back  with  consider- 
able loss,  after  a  severe  engagement  lasting  from  three  o'clock 
until  dark.  On  May  1st,  the  Federal  forces  reached  Blounts- 
ville  at  noon.  Here  all  the  wagons  save  one  were  burned, 
and  the  ammunition  placed  on  pack  mules,  after  distribut- 
ing to  the  men  all  that  they  could  carry.  At  three  o'clock 
Streight  started  again,  and  skirmishing  commenced  at  once 
on  their  rear.  Pressing  on,  the  command  marched  until 
twelve  o'clock  that  night.  Eesuming  their  march  in  the 
morning,  the  rear  skirmished  all  the  forenoon  of  the  2d  with 
the  rebels.  Arriving  at  Gadsden,  Streight  remained  long 
enough  to  destroy  a  large  quantity  of  provisions  in  store 
there  for  the  enemy.  It  was  expected  at  this  place  that 
a  small  steamer  would  be  found,  upon  which  a  detachment 
of  men  could  be  sent  to  capture  Eome.  In  this  Streight 
was  disappointed.  From  this  point  Streight's  animals  be- 
came much  exhausted,  and  the  men  were  falling  to  the  rear 
and  getting  captured.  To  prevent  this  the  command  had 
to  go  much,  slower.  Forrest  coming  up  about  one  o'clock 
on  the  2d,  attacked  the  command  while  the  horses  were 
being  fed  at  Blount's  farm.  Here  Colonel  Hathaway  fell, 
shot  through  the  breast.  Again  the  rebels  were  repulsed, 
but  they  constantly  pressed  upon  the  rear  of  Streight's  com- 
mand, keeping  up  a  brisk  skirmish  fire.  The  enemy  were 
kept  in  check  at  Blount's  farm  until  after  dark.  In  the 
meantime  the  main  command  had  crossed  the  Coosa.  Here 
the  river  was  so  high  that  the  ammunition  was  damaged  by 
being  wet.  From  this  place  Streight  sent  a  detachment  to 
burn  the  Round  Mountain  iron  works,  one  of  the  principal 
manufactories  of  munition  of  war  in  the  South.  It  was 
burned  to  the  ground  and  all  the  machinery  destroyed.    On 


IN   MURFREESBORO.  147 

arriving  at  the  other  branch  of  the  Coosa  a  bridge  was  f  otind, 
and,  as  soon  as  the  command  had  crossed,  it  was  destroyed. 
On  the  morning  of  the  3d,  as  the  men  were  preparing  their 
breakfast,  the  enemy  again  attacked.  Shortly  afterward 
Forrest  sent  in  a  flag  of  truce,  demanding  the  surrender  of 
the  entire  command.  This  was  at  first  refused,  but  on  con- 
sultation with  his  officers,  and  considering  the  damaged  con- 
dition of  his  ammunition  and  the  complete  exhaustion  of 
his  command,  Streight,  after  making  a  personal  inspection 
of  Forrest's  artillery,  finally  yielded,  and  the  entire  force 
of  1,466  officers  and  men  was  surrendered. 

On  April  20th,  Thomas  sent  J.  J.  Eeynolds  with  three  bri- 
gades of  infantry  and  Minty's  brigades  of  cavalry,  together 
with  Wilder's  brigade  of  mounted  infantry,  to  proceed  to 
McMinnville,  capture  what  force  was  there,  destroy  the 
railroad  from  Manchester  to  McMinnville,  and  co-operate 
with  a  force  to  move  from  Carthage  against  Morgan.  Eey- 
nolds made  a  successful  raid  on  the  railroad  and  nearly  de-i 
stroyed  it ;  burned  all  the  bridges,  trestle-work,  cars,  and 
locomotives  on  the  road,  also  the  depot  in  McMinnville, 
and  several  cotton  mills.  A  large  amount  of  supplies  was 
captured,  some  one  hundred  and  eighty  prisoners  taken, 
and  over  six  hundred  animals  picked  up.  The  command 
from  Carthage  failed  to  aid  in  the  expedition,  and  Morgan's 
command  in  the  main  effected  their  escape. 

Colonel  Lewis  D.  Watkins  on  the  27th  made  a  gallant 
charge  on  the  Texas  Legion,  encamped  close  to  Van  Doin's 
main  command  near  Spring  Hill.  Dashing  in  upon  the  en- 
emy early  in  the  morning,  he  was  among  them  before  they 
could  rally  for  defence,  capturing  one  hundred  and  twenty- 
eight  prisoners,  over  three  hundred  animals,  and  their  camp 
equipage  without  the  loss  of  a  man. 

It  was  during   the  six  months  waiting   at   Murfreesboro 


148       THE  ARMY  OF  THE  CUMBERLAND. 

that  the  unfortunate  controversy  arose  between  Eosecrans 
and  the  authorities  at  Washington,  represented  by  General 
Halleck,  as  Commander-in-Chief,  and  Mr.  Secretary  Stanton 
of  the  War  Department.  The  Army  of  the  Cumberland,  dur- 
ing the  period  of  the  active  movements  of  that  command, 
congratulated  itself  that  the  field  of  operations  was  so  far 
removed  from  Washington  City,  that  it  did  not  come  under 
the  influence  of  the  authority  that  seemed  to  paralyze  every 
effort  of  the  commands  immediately  around  the  seat  of  war 
at  the  East.  But  in  this  they  were  mistaken.  The  future 
student  of  the  history  of  the  war,  in  the  light  of  the  full  of- 
ficial records,  will  wonder  most  at  the  fact  that,  under  the 
orders  from  Washington,  the  commanders  in  the  field  were 
at  all  able  finally  to  crush  the  rebellion.  It  was  only  when 
the  armies  at  the  East  were  placed  under  a  general  who  was 
practically  untrammelled  in  the  exercise  of  his  power,  and 
who  conducted  his  campaigns  upon  military  principles,  and 
not  as  the  result  of  orders  from  Washington  that  the  begin- 
ning of  the  end  of  the  rebellion  in  the  East  began  to  dawn. 
In  Tennessee  we  have  seen  how  Halleck  gave  Buell  orders, 
and  then  attached  such  conditions  to  them  as  to  ren- 
der their  proper  execution  absolutely  impossible.  There 
was  nothing  to  prevent  Buell  from  occupying  Chattanooga 
in  June,  1862,  as  he  was  directed,  while  Bragg  with  his 
command  was  in  Northern  Mississippi,  except  the  utterly 
useless  condition  attached  to  his  orders,  that  he  should  re- 
pair the  Memphis  and  Charleston  Railroad  as  he  moved  east. 
Buell  urged,  in  forcible  terms,  the  foolishness  and  even  im- 
propriety of  this  delay,  but  Halleck,  who  knew  much  of  the 
theory  of  war  as  learned  from  books,  and  in  a  general  way 
wished  to  apply  these  principles  to  the  practical  movements 
of  troops,  overruled  Buell.  The  latter  knew  that  the  enemy 
in  his  front  always  resolutely  refused  to  be  bound  in  his 


IN  MURFREESBORO.  149 

operations  by  such  rules  in  conducting  campaigns.      The 
result   of   Halleck's  wisdom   soon   became   manifest   when 
Bragg  started  for  Kentucky,  after  the  waste  of  Buell's  time 
in  repairing  this  railroad,  which,  when  completed,  was  at 
once  turned  over  to  the  enemy  in  good  condition  for  imme- 
diate use  against  our  own  forces.     On  Buell  fell  the  force  of 
the  blow  that  some  one  had  to  bear  for  this  failure  to  take 
advantage  of  patent  opportunity.     Buell's  obedience  to  Hal- 
leck's orders  rendered  Bragg's  advance  into  Kentucky  pos- 
sible, while  Buell's  failure  to  bring  Bragg  to  a  decisive 
action  in  Kentucky,  and  his  refusal  to  follow  Bragg  into  the 
mountains  of  Eastern  Kentucky  and  Tennessee,  was  deemed 
sufficient  cause  by  Halleck  to  issue  the  order  removing  him 
from  his  command.     If  Halleck's  order  to  Buell  to  repair 
this  railroad  had  never  been  issued,  Bragg's  campaign  in 
Kentucky  would  never  have  been  made.     Halleck's  removal 
of  Buell  was  the  direct  result  of  the  latter's  obedience  to 
orders  received  from  the  former.     On  Rosecrans  assuming 
command,  almost  the  first  order  he  received  from  Halleck 
was  one  directing  him  to  advance  into  East  Tennessee  after 
Bragg.     With  a  full  knowledge  of  the  military  situation  ob- 
tained from  Buell,  Rosecrans  proceeded  at  once  to  protect 
the   line    established   by  Buell,  and   await   the  advance  of 
Bragg  in  the  vicinity  of  Nashville.     The  battle  of  Stone's 
River  was  for  the  time  sufficient  to  prove,  even  to  Halleck, 
that  Buell  and  Rosecrans  were  correct,  and  Rosecrans  was 
allowed   for  the   time   to  attend   to  his  command  without 
being  interfered  with.      During   the  encampment   at   Mur- 
freesboro,  the   first   object   of    Rosecrans   was    to   properly 
mount  and  equip  his  cavalry.     In  this  he  received  at  first 
faint  encouragement,  which  soon  ceased  altogether. 

On   March    1st    Halleck,  as   Commander-in-Chief   of  the 
Armies  of  the  United  States,  wrote  a  letter,  sending  a  copy 


150  THE    ARMY  OF  THE   CUMBERLAND. 

to  Eosecrans  and  Grant,  offering  the  position  of  the  then 
vacant  major-generalship  in  the  regular  army,  to  the  general 
in  the  field  who  should  first  achieve  an  important  and  decisive 
victory.  Grant  very  quietly  folded  up  the  letter,  put  it  by 
for  future  reference,  and  proceeded  with  the  plans  of  his 
campaign,  saying  nothing.  To  Eosecrans's  open,  impulsive, 
and  honorable  nature,  engaged  with  all  his  powers  in  fur- 
thering the  interests  of  the  Government  and  the  general  wel- 
fare of  his  command,  this  letter  was  an  insult,  and  he  treated 
it  accordingly.  On  March  6th  he  prepared  his  reply,  and 
forwarded  it  to  "Washington.  In  this  letter  he  informs  the 
General-in-Chief  that,  "  as  an  officer  and  as  a  citizen,"  he 
felt  "degraded  at  such  an  auctioneering  of  honors,"  and 
then  adds  :  "  Have  we  a  general  who  would  fight  for  his 
own  personal  benefit  when  he  would  not  for  honor  and  for 
his  country  ?  He  would  come  by  his  commission  basely  in 
that  case,  and  deserve  to  be  despised  by  men  of  honor.  But 
are  all  the  brave  and  honorable  generals  on  an  equality  as  to 
chances  ?  If  not,  it  is  unjust  to  those  who  probably  deserve 
most." 

The  effect  of  this  letter  was  to  widen  the  breach  between 
the  authorities  at  Washington  and  Eosecrans.  Halleck's 
letter  and  Eosecrans's  reply  were  both  characteristic  of  the 
men.  Halleck,  fresh  from  the  results  of  a  large  law  practice 
in  California— principally  devoted  to  the  establishment  of 
the  validity  of  land  grants  in  favor  of  his  clients,  in  the 
success  of  which  large  contingent  fees  were  gained— saw 
nothing  improper  in  such  an  offer  to  an  officer  of  sufficient 
ability  and  standing  to  be  in  command  of  one  of  the  armies 
of  the  United  States.  With  Eosecrans,  all  the  honest,  gen- 
erous impulses  of  a  high-principled,  honorable  gentleman, 
who  had  imperilled  his  life  on  many  a  battlefield,  fighting 
solely  from  a  sense  of  duty  to  his  country,  led  to  the  ex- 


IN  MURFREESBORO.  151 

pression  of  liis  contempt  for  the  author  of  such  an  offer. 
The  mistake  that  Halleck  made  was  in  thinking  that 
what  would  prove  a  tempting  offer  to  a  man  like  him- 
self, would  be  so  to  Eosecrans.  No  one  will  attempt  to 
maintain  the  wisdom  of  Kosecrans's  course  as  a  matter  of 
policy,  however  much  they  may  sympathize  with  and  ad- 
mire the  spirit  of  his  letter.  It  was  an  impolitic  letter, 
and  one  that  aided  in  drawing  the  ill-will  and  resentment 
of  Halleck  and  Stanton  upon  him  in  full  force  later. 

From  this  time  forward,  all  the  requests  of  Eosecrans  for 
the  improvement  of  the  efficiency  of  his  army  were  treated 
with  great  coolness,  and  in  many  instances  it  was  only  after 
the  greatest  importunity  that  he  was  able  to  secure  the 
least  attention  to  his  recommendations  for  the  increased 
usefulness  of  his  command.  His  repeated  applications  for 
more  cavalry,  and  that  they  be  armed  with  revolving  rifles, 
were  treated  with  little  attention.  In  the  meantime  nearly 
every  communication  from  Washington  intimated  that  he 
was  unnecessarily  delaying  bis  advance  upon  Bragg  in  his 
works  at  Shelbyville  and  Tullahoma.  Grant,  on  his  Vicks- 
burg  campaign,  became  very  anxious  for  the  advance  of 
the  Army  of  the  Cumberland,  to  engage  Bragg  and  pre- 
vent reinforcements  being  sent  from  him  to  Pemberton 
or  Johnston,  operating  on  his  front  and  rear ;  and  urged 
Eosecrans  to  move,  and  wrote  to  Halleck,  requesting  him 
to  direct  an  advance  of  the  Army  of  the  Cumberland  on 
Bragg's  position.  Eosecrans  regarded  it  for  the  best  in- 
terests of  the  country  for  his  army  to  remain  constantly 
threatening  Bragg,  in  order  to  hold  the  entire  army  of  the 
latter  in  his  immediate  front,  and  also  in  the  event  of  the 
defeat  of  Grant,  and  a  concentration  of  the  enemy  on  Eose- 
crans's  position,  that  he  should  be  close  to  his  base,  his 
army  being  then  the  reserve.     If  an  advance  succeeded  in 


152       THE  ARMY  OF  THE  CUMBERLAND. 

driving  Bragg  from  Tullahoma,  a  greater  clanger  than  his 
remaining  inactive  on  our  front  might  ensue.  To  Bragg-, 
the  occupancy  of  Middle  Tennessee  was  of  sufficient  im- 
portance to  justify  him  in  remaining  inactive  with  his  en- 
tire command,  waiting  for  the  advance  of  Rosecrans  some 
sis  months.  If  driven  from  Tennessee,  his  troops  were 
ready  to  unite  with  the  command  in  Mississippi  and  defeat 
Grant's  movements.  If  Bragg  could  be  held  in  Tennessee 
until  after  Grant's  success  was  assured,  then,  by  waiting  at 
Murfreesboro  with  his  army  quiet,  Kosecrans  could  render 
better  service  than  by  moving  on  the  enemy.  This  was 
a  matter  of  military  judgment,  on  one  side  espoused  by 
Rosecrans  and  all  his  corps  and  division  commanders,  who 
were  on  the  ground,  and  on  the  other  by  Halleck,  Stanton, 
and  Grant ;  and  this  question  served  to  increase  the  feeling 
against  Rosecrans  in  those  quarters.  Bragg  also  considered 
that  his  presence  on  the  front  of  the  Federal  army  would  pre- 
vent any  troops  from  it  being  sent  to  aid  Grant.  And  thus 
the  year  wore  away  until  early  summer.  Still  another  con- 
sideration with  Rosecrans,  was  the  character  of  the  soil  in 
Tennessee  from  a  short  distance  south  of  Murfreesboro  to 
the  foot  of  the  Cumberland  Mountains.  This  was  a  light 
sandy  loam,  that  in  winter  and  spring,  during  the  rains  of 
those  seasons,  became  like  quicksand,  allowing  the  artillery 
and  wagon  to  sink  almost  to  the  hub,  and  rendering  the 
rapid  movement  of  a  large  army  absolutely  impossible. 

During  the  early  part  of  June,  Rosecrans  commenced 
placing  his  troops  in  position,  preparatory  to  a  general  ad- 
vance. He  ordered  the  brigade  that  had  been  encamped  at 
Gallatin,  under  General  Ward,  to  Lavergne,  and  despatched 
Gordon  Granger  to  take  post  at  Triune,  moving  his  com- 
mand from  Franklin  up  to  that  place.  Crook  was  ordered 
from   Carthage  to  report  to   Murfreesboro,  and  on  his  ar- 


IN  MURFREESBORO.  153 

rival,  was  placed  in  Eeynolds's  division.  Kosecrans  organ- 
ized a  reserve  corps,  consisting  of  three  divisions  designated 
as  First,  Second,  and  Third,  under  Baird,  J.  D.  Morgan,  and 
K.  S.  Granger,  respectively,  and  he  assigned  Gordon  Gran- 
ger to  the  command  of  this  corps. 

Early  in  June,  Garfield,  then  Chief-of-Staff  of  the  General 
commanding,  urged  Rosecrans  to  make  an  advance  move- 
ment, both  as  a  military  and  political  measure  with  reference 
to  the  sentiment  of  the  North.  General  Rosecrans  had 
matured  his  plans  for  an  advance,  but  decided  to  refer  the 
question  to  his  general  officers  in  command  of  corps  and 
divisions.  The  matter  being  submitted  to  them,  the  uni- 
versal sentiment  of  these  officers  was  that  the  movement 
should  be  further  delayed.  However,  on  the  23d  of  June, 
Rosecrans  having  made  all  necessary  arrangements  for  his 
command,  according  to  his  plans,  and  learning  of  the  favor- 
able prospects  at  Vicksburg,  and  of  the  movement  of  the 
force  under  Burnside  into  East  Tennessee  to  take  and  hold 
Knoxville,  issued  the  necessary  orders  for  the  advance  of 
his  army  on  that  of  the  enemy, 
7* 


CHAPTER  X. 

THE  ADVANCE  ON  TULLAHOMA. 

At  the  time  of  the  advance  of  the  Army  of  the  Cumber- 
land, Polk's  corps  of  Bragg's  army  occupied  the  main 
position  at  Shelbyville,  strongly  intrenched  behind  heavy 
works  thrown  up  during  the  six  months  of  waiting.  These 
added  to  the  natural  strength  of  the  position,  and  extended 
from  Horse  Mountain  on  the  east,  to  Duck  Elver  on  the  west, 
and  were  covered  by  a  line  of  abattis.  The  town  was  noted 
for  the  strong  Union  sentiment  of  its  inhabitants,  of  which 
fact  the  rebels  took  full  advantage  to  the  loss  and  distress 
of  the  people.  It  is  situated  about  twenty -five  miles  south 
of  Murfreesboro,  and  some  twenty  miles  north  of  Tullahoma, 
on  a  branch  railroad  from  the  main  Nashville  line,  starting 
west  from  Wartrace.  Bragg's  right  was  posted  at  War- 
trace,  with  Hardee's  corps  occupying  the  passes  at  Liberty, 
Hoover,  and  Bellbuckle  Gaps.  These  gaps  were  all  held 
by  strong  forces  of  the  enemy,  supported  by  the  main  com- 
mand. Polk  bad  an  advance  in  Guy's  Gap  with  his  entire 
command  in  supporting  distance.  Bragg's  extreme  right 
was  protected  by  cavalry  with  headquarters  at  McMinnville, 
while  his  cavalry  on  the  left,  under  Forrest,  had  headquar- 
ters at  Columbia,  threatening  Franklin. 

At  this  time  the  main  base  of  supplies  of  the  enemy  was 
at  Chattanooga,  to  which  the  entire  country  south  of  Duck 
Biver  had  been  made  tributary.     From  Duck  Biver,  south, 


THE  ADVANCE   ON  TULLAHOMA.  155 

the  country  is  rough,  with  rocky  ranges  of  hills,  which  divide 
the  "  barrens  "  from  the  fertile  parts  of  Middle  Tennessee. 
These  "  barrens  "  constitute  a  high  rolling  plateau  of  ground 
between  the  ranges  of  hills  at  Duck  River  and  the  Cumber- 
land Mountains.  It  is  here  that  the  soil  during  a  rainy  sea- 
son offers  the  greatest  obstacle  to  active  campaigning.  Situ- 
ated on  the  ''barrens,"  at  the  junction  of  the  McMinnville 
branch  with  the  Nashville  and  Chattanooga  Railroad,  was 
Tullahoma,  a  small  straggling  village,  where  Bragg  had  es- 
tablished his  main  depot  and  made  a  large  intrenched 
camp.  The  defiles  of  Duck  River,  a  deep,  narrow  stream 
with  but  few  fords  or  bridges,  covered  its  front,  with  a  rough 
rocky  range  of  hills  immediately  south  of  the  river.  The 
principal  roads  as  they  passed  through  these  hills  bore 
southwardly  toward  the  line  of  the  enemy's  communica- 
tions and  Tullahoma.  The  Manchester  pike  passed  through 
Hoover's  Gap  and  reached  the  "barrens"  by  ascending 
a  long,  difficult  canon  called  Matt's  Hollow.  The  War- 
trace  road  passed  through  Liberty  Gap,  and  from  there  it 
ran  into  the  road  along  the  railroad  through  Bellbuckle 
Gap.  The  direct  road  to  Shelbyville  goes  through  Guy's 
Gap. 

Rosecrans  was  satisfied  from  the  information  he  had  re- 
ceived that  Bragg  intended  to  fight  in  his  intrenchments  at 
Shelbyville,  in  the  event  of  the  army  advancing  in  that  di- 
rection. The  "  effective  total  present,"  as  reported  by  Bragg 
as  the  strength  of  his  army  on  June  20,  1863,  at  Shelbyville, 
was  43,089,  of  all  arms.  If  he  were  attacked  at  Shelbyville 
and  beaten,  he  would  then  be  in  good  position  to  retreat  to 
his  strong  intrenchments  at  Tullahoma,  and  on  his  retreat 
could  so  retard  Rosecrans's  advance  through  the  narrow 
winding  roads  leading  up  to  the  "barrens,"  as  to  fully 
protect  his  own  line  of  retreat  and  inflict  severe  loss  on  the 


156       THE  ARMY  OF  THE  CUMBERLAND. 

advancing  force  without  exposing  his  own  troops.  Bose- 
crans's  plan  of  campaign  was  to  render  useless  Bragg's  in- 
trenchruents  by  turning  his  right,  and  then  if  possible  secure 
his  line  of  retreat  by  rnoving  on  the  railroad  bridge  at  Elk 
Eiver.  Bragg  by  this  means  would  either  be  forced  to 
accept  battle  on  ground  chosen  by  Eosecrans,  or  be  com- 
pelled to  beat  a  retreat  on  a  disadvantageous  line,  neither 
as  direct  nor  by  as  good  roads  as  he  would  have  from  Shel- 
byville and  Tullahoma  due  south.  To  carry  out  this  plan  it 
was  necessary  to  impress  Bragg  with  the  idea  that  our  ad- 
vance would  be  in  force  on  Shelbyville,  and,  if  possible, 
to  keep  up  this  impression  until  the  main  body  of  our 
army  reached  Manchester.  The  success  of  this  would  keep 
Bragg's  attention  on  the  movement  on  his  front  at  Shelby- 
ville, and  enable  our  army  to  pass  through  the  dangerous 
defile  of  Hoover's  Gap,  a  narrow  passage-way  three  miles 
long,  between  high  hills,  and  so  on  through  Matt's  Hollow, 
an  equally  dangerous  defile,  being  a  gorge  two  miles  long 
with  hardly  room  anywhere  for  wagons  to  pass  each  other. 
These  passes  were  only  eight  miles  from  Hardee's  head- 
quarters and  sixteen  from  Shelbyville. 

The  plan  then  of  Eosecrans  in  the  advance  on  Tullahoma, 
was  to  make  a  feint  with  Granger's  corps  and  the  main  por- 
tion of  the  cavalry,  on  Folk's  command  in  his  strong  position 
at  Shelbyville,  and  to  mass  the  three  main  corps  on  Bragg's 
right  at  Wartrace.  The  army  being  all  ready  for  the  open- 
ing campaign,  on  the  23d  of  June  General  E.  B.  Mitchell 
with  his  command — the  First  Cavalry  Division — commenced 
the  advance  from  Triune  on  the  Eaglesville  and  Shelbyville 
pike,  in  the  feint  on  Polk's  command,  made  a  furious  attack 
on  Bragg's  cavalry  and  drove  in  his  infantry  guards  on  their 
main  force,  pressing  the  whole  line  on  that  front.  Granger, 
with  the  three  divisions  of  his  corps  and  Brannan's  division 


THE  ADVANCE  ON  TULLAHOMA.       157 

of  Thomas's  corps,  on  that  day  moved  with  three  days'  rations 
from  Triune  to  Salem. 

On  the  same  day,  Palmer's  division  and  a  brigade  of  cav- 
alry marched  to  the  vicinity  of  Bradyville,  for  the  purpose  of 
seizing  with  his  advance  the  head  of  the  defile  leading  over 
an  obscure  road  by  Lumley's  Station  to  Manchester,  and  so 
up  to  the  "barrens."  All  the  other  troops  were  supplied 
with  twelve  days'  rations  of  bread,  coffee,  sugar,  and  salt, 
with  six  days'  pork  and  bacon,  and  six  days'  meat  on  hoof, 
and  were  held  in  readiness  to  move  southward.  These 
movements  being  made,  the  next  day  the  entire  army  pressed 
forward  on  the  advance. 

In  the  evening  of  the  23d,  the  corps  commanders  met  at 
army  headquarters.  The  plan  of  the  campaign  was  fully  ex- 
plained to  them,  and  each  one  received  in  writing  his  orders 
as  to  his  part  in  the  movement. 


"Major-General  McCooks'  corps  to  advance  on  the  Shelbyville 
road,  turn  to  the  left,  move  two  divisions  by  Millersburg,  and  advan- 
cing on  the  Wartrace  road  seize  and  hold  Liberty  Gap.  The  Third  Di- 
vision to  advance  on  Fosterville  and  cover  the  crossing  of  General 
Granger's  command  from  the  Middleton  road,  and  then  move  by  Chris- 
tiana to  join  the  rest  of  the  corps. 

"General  Granger  to  advance  on  the  Middleton  road,  threatening 
that  place,  and  cover  the  passing  of  General  Brannan's  division  of  the 
Fourteenth  Corps,  which  was  to  pass  by  Christiana  and  bivouac  with 
the  rear  division  of  the  Twentieth  Corps. 

"The  Fourteenth  Corps,  Major-General  Thomas,  to  advance  on 
the  Manchester  pike,  seize  and  hold  with  its  advance,  if  practicable, 
Hoover's  Gap,  and  bivouac  so  as  to  command  and  cover  that  and  the 
Millersburg  road,  so  that  McCook  and  himself  could  be  within  support- 
ing distance  of  each  other. 

"Major-General  Crittenden  to  leave  Van  Cleve's  division  of  the 
Twenty-first  Army  Corps  at  Murfreesboro,  concentrate  at  Bradyville 
with  the  other  two,  and  await  orders." 


158  THE  ARMY   OF  THE  CUMBERLAND. 

One  brigade  of  cavalry  under  Turchin  was  sent  with  Crit- 
tenden to  establish  a  lookout  toward  McMinnville.  All  the 
remaining  cavalry  under  Stanley  was  to  meet  Mitchell  as  he 
came  in  from  Versailles  and  at  once  attack  the  rebel  cavalry 
at  Middleton. 

These  movements  were  all  promptly  executed  in  the  midst 
of  heavy  drenching  rains,  as  it  only  could  rain  in  the  moun- 
tains and  hills  of  Tennessee,  whenever  the  Army  of  the  Cum- 
berland made  a  forward  movement.  The  ground  was  so 
softened  on  all  the  dirt  roads  as  to  render  them  next  to  im- 
passable. 

The  Twentieth  Corps,  consisting  of  Johnson's,  Davis's,  and 
Sheridan's  divisions,  started  on  the  Shelbyville  pike,  and  by 
different  cross  roads  moved  to  the  left  to  Millersburg,  where 
Davis's  and  Sheridan's  divisions  encamped  for  the  night. 
Johnson's  division  was  advanced  up  to  Liberty  Gap,  with  the 
Thirty-ninth  Indiana,  under  Colonel  Harrison,  thrown  for- 
ward to  skirmish.  Harrison  developed  the  enemy  in  front 
of  the  Gap.  Willich's  brigade  was  moved  forward,  and  drove 
the  skirmishers  in  the  rebel  front  back  upon  their  main  line, 
placed  on  the  crest  of  the  hills,  on  each  side  of  the  entrance 
to  the  gap.  Here  the  enemy  was  too  strongly  posted  to  at- 
tack his  front.  Another  brigade  under  Colonel  John  F. 
Miller,  who  had  been  transferred  from  Negley's  division  to 
Johnson's,  was  then  brought  forward.  These  two  brigades 
were  at  once  deployed  in  line,  making  a  front  of  such  length 
as  to  envelop  both  flanks  of  the  enemy's  line,  and  advan- 
cing, these  brigades  gallantly  drove  the  rebels  through  the 
defile,  a  distance  of  two  miles.  After  clearing  the  gap,  the 
troops  returned  to  the  north  end  of  it  and  there  bivouacked. 
0:i  the  following  day,  late  in  the  afternoon,  an  attack  was 
made  on  "Willich's  and  Miller's  brigades,  to  drive  them  out 
of  the  north  end  of  the  gap.     Johnson's  failure  to  hold  the 


THE  ADVANCE   ON  TULLAHOMA.  159 

southern  entrance  enabled  the  enemy  again  to  enter  it,  and 
to  secure  it  entirely  they  made  this  attack.  The  engage- 
ment opened  with  a  heavy  fire  on  the  centre  of  the  com- 
mand, the  enemy  attacking  in  force.  They  were  handsome- 
ly repulsed.  Kenewing  the  attack,  Hardee  then  endeav- 
ored to  secure  positions  on  the  hills  to  the  right  and  left,  so 
as  to  command  Johnson's  flanks  with  his  fire,  but  each  move- 
ment was  met  by  Johnson's  troops,  supported  by  Carlin's 
brigade  of  Davis's  division,  and  every  attack  was  repulsed. 
Beaten  at  every  point,  late  in  the  evening  the  enemy  with- 
drew entirely,  taking  position  at  Bellbuckle.  The  fighting 
at  Liberty  Gap  was  the  most  severe  of  the  campaign,  and  in 
this  attack  Johnson's  command,  including  Carlin's  brigade, 
lost  two  hundred  and  thirty-one  killed  and  wounded.  The 
enemy's  loss  was  still  greater.  It  was  in  repelling  one  of 
the  attacks  on  the  left  that  Colonel  Miller  fell  severely 
wounded  with  a  minie  ball  through  his  left  eye  while 
leading  his  brigade. 

On  the  24th,  General  Thomas  moved  direct  on  the  Manches- 
ter pike  from  Murfreesboro,  Beynolds's  division  in  advance, 
starting  at  4  o'clock  in  the  morning,  under  orders,  if  pos- 
sible, to  seize  and  hold  Hoover's  Gap.  At  7  a.m.,  Rousseau's 
division  followed  in  support  of  Reynolds's  division,  which 
encountered  the  mounted  videttes  of  the  enemy  a  few  miles 
beyond  our  picket  station,  forced  them  upon  their  reserve, 
and  then  resolutely  pressing  on  drove  the  entire  force  on 
the  run,  through  Hoover's  Gap  and  beyond  McBride's  Creek. 
Wilder,  finding  the  enemy  about  to  attack  him  with  two  bri- 
gades from  the  direction  of  Fairfield,  occupied  a  strong 
position  on  the  hills  at  the  southern  entrance  of  the  gap. 
Reynolds  at  once  moved  his  two  infantry  brigades  forward 
and  occupied  the  gap  in  the  rear  of  "Wilder's  command,  pre- 
pared to  resist  the  enemy  on  the  front.    Wilder's  brigade 


160       THE  ARMY  OF  THE  CUMBERLAND. 

was  immediately  attacked  by  tlie  enemy's  force.  Eeynolds 
supported  liim  at  once  with  his  other  brigades,  which  were 
posted  on  the  ridge  of  woods  on  the  extreme  right  to  pre- 
vent the  enemy  turning  our  right  flank,  then  heavily  engaged 
by  a  superior  force.  With  these  reinforcements  the  enemy 
was  driven  back  out  of  the  woods,  and  three  regiments  were 
posted  on  the  right,  making  that  position  secure.  Major 
Coolidge,  commanding  the  brigade  of  regulars  of  Rousseau's 
division,  was  ordered  to  reinforce  Reynolds,  and  every  prepa- 
ration was  made  for  an  attack  on  the  following  morning. 
The  other  brigades  of  Rousseau's  command,  with  Negley's 
division,  occupied  the  gap  in  the  rear  of  Reynolds  during 
the  night.  Early  on  the  morning  of  the  25tk,  Scribner  was 
ordered  with  his  brigade  to  the  front,  in  support  of  the  bat- 
teries and  to  form  picket  line  on  the  extreme  left. 

On  the  24th,  Crittenden,  with  Wood's  and  Palmer's  divi- 
sions, marched  to  Bradyville,  leaving  Van  Cleve's  division  to 
garrison  Murfreesboro.  Granger,  with  bis  tbree  divisions 
and  Brannan's,  advanced  from  Salem  to  Christiana.  Tur- 
chin's  division  of  cavalry  under  Stanley  moved  on  the 
"Woodbury  pike  to  Cripple  Creek,  and  thence  through 
Salem.  During  the  day  Mitchell  advanced  from  Rover 
through  Versailles  to  Middleton,  where  he  had  a  sharp 
engagement  with  the  enemy's  cavalry. 

The  plans  of  the  enemy  not  being  yet  fully  developed,  and 
in  view  of  the  uncertainty  that  existed  whether  he  would  fall 
on  McCook's  front,  or  mass  on  Thomas  near  Fan-field,  Rose- 
crans  issued  the  following  orders  for  the  25th : 

"Major-General  Crittenden  to  advance  to  Lannon's  Stand,  six  miles 
east  of  Beech  Grove,  and  open  communications  with  General  Thomas. 

"General  Thomas  to  attack  the  rebels  on  the  flank  of  his  advance 
position  at  the  forks  of  the  road,  and  drive  the  rebels  toward  Fair- 
field. 


THE  ADVANCE  ON  TULLAHOMA.        1G1 

"General  McCook  to  feign  and  advance,  as  if  in  force,  on  the  War- 
trace  road  by  the  Liberty  Gap  passes. 

"General  Stanley,  with  his  cavalry,  to  occupy  their  attention  at 
Forsterville,  and  General  Granger  to  support  him  with  his  infantry  at 
Christiana." 

Iu  the  event  that  Thomas  succeeded  in  his  attack  and 
drove  the  enemy  toward  Wartrace,  he  was  then  to  cover  that 
road  with  a  division,  and  taking  the  remainder  of  his  troops 
was  to  move  rapidly  on  Manchester.  McCook  was  then  to 
move  in  and  take  Thomas's  place  at  Beech  Grove,  holding 
Liberty  Gap  with  a  division,  and  was  finally  to  withdraw 
that  and  follow  Thomas  with  his  entire  command  to  Man- 
chester. 

The  same  day  that  Crittenden's  command  marched  to  Holly 
Springs,  Brannan's  division  reached  the  main  command  of 
Thomas,  and  went  into  camp  with  Boussean  at  Hoover's  Mills. 
Beynolds  had  a  slight  skirmish  with  the  enemy  on  his  front. 
On  the  night  of  the  25th,  Bousseau  was  ordered  up  with  his 
division  to  take  position  immediately  in  the  rear  of  Bey- 
nolds, preparatory  to  an  attack  on  the  enemy's  position  at 
Beech  Grove  the  next  morning.  Minty's  brigade  of  cavalry 
pressed  forward  at  all  points  and  drove  the  enemy  to  Guy's 
Gap.  Long  took  position  at  Lumley's  Station.  The  re- 
mainder of  Turchin's  division  moved  in  the  advance  with 
General  Crittenden. 

The  incessant  rains  that  had  fallen  since  the  opening  of  the 
campaign  delayed  the  advance,  by  preventing  Brannan  join- 
ing the  Fourteenth  Corps  as  soon  as  was  expected.  During 
the  night  of  the  25th  it  rained  so  continuously  that  it  was 
almost  impossible  for  the  troops  to  move,  but  by  extraordi- 
nary exertions  the  divisions  were  all  in  position  by  10.30  a.m. 
At  4  o'clock  in  the  morning  Brannan's  division  moved  up  to 
take  part  in  the  attack.     At  8  a.m.  Negley's  division  took 


162  THE  ARMY   OP  THE  CUMBERLAND. 

position  to  support  the  attack  of  tlie  other  divisions.  If  the 
enemy's  position  at  Beech  Grove  was  carried,  then  Rousseau 
and  Brannan  were  to  push  on  to  Manchester  that  night  if 
possible.  At  10.30  a.m.  the  advance  was  ordered.  Moving- 
forward  on  the  rebels  in  force  on  the  heights  north  of  Gar- 
rison Creek,  our  army  drove  them  steadily  and  rapidly 
toward  Fairfield,  Rousseau  and  Brannan  operating  on  their 
left  flank  from  the  hills  north  of  the  Fairfield  road,  while 
Reynolds  advanced  against  their  front  and  right.  The  enemy 
had  prepared  for  an  obstinate  resistance,  and  attempted  to 
enfilade  Thomas's  troops  frorn  the  high  ground  on  his  right. 
This  was  effectually  prevented  by  a  gallant  charge  of  Walk- 
er's brigade  and  the  regulars  under  Major  Coolidge,  who 
drove  the  enemy  from  this  position.  Thomas  pushed  for- 
ward his  troops,  driving  the  rebels  in  the  direction  of  Fair- 
field, who  covered  their  retreat  with  two  batteries  of  artil- 
lery, occupying  positions  behind  strong  lines  of  skirmishers 
flanked  by  heavy  cavalry  force.  The  rebels  thus  retired  to 
Fairfield,  near  to  which  place  our  pickets  were  advanced. 
Reynolds's  division  and  the  baggage  moved  forward  during 
the  night  toward  Manchester.  Late  in  the  afternoon  Wil- 
der's  brigade  seized  Matt's  Hollow,  and  thus  secured  that 
passage.  Thomas  placed  his  divisions  in  line  of  battle  ex- 
tending from  the  Fairfield  road  to  within  five  miles  of  Man- 
chester. McCook  remained  in  camp  at  Liberty  Gap  during 
the  day,  while  Granger  rested  at  Christiana.  Crittenden's 
command  pressed  forward  as  rapidly  as  possible  on  toward 
Manchester,  struggling  over  almost  impassable  roads. 

Rosecrans's  headquarters,  on  the  27th,  reached  Manches- 
ter. The  advanced  jiosition  secured  by  Thomas's  command 
rendered  the  concentration  of  the  whole  army  on  the  en- 
emy's left,  through  Hoover's  Gap,  at  this  time  an  easy  mat- 
ter.    With  this  done,  Bragg  would  either  be  forced  to  fight, 


THE  ADVANCE  ON  TULLAHOMA.        163 

in  resisting  the  further  advance  of  the  army  under  Rosecrans, 
or  abandon  Middle  Tennessee  altogether.  Early  on  the 
morning  of  the  27th,  Reynolds's  advance  brigade — Wilder's 
mounted  infantry — took  possession  of  Manchester,  capturing 
forty  prisoners,  a  guard  at  the  railroad  depot,  and  taking 
the  town  completely  by  surprise.  Reynolds's  entire  division 
reached  Manchester  during  the  morning.  General  Thomas 
then  moved  Rousseau's  and  Brannan's  divisions  in  pursuit 
of  the  enemy,  driving  him  as  far  as  Fairfield,  and  ascertained 
at  that  place  that  the  rebels  had  retreated  entirely.  These 
two  divisions  then  turned  into  the  Fairfield  and  Manchester 
road,  Brannan's  reaching  the  latter  place  at  10  p.m.  and 
Rousseau's  at  midnight.  Negley's  division  had,  during  the 
day,  been  moving  in  support  of  these  two  divisions  toward 
the  Fairfield  road,  by  way  of  Noale  Fork,  and  arrived  at 
Manchester  at  8  p.m.  Thomas's  corps  being  now  together, 
it  was  manifest  that  the  enemy  must  leave  his  intrenchment 
at  Shelbyville,  and  that  our  army  must  be  prepared  to  meet 
him  at  Tullahoma,  only  twelve  miles  distant.  Rosecrans 
gave  the  necessary  orders  at  once  to  the  other  corps  com- 
manders to  close  up  their  columns  on  Manchester,  and  be 
prepared  for  the  contest. 

On  the  extreme  right  our  cavalry,  on  the  27th,  did  bril- 
liant work.  Supported  by  the  reserve  corps  under  Gran- 
ger, Stanley  advanced  from  Christiana  to  Guy's  Gap,  where 
the  advance  of  the  rebel  army  under  Wheeler,  with  Martin's 
and  a  portion  of  "Wharton's  divisions,  was  encountered. 
Charging  down  on  them  with  Minty's  brigade,  closely  fol- 
lowed by  Mitchell's  division,  Stanley  routed  and  drove 
them  out  of  the  gap  into  their  intrenchments  just  north  of 
Shelbyville.  Here  they  again  made  a  stand.  Dashing 
ahead,  Minty  encountered  them  in  their  works,  and  drove 
them  in  disorder  from  their  intrenchments  into  Shelbyville. 


164       THE  ARMY  OF  THE  CUMBERLAND. 

While  Minty  was  pushing  them  on  the  front,  Mitchell  came 
up,  turned  their  right,  cutting  off  their  direct  line  of  retreat, 
and  both  forces  united  in  driving  them  beyond  the  town, 
completely  defeated.  Wheeler  lost  all  his  artillery  and 
some  five  hundred  prisoners.  A  large  number  of  the  rebels 
were  driven  into  Duck  River  and  drowned  while  attempting 
to  cross.  The  flight  was  so  hurried  that  Wheeler  himself 
only  escaped  by  swimming  the  river.  This  successful  move- 
ment established  the  fact  that  Bragg  had  abandoned  his 
strong  line  of  defence  at  Shelbyville,  and  the  question  now 
to  be  answered  was  whether  he  would  accept  battle  at  Tul- 
lahoma,  or  retire  with  his  entire  command  across  the  Cum- 
berland Mountains  and  the  Tennessee  River,  fighting  as  he 
fell  back. 

While  the  concentration  of  his  command  at  Manchester 
was  being  effected,  Rosecrans  determined  to  break  the  line 
of  railroad  in  the  rear  of  Bragg's  army,  if  possible.  On  the 
morning  of  the  28th  Wilder,  with  his  brigade  of  mounted 
infantry,  started  at  reveille  by  way  of  Hillsboro,  to  burn 
Elk  River  bridge,  and  to  destroy  the  railroad  between  De- 
chard  and  Cowan.  John  Beatty,  with  his  brigade  of  infantry 
marched  to  Hillsboro  for  the  purpose  of  covering  and  sup- 
porting  Wilder's  movement.  The  latter  reached  Elk  River 
and  crossed  his  command,  floating  his  mountain  howitzers 
on  a  raft  made  of  an  old  saw-mill.  He  then  moved  on  to 
Dechard,  where,  after  a  slight  skirmish  with  a  detachment 
of  the  enemy,  he  destroyed  the  depot  full  of  commissary 
goods,  the  water  tanks,  the  railroad  bridge  over  the  Win- 
chester road,  and  tore  up  some  three  hundred  yards  of  the 
railroad.  Earlier  in  the  day  Wilder  sent  part  of  his  com- 
mand, under  Colonel  Munroe,  to  destroy  the  railroad  bridge 
over  Elk  River.  Withers's  division  of  Bragg's  army  reached 
this  point  only  a  few  moments  ahead  of  Munroe,  and  pre- 


THE  ADVANCE  ON  TULLAHOMA.        165 

vented  the  burning  of  the  bridge.  Finding  that  the  enemy 
was  in  pursuit  of  him  at  all  points,  Wilder  next  moved  to 
Tantalon  and  Anderson  with  detachments  of  his  command, 
but  was  compelled  to  retire,  as  these  points  were  strongly 
guarded  by  heavy  forces  of  the  enemy's  infantry.  Crossing 
the  mountains  that  night  on  his  return  over  the  Tracy  City 
road,  and  so  on  to  Pelham,  the  troops  slept  at  the  foot  of 
the  mountains,  and  started  the  next  morning  just  in  time 
to  escape  Forrest,  who  was  in  pursuit  with  ten  regiments 
of  cavalry.  Wilder  reached  Manchester  at  1  p.m.  of  the 
30th. 

Sheridan's  division  of  McCook's  corps  reached  Manches- 
ter on  the  29th.  The  command — troops  and  animals — suf- 
fered severely  on  their  march  over  the  heavy  roads.  Crit- 
tenden's command,  which  had  been  on  the  road  since  the 
26th,  reached  Manchester  also  on  the  29th,  after  marching 
with  all  speed,  badly  worn,  by  reason  of  the  terrible  rains 
and  fearful  roads.  The  condition  of  the  latter  may  be  in- 
ferred from  the  fact  that  it  required  four  days  of  incessant 
labor  for  Crittenden  to  advance  the  distance  of  twenty-one 
miles.  The  concentration  of  the  entire  army  being  effected, 
orders  were  given  for  the  final  movement  on  the  30th,  as 
follows  : 

"  The  Fourteenth  Corps  to  occupy  the  centre  at  Concord  Church  and 
Bobo  Cross  Roads,  with  a  division  in  reserve. 

"The  Twentieth  Corps  to  take  the  right  on  Crumpton's  Creek,  two 
divisions  in  echelon  retired,  one  in  reserve. 

"  The  Twenty-first  Corps  to  come  up  on  the  left  near  Hall's  Chapel, 
one  division  in  front  and  one  in  reserve." 

The  rain  had  rendered  the  roads  over  which  this  move- 
ment was  to  be  made  as  soft  and  spongy  as  a  swamp,  into 
which  the  wagons  cut  to  the  hubs,  and  even  hoi'ses  could 
only  pass  over  with  the  greatest  exertion.     The  troops  on  the 


166  THE  ARMY   OF  THE  CUMBERLAND. 

30th  were  compelled  to  drag  along  the  artillery  through  the 
rnud  into  position.  While  the  orders  for  the  movements  of 
the  troops  were  being  executed  on  the  30th,  Thomas  sent 
Steedman's  brigade  of  Brannan's  division,  and  two  regi- 
ments of  Negley's  division  on  separate  roads  to  reconnoitre 
the  enemy's  position,  and  Sheridan  sent  Bradley's  brigade 
of  his  own  division  on  another  road,  for  the  same  purpose. 
These  reconnoissances  all  returned,  and  reported  having 
found  the  enemy  in  force  within  a  mile  or  two  of  Tulla- 
homa,  on  all  roads  except  the  one  leading  to  Estill  Springs. 
Scouts  coming  in  confirrned  this,  adding  that  it  was  the  gen- 
eral belief  that  Bragg  would  not  leave  his  intrenchments  at 
Tullahoina  without  a  fight. 

On  the  same  day  Rosecrans  ordered  his  topographical 
engineers  to  ascertain  the  nature  of  the  ground,  in  order 
to  determine  the  practicability  of  moving  by  columns  in 
mass  in  line  of  battle  from  the  position  in  front,  to  gain 
the  rear  of  the  rebel  position.  Their  report  being  favor- 
able, all  arrangements  were  completed,  and  the  second  divi- 
sion of  Crittenden's  corps  was  moved  into  position. 

On  July  1st,  Thomas,  hearing  from  a  citizen  that  the  ene- 
my were  evacuating  Tullahoma,  ordered  Steedman  with  his 
brigade,  supported  by  two  regiments  of  Reynolds's  divi- 
sion on  the  left,  to  advance  cautiously  and  ascertain  if  the 
report  was  true.  Pushing  forward  his  advance,  Steedman, 
meeting  with  no  opposition,  entered  the  place  at  noon,  cap- 
turing a  few  prisoners.  Rosecrans  being  at  once  notified  of 
this,  immediately  ordered  Rousseau's  and  Negley's  divi- 
sions in  pursuit.  Pressing  forward  with  all  possible  haste 
by  Spring  Creek,  these  divisions  overtook  the  rear  guard 
of  the  enemy  late  in  the  afternoon  at  Bethpage  Bridge, 
two  miles  above  the  railroad  crossing,  where,  after  a  sharp 
skirmish,  in  which  a  good  many  of  our  men  were  wounded, 


THE  ADVANCE  ON  TULLAHOMA.        167 

the  rebels  were  driven  steadily  back,  until  darkness  pre- 
vented further  pursuit.  The  enemy,  occupying  the  heights 
south  of  the  river,  commanded  the  bridge  -with  their  artil- 
lery, which  they  had  placed  behind  epaulements. 

On  the  2d,  the  ammunition  was  brought  forward,  and 
McCook,  with  Sheridan's  and  Davis's  divisions,  was  ordered 
in  pursuit  on  the  roads  west  of  the  railroad.  Sheridan,  on 
arriving  at  Eock  Creek  Ford,  found  Elk  River  so  swollen 
with  the  heavy  rains  of  the  past  week  as  to  be  barely  forda- 
ble  for  cavalry.  On  the  south  bank  of  the  river  the  enemy 
had  posted  a  force  of  cavalry  to  resist  the  crossing.  Sheri- 
dan opened  fire  at  once  on  them,  drove  them  away,  and 
occupied  the  ford.  During  the  night  the  enemy  burned 
the  bridge  on  the  line  of  advance  of  Thomas,  who  found 
equal  difficulty  in  crossing.  Here  the  river  was  very  deep, 
and  he  ordered  Rousseau's,  Brannan's,  and  Reynolds's  divi- 
sions up  the  river  to  Jones's  Ford.  Hambright's  brigade 
was  thrown  across  the  river,  and  the  other  troops  went  into 
camp  on  the  north  bank.  Hambright  captured  several  rebel 
prisoners,  who  told  him  that  Bragg's  army  was  in  full 
retreat  by  way  of  Pelham  and  Cowan,  across  the  Cumber- 
land Mountains.  Turchin,  with  a  small  brigade  of  cavalry, 
moved  forward  from  Hillsboro  on  the  Dechard  road.  On 
reaching  the  fords  of  Elk  River  at  Morris  Ferry  he  found 
the  rebel  cavalry  strongly  posted.  He  attacked  them  at 
once,  reinforced  by  Mitchell's  command,  and  forced  a  pas- 
sage of  the  river  after  a  sharp  fight.  Night  closed  the  pur- 
suit. 

On  the  3d,  Sheridan  succeeded  in  crossing  Elk  River, 
supported  by  Davis's  division,  and  pursued  the  enemy  to 
Cowan,  where  he  learned  that  Bragg  had  crossed  the  moun- 
tains with  part  of  his  artillery  and  infantry  by  the  University 
and  Sweden's  Cove,  sending  Hardee's  corps  into  Sequatchie 


1G8       THE  ARMY  OF  THE  CUMBERLAND. 

Valley,  and  covering  his  retreat  with  his  cavalry.  Thomas 
crossed  Eousseau's  and  Brannan's  divisions  at  Jones's  Ford 
and  ordered  thern  to  take  position  on  the  Winchester  and 
Hillsboro  road.  He  directed  Negley  and  Reynolds  to 
cross  their  divisions  at  the  ford  on  the  Winchester-  and 
Manchester  pike.  On  the  4th,  Rousseau  was  ordered  to 
march  to  the  Dechard  and  Pelham  roads,  and  to  take  up 
position  at  Brackenfield's  Point  toward  the  University. 
Reynolds  encamped  at  Penningtown,  and  Brannan's  divi- 
sion at  Taite's.  The  cavalry  sent  from  Sheridan's  position, 
and  by  Stanley  from  the  main  column,  developed  the  fact 
that  the  enemy  was  entirely  across  the  mountains,  and  the 
troops  were  now  ordered  into  camp  to  await  supplies  from 
the  depot  at  Murfreesboro. 

Bragg's  army  reached  Chattanooga  the  first  week  in  July. 
Here  he  established  his  headquarters  with  Polk's  corps  re- 
tained in  and  around  town  for  the  purposes  of  observation, 
with  the  exception  of  Anderson's  brigade  of  Withers's  divi- 
sion, which  was  ordered  to  Bridgeport,  at  the  crossing  of 
the  Nashville  and  Chattanooga  Railroad  over  the  Tennessee 
River.  Hardee's  corps  was  distributed  along  the  line  of 
the  Knoxville  Railroad,  with  Tyner's  Station  as  the  centre. 
At  Chattanooga  Bragg  at  once  commenced  fortifying  his 
position,  which  work  he  steadily  prosecuted  for  some  weeks, 
awaiting  the  development  of  Rosecrans's  plans.  He  also 
threw  up  defensive  works  at  each  of  the  crossings  of  the 
Tennessee  as  far  north  as  Blyth's  Ferry.  Forrest  was  sent 
to  Kingston,  on  the  north  bank  of  the  Tennessee  River,  with 
orders  to  picket  the  approaches  to  the  river  from  Sequat- 
chie Valley,  as  well  as  the  various  crossings  of  the  river,  and 
to  maintain  a  watchful  observation  of  Burnside's  movements 
in  East  Tennessee. 

The  Tullahoma  campaign,  with  the  exception  of  the  one 


THE  ADVANCE   ON   TULLAHOMA.  169 

immediately  following,  which  placed  the  army  of  the  Cum- 
berland across  the  Tennessee  and  terminated  in  the  battle 
of  Chickaniauga,  was  the  most  brilliant  of  the  great  strategic 
campaigns  carried  to  a  successful  issue  by  General  Bose- 
crans.  The  movements  of  the  army  occupied  nine  days,  dur- 
ing which  time  the  enemy  was  driven  from  two  strongly  for- 
tified positions,  with  a  loss  in  prisoners  captured  of  1,634, 
eleven  pieces  of  artillery,  and  a  large  amount  of  stores  and 
supplies.  The  result  of  this  campaign  gave  to  Rosecrans 
possession  of  Middle  Tennessee,  and  placed  the  armies  back 
in  the  relative  positions  occupied  by  them  prior  to  Bragg's 
advance  into  Kentucky,  a  little  less"  than  one  year  previous. 
The  campaign  was  conducted  throughout,  in  one  of  the  most 
extraordinary  series  of  rain-storms  ever  known  in  Tennessee 
at  that  season  of  the  year.  This,  with  the  resistance  inter- 
posed by  Bragg  to  our  advance  at  Hoover's  Gap,  retarded 
operations  thirty-six  hours,  and  in  front  of  Manchester  a 
detention  of  sixty  hours  occurred.  These  delays  and  the 
storms  prevented  us  getting  possession  of  Bragg's  communi- 
cation and  forcing  him  to  a  very  disastrous  battle.  General 
Rosecrans  in  his  official  report  of  this  campaign  says : 
"These  results  were  far  more  successful  than  were  antici- 
pated, and  could  only  have  been  obtained  by  a  surprise  as 
to  the  direction  and  force  of  our  movements." 

Bragg  made  no  official  report  of  the  Tullahoma  campaign, 
but  in  a  statement  to  General  J.  E.  Johnston  of  his  opera- 
tions at  that  time,  he  says  that  he  offered  battle  behind  his 
works  at  Shelbyville  to  Rosecrans,  which  was  refused ;  that 
the  latter  passed  to  his,  Bragg's,  right  on  two  occasions, 
threatening  his  rear.  He  being  not  able  to  cope  with  the 
Federal  army  retreated  to  the  Tennessee.  Bragg  adds : 
"  The  Tennessee  will  be  taken  as  our  line." 

During  these  nine  days  of  active  campaigning  the  Army 
VII.— 8 


170       THE  ARMY  OF  THE  CUMBERLAND. 

of  the  Cumberland,  numbering  less  than  sixty  thousand 
effective  men,  with  a  loss  of  560  killed,  wounded,  and  miss- 
ing, compelled  the  army  under  Bragg,  numbering  some< 
thing  less  than  forty-five  thousand  effective  men,  to  retreat 
a  greater  distance  and  out  of  far  stronger  positions  than  the 
united  armies  under  Sherman  were  able  to  compel  the  same 
army  with  but  slight  additional  strength  under  General 
Joe  Johnston,  to  fall  back,  in  four  months  of  active  field 
campaigning,  with  a  very  much  larger  relative  loss.  The 
proportion  of  the  forces  of  the  opposing  armies  during  the 
Tullahoma  campaign  was  far  nearer  equal  than  that  on  to 
Atlanta,  while  the  natural  and  military  obstacles  to  be  over- 
come were  largely  the  greater  in  the  Tullahoma  campaign. 
To  Bragg  the  forward  movement  of  the  Federal  army  in  full 
strength  was  a  surprise,  but  to  find  that  army  so  far  in  his 
rear  and  so  near  to  cutting  his  line  of  communications  was  a 
much  greater  surprise.  These  might  not  have  been  guarded 
against,  but  nothing  displayed  the  marked  superiority  of 
Bosecrans  over  his  opponent,  as  a  great  strategist,  so  much 
as  the  grand  success  of  the  final  movement  of  the  campaign, 
from  Manchester  south.  The  general  who — as  even  the 
rebels,  in  their  worship  of  their  leader  General  Lee,  admitted 
■ — was  able  in  Western  Virginia  to  completely  outgeneral 
Lee,  on  the  Tullahoma  campaign  again  demonstrated  his 
ability  as  the  greatest  strategic  general  of  the  war. 

Brilliant  campaigns,  however,  without  battles,  do  not  ac- 
complish the  destruction  of  an  army.  A  campaign  like  that 
of  Tullahoma  always  means  a  battle  at  some  other  point. 
This  was  true  after  the  Atlanta  campaign,  where  Sherman 
got  the  glory  and  Thomas  did  the  fighting.  This  was  equally 
:  true  as  to  the  Tullahoma,  and  the  fact  that  these  two  armies 
were  yet  somewhere  to  meet  and  engage  in  deadly  strife,  was 
apparent  to  the  commanders  of  both  armies.     Where  and 


THE  ADVANCE  ON  TULLAHOMA        171 

•when  that  meeting  was  to  be  was  the  problem  that  engaged 
the  minds  of  both  these  commanders.  In  the  Tullahoma  cam- 
paign the  elements  were  on  the  side  of  Bragg's  army,  both 
in  preventing  the  rapid  movements  of  the  Federal  amiy,  and 
in  furnishing  a  perfect  barrier  to  a  successful  pursuit  when 
the  retreat  was  under  way,  by  the  high  water  in  the  swollen 
streams,  the  bridges  over  which  Bragg  destroyed  as  he  fell 
back. 

The  concluding  line  of  Bragg's  letter  to  Johnston,  that 
"  The  Tennessee  will  be  taken  as  our  line,"  demonstrated 
that,  to  his  mind  at  least,  his  Kentucky  movement  of  the 
year  before  did  not  meet  with  the  success  he  anticipated. 
Here  now  he  was  waiting  his  opportunity  to  contest  his  last 
foothold  on  the  State  of  Tennessee  at  the  far  corner  in  Chat- 
tanooga. With  Bosecrans,  his  army  required  after  these  days 
of  hard  campaigning  a  rest  to  repair  the  wear  and  tear  of  the 
heavy  inarching,  and  the  resupplying  of  his  entire  command. 
The  railroads  in  his  rear  required  his  attention  first.  These 
were  placed  in  order  up  to  his  army,  and  the  repairs  on  the 
road  to  the  front  were  then  to  be  pushed  to  the  Tennessee 
Biver.  In  three  weeks  time  these  were  completed,  and  on 
the  25th,  the  first  supply  train  was  pushed  through  to  the 
Tennessee  Biver.  Then  Bosecrans  established  his  new  depot 
of  supplies  at  Stevenson,  Alabama,  and  hastened,  as  rapidly 
as  he  could,  the  accumulation  of  supplies  at  that  point. 


CHAPTEK  XL 

THE  MOVEMENT  TO  CHICKAMAUGA. 

The  withdrawal  of  the  army  under  Bragg  to  Chattanooga 
again  made  that  point  the  objective  of  a  campaign.  But 
several  things  had  to  he  taken  into  consideration  before  this 
was  entered  into.  Burnside  had  been  ordered  from  Cincin- 
nati to  East  Tennessee  through  Kentucky,  and  it  was  neces- 
sary to  know  the  force  and  position  of  his  command.  If 
Knoxville  and  Cumberland  Gap  were  under  his  control,  then 
it  would  be  reasonably  safe  to  follow  out  a  plan  of  operations 
looking  to  flank  Bragg's  left  by  a  movement  across  the  Ten- 
nessee over  the  ranges  of  mountains  of  Northern  Georgia. 
But  to  do  this,  part  of  the  force  under  Grant,  now  inactive 
after  Vicksburg,  should  be  ordered  up  at  least  as  far  east  as 
the  Tennessee,  to  protect  the  line  of  supplies  and  prevent 
any  movement  of  the  enemy  to  the  rear  on  that  flank  of 
Rosecrans's  army.  Another  weighty  consideration  was  that 
of  forage  for  the  animals  of  the  command.  By  the  middle 
of  August,  corn  in  the  valleys  of  Southern  Tennessee  and 
Northern  Alabama  would  be  ripe,  and  subject  to  the  wants 
of  the  army.  It  was  General  Rosecrans's  plan  to  wait  until 
these  movements  could  be  accomplished  and  until  the  corn 
had  ripened,  and  knowing  the  difficulties  in  the  way  at  the 
best,  of  his  successfully  accomplishing  his  plans  for  the  cam- 
paign, he  wished  at  least  to  have  that  best  in  his  favor. 

In  making  his  final  preparations  for  his  operations  against 


174       THE  ARMY  OF  THE  CUMBERLAND. 

Chattanooga,  General  Bosecrans  considered  two  plans.  One 
was  to  appear  on  the  front  of  Chattanooga  and  attempt  a 
direct  attack  on  the  town  and  reduce  it  by  a  lengthy  siege. 
The  other  was  to  flank  Bragg  out  of  Chattanooga,  as  he  had 
been  compelled  by  the  movement  on  the  Tullahoma  cam- 
paign to  abandon  his  strongholds  one  by  one. 

The  first  plan  could  hardly  be  entertained,  as  Bragg  was 
at  his  base,  with  but  short  lines  to  all  important  points  under 
control  of  the  rebel  government,  and  at  a  place  where  in  a 
very  short  time  heavy  reinforcements  could  be  sent  him, 
while  Bosecrans  in  front  of  Chattanooga  would  be  in  a 
rough,  sterile  country,  far  away  from  his  base  of  supplies, 
with  a  long  wagon-haul  over  rocky  mountain  ranges  from 
his  nearest  depot.  To  attempt  the  movement  on  the  left,  or 
through  Sequatchie  Valley,  would  concentrate  Bragg's  entire 
army  at  the  contemplated  point  of  crossing  the  Tennessee. 
This  plan  Bragg  was  prepared  for,  and  was  resting,  quietly 
awaiting  the  movements  of  our  army  carrying  it  into  effect. 
But  it  was  not  the  purpose  of  Bosecrans  to  meet  this  expec- 
tation of  his  opponent.  The  genius  of  Bosecrans  contem- 
plated one  of  the  most  brilliant  military  movements  of  the 
war  to  obtain  possession  of  this  great  stronghold  of  Nature, 
the  gateway  to  East  Tennessee  and  Northern  Georgia, 
Chattanooga.  At  that  time  this  place  was  of  the  utmost 
importance  to  each  of  the  contending  forces,  and  the  highest 
prize  in  a  military  point  of  view  that  the  Army  of  the  Cum- 
berland ever  contended  for. 

To  properly  understand  the  magnitude  and  importance  of 
the  campaign  that  Bosecrans  was  now  entering  on,  it  is 
necessary  that  the  topography  of  the  country  should  be  con- 
sidered. The  position  of  our  army  after  the  Tullahoma 
campaign  was  on  the  northwestern  base  of  the  Cumberland 
range,  in   camp   occupying  McMinnville,  Tullahoma,   De- 


THE  MOVEMENT  TO   CHICKAMAUGA.  175 

chard,  and  Winchester,  with  Chattanooga  south  of  east.  Im- 
mediately in  front  was  the  first  great  barrier  in  the  advance 
movement — the  Cumberland  Mountains — a  lofty  range  of 
rocks  dividing  the  waters  flowing  into  the  Cumberland  and 
Tennessee  Eivers.  The  range  rises  far  to  the  north  and 
extends  to  the  southwest  into  Alabama.  North  of  Chatta- 
nooga the  mountains  are  much  bolder,  more  difficult  to 
cross,  with  almost  sheer  declivities  on  each  of  the  sides. 

Beyond  the  main  range,  in  the  direct  road  to  Chattanooga, 
running  south,  flows  the  Sequatchie  River  through  the  valley 
of  that  name,  formed  by  another  range  jutting  off  slightly 
to  the  east  from  the  main  range,  and  between  it  and  the 
Tennessee  Eiver.  This  spur  is  known  by  the  name  of  Wal- 
ling's  Eidge,  after  an  early  settler  and  Indian  hunter.  It 
abuts  close  on  the  Tennessee  in  precipitous  rocky  bluffs. 

South  of  the  Tennessee,  and  separated  from  the  mountain 
ranges  north  by  this  river,  are  the  two  ranges  known  as 
Sand  and  Lookout  Mountains.  The  northern  extremity  of 
the  former  is  called  Eaccoon  Mountain.  Here  the  river  cuts 
its  channel  as  a  great  chasm  through  these  mountain  ranges, 
so  sharply  defined  that  the  masses  abut  directly  upon  the 
water  in  heavy  palisades  of  rock. 

The  tops  of  all  these  mountain  ranges  are  of  poor  soil  but 
generally  with  considerable  timber;  rough,  with  but  few 
roads,  and  these  almost  impassable  for  wagons  arid  nearly 
destitute  of  water.  The  western  slope  of  Sand  Mountain 
reaches  nearly  to  the  Tennessee  Eiver.  Between  this  latter 
range  and  Lookout  Mountain  is  Lookout  Valley  with  the 
creek  of  that  name  flowing  through  it  into  the  Tennessee  a 
short  distance  below  Chattanooga.  This  valley  is  also 
known  as  Wills  Valley,  and  at  that  time  was  traversed  by  a 
railroad  branching  from  the  Nashville  road  at  Wauhatchie, 
terminating  at  Trenton. 


176  THE  ARMY  OF  THE  CUMBERLAND. 

Beyond  this  was  Lookout  range,  2,400  feet  above  the  sea, 
with  almost  perpendicular  sides,  heavily  wooded  and  with 
little  water,  abutting  abruptly  on  the  Tennessee,  some  two 
miles  south  of  the  town,  with  only  three  practical  wagon 
roads  over  it — one  close  to  the  river,  one  at  Johnson's  Crook, 
and  the  third  at  Winston's  Gap,  twenty-six  and  forty-two 
miles  respectively  south  of  Chattanooga. 

To  the  east  of  Lookout  Mountain  is  Chattanooga  Valley 
with  the  town  at  the  head  of  it  and  the  creek  of  that  name 
flowing  through,  with  Dry  Creek  as  a  branch  emptying  its 
waters  into  the  Tennessee  just  south  of  the  town.  Beyond 
this  to  the  east  is  Missionary  Ridge,  and  parallel  to  it  and 
just  beyond  is  Chickamauga  Valley,  with  the  creek  of  that 
name  running  through  it  emptying  into  the  river  above 
Chattanooga,  formed  by  East,  Middle,  and  West  Chickamauga 
Creeks,  uniting  with  Pea  Vine  Creek  between  the  latter  two 
as  a  tributary.  Chattanooga  and  West  Chickamauga  Creeks 
have  a  common  source  in  McLemore's  Cove,  which  is  formed 
by  Pigeon  Mountain  on  the  east,  jutting  to  the  north  as  a 
spur  of  Lookout  Mountain,  with  the  latter  on  the  west,  Mis- 
sionary Ridge  running  out  as  it  enters  this  cove.  The 
wagon  road  from  Chattanooga  to  Rome,  known  as  the  La 
Fayette  road,  crosses  Missionary  Ridge  into  Chickamauga 
Valley  at  Rossville  and  proceeds  thence  nearly  due  south, 
crossing  Chickamauga  Creek  at  Lee  and  Gordon  mills, 
thence  to  the  east  of  Pigeon  Mountain,  passing  through  La 
Fayette  some  twenty-two  miles  south  of  Chattanooga ;  it 
then  continues  on  to  Summerville,  within  twenty -five  miles 
of  Rome,  and  so  on  to  the  latter  place. 

Beyond  these  ranges  is  Taylor's  ridge,  with  a  number  of 
lesser  ranges  between  it  and  the  Atlanta  Railroad,  running 
through  Dalton.  Both  Pigeon  Mountain  and  Taylor's  Ridge 
are  very  rough  mountain  ranges,  with  but  few  roads,  and 


THE  MOVEMENT  TO  CHICKAMAUGA.  177 

these  only  through  gaps.  At  Dalton  is  the  junction  of  the 
East  Tennessee  with  the  Atlanta  Eailroad,  in  the  valley  of  the 
head  waters  of  the  Coosa  River,  which  valley  is  here  some 
ten  miles  wide  and  is  the  great  natural  passage-way  into 
East  Tennessee  from  the  south. 

To  follow  Bragg  to  Chattanooga  and  to  cross  the  Tennes- 
see above  that  place  involved  moving  the  army  either  to  the 
north  of  the  Sequatchie  Valley  by  Dunlap  or  by  Therman  and 
Walling's  Eidge,  some  sixty-five  to  seventy  miles  through  a 
country  poorly  supplied  with  water,  with  no  forage,  and  by 
narrow  and  difficult  wagon  roads.  This  route  would  take 
Rosecrans  further  away  from  his  base  of  supplies  and  bine  of 
communication  than  that  south  of  the  river.  It  was  over 
this  northern  route  that  Bragg  anticipated  the  onward  move- 
ment of  the  Arrny  of  the  Cumberland.  This  would  enable 
him  to  make  a  protracted  defence  of  the  town  and  retard  the 
advance  for  weeks,  if  not  months.  But  Bosecrans's  plan  of 
the  campaign  contemplated  a  much  more  hazardous  move- 
ment and  a  far  speedier  one  for  the  possession  of  Chatta- 
nooga. To  accomplish  this,  however,  it  was  necessary  to 
cross  the  Cumberland  Mountains  with  subsistence,  ammu- 
nition, a  limited  supply  of  forage,  and  a  bridge  train  ;  then 
to  cross  his  army  over  the  Tennessee  Biver,  after  that  over 
Sand  or  Baccoon  Mountain  into  Lookout  Valley,  and  from 
there  to  cross  Lookout  Mountain,  and  finally  the  lesser 
ranges — Missionary  Bidge — if  he  went  directly  to  Chatta- 
nooga, or  to  cross  Missionary  Bidge,  Pigeon  Mountain,  and 
Taylor's  Bidge,  if  he  struck  the  railroad  at  Dalton  or  south 
of  it.  This  involved  the  carrying  by  his  amry  of  ammuni- 
tion for  two  great  battles  and  twenty-rive  days'  subsistence. 

As  soon  as  the  repairs  were  made  on  the  main  line  to 
Stevenson,  Bosecrans  ordered  Sheridan's  division  to  make 
an  advance  movement  with  two  brigades  to  Bridgeport  and 
8* 


178  THE  ARMY   OF  THE  CUMBERLAND. 

one  to  Stevenson.  Van  Cleve  had  been  ordered  up  with  his 
division  from  Murfreesboro  and  was  posted  at  McMinnville. 
On  August  8th,  stores  being  accumulated  at  the  front,  or- 
ders were  issued  to  corps  commanders  to  supply  their  troops, 
as  soon  as  possible,  with  rations  and  forage  sufficient  for  the 
general  advance. 

The  movement  over  the  Cumberland  Mountains  began  on 
August  16th,  and  the  troops  were  ordered  to  move  as  follows : 

"Crittenden's  corps  in  three  columns  to  move  through  the  Sequatchie 
Valley.  Minty's  cavalry  to  move  on  the  left  by  Sparta,  and  after  cover- 
ing the  left  flank  of  Van  Cleve  to  proceed  to  Pikeville. 

' '  Thomas  to  move  Reynolds  and  Brannan  from  University  by  way 
of  Battle  Creek,  where  they  were  to  take  post,  concealed  near  its  mouth. 
Negley  and  Baird  to  go  by  way  of  Tantallon  and  halt  on  Crow  Creek 
between  Anderson  and  Stevenson. 

' '  McCook  to  move  Johnson  by  Salem  and  Larkin's  Ford  to  Belief ont. 
Davis  by  Mount  Top  and  Crow  Creek  to  near  Stevenson.  The  three 
brigades  of  cavalry  by  Fayetteville  and  Athens  to  cover  the  line  of  the 
Tennessee  from  Whitesburg  up." 

These  orders  were  all  complied  with,  and  the  movements 
completed  by  the  evening  of  August  20th.  Crittenden  sent 
Hazen's  brigade  on  a  reconnoissance  to  Harrison's  Landing, 
where  he  found  the  enemy  throwing  up  works.  On  the  next 
day  Hazen  took  post  at  Poe's  cross-roads.  Wilder  was  sent 
to  reconnoitre  from  Harrison's  Landing  to  Chattanooga.  On 
reaching  Chattanooga,  he  was  supported  by  Wagner's  bri- 
gade, and  both  commands  opened  fire  on  the  next  day,  shell- 
ing the  town  from  across  the  river.  This  bombardment  of 
the  place  caused  it  to  be  evacuated  by  the  rebel  troops,  to 
points  beyond  range  outside,  and  the  withdrawal  by  Bragg 
of  his  stores  to  points  of  convenience  on  the  railroad  to  the 
rear.  Bragg  then  ordered  Anderson's  brigade  to  withdraw 
from  Bridgeport. 


THE   MOVEMENT   TO   CHICKAMAUGA.  179 

The  feint  under  Crittenden  was  so  well  timed  that  Bragg 
concentrated  his  immediate  command  at  and  above  Chatta- 
nooga, leaving  the  crossing  of  the  river  by  the  main  portion 
of  our  army  later,  unobstructed.  Kosecrans  had  posted 
his  army  so  that  demonstrations  were  made  simultaneously 
from  Whitesburg  to  Blythe's  Ferry,  a  distance  of  one  hun- 
dred and  fifty  miles,  and  Bragg  did  not  know  just  where 
to  look  for  his  real  advance,  but  definitely  concluded  that 
it  would  not  be  made  anywhere  in  the  vicinity  of  Bridge- 
port. On  the  26th,  five  days  after  the  surprise  at  Chatta- 
nooga, Burnside's  advance  into  East  Tennessee  was  an- 
nounced by  the  presence  of  his  cavalry  in  the  vicinity  of 
Knoxville.  Bragg  then  ordered  Buckner  to  evacuate  Knox- 
ville,  and  occupy  Loudon.  The  demonstration  at  Blythe's 
Ferry  on  the  Tennessee,  opposite  the  mouth  of  the  Hiawasse, 
caused  Bragg  to  order  him  to  retire  to  Charleston,  and  soon 
thereafter  to  Chattanooga.  On  the  30th,  information  was 
given  General  Thomas  that  Johnston,  with  15,000  men  from 
Mississippi,  had  reinforced  Bragg. 

Under  cover  of  the  apparent  activity  of  the  left  of  our 
army  in  front  of  and  above  Chattanooga,  Rosecrans  effected 
safely  the  crossing  of  the  first  great  barrier  to  the  objective 
point,  and  reached  the  banks  of  the  Tennessee  opposite  the 
enemy,  concealing  as  far  as  he  could  the  movements  of  his 
troops,  and  the  position  of  his  pontoons  and  trains.  He 
then  had  the  river  reconnoitred,  that  the  best  points  might 
be  selected  and  the  means  at  once  provided  for  the  cross- 
ing. As  soon  as  the  crossings  had  been  determined  on,  the 
proper  dispositions  were  made  to  begin  the  movement. 

The  Tennessee  River,  at  the  various  points  where  our  army 
was  to  cross,  is  very  wide  ;  and,  swollen  by  recent  rains,  was 
quite  high  for  that  season  of  the  year.  The  troops  crossed 
the  river  at  four  points.     As  there  were  not  enough  pon- 


180       THE  ARMY  OF  THE  CUMBERLAND. 

toons  for  two  bridges,  Sheridan  had  commenced  trestlework 
for  part  of  one  at  Bridgeport.  Keynolds  advanced  to  Shell- 
mound,  seizing  the  place.  Here  he  captured  a  number  of 
boats,  and  with  these  and  other  material  picked  up,  he  was 
enabled  to  cross  at  that  point,  while  Brannan  crossed  his 
division  from  the  mouth  of  Battle  Creek  on  rafts.  The  main 
crossing  of  McCook's  corps  was  at  Caperton's  Ferry,  about 
forty  miles  below  Chattanooga,  where  the  pontoon  bridge 
was  laid  by  Davis's  division,  after  driving  a  detachment  of 
rebel  cavalry  from  the  opposite  side. 

The  movement  across  the  river  was  commenced  on  Au- 
gust 29th,  and  completed  on  September  4th.  Baird,  in 
command  of  a  division  of  Thomas's  corps,  crossed  the  river 
at  Bridgeport  after  the  repairs  were  completed  to  the  bridge. 
Negley's  division  crossed  at  Caperton's  Ferry.  The  four 
divisions  of  Thomas's  corps  with  great  difficulty  crossed 
Sand  Mountain,  and  concentrated  near  Trenton  in  Will's 
Valley,  east  of  Sand  Mountain.  On  September  6th  Negley's 
division,  being  in  the  advance,  reached  Johnson's  Crook, 
where  Beatty's  brigade  was  sent  at  once  up  the  mountain 
to  seize  Stevens's  Gap.  Before  proceeding  far  he  met 
the  enemy's  pickets,  and,  night  coming  on,  he  went  into 
camp  just  west  of  the  gap.  The  Eighteenth  Ohio  went  a 
short  distance  on  the  road  to  the  top  of  Lookout  Mountain, 
met  the  enemy's  pickets  and  withdrew.  The  next  clay, 
Baird's  division  supporting  Negley,  the  latter  with  two  bri- 
gades, moved  forward,  and  with  his  advance  gained  posses- 
sion of  the  top  of  the  mountain,  and  secured  the  forks  of  the 
road.  The  entire  of  Negley's  division  reached  this  point  on 
the  9th,  at  the  head  of  Johnson's  Crook,  and  with  one  bri- 
gade held  the  pass  while  another  was  sent  a  short  distance 
north  on  the  mountain  to  seize  Cooper's  Gap,  with  a  regi- 
ment in  the  advance  to  occupy  and  hold  the  entrance  on  the 


THE  MOVEMENT  TO  CHICKAMAUGA.  181 

east.  Another  regiment  was  sent  forward  to  hold  Stevens's 
Gap,  which  was  found  heavily  obstructed  with  fallen  tim- 
ber. Negley  still  being  in  the  advance,  moved  the  day  fol- 
lowing across  Missionary  Bidge,  and  took  up  a  position  in 
McLemore's  Cove  on  the  road  through  Dug  Gap.  Here  ho 
found  the  enemy's  cavalry  drawn  up  in  line,  and  learned 
from  citizens  that  the  rebels  were  in  strong  force  concen- 
trated in  his  front  in  Dug  Gap,  with  infantry,  artillery,  and 
cavalry.  Baird's  division  was  in  supporting  distance  of 
Negley. 

Early  in  the  morning  of  the  9th  Eeynolds  sent  the  Ninety- 
second  Elinois  (mounted  infantry)  to  make  a  reconnoissance 
along  the  top  of  Lookout  Mountain,  to  discover  the  enemy's 
movements  and  to  determine  the  runiors  in  regard  to  the 
evacuation  of  Chattanooga.  At  11  a.m.  the  regiment  entered 
the  town  as  the  rear  of  the  enemy's  column  was  leaving  the 
place.  The  next  day  the  four  divisions  of  the  Fourteenth 
Corps  were  in  supporting  distance  of  each  other,  with  Negley 
still  in  front  of  Dug  Gap,  the  enemy  holding  the  east  en- 
trance with  a  heavy  force,  and  the  Gap  full  of  obstructions. 
Negley  discovered  early  on  the  following  day  that  the  rebels 
were  advancing  on  him  in  such  superior  force  that  his  situa- 
tion was  critical,  and  that  he  was  in  danger  of  losing  his 
train.  He  determined  to  fall  back  to  a  strong  j>osition  in 
front  of  Stevens's  Gap,  which  movement  he  proceeded  to 
execute,  and  succeeded  in  the  face  of  the  enemy  by  his  en- 
ergy and  skill,  with  the  prompt  co-operation  of  Baird,  in  se- 
curing his  position  in  front  of  the  gap  without  the  loss  of  a 
single  wagon.  The  next  day  the  location  of  Bragg's  army 
at  La  Fayette  with  Johnston's  reinforcements  was  fully  de- 
termined, and  Thomas's  corps  now  awaited  the  movements 
of  the  other  troops  with  reference  to  the  concentration  of  the 
army. 


182       THE  ARMY  OF  THE  CUMBERLAND. 

In  the  meantime  Davis's  and  Johnson's  divisions  of  Mc- 
Cook's  corps,  crossing  the  river  at  Caperton's  Ferry,  moved 
over  Sand  Mountain  into  "Will's  Valley,  and  thence — Davis 
being  in  the  advance — moved  into  and  seized  Winston's  Gaj?, 
some  twenty-five  miles  from  Caperton's  Ferry,  and  about 
forty-two  from  Chattanooga.  Sheridan's  division  crossed 
the  river  at  the  railroad  bridge,  moved  through  Trenton, 
and  on  the  6th  encamped  twelve  miles  from  Winston's  Gap. 
McCook  sent  several  detachments  on  the  8th  and  9th  to 
different  points,  reconnoitring  the  enemy.  One  went  to 
Alpine  and  two  into  Broomtown  Valley,  but  nothing  was 
discovered  of  Bragg's  whereabouts.  On  the  evening  of  the 
9th  Bosecrans  sent  orders  to  McCook,  stating  that  the  en- 
emy had  evacuated  Chattanooga  and  were  retreating  south- 
ward, and  directing  him  to  move  rapidly  upon  Alpine  and 
Summerville  in  pursuit,  to  intercept  his  line  of  retreat,  and 
to  attack  on  his  flank.  The  day  following  McCook  reached 
Alpine,  where  he  discovered  the  situation.  The  enemy  had 
not  retreated  very  far  from  Chattanooga,  the  exact  location 
as  yet  unknown.  McCook  learned  that  he  could  not  commu- 
nicate with  Thomas,  as  his  couriers  could  not  pass  through 
the  valley,  occupied  as  it  was  by  the  enemy  in  force,  and 
that  his  corps  was  entirely  isolated  at  Alpine.  That,  had 
he  gone  to  Summerville,  he  would  have  been  exposed  to  an 
attack  from  the  entire  rebel  army,  which  his  reconnoissance 
later  determined  was  concentrated  in  force  near  La  Fayette. 
On  the  following  day  McCook  remained  in  camp  waiting 
for  Thomas  to  move  up  on  him.  He,  however,  sent  his 
wagon-train  back  to  the  summit  of  Lookout  Mountain.  On 
the  12th  McCook  waited  in  camp  for  reports  from  the  cav- 
alry as  to  the  position  and  movements  of  the  enemy. 

Crittenden's  corps  had  during  the  time  moved  down  the 
Sequatchie  Valley,  in  readiness  for  an  active  campaign.     He 


THE  MOVEMENT  TO  CHICKAMAUGA.  183 

then  crossed  the  river  at  Bridgeport,  Shell  Mound,  and  Bat- 
tle Creek,  and  on  September  4th  his  entire  corps  was  across 
the  river.  He  was  ordered  to  move  up  the  valley  of  Running 
"Water  Creek  and  Whiteside,  leaving  one  division  on  the  line 
of  the  Nashville  and  Chattanooga  Railroad,  and  to  push  for- 
ward as  near  as  possible  to  Chattanooga,  threatening  the  en- 
emy in  that  direction.  At  G  a.m.  on  the  9th  Crittenden  was 
informed  by  a  despatch  from  Rosecrans  that  Chattanooga 
had  been  abandoned  by  the  enemy,  and  that  he  was  to  push 
forward  at  once  with  five  days'  rations  and  make  a  vigorous 
pursuit.  During  the  morning  Crittenden  with  Wood's  divi- 
sion occupied  the  town,  and  Wood  was  placed  in  command. 
Palmer's  and  Van  Cleve's  were  turned  off  south  after  they 
passed  the  spur  of  Lookout  Mountain,  and  encamped  at 
Rossville,  five  miles  south  of  Chattanooga.  In  the  afternoon 
of  the  same  day  Crittenden  was  ordered  to  leave  a  brigade  at 
Chattanooga,  and  with  the  balance  of  his  command  to  pur- 
sue the  enemy  with  the  utmost  vigor,  the  line  of  march  to 
be  through  Ringgold  and  on  to  Dalton.  The  next  day  Crit- 
tenden left  Wagner — who  had  crossed  the  river  from  the  front 
of  the  town  during  the  night — in  command,  and  ordered  for- 
ward Palmer's,  Van  Cleve's,  and  the  two  brigades  of  Wood's 
division  in  pursuit,  marching  on  the  Rossville  and  Ringgold 
road.  During  the  afternoon  Palmer  reported  the  enemy's 
cavalry  strong  on  his  front,  that  he  had  only  been  able  to 
march  six  miles,  had  encamped  at  Chickamauga  Creek,  and 
that  his  advance  had  been  checked  by  a  charge  of  the  rebel 
cavalry.  That  night  Crittenden  received  several  reports 
from  his  front  that  the  enemy  was  in  force  near  La  Fayette, 
and  threatening  to  "retake  Chattanooga. 

During  the  11th,  Wood,  with  his  two  brigades,  was  on  a 
reconnoissance  at  Gordon's  Mills,  and  Crittenden  was  ordered 
to  occupy  Ringgold  and  report.     These  movements  deter. 


134  THE   ARMY   OF   THE   CUMBERLAND. 

mined  to  Rosecrans's  satisfaction  the  position  of  the  enemy 
in  force  in  the  vicinity  of  La  Fayette.  He  immediately 
ordered  Crittenden  to  close  his  entire  command  upon  Wood, 
crossing  as  quickly  as  possible  to  the  Eossville  and  La  Fay- 
ette road,  to  some  point  near  Lee  and  Gordon's  Mills.  Early 
on  the  morning  of  the  12th,  Wilder  was  ordered  back  to 
Einggold  and  directed  to  follow  on  the  line  of  march  of  the 
infantry,  covering  the  left  flank.  Crittenden  succeeded  dur- 
ing the  day  in  effecting  a  concentration  of  his  command  at 
Lee  and  Gordon's  Mills,  which  point  Wilder's  brigade  reached 
after  a  severe  skirmish  during  the  day  near  Leet's  tanyard, 
where  he  lost  thirty  men  killed  and  wounded.  With  the 
knowledge  that  Bragg  was  concentrating  his  forces  awaiting 
reinforcements  behind  Pigeon  Mountain,  in  the  vicinity  of 
La  Fayette,  and  that  his  own  army  was  scattered  a  distance 
of  thirty  miles  from  flank  to  flank — from  Lee  and  Gordon's 
Mills  to  Alpine — Rosecrans  felt  that  it  was  a  matter  of  life 
and  death  to  effect  the  concentration  of  his  army  in  the  short- 
est possible  space  of  time. 

During  these  movements  of  the  army  under  Rosecrans, 
what  was  Bragg  doing '?  On  August  20th,  the  movement  of 
our  army  over  the  Cumberland  Mountains  was  reported  to 
Bragg,  and  he  then  knew  that  he  might  look  for  an  immedi- 
ate advance.  The  movement  of  our  army  across  the  Tennes- 
see was  also  reported  to  Bragg  by  his  scouts,  but  was  re- 
garded by  him  as  incredible.  These  reports  were  soon  after 
confirmed  by  the  news  that  our  cavalry  had  occupied  Trenton 
and  had  advanced  up  the  Will's  Valley  Railroad  as  far  as  Waii- 
hatcliie,  within  seven  miles  of  Chattanooga,  as  a  covering  force 
under  which  Rosecrans's  columns  of  infantry  were  advanc- 
ing. Our  army  was  now  as  near  the  line  of  communication 
of  the  rebel  army,  as  the  latter  was  to  the  line  to  Nashville, 
and  with  less  risk  in  its  advance  movements  should  Bragg 


THE  MOVEMENT  TO  CHICKAMAUGA.  185 

commence  operations  to  the  north.  Bringing  his  cavalry 
forward  at  once,  Bragg  soon  ascertained  that  the  general 
movement  of  our  army  was  toward  his  left  and  rear  in  the 
direction  of  Dalton  and  Borne,  keeping  Lookout  Mountain 
between  the  armies.  He  then  determined  to  meet  owv  army 
as  its  columns  debouched  from  the  defiles  of  the  mountains. 
To  hold  Chattanooga  would  require  at  least  two  strong  divi- 
sions, and  he  felt  that  his  force  would  not  permit  this  and 
make  a  successful  attack  also.  Bragg  put  his  army  in  motion 
on  September  7th  and  8th,  and  took  up  position  from  Lee 
and  Gordon's  Mills  to  La  Fayette,  on  the  road  running  south 
from  Chattanooga,  with  front  to  the  east  side  of  Lookout 
Mountain,  and  on  the  east  bank  of  Chickamauga  Creek,  es- 
tablishing his  headquarters  at  the  former  place. 

The  positions  of  our  detached  corps  was  fully  known  to 
Bragg  on  the  8th.  Learning  of  Negley's  movement  of  the 
9th  into  McLemore's  cove,  Bragg  rightly  interpreted  it  to 
mean  that  a  hurried  pursuit  was  being  made  after  his  force, 
under  the  idea  that  he  was  in  full  retreat.  With  his  own 
force  concentrated  in  front  of  the  centre,  Bragg  at  once  saw 
how  Bosecrans  had  exposed  the  corps  of  his  army  to  be 
attacked  and  defeated  in  detail,  and  that  evening  he  gave 
orders  to  Hindman  to  prepare  his  division  to  move  against 
Negley,  and  ordered  Hill  to  send  or  take  Cleburne's  division, 
join  Hindman,  and  immediately  move  upon  Negley.  On  re- 
ceipt of  these  orders,  Hill  replied  that  his  part  of  the  move- 
ment was  impracticable,  as  Cleburne  was  sick,  and  that  both 
gaps — Dug  and  Catlett's — had  been  closed  by  felling  timber, 
which  would  require  twenty-four  hours  to  remove.  Hindman 
having  marched  during  the  night  of  the  9th  some  ten  miles, 
was  now  in  position,  some  three  miles  from  Negley  in  the 
cove.  Bragg  not  wishing  to  lose  so  favorable  an  opportu- 
nity of  striking  his  opponent's  force,  ordered  Buckner  with 


186       THE  ARMY  OF  THE  CUMBERLAND. 

his  command  to  move  from  Anderson  and  join  Hindman  in 
the  cove,  which  he  did  during  the  afternoon  of  the  10th. 
After  these  commands  had  united,  the  commanders  held  a 
consultation  and  determined  that  a  change  in  the  plan  of 
operations  should  be  made.  Bragg  having  removed  his  head- 
quarters to  La  Fayette,  "so  as  to  secure  more  prompt  and 
decided  action  in  the  movements  ordered  against  the  enemy's 
centre,"  now  directed  Polk  to  send  his  remaining  division  to 
support  Hindman  during  the  operations  in  the  cove.  De- 
spatching an  officer  to  Bragg  with  a  report  as  to  this  change 
of  plans,  Hindman  and  Cleburne  waited  his  return.  Bragg 
refused  to  make  any  change,  and  sent  a  verbal  order  to  Hind- 
man to  proceed  at  once  to  carry  out  his  previous  instruction. 
Bragg  at  the  same  time  sent  written  orders  by  courier  to 
Hindman,  notifying  him  of  the  movements  of  our  forces, 
that  Polk  had  been  directed  to  cover  his  rear,  and  ordered 
him  to  attack  and  force  his  way  through  Negley  to  La  Fay- 
ette at  the  earliest  hour  in  the  morning,  and  adds  "  Cleburne 
will  attack  in  front  the  moment  your  guns  are  heard." 
Walker's  reserve  corps  was  also  ordered  to  move  promptly, 
join  Cleburne's  division  at  Lug  Gap  and  unite  in  the  attack. 
All  obstructions  were  removed  from  Lug  and  Catlett's  Gaps, 
and  Breckinridge's  division  of  Hill's  corps  was  kept  in  posi- 
tion south  of  La  Fayette  to  check  any  movement  of  our 
troops  from  that  direction,  thus  putting  30,000  troops  in 
position  to  crush  Negley  and  Baird.  Bragg  shortly  after 
daylight  joined  Cleburne,  where  they  waited  nearly  all  day 
for  Hindman's  guns  to  open — when  Cleburne  was  to  attack — ■ 
on  the  flank  and  rear  of  Negley  and  Baird's  divisions.  After 
waiting  long  past  noon  in  great  anxiety  for  Hindman's  attack, 
about  the  middle  of  the  afternoon  his  first  gun  was  heard. 
Cleburne  at  once  pressed  forward  and  discovered  that  Negley 
had  fallen  back  to  Stevens's  Gap. 


THE  MOVEMENT  TO  CHICKAMAUGA.  1S7 

Bragg,  finding  his  attempt  against  Thomas's  corps  a  fail- 
ure, then  determined  to  hurl  his  columns  upon  Crittenden's 
divided  corps,  approaching  from  Chattanooga,  by  withdraw- 
ing the  troops  engaged  in  the  movement  on  Thomas's  com- 
mand to  La  Fayette,  and  directing  Polk's  and  Walker's  corps 
to  move  immediately  in  the  direction  of  Lee  and  Gordon's 
Mills.  Bragg  knew  Crittenden's  corps  was  divided,  but  sup- 
posed only  one  division  had  been  sent  to  Ringgold.  At  six 
o'clock  on  the  evening  of  the  12th,  Bragg  wrote  again  to 
Polk,  notifying  him  of  Crittenden's  position  of  the  11th, 
and  stated:  " This  ju-esents  you  a  fine  opportunity  of  strik- 
ing Crittenden  in  detail,  and  I  hope  you  will  avail  yourself 
of  it  at  daylight  to-morrow.  This  division  crushed,  and  the 
others  are  yours.  "We  can  then  turn  on  the  force  in  the  cove. 
Wheeler's  cavalry  will  move  on  Wilder  so  as  to  cover  your 
right.  I  shall  be  delighted  to  hear  of  your  success."  Later 
in  the  evening  two  additional  orders  were  issued  to  Polk, 
urging  him  to  attack  promptly  at  "  day-dawn,"  on  the  13th  ; 
that  our  army  was  concentrating,  and  that  it  was  "  highly 
important  that  your  attack  in  the  morning  should  be  quick 
and  decided."  At  eleven  o'clock  that  night  Polk  sent  a  dis- 
patch stating  that  he  had  taken  a  strong  position  for  defense 
and  asked  that  he  be  heavily  reinforced.  Bragg  sent  him 
an  immediate  order  not  to  defer  his  attack,  as  his  command 
was  numerically  superior  to  the  opposing  force,  and  told 
him  that  to  secure  success,  prompt  and  rapid  movements  on 
his  part  were  necessary.  Early  on  the  morning  of  the  13th, 
Bragg,  at  the  head  of  Buckner's  command,  went  to  the  front, 
and  found  no  advance  had  been  made  by  Polk  as  ordered, 
and  that  Crittenden  had  united  his  forces  and  recrossed  the 
Chickamauga. 

Again  the  attempt  to  strike  our  army  in  detail  had  failed, 
and  now  Bragg  gave  orders  to  his  commanders  to  concen- 


188  THE   ARMY   OF   THE   CUMBERLAND. 

trate  along  the  east  bank  of  Chickarnauga  in  position  for 
battle,  and  as  soon  as  his  reinforcements  under  Longstreet 
from  Virginia  were  up  to  attack  with  the  entire  command. 
"Wheeler,  with  two  divisions  of  cavalry  on  the  extreme  left,  was 
ordered  to  engage  the  attention  of  Thomas  in  McLemore's 
Cove,  covering  the  main  movement  of  the  rebel  army ;  For- 
rest with  his  own  and  Pegram's  divisions  of  cavalry  covered 
the  right  and  front.  Bragg  ordered  B.  K.  Johnson's  brigade 
from  Binggold,  where  he  had  been  stationed  protecting  the 
railroad,  to  take  position  near  Reed's  bridge  on  the  extreme 
right  of  his  line.  Walker's  corps  was  then  formed  on  John- 
son's left,  opposite  Alexander's  Bridge.  Buckner's  corps  was 
formed  on  the  left  of  WTalker,  near  Ledford's  Ford.  Polk's 
corps  was  placed  in  line  opposite  Lee  and  Gordon's  Mills 
on  Buckner's  left,  with  Hill  on  the  extreme  left.  Two  bri- 
gades that  had  just  arrived  from  Mississippi  were  placed 
under  Johnson  on  the  right,  making  his  command  a  division 
of  three  brigades  strong.  To  this  division  in  the  earlier 
movements  three  brigades  of  Longstreet's  corps  from  Vir- 
ginia were  temporarily  attached.  On  the  18th,  Hood  report- 
ing, was  placed  in  command  of  this  column  on  the  right. 

The  rebel  army  on  the  17th  were  in  position,  and  that 
evening  Bragg  issued  his  orders  for  his  forces  to  cross  the 
Chickarnauga,  commencing  the  movement  at  six  o'clock  on 
the  morning  of  the  18th.  Bragg's  plan  of  battle  for  the 
18th  was  for  the  column  under  Johnson — later  under  Hood — 
to  cross  in  force  at  Reed's  Bridge,  rapidly  turn  to  the  left  by 
the  most  practicable  route,  and  sweep  lap  the  Chickarnauga 
toward  Lee  and  Gordon's  Mills.  Walker's  corps  next  on  the 
left,  crossing  at  Alexandria  Bridge,  was  to  unite  in  the 
movement,  pressing  our  army  vigorously  on  flank  and  rear, 
in  the  same  direction.  Buckner,  crossing  at  Ledford's  Ford, 
was  to  join  in  the  movement  to  the  left,  pressing  our  army 


THE  MOVEMENT  TO  CHICKAMAUGA.  189 

back  up  the  stream  from  Polk's  front.  The  latter  to  push 
forward  to  the  front  at  Lee  and  Gordon's  Mills,  and  if  not 
able  to  cross  there,  to  bear  to  the  right  and  cross  at  Dalton's 
Ford  or  Alexander's  Bridge,  and  unite  in  the  attack  wher- 
ever he  could  find  an  opposing  force.  Hill,  to  cover  the 
left  flank  of  the  rebel  army  from  an  advance  by  our  forces  in 
the  cove,  to  ascei'tain  by  pressing  his  cavalry  to  the  front  if 
we  were  reinforcing  our  corps  at  Lee  and  Gordon's  Mills, 
and  if  so  to  attack  on  the  flank.  This  plan  contemplated 
the  destruction  of  the  left  of  our  army,  the  seizing  of  the 
La  Fayette  road,  and,  if  possible,  occupying  and  holding  the 
roads  in  Chattanooga  Valley,  cutting  off  all  access  from  Chat- 
tanooga. These  movements  were  not  executed  as  rapidly  as 
was  contemplated  by  Bragg,  owing  to  the  resistance  made  by 
our  cavalry  and  Wilder's  mounted  infantry,  and  the  difficulties 
arising  from  bad  and  narrow  roads.  Johnson  was  repeatedly 
urged  to  commence  the  movement  on  the  right,  but  he  de- 
layed his  advance  until  late  in  the  afternoon,  when  Hood  ar- 
rived and  effected  the  crossing.  Walker  moved  up  to  Alex- 
ander's Bridge,  at  which  point  Wilder  hotly  contested  his 
crossing,  and  finally  broke  up  the  bridge.  Walker  moved 
down  the  creek  to  Byron's  Ford,  where  he  crossed  and  joined 
Hood  on  the  right  during  the  night.  On  Walker's  crossing, 
Wilder  was  compelled  to  fall  back. 

The  concentration  of  our  army  continued  on  the  13th, 
Thomas  held  his  position  of  the  12th,  with  Negley's,  Baird's, 
and  Brannan's  divisions  remaining  in  camp,  waiting  the  ar- 
rival of  McCook,  who  had  been  ordered  to  close  up  to  the 
left.  Reynolds's  division  was  concentrated  on  the  road  f rom 
Cooper's  or  Frick's  Gap  to  Catlett's  Gap,  and  the  next  day 
moved  forward  and  took  position  at  Pond  Spring,  with  his 
two  infantry  brigades,  and  was  joined  here  by  Wilder.  Rey- 
nolds sent  Turchin  to  make  a  reconnoissance  with  the  Ninetv- 


190  THE  ARMY   OF  THE  CUMBERLAND. 

second  Illinois  mounted  infantry,  to  the  month  of  Catlett's 
Gap,  driving  the  rebel  cavalry  pickets  from  Chickamauga 
Creek  to  the  gap,  where  he  found  the  enemy  posted  with 
strong  reserves.  Brannan  on  the  same  day  reconnoitred  the 
position  of  the  enemy  toward  Dug  Gap,  sending  a  brigade  to 
Chickamauga  Creek,  east  of  Lee's  Mills,  one  mile  to  the  right 
and  south  of  Eeynolds,  at  Pond  Spring.  Turchin  made  an- 
other reconnoissance  on  the  16th  toward  Catlett's  Gap,  and 
found  the  enemy  strongly  posted  there  with  infantry  and  ar- 
tillery. The  next  day  Thomas  moved  his  entire  corps  and 
closed  up  on  Crittenden's  right  along  Chickamauga  Creek, 
and  was  joined  at  night  by  McCook  on  his  right.  The  four 
divisions  of  Thomas's  command  on  the  afternoon  of  the  18th 
moved  to  the  left  to  Crawfish  Springs.  Here  Eosecrans,  anti- 
cipating the  movement  of  Bragg  to  secure  the  road  to  Chatta- 
nooga, and  recognizing  the  importance  of  holding  it,  ordered 
Thomas  with  his  corps  to  march  on  the  cross-road  leading 
by  the  Widow  Glenn's  to  the  Chattanooga  and  La  Fayette 
road,  and  take  position  on  that  road  near  Kelly's  farm,  con- 
necting with  Crittenden's  corps  on  his  right  at  Gordon's 
Mills.  During  the  entire  night  of  the  18th  the  troops  of 
Thomas's  corps  were  moving  to  the  left,  and  at  daylight  on 
the  19th  the  head  of  the  column  reached  Kelly's  farm; 
Baird's  division  in  the  advance,  taking  position  at  the  forks 
of  the  road,  facing  toward  Beed's  and  Alexander's  Bridges 
over  the  Chickamauga.  "Wilder  had  been  driven  across  the 
State  road  to  the  heights  east  of  Widow  Glenn's  house  the 
evening  before,  by  the  advance  in  force  of  the  enemy  over 
these  bridges,  and  Baird's  right  rested  close  to  Wilder's 
brigade.  Baird's  division  was  closely  followed  by  Brannan, 
who  was  placed  in  position  on  the  left  of  Baird,  on  the  two 
roads  leading  to  the  bridges. 

Orders  were  received  by  McCook  at  midnight  on  the  13th, 


THE  MOVEMENT  TO  CHICKAMAUGA.  191 

directing  two  divisions  of  his  corps  to  move  to  Thomas's  sup- 
port, and  that  he  send  his  train  back  under  guard  of  his  re- 
maining division.  McCook  moved  his  command,  by  way  of 
Valley  Head,  up  the  mountain  at  Alpine  on  the  night  of  the 
13th,  and  down  on  the  14th  into  Lookout  Valley,  except  one 
brigade  from  each  division  forming  his  train  guard  under 
command  of  Lytle,  encamped  at  Little  Kiver  in  the  moun- 
tains. Sheridan's  marched  down  Lookout  Valley  to  Johnson's 
Crook,  while  Johnson's  and  Davis's  divisions  were  sent  from 
Valley  Head  on  the  direct  road  to  Stevens's  Gap.  General 
Lytle  was  ordered  to  make  a  reconnoissance  with  two  bri- 
gades toward  Dougherty's  Gap  at  the  head  of  McLemore's 
Cove.  McCook's  corps  was  concentrated  on  the  17th  at  Mc- 
Lemore's Cove,  and  on  the  night  of  the  18th  General  Lytle 
joining  the  corps  with  two  of  his  brigades,  McCook's  com- 
mand was  closed  up  on  the  Fourteenth  Corps,  except  Post's 
brigade  of  Davis's  division,  ordered  by  General  Rosecrans 
to  hold  Stevens's  Gap  at  all  hazards. 

Crittenden  on  the  13th,  under  orders  from  headquarters, 
posted  Wood's  division  in  a  strong  position  at  Lee  and  Gor- 
don's Mills,  under  orders  to  resist  any  advance  of  the  enemy 
to  the  last,  and  in  case  of  extremity,  if  Granger  was  not  in 
position  to  support,  then  to  fall  back  to  some  point  where  he 
could  guard  the  road  to  Chattanooga  and  the  one  around  the 
point  of  Lookout  Mountain,  and  hold  both  roads,  as  long  as 
he  had  a  man  under  him.  The  next  day  Crittenden  moved 
the  two  remaining  divisions  of  his  corps  to  a  position  on  the 
southern  spur  of  Missionary  Ridge,  his  right  communicating 
with  Thomas,  where  he  was  to  remain,  covering  the  road  in 
Chattanooga  Valley.  Finding  no  movement  of  the  enemy  on 
his  front,  on  the  15th  Crittenden  was  ordered  to  return  with 
his  command  and  take  position  near  Crawfish  Spring,  with 
Van  Cleve  on  the  left  and  Palmer  on  the  right.    During  the 


192       THE  ARMY  OF  THE  CUMBERLAND. 

day  Minty  with  the  cavalry  made  an  extended  reconnoissance 
on  the  front,  finding  the  enemy  in  force  at  all  points.  Wood, 
holding  position  on  Chickamatiga  Creek,  at  Lee  and  Gordon's 
Mills,  on  the  morning  of  the  18th  reported  the  enemy  ad- 
vancing with  strong  line  of  skirmishers  on  his  left  and  asked 
for  supports.  Van  Cleve  was  placed  on  Wood's  left  and  Pal- 
mer then  took  Van  Oleve's  position  on  Wood's  right.  Wilder 
in  the  afternoon  reported  Minty's  cavalry  driven  back  after 
being  reinforced  with  two  of  his  regiments ;  that  the  enemy 
was  flanking  him  and  that  he  would  fall  back  on  Wood. 
Palmer  later  in  the  day  was  placed  on  the  left  of  Van  Cleve's 
new  position  on  the  line  of  Chickamauga  Creek,  his  last  bri- 
gade reaching  its  position  at  four  o'clock  on  the  morning  of 
the  19th  ;  Wood  holding  his  position  on  the  creek  at  Lee  and 
Gordon's  Mills,  which  at  this  point  runs  between  steep  rocky 
bluffs  in  an  eastwardly  course,  with  the  road  to  Chattanooga 
via  Rossville  crossing  it  at  right  angles ;  Van  Cleve  on  his 
left  and  Palmer  on  the  left  of  Van  Cleve  ;  the  general  course 
of  the  line  being  northeasterly  along  the  Chickamauga  and 
Rossville  road. 


CHAPTER  XII 

THE  BATTLE  OP  CHICKAMATTGA. 

Colonel  Dan.  McCook,  of  Granger's  reserve  corps,  who 
had  been  posted  on  the  road  leading  to  Heed's  Bridge,  on  the 
evening  of  the  18th,  made  a  reconnoissance  to  Chickamauga 
Creek  as  far  as  Beed's  Bridge,  which  he  burned.  On  the  19th, 
meeting  Thomas,  he  reported  that  an  isolated  brigade  of  the 
enemy  was  on  the  west  side  of  the  creek,  and  as  the  bridge 
was  destroyed  a  prompt  movement  in  that  direction  might 
succeed  in  capturing  the  entire  force.  Thomas  ordered 
Brannan  to  poet  a  brigade  on  the  road  to  Alexander's  Bridge 
as  support  to  Baird,  and  with  his  other  brigades  to  recon- 
noitre the  road  to  Beed's  Bridge  in  search  of  this  brigade  of 
the  enemy.  Brannan  moved  at  nine  o'clock  a.m.,  and  Baird, 
under  orders  from  Thomas,  threw  forward  his  right  wing  so 
as  to  get  into  line  with  Brannan.  Baird  was  also  ordered  to 
keep  a  sharp  outlook  on  his  right  flank  and  watch  the  move- 
ments of  the  enemy  in  that  quarter.  Shortly  after  these 
movements  a  part  of  Palmer's  division  reported  to  Thomas 
and  was  placed  in  position  on  the  right  of  Baird.  Kosecrans, 
when  he  sent  Thomas  to  the  left — the  critical  point — told 
him  that  he  was  to  hold  the  road  to  Bossville,  and  if  hard 
pressed,  that  he  should  be  reinforced  with  the  entire  army. 

Under  Bragg's  orders,  Walker's  corps  on  the  18th  crossed 
to  the  west  side  of  Chickamauga  a  little  below  Alexander's 
Bridge  and  then  moved  up  the  stream  opposite  this  point. 
VII.— 9 


194 


THE  ARMY  OF  THE  CUMBERLAND. 


THE  BATTLE  OP  CHICK  AM  AUG  A.  195 

Bushrod  Johnson's  command  the  same  day  crossed  at  Reed's 
bridge,  and  then  marched  up  the  stream  some  three  miles 
and  took  position  on  the  morning  of  the  19th.  Walker  re- 
sumed his  movement  to  his  left  up  the  stream,  under  the  im- 
pression that  our  centre  was  still  at  Lee  and  Gordon's  Mills, 
Bragg's  plan  being  to  mass  Walker's  and  Johnson's  com- 
mands and  attack  our  left  flank.  The  advance  movement  of 
Brannan's  division,  Croxton's  brigade  in  front,  about  ten 
o'clock  encountered  the  enemy,  being  the  cavalry  under 
Forrest  with  Wilson's  and  Ector's  brigades  of  infantry,  and 
drove  them  nearly  half  a  mile,  when  it  met  with  obstinate 
resistance.  This  reconnoissance  of  Brannan  ha  pursuit  of 
the  brigade  reported  by  Dan.  McCook  developed  the  relative 
position  of  the  opposing  contending  forces,  which  up  to  this 
time  was  unknown  to  the  respective  commanders  of  each. 
It  gave  to  Bragg  the  knowledge  that  his  right  was  greatly 
overlapped  by  Thomas  on  our  left,  and  that  his  flank  was  in 
danger  of  being  turned.  It  compelled  him  at  once  to  halt 
Walker's  command  on  its  march,  and  to  direct  it  to  retrace 
its  steps  and  reinforce  Forrest,  now  engaged  with  Croxton, 
whose  movement  brought  on  the  battle  of  Chickamauga  be- 
fore Bragg  had  his  troops  in  the  position  ordered. 

Thomas  then  ordered  Baird's  division  forward  to  Crox- 
ton's support.  Moving  at  once  with  two  brigades  on  the 
front,  with  Starkweather's  in  reserve,  Baird  and  Croxton 
drove  the  enemy  steadily  for  some  distance  with  great  loss, 
capturing  many  prisoners.  Croxton's  brigade  having  ex- 
hausted its  ammunition  in  the  severe  fighting  of  over  an 
hour,  was  then  moved  to  the  rear,  and  Brannan's  and  Baird's 
divisions  with  united  forces  drove  the  enemy  from  their  im- 
mediate front.  Here  the  line  was  halted  and  readjusted. 
Baird  learning  from  his  prisoners  that  the  rebel  army  was  in 
heavy  force  on  his  immediate  front,  gathering  for  an  attack 


196      THE  ARMY  OF  THE  CUMBERLAND. 

in  mass,  drew  back  his  right  wing  and  waited  the  assault  of 
Bragg's  right  on  his  line,  which  was  made  in  heavy  force  by 
Walker,  who  had  reached  his  new  position.  Before  Band 
had  completed  the  reforming  of  his  line,  "Walker's  corps,  in 
overwhelming  numbers  was  upon  him,  assaulting  Scribner's 
and  King's  brigades,  and  driving  them  back  in  disorder. 

McCook,  early  on  the  morning  of  the  19th,  had  taken  posi- 
tion with  his  corps  at  Crawfish  Spring,  and  was  now  beyond 
the  extreme  left  of  the  rebel  army,  massing  his  troops  at 
this  point  and  waiting  for  orders.  At  a  little  after  ten  o'clock 
in  the  morning  he  was  directed  to  take  command  of  the 
right  and  the  cavalry  on  that  flank.  This  included  Negley's 
division  of  the  Fourteenth  Corps,  which  was  watching  the 
fords  of  Chickamauga  near  Crawfish  Spring,  one  brigade  of 
his  command  being  then  engaged  with  the  enemy.  The 
same  order  directed  McCook  to  send  Johnson's  divisions  to 
the  left  to  report  to  Thomas,  and  following  this  came  an- 
other one  from  Bosecrans,  directing  McCook  to  send  Davis's 
division  also  to  Thomas.  On  Baird  being  driven  back,  Gen- 
eral Thomas  ordered  Johnson's  and  Beynolds's  division  of 
his  own  corps — both  of  whom  had  opportunely  arrived  by 
this  time — immediately  to  advance  and  drive  the  enemy 
back.  Johnson  arriving  first  was  ordered  at  once  to  advance 
his  left,  connecting  with  Baird's  right,  Palmer  was  imme- 
diately placed  on  Johnson's  right  and  Beynolds  still  to  the 
right  of  Palmer,  with  one  brigade  of  his  division  in  reserve. 
As  soon  as  the  line  was  thus  formed  the  troops  advanced, 
attacking  Walker's  corps  on  the  flank  with  great  vigor,  driv- 
ing it  in  confusion  back  to  its  first  position,  while  Brannan's 
division,  fighting  them  on  the  front,  drove  back  the  head  of 
the  column  and  retook  the  artillery  which  had  been  captured 
from  Baird  when  he  was  driven  back.  Bragg  then  ordered 
up  Cheatham's  division,  which  had  been  in  reserve,  reinfor- 


THE  BATTLE  OF  CHICKAMAUGA.  197 

cing  Walker.  With  these  two  commands  united,  the  rebels 
pressed  forward  with  loud  yells,  determined  on  the  destruc- 
tion of  our  left.  As  these  two  commands  advanced,  a  gap 
was  made  in  their  lines,  into  which  Bragg  threw  Stewart's  di- 
vision. As  they  encountered  our  line,  these  troops  moved  for- 
ward. Striking  Johnson  first,  they  drove  him  from  his  posi- 
tion in  disorder,  then  Palmer  was  compelled  to  retire,  when 
Van  Cleve  coming  to  his  support  was  also  beaten  back.  Rey- 
nolds then  in  turn  was  overpowered  and  the  rebels  seemed 
to  be  sweeping  every  thing  before  them  as  at  Stone's  Eiver. 
By  this  time  Davis  had  reported  with  his  division,  and  mov- 
ing at  once  to  the  front  checked  the  rebel  advance,  when 
Wood  coming  up  to  his  assistance,  our  lines  were  reformed, 
and  Cheatham's,  Stewart's,  and  Walker's  troops  were  driven 
in  rapid  retreat  back  to  their  original  line.  Sheridan,  under 
orders,  had  left  Lytle's  brigade  to  hold  Lee  and  Gordon's 
Mills  on  our  extreme  right,  and  moved  to  our  left  in  support  of 
the  new  line  near  Wood's  and  Davis's  divisions.  He  reached 
the  position  opportunely  and  aided  in  driving  back  the 
rebels,  Bradley's  brigade  recapturing  the  Eighth  Indiana 
battery  previously  taken  by  the  enemy.  A  large  number  of 
prisoners  were  captured  belonging  to  Longstreet's  corps. 

Bragg,  finding  that  his  plan  of  battle  was  discovered  by 
his  opponent,  and  that  the  latter  intended  to  dispute  to  the 
end  for  the  possession  of  the  Bossville  and  Chattanooga 
road,  ordered  Polk  to  cross  the  creek  with  his  remaining 
division  at  the  nearest  ford  and  to  assume  command  in  per- 
son on  their  right.  Hill  with  his  corps  was  also  ordered  to 
move  across  the  Chickamauga  below  Lee  and  Gordon's  Mills 
and  to  join  the  line  on  the  right. 

The  rebels  made  another  desperate  assault  at  about  half 
past  two  o'clock  on  our  right.  Hood's  corps,  with  Bushrod 
Johnson's  division  from  the  enemy's  centre,  moved  forward  in 


198       THE  ARMY  OP  THE  CUMBERLAND. 

heavy  masses,  assaulting  furiously  Reynolds's  and  Van  Cleve's 
divisions.  Here  they  met  with  fearful  loss  from  the  heavy 
infantry  and  artillery  fire,  portions  of  six  batteries  open- 
ing with  canister  on  their  advancing  columns,  but  still  on 
they  came.  Soon  the  roar  of  battle  was  heard  approach- 
ing near  to  the  Widow  Glenn's  house,  where  Rosecrans's 
headquarters  were.  Our  right  centre  now  was  pierced  and 
the  enemy  was  on  the  La  Fayette  road.  Negley,  from  the 
right  under  McCook,  was  immediately  ordered  up  with  his 
division,  Brannan  from  Thomas's  left  joining  him.  These 
two  divisions  were  at  once  sent  in  to  the  fight.  Moving 
rapidly  forward  to  the  attack,  with  cheer  on  cheer,  they 
hurled  back  Hood  and  Johnson,  steadily  driving  them  until 
darkness  ended  the  combat,  our  troops  re-occupying  their 
old  positions. 

Thomas,  wishing  to  reform  his  lines — which  had  become 
greatly  extended  in  driving  the  rebels — and  concentrate 
them  on  more  commanding  ground  in  the  rear  preparatory 
to  the  engagement  to  be  renewed  on  the  morrow,  selected  a 
new  position  for  Baird's  and  Johnson's  divisions,  the  former 
on  the  extreme  left.  These  positions  were  designated  to 
them  and  were  occupied  at  once.  Palmer  and  Reynolds 
were  ordered  into  position  in  line  on  the  right  of  John- 
son, with  Brannan  to  the  rear  and  right  of  Reynolds  as  re- 
serve. While  these  movements  were  being  made,  Cleburne 
with  his  fresh  division  of  Hill's  corps,  who  had  been  ordered 
to  the  extreme  right  by  Bragg,  under  orders  to  attack  im- 
mediately, advancing  in  full  force,  supported  by  Cheatham, 
assaulted  Johnson  first  and  then  Baird  with  tremendous 
force.  The  onset  was  so  determined  that  some  confusion  in 
the  line  resulted,  but  in  a  few  minutes  our  troops  rallied 
and  the  enemy  was  repulsed  in  fine  style.  This  conflict 
lasted  for  some  time  after  dark  with  heavy  losses  on  both 


THE   BATTLE   OF  CHICKAMAUGA.  199 

sides,  tlio  heavy  firing  lighting  up  the  struggle.  At  this 
point  our  artillery  was  again  used  with  good  effect.  Wil 
der's  brigade  had  occupied  a  position  during  the  day  on  the 
La  Fayette  road  about  a  mile  north  of  Lee  and  Gordon's 
Mills,  with  Minty  close  by.  The  latter  was  now  ordered  to 
report  to  Granger  at  Bossville,  to  hold  in  cheek  the  enemy's 
cavalry  operating  on  their  right.  Granger,  with  his  reserves, 
protected  the  roads  to  the  rear  toward  Bossville  and  cov- 
ered our  left  flank. 

"With  night  the  fighting  ceased,  and  the  troops,  worn  out 
after  the  marching  of  the  night  before — moving  from  the 
right  to  the  extreme  left — and  the  heavy  fighting  of  the  day, 
slept  on  their  arms,  awaiting  the  heavier  conflict  of  the 
moiTow.  Though  weary,  the  troops  were  in  most  excel- 
lent spirits,  and  confident  of  final  victory.  It  was  known 
throughout  the  army  that  we  had  been  fighting  during 
the  day  largely  superior  forces.  That  Bragg  had  been 
heavily  reinforced  from  Mississippi  and  East  Tennessee, 
and  by  Longstreet's  command  from  Virginia,  and  that  the 
enemy  was  fighting  most  desperately.  Bragg's  great  aim 
had  been  to  conceal  his  main  attack  on  our  left  by  the 
feint  on  the  centre,  and  supposed  that  our  centre  on  the 
morning  of  the  19th  was  still  at  Lee  and  Gordon's  Mills. 
Presuming  this  to  be  the  case,  Bragg  had  massed  heavily 
on  our  left,  intending  to  repeat  his  movement  made  on  our 
right  at  Murfreesboro.  His  plan  contemplated  the  break- 
ing our  left,  sweeping  it  before  him  in  broken  masses, 
crushing  our  centre,  and  destroying  our  right,  and  then 
occupying  the  road  to  Chattanooga  in  force  he  would  have 
the  Federal  arcny  completely  in  his  power.  The  move- 
ment made  by  Croxton  compelled  Bragg  to  open  the  battle 
in  heavy  force  on  the  left,  before  his  troops  had  secured 
the   positions    assigned   them,    and   then,    to   his  surprise, 


200       THE  ARMY  OF  THE  CUMBERLAND. 

lie  found  that  during  the  night  our  left  had  been  greatly 
prolonged,  and  that  Rosecrans  was  in  force,  occupying 
a,  position  far  to  the  north  of  what  he  had  been  led  to 
expect.  During  the  night  Bragg  ordered  up  by  forced 
marches  all  reinforcements  arriving  by  railroad.  Three 
brigades  of  fresh  troops  reached  the  enemy  during  the 
night,  and  were  placed  in  line  early  in  the  morning  of  the 
20th.  These,  with  the  troops  ordered  late  the  day  before 
from  the  east  bank  of  the  Chickamauga,  gave  Bragg  a  large 
number  of  fresh  troops,  which  he  placed  in  line  of  battle 
on  the  20th.  During  the  night  Bragg  summoned  his 
generals  to  meet  him  at  his  camp  fire,  and  there  gave  them 
orders  for  the  following  day.  He  divided  his  entire  force 
into  two  commands,  to  which  he  assigned  his  senior  Lieu- 
tenant-Generals  Longstreet  and  Polk.  The  former — who 
had  reported  during  the  night — to  the  left,  composed  of  six 
divisions  where  his  own  troops  were  stationed,  and  the 
latter  continuing  in  his  command  of  five  divisions  on  the 
right.  Bragg's  plan  of  battle  for  the  20th  was  for  Polk  to 
assault  in  force,  with  Breckinridge's  division  on  his  extreme 
right  at  day-dawn,  when  the  attack  was  to  be  taken  up  rap- 
idly in  succession  by  the  divisions  to  his  left.  The  left 
wing  was  to  await  the  movement  on  the  right,  and  when 
the  attack  was  made  there  to  take  it  up  promptly.  When 
the  entire  line  became  engaged  it  was  to  move  forward 
vigorously  and  persistently  throughout  its  entire  length,  the 
whole  army  wheeling  on  Longstreet's  left  as  a  pivot,  but 
constantly  pressing  our  left  to  get  possession  of  the  road 
to  Chattanooga. 

The  battle  of  the  1 9th  was  a  series  of  brilliant  charges  and 
counter-charges,  in  favor  of  first  one  side  and  then  the 
other.  During  the  day  our  troops,  at  times  broken  and 
driven  by  the   enemy,  always   promptly  rallied   and  drove 


THE  BATTLE   OF  CHICKAMATJGA.  201 

the  rebels  in  disorder  to  their  lines  by  brilliant  and  effec- 
tive dashes,  moving  to  the  attack  with  vigor  and  determina- 
tion. In  the  main  the  results  of  the  day  were  in  our  favor. 
Bragg  had  been  forced  to  fight  before  he  was  in  position, 
and  had  been  foiled  in  his  attempt  to  secure  the  roads, 
which  on  the  evening  of  the  19th  remained  even  more  se- 
curely in  our  possession  than  before,  fully  protected  on  both 
flanks  by  our  cavalry.  As  this  was  the  object  of  the  severe 
conflict  of  the  19th,  that  day's  fighting  was  a  success  for 
our  arms,  both  the  Eossville  and  the  Dry  Valley  roads  being 
firmly  held  by  our  troops  that  night. 

But  the  battle  was  not  yet  over.  During  the  night  Bose- 
crans  assembled  his  corps  commanders  at  his  headquarters 
at  the  Widow  Glenn's  house,  and  after  a  consultation  with 
them  on  the  state  and  condition  of  their  commands,  gave 
orders  for  the  disposition  and  movements  of  the  troops  for 
the  next  day.  Tho  divisions  of  Thomas's  corps,  with  those 
which  had  reinforced  him,  to  hold  the  road  to  Bossville,  in 
the  same  position  as  then  occupied  by  them  in  line  of  battle, 
with  Brannan  in  reserve.  McCook,  with  Sheridan's  and 
Davis's  divisions  was  to  maintain  his  picket  line  until  it  was 
attacked  and  driven  back.  His  left  division — Davis's — was 
to  close  on  Thomas,  and  to  have  his  right  refused  covering 
the  position  at  Widow  Glenn's  house.  Crittenden  was  to 
hold  two  divisions,  Wood's  and  Van  Cleve's,  in  reserve  near 
where  the  line  of  McCook  and  Thomas  joined  to  reinforce 
the  front  line  as  needed. 

During  the  night  Thomas  received  word  from  Baird  on  the 
extreme  left,  that  the  left  of  his  division  did  not  reach  the 
road  to  Beed's  Bridge,  as  had  been  anticipated.  Thomas 
immediately  requested  that  Negley's  division  be  ordered  to 
report  to  him  to  take  position  on  Baird's  left  and  rear,  se- 
curing this  flank  from  assault.  At  daylight  Bosecrans,  rid- 
9* 


202       THE  ARMY  OP  THE  CUMBERLAND. 

ing  the  line,  ordered  Negley  to  join  Thomas  at  once,  and 
directed  McCook  to  relieve  Negley,  who  was  on  the  front 
line.  He  also  ordered  McCook  to  adjust  his  right,  as  it 
was  too  far  out  on  the  crest,  and  to  move  Davis's  division 
to  the  left,  and  close  it  up  compactly.  Crittenden  was  also 
directed  to  move  his  two  divisions  to  the  left  and  Palmer, 
on  Thomas's  line,  was  instructed  to  close  up  his  front.  On 
reaching  the  left  Eosecrans  was  convinced  that  the  first 
attack  would  be  made  on  that  flank,  and  returned  at  once 
to  the  right  to  hurry  Negley  over  to  Thomas.  Arriving 
there  he  found  that  this  division  had  not  moved,  and  that 
McCook's  troops  were  not  ready  to  relieve  him.  Negley 
was  then  ordered  to  send  his  reserve  brigade  under  John 
Beatty,  and  to  follow  with  the  other  two  when  relieved 
from  the  front.  Impatient  at  McCook's  delay  in  reliev- 
ing Negley,  and  anticipating  momentarily  the  attack  of 
the  enemy  on  our  left,  Eosecrans  ordered  Crittenden  to 
move  Wood's  division  to  the  front,  to  fill  the  position  oc- 
cupied by  Negley  of  which  McCook  was  notified  by  Eose- 
crans in  person.  Eosecrans,  when  first  at  McCook's  line,  was 
greatly  dissatisfied  with  McCook's  position.  He  now  called 
McCook's  attention  to  the  defects  in  his  line,  that  it  was 
too  light,  and  that  it  was  weakened  by  being  too  much 
strung  out,  and  charged  him  to  keep  well  closed  up  on  the 
left  at  all  hazards.  Leaving  McCook,  Eosecrans  then  re- 
turned to  Negley,  and  found  to  his  surprise  that  the  bri- 
gades in  front  had  not  yet  been  relieved  and  started  to 
Thomas  after  his  repeated  orders,  as  Wood's  division  had 
only  reached  the  position  of  Negley's  reserve.  Greatly 
irritated  at  this,  Eosecrans  gave  peremptory  orders  and 
Wood's  division  was  at  once  placed  in  front,  closed  up  on 
the  right  of  Brannan. 

A  heavy  fog  hung  over  the   battlefield  during  the  early 


THE  BATTLE   OP  CHICKAMAUGA.  203 

morning.  Bragg,  before  daylight  with  his  staff,  took  posi- 
tion immediately  in  the  rear  of  the  centre  of  his  line,  and 
waited  for  Polk  to  begin  the  attack,  waiting  until  after  sun- 
rise with  increasing  anxiety  and  disappointment.  Bragg 
then  sent  a  staff  officer  to  Polk  to  ascertain  and  report  as  to 
the  cause  of  the  delay,  with  orders  urging  him  to  a  pronijit 
and  speedy  attack.  Polk  was  not  found  with  his  troops,  and 
the  staff  officer  learning  that  he  had  spent  the  night  on  the 
east  side  of  Ohickamauga  Creek,  rode  over  there  and  deliv- 
ered his  message.  Bragg,  impatient  at  the  delay,  proceeded 
in  person  to  his  right  wing  and  there  found  the  troops  wholly 
unprepared  for  the  movement.  Messengers  were  sent  for 
Polk  in  hot  haste,  and  on  his  reporting  he  was  urged  to  a 
prompt  execution  of  his  orders  and  to  make  a  vigorous  attack 
at  once. 

During  the  night  our  troops  threw  up  temporary  breast- 
works of  logs  and  rails.  Behind  these  Thomas's  command 
awaited  the  attack.  After  Bragg  had  sent  for  Polk,  he  or- 
dered a  reconnoissance  in  his  front  on  the  extreme  left  of 
our  line,  and  crossing  the  main  road  to  Chattanooga  devel- 
oped the  fact  that  this  position  so  greatly  desired  by  him 
was  thus  feebly  held.  At  half  past  eight  o'clock  the  rebel 
attack  opened  on  our  left  with  skirmish  firing.  Pushing 
forward  with  a  heavy  line  of  skirmishers  to  develop  Baird's 
position,  with  Breckinridge's  division  on  the  right  and 
Cleburne  to  his  left,  the  rebels  made,  about  an  hour  later, 
a  tremendous  assault.  Beatty's  brigade  of  Negley's  division 
being  now  in  line  on  Baird's  left,  received  the  full  force  of 
the  blow  from  the  brigades  of  Adams  and  Stovall  on  the 
right  of  Breckinridge's  division,  and  was  driven  back  in 
disorder.  Helm's  brigade  and  Cleburne's  division,  advan- 
cing on  the  front  of  Baird,  encountered  the  troops  behind 
their  breastworks  but  were  here  met  with  a  terrific  fire  of 


204       THE  ARMY  OF  THE  CUMBERLAND. 

canister  and  musketry,  and  their  advance  checked  so  thor 
oughly  that  it  was  not  regarded  as  safe  to  send  the  two  bri- 
gades now  overlapping  Baird  to  attack  his  rear.  These 
brigades,  however,  had  reached  and  crossed  the  La  Fayette 
road.  Beatty  in  falling  back  was  relieved  by  several  regi- 
ments of  Johnson's  division,  which  were  placed  in  position 
by  Baird.  These  regiments  were  joined  by  Vanderveer's 
brigade  of  Brannan's  division  and  a  portion  of  Stanley's  bri- 
gade of  Negley's  division,  which  had  been  hurried  to  the  left 
and  thrown  into  action.  These  forces  advancing  checked 
the  assault  of  the  enemy  and  then  drove  him  entirely  from 
Baird's  left  and  rear.  Immediately  following  the  attack  on 
Baird,  the  enemy's  assault,  being  taken  up  by  the  divisions 
on  Breckinridge's  left,  pressed  on  and  struck  Johnson,  then 
Palmer  and  Reynolds  successively  with  ecpial  fierceness, 
maintaining  the  attack  for  two  hours,  the  enemy  in  repeated 
assaults  bringing  fresh  troops  constantly  to  the  front  was 
each  time  met  and  hurled  back  by  the  splendid  fighting  of 
our  troops.  Here  Bragg  exhausted  his  utmost  energies  to 
drive  in  tho  centre  and  to  dislodge  Thomas's  right,  and  fail- 
ing in  this  after  repeated  attacks  fell  back  and  occupied  his 
old  position. 

McCook,  early  in  the  morning,  on  going  to  the  front  found 
that  "Wood's  division,  not  having  the  battle-front  of  Negley's, 
did  not  occupy  the  entire  of  the  rude  barricade  thrown  up 
by  Negley's  troops,  and  that  a  portion  of  it  on  Wood's  right 
was  not  occupied  by  any  of  our  forces.  Wood,  on  meeting 
McCook,  explained  to  him  that  his  left  was  well  protected, 
resting  on  Brannan's  right,  and  that  his  orders  were  to  keep 
well  closed  up  on  Brannan.  On  the  right  of  this  gap  to  the 
right  of  Wood,  McCook  had  posted  Wilder  with  his  bri- 
gade, who  had  been  ordered  to  report  to  McCook  and  receive 
orders  from  him.     McCook  then  directed  Sheridan  to  bring 


THE  BATTLE  OF  CHICKAMAUGA.  205 

forward  one  of  his  brigades  and  occupy  with  it  the  space 
between  Wood's  right  and  Wilder.  As  McCook  started  to 
leave  this  portion  of  the  line,  he  met  Davis's  division  march- 
ing toward  this  vacant  space.  Davis  was  directed  at  once  to 
post  one  of  his  brigades  in  this  part  of  the  line,  holding  the 
other  in  reserve.  When  the  brigade  Sheridan  sent  arrived, 
McCook  placed  it  in  column  as  support  to  Davis  on  his 
right  and  rear.  At  this  time  Thomas  again  reporting  that 
he  needed  reinforcements  and  the  right  as  yet  not  being 
actively  engaged,  Rosecrans  concluded  that  Bragg's  efforts 
were  still  looking  to  the  possession  of  the  roads  on  our  left, 
and  that  he  was  massing  his  troops  on  his  right,  thus  pro- 
longing his  line  on  that  flank.  He  then,  at  10.10  a.m., 
ordered  McCook  to  withdraw  as  far  as  possible  the  force 
on  the  right  and  reinforce  Thomas,  stating  that  "the  left 
must  be  held  at  all  hazards,  even  if  the  right  is  withdrawn 
wholly  back  to  the  present  left."  Five  minutes  after  the 
receipt  of  this  order  McCook  received  one  dated  10.30  a.m., 
directing  him  to  send  two  brigades  of  Sheridan's  division 
at  once  with  all  possible  dispatch  to  support  Thomas  and 
to  send  the  third  brigade  as  soon  as  it  could  safely  be 
withdrawn.  McCook  immediately  sent  Lytle's  and  Wal- 
worth's brigades  of  Sheridan's  division  on  the  double  quick 
to  the  support  of  Thomas. 

The  battle  increasing  in  fury  and  volume  was  gradually 
approaching  the  centre  from  the  left,  but  Thomas  still  sus- 
taining the  brant  of  the  fight  was  compelled  to  send  again 
and  again  for  reinforcements.  Beatty's  and  Stanley's  bri- 
gades of  Negley's  division  had  been  sent  from  the  right. 
Vanderveer  with  his  brigade  of  Brannan's  division  also  re- 
ported. Barnes's  brigade  of  Van  Cleve's  division  had  also 
been  ordered  to  Thomas,  and  now  the  two  of  Sheridan's  di- 
vision were  under  orders  to  proceed  to  the  left.     About  this 


20'j  THE  ARMY  OP  THE  CUMBERLAND. 

time  Lieutenant-Colonel  Von  Schrader  of  Thomas's  staff, 
who  had  been  riding  the  lines,  reported  to  Thomas  that 
there  were  no  troops  on  Reynolds's  right,  and  a  long  gap 
existed  between  Reynolds  and  Wood ;  not  aware  that  Bran- 
nan's  division  although  not  in  front  line  was  still  in  position, 
retired  in  the  woods  a  short  distance  back,  but  not  out  of 
line.  This  information  was  at  once  sent  by  Thomas  to 
Rosecrans,  who  immediately  directed  Wood  to  close  up 
the  line  on  Reynolds  and  support  him,  and  sent  word  to 
Thomas  that  he  would  be  supported  if  it  required  all  of 
McCook's  and  Crittenden's  corps  to  do  so. 

On  receipt  of  this  order — impossible  for  him  to  execute 
literally — Wood  undertook  to  cany  it  out  by  withdrawing 
his  entire  command  from  the  front,  leaving  a  gap  of  two 
brigades  in  the  line  of  battle,  moving  to  the  rear  past  Bran- 
nan's  division,  to  where  Reynolds  was  posted  in  line.  Into 
the  gap  thus  made  by  Wood,  Davis  attempted  to  throw  suf- 
ficient force  to  hold  that  portion  of  the  line  thus  vacated,  by 
posting  his  reserve  brigade. 

Just  at  this  time  the  order  of  battle  on  the  enemy's  line 
had  reached  Longstreet's  command,  who,  seeing  this  gap, 
ordered  his  troops,  formed  in  heavy  columns,  to  advance. 
Into  this  gap  there  poured  Stewart's,  Hood's,  Kershaw's, 
Johnson's,  and  Hindman's  divisions,  dashing  impetuously 
forward,  with  Preston's  large  division  as  supports.  Our 
right,  disabled  as  it  was,  was  speedily  turned,  the  line  of 
battle  on  the  enemy's  front  extending  nearly  from  Bran- 
nan's  centre  to  a  point  far  to  the  right  of  the  Widow  Glenn's 
home,  and  from  the  front  of  that  portion  of  the  line  Sheri- 
dan's brigades  had  just  been  taken.  McCook,  to  resist  this 
!  assault,  had  only  Carlin's  and  Heg's  brigades  of  Davis's 

division  and  Laibold's  brigade  of  Sheridan's  division.  On 
finding  the  rebel  troops  pressing  through  the  space  vacated 


THE   BATTLE  OF  CHICKAMAUGA.  207 

by  Wood,  McCook  ordered  Lytle  and  Walworth  to  change 
front  and  return  to  assist  in  repelling  the  enemy.  Wilder 
and  Harrison  closed  in  on  Sheridan  with  their  commands  as 
speedily  as  possible,  and  aided  in  resisting  the  enemy's  at- 
tack. Davis,  being  overpowered  by  the  immense  numbers 
of  the  rebels,  was  compelled  to  retire  to  save  his  command. 
Laibold  was  in  turn  driven  back  in  confusion,  and  the  tide 
of  battle  then  struck  Lytle  and  Walworth,  who  contended 
nobly  against  the  overpowering  columns,  and  for  a  time 
checked  the  advance  of  the  enemy  on  their  immediate  front. 
The  rebel  troops  swarming  in,  turned  the  left  of  these  bri- 
gades, and  they  were  compelled  to  withdraw  to  escape  being 
surrounded.  At  this  point  the  gallant  Lytle  was  killed. 
Here  our  army  lost  several  thousand  prisoners,  forty  guns, 
and  a  large  number  of  wagon-trains. 

Once  more  the  right  of  the  army  was  broken  all  to  pieces, 
and  five  brigades  of  that  wing  cut  off  entirely  from  the  rest 
of  the  command.  In  the  meantime  Bragg,  determined  to 
turn  Thomas's  left,  and  cut  him  off  from  Chattauooga,  was 
making  his  preparations  for  a  second  assault  on  his  right  in 
heavier  force.  Bragg  directed  this  movement  in  person. 
Extending  his  right  by  moving  Breckinridge's  division  be- 
yond its  former  position,  he  ordered  Walker's  corps  in  line 
on  Breckinridge's  left,  and  connected  Cleburne's  right  on  the 
left  of  Walker.  Bragg's  plan  was  for  Breckinridge  to  ad- 
vance, wheeling  to  the  left,  and  thus  envelop  Thomas's  ex- 
posed left  flank,  striking  it  in  the  rear.  Breckinridge,  ad- 
vancing, was  soon  in  position  on  the  Chattanooga  road, 
partly  in  rear  of  Thomas.  But  he  was  now  detached  from 
the  main  body  of  the  rebel  troops  engaged  in  the  movement, 
and,  making  a  bold  assault  on  the  rear,  he  was  here  met  by 
the  three  reserve  brigades  under  Vandeveer,  Willich,  and 
Grose,  and  hurled  in  rout  back  on  his  original  line.     On 


208  THE  ARMY   OF   THE  CUMBERLAND. 

reaching  it  lie  there  found  the  other  troops  that  had  taken 
part  in  this  charge,  and  that  they  had  been  repulsed  at  every 
point  by  Baird's,  Johnson's,  and  Palmer's  divisions. 

Beatty,  just  prior  to  the  repulse  of  the  enemy  on  the  left 
by  Thomas,  applied  in  person  to  the  latter  for  at  least  a  bri- 
gade to  support  him  in  the  attack  of  the  rebels  he  was  then 
expecting.  Thomas  sent  an  aid  to  hurry  Sheridan  up.  This 
officer  returned  soon  afterward,  and  reported  that  he  had 
encountered  a  heavy  force  of  the  enemy  in  the  rear  of  Rey- 
nolds's  position,  which  was  advancing  slowly,  with  a  strong 
line  of  skirmishers  thrown  out ;  that  he  had  met  Harker, 
who,  with  his  brigade  posted  on  a  ridge  a  short  distance  to 
Reynolds's  rear,  was  watching  this  force  approaching,  and 
was  of  the  opinion  that  these  troops  were  Sheridan's  coming 
to  Thomas's  assistance.  Thomas  then  rode  forward  to  de- 
termine the  character  of  the  advancing  troops,  which  he 
soon  did,  and  ordered  Harker  to  open  fire  upon  them,  re- 
sisting their  farther  advance.  Thomas  then  selected  the  crest 
of  a  commanding  ridge,  known  as  "  Horseshoe  Bidge,"  on 
which  to  place  Brannan's  division  in  line,  which — on  Long- 
street's  sweeping  McCook's  lines  from  the  right — had  been 
struck  in  the  flank  on  the  line  of  battle.  On  the  spurs  to 
the  rear  he  posted  his  artillery.  On  Thomas  leaving  Har- 
ker, the  latter  opening  fire  with  his  skirmishers,  then  posted 
his  right  to  connect  with  Brannan's  division  and  portions  of 
Beatty's  and  Stanley's  brigades  of  Negley's  division,  which 
had  been  ordered  over  to  this  point  from  the  extreme  left. 
Thomas  then  went  to  the  crest  of  the  hill  on  the  front, 
where  he  met  Wood  with  his  division,  who  confirmed  him  in 
the  opinion  that  the  troops  advancing  were  those  of  the 
enemy.  Thomas  was  not  aware  at  that  time  of  the  extent 
of  the  disaster  to  the  right.  He  ordered  Wood  to  place 
his  division  in  line  with  Brannan's,  and  to  resist  as  long  as 


THE  BATTLE  OF  CHICK  AM  AUG  A.  209 

possible  the  advance  of  the  enemy.  On  receipt  of  his  order 
Wood  immediately  threw  his  troops  on  the  left  of  Brannan, 
and  had  barely  time  to  form  his  lines  when  the  enemy  was 
upon  then  in  a  heavy,  fierce  assault  like  those  early  in  the 
day.  This,  however,  was  handsomely  repulsed,  the  enemy 
charging  again  and  again  with  fresh  troops,  but  their  efforts 
were  successfully  resisted.  These  were  Bushrod  Johnson's 
men,  with  Patton  Anderson's  brigade  on  his  right,  which 
had  been  formed  on  the  brow  of  the  secondary  spur  of  the 
ridge,  and  at  about  two  o'clock  moved  forward,  making  a 
most  determined  assault  on  our  forces.  Part  of  his  line 
reached  the  crest  held  by  Wood,  but  was  hurled  back  to  its 
original  position  under  as  determined  a  counter-charge. 

Away  off  at  Rossville  Gordon  Granger  with  three  brigades 
of  the  reserve  corps  was  stationed.  He  had  heard  during 
the  morning  heavy  firing  from  the  front,  in  the  direction  of 
Thomas,  and  as  the  firing  increased  in  volume  and  intensity 
on  the  right,  he  judged  that  the  enemy  were  pressing  him 
hard.  He  then  determined,  although  contrary  to  his  orders, 
to  gather  what  troops  he  could  and  go  to  Thomas's  assist- 
ance. Ordering  Whittaker's  and  Mitchell's  brigades  under 
the  immediate  command  of  Steedman  to  move  to  his  front, 
he  placed  Dan  McCook's  brigade  at  the  Mc  Afee  church,  to 
cover  the  Ringgold  road.  Thomas  was  at  this  time  heavily 
engaged  on  "  Horseshoe  Bidge,"  between  the  La  Fayette 
and  the  Dry  Valley  roads,  about  three  miles  and  a  half  from 
Granger's  headquarters.  Pushing  forward  his  troops  rapidly, 
Granger  moved  past  a  detachment  of  the  enemy  some  two 
miles  out,  and  ordered  Dan  McCook  forward  to  watch  the 
movements  of  the  rebels,  to  keep  open  the  La  Fayette  road, 
and  to  cover  the  open  fields  on  the  right  of  the  road  inter- 
vening between  this  point  and  Thomas's  position.  McCook 
brought  up  his  brigade  as  rapidly  as  possible,  took  and  held 


210       THE  ARMY  OF  THE  CUMBERLAND. 

his  position  until  late  that  night.  Granger  moving  to  the 
front  arrived  with  his  command  about  three  o'clock,  and  re- 
ported at  once  to  Thomas,  who  was  then  with  this  part  of  his 
command  on  "  Horseshoe  Ridge,"  where  the  enemy  was 
pressing  him  hard  on  front  and  endeavoring  to  turn  both  of 
his  flanks.  To  the  right  of  this  position  was  a  ridge  ranning 
east  and  west  nearly  at  right  angles  with  it.  On  this  Bush- 
rod  Johnson  had  reformed  his  command,  so  severely  re- 
pulsed by  Wood.  Longstreet  now  strengthened  it  with 
Hindman's  division  and  that  of  Kershaw,  all  under  the  com- 
mand of  Hindman,  who  formed  it  in  heavy  columns  for  an 
attack  on  the  right  flank  and  rear  of  Thomas's  troops. 
Kershaw's  division  had  possession  of  a  gorge  in  this  ridge 
through  which  his  division  was  moving  in  heavy  masses, 
with  the  design  of  making  an  attack  in  the  rear.  This  was 
the  most  critical  hour  of  this  eventful  day.  Granger  promptly 
ordered  Whit  taker  and  Mitchell  to  hurl  themselves  against 
this  threatening  force.  Steedman  gallantly  seizing  the 
colors  of  a  regiment,  led  his  command  to  the  charge.  Rush- 
ing upon  the  enemy  with  loud  cheers,  after  a  terrific  con- 
flict, only  of  some  twenty  minutes'  duration,  with  a  hot  in- 
fantry and  artillery  fire,  Steedman  drove  them  from  their 
position  and  occupied  both  the  ridge  and  gorge.  Here  the 
slaughter  was  frightful.  The  victory  was  won  at  a  fearful 
cost,  but  the  army  was  saved.  After  Hindman  was  driven 
back,  Longstreet  about  four  o'clock,  determined  to  re-take 
the  ridge.  Asking  Bragg  for  reinforcements  from  the  right, 
he  was  informed  by  him  "  that  they  had  been  beaten  back 
so  badly  that  they  could  be  of  no  service  to  me."  Long- 
street  then  ordered  up  his  reserve  division  of  fresh  troops 
under  Preston,  four  brigades  strong,  supported  by  Stewart's 
corps,  and  directed  him  to  attack  the  troops  on  the  ridge. 
Advancing  with  wild  yells,  confident   of  success,  Preston 


THE   BATTLE   OF   CHICKAMAUGA.  211 

dashed  boldly  up  the  hill,  supported  by  Kershaw's  troops, 
with  Johnson's — part  of  Hiudman's — and  later  on  by  those 
of  Stewart's.  But  once  more  the  enemy  was  driven  back, 
with  frightful  slaughter,  and  thus  with  charge  and  counter- 
charge at  this  part  of  the  field,  lasting  for  nearly  two  hours, 
the  day  wore  away  until  darkness  settled  down,  night  find- 
ing Thomas's  command — the  troops  under  Brannan,  Wood, 
and  Granger — still  holding  the  ridge.  Some  unauthorized 
person  had  ordered  Thomas's  ammunition  train  back  to 
Chattanooga,  and  the  supply  with  the  troops  on  the  field  was 
running  very  low.  The  ammunition  that  Granger  brought 
up  with  him  was  divided  with  the  troops  on  that  part  of  the 
field  where  his  command  fought — Brannan's  and  "Wood's  di- 
visions— but  this  supply  was  soon  exhausted.  The  troops 
then  gathered  what  could  be  found  in  the  cartridge-boxes 
of  the  slain,  friend  and  foe  being  alike  examined.  With 
the  fresh  charges  of  the  enemy,  the  troops  were  ordered  to 
use  their  bayonets  and  give  the  rebels  cold  steel,  and  in  the 
final  charges  the  enemy  was  met  and  repulsed  in  this  way. 

In  the  breaking  up  of  our  right,  two  brigades  of  Davis's 
division,  one  of  Yan  Cleve's,  and  the  entire  of  Sheridan's  di- 
vision was  caught  in  the  whirl  and  sent  adrift  from  the 
main  command,  the  enemy  in  heavy  columns  completely 
controlling  all  access  to  Thomas  and  the  remaining  divisions 
with  him,  except  by  way  of  the  Dry  Valley  road  across  the 
ridge  and  on  to  Bossville,  thence  back  on  the  La  Fayette 
road  to  Thomas's  left.  The  troops  of  Sheridan's  and  Davis's 
divisions  were  rallied  a  short  distance  in  the  rear  of  the  lino, 
and  taking  the  Dry  Valley  road,  endeavored  to  unite  with 
Thomas's  command.  They  were  placed  in  position  on  the 
Bossville  road  leading  to  the  battlefield. 

Bosecrans  was  watching  on  the  rear  of  Davis's  right  for 
McCook  to  close  up  his  line  to  the  left  when  Longstreet'i 


212       THE  ARMY  OF  THE  CUMBERLAND. 

men  poured  through  the  gap  left  by  Wood's  withdrawal. 
Seeing  that  some  disaster  had  occurred,  Eosecrans  hurried 
in  person  to  the  extreme  right,  to  direct  Sheridan's  move- 
ments on  the  flank  of  the  advancing  rebels.  But  it  was 
simply  impossible  to  stem  the  tide  and  our  men  were  driven 
back  as  the  enemy  advanced.  Leaving  orders  for  the  troops 
to  be  rallied  behind  the  ridges  west  of  the  Dry  Valley  road, 
Eosecrans  endeavored  with  Garfield,  his  chief  of  staff,  and  a 
few  others  of  his  staff,  to  rejoin  Thomas  by  passing  to  the 
rear  of  the  broken  portions  of  the  right.  Eiding  down  in 
this  direction,  some  two  or  three  hundred  yards  under  a  heavy 
fire,  he  found  the  troops  that  had  been  driven  from  the  right 
far  over  toward  the  left,  and  from  all  indications  it  appeared 
doubtful  if  the  left  had  been  able  to  maintain  its  position. 
He  then  concluded  to  go  to  Eossville  and  there  determine 
whether  to  join  Thomas  on  the  battlefield  or  whether  his 
duty  called  him  to  Chattanooga,  to  prepare  for  his  broken 
army  if  his  worst  fears  should  be  realized.  On  reaching 
Eossville  it  was  determined  that  Garfield  should  go  to  the 
front  to  Thomas  and  report,  and  that  Eosecrans  should  go 
to  Chattanooga  and  make  the  necessary  dispositions  for  the 
troops  as  they  came  back  in  rout. 

Eosecrans  on  arriving  at  Chattanooga  at  once  sent  out  or- 
ders to  Thomas  to  assume  command  of  all  the  troops  at  the 
front,  and  with  Crittenden  and  McCook  to  take  a  strong  po- 
sition and  assume  a  threatening  attitude  at  Eossville,  where 
ammunition  and  rations  would  be  sent  to  meet  him.  Tho- 
mas determined  to  hold  his  position  until  nightfall,  if  pos- 
sible, before  withdrawing.  He  then  distributed  ammuni- 
tion to  the  commands  and  ordered  the  division  commanders 
to  hold  themselves  in  readiness  to  fall  back  as  soon  as  or- 
dered.    Eeynolds  at  half-past  five  was  notified  to  commence 


THE  BATTLE  OF  CHICKAMAUGA.  213 

the  movement.  Leaving  the  position  he  had  held  near 
Wood,  Thomas  started  to  meet  Reynolds  and  show  him  the 
position  he  wanted  him  to  occupy,  forming  the  line  covering 
the  retirement  of  the  troops  on  the  La  Fayette  road  on  the 
left.  Just  before  meeting  Reynolds,  Thomas  was  informed 
of  a  large  rebel  force  in  the  woods  ahead  of  him,  drawn  up 
in  line  and  advancing  toward  him.  This  was  Liddell's  divi- 
sion on  the  extreme  rebel  right,  under  orders  from  Bragg, 
moving  to  a  third  attack  on  Thomas's  left.  Reynolds  arriv- 
ing at  this  time,  Thomas  ordered  him  to  at  once  change  the 
head  of  the  column  to  the  left,  form  bine  perpendicular  to  the 
road  and  to  charge  the  enemy  then  in  his  immediate  front, 
while  the  artillery  opened  a  converging  fire  from  the  right 
and  left.  Turchin  charged  with  his  brigade  upon  the  rebel 
force  and  drove  them  in  complete  rout  far  beyond  Baird's 
left.  Robinson's  command — King's  brigade — closely  sup- 
porting Turchin,  was  posted  on  the  road  leading  through  the 
ridge  to  hold  the  ground,  while  the  troops  on  our  right  and 
left  retired. 

Shortly  after  this  Willich  with  his  brigade  was  placed  in  po- 
sition on  commanding  ground  to  the  right  of  the  ridge  road, 
and  assisted  in  covering  the  withdrawal  of  our  troops.  Tur- 
chin's  brigade,  having  cleared  the  front,  returned  and  took 
position  on  this  road  with  Robinson  and  Willich. 

Thomas  having  made  this  disposition  of  the  troops,  or- 
dered Wood,  Brannan,  and  Granger,  to  fall  back  from  their 
positions.  These  troops  were  not  molested,  but  Baird  and 
Johnson  as  they  were  retiring  were  attacked.  By  the  exer- 
cise of  care  and  foresight  they  retired  without  confusion  and 
with  but  slight  loss.  This  attack  was  led  by  L.  E.  Polk's 
brigade,  but  the  rebel  lines  had  become  so  changed  that  they 
formed  an  acute  angle  and  their  troops  were  firing  into  each 


2U  THE   ARMY   OF   THE   CUMBERLAND 

other  in  the  dark.  So  quietly  was  the  army  withdrawn  that 
it  was  not  until  after  sunrise  on  the  21st  that  Bragg  discov- 
ered that  Thomas  had  retired.  Having  effected  the  with- 
drawal of  his  troops,  General  Thomas,  accompanied  by 
Granger  and  Garfield,  proceeded  to  Rossville  and  placed  the 
command  in  position  at  that  place,  ordering  one  brigade  of 
Negley's  division  to  hold  the  gap  on  the  Ringgold  road  with 
the  other  two  brigades  posted  on  the  top  of  the  ridge  to  the 
right,  joining  on  the  brigades  in  the  road,  with  Dan  Mc- 
Cook's  brigade  in  reserve.  On  the  right  of  Negley  Rey- 
nolds's division  took  position,  reaching  to  the  Dry  Valley 
road,  with  Brannan's  division  as  a  reserve  in  rear  of  Rey- 
nolds's right.  On  the  right  of  the  Dry  Valley  road,  extending 
to  the  west,  McCook's  corps  was  placed,  his  right  extending 
to  Chattanooga  Creek.  Upon  the  high  ground  to  the  left 
of  the  Ringgold  road  the  entire  of  Crittenden's  corps  was 
placed.  As  a  reserve  Steedman's  division  of  Granger's  corps 
was  posted  on  his  left,  while  Baird's  division  was  also  in  re- 
serve and  in  support  of  the  brigade  of  Negley's  division 
holding  the  gap.  Thrown  out  on  the  Ringgold  road,  a  mile 
and  a  half  in  advance  of  the  gap,  Minty's  brigade  of  cavalry 
held  the  road  at  that  point  during  the  night.  Here  the 
weaiy  troops  rested  undisturbed  the  night  after  the  heavy 
fighting  and  nothing  was  seen  of  the  enemy  until  about  nine 
o'clock  of  the  21st,  when  their  advance  appeared  in  heavy 
force  of  infantry  and  cavalry  on  Minty's  front.  Thomas, 
withdrawing  Minty  through  the  gap,  posted  his  command  on 
our  left  flank  and  directed  him  to  throw  out  strong  recon- 
noitring parties  across  the  ridge,  watching  the  enemy's 
movements  on  our  left  and  front.  There  was  no  object 
in  attempting  to  hold  the  position  at  Rossville  Gap,  be- 
yond the  gaining  of  a  day  to  select  the  final  position  for  the 
hoops  tit   Chattanooga  on  their  retirement  to    that   place, 


l 


THE   BATTLE   OF   CHICKAMAUGA.  215 

the  location  of  the  lines,  and  the  preparation  for  throw- 
ing up  earthworks.  This  was  all  accomplished  on  the  21st 
and  preparations  made  to  fall  back.  All  wagons,  ambu- 
lances, and  surplus  artillery-carriages  were  sent  to  the 
rear  before  night  and  the  troops  were  held  in  readiness 
to  move  at  a  moment's  notice.  The  orders  to  withdraw 
reached  Thomas  about  six  o'clock  p.m.,  aud  the  movement 
commenced  about  nine  p.m. 

Brannan's  division  was  posted  at  six  p.m.  on  the  road 
about  half  way  from  Rossville  to  Chattanooga,  covering  the 
movement.  Orders  were  sent  by  Thomas  for  each  division 
commander  to  throw  out  a  strong  skirmish  line,  to  be  with- 
drawn at  daylight,  concealing  the  movement  to  the  rear. 
This  line  was  to  be  supportod  by  Baird's  division  and 
Minty's  brigade  of  cavalry,  which  was  to  retire  after  the 
skirmishers  were  withdrawn.  During  the  night  the  move- 
ment was  completed  without  the  loss  of  a  single  man,  and 
at  seven  o'clock  on  the  morning  of  the  22d,  the  Army  of  the 
Cumberland,  again  united,  was  in  position,  holding  the  cov- 
eted prize,  still  strong  enough  to  prevent  the  enemy  from  at- 
tempting further  to  dispute  our  possession  of  the  town. 
The  temporary  works  were  strengthened  from  day  to  day 
until  all  apprehension  of  an  attack  from  the  enemy  on  the 
front  was  at  an  end. 

Taking  all  the  surroundings  into  consideration,  the  cam- 
paign from  the  western  slopes  of  the  Cumberland  Mountains, 
ending  in  the  battle  of  Chickamauga,  was  the  most  brilliant 
one  of  the  war,  made  as  it  was,  in  the  face  of  the  strong 
column  of  the  enemy,  whose  business  it  was  to  watch  every 
movement,  and  as  far  as  possible  to  retard  and  cripple  the 
advance.  Rosecrans,  with  his  masterly  manoeuvring,  in  every 
instance  deceived  his  opponent  down  to  the  withdrawal  of 
Bragg  from  Chattanooga.     While  recognizing  the  genius  of 


216  THE  ARMY   OF   THE   CUMBERLAND. 

the  military  leader  who  could  plan  the  campaign  that  was 
made  from  the  time  of  the  crossing  of  the  Cumberland 
Mountains,  Bragg  regarded  the  obstacles  to  be  overcome  on 
such  a  campaign  so  stupendous  that  he  was  incredulous  that 
any  movement  south  of  the  Tennessee  was  contemplated  by 
the  Federal  leader.  Every  preparation  was  made  by  Bragg 
to  meet  the  crossing  of  our  army  over  the  Tennessee  north 
of  Chattanooga,  watching  all  the  fords  with  strong  detach- 
ments of  infantry  and  artillery,  holding  the  main  portion  of 
his  command  ready  to  move  to  the  north  at  any  moment,  he 
watched  the  movement  of  our  troops  through  the  Sequatchie 
Valley  and  so  on  to  the  Tennessee.  Withdrawing  his  only 
brigade  that  was  south  and  west  of  Chattanooga  on  the  ad- 
vance of  Crittenden,  he  threw  open  the  gateway  for  Bose- 
crans's  advance.  When  the  full  scope  of  the  movement 
dawned  upon  him,  Bragg  abandoned  Chattanooga  and 
gathered  his  troops  wherever  he  could  reach  them  from  all 
quarters  to  concentrate  for  the  destruction  of  our  army. 
Bragg  never  intended  his  withdrawal  from  Chattanooga  to 
be  permanent ;  all  the  indications  he  left  behind  him  pointed 
that  way.  None  of  the  bridges  were  destroyed  as  he  retired. 
All  storehouses,  hospitals,  and  other  buildings  used  by  his 
army  were  left  standing,  and  Bosecrans's  mistake  was  in  con- 
struing Bragg's  withdrawal  to  be  a  demoralized  retreat  and 
in  ordering  his  army  to  pursue  before  this  was  definitely 
determined.  However,  all  advices  that  Kosecrans  had  were 
to  the  effect  that  the  rebels  were  in  hasty  flight  and  would 
not  stop  anywhere  north  of  Dalton,  and  that  their  probable 
destination  was  Borne.  This  information  was  sent  to  him 
from  Washington,  and  Bragg  aided  in  confirming  this  belief 
by  sending  numbers  of  his  soldiers  as  "  deserters  "  into  the 
Federal  lines  with  the  same  report. 

As  late  as  the  11th,  Halleck  telegraphed  Rosecrans  that 


THE  BATTLE  OP  CHICKAMAUGA.  217 

after  lie  occupied  "  the  mountain  passes  to  the  west  of  Dal- 
ton"  it  would  be  determined  what  his  future  movements 
would  be ;  and  on  the  13th,  Halleck  telegraphed  Bosecrans 
that  if  Bragg  should  go  to  Alabama  he  must  not  be  al- 
lowed to  re-enter  Middle  Tennessee.  On  the  13th,  Foster,  at 
Fortress  Monroe,  telegraphed  Halleck  that  trains  of  ears  had 
been  running  day  and  night  southward  for  the  past  thirty-six 
hours.  On  the  following  day  Foster  sent  Halleck  another 
despatch,  that  Longstreet's  corps  was  reported  going  south, 
which  Meade  on  the  same  day  confirmed.  Then  Halleck 
sent  urgent  messages  to  Hurlbut  and  Burnside  to  move  to 
Bosecrans's  support.  But  it  was  too  late.  These  commands 
were  many  days'  marches  away,  and  at  that  moment  the 
Army  of  the  Cumberland  was  engaged  in  the  earlier  move- 
ments of  the  life  and  death  straggle  it  was  peremptorily 
ordered  by  Halleck  to  encounter  alone  with  its  old  enemy, 
under  Bragg,  heavily  re-enforced,  while  large  numbers  of 
Federal  troops  which  might  have  been  within  helping  dis- 
tance, had  orders  been  given  in  due  season,  as  asked  for  by 
Bosecrans,  remained  inactive. 

It  was  not  until  McCook  had  received  and  partly  exe- 
cuted his  orders  to  occupy  Alpine  that  the  actual  facts  as  to 
Bragg's  movements  were  developed,  and  that  he  was  concen- 
trated at  La  Fayette,  there  waiting  for  reinforcements,  but 
strong  enough  without  them  to  crush  the  Army  of  the 
Cumberland  in  detail.  Bosecrans,  when  aware  of  Bragg's 
movements,  grasped  the  situation  at  once.  Bending  every 
energy  to  the  concentration  of  his  army  before  Bragg  should 
strike,  on  the  12th  he  issued  orders  for  McCook's  immediate 
return,  and  despatched  the  same  in  all  haste  by  courier. 
Hearing  nothing  definite  from  McCook,  on  the  next  day 
Bosecrans  repeated  his  orders  and  duplicated  them  in  the 
afternoon  of  that  day.  Still  learning  nothing  positive  as  to 
VII.— 10 


218  THE  ARMY   OF  THE  CUMBERLAND. 

McCook's  movements,  on  the  14th  repeated  orders  were 
sent  to  him  urging  him  to  consummate  his  rearward  move- 
ment with  all  possible  haste.  After  a  sleepless  night,  Bose- 
crans  on  the  15th  left  Chattanooga  for  the  front,  to  hasten,  if 
possible,  McCook's  movements.  After  another  sleepless 
night,  information  was  had  from  McCook  as  to  the  position 
of  his  command,  and  on  the  17th  the  concentration  of  the 
army  was  effected  in  McLemore's  Cove,  five  days  after  Mc- 
Cook's first  orders  were  dated. 

The  delay  attending  McCook's  movements  was  almost  fatal 
to  the  Army  of  the  Cumberland.  Had  Bragg  received  his 
promised  reinforcements  at  the  date  he  expected  them,  our 
army  would  in  all  probability  have  been  completely  annihil- 
ated in  detail.  McCook  claims  that  his  delay  was  only  inci- 
dent to  the  route  he  was  compelled  to  take  to  join  Thomas. 
This  took  him  back  over  Lookout  Mountain,  to  Valley  Head, 
then  down  that  valley,  crossing  the  mountain  again  at  Coop- 
er's Gap,  and  then  up  and  down  Missionary  Eidge  into  Mc- 
Lemore's Cove,  a  long,  difficult  road,  nearly  all  of  it  over 
rough  mountains.  This  route,  McCook  from  the  information 
received,  regarded  as  the  better  one  to  take,  as  between  it 
and  the  one  on  which  he  was  ordered  to  move,  which  was  a 
road  on  the  mountain  into  the  head  of  McLemore's  Cove, 
through  Dougherty's  Gap. 

The  battle  for  Chattanooga  would  never  have  been  fought 
at  Chickamauga  had  not  the  safety  of  McCook's  corps  de- 
manded it.  Could  the  Army  of  the  Cumberland  have  been 
withdrawn  in  safety  to  Chattanooga  and  there  concentrated 
behind  earthworks,  as  it  was  later,  while  Bragg  doubtless 
would  have  made  his  attack  there,  yet  the  surroundings 
would  have  been  far  more  favorable  for  our  army,  especially 
as  the  troops  afterward  sent  might  have  reached  Eosecrana 
in  time  to  have  defeated  Bragg,  as  he  was  later  at  the  battle 


THE   BATTLE  OF  CHICKAMAUGA.  219 

of  Missionary  Ridge.  But  the  reinforcements  that  were 
hurried  from  all  points  after  the  disaster,  by  the  officials  at 
Washington  were  not  to  benefit  Rosecrans. 

While  the  battle  of  the  19th  was  severe  at  times,  and  some 
slight  advantages  were  gained  by  the  enemy,  still  nothing  had 
been  accomplished  to  mark  that  day's  fighting  as  a  great,  dis- 
tinctive battle.  The  delay  on  the  part  of  Negley  in  report- 
ing as  ordered,  to  Thomas  on  the  left,  placed  that  position 
in  extreme  peril,  had  Polk  made  his  attack  as  ordered  at  day- 
dawn  on  the  20th.  Fortunately,  Polk  slept  outside  of  his 
lines  that  night — not  as  he  was  accustomed  to — and  was  not 
awakened  as  early  as  he  would  have  been  had  he  remained 
in  camp.  For  this  reason  the  attack,  was  not  made  until 
after  Beatty's  brigade  had  reached  Baird's  left.  While  this 
was  too  weak  to  successfully  resist  the  attack,  still  with  this 
command  rallied  after  it  was  driven  back  and  aided  by  the 
troops  sent  to  its  support,  Thomas  was  able  to  repulse 
Breckinridge's  first  charge  of  the  morning.  The  delay  from 
six  o'clock  until  after  nine  was  of  great  service  to  the  Army 
of  the  Cumberland.  Negley's  delay  in  reporting  at  an  early 
hour  with  his  entire  division  was  owing  to  Wood's  failure  to 
relieve  him.  Sheridan  had  at  an  earlier  hour  been  ordered 
to  Negley's  position  on  his  front,  but  Thomas  representing 
the  urgency  of  the  movement,  Crittenden  was  ordered  to 
send  Wood,  who  was  only  a  short  distance  from  Negley. 
Wood,  on  receiving  his  orders  to  relieve  Negley,  simply 
moved  forward  and  occupied  the  position  that  had  been 
vacated  by  Negley's  reserve  brigade,  already  started  for 
Thomas's  left.  On  Rosecrans's  return  from  the  extreme 
right,  he  found  that  Negley  had  not  yet  reported  to  Thomas, 
although  more  than  an  hour  had  elasped  since  he  was  so 
ordered,  and  then  discovered  that  Wood  had  failed  to  re- 
lieve him  on  the  front.     Repeating  his  orders  in  such  plain 


220  THE   ARMY    OF   THE   CUMBERLAND. 

English  that  there  could  be  no  further  misapprehension  of 
them,  Roseerans  moved  Wood's  division  into  position,  re- 
lieved Negley  at  once,  and  started  him  in  all  haste  to 
Thomas.  Negley  did  not  reach  the  left  until  after  ten 
o'clock.  Roseerans,  impatient  at  the  delay  that  occurred  in 
the  execution  of  this  order,  expressed  himself  very  forcibly 
to  Wood,  much  to  the  dissatisfaction  of  the  latter.  After 
seeing  Negley  at  last  en  route  to  Thomas,  Roseerans  then 
went  to  the  right  and  was  watching  the  movements  of  the 
troops  when  the  word  reached  him  of  the  supposed  gap  to 
the  right  of  Reynolds,  on  the  left  of  Wood.  Rosecrans's 
plan  of  battle  being  to  keep  his  line  well  closed  up  on  the 
left,  he  directed  an  aid  to  send  Wood  an  order  to  close  up 
on  Reynolds,  which  he  did  as  follows. 

Headquarters  of  the  Army  of  the  Cumberland. 
Brigadier- General  Wood,  Commanding  Division: 

The  General  Commanding  directs  that  you  close  up  on  Reynolds  as 
fast  as  possible,  and  support  him, 

Respectfully,  etc., 

FRANK  S.  BOND, 
Major  and  Aid-de-Camp. 

This  order  was  written  by  an  officer  who  had  no  military 
experience  prior  to  the  war,  and,  as  the  order  shows  on  its 
face,  embraced  much  more  than  the  General  Commanding 
intended  it  should.  The  orderly  who  carried  this  order 
to  Wood  reported  on  his  return  that  "  General  Wood  on 
receipt  of  the  order  remarked  that  he  '  was  glad  the  order 
was  in  writing,  as  it  was  a  good  thing  to  have  for  future 
reference.'  That  he  carefully  took  out  his  note-book,  safely 
deposited  the  order  in  it,  and  then  proceeded  to  execute  it." 
Wood's  official  report  contains  the  order  written  out  in  full. 
He  says  that  it  was  eleven   o'clock  when  it  reached  him. 


THE  BATTLE  OF  CHICKAMAUGA.  221 

"  General  McCook  was  with  me  when  I  received  it.  I  in- 
formed him  that  I  would  immediately  cany  it  into  execu- 
tion, and  suggested  to  him  that  he  should  close  up  his 
command  rapidly  on  my  right,  to  prevent  the  occurrence 
of  a  gap  in  the  line.  He  said  he  would  do  so,  and  imme- 
diately rode  away." 

McCook  says,  in  reference  to  the  movement  of  Sheridan 
to  the  aid  of  Thomas,  which  he  had  just  ordered,  "  Simul- 
taneously with  this  movement,  and  much  to  my  surprise, 
Wood's  division  left  the  position  it  had  in  line  of  battle  on 
Davis's  left,  marching  by  the  left  flank,  leaving  a  wide  gap 
in  the  line."  Wood  also  says  in  his  official  report  that 
when  he  started  to  execute  the  order  he  met  Thomas,  and 
told  him  of  his  order.  He  says,  "  I  exhibited  my  order  to 
him,  and  asked  him  whether  he  would  take  the  responsi- 
bility of  changing  it.  He  replied  he  would,  and  I  then 
informed  him  that  I  would  move  my  command  to  the  sup- 
port of  General  Baird."  The  first  mention  Thomas  makes 
in  his  official  report  of  seeing  Wood  is  when  in  riding 
"  toward  the  crest  of  the  hill,"  coming  from  the  left,  he 
met  Wood  on  the  way,  and  directed  him  to  take  position 
on  Brannan's  right.  Later,  he  says,  "  About  the  time  that 
Wood  took  up  his  position,  General  Gordon  Granger  ap- 
peared," etc.  This  was  over  three  hours  after  what  Gen- 
eral Wood  styles  "  the  disastrous  event  of  the  right "  oc- 
curred. It  seems  strange,  if  Wood  was  properly  executing 
an  order  from  the  Commanding  General,  that  he  should  try 
so  hard  to  shield  his  action  by  the  authority  of  these  two 
corps  commanders,  especially  when  he  was  under  the  direct 
command  of  neither  of  them. 

General  Wood  was  a  graduate  of  West  Point,  had  been 
in  the  army  all  his  life,  and  knew  the  full  meaning  of  all 
technical  terms  used  to  describe  military  movements.     The 


222  THE  ARMY   OP  THE  CUMBERLAND. 

order  bore  on  its  face  a  direction  to  him  to  make  a  move- 
ment with  his  front  in  line  of  battle,  and  at  the  same  time 
to  occupy  a  position  in  the  rear  of  the  division,  on  which 
he  was  ordered  to  join  his  left  in  line  on  the  immediate 
battle-front.  He  knew  he  could  not  execute  the  order  lit- 
erally as  given,  and  from  the  wording  of  it  must  have 
known  that  there  was  some  mistake  about  it.  Instead  of 
sending  a  short  distance  to  the  rear,  or  going  himself  to 
Rosecrans  and  finding  out  just  what  was  meant  by  the 
order,  he  chose  to  give  it  a  meaning  that  it  was  never  in- 
tended to  convey,  and  moved  to  the  rear  from  the  front  of 
battle,  when  he  knew,  as  he  says  in  his  report,  "  although  I 
had  not  been  seriously  engaged  at  any  time  during  the 
morning,  I  was  well  satisfied  the  enemy  was  in  considerable 
force  in  my  immediate  front."  Wood  says  in  his  official 
report,  "  Reynolds's  division  was  posted  on  the  left  of  Bran- 
nan's  division,  which  in  turn  was  on  the  left  of  the  position 
I  was  just  quitting  ;  I  had  consequently  to  pass  my  command 
in  the  rear  of  Brannan's  division  to  close  up  on  and  go 
into  the  support  of  Reynolds."  If  "  Reynolds's,-  division  was 
posted  on  the  left  of  Brannan's  division,"  then  there  was 
no  gap,  and  no  place  for  Wood  to  place  his  division  as 
ordered,  and  he  knew  it.  He  could  support  Reynolds,  but 
to  do  this  he  was  compelled  to  disobey  the  first  part  of 
his  order,  which  in  its  spirit  and  intent  ivas  to  keep  him  on 
the  line  of  battle,  simply  moving  his  division  to  the  left. 
This  space  by  his  own  official  report  he  shows  was  occupied 
by  Brannan's  division,  and  with  this  knowledge  he  under- 
took to  execute  an  order  that  directed  him  to  make  an 
impossible  movement  rather  than  ask  an  explanation  of  it 
from  his  commanding  officer.  No  wonder  he  wanted  to 
keep  his  order  safe  where  he  could  produce  it  if  occasion 
required.      Wood,  irritated  at  the  reprimand  of  Rosecrans 


THE   BATTLE  OF  CHICKAMAUGA.  223 

earlier  in  the  day,  intent  on  maintaining  his  dignity,  chose 
rather  to  undertake  to  carry  out  an  order  in  the  execution 
of  which  he  felt  safe,  so  long  as  he  had  it  in  writing  and 
where  he  could  produce  it  if  occasion  demanded  it,  than  to 
suspend  its  execution  long  enough  to  ride  a  short  distance 
to  the  real',  and  find  out  just  what  the  order  meant ;  and  to 
this  extent  he  is  responsible  for  the  great  disaster  which  swept 
the  right  wing  of  the  Army  of  the  Cumberland  from  the 
field  of  battle  on  the  20th.  That  Wood  must  have  known 
that  there  was  a  mistake  in  regard  to  the  order  is  plain,  from 
the  fact  that  he  himself  says  that  his  troops  had  not  been 
seriously  engaged  that  morning.  It  was  hardly  possible  that 
Beynolds's  division,  which  was  only  a  division  front  from  his, 
could  be  so  hardly  pressed  as  to  need  supports,  and  that  his 
division  should  "not  be  seriously  engaged."  In  fact,  when 
Wood  undertook  to  carry  out  this  order,  he  says  he  met 
Thomas  and  was  told  by  him  that  Reynolds  did  not  need 
supports,  and  that  he,  Wood,  "  had  better  move  to  the 
support  of  General  Baird,  posted  on  the  extreme  left,  who 
needed  assistance,"  showing  that  the  conflict  had  as  yet 
not  reached  down  the  line  to  Eeynolds.  The  spirit  in 
which  General  Wood  fought  the  battle  of  Chickamauga  is 
shown  by  the  following  extract  from  his  official  report, 
where,  in  speaking  of  Garfield's  arrival  on  the  battlefield 
later  in  the  afternoon  of  the  20th,  he  says,  "  After  the  dis- 
astrous event  of  the  right,  General  Garfield  made  his  way 
back  to  the  battlefield,  showing  thereby  that  the  road  was 
open  to  all  who  might  choose  to  follow  it  where  duty  called.'' 
After  Wood  reported  to  Thomas  there  was  no  more  splendid 
fighting  done  on  that  field  of  terrific  conflict  on  the  20th  than 
was  done  by  Thomas  J.  Wood  and  his  division.  To  the  last 
he  aided  Thomas  in  holding  Horseshoe  Ridge,  and  was  one 
of  the  last  divisions  to  retire. 


224       THE  ARMY  OF  THE  CUMBERLAND. 

In  the  tide  that  swept  down  the  Dry  Valley  road,  Rose- 
crans  was  caught  with  the  members  of  his  staff.  He  breasted 
this  for  a  while,  and  endeavored  to  join  his  left  and  cen- 
tre tinder  Thomas  by  a  direct  route.  After  riding  along  a 
short  distance,  under  the  heavy  fire  of  the  rebels  with  both 
artillery  and  musketry,  he  discovered  that  that  road  was 
effectually  closed  by  the  enemy  in  strong  force.  He  then 
started  over  the  ridge  to  the  Dry  Valley  road,  and  made 
his  way  as  rapidly  as  possible  through  the  swarming 
masses  of  broken  troops  from  the  right  of  the  battlefield  to 
Rossville,  with  the  intention  of  joining  Thomas  from  that 
place  down  the  La  Fayette  road  if  the  left  and  centre  were 
not  also  in  rout,  and  on  the  road  to  Chattanooga.  On 
reaching  Rossville,  Rosecrans  and  Garfield  halted  in  the 
midst  of  the  driving  masses  of  teamsters,  stragglers,  and 
fugitives  from  Thomas's  command,  all  striving  in  hot  haste 
to  be  among  the  first  to  reach  Chattanooga.  Making  in- 
quiry of  these  men  as  to  the  condition  of  affairs  at  the 
front,  they  were  informed  "that  the  entire  army  was  de- 
feated, and  in  retreat  to  Chattanooga."  "That  Rosecrans 
and  Thomas  were  both  killed,  and  that  McCook  and  Crit- 
tenden were  prisoners."  Asking  a  small  detachment  of 
troops  the  command  they  belonged  to,  Rosecrans  was  in- 
formed Negley's  division.  He  then  asked  as  to  the  where- 
abouts of  Negley.  He  was  informed  that  he  was  a  short 
distance  from  Rossville,  though  some  distance  from  the 
battlefield,  "  rallying  stragglers,"  and  that  the  entire  divi- 
sion "was  knocked  all  to  pieces."  Knowing  that  one  of 
the  last  orders  he  had  given  on  the  battlefield  was  for 
Negley's  division  to  report  to  Thomas  to  take  position  on 
his  extreme  left,  Rosecrans  was  satisfied  that  if  these 
soldiers  reported  truly  the  left  and  centre  were  routed  and 
that   the  whole  army  as  a  broken  mass  would  be  back  in 


THE  BATTLE  OP  CHICKAMAUGA.  225 

Chattanooga  very  shortly.  At  this  time  there  was  a  lull  in 
the  firing  at  the  front.  Dismounting  from  their  horses, 
Eosecrans  and  Garfield  placing  their  ears  to  the  ground, 
endeavored  to  determine  from  the  sound  as  it  reached 
them  the  truth  of  the  reported  rout.  Hearing  no  artillery 
firing,  and  detecting  only  what  appeared  to  be  a  scattering 
fire  of  musketry,  the  conclusion  was  forced  on  Eosecrans  that 
his  army  was  entirely  broken.  His  information  prior  to 
the  battle  led  him  to  believe  that  the  rebels  outnumbered 
him  two  to  one,  and  if  this  proved  true,  the  disaster  in  part 
could  be  accounted  for.  Conferring  with  Garfield  as  to 
what  was  the  best  thing  to  be  done  under  the  circum- 
stances, Garfield  told  him  that  if  these  reports  were  true 
that  then  his,  Eosecrans's,  place  was  in  Chattanooga,  where 
he  could  receive  and  reorganize,  if  possible,  his  army  on 
its  reaching  that  place.  That  he,  of  all  persons,  had  more 
influence  with  the  army,  and  if  it  was  broken  that  his  duty 
was  to  go  to  that  place  and  make  such  disposition  of  the 
troops  as  might  possibly  save  the  army  from  complete  de- 
struction. That  he,  Garfield,  would  ride  to  the  front,  try 
and  find  Thomas,  if  alive,  and  would  report  immediately 
to  Eosecrans  at  Chattanooga  as  to  the  condition  of  affairs  at 
the  front.  Unfortunately,  this  plan  was  carried  out.  The 
reverse  of  this  should  have  been  done.  Eosecrans  should 
at  once  have  gone  to  the  front,  and  by  his  presence  there 
aided,  as  he  did  at  Stone's  Eiver,  more  than  any  other  thing 
to  retrieve  the  fortunes  of  the  day,  and  pluck  victory  from 
disaster.  Had  Eosecrans  gone  to  the  front,  and  discovered 
from  a  personal  observation  the  true  condition  of  affairs,  and 
the  spirit  and  morale  of  the  troops  there,  the  chances  are 
that  he  never  would  have  ordered  their  retirement  to  Eoss- 
ville  the  night  of  the  20th.  That  was  the  turning-point,  and 
his  hour  had  arrived. 
10* 


226       THE  ARMY  OF  THE  CUMBERLAND. 

On  reaching  Chattanooga,  General  Eosecrans  rode  up  to 
Department  Headquarters  there,  and  was  helped  from  his 
horse  into  the  house.  He  had  the  appearance  of  one  broken 
in  spirit,  and  as  if  he  were  bearing  up  as  best  he  could  under 
terrible  blow,  the  full  force  and  effect  of  which  he  himself 
did  not  at  that  time  clearly  perceive  and  only  partly  felt. 
This  was  aboiit  four  o'clock  in  the  afternoon.  He  had  been 
in  the  saddle  all  day  from  before  daylight,  with  nothing  to 
eat  since  then.  Rarely  has  mortal  man  been  called  on  to 
undergo  the  terrible  mental  strain  that  had  been  on  him 
during  the  week  just  past,  of  which  for  two  nights  in  succes- 
sion his  anxiety  for  McCook  was  so  great  as  to  prevent  his 
sleeping.  During  the  past  week  the  peril  of  his  army 
had  weighed  on  him  to  the  extent  that  his  nervous  system 
was  stretched  to  its  utmost  tension.  When  he  saw  the 
rout  of  his  right,  supposing  that  it  extended  to  his  entire 
army,  the  blow  was  so  strong  that  it  staggered  him.  A  short 
time  after  Eosecrans  arrived,  McCook  and  Crittenden,  also 
caught  in  the  drift  from  the  right,  reached  headquarters. 
"While  seated  in  the  adjutant-general's  office  comparing  notes 
with  each  other  as  to  the  events  of  the  day,  Eosecrans  re- 
ceived a  despatch  from  Garfield,  who  had  reached  the  front. 
Hastily  reading  it  over  he  exclaimed,  "  Thank  God ! "  and  read 
the  despatch  aloud.  In  it  Garfield  announced  his  safe  arrival 
at  the  front,  that  he  was  then  with  Thomas,  who  had  seven 
divisions  intact  with  a  number  of  detachments,  that  Thomas 
had  just  repulsed  a  heavy  assault  of  the  rebels,  and  felt  con- 
fident that  he  could  successfully  resist  all  attacks  against 
his  position.  Waving  this  over  his  head  Eosecrans  said, 
"This  is  good  enough,  the  day  isn't  lost  yet."  Turning  to 
McCook  and  Crittenden  he  said,  "  Gentlemen,  this  is  no  place 
for  you.  Go  at  once  to  your  commands  at  the  front."  He 
then  directed  Wagner,  in  command  of  the  post,  to  take  his 


THE  BATTLE  OF  CHICKAMAUGA.  227 

entire  brigade,  stop  the  stragglers  and  all  others  from  the 
front  on  the  edge  of  the  town,  and  ordered  rations  and  am- 
munition for  his  troops  to  be  at  once  sent  out  to  meet  them 
at  Rossville. 

During  the  heavy  fighting  of  the  20th,  Thomas  was  the 
only  general  officer  on  the  field  of  rank  above  a  division  com- 
mander. Learning  some  time  later  in  the  day  of  the  disas- 
ter on  our  right,  he  gathered  his  troops  together  from  all 
parts  of  the  field  to  the  position  selected  by  himself  after 
the  break  on  the  right.  Here  in  a  more  marked  degree  even 
than  at  Stone's  River,  he  displayed  his  great  staying  quali- 
ties. Posting  his  troops  on  the  lines  he  designated,  he,  so  to 
speak,  placed  himself  with  his  back  against  a  rock  and  re- 
fused to  be  driven  from  the  field.  Here  he  stayed,  despite 
the  fierce  and  prolonged  assaults  of  the  enemy,  repulsing 
every  attack.  And  when  the  sun  went  down  he  was  still 
there.  Well  was  he  called  the  "Rock  of  Chickamauga,'» 
and  trebly  well  for  the  army  of  the  Cumberland  that  George 
H.  Thomas  was  in  command  of  the  left  at  that  battle.  On 
the  20th,  when  the  hour  of  supreme  trial  came  and  he  was 
left  on  the  field  with  less  than  one  half  of  the  strength  of 
the  army  that  the  day  before  had  been  barely  able  to  hold 
its  own  against  the  rebel  assaults,  he  formed  his  25,000 
troops  on  "  Horseshoe  Ridge,"  and  successfully  resisted  for 
nearly  six  long  hours  the  repeated  attacks  of  that  same  rebel 
army,  largely  reinforced  until  it  numbered  twice  his  com- 
mand, when  it  was  flushed  with  victory  and  determined  on 
his  utter  destruction.  There  is  nothing  finer  in  history  than 
Thomas  at  Chickamauga. 

All  things  considered,  the  battle  of  Chickamauga  for  the 
forces  engaged  was  the  hardest  fought  and  the  bloodiest 
battle  of  the  Rebellion.  Hindman,  who  fought  our  right 
at  Horseshoe  Ridge,  says  in  his  official  report  that  he  had 


228  THE  ARMY   OF   THE  CUMBERLAND. 

"  never  known  Federal  troops  to  fight  so  well,"  and  that  he 
"never  saw  Confederate  soldiers  fight  better."  The  largest 
number  of  troops  Eosecrans  had  of  all  arms  on  the  field 
during  the  two  days'  fighting  was  55,000  effective  men. 
While  the  return  of  the  Army  of  the  Cumberland  for  Sep- 
tember 20,  1863,  shows  67,548  "  present  for  duty  equipped," 
still,  taking  out  the  troops  guarding  important  points  within 
the  Department,  the  actual  force  was  reduced  to  the  figures 
just  given.  Of  Gordon  Granger's  nine  brigades,  only  two 
were  on  the  battlefield.  Wagner,  of  Wood's  division,  was  in 
Chattanooga,  and  Dan  McCook  was  holding  Eossville.  Post's 
brigade  was  guarding  the  wagon  trains  and  was  not  in  the 
action.  Eosecrans  losses  aggregated  killed,  1,687  ;  wounded, 
9,394;  missing,  5,255.  Total  loss,  16,336.  Bragg,  during  the 
battle,  when  his  entire  five  corps  were  engaged,  had  about 
70,000  effective  troops  in  line.  Among  Bragg's  troops  were 
large  numbers  of  prisoners  of  war  captured  at  Yicksburg 
and  Port  Hudson,  who  had  been  falsely  declared  by  the 
rebel  authorities  as  exchanged  and  released  from  their 
parole,  and  in  violation  of  the  cartel  were  again  placed  in 
battle.  His  losses,  in  part  estimated,  were  2,673  killed, 
16,274  wounded,  and  2,003  missing,  a  total  of  20,950.  A 
full  report  of  the  rebel  losses  was  never  made. 

To  the  enemy  the  results  of  the  engagement  proved  a 
victory  barren  of  any  lasting  benefits,  and  produced  no  ade- 
quate results  to  the  immense  drain  on  the  resources  of  his 
army.  In  a  number  of  places  Bragg's  official  report  shows 
that  his  army  was  so  crippled  that  he  was  not  able  to 
strengthen  one  portion  of  his  line,  when  needed,  with  troops 
from  another  part  of  the  field,  and  after  the  conflict  was 
over  his  arcuy  was  so  cut  up  that  it  was  impossible  for  him 
to  follow  up  his  apparent  success  and  secure  possession  of 
the  objective   point  of  the  campaign— Chattanooga.     This 


THE  BATTLE   OF  CHICKAMAUGA.  229 

great  gateway  of  the  mountains  remaining  in  possession  of 
the  Army  of  the  Cumberland,  after  Bragg  had  paid  the  heavy 
price  he  did  at  Chickamauga,  proves  that  his  battle  was  a 
victory  only  in  name,  and  a  careful  examination  of  the  re- 
sults and  their  cost  will  show  how  exceedingly  small  it  was 
to  the  enemy. 


CHAPTER  Xm. 

THE  SIEGE   OF  CHATTANOOGA. 

On  taking  position  at  Chattanooga,  after  the  battle,  the 
Army  of  the  Cumberland,  between  the  rebel  troops  in  front 
and  the  forces  of  Nature  in  the  rear,  was  practically  in  a 
state  of  siege.  The  lines  around  .the  town  were  held  by  our 
troops  behind  extensive  rifle-pits,  strengthened  with  heavy 
earthworks  covering  all  approaches  on  the  front.  Bragg's 
army  moved  up  immediately,  and  invested  our  lines,  throw- 
ing up  rifle-pits  within  a  short  distance  of  those  of  our  army. 
To  the  rear  of  these  Bragg  threw  up  two  other  lines  of  in- 
trenchments  and  on  the  right  of  his  command  erected  a  more 
permanent  line  of  earthworks  on  the  crest  of  Missionary 
Bidge,  massing  however,  the  bulk  of  his  troops  in  Chatta- 
nooga Valley  on  our  immediate  front.  As  our  army  retired 
within  its  works  at  Chattanooga,  the  troops  holding  the  road 
over  Lookout  Mountain  were  withdrawn,  and  this  point  was 
immediately  occupied  by  the  enemy  and  strengthened  by 
extensive  works,  Bragg  sending  Longstreet's  corps  into 
Lookout  Valley  to  occupy  the  extreme  left  of  the  besieging 
line,  and  to  cut  off  all  communication  with  Bridgeport,  on 
the  south  bank  of  the  Tennessee  Biver.  The  lines  were  now 
fully  occupied  from  the  river  on  the  north  to  the  bank  south 
of  the  town,  and  the  rebel  army  in  force  on  our  front.  To 
the  rear  the  only  road  that  was  open  was  over  Walling's 
Bidge,  through  Sequatchie  Valley,  down  to  Bridgeport,  a  dis- 


THE  SIEGE  OF   CHATTANOOGA.  231 

tance  of  sixty  miles  ;  the  short  road  on  the  north  side  down 
to  Bridgeport  being  closed  by  the  rebel  batteries  and  sharp- 
shooters, while  their  troops  holding  the  road  to  the  south  of 
the  river  compelled  all  supplies  of  every  kind  to  be  hauled 
over  these  sixty  miles  of  road.  To  thus  supply  the  army 
during  good  weather  was  a  very  great  undertaking,  even 
with  the  teams  of  the  various  commands  in  good  condition, 
but  with  the  rainy  season  that  soon  set  in,  and  the  incessant 
hauling  wearing  out  the  mules,  the  daily  rations  for  the 
army  were  constantly  growing  less  and  less.  On  October 
1st,  Wheeler  crossing  the  Tennessee  with  Martin's  and 
Wharton's  divisions  of  cavalry  moved  up  the  Sequatchie 
Valley  upon  our  line  of  supplies  at  Anderson  cross-roads. 
Here  he  captured  a  large  number  of  trains  loaded  with  ra- 
tions for  the  front,  burned  over  three  hundred  wagons,  and 
killed  a  large  number  of  animals.  Colonel  E.  M.  McCook 
with  his  cavalry  division,  moving  rapidly  from  Bridge- 
port, overtook  Wheeler  on  the  2d,  and  drove  him  with  great 
loss  in  a  sabre  charge  from  the  trains,  recapturing  some 
eight  hundred  mules.  After  this  Wheeler  was  driven  from 
Shelbyville  on  the  6th  by  Mitchell's  cavalry,  and  on  the  8th 
from  Farmington  by  Crook,  and  from  here  he  re-crossed  the 
Tennessee  with  a  small  portion  of  his  command,  the  rest  hav- 
ing been  killed  or  captured.  This  loss  in  wagons,  with  the 
roads  becoming  almost  impassable  by  reason  of  the  heavy 
rains  and  the  growing  weakness  of  the  animals,  lessened 
daily  the  amount  of  supplies  brought  into  the  town,  so  that 
our  troops  were  suffering  for  food  and  were  in  danger  oi 
being  starved  out  of  Chattanooga.  This  was  what  Bragg 
was  quietly  waiting  for.  To  supply  an  army  some  forty 
thousand  strong,  by  wagon  transportation  over  rough  moun- 
tain roads  a  distance  of  sixty  miles,  Bragg  knew  was  an  im- 
possibility, and  that  unless  other  lines  were  opened  up,  the 


232      THE  ARMY  OP  THE  CUMBERLAND. 

evacuation  of  the  place  was  only  a  question  of  time,  and  he 
could  then  walk  in  and  take  undisturbed  possession.  As 
the  forage  became  reduced,  the  artillery  horses,  for  which 
there  was  no  immediate  need,  had  their  rations  cut  off,  and 
they  died  in  large  numbers,  starved  to  death.  The  supplies 
grew  so  small  that  parts  of  crackers  and  corn  dropped  in 
handling  the  packages  were  eagerly  seized  and  eaten  to  stay 
the  demands  of  hunger,  and  still  the  pressure  was  growing 
daily,  and  no  one  knew  how  it  would  ultimately  end.  How- 
ever, not  for  an  instant  was  the  idea  entertained  of  abandon- 
ing the  town,  to  say  nothing  of  the  extreme  hazard  of  at- 
tempting that,  in  the  face  of  the  strong  force  of  the  enemy 
on  our  front.  The  Army  of  the  Cumberland  had  won  Chat- 
tanooga and  there  they  proposed  remaining. 

Immediately  after  the  battle  of  Chiekamauga,  the  authori- 
ties at  Washington  sent  hurried  orders  to  Burnside,  Hurl- 
but  and  Sherman  to  move  forward  without  delay  to  Eose- 
crans's  assistance,  and  on  September  24th  the  latter  was 
informed  that  "  Hooker,  with  some  fifteen  thousand  men," 
was  en  route  from  the  East  as  fast  as  rail  i  could  take  him, 
and  that  he  would  be  in  Nashville  in  about  seven  days. 
While  reinforcements  were  the  thing  needed  before  the  bat- 
tle, now  the  pressing  demand  of  the  hour  was  the  opening 
of  the  line  of  communication  to  the  rear,  over  which  ade- 
quate supplies  could  be  forwarded  to  the  troops  at  the  front. 
To  add  to  the  number  of  men  there  simply  increased  the 
difficulties  of  the  situation. 

On  the  arrival  of  Hooker  with  the  Eleventh  and  Twelfth 
Army  Corps  at  Nashville,  Eosecrans  directed  him  to  take 
position  on  the  line  of  the  Chattanooga  Railroad,  securing 
that  road  from  the  attacks  of  the  rebel  cavalry  while  sup- 
plies were  being  accumulated  at  Stevenson  awaiting  the 
opening  of  communication  with  the  army  at  Chattanooga. 


THE  SIEGE  OF   CHATTANOOGA.  233 

Without  driving  back  the  entire  of  Bragg's  army  in  Lookout 
and  Chattanooga  Valleys,  it  was  impossible  to  use  the  rail- 
road from  Bridgeport  east  in  bringing  up  supplies.  The 
wagon-trains  could  no  longer  be  depended  on,  and,  under 
the  spur  of  necessity,  Rosecrans  was  preparing  a  plan  to 
utilize  the  river  with  boats.  A  new  one  had  been  built  at 
Bridgeport  and  another  captured  at  Chattanooga  had  been 
repaired.  By  thus  using  the  river  he  could  secure  his  sup- 
plies over  a  wagon-road  of  only  eight  miles  from  Kelley's 
Ferry,  via  Brown's  Ferry.  The  course  of  the  Tennessee 
River  at  Chattanooga  is  due  west ;  after  passing  the  town  it 
flows  south  to  the  foot  of  Lookout  Mountain,  from  which 
point  it  then  sweeps,  after  a  short  curve  to  the  northwest, 
due  north,  forming  here  what  is  known  as  "Moccasin  Point." 
Crossing  the  river  at  the  town,  a  road  leads  southwest  across 
this  point  on  to  the  other  side,  where  the  river,  as  it  sweeps 
north,  is  reached  at  Brown's  Ferry.  Shortly  after  passing 
Brown's  Ferry,  the  river  again  makes  a  sharp  bend  to  the 
south,  forming  another  point  of  land  running  northwardly. 
Across  this  point  on  the  east  bank,  as  the  river  passes  south, 
is  Kelley's  Ferry.  At  the  extreme  angle  of  this  bend  the 
river  rushes  through  the  mountains,  which  here  crowd  down 
closely,  forming  a  narrow  channel  through  which  the  waters 
rush  headlong.  This  chasm  is  known  as  the  "  Suck."  The 
velocity  of  the  water  is  so  great  that  steamers  in  high  water 
cannot  stem  the  current  at  this  point,  which  necessitated 
the  landing  of  supplies  at  Kelley's  Ferry,  and  then  hauling 
them  over  land  across  the  bridge  at  Brown's  Ferry  to  Chat- 
tanooga. 

Immediately  after  the  battle,  under  orders  from  the  War 
Department,  the  Twentieth  and  Twenty-first  Army  Corps 
were  consolidated  and  designated  the  Fourth  Army  Corps 
and  Gordon  Granger  was  placed  in  command.    McCook  and 


234  THE   ARMY   OF   THE   CUMBERLAND. 

Crittenden  were  relieved  from  the  command  of  these  corps, 
and  ordered  North  to  await  a  "  Court  of  Inquiry,"  "  upon 
their  conduct  on  September  19th  and  20th." 

By  War  Department  order  of  October  16th,  the  Depart- 
ments of  the  Ohio,  the  Cumberland,  and  the  Tennessee  were 
constituted  "  The  Military  Division  of  the  Mississippi,"  under 
the  command  of  Grant.  By  the  same  order  Rosecrans  was  re- 
lieved of  the  command  of  the  Department  and  Army  of  the 
Cumberland,  and  Thomas  was  assigned  to  that  command. 
Halleck,  in  his  report  of  operations  for  the  year  1863,  says 
this  change  was  made  on  the  recommendation  of  General 
Grant.     These  orders  were  promulgated  on  the  19th. 

On  Bosecrans's  return  from  a  visit  to  Brown's  Ferry  and 
Williams's  Island  on  the  19th,  where  he  had  been  with  Wil- 
liam F.  Smith,  his  chief  engineer,  making  his  plans  for 
bringing  supplies  to  that  point,  he  found  the  order  awaiting 
him  relieving  him  of  his  command.  Quietly  making  his 
preparations  for  his  departure  that  night  over  the  mountains 
to  Stevenson,  he  wrote  out  his  farewell  order,  to  be  printed 
and  issued  the  next  day,  and,  without  even  bidding  his  staff 
good-bye,  placed  Thomas  in  command  and  started  for  his 
home  in  Cincinnati.  Rosecrans,  in  the  summer  of  1862,  was 
under  Grant  at  Iuka  and  Corinth.  Here  some  hasty  criti- 
cism made  by  him  brought  him  into  collision  with  Grant, 
which  now  bore  fruit. 

When  it  was  known  that  Rosecrans  had  been  relieved,  and 
that  he  had  left  the  army  for  the  north,  there  was  universal 
regret  that  the  troops  that  had  loved  and  trusted  him  should 
no  longer  follow  his  skilful  leadership.  Every  soldier  in  his 
army  felt  that  he  had  a  personal  friend  in  "  Old  Rosy."  His 
troops  never  for  a  moment  faltered  in  their  devotion  to  him 
or  confidence  in  him.  They  felt  that  he  had  been  made  the 
victim  of  a  foolish  interpretation  of  an  order  that  brought 


THE   SIEGE   OF  CHATTANOOGA.  235 

rain  and  disaster  upon  his  army,  for  which  he  was  not  re- 
sponsible, but  for  which  he  was  made  to  suffer. 

General  Kosecrans,  to  his  subordinates,  was  one  of  the 
most  genial  of  men.  Kind  and  good-natured,  he  at  times 
failed  to  act  as  decisively  as  occasion  required,  deterred  by 
the  fact  that,  should  he  do  so,  some  of  his  subordinates 
would  suffer.  His  restless  activity  led  him  to  give  attention 
to  details  that  he  should  have  been  entirely  relieved  of  by 
his  subordinates.  But  no  amount  of  work  daunted  him. 
He  lived  almost  without  rest  and  sleep,  and  would  wear  out 
two  sets  of  staff  officers  nightly,  and  then,  if  occasion  re- 
quired it,  be  up  and  out  before  daylight.  To  his  superiors 
he  unfortunately  allowed  his  high  spirit  to  get  the  better  of 
his  judgment,  and  many  times  when  he  was  in  the  right  he 
ruined  his  position  by  his  hasty  temper.  His  fame,  despite 
his  enemies— and  no  general  in  the  field  had  stronger  nor 
more  unscrupulous  ones — as  the  greatest  strategist  of  the 
war,  is  permanently  fixed  in  history.  What  it  might  have 
been  had  he  not  been  hampered,  annoyed,  and  insulted  as 
no  other  commanding  general  was  at  any  time  by  both  the 
Secretary  of  War  and  the  General-in-Chief,  is  merely  prob- 
lematical. Personally,  he  regarded  all  this  as  mere  "inci- 
dents of  the  service,"  and  strove  to  the  best  of  his  ability 
to  do  his  whole  duty  to  his  country.  His  combination 
with  Thomas— Kosecrans  to  plan  brilliant  campaigns,  with 
Thomas's  great  abilities  to  aid  him  in  carrying  them  out — 
made  the  Army  of  the  Cumberland  the  great  aggressive  force 
moving  on  the  centre,  gaining  territory  after  each  campaign. 
But  it  was  as  well  for  Kosecrans  and  the  service  that  he  was 
relieved  when  he  was,  with  the  combination  of  the  armies 
under  Grant.  He  had  faithfully  performed  his  duty  up  to 
this  time,  but  now  the  surroundings  were  so  changed  that 
both  for  his  sake  and  the  good  of  the  service  the  change  was 


236       THE  ARMY  OF  THE  CUMBERLAND. 

a  fitting  one  to  be  made.  Roseerans  could  never  again  serve 
as  a  subordinate,  and  as  the  change  was  determined  on, 
when  Grant  arrived  it  was  as  well  for  Roseerans  to  retire. 

When  Anderson  in  1861  applied  for  George  H.  Thomas  to 
be  one  of  the  brigadier-generals  to  accompany  him  to  Ken- 
tucky, to  help  him  in  the  task  he  was  set  to  accomplish 
there,  Mr.  Lincoln  told  him  he  was  afraid  to  give  the  order 
for  Thomas,  as  he  was  a  Southerner,  and  from  Virginia. 
Anderson  and  Sherman,  who  were  present,  both  responded 
in  the  strongest  terms,  vouching  for  Thomas's  earnest  j)a- 
triotism  and  deep  devotion  to  the  Union,  and  the  order  was 
given.  And  now  it  bore  full  fruit.  The  quiet,  patient  sol- 
dier, who  from  his  fii'st  day's  service  in  Kentucky  had  never 
swerved  a  line  from  the  strict  performance  of  his  duty  to 
his  Government,  according  to  his  oath,  without  reference 
to  self,  had  now  met  his  reward.  His  fame  had  steadily 
grown  and  rounded  from  the  time  he  gained  the  first  Fed- 
eral victory  in  the  West,  at  Mill  Springs,  up  to  the  battle  of 
Chickamauga,  where  he  saved  the  Army  of  the  Cumberland 
to  the  nation.  He  had  always  been  the  main  stay  of  that 
army,  holding  the  command  of  the  centre — either  nominally 
or  actually  the  second  in  command.  Upon  his  judgment 
and  military  skill  every  commander  of  that  army  depended, 
and  no  movement  was  made  without  his  approbation.  Yet 
so  modest  was  he  that  his  face  would  color  with  blushes 
when  his  troops  cheered  him,  which  they  did  at  eveiy 
opportunity;  and  so  diffident,  that,  prior  to  the  battle  of 
Chickamauga,  he  doubted  his  ability  to  handle  large  bod- 
ies of  troops  upon  the  battlefield,  and  for  this  reason 
refused  to  accept  the  command  of  that  army,  just  prior  to 
JViTvville,  when  tendered  him.  His  kind  consideration  for 
the  feelings  of  others  was  one  of  his  marked  characteris- 
tics.    With  a  pure  mind  and  large  heart,  his  noble  soul 


THE  SIEGE  OF  CHATTANOOGA.  237 

made  him  one  of  the  greatest  of  Nature's  noblemen — a  true 
gentleman.  The  experience  of  Chickamauga  ripened  his 
powers  and  developed  him  to  his  full  height.  As  the  Gen- 
eral who  won  the  first  victory  in  the  West,  who  saved  an 
army  by  his  skill  and  valor,  and  who  was  the  only  General 
of  the  war  on  either  side  able  to  crush  an  army  on  the  bat- 
tlefield, George  H.  Thomas,  "the  true  soldier,  the  prudent 
and  undaunted  commander,  the  modest  and  incorruptible 
patriot,"  stands  as  the  model  American  soldier,  the  grandest 
figure  of  the  War  of  the  Eebellion. 

One  of  Grant's  first  acts  on  taking  command  was  to  tele- 
graph Thomas  to  hold  Chattanooga  at  all  hazards.  The 
commander  who  had  seen  his  troops  on  less  than  half  rations 
for  nearly  a  month,  with  steadily  approaching  signs  of  star- 
vation, hardly  needed  an  intimation  that  what  had  been 
gained  by  the  sacrifice  on  Chickamauga's  field  was  not  to 
be  yielded  up  without  a  struggle.  Thomas  replied  "We 
will  hold  the  town  till  we  starve."  On  the  24th,  Grant,  in 
company  with  Thomas  and  W.  F.  Smith,  made  a  personal 
inspection  across  the  river  of  the  situation,  with  reference  to 
carrying  out  the  plan  of  Rosecrans  for  the  opening  of  the 
road  by  Brown's  Ferry,  and,  approving  of  it,  Thomas  was 
directed  to  proceed  to  execute  it.  This  plan  required  the 
greatest  secrecy  of  movement,  otherwise  Longstreet's  entire 
command  would  resist  the  landing,  and  contemplated  the 
co-operation  of  Hooker's  moving  up  from  Bridgeport,  hold- 
ing the  road  to  Kelley's  Ferry.  The  latter  was  to  meet  a  force 
sent  from  the  town  down  the  river  in  pontoons  under  cover 
of  night,  which  was  to  seize  the  landing  on  the  left  bank  of 
the  river,  driving  back  the  rebel  pickets  and  fortifying  their 
position,  and  then  swinging  the  bridge  across  the  river. 
Thomas  says  in  his  official  report  of  the  battle  of  Wauhat- 
chie,  that  "  preliminary  steps  had  already  been  taken  to  ex- 


238  THE  ARMY   01'  THE  CUMBERLAND. 

ecute  this  vitally  important  movement  before  the  command 
of  the  Department  devolved  on  me."  Thomas  on  the  23d 
ordered  Hooker  to  concentrate  the  Eleventh  Corps,  and 
Geary's  division  of  the  Twelfth  Corps  at  Bridgeport  and 
sent  him  instructions  as  to  his  movements,  and  directed  him 
to  advance  as  soon  as  possible,  co-operating  with  the  force 
from  Chattanooga.  Hooker  was  also  ordered  to  move  into 
Lookout  Valley,  and  to  protect  the  bridge  when  laid  from 
any  attack  by  Longstreet  in  that  direction.  Thomas  also 
sent  two  brigades  under  Palmer  to  co-operate  with  Hooker. 
Palmer  moved  across  the  river  to  Brown's  Ferry,  and  then 
took  the  road  through  Whitesides  to  Rankin's  Ferry,  estab- 
lishing himself  securely  at  these  points,  protecting  the  river 
communication  from  attack  from  the  south.  Thomas  placed 
W.  F.  Smith  in  charge  of  the  expedition,  and  detached  Tur- 
chin's  and  Hazen's  brigades,  with  three  batteries  under  Major 
John  Mendenhall.  Smith  was  directed  to  organize  a  picked 
force,  armed  from  these  brigades,  to  be  divided  into  fifty 
squads  of  twenty-four  men  each,  under  the  command  of  an 
officer,  who  were  to  float  down  the  river  in  pontoons  that 
night — a  distance  by  the  bends  of  the  river  of  some  nine 
miles.  The  boats  were  placed  under  the  charge  of  Colonel 
T.  R.  Stanley  of  the  Eighteenth  Ohio,  the  bridge  to  be 
placed  in  position  under  direction  of  Captain  P.  V.  Fox, 
First  Michigan  Engineers.  The  troops  under  Hazen  were  to 
take  the  gorge  and  hills  to  the  left,  and  Turchin  was  to  ex- 
tend from  the  gorge  down  the  river.  Turchin  in  command 
of  the  remainder  of  the  troops  marched  across  Moccasin 
Point  to  the  ferry,  where  they  were  to  cross  in  the  same 
boats,  supporting  the  troops  already  landed,  when  the  posi- 
tion was  to  be  strongly  fortified  and  held  by  them  until  the 
arrival  of  Hooker. 

At  midnight  the  troops  who  were  to  take  part  in  the  ex. 


THE  SIEGE   OF  CHATTANOOGA.  239 

pedition  were  inarched  to  the  river  and  placed  in  the  boats 
manned  by  crews  with  oars,  and  on  two  flat  boats.  The  force 
that  marched  under  Turchin  moved  out  under  cover  of  dense 
woods  over  the  point  to  the  ferry,  where  they  remained  in 
readiness  to  cover  the  landing  of  the  troops  coming  down 
the  river.  The  artillery  accompanied  this  part  of  the  com- 
mand and  remained  under  cover. 

At  3  o'clock  a.m.  of  the  27th,  the  boats  moved  out  into  the 
stream  under  cover  of  a  slight  fog.  On  arriving  at  a  point 
some  two  miles  below  the  town,  these  troops  reached  the 
rebel  picket  line  posted  on  the  left  bank  of  the  river.  The 
boats  passed  on  unobserved  by  keeping  close  to  the  right 
hand  shore  until  just  at  the  landing,  when  the  troops  in  the 
first  boat  were  greeted  with  a  volley  from  the  rebel  pickets, 
a  station  being  at  this  landing.  In  perfect  order,  as  previ- 
ously planned,  the  troops  hastily  disembarked,  moved  for- 
ward, occupying  the  crest  of  the  hill  immediately  in  front 
and  commenced  the  work  of  intrenching.  Before  this  was 
completed  the  enemy,  heavily  reinforced,  just  beyond  this 
crest,  moved  forward  to  drive  Hazen  back.  Here  a  stubborn 
little  fight  was  had,  the  rebels  making  a  gallant  charge  with 
partial  success  on  the  right  of  Hazen,  when  they  were  met 
with  the  remainder  of  the  brigade  under  Colonel  Langdon, 
who  charged  at  once  on  their  lines  and  after  a  short  en- 
gagement drove  them  from  the  hill  into  the  valley  beyond. 
Turchin's  brigade  having  crossed  the  river  was  placed  in 
position  on  Hazen's  right,  when  the  enemy  moved  from  the 
front  up  the  valley.  The  rebel  force  here  was  a  thousand 
infantry,  three  pieces  of  artillery,  and  a  squadron  of  cavalry. 

As  soon  as  the  last  of  the  troops  were  over,  work  on  the 
bridge  was  commenced  and  finished  at  a  little  after  four 
o'clock  in  the  afternoon.  For  an  hour  or  so  in  the  morning 
the  work  progressed  under  an  artillery  fire  from  the  rebel 


24:0  THE   ARMY    OF    THE   CUMBERLAND. 

batteries  on  Lookout  Mountain.  Our  losses  were  six  killed, 
twenty-three  wounded,  and  nine  missing.  The  rebels  lost 
six  men  captured  and  six  of  their  dead  were  buried  by  our 
men.  Our  forces  captured  twenty  beeves,  six  pontoons  and 
some  two  thousand  bushels  of  corn.  The  bridge  was  com 
pleted  and  the  position  held  until  the  28th,  when  Hooker's 
command  arrived.  No  attempt  was  made  by  Bragg  to  dis- 
lodge this  force  or  to  destroy  the  bridge.  Hooker  moved 
on  the  road  by  the  base  of  Raccoon  Mountain  into  Lookout 
Valley,  driving  the  rebel  pickets  before  him,  and  occupied 
the  roads  to  Kelley's  and  Brown's  Ferries  through  the  valley. 
Later  in  the  afternoon  of  the  28th,  as  Hooker's  troops  pushed 
down  the  valley,  Howard's  corps  in  the  advance  was  met 
with  a  sharp  volley  of  musketry  from  a  wooded  ridge  near 
the  Wills  Valley  Railroad.  Two  brigades  of  Howard's  com- 
mand were  deployed,  and  advancing,  drove  the  rebels  from 
their  cover  with  the  loss  of  a  few  of  our  men.  As  the  enemy 
retreated  they  burned  the  railroad  bridge  over  Lookout 
Creek.  Hooker  then  went  into  camp  with  Howard's  corps 
at  six  o'clock  in  the  afternoon  about  a  mile  up  the  valley 
from  Brown's  Ferry.  Here  he  learned  of  the  movement  to 
this  place  and  of  the  building  of  the  bridge. 

With  the  object  of  holding  the  road  to  Kelley's  Ferry, 
Geary's  division  was  ordered  to  encamp  near  Wauhatchie, 
Borne  three  miles  up  the  valley  from  Howard's  position. 
This  created  two  camps — the  latter  holding  the  Brown  Ferry 
road — each  camp  separate  and  picketed  by  its  own  command, 
as  the  numbers  of  the  troops  would  not  admit  of  communi- 
cation being  kept  up  between  them  or  of  their  forming  one 
line. 

About  midnight  a  regiment  that  had  been  ordered  by 
Howard  to  hold  the  Chattanooga  road  across  Lookout  Creek, 
had  a  slight  skirmish  with  the  advance  of  the  enemy.     This 


THE  SIEGE  OF  CHATTANOOGA.  241 

was  a  portion  of  Longstreet's  corps  getting  into  position  for 
a  night  attack  on  the  two  encampments.  Dividing  his  com- 
mand into  two  detachments,  Longstreet,  about  an  hour  later, 
with  his  strong  one  on  his  left,  assaulted  Geary's  camp  with 
a  fierce  attack,  driving  in  his  pickets  and  then  charging  on 
the  main  command.  Geary  immediately  formed  his  men  in 
line,  and  for  three  hours  with  heavy  fighting  maintained  his 
position,  although  enveloped  on  three  sides  by  the  enemy, 
repelling  every  attack,  and  finally  charged  on  the  rebels  and 
drove  them  from  beyond  his  front.  The  enemy  here  at- 
tacked in  greatly  superior  numbers,  and  were  only  defeated 
by  the  skill  and  coolness  of  Geary,  aided  by  the  bravery  of 
his  troops.  As  the  sound  of  the  heavy  fire  which  the  enemy 
opened  on  Geary  rolled  down  the  valley,  Hooker  ordered 
Howard  to  double-quick  his  nearest  division,  Schurz's,  to 
Geary's  assistance.  The  division  was  started  at  once,  but 
before  it  had  proceeded  far  it  encountered  the  other  detach- 
ment of  Longstreet's  command,  which  opened  on  our  troops 
with  a  volley  of  musketry.  Hooker  now  determined  that  he 
had  two  fights  on  his  hands.  At  once  detaching  Tyndale's 
brigade,  Howard  charged  the  rebel  lines  on  the  hill  to  the  left 
with  it,  pushing  on  the  other  brigade  to  Geary.  By  this  time 
Steinwehr's  division  of  Howard's  corps  had  arrived  on  the 
ground,  and  it  was  then  discovered  that  the  rebels  were  try- 
ing to  surround  Howard's  camp  and  that  they  occupied  a 
hill  to  the  rear  of  Tyndale's  brigade.  Hooker  ordered  Col- 
onel Orland  Smith  with  his  brigade  to  charge  this  hill,  which 
he  did  up  the  steep  side,  almost  inaccessible  by  daylight, 
reached  the  rebel  intrenchments  under  a  heavy  fire  and 
drove  the  troops  with  the  bayonet,  after  a  severe  engage- 
ment, in  rout  from  the  hill  and  capturing  a  number  of 
prisoners.  Here  General  Greene  and  Colonel  Underwood 
were  severely  wounded.  Tyndale  also  pressing  forward  oc- 
Vol.  VII.— 11 


242  THE  ARMY   OF  THE  CUMBERLAND. 

cupied  the  rebel  line  in  his  front  and  drove  their  forces  be- 
yond his  lines.  The  attack  on  Howard  was  intended  to  hold 
that  command  from  reinforcing  Geary  until  he  was  routed, 
and  then  in  turn  Howard  was  to  be  driven  from  the  field. 

During  the  engagement  the  enemy  opened  with  artillery 
fire  in  the  valley,  aided  by  that  from  the  batteries  on  Look- 
out Mountain,  sending  the  shells  crashing  among  our  troops. 
Their  forces  in  the  valley  were  repulsed  in  every  charge  and 
our  troops  occupied  the  field  at  all  points.  Our  losses  in 
the  attack  were  76  killed,  339  wounded,  and  22  missing,  mak- 
inga  total  of  437.  The  rebel  loss  is  unknown.  Geary  buried 
153  of  the  enemy  on  his  front  alone.  One  hundred  prisoners 
were  captured,  with  a  large  number  of  small  arms.  Thomas 
congratulated  Hooker's  troops  for  the  gallant  repulse  given 
to  their  old  enemy,  Longstreet,  and  adds  :  "  The  bayonet 
charge  of  Howard's  troops,  made  up  the  side  of  a  steep  and 
difficult  hill  over  two  hundred  feet  high,  completely  routing 
the  enemy  from  his  barricades  on  its  top,  and  the  repulse  by 
Geary  of  greatly  superior  numbers  who  attempted  to  sur- 
prise him,  will  rank  among  the  most  distinguished  feats  of 
arms  of  this  war."  Eeinforcements  were  sent  Hooker  by 
Thomas  from  Chattanooga  of  two  brigades  under  Whittaker 
and  John  G.  Mitchell,  but  the  fighting  was  over  before  they 
reached  the  valley. 

"Work  was  now  pushed  rapidly  forward  on  the  road  from 
Brown's  to  Kelley  s  Ferry,  and  this  being  successfully  ac- 
complished by  the  1st  of  November,  the  forces  of  Nature 
were  overcome  and  the  siege  of  Chattanooga  was  at  an  end 
as  to  them.  It  now  remained  to  raise  it  on  the  front,  driv- 
ing Bragg  from  his  strongholds,  Lookout  Mountain,  Chatta- 
nooga Valley,  and  Missionary  Bidge. 


CHAPTER  XIV 

CHATTANOOGA,  LOOKOUT  MOUNTAIN,  AND  MISSIONARY 
RIDGE  BATTLES. 

These  three  detached  actions,  fought  by  different  portions 
of  our  troops,  were  parts  of  a  series  of  operations  for  secur- 
ing our  front  and  driving  the  enemy  from  his  position,  and 
are  known  properly  as  the  Battle  of  Chattanooga.  Grant, 
late  in  October,  ordered  Sherman  with  the  Fifteenth  Army 
Corps  to  press  forward  to  the  Tennessee  River,  cross  at 
Bridgeport  and  push  rapidly  on  to  Chattanooga.  Early  in 
November,  learning  that  Bragg  had  weakened  his  forces  on  our 
front  by  sending  Longstreet's  command  into  East  Tennessee 
to  attack  Burnside,  Grant  was  very  desirous  of  making  an 
attack  at  once  on  the  rebel  forces  on  Lookout  and  Missionary 
Ridge,  but  examining  the  strong  position  occupied  by  Bragg 
at  these  points  and  the  length  of  his  lines,  Grant  became 
convinced  that  to  successfully  operate  against  the  enemy  it 
was  necessary  to  wait  until  Sherman  with  his  command  came 
up.  While  this  force  moved  eastward,  Grant  was  maturing 
his  plans  for  the  engagement.  He  directed  Sherman  to  re- 
port in  person,  which  he  did  on  the  15th,  and  on  consultation 
with  him  and  Thomas  the  general  plan  of  battle  was  sub- 
mitted to  them.  The  main  attack  was  to  be  made  on  the  21st, 
at  daylight,  by  Sherman's  troops,  on  the  north  end  of  Mis- 
sionary Ridge.  To  accomplish  this  his  command  was  to  1  >e 
reinforced  with  one  division  of  the  Army  of  the  Cumberland 


244       THE  ARMY  OF  THE  CUMBERLAND. 

under  Jeff  C.  Davis.  Sherman's  troops — four  divisions — 
were  to  move  from  Brown's  Ferry  through  the  woods  to  the 
north  of  the  town  up  to  the  Tennessee  River,  opposite  the 
mouth  of  Chickamauga  Creek,  where  they  were  to.  cross  on  a 
pontoon  bridge  to  be  swung  there  under  the  supervision  of 
"W.  F.  Smith,  and  the  crossing  of  the  troops  to  be  protected 
by  batteries  under  Brannan,  Thomas's  Chief  of  Artillery. 
After  crossing  the  river,  Sherman  was  to  move  rapidly  for- 
ward, carrying  the  heights  on  the  north  end  of  Missionary 
Bidge  as  far  as  the  tunnel,  if  possible,  before  the  enemy 
could  concentrate  on  his  front,  Thomas  was  to  concentrate 
all  his  troops  in  Chattanooga  Valley  on  his  left  flank,  leav- 
ing only  the  necessary  force  to  defend  the  fortifications  on 
his  right  and  centre  and  to  hold  a  movable  column  of  one 
division  to  move  wherever  needed.  This  division  was  to 
make  a  show  of  threatening  Bragg's  forces  up  the  valley. 
Thomas  was  then  to  effect  a  junction  with  Sherman,  co-oper- 
ate with  him,  advancing  his  left  and  moving  forward  as 
nearly  simultaneously  as  possible,  and  support  him.  Hooker 
on  the  right  in  Lookout  Valley,  was  to  hold  that  jiosition 
with  Geary's  division  and  two  brigades  under  Cruft  from  the 
Fourth  Army  Corps,  ordered  to  report  to  him.  Howard,  on 
Friday,  the  20th,  was  ordered  with  his  corps  to  take  position 
on  the  north  side  of  the  Tennessee,  opposite  Chattanooga, 
near  the  pontoon  bridge,  and  hold  himself  in  readiness  to 
move  to  Thomas's  front  or  to  co-operate  with  Sherman  as 
needed.  Colonel  Eli  Long  with  his  brigade  of  cavalry  was 
directed  to  report  by  noon  on  Saturday,  the  21st,  at  Chatta- 
nooga, to  cover  Sherman's  left  flank,  and  if  not  further  re- 
quired by  Sherman  he  was  then  to  cross  the  Chickamauga, 
make  a  raid  on  the  enemy's  line  of  communication  in  the 
rear,  doing  as  much  damage  as  he  could. 

Sherman  made  his  movement  with  his  troops  from  Bridge- 


POSITIONS  OF  ARMIES  BEFORE  THE  BATTLES. 


—  Union  Army    )     uhen  Gen.Grant 

do.  Picket     i     took  command,Oct.23.1S63. 

=  =  Rebel  Army  ) 

►..♦*    do.  Picket  Line   > 

^m  Position  of  Gen. Hooker's  Corps 

=■=»  Gen.Sherman's  first  j'osition 

*■  MONDAY  NOV. 23. 

-  -  Line  developed  by  Recconnoissance 

in  force  under  Gen. Thomas 

TUESDAY  NOV. 24. 
w  Position  of  General  Hooker's  Corps 
">  Position  of  Gen.Sherman's  Corps  in  the  morning 
m       »     n       n       it        it        a      evening 


WEDNESDAY  NOV.2B. 

■=>  Rebel  Line  in  the  morning 
- — Routes  taken  by  Hooker 
—  —  Ground  covered  by  a  charge  of  the 
Army  of  the  Cumberland  in  the 


=  Lines  of  Rebel  retreat 

Lines  of  advance  by  the  Army  of 

the  Cumberland 


246  THE   ARMY   OF  THE   CUMBERLAND. 

port  through  Whitesides.  Sending  his  leading  division  under 
Ewing  up  Lookout  Valley,  to  make  a  feint  on  the  left  flank 
of  the  rebel  army  in  the  direction  of  Trenton,  lie  crossed  his 
others  at  Brown's  Ferry  and  marched  up  the  north  bank  of 
the  river  to  the  mouth  of  South  Chickamauga  Creek.  Here 
they  kept  concealed  in  the  woods  from  the  enemy  until  they 
were  ready  to  effect  their  crossing.  Owing  to  heavy  rains 
and  the  state  of  the  roads,  Sherman  was  able  to  have  but 
,one  division,  under  John  E.  Smith,  in  position  by  the  21st, 
and  Grant  delayed  his  plans  of  battle  to  give  him  additional 
time.  Sherman  on  the  21st  moved  his  second  division  under 
Morgan  L.  Smith  over  the  bridge  at  Brown's  Ferry,  and  on 
the  23d,  after  many  repairs  to  the  bridge,  rendered  necessary 
by  the  swollen  stream  and  the  raft  of  logs  sent  down  the 
river  by  the  rebels,  Ewing's  division  also  got  safely  across. 
Sherman's  fourth  division  under  Osterhaus  was  not  able  on 
the  23d  to  cross,  and  this  division  was  then  ordered,  in  the 
event  of  not  being  able  to  cross  by  eight  a.m.  the  24th,  to 
report  to  Hooker  on  the  south  bank  of  the  Tennessee.  Davis 
had  reported  with  his  division  to  Sherman,  and  on  the  23d, 
the  boats  of  the  pontoon  bridge  were  used  to  effect  a  land- 
ing at  the  mouth  of  South  Chickamauga  Creek  by  Giles  A. 
Smith's  brigade,  who  captured  the  rebel  pickets  at  this  place, 
landed  his  entire  brigade,  and  then  sent  the  boats  back  for 
additional  troops.  By  daylight  of  the  24th,  Sherman  with 
two  divisions  of  some  8,000  men  was  intrenched  on  the  east 
bank  of  the  Tennessee.  A  pontoon  bridge,  1,350  feet  long, 
was  then  built  over  this  river,  and  another  over  Chickamauga 
Creek  under  the  direction  of  W.  F.  Smith. 

Thomas,  learning  that  Sherman's  movements  across  Look- 
out Valley  had  been  discovered  by  Bragg,  on  Sunday,  the 
22d,  directed  Howard  to  cross  into  Chattanooga  to  give 
Bragg  the  idea  that  these  were  Sherman's  troops  coming  to 


CHATTANOOGA,  LOOKOUT  MT.  MISSIONARY  RIDGE.    247 

reinforce  Chattanooga.  Howard  made  the  crossing  on  Sun- 
day and  took  position  in  rear  of  our  front  line  in  full  view 
of  the  enemy.  On  the  20th,  Bragg  notified  Grant  that  it 
would  be  well  for  him  to  withdraw  all  non-combatants  from 
Chattanooga.  This  the  latter  regarded  as  a  cover  for  Bragg's 
withdrawal  of  his  own  command,  which  he  was  confirmed  in 
by  deserters  and  spies  reporting  a  large  number  of  Bragg's 
troops  as  marching  to  the  north.  These  were  two  divisions 
of  Buckner's  corps  sent  to  strengthen  Longstreet  in  East  Ten- 
nessee ;  that  last  sent,  however,  was  recalled.  To  determine 
the  truth  of  these  reports,  early  on  the  morning  of  the  23d, 
Grant  directed  Thomas  to  develop  the  enemy's  lines,  driving 
in  his  pickets,  and  determine  if  he  still  held  his  force  on  our 
front.  Thomas  ordered  Granger  in  command  of  the  Fourth 
Corps  to  form  with  Sheridan's  and  Wood's  divisions — Sheri- 
dan on  the  right,  Wood  on  the  left — with  his  left  extended 
nearly  to  Citico  Creek,  and  advance  directly  in  frout  of  Fort 
Wood,  and  make  this  movement.  Palmer,  commanding  the 
Fourteenth  Corps  with  Baird's  division  refused,  was  to  sup- 
port Granger's  right  and  was  to  hold  Johnson's  division 
under  arms  in  the  intrenchments  iu  readiness  to  move  as 
occasion  might  require.  The  troops  were  all  in  position  at 
2  p.m.  They  moved  out  on  the  plain  as  if  on  parade,  and  in 
plain  sight  of  Bragg  and  his  army  on  Lookout  and  Mission- 
ary Bidge,  formed  their  lines  as  if  in  review  and  moved  for- 
ward to  attack  the  enemy.  Bapidly  advancing  "  in  the  most 
gallant  style "  our  troops  steadily  pushed  in  the  rebel  line. 
They  first  struck  the  pickets,  drove  these  on  the  reserve  and 
then  sweeping  everything  before  them  they  hurled  the  rebels 
out  of  their  first  line  of  rifle-pits  and  sent  them  on  the  full 
run  in  retreat  to  the  rear,  except  over  two  hundred  of  them 
captured.  Here  Granger's  troops  made  themselves  secure  by 
throwing  up  temporary  breastworks,  while  he  sent  a  strong 


248       THE  ARMY  OF  THE  CUMBERLAND. 

picket  line  to  the  front  to  protect  his  new  line.  In  this 
charge  Granger's  line  secured  "  Orchard  Knob  "  which  was 
then  occupied  by  Bridges'  battery.  Howard's  corps  was 
placed  in  position  on  the  left  of  the  line  to  Granger's  left 
and  also  ordered  to  throw  up  breastworks. 

Sherman  after  crossing  the  river  on  the  23d,  about  1  p.m., 
placed  his  command  in  three  columns,  following  in  his  ad- 
vance the  general  direction  of  Chickamauga  Creek,  with  his 
left  under  Morgan  L.  Smith  resting  on  the  creek.  His 
centre  was  under  John  E.  Smith  and  his  right  under  Ewing, 
all  under  the  command  of  Frank  P.  Blair,  Corps  Com- 
mander. In  support  of  these,  Davis's  division  also  moved 
to  the  attack.  Grant  and  Sherman  had  supposed  that  Mis- 
sionary Ridge  was  one  prolonged  even  range.  When  Sher- 
man left  the  river  he  passed  over  the  foothills  and  then 
pressed  up  what  he  supposed  was  the  main  portion  of  the 
ridge.  "When  he  reached  the  top  of  this,  after  a  lively 
skirmish  with  the  rebel  pickets,  he  found  a  deep  depres- 
sion intervening  between  this  hill  and  the  next,  which  was 
the  one  the  tunnel  ran  through,  where  the  rebels  were 
heavily  intrenched,  and  which  he  had  been  ordered  to 
take.  On  the  top  of  this  first  hill,  finding  he  could  not 
take  the  hill  beyond  where  the  tunnel  ran  through,  he 
threw  up  intrenchments  and  prepared  to  hold  the  ground 
he  had  thus  far  gained.  Here  about  4  p.m.  he  had  a  heavy 
engagement.  The  enemy's  advance  with  sharp  artillery  and 
musketry  fire  was  gallantly  met  and  repulsed.  Sherman 
then  made  preparations  for  the  night,  posting  his  command 
to  hold  all  positions.  Howard  had  reported  with  three  regi- 
ments to  him,  as  he  crossed  the  bridge  which  connected 
him  with  the  main  Army  of  the  Cumberland.  Howard  leav- 
ing these  troops  with  Sherman,  then  returned  to  his  corps. 
When  his  command  was  placed  on  the  front  to  Granger's 


CHATTANOOGA,  LOOKOUT  MT.  MISSIONARY  RIDGE.    219 

left  in  the  afternoon,  he  connected  with  Sherman's  right. 
Here  Sherman  rested  all  night,  and  about  midnight  received 
orders  from  Grant  to  "  attack  the  enemy  at  dawn  of  day,'' 
"that  General  Thomas  would  attack  in  force  early  in  the 
day." 

While  the  main  attack  was  progressing  under  Sherman  on 
the  left,  Hooker  on  the  right  had  been  pressing  the  enemy. 
On  the  23d,  Osterhaus,  finding  that  he  could  not  cross  the 
Tennessee  in  time  to  engage  in  the  movement  with  Sherman, 
reported  with  his  division  to  Hooker,  who  was  then  ordered 
to  take  these  troops,  with  Geary's  division  and  Whittaker's 
and  Grose's  brigades  of  the  First  Division  of  the  Fourth 
Corps  under  Cruft,  and  make  a  strong  demonstration  on  the 
northern  slope  of  Lookout  Mountain,  drawing  Bragg's  at- 
tention to  this  point  and  away  from  Sherman  while  crossing 
the  river  and  getting  into  position.  Thomas  instructed 
Hooker  if  he  found  he  was  able  to  carry  the  enemy's  posi- 
tion here,  to  do  so. 

At  4  a.m.  of  the  24th,  Hooker  reported  his  troops  in  readi- 
ness to  begin  the  movement.  As  he  advanced  he  found 
Lookout  Creek  so  swollen  with  recent  rains  that  he  could 
not  cross  without  building  a  temporary  bridge  at  the  main 
road.  He  then  sent  Geary  with  two  divisions  and  "Whit- 
taker's brigade  of  Graft's  command  up  the  creek  to  effect  a 
crossing  at  Wauhatehie.  Geary  was  then  to  sweep  down 
the  right  bank,  driving  the  rebels  before  him.  The  enemy, 
watching  the  construction  of  the  bridge  under  Hooker, 
failed  to  observe  the  movement  of  the  troops  under  Geary, 
by  reason  of  a  heavy  mist  which  overhung  the  mountain, 
until  he  was  on  their  flank  and  threatening  their  rear.  The 
enemy's  force  here  and  on  the  top  of  the  mountain  was  under 
Stevenson,  with  a  command  of  six  brigades  posted  mainly 
on  the  Northern  slope  midway  between  the  Palisades  and 


250       THE  ARMY  OF  THE  CUMBERLAND. 

the  Tennessee  River,  on  a  belt  of  cultivated  land.  A  con 
tinuous  line  of  earthworks  had  been  constructed,  with  re- 
doubts, redans,  and  pits,  lower  down  the  slope,  with  refer- 
erence  to  an  assault  from  the  direction  of  the  river.  On 
each  flank  were  rifle-pits,  epaulements  for  batteries,  walls  of 
stone  and  abatis,  as  against  attack  from  either  Chattanooga 
or  Lookout  Valley.  In  these  valleys  were  still  more  exten- 
sive earthworks. 

As  Geary  moved  down  on  the  right  bank  of  the  creek,  he 
soon  encountered  the  enemy's  pickets.  These  gave  the 
alarm  at  once,  when  their  troops  formed  in  the  breastworks 
and  rifle-pits.  All  these  positions  were  soon  covered  by 
artillery  planted  by  Hooker's  orders.  He  then  sent  "Wood's 
brigade  of  Osterhaus's  division  about  eight  hundred  yards 
up  the  creek  to  build  another  bridge,  and  directed  Graft  to 
leave  a  small  command  at  the  first  bridge,  to  attract  the  at- 
tention of  the  enemy,  and  ordered  the  rest  of  Grose's  brigade 
to  cross  with  Wood's.  This  bridge  was  completed  at  11 
o'clock,  when  the  troops  under  Wood  and  Grose  crossed,  and 
joined  Geary  on  the  right  bank,  who  had  driven  the  enemy 
up  to  this  point.  Under  cover  of  the  heavy  artillery  fire, 
the  entire  line  advanced,  pressing  the  enemy  steadily  back. 
At  noon  Geary's  advance  drove  the  rebels  around  the  peak 
of  the  mountain.  Here  Geaiy  was  ordered  to  halt  and  re- 
form his  command,  but  having  the  rebels  on  the  run  he  pressed 
forward  and  drove  them  in  a  fleeing,  panic-stricken  crowd. 
Cobham's  and  Ireland's  brigades  on  the  high  ground  on  the 
right,  near  the  Palisades,  pressed  on,  rolling  their  line  up  on 
the  flank,  closely  supported  by  Whittaker's  and  Creighton's 
brigades.  The  enemy  had  been  reinforced,  but  he  was  not 
able  to  resist  the  sweep  of  Hooker's  troops  as  they  rounded 
the  crest  of  the  mountain  at  Craven's  house,  where  the 
enemy  made  his  last  stand,  and  from  here,  with  his  Hue  all 
11* 


CHATTANOOGA,  LOOKOUT  MT.  MISSIONARY  RIDGE.   251 

broken  and  in  rout,  he  was  driven  over  the  rocks  and  preci- 
pices into  Chattanooga  Valley.  At  this  time  the  mist  that 
had  been  hanging  round  the  mountain  all  the  day  settled 
still  lower  down.  It  was  now  about  2  o'clock,  and  Hooker 
in  the  mist,  unable  to  see  beyond  his  immediate  front,  placed 
his  troops  in  position,  threw  up  temporary  breastworks,  with 
his  line  on  the  east  side  of  the  mountain,  the  right  resting 
at  the  Palisades  and  the  left  near  the  mouth  of  Chattanooga 
Creek.  He  then  reported  to  Thomas,  who  ordered  Carlin 
with  his  brigade  to  report  to  him,  when  he  was  placed  on 
the  extreme  right,  relieving  Geary's  troops.  During  the 
night  the  rebels  opened  a  heavy  fire  on  our  right  as  if  in- 
tending to  break  our  Lines.  This  was  handsomely  repulsed, 
Carlin's  brigade  taking  an  active  part.  Early  in  the  morn- 
ing, before  daylight,  several  parties  were  sent  up  the  moun- 
tain, in  anticipation  of  the  retreat  of  the  enemy  during  the 
'night,  to  scale  the  heights.  One  from  the  Eighth  Kentucky 
was  the  first  that  reached  the  summit,  and  here  at  sunrise 
the  stars  and  stripes  were  unfurled  at  the  extreme  point 
amid  the  cheers  of  the  entire  army.  During  the  night 
Stevenson  abandoned  the  top  of  the  mountain,  while  the 
Summertown  road  remained  open,  leaving  his  camp  and 
garrison  equipage.  This  gave  to  our  army  full  possession 
and  control  of  the  river  and  railroad  up  to  Chattanooga. 

The  mist  still  clung  to  the  mountain  in  heavy  folds  early 
on  the  25th,  when  Hooker  was  ordered  to  press  forward  on 
the  road  to  Eossville,  cany  the  pass,  and  operate  on  Bragg's 
left  and  rear.  Advancing  down  into  the  valley,  he  found 
the  rebel  pickets  still  holding  the  right  bank  of  Chatta- 
nooga Creek.  Arriving  at  the  creek  at  about  ten  o'clock 
he  found  the  bridges  on  the  Eossville  road  destroyed.  Here 
Hooker  was  delayed  for  some  three  hours,  when  Osterhaus 
in  the  advance  crossed  the  infantry  on  the  stringers  and 


252  THE  ARMY  OP   THE  CUMBERLAND. 

pressed  forward,  driving  the  enemy's  pickets  over  to  Ross- 
ville.  Hooker  found  the  rebels  at  this  j)lace  loading  up 
their  stores.  Leaving  a  force  on  their  front,  he  sent 
Wood's  brigade  to  take  the  ridge  on  the  right,  and  William- 
son's on  the  left.  After  a  severe  skirmish  the  enemy  hastily 
retreated,  abandoning  large  quantities  of  stores,  wagons, 
and  ambulances.  The  gap  now  being  under  our  control, 
Hooker  ordered  the  advance  of  our  entire  line,  Osterhaus 
with  his  division  on  the  east  of  the  ridge,  Cruft  on  the 
ridge,  and  Geary  in  the  valley  west  of  the  ridge.  This  line 
advancing  soon  encountered  the  rebels  under  Stewart,  oc- 
cupying the  line  of  breastworks  thrown  up  by  our  troops 
after  Chickainauga.  Craft  charged  on  them,  drove  them  in 
all  directions  out  of  these  works  in  full  retreat.  Part  of 
them  ran  into  Osterhaus's  men  and  were  captured.  Others 
were  captured  by  Geary  in  the  valley.  The  mass  of  them 
fell  back  to  their  second  line,  from  which  they  were  like- 
wise speedily  driven,  when  the  tight  became  a  running  one, 
continuing  until  sunset.  Part  of  the  enemy  in  their  en- 
deavors to  escape  ran  into  Johnson's  division  of  the  Four- 
teenth Corps,  thrown  forward  to  join  the  pursuit,  and  were 
captured.     Hooker's  command  then  went  into  camp. 

Early  on  the  morning  of  the  25th  Sherman  made  his  dis- 
position for  his  main  attack.  Holding  his  centre  with 
three  brigades,  he  was  then  to  move  along  the  east  and 
west  base  of  Missionary  Ridge  with  his  right  and  left 
flanks.  Corse  advancing  from  the  right  centre  moved  for- 
ward, supported  by  Lightburn  on  the  left  and  Morgan  L. 
Smith  on  his  right,  and  occupied  a  crest  in  the  woods  about 
eighty  yards  from  the  intrenched  line  of  the  enemy.  From 
this  point  Corse  assaulted  the  main  rebel  line,  and  for  over 
an  hour  maintained  a  heavy  contest,  driving  the  enemy, 
and  at  times  being  driven  back,  but  still  holding  his  crest  as 


CHATTANOOGA,  LOOKOUT  MT.  MISSIONARY  RIDGE.    253 

first  secured.  Here  Corse,  Loornis,  and  Morgan  L.  Smith 
fought  the  rebels  under  Hardee  with  Cleburne's,  Gist's, 
Cheatham's,  and  Stevenson's  divisions  in  a  stubborn  strug- 
gle all  day  up  to  three  o'clock,  holding  their  own,  but  mak- 
ing little  headway.  About  two  o'clock  John  E.  Smith's 
two  brigades,  while  moving  to  the  support  of  Ewing,  were 
driven  in  some  disorder  by  a  charge  of  the  enemy,  heavily 
massed.  They  were  quickly  reformed  and,  aided  by  Corse's 
troops  taking  the  rebels  in  the  flank  with  a  hot  musketry 
fire,  the  enemy  was  soon  driven  back  into  his  line  of  works. 

Here  Sherman  was  fighting  the  heavy  column  of  the  ene- 
my on  our  left,  and  the  main  part  of  the  battle  had  been 
his  share.  Grant  was  waiting  for  Hooker  to  reach  the  rebel 
left  at  Eossville,  in  the  hope  that  this  would  afford  some 
relief  to  the  stubborn  fighting  Sherman  had  encountered. 
Finding  that  Hooker  had  been  delayed  by  the  destruction 
of  the  bridge  longer  than  was  anticipated,  and  that  the 
diversion  was  not  to  come  from  that  quarter,  Grant  ordered 
Thomas  to  move  out  the  four  divisions  constituting  the 
centre — Baird  on  the  left,  then  Wood  with  Sheridan  on  his 
right,  and  Johnson  on  the  extreme  right  of  the  line — with  a 
double  line  of  skirmishers  to  the  front,  supported  by  the 
entire  force,  press  forward  to  cany  the  first  line  of  rifle- 
pits  and  there  halt  and  await  orders,  the  movement  to 
commence  at  three  o'clock,  at  a  signal  of  six  guns  fired  in 
rapid  succession  from  Orchard  Knob. 

There  was  some  little  delay  attending  the  preliminaries 
of  the  movement,  and  it  was  not  until  after  half  jjast  three 
that  the  commands  having  moved  out  and  taken  the  align- 
ment were  in  position  for  the  advance,  when  the  guns 
sounded  one,  two,  three,  four,  five,  six.  With  this  the 
troops,  impatient  all  the  day  with  being  kept  in  the  breast- 
works while   Sherman's   men  were  hard  at   work,  eagerly 


254       THE  ARMY  OF  THE  CUMBERLAND. 

pressed  onward,  divisions,  brigades,  and  regiments  striving 
each  with  the  other  for  the  advance.  "With  the  first  move- 
ment Bragg  at  once  hurried  reinforcements  from  his  right 
and  left  to  strengthen  his  troops  in  his  works  to  resist  the 
advance  on  his  centre.  Here  his  line  was  under  the  com- 
mand of  Breckinridge,  who  had  his  own  division  under 
Lewis,  Stewart's  division,  and  part  of  those  of  Buckner  and 
Hindman  under  Patton  Anderson.  The  enemy  had  origin- 
ally four  lines  of  breastworks.  The  first  one  on  our  front 
was  captured  by  Thomas  on  the  23d,  when  Orchard  Knob 
was  taken.  This  left  three  lines  of  rifle-pits  remaining. 
The  second  one  was  about  half  a  mile  to  the  rear  of  the 
first,  near  the  foot  of  the  ridge.  From  here  to  the  top  was 
a  steep  ascent  of  some  five  hundred  yards,  covered  with 
large  rocks  and  fallen  timber.  About  half  way  up  the  ridge 
a  small  line  of  works  had  been  thrown  up.  On  the  crest  of 
the  hill  Bragg's  men  had  constructed  their  heaviest  breast- 
works, protected  on  our  front  by  some  fifty  pieces  of  artil- 
lery in  position.  As  our  troops  advanced,  each  command 
cheering  and  answering  back  the  cheer  of  the  others,  the 
men  broke  into  a  double-quick,  all  striving  to  be  the  first  to 
reach  the  rifle-pits  at  the  foot  of  the  ridge,  held  by  a  strong 
line  of  the  enemy's  troops.  The  rebels  opened  fire  with 
shot  and  shell  from  their  batteries,  as  our  troops  advanced, 
changing  it  soon  to  grape  and  canister,  which  with  the  fire 
from  the  infantry  made  it  terrifically  hut.  Dashing  through 
this  over  the  open  plain,  the  soldiers  of  the  Army  of  the  Cum- 
berland swept  on,  driving  the  enemy's  skirmishers,  charging 
down  on  the  line  of  works  at  the  foot  of  the  ridge,  captur- 
ing it  at  the  point  of  the  bayonet,  and  routing  the  rebels, 
sending  them  at  full  speed  up  the  ridge,  killing  and  captur- 
ing them  in  large  numbers.  These  rifle-pits  were  reached 
nearly  simultaneously  by  the  several  commands,  when  the 


CHATTANOOGA,  LOOKOUT  MT.  MISSIONARY  RIDGE.   255 

troops,  in  compliance  with  their  instructions,  laid  down  at  the 
foot  of  the  ridge  awaiting  further  orders.  Here  they  were 
under  a  hot,  plunging,  galling  Are  from  the  enemy  in  their 
works  on  the  crest  of  the  ridge.  Without  further  waiting, 
and  under  no  orders  from  their  officers,  first  one  regiment, 
then  another  started  with  its  colors  up  the  ascent,  until  with 
loud  hurrahs  the  entire  line,  cheered  by  their  officers,  ad- 
vanced over  and  around  rocks,  under  and  through  the  fallen 
timber,  charged  up  the  ridge,  each  determined  to  reach 
the  summit  first.  The  centre  part  of  Sheridan's  division 
reached  the  top  first,  as  they  were  the  nearest  to  the  crest, 
and  crossed  it  to  the  right  of  Bragg's  headquarters.  The 
rest  of  the  line  was  soon  up,  and  almost  simultaneously  the 
ridge  was  carried  in  sis  places.  Here  the  enemy  making  a 
fight  for  a  short  time  was  routed  from  the  last  of  his  lines, 
and  his  centre,  panic-stricken,  broke  in  full  retreat.  Regi- 
ments were  captured  almost  entire,  battery  after  battery 
along  the  ridge  was  taken.  In  some  cases  the  rebels  were 
bayonetted  at  their  guns,  and  the  cannon  that  but  a  moment 
before  was  firing  on  our  troops,  were  by  them  captured, 
turned,  and  used  against  the  rebels  as  they  were  driven  in 
masses  to  the  rear.  The  charge  occupied  about  one  hour  from 
the  time  of  the  firing  of  the  guns  on  Orchard  Knob  until 
the  troops  occupied  the  rebel  lines  on  the  ridge.  Sheridan's 
division  reached  the  ridge  a  few  minutes  too  late  to  capture 
Bragg,  Breckinridge,  and  a  number  of  the  rebel  generals, 
who  left  Bragg's  headcpiarters  on  the  charge  of  our  men  up 
the  ridge. 

Sheridan  advanced  with  his  division,  skirmishing  with  the 
enemy's  rear-guard,  but  driving  them  steadily  for  about  a 
mile  on  the  Chickamauga  station  road.  Here  this  road  runs 
over  a  high  ridge  on  which  the  enemy  had  posted  eight 
pieces  of  artillery  supported  by  a  strong  force  to  cover  their 


256       THE  ARMY  OP  THE  CUMBERLAND. 

retreat.  At  this  point  Sheridan,  with  Harker's  and  Wagner's 
brigades,  had  an  engagement  with  these  troops,  but  after  a 
movement  flanking  the  rebel's  right  and  left,  they  hurriedly 
retreated,  leaving  two  pieces  of  artillery  and  a  large  num- 
ber of  wagons.  After  this  ridge  was  captured,  Sheridan's 
troops  went  into  bivouac.  During  the  night  the  full  moon 
flooded  the  surrounding  country  with  its  bright  light.  At 
midnight,  on  Granger's  suggestion,  Sheridan  in  the  advance 
was  again  ordered  with  his  division  to  press  the  enemy.  He 
at  once  advanced  his  command  to  Chickamauga  Creek,  cap- 
turing a  large  number  of  prisoners  and  quantities  of  mater- 
ial and  stores. 

Wood,  on  reaching  the  top  of  the  ridge,  with  Baird  on  his 
left,  met  with  heavy  opposition.  The  enemy  was  supported 
by  a  division  from  Hardee  on  the  right,  advancing  just  as 
Baird  was  getting  into  position.  Here  these  two  divisions 
were  engaged  in  a  sharp  contest  until  after  dark.  Turchin, 
with  his  brigade,  which  was  the  left  wing  of  Baird,  had 
taken  possession  of  a  small  work  constructed  by  the  enemy 
on  the  ridge  when  he  was  attacked  by  the  rebels  in  a  most 
furious  charge,  but  gallantly  repulsed  them,  when  they  drew 
off  in  the  direction  of  Tunnel  Hill.  Missionary  Bidge  was 
now  entirely  within  our  control,  with  the  exception  of  the 
point,  where  Sherman's  advance  had  been  so  stoutly  resisted. 
During  the  night,  Bragg  drew  off  Hardee's  troops  from  the 
front  of  Sherman,  where  the  latter  at  once  placed  his  com- 
mand in  position  for  the  pursuit  the  next  day. 

During  the  night  of  the  25th,  Thomas  was  directed  to 
send  Granger  with  his  corps,  and  additional  troops  to  make 
his  command  up  to  20,000,  to  march  to  Burnside's  relief  at 
Knoxville,  and  the  other  portion  of  Thomas's  command  with 
Sherman's  troops  to  pursrie  the  enemy  on  the  26th.  The 
latter,  on  the  morning  of  that   day   advanced  by  the  road 


CHATTANOOGA,  LOOKOUT  MT.  MISSIONARY  RIDGE.    257 

through  Chickarnauga  Station,  while  Thomas  ordered  the 
command  under  Hooker  and  Palmer  to  push  on  by  way  of 
the  Greysville  and  Einggold  road.  At  the  former  place  the 
rearguard  of  the  rebels  was  surprised  after  night,  and  three 
cannon  and  a  large  number  of  prisoners  captured.  On  the 
next  day  another  piece  of  artillery  was  captured  at  Greys- 
ville, and  later  in  the  day  Hooker's  advance  again  struck 
the  enemy,  strongly  posted  in  a  pass  in  Taylor's  Ridge.  Here, 
after  a  heavy  fight  of  over  an  hour,  they  were  driven  from 
the  pass  with  considerable  loss  on  both  sides.  The  pursuit 
was  discontinued  on  the  28th.  Hooker  remained  for  a  few 
days  at  Ringgold,  while  Palmer  returned  to  his  camp  at 
Chattanooga. 

Sherman's  troops,  with  Davis's  division  in  the  advance, 
pressed  through  Chickamauga  Station,  and  at  about  dark 
struck  the  rear  of  the  enemy's  column,  and  had  a  sharp  fight. 
After  leaving  Greysville,  Sherman  turned  his  command  to 
the  left,  to  strike  the  railroad  between  Dal  ton  and  Cleve- 
land. Howard  was  sent  to  destroy  this  road,  which  he  did 
in  a  most  thorough  manner.  On  the  following  day  the  Fif- 
teenth Corps  destroyed  the  Atlanta  Railroad  from  below 
Greysville  back  to  the  State  line.  On  the  28th,  Sherman  was 
ordered  to  make  a  reconnoissance  to  the  Hiawassee  with  his 
own  corps,  together  with  Davis's  and  Howard's  troops  of 
Thomas's  command.  On  reaching  Charleston,  Sherman  re- 
ceived orders  to  take  command  of  Granger's  column,  moving 
to  Burnside's  relief,  and  to  press  forward  with  all  the  troops 
under  him  in  all  haste  to  Knoxville,  eighty-four  miles  distant. 
Advancing  rapidly  with  his  command,  Sherman  reached 
Knoxville  on  the  6th.  Longstreet,  however,  retreated  on  the 
4th  of  December  to  Virginia.  Leaving  Granger's  corps  to 
aid  in  the  pursuit  of  Longstreet,  Sherman  by  easy  marches 
returned  to  Chattanooga  on  the  16th  of  the  month,  where  he 


258       THE  ARMY  OP  THE  CUMBERLAND. 

ordered  Howard  and  Davis  to  report  with  their  commands, 
while  he  marched  west  with  his  own  corps  to  Northern 
Alabama  and  placed  them  in  winter  quarters. 

Sherman  with  his  two  days'  fighting  reports  the  losses  of 
his  command,  including  Howard's,  command,  but  not  that  of 
Davis,  whose  loss  he  says  was  small,  at  295  killed,  1,402 
wounded,  and  292  missing — making  a  total  of  1,989.  This, 
however,  includes  the  losses  in  his  first  division — Oster- 
haus's,  which  fought  under  Hooker  on  the  right — of  87  killed, 
344  wounded,  and  66  missing,  making  497  to  be  deducted, 
which  leaves  Sherman's  loss  proper,  208  killed,  1,058 
wounded,  and  226  missing — a  total  of  1,492.  Thomas's 
loss  in  the  part  taken  by  his  troops,  also  including  How- 
ard's command  and  not  including  Davis's  division,  was 
529  killed,  2,281  wounded,  and  141  missing — an  aggregate  of 
3,951.  The  large  bulk  of  the  losses  under  Thomas  were  in 
Sheridan's  and  Wood's  divisions.  That  of  the  former  was 
135  killed,  1,151  wounded,  missing,  none — aggregate  1,256  ; 
that  of  the  latter,  150  killed,  851  wounded,  missing,  none — 
aggregate  1,001.  These  two  divisions  in  their  one  hour's 
work  storming  Missionary  Ridge  met  with  a  loss  of  2,287 
men,  showing  hot  work.  There  was  captured  by  the  army 
of  the  Cumberland  40  pieces  of  artillery,  58  artillery  car- 
riages and  caissons,  6,175  stand  of  small  arms,  principally 
English  Enfield,  and  5,471  prisoners. 

During  the  winter  there  were  nothing  but  minor  move- 
ments of  the  troops.  The  railroads  up  to  Chattanooga  were 
repaired,  and  the  first  "cracker  train"  that  entered  the 
place  was  greated  with  many  hearty  cheers  by  our  troops  in 
the  town,  as  the  shrill  scream  of  its  whistle  woke  the  echoes 
among  the  surrounding  mountains,  so  long  silent  to  this 
music.  The  roads  into  and  through  East  Tennessee  were 
repaired  to  Knoxville  and  beyond. 


CHATTANOOGA,  LOOKOUT  MT.  MISSIONARY  RIDGE.    259 

In  the  early  spring  the  organization  of  the  Army  of  the 
Cumberland  was  changed  by  Granger  being  relieved  of  the 
command  of  the  Fourth  Corps,  when  Howard  was  assigned 
to  that  command.  Palmer  was  retained  in  command  of  the 
Fourteenth  Corps,  and  the  Eleventh  and  Twelfth  Corps  were 
consolidated  into  the  Twentieth  Corps,  with  Hooker  in  com- 
mand. The  cavalry  was  organized  in  four  divisions,  under 
the  command  of  W.  L.  Elliott.  The  army  in  the  field  con- 
sisted of  60,773  effective  men. 

General  Thomas  ordered  the  Fourth  Corps  to  Cleveland. 
The  Fourteenth  Corps  in  front  of  Chattanooga  was  well 
thrown  forward  toward  the  enemy's  front  at  Dalton,  prepar- 
atory to  the  spring  campaign  to  Atlanta,  under  General 
Sherman.  The  Twentieth  Corps  was  stationed  in  Lookout 
Valley. 

In  the  general  engagement  Grant's  plan  of  battle  had 
been  for  Sherman  with  five  divisions  to  make  the  main  attack, 
sweep  everything  before  him  down  the  ridge,  and  when  he 
had  the  rebels  in  full  retreat,  the  Army  of  the  Cumberland 
was  then  to  aid  in  the  pursuit,  after  patiently  waiting  until 
the  fighting  was  over.  Hooker,  under  Grant's  original 
plan,  was  to  simply  hold  Lookout  Valley  secure,  and  when 
the  enemy  was  driven  by  Sherman,  he  too  was  to  join  in 
the  pursuit.  All  the  fighting  of  the  battle  was  to  be  done 
by  Sherman  and  all  the  glory  thereof  was  to  be  his.  In 
Sherman's  memoirs  we  are  favored  with  Grant's  views  of  the 
Army  of  the  Cumberland  when  Sherman  first  reported  in 
person  to  Grant  at  Chattanooga,  to  learn  of  his  plan  and  the 
part  he,  Sherman,  was  to  take.  Sherman  says  that  Grant 
told  him  "  that  the  men  of  Thomas's  army  had  been  so  de- 
moralized by  the  battle  of  Chickamauga  that  he  feared  they 
could  not  be  got  out  of  their  trenches  to  assume  the  offen- 
sive," and  that  "  the  Arrny  of  the  Cumberland  had  so  long 


260       THE  ARMY  OF  THE  CUMBERLAND. 

been  in  the  trenches  that  he  wanted  my  troops  to  hurry  up 
to  take  the  offensive  first,  after  which  he  had  no  doubt  the 
Cumberland  Army  would  fight  well."  So,  under  Grant's 
plan,  the  Arnry  of  the  Cumberland  was  to  stand  by  and  be 
taught  a  grand  object  lesson  how  to  fight,  as  given  by  Sher- 
man. During  the  course  of  the  engagement  the  plan  was 
modified  twice.  Under  the  original  plan,  Sherman  was  to 
make  a  demonstration  up  Lookout  Valley,  in  the  expectation 
that  Bragg  would  strengthen  his  left  at  the  expense  of  his 
right,  thereby  making  Sherman's  part  of  the  plan  so  much 
the  lighter  as  the  line  on  his  battle  front  was  weakened. 
To  carry  this  out  Hugh  Ewing's  division  was  sent  to  Trenton, 
but  this  accomplished  nothing.  Grant  fearing  that  Bragg's 
right  might  be  too  strong  for  Sherman  to  give  his  lesson  to 
the  Army  of  the  Cumberland  properly,  finding  Osterhaus's 
division  cut  off  from  Sherman,  ordered  it  to  report  to 
Hooker,  who  was  directed  to  take  it  and  Geary's  division 
with  Craft's  division  of  the  Fourth  Corps  and  make  a  de- 
monstration on  the  rebel  left  at  Lookout  Mountain,  to  at- 
tract the  attention  of  Bragg  while  Sherman  was  getting  into 
position  to  take  "  the  end  of  Missionary  Bidge  as  far  as  the 
tunnel."  Hooker,  on  the  day  previous,  learning  that  How- 
ard's corps  was  going  into  Chattanooga,  and  probably  into 
the  fight,  asked  to  be  allowed  his  right  to  be  with  his  troops 
under  fire.  Under  his  original  order  he  was  siniply  to  hold 
Lookout  Valley,  which  he  did  not  relish  if  part  of  his  com- 
mand should  engage  the  enemy.  "When  his  orders  came  to 
"  make  a  demonstration "  he  determined  he  would  take 
Lookout  Mountain  and  drive  Bragg's  left  out  of  his  works. 
With  less  than  ten  thousand  troops,  over  two-thirds  of  whom 
were  the  Army  of  the  Cumberland,  Hooker  fought  his  "  Bat- 
tle above  the  Clouds,"  that  will  last  in  history  forever,  and 
grow  in  fancy  and  song  as  the  years  roll  on.     Hooker  took 


CHATTANOOGA,  LOOKOUT  MT.  MISSIONARY  RIDGE.    201 

Lookout  Mountain  and  drove  the  rebel  left  to  Bossville,  over 
five  miles,  before  Sherman  reached  the  tunnel.  He  made 
Sherman's  task  none  the  easier,  however,  because  Bragg 
then  threw  the  two  divisions  Hooker  had  whipped  upon 
Sherman's  front. 

Then,  when  Sherman  had  been  fighting  for  nearly  two  days, 
and  had  failed  to  make  the  headway  Grant's  plan  contem- 
plated, the  plan  underwent  another  modification.  On  the 
25th,  Grant  ordered  Thomas  to  move  out  his  troops  from  the 
centre,  to  make  another  "  demonstration  "  in  Sherman's  be- 
half, so  he  could  take  the  tunnel  in  accordance  with  the 
original  plan.  Thomas  was  ordered  to  take  the  first  line  of 
rifle-pits  and  hold  his  command  there,  while  Bragg  was  ex- 
pected to  draw  off  part  of  his  troops  from  Sherman's  front 
and  strengthen  his  line  in  front  of  the  "demonstration." 
Thomas's  orders  to  his  corps  and  division  generals  were  given 
in  accordance  with  Grant's  instructions,  and  as  the  orders 
reached  the  brigade  and  regimental  commanders,  as  far  as 
the  officers  were  concerned  the  movement  was  only  to  be  a 
"  demonstration."  When  the  troops  reached  the  rebel  line, 
captured  it,  and  then  found  themselves  under  the  heavy  fire 
from  the  enemy's  lines  on  the  heights  above,  without  orders, 
and  even  against  orders,  the  soldiers  of  the  Army  of  the 
Cumberland,  who  were  "  so  demoralized  that  they  would  not 
fight,"  pressed  up  the  face  of  the  ridge  under  the  deadly 
musketry  fire  that  greeted  them,  with  cannon  in  front,  to  the 
right  and  the  left,  raking  with  converging  fire,  and  won  for 
General  Grant  the  battle  of  Missionary  Bidge,  driving  Bragg 
away  from  Sherman's  front  and  thus  enabling  him  to  take 
the  tunnel  as  ordered.  Whenever  the  victory  of  Missionary 
Bidge  shall  be  narrated  on  history's  page,  this  gallant 
charge  of  the  brave  men  of  Wood's  and  Sheridan's  divisions, 
with  those  of  Baird  and  Johnson  on  their  left  and  right,  will 


262       THE  ARMY  OF  THE  CUMBERLAND. 

always  be  the  prominent  feature  of  the  engagement  as  told 
in  the  coming  years,  and  will  be  the  last  to  lose  its  glory  and 
renown. 

No  wonder  that  General  Grant  failed  to  appreciate  this 
movement  at  the  time,  not  understanding  the  troops  who 
had  it  in  charge.  When  he  found  these  commands  ascending 
the  ridge  to  capture  it  when  he  ordered  a  "  demonstration  " 
to  be  made  to  the  foot  of  the  hill  and  there  to  wait,  he 
turned  sharply  to  General  Thomas  and  asked,  "  By  whose 
orders  are  those  troops  going  up  the  hill  ?  "  General  Thomas, 
taking  in  the  situation  at  once,  suggested  that  it  was  prob- 
ably by  their  own.  General  Grant  remarked  that  "  it  was  all 
right  if  it  turned  out  all  right,"  and  added,  "  if  not,  some 
one  would  suffer."  But  it  turned  out  "  all  right,"  and  Grant 
in  his  official  report  compliments  the  troops  for  "  following 
closely  the  retreating  enemy  without  further  orders."  Gen- 
eral Thomas,  in  his  official  report,  after  narrating  the  events 
of  the  23d,  24th,  and  25th  of  November,  quietly  says:  "It 
will  be  seen  by  the  above  report  that  the  original  plan  of 
operations  was  somewhat  modified  to  meet  and  take  the 
best  advantage  of  emergencies  which  necessitated  material 
modifications  of  that  plan.  It  is  believed,  however,  that  the 
original  plan  had  it  been  carried  out  could  not  possibly  have 
led  to  more  successful  lesults." 


APPENDIX    A. 

ORGANIZATION  OF  THE  FOURTEENTH  ARMY 
CORPS,  DEPT.  OF  THE  CUMBERLAND. 

Major-General  W.  S.  ROSECRANS,  Commanding. 
December  20,  1862. 
CENTRE. 
Major-General  Geo.  H.  THOMAS. 

FIRST  DIVISION. 

Brigadier-General  S.  S.  FRY. 

First  Brigade.— Col.  M.  B.  Walker,  82d  Ind.,  12th  Ky.,  17th  O.,  31st  O., 
S8th  O.  Second  Brigade.—  Col.  J.  M.  Harlan,  10th  Ind.,  74th  Ind.,  4th 
Ky.,  10th  Ky.,  14th  O.  Third  Brigade.—  Brig.-General  J.  B.  Steedman, 
87th  Ind.,  2d  Minn.,  9th  O.,  35th  O.,  18th  U.  S.  Artillery —4th  Mich.  Battery. 
1st  O.  Battery  "  C,"  4th  U.  S.  Battery  "  I." 

THIRD  DIVISION. 

Brigadier-General  L.  H.  ROUSSEAU, 

Ninth  Brigade.— Col.  B.  F.  Scribner,  38th  Ind.,  2d  O.,  33d  O.,  94th  O., 
10th  Wis.  Seventeenth  Brigade.— Col.  J.  G.  Jones,  42d  Ind.,  88th  Ind.,  15th 
Ky..  3d  O.,  10th  O.  Twenty- Eighth  Brigade.— Col.  H.  A.  Hambright,  24th 
111.,  79th  Penn.,  1st  Wis.,  21st  Wis.  Artillery.— 4th  Ind.  Battery,  5th  Ind. 
Battery,  1st  Ky.,  l*t  Mich.  Battery  "  A."  Cavalry.— -2d  Ky .  (.Battalion),  11th 
Ky.  (Detachment),  4th  Ind.  (Detachment). 

EIGHTH  DIVISION. 

Brigadier-General  J.  S.  NEGLEY. 

Seventh  Brigade.— Col.  John  F.  Miller,  37th  Ind.,  78th  Penn.,  21st  O. 
74th  O.,  Independent  Battalion,  Capt.  Casev.  Twenty-Ninth  Brigade.— 
Col.  T.  R.  Stanley,  19th  111..  11th  Mich.,  18th  O.,  69th  O.  Artillery.— 1st 
Ky.  Battery  "  B.,"  1st  O.  Battery  "  G.,"  1st  O.  Battery  "  M."  Cavalry.—  7th 
Penn.,  1st  Tenn. 

SEVENTH  DIVISION. 

Brigadier-General  J.  M.  PALMER. 

First  Brigade.— Col.  G.  W.  Roberts,  22d  111.,  27th  111.,  42d  111.,  51st  111. 
Second  Brigade—  Brig.-General  J.  D.  Morgan,  10th  111.,  16th  III.,  60th  111., 
10th  Mich. ,  14th  Mich.  Artillery .—1st  111.  Battery  "  C,"  10th  Wis.  Battery. 
Cavalry—  7th  111.  Co.  "C." 

263 


264  APPENDIX    A. 

TWELFTH  DIVISION. 

Brigadier-General  E.  DUMONT. 

Fortieth    Br igade.  —Col.  A.  O.  Miller,  98th  111.,  72d  Ind.,  75th  Ind 
■Brigade.— Gen.  W.  T.  Ward.  102d  111.,  lU5th  111.,  70th  Ind.,  79th  O. 


Artillery. — 18th  Ind.   Battery.     Cavalry. — 4th  Ind.   (.Detachment),  7th  Ky., 
11th  Ky.  (Detachment). 


RIGHT  WING. 
Major-Gexeral  A.  McD.  MeCOOK. 

SECOND  DIVISION. 

Brigadier-General  J.  W.  SILL. 

Fourth  Brigade— Col.  Buckley, 6th Ind  ,  5th  Ky..  1st  O.,  93d  O..  16th  U. 
S.,  19th  U.  S.  Fifth  Brigade.—  Col.  E.  N.  Kirk,  34th  III.,  79th  III.,  29th 
Ind.,  30th  Ind.,  77th  Penn.  Sixth  Brigade.—  Brig.-General  Willich,  89th  111., 
32d  Ind.,  39th  Ind.,  15th  O.,  49th  O.  Artillery.— 1st  O.  Battery  "A.,"  1st  O. 
Battery  "E.,"  5th  U.  S.  Battery  "I."     Cavalry.— 2d  Ky.  (2  Cos). 

NINTH  DrVISION. 

Brigadier-General*  J.  C.  DAVIS. 

Thirtieth  Brigade.*- -59th  111.,  74th  111.,  75th  111.,  22d  Ind.  Thirty-First 
Brigade.*— 9,Ut  111.,  38th  111.,  101st  O.,  15th  Wis.  Thirty-Second  Brigade* 
—25th  111.,  35th  111.,  81st  Ind.,  81  h  Kan.  Artillery  .—2d  Minn.  Battery,  5th 
Wis.  Battery,  8th  Wis.  Battery. 

ELEVENTH  DIVISION. 

Brigadier-General  P.  H.  SHERIDAN. 

Tliirty-Fifth  Brigade.— Col.  F.  Schaefer,  44th  111.,  73d  111.,  2d  Mo.,  15th 
Mo.  Thirty-Sixth  Brigade.— Col.  Moore,  85th  111.,  86th  111.,  125th  111..  52d  O. 
Thirty-Seventh  Brigade.— Col.  N.  Grensel,  36th  111.,  88th  111.,  21st  Mich., 
24th  Wis.  Artillery.— 2d  111.  Battery  "  I.,"  1st  Mo.  Battery  "  G."  Cavalry  — 
2d  Ky.  Co.  "L." 


LEFT  WING. 
Major-General  T.  L.  CRITTENDEN. 

FOURTH  DIVISION. 

Brigadier-General  W.  S.  SMITH. 

Tenth  Brigade.— Col.  W.  Grose,  84th  111.,  36th  Ind.,  23d  Ky.,  6th  O.,  24th 
O.  Nineteenth  Brigade.— Col.  W.  B.  Hazen,  110th  111.,  9th  Ind.,  6th  Ky., 
41st  o.  Twenty-Second  Brigade— Col.  Enyart,  31st  Ind.,  1st  Ky.,  2d  Ky., 
90th  Ky.,  90th  O.    Artillery.i— Capt.  Standart. 


♦Brigade  commanders  not  indicated  on  return, 
t  Batteries  not  indicated  on  return. 


APPENDIX   A.  265 

FIFTH  DIVISION. 

Brigadier-General  H.  P. VAN  CLEVE. 

Eleventh  Brigade.— Col.  Sam'l  Beattt,  79th  Ind.,  9th  Ky.,  19th  O..  59th  O. 
Fourteenth  Brigade.— Col.  J.  P.  Fyffe,  44th  Ind.,  86th  Ind.,  11th  Ky. ,13th 
O.  Twenty-Third  Brigade.— Col.  S.  Matthews,  35th  Ind.,  8th  Ky.,  21st 
Ky.,  51st  Q.,  99tli  O.     Artillery.*— Capt.  G.  R.  Swallow. 

SIXTH  DIVISION. 

Brigadier-General  M.  S.  HASCALL. 

Fifteenth  Brigade.— Col.  G.  P.  Buell,  100th  HI.,  17th  Ind.,  58th  Ind..  3d 
Ky.,  26th  O.  Twentieth  Brigade.— Col.  C.  G.  Harker,  51st  Ind.,  73d  Ind., 
13th  Mich.,  64th  O.,  65th  O.  Twenty-First  Brigade.—  Col.  G.  D.  Wagneb, 
15th  Zud.,  40th  Ind.,  57th  Ind.,  97th  O.    Artillery.*— Maj.  S.  Rack. 


CAVALRY. 

Brigadier-General  STANLEY. 

FIRST   DIVISION. 

Colonel  KENNETT. 

First  Brigade.— Co\.  E.  H.  Murray,  2d  Ind.,  1st  Ky.,  3d  Ky.,  4th  Ky.,  4th 
Mich.,  7th  Penn.  Second  Brigade.— Col.  L.  Zahm,  5th  Ky.,  1st  0.,  3d  0.,  4th 
©.,  1st  O.  Artillery,  Battery  "  D.'1 

UNATTACHED  FORCES. 

1st  Mich.  Engineers,  9th  Mich.  (Detach.),  3d  E.  Teim.,  6th  E.  Tenn.,  15th 
Penn.  Cavalry,  4th  U.  S.  Cavalry  (Detach.),  Signal  Corps,  Stokes'  111.  Battery. 

GARRISONS. 

Bowling  Green,  iTy.~Brig.-Oen.  Granger,  129th  111.,  26th  Ky.,  23d  Mich., 
102d  O.,  111th  O.,  4th  Ky.  Cavalry.  Nashville,  Tenn.—  Brig.-Gen.  R.  B. 
Mitchell,  1st  Mid.  Tenn.,  11th  Ind.  Battery,  12th  Ind.  Battery,  1st  Mich. 
Artillery,  5th  Battery.    3d  Ind.  Cavalry  (1  Co.) 

*  Batteries  not  indicated  on  return. 


APPENDIX  B. 

ORGANIZATION  OF  TROOPS  IN  THE  DEPT. 
OF  THE  CUMBERLAND,  COMMANDED  BY 
MAJOR  GENERAL  GEORGE  H.  THOMAS. 
CHATTANOOGA,  TENN.,  OCT.  20th,  1863. 

FOURTH     ARMY     CORPS. 
Maj.-Gen'l  G.  GRANGER. 

FIKST  DIVISION. 
Maj.-Gen'l  J.  M.  PALMER, 
First  Brigade— Brig.  Gen'l  Chas.  Cruft,  21st  111.,  38th  111.,  39th  Ind., 
31st  Ind.,  81st  Ind.,  1st  Ky.,  2d  Ky.,  90th  O.,  101st  O,  Second  Brigade.— 
Brig.  Gen'l  W.  C.  Whitakek,  96th  111.,  115tli  111.,  35th  Ind.,  84th  Ind., 
8th  Ky.,  40th  O.,  51st  O.,  99th  O.  Third  Brigade.— €ol.  Wm.  Grose, 
59th  111.,  75th  111.,  84th  111.,  9th  Ind.,  30th  Ind.,  36th  Ind.,  24th  O.,  77th 
Penn.  Artillery.— 5th  Ind.  Battery,  4th  U.  S.  Art.,  Co.  "H  ;"  4th  U.  S. 
Art.,  Co.  "M." 

SECOND   DIVISION. 

Maj.-Gen'l  P.  II.  SHERIDAN. 

First  Brigade.— Brig.-Gen'l  J.  B.  Steedman,  36th  111.,  44thlll.,  73d  111.,  74th 
111 .,  88th  111 .,  22d  Ind.,  21st  Mich.,  2d  Mo.,  15th  Mo.,  24th  Wis.  Second  Brigade. 
—Brig.-Gen'l  G.  D.  Wagner,  100th  111.,  15th  Ind..  40th  Ind..  57th  Ind.,  5Sth 
Ind.,  13th  Mich.,  2fith  O.,  97th  O.  Third  Brigade— Col.  C.  G.  Harker, 
22d  111.,  27th  111.,  42d  111.,  51st  111.,  79th  111., 3d  Ky.,  64th  O.,  65th  O.,  125th  O. 
Artillery.— 1st  111.  Art.,  Co."M,"  10th  Ind.  Battery,  1st  Miss.  Art,,  Co.  "  G." 

THIRD  DIVISION. 

Brig.-Gen'l  T.  J.  WOOD. 

First.  Brigade.—  Brig.-Gen'l  A.  Willich,  25th  111.,  35th  111,  89th  111.,  32d 
Ind.,  68th  Ind.,  8th  Kan.,  15th  O.,  49th  O.,  15th  Wis.  Second  Brigade.— 
Brig.-Gen'l  W.  B.  Hazen,  6th  Ind.,  5th  Ky.,  6th  Ky.,  23d  Ky.,  1st  O.,  6th 
U..  41st  O.,  93d  O.,  124th  O.  Third  Brigade.— Bris. -Gen'l  S.  Beatty.  nth 
Ind.,  79th  Ind.,  86th  Ind.,  9th  Ky.,  17th  Ky.,  13th  O..  19th  O.,  59th  O.  Artil- 
lery .— Bridge' s  Buttery  111.  Ait..  6th  O.  Battery,  26th  Penn.  Battery, 

ELEVENTH    ARMY    CORPS.* 
Maj.-Gen'l  O.    O.   HOWARD. 

SECOND  DIVISION. 
Brig.-Gen'l  A.  Von  STEINWKHI!. 
First  Brigade.— ,33d  N.  J.,  131th  N.  Y.,  154th  X.  Y.,  27th  Penn.,  73d  Penn. 
Second  Brigade.-  BSd  Mass.,  136th  N.  V.,  55th  O.,  73d  O. 

*  Brigade  Commanders  not  given. 

266 


APPENDIX    B.  26? 


THIRD  DIVISION. 
Maj.-Gen'l  C.  SCHURZ. 
First  Brigade.— 82d  111.,  45th  N.  Y.,  143d  N.  Y.,  61st  O.,  82d  O.  Second 
Brigade.— mh  N.  Y.,  68ih  N.  Y.,  119th  N.  Y.,  141st  N.  Y..  75th  Perm.,  aGth 
Wis.  Artillery.— -1st  New  York  Art..,  Co.  "  I,"  13th  New  York  Battery.  Indt. 
Co.  8th  N.  Y.  Vol.  Infty.,  1st  Ohio  Art.,  Co.  "I,"  1st  Ohio  Art.,  Co.  "  K," 
4th  U.  S.,  Co.  "G." 

TWELFTH    ARMY    CORPS.* 
Maj.-Gen'l  H.  W.  SLOCUM. 

FIRST  DIVISION. 
Brig.-Gen'l  A.  S.  WILLIAMS. 
First  Brigade.— -5th  Conn..  20th  Conn.,  3d  Md..  123d  N.  Y.,  145th  N.  Y.,  46th 
Penn.    Sicoud  Brigade— 27th  Iiid.,  2d  Mass.,  13th  N.  J.,  107th  N.  Y.,  150th 
N.  Y.,  3d  Wis. 

SECOND  DIVISION. 
Brig.-Gen'l  JOHN  W.  GEARY. 
First  Brigade.—  5th  O.,  7th  O..  29th  O.,  66th  O.,  28th  Penn.,  147th  Penn. 
Second  Brigade.— 23th.  Penn.,  109th  Penn  ,  111th  Penn.  Third  Brigade.— 
60th  N.  Y.,  78th  N.  Y.,  102d  N.  Y.,  137th  N.  Y.,  149th  N.  Y.  Artillery.— 1st 
Batt'n  10th  Maine  Vol.  Infty.,  1st  New  York  Art.,  Co.  "M,"  Pennsylvania 
Batt'y,  Co.  "E,"  4th  U.  S.  Art.,  Co.  "  F,"  5th  U.  S.  Art,  Co.  "  K." 

(Maj.-Gen'l  JOSEPH  HOOKER,  Com'g  11th  and  12th  Army 
Corps.) 
Lieut. -Col.  Hitnton,  Unassigned  Artillery. 
2d  Ky.  Batt'y,  1st  Mich.  E.  and  M.,  20th  Ind.  Batty.,  1st  Ky.  Batt'y.,  1st 
O.  Art.,  Co.  "E,"  10th  Wis.  Batt'y. 

FOURTEENTH  ARMY  CORPS. 
Maj.-Gen'l.  GEORGE  H.  THOMAS. 

FIRST  DIVISION. 

Brig.-Gen'l.  W.  P.  CARLIN. 

First  Brigade.— Col.  O.  F.  Moore:  104th  111.,  38th  Ind.,42d  Ind.,  88th  Ind., 
15th  Ky.,  2d  O.,  33d  O.,  94th  O.,  10th  Wis.  Second  Brigade.— Col.  M.  F. 
Moore:  19th  111.,  11th  Mich.,  18th  O.,  69tli  O.,  15th  U.  S.  Infty.,  1st  and  2d 
Batt.,  16th  U.  S.  Infty..  1st  Batt.,  18th  U.  S  Infty..  1st  and  2d  Batt.,  19th  U.  S. 
Infty.,  1st  Batt.  Third  Brigade.— Col.  W.  Sirwell:  24th  111.,  37th  Ind..  21st 
O.,  74th  O.,  78th  Penn..  79th  Penn.,  1st  Wis.,  21st  Wis.  Artillery— 1st  111. 
Art.,  Co.  "C,"  1st.  Mich.  Art.,  Co.  "A.,"  5th  U.  S.  Art.,  Co.  "  H." 

SECOND  DIVISION. 
Bhig.-Gen'l.  JEFF.  C.  DAVIS. 
First  Brigade.- Brig. -Gen'l.  J.  D.  Morgan:  10th  111..  16th  111.,  60th  111., 
10th  Mich.,  14th  Mich.  Second  Brigade.  —  Brig.-Gen'l  J.  Beatty  :  3d 
East  Tenn.,  5th  East  Tenn.,  6ih  East  Tenn.,  78th  111.,  98th  O.,  113th  O., 
121st  O.  Third  Brigade.— Col.  D.  McCook:  85th  111.,  86th  111.,  110th  TIL, 
125th  111.,  52d  O.,  22d  Mich.  Artillery.— 2d  III.  Art.,  Co.  "I  ,"  M  Minn.  Batt'y., 
5th  Wis.  Batt'y. 

*  Brigade  Commanders  not  given. 


268  APPENDIX   B. 


THIRD  DIVISION. 
Brig.-Gen'l  A.  BAIRD. 
First  Brigade.—  Brig. -Gen'l  J.  B.  Turchin:  82d  Ind.,  11th  O.,  17th  O.,  31st 
O.,  36th  O.',  89th  O.,  92d  O.  Second  Brigade.— Co\.  Jas.  George  :  75th 
Ind.,  87th  Ind.,  lOlstlnd..  2d  Minn.,  9th  0.,  35th  O.,  105th  O.  Third  Bri- 
gade—Col.  E.  H.  Phelps:  10th  Ind.,  74th  Ind.,  4th  Ky.,  10th  Ky.,  18th  Ky., 
14th  O.,  38th  0.  Artillery.— 7th  Ind.  Batt'y.,  19th  Ind.  Batt'y.,  4th  U.*S. 
Art.,  Co.  "I." 

ARTILLERY  RESERVE. 
Brig. -Gen'l  J.  M.  BRANNAN,  Chf.  of  Art. 

FIRST  DIVISION. 

Col.  J.  BARNETT. 
First  Brigade.— 1st  0.  Art.,  Co.  "  A.,"  1st  O.  Art,  Co.  "  B.,"  1st.  O.  Art., 
Co.  "C,"  1st  O.  Art.,  Co.  "F."    Second 'Brigade— 1st  O.  Art.,  Co.  "  G.,"  1st 
O.  Art.,  Co.  "M.,"  18th  O.  Batt'y.,  20th  O.  Batt'y. 

SECOND  DIVISION. 
First  Brigade. — Capt.  Sutermeister:  4th  Ind.  Batt'y.,  8th  Ind.  Batt'y., 
11th  Ind.  Batt'y.,  21st  Ind.  Batt'y.  Second  Brigade.— Capt.  Church:  1st 
Mich  Art.,  Co.  "  D.,"  1st  M.  Tenn.  Art.,  Co.  "A.,"  3d  Wis.  Batt'y.  8th 
Wis.  Batt'y.  Coburn's  Biigade.—S&d  Ind.,  85th  Ind.,  19th  Mich.,  22d  Wis., 
9th  O.  Batt'y.  XT.  S.  Forces,  Gallatin,  Tenn.— Brig. -Gen'l.  E.  A.  Paine: 
91st  Ind.  (1st  Batt.),  50th  O.  (1st  Batt.),  71st  O.,  106th  O.,  13th  Ind.  Batt'y. 


NASHVILLE,  TENN. 
Brig.-Gen'l  R.  S.  GRANGER,  Comdg.  Post. 
Ward's  Brigade.— Brig.-Gen'l  W.  T.  Ward  :  105th  111.,  129th  111.,  70th 
Ind.,  79th  O  ',  1st  Mich.  Art..  Co.  "  E"  Unassigned.—Mh  Mich.  Vol. 
Inft'y.,  12th.  Ind  Batt'y.  Clarksrille,  Tenn.— Col.  A.  A.  Smith,  Comdg.  Post: 
83d  111.  (1st  Batt.),  2d  111.  Art.,  Co.  "H."  Chattanooga,  Tenn.— 10th  O.  Vol. 
Inft'y,  1st  Batt.  O.  S.  S. 

FIRST  DIVISION  CAVALRY. 
Brig.-Gen'l  R.  B.  MITCHELL. 
First  Brigade.— Col.  A.  P.  Campbell  :  1st  E.  Tenn.  Oav.,  2d  Mich.  Cav., 
9th  Penn.  Cav.  Second  Brigade.— Col.  E.  McCook:  2d  E.  Tenn.  Cav.,  3d  E. 
Tenn.  Cav.,  2d  Ind.  Cav.,  4th  Ind.  Cav.,  1st  Wis.  Cav.  Third  Brigade  — 
Col.  L.  D.  Watkins  :  4th  Ky.  Cav.,  5th  Ky.  Cav.,  6th  Ky.  Cav.,  7th  Ky.  Cav. 
— Artillery.    Sec.  1,  O.  Art.,  Co.  "D." 

SECOND  DIVISION  CAVALRY. 
Brig.-Gen'l  GEO.  CROOK. 

First 'Brigade.— Col.  R.  L  Minty  :  3d  Ind.  Cav.  (Detachm'f),  4th  Mich. 
Cav.,  7th  Penn.  Cav.,  4th  U.  S.  Cav.  Second  Brigade— Col.  E.  Long:  2d 
Ky.  Cav.,  1st  O.  Cav.,  3d  O.  Cav.,  4th  O.  Cav.  Third  Brigade— Col.  V7.  W. 
Lowe:  5th  la.  Cav.,  1st  Mid.  Tenn.  Cav.,  10th  O.  Cav  ,  Capt.  Stokes'  111. 
Batt'y,  15th  Pa.  Vol.  Cav.,  Col.  W.  J.  Palmer.  Miller's  Brig.  Mid.  Tnftij. 
—Col.  A.  O.  Miller:  92d  111.,  98th  111.,  123d  111.,  17th  Ind.,  72d  Ind..i8th 
Ind.  Batt'y.  U.  8.  Forces,  Ft.  Donelson.—  Lt.-Col.  E.  C.  Brott  :  83d  111. 
(Detachm't.),  2d  111.  Art.,  Co.  "C." 

reassigned  InfaiUry.-Uih  III.,  80th  111.,  102d  111.,  39th  Ind.,  51st  Ind., 
73d  Ind.,  21st  Ky'.,  28th  Ky.,  3d  O..  102d  O.,  108th  O.,  10th  Tenn.,  31st  Wis. 


APPENDIX  C. 

ORGANIZATION  OF  THE  CONFEDERATE 
ARMY  AT  THE  BATTLE  OF  CHICKA- 
MAUGA,  GA. 

RIGHT  WING. 
Lieut  .-Gex'l.  LEONIDAS  POLK. 

CHEATHAM'S  DIVISION. 
Maj.-Gen'l  B.  F.  Cheatham. 

t/nAksfm?*  Hri.nnr7.fi  - 

2d 

Brig.- 

Term..  Maney  s  (Tenn.)  Batt.,  Smith's  (Miss.)  Batt'y.  Smith's  Brigade.— 
Brig.-Gen'l  Preston  Smith,  Col.  A.  J.  Vaughan  :  11th  Term.,  12th  Term., 
4Tt.h  Tenn.,  13th  Tenn.,  29th  Tenn.,  154th  Tenn.,  Scott's  (Tenn.)  Batt' v. 
Wright's  Brigade.—  Brig.-Gen'l  M.  J.  Wkight  :  8th  Tenn.,  Kith  Tenn.,  2^th 
Tenn.,  38th  Tenn.,  51st  Tenn.,  52d  Tenn.,  Games'  (Tenn.)  Batt'y.  Slralil's 
Brigade.—  Brig-Gen'l  O.  F.  Strahl:  4th  Tenn.,  5th  Tenn.,  19th  Tenn.,  24th 
Tenn.,  31st  Tenn.,  33d  Tenn.,  Stanford's  (Miss.)  Butty. 

HILL'S  CORPS. 
Lieut.  -Gen'l.  D.  H.  HILL. 

CLEBURNE'S  DIVISION. 

Maj-Gen'l  P.  R.  CLEBURNE. 

Polk's  Brigade.— Brig-Gen'l  L.  E.  Polk  :  1st  Ark.,  3d  Confed.,  5th  Confed., 
2d  Tenn  ,  35th  Tenn.,  48th  Tenn..  Calvert's  (Tenn.)  Batt'y,  Wood's  Brigade. 
—Brig-Gen'l  S.  A.  M.  Wood  :  Kith  Ala.,  33d  Ala..  45th  Ala.,  32d  Miss..  45th 
Miss.,  Hmkin'a  Batt., Semple's (Ala.) Batt'y.  Beshler' s Brigade .—  Brig.-Gen'l 
James  Deshler,  Col.  R.  Q.  Mills  :  19th  Ark.,  24th  Ark.,  6th  Tex..  10th 
Tex.,  15th  Tex.,  17th  Tex.,  18th  Tex.,  24th  Tex.,  25ih  Tex.,  Douglas'  (Tex.) 
Batt'y. 

BRECKINRIDGE'S  DIVISION. 

Maj.-Gen'l  JOHN  C.  BRECKINRIDGE. 

Helm's  Brigade.—  Brig.-Gen'l  B.  H.  Helm,  Col.  J.  H.  Lewis,  41st  Ala.,  2d 
Ky.,4thKy.,  6th  Ky.,  9th  Ky.,  Cobb's  (Ky.)  Battery.  Adams' Brigade.— 
Brig.-Gen'l  Dan'l  Adams,  Col.  R.  L.  Gibso.;,  32d  Ala.,  13th  La.,  20th  La., 
16th  La.,  25th  La.,  19th  La.,  Austin's  (La.)  Batt.,  Slocomb's  (La.)  Battery. 
Stovall's  Brigade.—  Brig.-Gen'l  M.  A.  Stovall,  1st  Fla.,  3d  Fla.,  4th  Fla., 
47th  Ga.,  60th  No.  Car.,  Mebane's  (Tenn.)  Battery. 

269 


270  APPENDIX    C. 

WALKER'S  DIVISION.* 

Maj.-Gen'l  W.  H.  T.  WALKER. 

Brig.-Gen'l  S.  E.  GIST. 

Gift's  BHgade.—  Brig.-Gen'l  S.  R.  Gist,  Col.  P.  H.  Colquitt,  46th  Ga.,  8th 
Ga.  Batt.,  10th  So.  Car.,  34th  So.  Ca.,  Ferguson's  (So.  Car.)  Battery.  Ector's 
Brigade.—  Brig.-Gen"l  ,M.  D.  Ect  K,AJa.Batt.  (Stone's).Miss.  Batt.(Pound's). 
9thJTex.,  10th  Tex.  Cav..t  14th  Tex.  Cav.,t  32d  Tex.  Cav.,t  Batterv.J  Wil- 
son's Brigade.— Co\.  C.  C.  Wilson,  35th  Ga.,  39th  Ga.,  30th  Ga.,  1st  Ga.  Batt.. 
4th  La.  Batt.,  Battery.* 

LIDDELL'S    DIVISION.* 

Brig.-Gen'l  S.  J.  R.  L1DDELL. 

Liddell's  Brigade—  Col.  D.  C.  Gov  an,  2d  Ark.,  15th  Ark.,  5th  Ark.,  13th 
A.k.,  6th  Ark  ,  7th  Ark.,  8th  Ark.,  1st  La.,  Swett's  (Miss.)  Batt.  Walthall's 
Brigade.—  Brig.-Gen'l  E.  C.  Walthall,  34th  Miss.,  27th  Miss.,  29th  Miss., 
30th  Miss.,  34th  Miss.,  Fowler's  (Ala.)  Battery. 

LEFT  WING. 
Lieut. -Gen'l  JAMES  LONGSTREET. 

McLAW'S  DIVISIONS 

Maj.-Gen'l  LAFAYETTE  McLAW. 

Brig.-Gen'l  J.  B.  KERSHAW. 

Kershaw's  Brigade.—  Brig.-Gen'l  J.  B.  Kershaw,  2d  So.  Car.,  3d  So.  Car., 
7th  So.  Car.,  8th  So.  Car.,  15th  So.  Car  ,  3d  So.  Car.  Batt.  Woford's  Brigade. 
—Brig.-Gen'l  W.  T.  Wofford,  16th  Ga.,  18th  Ga.,  24th  Ga.,  3d  Ga.  Bait,, 
Cobb's  (Ga.)  Legion,  Phillip's  (Ga.)  Legion.  Humphreys'  Brigade.— Brig. - 
Gen'l  B.  G.  Humphreys.  13th  Miss.,  17th  Miss.,  18th  Miss.,  21st  Miss.  Bry- 
an's Brigade.W—  Brig.-Gen'l  Goode  Bryan,  10th  Ga.,  50th  Ga.,  51st  Ga.,  53d 
Ga. 

HOOD'S  DIVISIONS 

Maj.-Gen'l  J.  B.  HOOD. 

Brig.-Gen'l  E.  M.  LAW. 

Law's  Brigade.— Brig.-Gen'l  E.  M.  Law,  Col.  Sheffield,  4th  Ala.,  15th 
Ala.,  44th  Ala.,  47th  Ala.,  48th  Ala.  Eobertson's  Brigade.— -Brig.  Gen'l  J.  B. 
Robertson,  3d  Ark.,  18th  Tex.,  4th  Tex..  5th  Tex.  Anderson's  Brigade.— 
Brig.  Gen'l  Geo.  T.  Anderson,  7th  Ga.,  8th  Ga„  9th  Ga.,  11th  Ga.,  59th  Ga. 
Benning's  Brigade.—  Brig.-Gen'l  H.  L.  Benning.  2d  Ga.,  15th  Ga.,  17th  Ga., 
20th  Ga.  Artiltery.^— Mai.  Frank  Huger,  Fickling's  (Va.)  Bat.,  Jordan's 
(Va. )  Bat.,  Moody's  (La.)  Bat.,  Parker's  (Va.)  Bat.,  Taylor's  (Va.^  Bat.,  Wool- 
folk's  (Va.)  Bat. 

*  Walker's  and  Liddell's  divisions  constituted  a  "reserve  corps"  under 
Walker's  command,  Gist  commanding  Walker's  division. 

+  Dismounted. 

J  Gen'l  Walker  reports  five  batteries,  but  those  of  Ector's  and  Wilson's 
brigades  are  not  named  in  reports. 

SLongatreet's  corps,  organization  of  these  divisions,  and  of  the  artillery 
battalion  taken  from  Return  of  the  Army  of  Northern  Virginia,  for  August 
31.  1S63;  the  artillery  is  not  mentioned  in  the  reports. 

II  Longstreet's  report  indicates  that  these  brigades  were  not  eng 

11  Served  in  Johnson's  division. 


APPENDIX   C.  271 

HLNDMAN'S  DIVISION.* 

Maj.-Gbn'l  T.  C.  HINDMAX. 

Brig.-Gen'l  PATTON  ANDERSON. 

Anderson's  Brigade.— Brig.-Gen'l  Patton  Anderson,  Col.  J.  H.  Sharp, 

7th  Miss.,  9th  Miss.,  loth  Miss.,  41st  Miss.,  44th  Miss.,  9th  Miss.  Batt..  Gar- 

ntvs    iAla.  i  Bat.      Dntx'  Brigade.—  Brig.-Gen'l  Z.  C.  Deas,  19th  Ala.,  22d 

Ala..  25th  Ala..  39th  Ala..  50th  Ala,,  17th  Ala.  Batt.,  Dent's  (Ala.)  Bat.    Mani- 

gault's  Brigade.— Brig.-Gen'l  A.  M.  Manigault,  34th  Ala  .  28th  AJa.,  34th 

Ala.,  10th  So.  Car.  and  19th  So.  Car.  consol.,  Water's  (Ala.)  Bat. 

BUCKNER'S  CORPS. 
Maj-Gen'l  S.  B.  BUCKNER. 

STEWART'S  DIVISION. 
Maj.-Gen'l  A.  P.  STEWART. 
Johnson's  BrigadeA— Brig.-Gen'l  B.  R.  Johnson.  Col.  J.  S.  Fulton,  17th 
Tenn..  23d  Term..  25th  Tenn.,  44tU  Tenu..  9th  Ga.  Art.,  Bat.  "  E."  Brown's 
Brigade  —  Brig.-Gen'l  J.  C.  Brown,  18th  Tenn.,  2fitli  Tenn  .  32d  Tenn..  45th 
Tenn.,  Newman's  (Tenn.)  Batt.,  Dawson's  (Ga.)  Bat.  Bate's  Brigade. — 
Brig.-Gen  1  W.  B.  Bate,  58th  Ala..  37th  Ga.,  4th  Ga.  Batt.,  15th  Tenn., 
37th  Tenn..  20th  Tenn..  Oliver's  (Ala.)  Art.  Clayton's  Brigade.— Bri^.-Gen'l 
H.  D.  Clayton,  18th  Ala.,  36th  Ala.,  38th  Ala,,  Humphreys  (Ark.)  Bat. 

PRESTON'S  DIVISION. 
Brig.-Gen'l  WILLIAM  PRESTON. 
Grade's  Brigade.— Brig.-Gen']  A.  Gracie,  Jr.,  43d  Ala.,  1st  Ala.  Batt., J 
2d  Ala.  Batt..j'3d  Ala.  Batt..t  83d  Tenn.,  Battery. II  Tiigg's  Brigad*.— Col. 
R.  C.  Tf.igo.  1st  Fla.  Cav.,§  6th  Fla.,  7th  Fla.,  54th  Va.,  Peeple's  (Ga.)  Bat. 
Kelly's  Brigade.— Col.  J.  H.  Kelly,  65th  Ga.,  5th  Ky.,  58th  No.  Car.,  63d 
Va.,  Battery. II 

JOHNSON'S  DIVISION.! 

Brig.-Gen'l  B.  R.  JOHNSON. 
Gregg's  Brigade.— Brig.-Gen'l  John  Gregg,  Col.  C.  A.  Sttgy,  3d  Tenn., 
10th  Tenn,  30th  Tenn.,  41st  Tenn..  50th  Tenn,  1st  [20th]  Tenn.  Batt.,  7th 
Texas  Bledsoe's  (Mo.)  Bat.  McXau-'s  Brigade.— Brig.  Gen'l  E.  McNaik, 
Col.  D.  Coleman.  1st  Ark.  Rifles,  2d  Ark.  Rifles,  4th  Ark  ,  25th  Ark.,  35th 
Ark.,  Culpeper's  (S.  C.)  Bat. 

CAVALRY. 
Maj.-Gen'l  JOSEPH  WHEELER.** 

WHARTON'S  DIVISION. 
Brig.-Gen'l  JOHN  A.  WHARTON. 
First  Brigade.^Col.  C.  C.  Crews,  7th  Ala.,  2d  Ga.,  3d  Ga.,  4th  Ga.   Second 
Brigade.— Col.  T.  Harrison,  3d  Confederates,  lstKy.,4th  Tenn.,  8th  Texas, 
11th  Texas,  White's  (Ga.)  Battery. 

*  Of  Polk's  corps,    t  See  Johnson's  Division,  following. 

J  Hilliard's  Legion.     §  Dismounted. 

II  It  appears  that  Baxter's  (Tenn.)  and  Jeffress'  (Va.)  Batteries  belonged  to 
this  division,  but  their  assignment  is  not  clearly  indicated. 

U  This  was  a  temporary  organization,  embracing  Benning's,  Johnson's, 
Law's,  and  Robertson's  brigades,  as  well  as  Gregg's  and  McNair's. 

**  This  organization  taken  from  return  for  August  31st.  1863. 


272  APPENDIX   c. 

MARTIN'S  DIVISION. 

Brig.-Gen'l  W.  T.  MARTIN. 

First  Brigade.— Col.  J.  T.  Morgan,  1st  Ala.,  3d  Ala.,  51st  Ala..  8th  Con- 
federate.  Second  Brigade— Col.  A.  A.  Russell,  4th  AJa.,*  1st  Confederate, 
Wiggins'  (Ark.)  Battery. 

RODDEVS  BRIGADE. 

Brig.-Gen'l  P.  D.  RODDET. 

4th  Ala.,*  5th  Ala.,  53d  Ala.,  Forrest's  (Tenn.)  Regiment,  Ferrell's  (Ga.) 
Battery. 

FORREST'S  CORPS. 

Maj.-Gen'l  N.  B.  FORREST, 

ARMSTRONG'S  DIVISION.  + 

Bbig.-Gen'l  F.  C.  ARMSTRONG. 

Armstrong's  Brigade— 3d  Ark.,  1st  Tenn.,  2d  Tenn.,  McDonald's  Battalion. 

Brigade— 4th  Tenn.,  8th  Tenn.,  9th  Tenn.,  10th  Tenn.,  11th  Tenn., 

Freeman's  (Tenn.)  Battery,  Marion's  (Tenn.)  Battery. 

PEGRAM'S  DIVISION.* 

Brig.-Gen'l  JOHN  PEGRAM. 

Davidson's  Brigade.—  Brig.-Gen'l  H.  B.  Davidson,  1st  Ga  ,  6th  Ga.,  65th 
North  Carolina,  Rucker's  Legion,  Huwald's  (Tenn.)  Battery.  Scott's 
Brigade.— Col.  .1.  L.  Scott,  10th  Confederate,  1st  La.,  5th  Tenn.,  12th  Tenn. 
Battalion,  16th  Tenn.  Battalion,  Louisiana  Battery  (1  section). 

RESERVE  ARTILLERY.g 

Barret's  (Mo.)  Battery,  Darden's  (Miss.')  Battery.  Havis'  (Ala.)  Battery, 
Le  Gardewi's  (La.)  Battery,  Lumsden's  (Ala.)  Battery,  Massenhurg's  (,Ga.) 
Battery. 

*  Two  regiments  of  the  same  designation.  Lt.-Col.  Johnson  commanded 
that  in  Roddey's  brigade. 

t  Taken  from  return  for  August  31,  1863,  and  Forrest's  report. 

i  Taken  from  Pegram's  and  Scott's  reports  and  assignments  ;  but  the 
composition  of  this  division  is  uncertain. 

S  With  exception  of  Darden's  battery  taken  from  return  for  August  31,  1863; 
on  that  return  that  battery  appears  as  of  Johnson's  Brigade. 


ODEX. 


Note. — Regiments,  batteries,  etc.,  are  indexed  under  the  names  of 
their  States,  excepting  batteries  called  by  their  captain's  or  by  sonie 
other  special  name.     These  are  indexed  under  Battekies. 


Abbott's  Creek,  7  et  seq. 

Abington,  Va.,  8 

Adams,  General,  brigade  of,  33, 
97  et  seq.,  116  et  seq.,  121,  203 

Alabama,  regiment  of  :  Thirty- 
second,  79 

Aleshire,  battery  of,  141 

Alexander's  Bridge,  188,  190,  193 

Alpine,  Ga.,  182,  184,  191,  217 

Altamont,  49  et  seq. 

Ammen,  brigade  of,  30,  56,  75 

Anderson,  165,  178,  186,  231 

Anderson,  General,  given  com- 
mand in  Kentucky,  1  et  seq.; 
relinquishes  command,  4,  236 

Anderson,  General  S.  R.,  division 
under  Hardee,  65,  67  ;  at  La- 
vergne,  79 ;  at  Stone's  Riv- 
er, 124,  168;  ordered  to  with- 
draw from  Bridgeport,  178 

Anderson,  Patton,  brigade  of, 
209,  254 

Armstrong,  brigade  of ,  142 

Athens,  Ala.,  33,  42,  178 

Atlanta,  Ga.,  170,  176  et  seq.,  257, 
259 

12* 


Bacon  Creek,  84  et  seq. 

Baird,  General,  141,  143,  153; 
movements  of,  178,  180  et  seq., 
186;  at  Chickamauga,  189  et 
seq.,  193  ;  ordered  to  Crox- 
ton's  support,  195  et  seq.,  19S, 
201  et  seq.,  208,  213  et  seq, 
219,  221.223,  247,  253,  250; 
gallant  charge  of,  261 

Baldwin,  brigade  of,  89,  106,  132 

Barboursville,  Ky.,  3,  52 

Bardstown,  Ky.,  59,  61  et  seq.,  86 

Barnes,  brigade  of,  205 

Barren  River,  Ky. ,  13S 

Barton,  General,  34 

Batteries  :  Aleshire's,  141  ;  Brid- 
ges's,  248 ;  Bush's,  66  ;  Cot- 
ter's, 24  ;  Drury's,  121  ;  G.m- 
ther's,  113  et  seq.;  Hewitt's, 
12,  45;  Hotchkiss's,  109; 
Kinney's,  13  et  seq.,  17 ;  Kon- 
kle's,  4  et  seq.  ;  Loomis's,  65, 
113  et  seq.  ;  McClung's,  16  ; 
Mendenhall's,  238;  Rutledge's, 
16 ;  Simonson's,  31,  65,  106  ; 
Sloan's,    67;    Standart's,     11, 


274 


INDEX. 


14;  Stokes's,  112,  114,  122; 
Stone's,  66 ;  Webster's,  74  et 
seq.;  Wetmore's,  14;  Wright's, 
98 

Battle  Creek,  48,  178,  180,  183 

Battle,  regiment  of,  17 

Beatty,  Colonel  Samuel,  brigade 
of,  113,  121,124,  180 

Beatty,  General  John,  brigade  of, 
114,  124,  164,  202  et  seq.,  205, 
208,  219 

Beauregard,  General,  41 

Beech  Grove,  Ky.,  4,  9,  18,  160 

Bellbuckle  Gap,  154  et  seq.,  159 

Bellefonte,  Ala.,  178 

Bethpage  Bridge,  166 

Big  Creek  Gap,  34 

Big  Hill,  53 

Big  Sandy  Valley,  6  et  seq. 

Blair,  Frank  P.,  248 

Bledsoe,  cavalry  of,  16 

Bloomfield,  Ky.,  61,  63 

Blount's  Farm,  146 

Blountsville,  Ala.,  115  et  seq. 

Blyth's  Ferry,  168,  179 

Bubo  Cross  Roads,  165 

Bole  Jack,  90 

Bolles,  Col.,  7 

Bon  Aqua  Springs,  Term.,  141 

Bond,  Major,  Frank  S. ,  220 

Boone,  Colonel,  46 

Boonville,  42 

Bowling  Green,  Ky.,  2  et  seq.,  9 
et  seq. ,  13,  20,  23  et  seq.,  57, 
72,  77 

Brackenfield's  Point,  168 

Bradley,  brigade  of,  166,  197 

Brady  ville,  157,  160 

Bragg,  General,  36 ;  succeeds  John- 
ston, 41  et  seq.,  46 ;  theories 
about  his  movements,  48  et 
seq.  ;  in  Kentucky,  55  et  seq.  ; 


at  Perryville,  61  et  seq.  ;  re- 
tires in  good  order,  68 ;  official 
report  of,  69  ;  force  of,  70  et 
seq.  ;  feeling  against,  72 ;  po- 
sition in  Kentucky,  73 ;  his 
unpopularity  in  Kentucky,  77 
et  6eq.  ;  mistake  of,  80 ;  at 
Murfreesboro,  81,  84;  designs 
of.  85  ;  position  of,  87  ;  move- 
ments of,  96  et  seq.  ;  plan 
of  battle  of,  101  et  seq.  ;  at 
Stone's  River,  104,  110 ;  or- 
ders reinforcements  to  Polk, 
116,  118  et  seq. ;  report  of, 
123  ;  decides  to  retreat,  124  ; 
in  retreat,  125  ;  losses  of,  127, 
131  ;  official  report  of,  134, 
137  et  seq.  ;  in  Northern  Mis- 
sissippi, 148  et  seq;,  151  et 
seq.  ;  at  Shelbyville,  154.  162  ; 
abandons  Shelbyville,  164 ;  at 
Tullahoma,  166 ;  in  retreat, 
167  et  seq.,  169  et  seq.  ;  at 
Chattanooga,  173  et  seq.,  177 
et  seq.  ;  location  of  his  army 
determined,  181 ;  near  La  Fay- 
ette, 184  et  seq.  ;  his  letter  to 
Polk,  187  et  seq.,  189  et  seq., 
193  ;  plans  of,  195  et  seq.,  201 ; 
position  of,  203  et  seq.,  207, 
210,  213  et  seq.,  217  et  seq.  ; 
effective  force  of,  228  et  seq.  ; 
before  Chattanooga,  230  et 
seq.,  233,  242  et  seq.,  246  et 
seq.,  251 ;  reinforces  his  cen- 
tre, 254  ;  leaves  his  headquar- 
ters. 255  et  seq.,  260  et  seq. 

Bramlette,  Colonel.  11 

Brannan,  General,  156  et  seq.,  160 
etseq.,  163;  division  of,  166  et 
seq.  ;  movements  of,  178,  180 ; 
at  Chickamauga,  189  et  seq.  ; 


INDEX. 


275 


ordered  to  support  Baird,  193,  | 
195  et  seq.  ;  joins  Negley,  198, 
201  et  seq.,  204  et  seq.,  208  et 
seq.,  211,  213  et  seq.,  221  et 
seq.,  244 

Brauner,  cavalry  of,  16 

Breckinridge,  Colonel  W.  C.  P., 
under  Morgan,  83, 

Breckinridge,  General  John  C. ,  25 ; 
blockades  Nashville,  78,  80, 
91,  95,  97  et  seq.  ;  at  Stone's 
River,  116  et  seq. ;  defeat  of, 
127,  200,  203  et  seq.,  186,  207, 
219,  254 

Brentwood,  92  et  seq. 

Bridges,  battery  of,  248 

Bridgeport  Ala.,  32,  98,  168,  177 
et  seq.,  183,  230  et  seq.,  233, 
237  et  seq. ,  243 

Broomtown  Valley,  183 

Brown's  Ferry,  Tenn.,  233  et  seq., 
237  et  seq.,  240,  242.  244,  246 

Bryantsville.  Ky.,63,  69 

Buckner,  General,  occupies  Bowl- 
ing Green,  2  et  seq.,  9,  65  ;  or- 
dered to  occupy  Loudon,  179, 
187,  188  et  seq.  ;  reinforces 
Longstreet,  247,  254 

Buell,  General  D.  C.,  given  com- 
mand of  Department  of  Ohio, 
5  et  seq.,  8  ;  orders  to  Thomas, 
12  et  seq.,  20  ;  sketch  of,  21  ; 
his  organization  of  the  army, 
22  et  seq.  ;  his  correspondence 
with  Halleck,  27  et  seq.  ;  force 
of,  'J9  et  seq.  ;  orders  to  Mor- 
gan, 34  ;  plans  of,  40  et  seq. ; 
organizes  against  guerillas, 
46 ;  his  orders  to  Nelson,  4S  ; 
preparations  fora  conflict  with 
Bragg,  49  et  seq. ,  53  ;  pursues 
Bragg,  55  et  seq.  ;  at  Perry- 


ville,  61  et  seq.  ;  report  of,  68 
et  seq.,  orders  a  pursuit  of 
Bragg,  71 ;  relieved  of  com- 
mand of  Department  of  Ohio, 
72  et  seq.  ;  as  an  organizer 
and  disciplinarian,  74  et  seq.  ; 
army  of,  78,  80  et  seq.,  130, 
136  et  seq. ;  Halleck's  orders 
to,  148  ;  removed  by  Halleck, 
148 

Buena  Vista,  Mexico,  6 

Buford,  General,  55 

Burbrldge,  Colonel,  25 

Burnside,  152,  168,  173  ;  in  East 
Tennessee,  179,  217 ;  ordered 
to  reinforce  Rosecrans,  232, 
243  ;  reinforced  by  Granger, 
256  et  seq. 

Bush,  battery  of,  66 

Byron's  Ford,  189 

Cairo,  111.,  27 

Camp  Boone,  Tenn. ,  2 

Camp  Dick  Robinson,  3et  seq. 

Camp  Joe  Holt,  2 

Camp  Kenton,  Ky. ,  4 

Camp  Nevin,  22 

Camp  Wickliffe,  25 

Camp  Wildcat,  3 

Caperton  Ferry,  180,  182 

Carlin,  brigade  of,  67  8S ;  re- 
pulses the  enemy  at  Stone's 
River,  107  et  seq.,  159,  206 ; 
reports  to  Hooker,  251 

Carroll,  General,  16 

Carter,   General,  11  et  seq.,  17,  86 

Carter's  Station,  86 

Carthage,  Tenn.,  51,  141,  147,  152 

Cary,  battalion  of,  16 

Catlettsburg,  Ky.,  6 

Catlett's  Gap,  Ga.,  185,  189 

Cave  City,  35 


276 


INDEX. 


Celina,  Term.,  37 

Centreville,  Term.,  141 

Chalmers,  General,  30,  57  et  seq. ; 
severely  wounded,  115,  119 

Chaplin  River,  05 

Charleston,  Railroad,  179,  257 

Charleston,  S.  C,  28,  32,  148 

Charlotte,  Tenn.,  80 

Chattanooga,  Tenn.,  32  etseq.,  36, 
40  et  seq.,  48  et  seq.,  52,  96, 
148,  154  et  seq.,  168,  171,  173 
et  seq.,  181  et  seq.,  185,  187, 
189  et  seq.,  197,  199  et  seq., 
203,  207,  211  et  seq.,  214  et 
seq.,  218,  224  et  seq.,  228, 
230  et  seq.,  233,  237  et  seq., 
240,  242  et  seq.,  246  et  seq., 
250,  et  seq.,  252,  257  et  seq. 

Cheatham,  division  of,  63,  65,  91, 
97,  101,  107,  196,  253 

Chestnut  Mound,  19 

Chickamauga,  Ga.,  135,  169,  176, 
183,  185,  187  et  seq.,  190,  192 
et  seq.,  197,  200,  203,  215,  223, 
227,  229,  232,  236  et  seq.,  244, 
246,  248,  255  et  seq.,  257, 
259 

Child,  Colonel,  53 

Christiana,  157,  160  et  seq.,  163 

Cincinnati,  Ohio,  6,  22,  38,  51,  55, 
173,  834 

Citico  Creek,  247 

Clarksville,  Tenn.,  28,  143 

Cleburne,  brigade  of,  52 ;  division 
of,  97  et  seq.,  101,  104,  107  et 
seq.,  124,  131,  185  et  seq,,  198, 
203,  207,  253 

Cleveland,  Tenn.,  257,  259 

Cobham,  brigade  of,  250 

Coburn,  Colonel,  12,  141  et  seq.  ; 
losses  of,  143 

Columbia,  Ky.,  86 


Columbia,  Tenn.,  11  et  seq.,  33, 
35,48,  139,  141  etseq.,  154 

Columbus,  Ky. ,  3,  9 

Concord  Church,  165 

Connell,  Colonel,  11  et  seq. 

Coolidge,  Major,  160,  162 

Cooper's  Gap,  Ga.,  180,  189,  218 

Coosa  River,  146  et  seq. 

Corinth  Miss.,  27,  28  et  seq.,  35, 
42,  234 

Corse,  General,  252  et  seq. 

Cotter,  battery  of,  24 

Covington,  Ky.,  55 

Cowan,  33,  164,  167 

Crab  Orchard,  12,  39,  71 

Cranor,  Colonel,  7 

Craven's  House,  250 

Crawfish  Springs,  Ga.,  190,  196 

Creighton,  brigade  of,  250 

Cripple  Creek,  160 

Crittenden,  General  George  B., 
sketch  of,  10,  14;  retreat  of,  18 

Crittenden,  General  Thomas  L., 
given  command  of  Fifth  Divi- 
sion of  Army  of  Ohio,  23,  25 
et  seq.,  29  et  seq.,  42  ;  at  Bat- 
tle Creek,  48  et  seq.,  56,  61  et 
seq. ,  65  ;  corps  of,  68  ;  at  Glas- 
gow, 71,  75  ;  under  Rosecrans, 
77  ;  disposition  of,  S7  et  seq.  ; 
before  Murfreesboro,  93  et 
seq.,  100,  112,  119,121  et  seq., 
124  etseq.  ;  at  Bradyville,  157  ; 
Rosecrans's  orders  to,  160  et 
seq.  ;  at  Manchester,  1C5  et 
seq.  ;  movements  of,  178  et 
seq. ,  182  et  seq.  ;  attacked  by 
Bragg,  187,  190  et  seq.  ;  posi- 
tion of,  201  et  seq.  ;  206,  212, 
214,  216,219;  reports  concern- 
ing, 224,  226 ;  relieved  from 
his  command,  234 


INDEX. 


277 


Crittenden,  General  T.  T.,  43 
Crittenden,  John  J.,  23 
Crook,  General,  141,  152,  231 
Crow  Creek,  178 
Croxton,  brigade  of,  195,  199 
Craft,  General  Charles,  25,  29,  53 
et   saq.,  114  et  seq.,  122  ;  bri- 
gade of,  244,  249,  252,  260 
Crumpton's  Creek,  165 
Cumberland,  Army  of,  21  etseq., 
72  et  seq.;  extent  of,  77,  127, 
136,  139,  148,  151, 154,  158, 169 
et  seq,  177,  215,  217  et  seq, 
219,  223,  227  et  seq,  232,  235 
etseq,  243,  248,254,  258 
Cumberland,  Department  of,  234 
Cumberland  Ford,  3,  29,  34,  52 
Cumberland  Gap,  Ky.,  3,  9,  29,  34, 

50  etseq,  71,  86,  173 
Cumberland  Mountains,  215 
Cumberland  River,  139, 141 
Cynthiana,  Ky.,  46 


Dalton,  Ga.,  176  et  seq.,  183  et 
seq.,  1S9,  216  et  seq.,  257,  259 

Danville,  Ky.,  61 

Davis,  General  J.  C,  division  of, 
at  Murfreesboro,  50 ;  under 
McCook,  87  et  seq,  100,  102, 
107  et  seq.,  123  et  seq.,  130, 
140  et  seq.,  143,  158  et  seq; 
ordered  in  pursuit,  167  ;  move- 
ments of,  178  ;  division  of,  180, 
182,  191,  196  et  seq.,  201  et 
seq.,  205  et  seq.,  211,  821,  244  ; 
reports  to  Sherman,  246,  257 

Davis,  Jefferson,  83 

Day's  Gap,  145 

Decatur,  Ala.,  28,  32,  42,  48 

Dechard,  Term.,  43,  49,  164,  167 
et  seq.,  174  et  seq. 


Dillon,  Captain,  incompetency  of, 

11  et  seq. 
Donelson,  brigade  of,  115  et  seq. 
Donelson  Fort,  see  Fort  Donelson 
Dougherty's  Gap,  GaM  191,  218 
Dover,  Tenn.,  27,  140,  141 
Drury,  battery  of,  121 
Dry  Creek,  176 
Dry  Valley,  201,  209,  211  et  seq., 

214,  224 
Duck  River,  29,  125,  141,  154  et 

seq.,  164 
Duffield,  Colonel,  29,  31,  35,  43 
Dug  Gap,  181,  185  et  seq.,  190 
Duke,    Colonel    Basil    W.,   under 

Morgan,  83 
Duke,  General,  his  history,  26,  33  ; 

his  opinion  of  Johnson,  47 
Dumont,    General    E.,    placed   in 

command  at  Nashville,  29,  35, 

70,77 
Dunham,    Colonel,    at   Munfords- 

ville,  58 
Dunlap,  49,  177 

Eaglesville,  87,  89,  97,  140,  143, 

156 
Eastport,  Miss.,  145 
Ector,  brigade  of,  104,  195 
Edgefield,  25 
Edmonson  pike,  88 
Elizabeth  town,  Ky.,  2,  85 
Elk  River,  167 
Elliott,  General  W.  L.,  259 
Estill  Springs,  166 
Ewing,  General  Hugh,  division  of, 

246,  248,  253,  260 

Fairfield,  Ky.,  61,  159,  162 

Farmington,  231 
Fayetteville,  Tenn.,  33,  178 
Fishing  Creek,  12  et  seq,  19 


278 


INDEX. 


Florence,  Ala.,  28,  42 

Forrest,  raids  of,  43  et  seq.,  48; 
cavalry  of,  78  et  seq.,  127,  136 ; 
his  command  assigned  to  Van 
Dora,  139,  142  et  seq.,  145  et 
seq.  ;  demands  a  surrender  of 
Streight,  147 ;  at  Columbia, 
154,  165,  168,  188,  195 

Fort  Donelson,  Tenn.,  24  et  seq., 
76,  139  et  seq. 

Fort  Heiman,  139 

Fort  Henry,  Tenn.,  20,  25  et  seq., 
76,  139,  145 

Fortress  Monroe,  217 

Fort  Wood,  247 

Foster  telegraphs  Halleck,  217 

Foster  ville,  157,  161 

Fox,  Captain  P.  V.,  238 

Frankfort,  Ky.,  38,  55,  61,  63,  69 

Franklin,  Tenn.,  80,  83,  87  et  seq., 
91  et  seq.,  98,  100,  140  et  seq., 
143,  152,  154  et  seq. 

Frick's  Gap,  Ga.,  189  et  seq. 

Fry,  Colonel  Speed  S.,  16  et  seq.; 
division  of,  77,  87,  139 

Fyffe,  brigade  of,  121 


Gainesville,  57 

Gallatin,  Tenn.,  46,  77,  87,  139, 
152 

Gano,  Captain  R.  M. ,  36  et  seq. 

Garesche,  death  of,  117,  129 

Garfield,  General  James  A.,  placed 
in  command  of  a  brigade  of  the 
Army  of  Ohio,  6  et  seq.;  suc- 
cesses of,  8  ;  urges  Rosecrans 
to  make  an  advance,  153,  211, 
214,  223  et  seq. ;  despatch  from, 
226 

Garrard,  Colonel  T.  T.,  3 

Garrison  Creek,  162 


Geary,  division  of,  238,  240  et  seq. , 
244,  249  et  seq.,  252 

Georgetown,  Ky.,  3S 

Georgia,  regiment  of,  Second,  43 

Gibson,  brigade  of,  119 

Gilbert,  General,  at  Louisville,  58, 
60 ;  commands  Third  Corps, 
61  ;  at  Perryville,  02,  64,  66 
et  seq.  ;  at  Bowling  Green,  71  ; 
inefficiency  of,  73,  141  et  seq. 

Gist,  division  of,  253 

Glasgow,  Ky.,  37,  51,  71 

Gooding,  Colonel,  brigade  of,  67 

Gordon's  Mills,  Ga.,  176,  183  et 
seq.,  187,  190,195,  197,  199 

Granger,  General  Gordon,  141, 143, 
152  et  seq.,  157,  161  et  seq.; 
at  Chickamauga,  209  et  seq., 
213  et  seq.,  221,  22S;  placed 
in  command  of  Fourth  Army 
Corps,  233,  247  et  seq. ,  256 ; 
superseded  by  Palmer,  259 

Granger,  R.  S.,  143,  153,  156,  160, 
163,  191, 193  ;  at  Rossville,  199 

Grant,  General  U.  S.,  25,  29  et 
seq.,  42,  74,  76,  139,  150  et 
seq.,  173 ;  given  command  of 
the  Military  Division  of  the 
Mississippi,  234  et  seq.;  orders 
Sherman  to  Chattanooga,  243, 
246  et  seq. ,  253  ;  his  plan  of 
ba.ttle,  259  et  seq. 

Greene,  General,  241 

Greenville,  25 

Greysville,  257 

Grider,  brigade  of,  121  et  seq. 

Grose,  brigade  of,  114  et  seq.,  207, 
249  et  seq. 

Gnenther,  battery  of,  113  et  seq. 

Guy's  Gap,  154  et  seq  ,  161,  163 

HALL,  Colonel,  14,!  et  seq. 


INDEX. 


279 


Halleck,  General,  26  et  seq. ;  placed 
in  command  of  Department  of 
Mississippi,  28  et  seq. ;  at 
Pittsburg  Landing,  31  ;  plans 
of,  40  et  seq. ,  60 ;  comman- 
der-in-chief, 71  et  seq. ,  76  ; 
paper  campaign  of,  78 ;  con- 
troversy with  Rosecrans,  1 48 
et  seq.  ;  letter  to  Rosecrans, 
153  et  seq.  ;  telegraphs  Rose- 
crans, 216  et  seq.  ;  his  report 
of  year  1863,  234  et  seq. 

Hall's  Chapel,  165 

Hambright,  Colonel,  brigade  of, 
167 

Hanson,  General  Roger,  79  etseq., 
98etseq.,  121 

Hardee,  General,  with  Bragg,  51, 
65  ;  urges  Morgan's  promotion, 
83  ;  position  of,  87  et  seq.,  91  ; 
at  Murfreesboro,  97,  99,  101  ; 
attacks  Post,  108,  110;  at 
Stone's  River,  124,  131,  154, 
156,  159  et  seq.,  167  et  seq., 
253,  256 

Harding,  Colonel,  attacked  by 
Wheeler,  140  et  seq. 

Harker,  Colonel,  brigade  of,  95, 
98  etseq.,  112,  114,  208,  256 

Harlan,  Colonel,  18,  86 

Harris,  Colonel  L.  A.,  4  et  seq.  ; 
brigade  of,  67 

Harrison,  Colonel,  158,  207 

Harrison's  Landing,  178 

Harrodsburg,  Ky.,  38,  61,  68,  70 

Hartsville,  Tenn.,  82  etseq. 

Hascall,  brigade  of,  at  Murfrees- 
boro, 94  et  seq.  ;  at  Stone's 
River,  112,  114  et  seq.,  117 

Hathaway,  Colonel,  146 

Hazel  Green,  Ala. ,  5 

Hazen,    brigade    of,    94,    114    et 


seq.,  122   et   seq.,  178,  238  et 
seq. 

Heiman,  Fort,  see  Fort  Heiman 

Henry,  Fort,  see  Fort  Henry 

Helm,  brigade  of,  203 

Heth,  General,  at  Covington,  55 

Hewitt,  battery  of,  12,  45 

Heg,  brigade  of,  206 

Hiawassee  River,  257 

Hill,  ordered  to  join  Hindman, 
185  ;  with  Polk,  188,  197 

Hillsboro,  164,  167  et  seq. 

Hindman,  General,  13,  23  et  seq., 
1S5  et  seq.,  206,  210  et  seq.; 
official  report  of,  227,  254 

Hobson,  Colonel,  84 

Holly  Springs,  161 

Hood,  General  J.  B.,  188  et  seq., 
197  etseq.,  2C6 

Hooker,  General  Jos.,  reinforces 
Rosecrans,  232,  237  et  seq.  ;  at 
Brown's  Ferry,  240  et  seq., 
244,  246,  249  et  seq.,  253; 
strikes  the  enemy  at  Taylor's 
Ridge,  257  et  seq. ;  in  command 
of  Twentieth  Corps,  259  et  seq. 

Hoover's  Gap,  154  et  seq.,  157, 
159,  162,  169 

Hoover's  Mills,  161 

Horse  Mountain,  154 

Horseshoe  Ridge,  208,  224,  227 

Hoskins,  Colonel,  11.  18,  86 

Hotchkiss,  battery  of,  109 

Howard,  at  Brown's  Ferry,  240  et 
seq.  ;  ordered  to  Chattanooga, 
244,  246  et  seq.  ;  destroys  rail- 
road, 257  et  seq.  ;  supersedes 
Granger,  259  et  seq. 

Huffman,  John,  36 

Humboldt,  Tenn.,  28 

Hunt,  Colonel,  of  Georgia,  36 

Hunter,   General,   placed  in  com- 


280 


INDEX. 


mand  of   one   department   of 

Mississippi,  28 
Huntsville,  Ala.,  31  et  seq.,  42 
Hurlbut,  217 ;  ordered  to  reinforce 

Rosecrans,  232 

Illinois,  regiments  of :  Thirty- 
fourth,  105 ;  Eighty-third, 
140;  Ninety-second,  181,  190 

Indiana,  regiments  of:  Second, 
46 ;  Tenth,  14,  16  et  seq.  ; 
Thirty-second,  23  et  seq.  ; 
Thirty-third,  12 ;  Thirty- 
ninth,  23,  158;  battery  of, 
Eighth,  197 

Ireland,  brigade  of,  250 

Ivy  Mountain,  5 

Iuka,  Miss.,  234 

Jackson,  General  J.  S.,  53;  di- 
vision of,  64  et  seq.  ;  killed,  66 

Jackson,  Tenn.,  28 

Jackson,  T.  R.,  brigade  of,  97  et 
seq. ;  116  et  seq. 

Jasper,  Tenn.,  33 

Jefferson,  Tenn.,  93  et  seq. 

Jenny's  Creek,  7 

Johnson,  B.  R.,  Bragg  orders  his 
brigade  from  Ringgold,  188 

Johnson,  Bushrod,  195,  197  et  seq. , 
206,  209  et  seq. 

Johnson,  division  under  McCook, 
87  et  seq.,  100,  102;  negli- 
gence of,  105  et  seq.,  131  et 
seq.,  158  et  seq.  ;  movements 
of,  178,  1S2,  191,  196  et  seq., 
204,  208,  213,  247,  252  et  seq.  ; 
gallant  charge  of,  261 

Johnson,  General  R.  W. ,  of  Third 
Kentucky  Cavalry,  2;  occu- 
pies Mumfordsville,  23 ;  forces 
a  fight  with  Morgan,  46,  84 


Johnson,  Lieutenant-Colonel,  of 
the  Twenty-eighth  Ky.,  37 

Johnson's  Crook,  Ga. ,  180,  191 

Johnston,  General  Albert  Sidney, 
2  et  seq.  ;  resigns  from  Second 
United  States  Cavalry,  9  et 
seq.  ;  orders  to  Hindman,  13 
et  seq.  ;  on  Crittenden,  19  et 
seq.  ;  orders  to  Hindman,  23 
et  seq.  ;  his  force  and  plan9, 
26  et  seq. ,  31 ;  death  of,  41 , 
51,  151 

Johnston,  General  J.  E.,  169  et 
seq.,  179,  181 

Jones,  Lieutenant-Colonel,  of  the 
Thirty-ninth  Indiana,  23 

Jones's  Ford,  167  et  seq. 

Jordan,  Colonel,  37,  141 

Kelley's  Ferry,  Tenn.,  233,  237, 
240,  242 

Kelly's  farm,  190 

Kennett,  Colonel  John,  cavalry 
of,  31,  125 

Kenton,  Simon,  4 

Kentucky,  regiments  of :  First, 
35;  Second,  45;  Third  Cav- 
alry, 2;  Fourth,  14,  16  et  seq., 
46;  Fifth,  46;  Seventh,  3, 
53;  Eighth,  251;  Tenth,  14, 
18;  Twelfth,  14;  Fourteenth, 
6  et  seq.  ;  Eighteenth,  39 ; 
Twenty -second,  6  et  seq.  ;' 
Twenty-eighth,  38 

Kershaw,  division  of,  206,  210 

Kinderhook,  Tenn.,  141 

King,  brigade  of,  196,  213 

Kingston,  on  Tenn.  River,  168 

Kinney,  battery  of,  13  et  seq.,  17 

Kirk,  General,  brigade  of,  91,  105 
et  seq.,  131  et  seq. 

Knob's  Gap,  Tenn.,  88 


INDEX. 


281 


Knoxville,  Tenn.,  3,  9  et  seq.,  36 
et  seq.,  40,  48,  153,  168,  173, 
179,  256,  257  et  seq. 

Konkle,  Captain,  battery  of,  4 

La  Fayette,  Ga.,  176, 181  et  seq., 
1&5  et  seq.,  189  et  seq.,  198, 
204,  209,  211,213,  217,  224 

Laibold,  brigade  of,  206  et  seq. 

Lancaster,  Ky.,  71 

Landrum,  Colonel  John  J.,  39 

Langdon,  Colonel,  239 

Lannon's  Stand,  160 

Larkin's  Ford,  Ala. ,  178 

Lavergne,  Tenn.,  29,  79,  87  et 
seq.,  94,  126,  139,  152 

Lebanon  Junction,  Ky.,  2,  13,  20, 
35  et  seq.,  45  et  seq.,  61  et 
seq.,  82,  86,  98 

Ledford's  Ford,  188 

Lee,  General  Robert  E. ,  170 

Leet's  tanyard,  184 

Lester,  Colonel,  43  et  seq. 

Letcher,  Lieutenant-Colonel,  7 

Lewis,  General,  254 

Lexington,  Ky.,  38,  50,  53,  63 

Liberty  Gap,  144,  154  et  seq., 
157,  159,  161  et  seq. 

Liddell,  division  of,  213 

Lightburn,  General,  252 

Lincoln,  President  Abraham,  19  ; 
war  order  of,  28,  236 

Lindsay,  Colonel,  6 

Livingston,  Tenn.,  40 

Logan's  Cross  Roads,  13,  19 

London,  Ky.,  11  et  seq.,  71 

Long,  Colonel  Eli,  at  Lumley's 
Station,  161,  244 

Longstreet ;  reinforces  Bragg,  1S8, 
197,  199 ;  assigned  command  of 
half  Bragg's  force,  200,  206, 
208;    reinforced,  210  et    seq., 


217.  230,  237  et  seq.;  assaults 
Geary's  camp,  241,  repulse 
of,  242;  in  East  Tenn.,  243; 
reinforced  by  Buckner,  247, 
257 

Lookout  Mountain,  175,  177,  180 
et  seq,  185,  191,  218,  £30, 
233,  238,  240,  2J2  et  seq., 
246,  247,  249  et  seq.,  259 

Loomis,  battery  of,  65,  113 

Loomis,  brigade  of,  107 

Loudon,  Tenn.,  179 

Louisa,  Ky.,  7 

Louisville,  Ky.,  2,  5  et  seq.,  8, 
20,  23,  27,  35,  37,  39,  45  et 
seq.,  49,  51,  53  et  seq.,  58  et 
seq.,  61,  63,  70,  73,  77,  80  et 
stq  ,  84,  87,  137  et  seq. 

Lumley's  Station,  Tenn.,  157,  161 

Lytle.  Colonel,  33,  brigade  of,  67, 
191,197,  205;  killed,  207 

Lytle' s  Creek,  Tenn.,  126 


McAfee  Church,  209 

McBride's  Creek,  159 

McClellan,  cavalry  of,  16 

McClernand,  General  J.  A.,  at 
Pittsburg  Landing,  31 

McClung,  battery  of,  16 

McCook,  Colonel  Dan,  brigade 
of,  13,  17,  62  et  seq.,  193, 
195  et  seq. ,  209,  214,  22S 

McCook,  Colonel  E.  M.,  cavalry 
division  of,  231 

McCook,  General  A.  McD. ,  placed 
in  command  under  Sherman, 
4 ;  given  command  of  Second 
Division  of  Army  of  Ohio,  22, 
30,  32;  at  Athens,  42,  48  et 
seq. ,  56,  61  et  seq. ,  64 ;  at 
Perry ville,  65  et  seq. ;  at  Bow 


282 


INDEX. 


ling  Green,  71,  74  et  seq.  ; 
under  Rosecrans,  77  ;  position 
of,  87  et  seq.,  94.  99,  101  et 
seq.  ;  disaster  of,  104  et  seq.  ; 
his  orders  to  Sheridan,  110; 
rout  of,  112,  117  et  seq.  ;  120, 
125  et  seq.  ;  defective  line  of, 
129  et  seq.  ;  at  Tullahoma,  157, 
160  et  seq.,  165 ;  ordered  in 
pursuit,  167 ;  movements  of, 
178,  180,  182  ;  at  Chiekarnauga, 
189  et  seq.,  198  ;  position  of, 
201 ;  defects  in  his  line,  202, 
204  et  seq.,  211  et  seq.,  214, 
217  et  seq.,  221 ;  reports  con- 
cerning, 224,  226 ;  relieved  of 
his  command,  233 

McCook,  General  Robert  L. ,  42 

McCorrnick's  Gap,  4 

McCown,  division  of,  52,  91,  97  et 
ssq.,  101,  104,  107  et  seq. 

McDowell,  General,  27 

McHenry,  Colonel,  25 

McLaughlin,  Major,  4,  7 

McLemore's  Cove,  176,  181,  185, 
188,  191,  218 

McMinnville,  Tenn.,  41,  43,  45,  48 
et  seq.,  147,  154  et  seq.,  158, 
174,  178 

McNair,  brigade  of,  104 

Manchester,  Tenn.,  125  et  seq., 
147,  155  et  seq,  157,  159,  161 
et  seq.,  165,  168  et  seq. 

Maney,  Colonel,  107 

Manigault,  brigade  of,  107 

Manson,  General  M.  D.,  13,  16,  53 

Maps:    Mill   Springs,    15;    Perry- 
ville,  64 ;  Stone's  River,  103 
Chiekarnauga  Campaign,  172 
Battle  of   Chiekarnauga,   194 
Battlefield     of     Chattanooga, 
215 


Marshall,  General  Humphrey, 
sketch  of,  6  et  seq. 

Martin,  division  of,  139,  163,  231 

Matt's  Hollow,  155  et  seq.,  162 

Maxville,  Ky.,  64  et  seq. 

Maysville,  Ky. ,  4,  6  et  seq. 

Meade,  General,  217 

Memphis,  Tenn.,  28,  32,  41,  148 

Mendenhall,  Major  John,  batteries 
of,  238 

Metcalfe,  Colonel,  53 

Michigan,  regiments  of :  First, 
238 ;  Ninth,  44 

Middle  Creek,  8 

Middleton  Road,  157  et  seq.,  160 

Midway,  Ky.,  38 

Miller,  Colonel  John  F.,  79,  111, 
115,  122  et  seq.,  158  et  seq. 

Millersburg,  157  et  seq. 

Mill  Springs,  Ky.,  4, 10,  14  et  seq., 
19  et  seq.,  236 

Minnesota,  regiments  of :  Second, 
14,  17  et  seq.  ;  Third,  43 

Minty,  Colonel,  125,  140,  143,  147, 
161,  163  et  seq.,  178,  192,  199, 
214 

Missionary  Ridge,  176  et  seq.,  181, 
191,  218  et  seq.,  230,  242  et 
seq.,  247,  252,  256,  258,  260 

Mississippi,  Department  of,  28 

Mitchel,  General  O.  M.,  given 
command  of  Third  Division 
of  Army  of  Ohio,  22,  24  et 
seq.,  2S ;  at  Murfreesboro, 
31,  33,  42,  48 

Mitchell,  General  Robert  B.,  at 
Murfreesboro,  Tenn.,  50  ;  divi- 
sion of,  56,  63  et  seq.;  assigned 
to  the  command  of  Nash- 
ville, 87;  on  Tullahoma  cam- 
paign, 156,  158,  160,  163, 
167 


INDEX. 


283 


Mitchell,  General  John  G.,  brigade 
of,  209,  242 

Mitchellville,  81 

Moccasin  Point.  Tenn.,  233,  238 

Monticello,  Ky.,  40 

Moore,  Colonel  A.  B. ,  capture  of, 
82  et  seq. 

Moore,  Colonel  L.  P.,  6 

Morgan,  General,  George  W.,  as- 
signed command  of  Seventh 
Division  of  Buell's  Army,  28 ; 
assumes  command  of  Eastern 
Kentucky,  34  et  seq.  ;  official 
report  of,  40,  45  et  seq.  ;  aban- 
dons Cumberland  Gap.  52 

Morgan,  General  John  H. ,  history 
of  his  cavalry,  26  ;  raids  of,  35 
et  seq.,  52;  his  raids  in  Ken- 
tucky, 81  et  seq. ;  made  Briga- 
dier-General, 83 ;  reverses  of, 
84,  127,136,  139,  143,  147 

Morgan,  General  J.  D.,  assigned 
command  of  Second  Division 
of  Reserve  Corps  under  Rose- 
crans,  153 

Morris  Ferry,  167 

Morton,  Captain  St.  Clair,  96, 
114 

Moulton,  Ala.,  145 

Mount  Top,  178 

Mount  Washington,  Ky.,  61 

Muldraugh's  Hills,  2,  85,  136 

Munfordsville,  Ky,  20,  23,  57,  59, 
72  et  seq. ,  84 

Munroe,  Col.,  164 

Murfreesboro,  Tenn.,  29,  31,  35,  43. 
50  et  seq.,  55,  78  et  seq.,  85  et 
seq,  87  et  seq.,  92  et  seq.,  102, 
109  et  seq.,  117  et  seq.,  124  et 
seq.,  136  et  seq.,  141,  144,  147, 
149,  152,  154,  157,  159  et  seq., 
168,  178,  199 


Nashville,  Tenn.,  2,  9  et  seq., 
19  et  seq.,  22,  24  et  seq.,  28 
et  seq.,  31  et  seq.,  35,  41  et 
seq.,  45  et  seq.,  48  et  seq.,  56 
et  seq.,  70  et  seq.,  76  et  seq., 
87,  96  et  seq.,  101,  108,  111  et 
seq.,  114,  117,  119,  125  et  seq., 
136  et  seq.,  141,  143,  145,  149 
154  et  seq.,  168,  175,  183,  232 

Negley,  General,  32  et  seq.  ;  divi- 
sion of,  56  et  seq.,  79  et  seq., 
87,  90  et  seq.  ;  at  Murfrees- 
boro, 96, 100;  at  Stone's  River, 
110  et  seq.,  114  et  seq.,  117; 
supports  McCook,  120  et  seq., 
158,  160  et  seq.  ;  at  Manches- 
ter, 163,  166,  168  ;  movements 
of,  178,  180  et  seq.  ;  at  McLe- 
more's  Cove,  185  et  seq.,  1S9, 
196,  19S  ;  ordered  to  report  to 
Thomas,  201  et  seq.,  205,  208, 
214  ;  delay  of,  219  et  seq.,  224 

Nelson,  General  William,  4  et 
seq. ;  given  command  of  Fourth 
Division  of  Army  of  Ohio, 
23,  25  et  seq.;  given  Second 
Division  of  Buell's  Army,  29 
et  seq.,  42  et  seq.;  endeavors 
to  intercept  Forrest,  45 ;  or- 
dered to  McMinnville,  48,  51 ; 
at  Richmond,  53,  75 

New  Hope  Church,  37 

Newport,  Ky.,  55 

Nicholasville,  Ky.,  4 

Noale  Fork,  163 

Nolin,  Ky.,  85 

Nolinsville,  80,  87  et  seq.,  92  et 
seq.,  125,  140 

Norton,  Colonel,  4 

Ohio,  Department  of,  description 
of,  5  et  seq.,  21  et  seq.,  28,  30 


284 


INDEX. 


et  seq.,  59  et  seq.,  71  et  seq., 
75etseq.,  137,  234 

Ohio,  regiments  of :  Second,  4 ; 
Ninth,  14,  17  et  seq.;  Four- 
teenth, 18;  Seventeenth,  11; 
Eighteenth,  33,  180,  238  ; 
Twenty-first,  4  ;  Twenty- 
third,  5  ;  Thirty-fifth,  12 ; 
Thirty-eighth,  11,  16;  For- 
tieth, 7 ;  Forty-second,  6  et 
seq.;  Seventy-fourth.  79 ;  One 
Hundred  and  Sixth,  82 

Olympia  Springs,  4 

Orchard  Knob,  248,  253  et  seq. 

Osterhaus,  division  of,  246,  249  et 
seq.,  25S,  260 

Overall's  Creek,  90,  117,  120 

Owensboro,  Ky.,  25 

Paducati,  Ky.,  27 

Paine,  General  E.  A.,  51 ;  division 
of,  57,  80 

Paintville,  6  et  seq. 

Palmer,  brigade  of,  98,  116,  121 

Palmer,  General  J.  M.,  at  Nash- 
ville, 51 ;  division  of,  56,  79  ; 
under  Crittenden,  87  ;  at  Mur- 
freesboro,  93  et  seq.,  100,  111 
et  seq.,  114  et  seq.,  121  et  seq., 
157,  160,  183,  191  et  seq.,  196 
et  seq.,  202,  204,  208,  238; 
commands  Fourteenth  Corps, 
247 ;  at  Chattanooga,  256,  259 

Paris,  Comte  de,  74  et  seq. 

Paris,  Ky.,  7,  38 

Patterson,  General,  27 

Pea  Vine  Creek,  176 

Pegram,  Confederate  cavalry  un- 
der, 96,  120,  1SS 

Pelham,  Tenn.,  165,  167  et  seq. 

Pemberton,  General,  151 

Penney,  battery  of,  67 


Pennsylvania,  regiments  of:  Sev- 
enth, 35,  46  ;  Ninth,  37 

Pennington,  Tenn.,  168 

Perryville,  Ky.,  61  et  seq.,  130,  236 

Pigeon  Mountain,  176  et  seq.,  1S4 

Piketon,  Ky.,  5,  8 

Pikeville,  178 

Pillow,  General,  assigned  command 
of  Palmer's  biigade,  121 

Pine  Mountain,  34 

Pittsburg  Landing,  Tenn.,  28,  31, 
75,  77 

Poe's  Cross-roads,  178 

Polk,  Gen.  Leonidas,  occupies  Co- 
lumbus, 9 ;  with  Bragg,  51  ; 
at  Bardstown,  C3  ;  at  battle  of 
Perryville,  69 ;  at  Murfrees- 
boro,  87,  97,  101,  104,  110,  115 
et  seq.,  119  et  seq.,  125;  at 
Shelbyville,  154, 156 ;  at  Chat- 
tanooga, 16S  ;  ordered  to  sup- 
port Hindman,  186  et  seq., 
197 ;  assigned  command  of 
half  Bragg  s  force,  200,  203, 
213,  219 

Pond  Spring,  Ga.,  189  et  seq. 

Pope,  General  John,  at  Pittsburg 
Landing,  31 

Port  Hudson,  228 

Post,  brigade  of,  107  et  seq.,  134, 
191,  228 

Pound  Gap,  5  et  seq.,  8 

Powell's  Valley,  34 

Preston,  brigade  of,  98, 116  et  seq., 
121,  206,  210 

Prestonburg,  Ky.,  4  et  seq.,  7 

Prewitt's  Knob,  59 

Price,  brigade  of,  121  et  seq. 

Pulaski,  Tenn.,  35 

Raccoon  Mountain,  175,  177,  240 
Rains,  brigade  of,  104 


INDEX. 


285 


Rankin's  Ferry,  238 

Ready ville,  Tenn.,  97 

Reed's  Bridge,  1S8,  190,  193,  195, 

201 
Reid,  Whitelaw,  76  et  seq. 
Reynolds,  General,  J.  J. ,  division 
of,  87 ;  at  Murfreesboro,  139, 
143,    147,  153,  159  et  seq.  ;  at 
Manchester,  163,  168  et  seq. ; 
movements  of,  178 ;  at  Shell- 
mound,  180 et  seq.;  at  Chicka- 
mauga,  189  et  seq.,  196  ;  over- 
powered, 197  et  seq.,  204,  206, 
208,  212  et  seq  ,  220,  222  et  seq. 
Richmond,  Ky. ,  39,  53  et  seq. 
Richmond,  Va.,  26,  32 
Ringgold,  Ga.,  183  et  seq.,  187  et 

seq.,  209,  214,  257 
Roberts,     under    Sheridan,     1 10 ; 

killed,  111 
Robertsport,  14 
Robinson,  General,  213 
Rochester,  25 
Rock  Castle  Hills,  3,  9 
Rock  Creek  Ford,  167 
Roger's  Gap,  52 
Rogersville,  Ala.,  33,  54 
Rome,  Ga.,  141,  146,  176,  185,  216 
Rosecrans,  Major  General  William 
S.,  assigned  command  of  De- 
partment of  Cumberland,  72  ; 
organizes    his    army,    77 ;   at 
Nashville,  81,  S3  et  seq.  ;  his 
plans,  87;   instruction  to  Mc- 
Cook,  91    et   seq.  ;   orders    to 
Crittenden,    94  et  seq.,  99  et 
seq. ;   plan  of  battle  of,  1 01  et 
seq. ;  at  Stone's   River,  104  et 
seq.;     orders   the    movement 
of    troops,    112,    114,    116  et 
seq.,  124,  126;  losses  and  suc- 
cess of,  127  ;   bravery  of,  128 


et  seq.;  his  report  of  Mc- 
Cook,  130  et  seq.;  loss  of  guns 
of,  133  ;  plans  of,  136  et  seq., 
139  et  seq.  ,143,  145  ;  contro- 
versy with  the  authorities  at 
Washington,  148  et  seq.;  reply 
to  Halleck,  150  et  seq.;  or- 
ganizes a  reserve  corps,  153  ; 
plans  of,  155  et  seq.  ;  orders  of, 
160  ;  at  Manchester,  162  et 
seq.;  at  Tullahoma,  166;  plans 
of,  168  ;  report  of,  169  et  seq. ; 
plan  of,  173  et  seq.,  177,  179, 
182  et  seq.,  185,  190  et  seq., 
193  ;  orders  of,  196 ;  headquar- 
ters at  Widow  Glenn's  house, 
198,  200  ;  assembles  his  corps 
commanders,  201,  205  et  seq., 
211  ;  retires  to  Chattanooga, 
212 ;  masterly  manoeuvring 
of,  215,  217  et  seq.,  219  et  seq. ; 
reprimands  Wood,  222 ;  re- 
ports concerning,  224  et  seq. ; 
effective  force  of,  228 ;  rein- 
forced from  Washington,  232  et 
seq.  ;  superseded  by  Thomas, 
234  ;  character  of,  235  et  seq. 

Rossville,  Ga.,  176,  183  et  seq.,  192 
et  seq.,  197,  199,  201,  209,  211 
et  seq.,  214  et  seq.,  224  et  seq., 
227  et  seq.,  251  et  seq.,  261 

Round  Forest,  116,  119,  129 

Round  Mountain,  146 

Rousseau,  General,  ordered  by  An- 
derson to  report  at  Louisville, 
2,  22,  48,  56  ;  division  of,  64  et 
seq.,  87;  encamps  at  Owen's 
store,  92  et  seq.,  100,  111  et 
seq.,  117,  124,  159,  163,  166 

Rover,  Tenn.,  140,  160 

Rowlett's  Station,  23 

Running  Water  Creek,  183 


286 


INDEX. 


Rutherford's  Creek,  143 
Rutledge,  battery  of,  16 

Salem,  Term.,  91,  100,  143,  157, 
160,  178 

Sal  visa,  Ky.,  62 

Salyersville,  Ky. ,  5 

Sand  Mountain,  145,  175,  177,  180, 
182 

Saunders,  cavalry  of,  16 

Savannah,  Tenn. ,  28  et  seq.,  33 

Schoepff,  General,  3  ;  on  the  Cum- 
berland, 11  eb  seq.  ;  at  Mill 
Springs,  18 ;  at  Perry  ville,  67 

Schurz,  General,  241 

Scottsboro,  51 

Seribner,  brigade  of,  114,  160, 
196 

Sequatchie  Valley,  49,  167  et  seq., 
174,  177,  182,  216,  230 

Shafer,  brigade  of,  110  et  seq. 

Shelby  ville,  Ky.,  69,87,  89 

Shelbyville,  Tenn.,  29,  31,  33,  125 
et  seq.,  138,  151,  154  et  seq., 
157  et  seq.,  163  et  seq.,  169, 
231 

Sheldon,  Colonel,  7  et  seq. 

Shellmound,  Tenn.,  180,  183 

Shepardsville,  Ky.,  61 

Sheppard,  Colonel,  114 

Sheridan,  division  o°,  63,  66et  seq.; 
under  McCook,  87  et  seq.,  100, 
107  et  seq.,  118;  gallant  fight 
of,  130,  134;  ordered  to  the 
front,  143;  at  Millersburg, 
158;  at  Manchester,  165  et 
seq.;  ordered  in  pursuit,  167  et 
seq.,  177;  at  Bridgeport,  180, 
18i,  191,  197;  position  of,  201, 
204  et  seq. ,  206  et  seq. ;  sepa- 
rated from  the  main  command, 
211  et  seq. ,  219  ;  his  movement 
to  the  aid  of  Thomas, 2  - 1 ,  247, 


253,  255  et  seq. ;  losses  of,  258 ; 
gallant  charge  of.  261 

Sh  rman,  General  William  T,  sec- 
ond in  command,  2  ;  succeeds 
General  Anderson  4  et  seq.; 
succeeded  by  Bur  11,  21  et  seq.. 
75,  170 ;  ordered  to  reinforce 
Rosecrans,  232,  236 ;  ordered 
to  Chattanoogn ,  243  et  6eq., 
246,  248  et  seq.,  252;  pursues 
the  enemy,  256  ;  oi  dered  to 
press  forward,  257  ;  losses  of, 
258  ;  prepares  lor  spring  cam- 
paign, 259  ;  his  role  in  Grant's 
I  dan,  260  et  seq. 

Shiloh,  30,  51,  74,  76,  130 

Sill,  Co'onel,  5,  31 

Sill,  General,  commands  two  divi- 
sions 61,  63,  70;  repulses  the 
enemy  at  Stone's  Rirer,  107; 
killed,  108;  brigade  of,  110; 
his  report  to  Sheridan,  134 

Simonson,  battery  of,  31,  65,  106 

Sloan,  battery  of,  67 

Smith,  Colonel  Orland,  241 

Smith,  General  A.  J.,  at  Pittsburg 
Landing,  31 

Smith,  General  C.  F.,  at  Pitts- 
bi.rg  Landing,  28 

Smith,  Giles  A.,  246 

Smith,  Green  Clay,  35,  39 

Smith,  John  E.,  246,  248,  253 

Smith,  Kirby,  32;  in  East  Ten- 
nessee, 31;  marching  on  Lex- 
ington, 50  et  seq.;  occupies 
Lexington  54  et  seq.  ;  at 
Frankfort,  61  et  seq.,  09  et 
seq. ;  at  Murf  reesboro,  87  ;  at 
Readyville,  97 

Smith,  Lieutenant-Colonel,  85 

Smith,  Major,  44 

Smith,  Morgan  L.,  246,  248,  252  et 
seq. 


INDEX. 


287 


Smith,  Preston,  brigade  of,  52 

Smith,  Wil  iam  F.,  Rosecrans' 
Chief  Engineer,  234,  237  et 
seq.,  244,  246 

Smith,  W.  S.,  division  of,  71 

Smyrna,  Tenn.,  94 

Snow  Hill,  144 

Somerset,  Tenn.,  11,  20,  39,  71 

Sparta,  49,  lr.8 

Spears,  General,  34,  124 ;  brigade 
of,  126 

Spring  Creek,  166 

Springfield,  Ky.,  38,  61 

Spring  Hill,  Tenn.,  141,  147 

Stagall's  Ferry,  39 

Standart,  battery  of,  11,  14 

Stanford,  Ky.,  7,  12,  71 

Stanley,  General  D.  S.,  made 
chief  of  cavalry  to  Rosecrans, 
83,  89;  at  Murfreesboro,  125 
et  seq.,  144,158,  160;  Rose- 
crans's  orders  to,  161,  163,  168 

Stanley,  Colonel  T.  R.,  Eigh- 
teenth Ohio,  33 ;  brigade  of, 
111,  204  et  seq,  208,  238 

Stanton,  Secretary  of  War,  148, 
151,  235 

Starkweather.  Colonel,  brigade  of, 
66  et  seq.,  93,  118,  195 

Statesville,  144 

Steedman,  Colonel  J.  B.,  18,  67, 
139,  166 ;  gallant  conduct  of, 
209,  214 

Steinwehr,  division  of,  241 

Stevens's  Gap,  180  et  seq.,  186,  191 

Stevenson,  division  of,  52,  249,  251, 
353 

Stevenson,  Ala.,  32,  49,  171,  177  et 
seq.,  232,  234 

Stewart,  General  A.  P.,  division 
of,  197,  206 ;  under  Longstreet, 
210  et  seq.,  252,  254 

Stevvartsboro,  93  et  seq. 


Stewart's  Creek,  87  et  seq.,  93 

Stokes,  battery  of,  112,  114,  122 

Stone,  battery  of,  66 

Stone's  River,  97  et  seq,  101,  118, 
120,  124,  126,  128,  130,  136, 
149,  197,  225,  227 

Stovall,  brigade  of,  203 

Streight,  Colonel,  repulses  For- 
rest, 145  et  seq. ;  surrenders  to 
Forrest,  147 

"Suck,"  The,  233 

Summertown,  251 

Summerville,  Ga.,  176,  182 

Sumner,  General  E.  V.,  21 

Sweden's  Cove,  167 


Tafel,  Colonel,  82  et  seq. 
Tantalon,  Tenn.,  165,  178 
Taylor's  Ridge,  176  et  seq. ,  257 
Tennessee,  Army  of,  28,  31,  50,  83 
Tennessee,  department  of,  234 
Tennessee,    Regiments   of,    First, 
14,  18  ;  Second,  14,  18  ;  Nine- 
teenth,   17;    Twentieth,     98; 
Twenty-sixth,  123 
Terrill,  killed,  66 
Terry,  Colonel,  killed,  24 
Texas,  Regiment  of,  Eighth,  43,  45 
Therman,  Tenn.,  49,  177 
Thomas,    General    George   H,   3; 
ordered  to  report  for  duty  in 
Kentucky,  4;  at  Columbia,  11 
et  seq.  ;  orders  to  Manson,  16  ; 
at  Mill  Spring,  1 7  et  seq.  ;  as- 
signed command  of  First  Divi- 
sion of  Army  of  the  Ohio,  22, 
29  ;  force  of,  31 ;    establishes 
headquarters  at  Dechard,  42  et 
seq.  ;    at  McMinnville,    48  et 
seq.  ;    captures  a  despatch  of 
Bragg's,  50 ;  division  of,  56  et 
seq.,  59 ;   at  Perryville,  61   et 


288 


INDEX. 


seq.,  6S ;  his  faith  in  Buell,  72  ; 
under  Rosecrans,  77,  82  ;  at 
Nashville,  87;  at  Nolinsville, 
88,  92  et  seq.,  100;  at  Stone's 
River,  110  et  seq. ;  calmness 
of,  118  et  seq.  ;  at  Murfrees- 
boro,  125  et  seq.  ;  staying 
qualities  of,  135,  147;  at  Sa- 
lem, 157,  159 ;  Rosecrans's 
orders  to,  160,  161  et  seq.  ; 
drives  the  enemy  to  Fairfield, 
163;  at  Tullahoma,  166  et 
seq.,  170;  movements  of,  178 
etseq.,  181  et  seq.,  187  et  seq.  ; 
at  Chickamauga,  189  et  seq., 
193,  195  et  seq.  ;  joins  Negley, 
198,  205  et  seq.  ;  at  Chicka- 
mauga, 209 et  seq.,  218 et  seq.  ; 
official  report  of,  211 ;  inter- 
view with  Wood,  223  et  seq.  ; 
position  after  battle  of  Chicka- 
mauga, 226  et  seq.  ;  supersedes 
Rosecrans,  234 ;  ability  of, 
235  et  seq ;  eulogy  on,  236, 
237 ;  congratulates  Hooker's 
troops,  242,  244;  orders  to 
Howard,  246,  247,  249,  251, 
253  et  seq.  ;  sends  additional 
troops  to  Burnside,  256  ;  orders 
to  Hooker  and  Palmer,  257 ; 
losses  of,  258 ;  orders  Fourth 
Corps  to  Cleveland,  259,  261 

Thompson's  Station,  142 

Tompkins ville,  Ky.,  37 

Tracy  City,  Tenn.,  49,  165 

Trenton,  Ga.,  175,  180,  182,  184, 
246,  260 

Triune,  Tenn.,  87 et  seq.,  94,  97  et 
seq,  139  etseq.,  152,  156 

Tullahoma,  Tenn.,  48,  139,  151  et 
seq.,  154,  163,  166,  168,  174 

Tunnel  Hill.  Ga.,  256 

Turchin,  brigade  of,  24,  31  et  seq., 


158,   160  et  seq.,  167,  189  et 
seq.,  213,  218  et  seq.,  256 

Tuscumbia,  Ala.,  32,  145 

Tyndale,  brigade  of,  241 

Tyner's  Station,  168 

Underwood,  Colonel,  241 

Unionville,  140 

United  States,  regiments  of  :  Sec- 
ond Cavalry,  9;  Eighteenth 
Infantry,  14 

University,  Tenn.,  33,  167,  178 

Valley  Head,  191,  218 
Van  Cleve,  division  of,  under  Crit- 
tenden, 87,  95,  100, 102,  112  et 
seq.,  117  et  seq.,  157,  160,  17S, 
183,  191  et  seq.,  197  et  seq., 
201,  205,  211 
Vanderveer,    Colonel,    brigade  of, 

12,  204  et  seq.,  207 
Van   Dorn,  50  ;    reports  to  Bragg, 
139 ;  assumes  command  at  Col- 
umbia, 141  et  seq.  ;  at  Spring 
Hill,  143,  147 
Vaughan,  Col.  A.  J.,  107 
Versailles,  Mo.,  140,  143,  158,  160 
Vicksburg,    Miss.,    151,  153,    173, 

228 
Von  Schrader,  Lieut. -Col.,  79,  206 
Von  Trebra,  Lieut. -Col.,  23 

Wagner,  brigade  of,  68,  114  et 
seq.,  178,  183,  226,  228 

Waitsborough,  11 

Walford,  Colonel,  7,  11,  16,  35,  39 

Walker,  Colonel,  brigade  of,  87, 
92  et  seq.,  118,  162,  186  et 
seq.,    1S9,  193,  195  et  seq.,  207 

Wallace,  Lewis,  division  of,  76 

Walling's  Ridge,  Tenn.,  175,  177, 
230 

Walthall,  regiment  of,  17 


INDEX. 


289 


Walworth,  brigade  of,  205,  207 
VVard,  General,  152 

Wartrace,  Tenn.,  154  et  seq.,  157 

Washington,  D.  C,  1,  71  et  seq., 
138, 148,  150,  151,  216,  219,  232 

Watkins,  Colonel  Lewis  D.,  gallant 
charge  of,  147 

Wauhatchie,  Tenn.,  175,  184  ;  bat- 
tle of,  "237,  240,  249 

Webster,  Colonel,  battery  of,  74 

West  Liberty,  Ky. ,  4  et  seq. 

West  Point,  N.  Y.,  6,  10,  21 

Wetmore,  battery  of,  14 

Wharton,  Colonel,  43,  96,  120,  139 
et  seq.  ;  division  of,  163,  231 

Wheeler,  Confederate  cavalry  un- 
der, 78  ;  raid  in  West  Tennes- 
see, 81,  96etseq.,  126,  139  et 
seq.,  141  ;  at  Guy's  Gap,  163 
et  seq.,  187,  231 

Whitesburg,  Ala.,  178  et  seq. 

Whiteside,  183,  23S,  246 

Whitfield,  Texan  brigade  of,  142 

Whittaker,  brigade  of,  209  et  seq. , 
242,  249  et  seq. 

Widow  Glenn's  Farm,  190,  198, 
201 ,  206 

Widow's  Creek,  32 

Wildcat,  Ky.,  9 

Wilder,  Colonel  John  T.,  at  Mun- 
fordsviile,  57  et  seq.,  138,  147, 
159,  165,  178,  184,  187,  189  et 
seq.,  192,  199,  204  et  seq.,  207 

Wilkinson  Pike,  90,  93,  98,  109 

Williams,  Colonel  J.  S.,  4 

Williams  Island,  234 

Williamson,  brigade  of,  252 

Williuk,  General,  24  ;  brigade,  89, 
91 ;  negligence  of,  105  et  seq., 
131  et  seq.,  158,  207,  213 

Will's  Valley,  175,  180,  182,  1S4, 
240 


Wilson,  brigade  of,  195 

Wilson's  Creek,  89 

Wilson,  Tenn.,  88,  92 

Winchester,  Ky.,  39 

Winchester,  Tenn.,  33,  164,  168, 
175 

Winston's  Gap,  176,  182 

Withers,  division  of,  63,  91,  97, 
101,  104,  107,  124,  164,  168 

Wisconsin,  battery  of  Fifth.  67 

Woodbury  Pike.  160 

Wood,  Fort,  see  Fort  Wood 

Wood,  General  T.  J.,  given  com- 
mand of  Sixth  Division  of 
Army  of  Ohio,  23,  29,  48  et 
seq.,  56,  68  ;  at  Stanford,  71 ; 
under  Crittenden,  87  ;  at  Mur- 
freesboro,  94  et  seq.,  100;  at 
Stone's  R'.ver,  102,  112,  114  et 
seq.,  160  ;  at  Chattanooga,  183 
et  seq.,  191  et  seq.,  197  ;  posi- 
tion of,  201  et  seq.,  205  et  seq., 
209  et  seq.,  213.  219  et  seq.  ; 
official  report  of,  221  et  seq., 
228,  247,  250,  252,  et  seq.,  256  ; 
losses  of,  258 ;  gallant  charge 
of,  261 

Woodland,  25 

Woodruff',  brigade  of,  90  ;  107 

Woodson ville,  Ky.,  24 

Wright,  battery  of.  98 

Wright,  General  H.  G.,  53 

Wynkoop,  cavalry  of,  35 


Zahm,  Colonel,  125  et  seq. 

Zollicoffer,  General,  ordered  to  ad- 
vance into  Eastern  Kentucky, 
3  ;  sketch  of,  9  et  seq.  ;  at 
Mill  Springs.  16  et  seq.  ;  shot, 
18 ;  his  body  sent  to  Buell,  20 


MESSRS.    CHARLES    SCRIBNER'S    SONS 

are  publishing,  under  the  general  title  of  THE 

Campaigns  of  the  Civil  War, 

a  series  of  volumes,  contributed  at  their  solicitation  by  a 
number  of  leading  actors  in  and  students  of  the  great  conflict 
of  1861-65,  with  a  view  to  bringing  together,  for  the  first 
time,  a  full  and  authoritative  military  history  of  the  suppres- 
sion of  the  Rebellion. 


The  final  and  exhaustive  form  of  this  great  narrative,  in  which  every 
doubt  shall  be  settled  and  every  detail  covered,  may  be  a  possibility 
only  of  the  future.  But  it  is  a  matter  for  surprise  that  twenty  years 
after  the  beginning  of  the  Rebellion,  and  when  a  whole  generation 
has  grown  up  needing  such  knowledge,  there  is  no  authority  which  is 
at  the  same  time  of  the  highest  rank,  intelligible  and  trustworthy,  and 
to  which  a  reader  can  turn  for  any  general  view  of  the  field — for  a 
strong,  vivid,  concise  but  truly  proportioned  story  of  the  great  salient 
events. 

The  many  reports,  regimental  histories,  memoirs,  and  other  materi- 
als of  value  for  special  passages,  require,  for  their  intelligent  reading, 
an  ability  to  combine  and  proportion  them  which  the  ordinary  reader 
does  not  possess.  There  have  been  no  attempts  at  general  histories 
which  have  supplied  this  satisfactorily  to  any  large  part  of  the  public. 
Undoubtedly  there  has  been  no  such  narrative  as  would  be  especially 
welcome  to  men  of  the  new  generation,  and  would  be  valued  by  a  very 
great  class  of  readers; — and  there  has  seemed  to  be  great  danger  that 
the  time  would  be  allowed  to  pass  when  it  would  be  possible  to  give 
to  such  a  work  the  vividness  and  accuracy  that  come  from  personal 
recollection.     These  facts  led  to  the  conception  of  the  present  work. 


From  every  department  of  the  Government,  from  the  officers  ot  the 
army,  and  from  a  great  number  of  custodians  of  records  and  special 
information  everywhere,  both  authors  and  publishers  have  received 
every  aid  that  could  be  asked  in  this  undertaking;  and  in  announcing 
the  issue  of  the  work  the  publishers  take  this  occasion  to  convey  the 
thanks  which  the  authors  have  had  individual  opportunities  to  express 
elsewhere. 


The  volumes  of  the  series  will  be  duodecimos  of  about  250 
pages  each,  illustrated  by  maps  and  plans  prepared  under 
the  direction  of  the  authors.  They  will  appear,  as  far  as 
possible,  in  the  chronological  order  of  the  Campaigns  of 
which  they  treat ;  and  by  their  preliminary  and  concluding 
chapters  will  be  so  far  connected  that  the  completed  work 
will  practically  cover  the  entire  field  of  the  war. 

The  price  of  each  volume  will  be  $1.00. 


The  following  volumes  are  now  ready  : 

I.— THE  OUTBREAK  OF  REBELLION.  By  John  G. 
Nicolay,  Esq.,  Private  Secretary  to  President  Lincoln;  late 
Consul- General  to  France,  etc. 

A  preliminary   volume,  describing   the  opening  of  the  war.  and   covering  the 
period  from  the  election  ot  Lincoln  to  the  end  of  the  first  battle  of  Bull  Run. 

II.—FROM  FORT  HENRY  TO  CORINTH.  By  the  Hon. 
M.  F.  Force,  Justice  of  the  Superior  Court,  Cincinnati ;  late 
Brigadier-General  and  Bvt.  Maj.  Gen'l,  U.S.V.,  commanding 
First  Division,  17th  Corps:  in  1862,  Lieut.  Colonel  of  the 
20th  Ohio,  commanding  the  regiment  at  Shiloh ;  Treasurer  of 
the  Society  of  the  Army  of  the  Tennessee. 

The  narrative  of  events  in  the  West  from  the  Summer  of  iS6t  to  May,  1862: 
covering  the  capture  of  Fts.  Henry  and  Donelson,  the  Battle  of  Shiloh,  etc.,  etc. 


III.— THE  PENINSULA.  By  Alexandsr  S.  Webb,  LL  D  , 
President  of  the  College  of  the  City  of  New  York ;  Assistant 
Chief  of  Artillery,  Army  of  the  Potomac,  1861-62;  Inspector 
General  Fifth  Army  Corps;  General  commanding  2d  Div. , 
2d  Corps;  Major  General  Assigned,  and  Chief  of  Staff,  Army 
of  the  Potomac. 

The  history  of  McC'ellan's   Peninsula  Campaign,  from  his  appointment  to  the 
end  of  the  Seven  Days'  Fight. 

IV.— THE  ARMY  UNDER  POPE.  By  John  C.  Ropes, 
Esq.,  of  the  Military  Historical  Society  of  Massachusetts,  the 
Massachusetts  Historical  Society,  etc. 

From  the  appointment  of  Pope  to  command  the  Army  of  Virginia,  to  the  appoint- 
ment of  McClellan  to  the  general  command  in  September,  1862. 


V.— THE    ANTIETAM    AND    FREDERICKSBURG.      By 

Francis  Winthrop  Palfrey,  Bvt.  Brigadier  Gen'l,  U.S.V., 
and  formerly  Colonel  20th  Mass.  Infantry;  Lieut.  Col.  of  the 
20th  Massachusetts  at  the  battle  of  the  Antietam  ;  Member  of 
Military  Historical  Society  of  Massachusetts,  of  the  Massachu- 
setts Historical  Society,  etc. 

From  the  appointment  of  McClellan  to  the  general  command,  Sept.  1862,  to  the 
end  of  the  battle  of  Fredericksburg. 


VI.— CHANCELLORSVILLE  AND  GETTYSBURG.  By 

Abner  Doubleday,  Bvt.  Maj.  Gen'l,  U.S.A.,  and  Maj. 
Gen'l,  U.  S.V.  ;  commanding  the  First  Corps  at  Gettysburg, 
etc. 

From  the  appointment  of  Hooker,  through  the  campaigns  of  Chancellorsville  and 
Gettysburg,  to  the  retreat  of  Lee  aftet  the  latter  battle. 


VII.— THE  ARMY  OF  THE  CUMBERLAND.  By  Henry 
M.  Cist,  Brevet  Brig.  Gen'l  U.S.V. ;  A.A.G.  on  the  staff  of 
Major  Gen'l  Rosecrans,  and  afterwards  on  that  of  Major  Gen'l 
Thomas;  Corresponding  Secretary  of  the  Society  of  the  Army 
of  the  Cumberland. 

From  the  formation  of  the  Army  of  the  Cumberland  to  the  end  of  the  battles  at 
Chattanooga,  November,  1863. 


IX.— THE  CAMPAIGN  OF  ATLANTA.  By  the  Hon. 
Jacob  U.  Cox,  Ex-Governor  of  Ohio  ;  late  Secretary  of  the 
Interior  of  the  United  States;  Major  General  U.S.V.,  com- 
manding Twenty-third  Corps  during  the  campaigns  of  Atlanta 
and  the  Carolinas,  etc.,  etc. 

From  Sherman's  first  advance  into  Georgia  in  May,  1864,  to  the  beginning  of 
the  March  to  the  Sea. 

X.— THE  MARCH  TO  THE  SEA— FRANKLIN  AND 
NASHVILLE.     By  the  Hon.  Jacob  D.  Cox. 

From  the  beginning  of  the  March  to  the  Sea  to  the   Surrender  of  Johnston — 
including  also  the  operations  of  Thomas  in  Tennessee. 


The  following  volumes,  now  preparing  for  early  publica- 
tion, will  complete  the  series  : 

VIII.— THE    MISSISSIPPI.      By  Francis  Vinton  Greene, 

Lieut,  of  Engineers,  U.  S.  Army  ;  late  Military  Attache  to  the 

U.  S.  Legation  in  St.  Petersburg ;    Author  of  "  the    Russian 

Army  and  its  Campaigns  in  Turkey  in  1877-78,"  and  of  "Army 

Life  in  Russia." 

An  account  of  the  operations— especially  at  Vicksburg  and    Port    Hudson— by 
which  the  Mississippi  River  and  its  shores  were  restored  to  the  control  of  the  Union. 

XL— THE  SHENANDOAH  VALLEY  in  1864.  The  Cam- 
paign of  Sheridan.  By  George  E.  Pond,  Esq.,  Associate 
Editor  of  the  Army  and  Navy  Journal. 

XIL— THE    CAMPAIGNS    OF    GRANT    IN   VIRGINIA. 

By   Andrew   A.    Humphreys,   Brigadier  General  and  Bvt. 
Major  General,   U.S  A.  ;    late   Chief  of  Engineers;  Chief  of 
Staff,  Army  of  the   Potomac,  i863~'64  ;    commanding  Second 
Corps,  1 864-' 65,  etc.,  etc. 
Covering  the  Virginia  Campaigns  of  1864  and  '65,  to  Lee's  surrender. 


***  The  above  books  for  sale  by  all  booksellers,  or  will be  sent, post-paid,  upon 
receipt  0/ price  by 

CHARLES    SCRIBNER'S   SONS, 

743  and  745  Broadway,  New  York. 


B  422 


The  Army  of  the  Cumberland,  main 
973.7416C579a 


3  12b5  03071  bbM2 


LAD 


