Google 


This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  library  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project 

to  make  the  world's  books  discoverable  online. 

It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject 

to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books 

are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover. 

Marks,  notations  and  other  maiginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journey  from  the 

publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you. 

Usage  guidelines 

Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the 
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  tliis  resource,  we  liave  taken  steps  to 
prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying. 
We  also  ask  that  you: 

+  Make  non-commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for 
personal,  non-commercial  purposes. 

+  Refrain  fivm  automated  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine 
translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the 
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help. 

+  Maintain  attributionTht  GoogXt  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  in  forming  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find 
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it. 

+  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just 
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other 
countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can't  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of 
any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner 
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liabili^  can  be  quite  severe. 

About  Google  Book  Search 

Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful.   Google  Book  Search  helps  readers 
discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web 

at|http: //books  .google  .com/I 


HARVARD  COLLEGE 
LIBRARY 


FROM  THE  FUND  OF 

CHARLES  MINOT 


CLASS  OF  1828 


i 


-'^ 


The  Campaigns 


I     Lieut.-Gen.  N.  B.  Forrest, 

I  AND  or 

(  FoRRESTS   Cavalry, 

WITH  PORTRAITS,  MAPS,  AND  ILLUSTRATIONa 

■■■    .gr 
GENERAL    THOMAS    JORDAN    AND    J.    p.    PRYOR. 


^BLELOCK     &     COMPANY, 
New-Orleans,  La.,  Memphis,  Tenk.,  and  New-York. 


lotcrdd,  icoordloff  to  Act  of  OoogreH,  la  the  jmr  IMT,  bj 

BLKLOOK   k  OOIIPANT, 

In  tlM  Cl»k*i  Ofltoe  of  the  Diitrlct  Oourt  of  the  United  Stetee  for  the  Boathern  District  of 

Nev-Tork. 


'1 


SD^ 


T 


o  THE  'Memory 


OP 


THE    DEAD,   WHO    BY    THEIR    ENDURANCE,    HARDIHOOD,   VAUM^ 
WHILE  LIVING,  AND  THE  SACRIFICE  OF  THEIR  PRE- 
CIOUS   LIVES,     LARGELY    HELPED    TO 
BUILD    UP    THE    FAME, 
AT  HOME  AND 
ABROAD, 
OF 

FORREST'S    CAVALRY. 


"  The  memory  of  their  proud  deeds  can  not  die. 
They  may  go  down  to  dust  in  bloody  shrouds. 
And  sleep  in  nameless  graves.    But,  for  all  time^ 
Foundlings  of  Fame  are  our  beloved  lost" 


i 


PREFACE. 


We  are  aware  of  the  belief  obtaining  among  the  Southern  people 
that  the  time  has  not  yet  come  for  the  publication  of  histories  or 
memoirs  of  the  more  prominent  operations  of  Confederate  com- 
manders and  officers.  £Many,  indeed,  of  our  countrymen  we  know 
earnestly  deprecate  all  such  publications  at  this  juncture,  as  fraught 
with  the  provocation  of  unfriendly  controversies  at  the  South ;  as 
sure  to  breed  ill-feeling  and  strife  there,  among  the  survivors  of  the 
battles,  marches,  and  exploits  recounted^  We  are  conscious,  more- 
over, how  impossible  it  were  so  to  write  the  annals  we  here  present 
as  to  steer  clear  of  giving  pain  to  some,  umbrage  to  others,  dissat- 
isfaction also,  and  some  grounds  for  disputation  and  criticism. 
'j  However,  we  are  of  those  who  believe  it  to  be  essential  to  the 
truth  of  history,  that  the  Confederate  story  of  the  war  should  be 
told  without  delay — told  with  all  possible  fullness  and  unreserve.J 
Unquestionably  somewhat  intemperate  discussions  may  spring  up. 
But  even  this,  in  the  end,  will  not  be  without  downright  profit ;  for 
in  the  sharp,  vehement  clash  and  collision  the  truth  will  be  evolved, 
as  the  fire-spark  is  bom  of  the  violent  encounter  of  flint  vdth  flint 
One  account  of  a  campaign  or  affair  will  evoke  another,  and  that,  , 
others  again  ;  and  all  will  be  found  adding  their  important  mite,  at 
least,  to  the  general  store  of  true  historical  matter,  and  of  a  kind,  for 
the  most  part,  which  would  never  have  come  to  light  at  all,  had  each 
annalist  kept  his  notes  in  petto  during  the  lifetime  of  those  who 
were  chief  actors  in  the  war.  The  early  multiplication  of  these 
memoirs  to  serve,  {as  the  French  terra  them,)  of  Southern  origin,  is  J 


viii 


Pre/ace. 


indispensable,  in  fact,  for  any  adequate  summary  hereafter  of  what 
was  achieved  by  the  armies  and  the  people  of  the  Confederate 
States,  as  well  as  under  what  circumstances  of  disadvantage  and 
incommodity.     Otherwise,  there  can  never  be  a  vivid  portraiture  of 
the  splendid  martial  qualities  of  that  people,  their  peculiar  aptitude 
for  war,  their  vigorous,  ardent  spirit,  their  manhood  and  heroism  in 
the  face  of  prodigious  odds,  and  the  constant  mismanagement  of 
their  defensive  resources.    Only  from  manifold  narratives  of  each 
and  every  important  phase  of  the  war  will  the  historian  be  able  here- 
after to  shape  a  faithful,  life-like  delineation  of  their  mighty  struggle 
for  a  separate  nationality,  just  as  the  photo-sculptor  moulds  his  mar- 
velously  exactimage  of  the  human  features  from  the  reflections  of 
his  camera,  taken  from  every  possible  side  of  his  subject 

Having  been  placed  in  possession  of  the  papers  and  military 
records  of  General  Forrest,  as  well  as  copious  notes,  taken  down 
from  his  lips,  of  the  principal  occurrences  of  his  remarkable  career,* 
we  were  led  to  adventure  upon  a  work  that  might  be  accepted  as  an 
approximate  sketch  of  what  General  Forrest  and  his  men  actually 
accomplished,  and  give  a  somewhat  just  conception  of  what  manner 
of  man  and  leader  he  was,  the  nature  of  his  tactics,  the  scope  of 
his  operations,  and  the  character  of  his  soldiery,  or  how  he  was  se- 
conded. Undertaking  this,  we  next  sought  out  every  possible  source 
of  information  likely  to  be  of  use,  until  we  collected  a  mass  of  ori- 


♦  Memphis,  Tenn.,  October  3, 1867. 

In  the  work,  now  in  course  of  prepa- 
ration by  the  Messrs.  Blelock  &  Co., 
will  be  found  an  authentic  account  of 
the  campaigns  and  operations  in  which 
I  took  part  during  the  war  for  the  inde- 
pendence of  the  Confederate  States. 
Believing  it  to  be  proper  that  there 
should  be  a  timely  and  lasting  record  of 
the  deeds  and  services  of  those  whom  I 
have  been  so  fortunate  as  to  command, 
I  placed  all  the  facts  and  papers  in  my 
possession  or  available  to  me,  in  the 
hands  of  accomplished  writers,  who 
have  done  their  part  with  dose  and 


conscientious  research,  and  have  en- 
deavored to  make  up  a  chronicle  nei- 
ther over-wrought  nor  over-colored,  as 
I  can  testify.  For  the  greater  part  of 
the  statements  of  the  narrative  I  am  re- 
sponsible, and  all  facts  and  incidents  de- 
rived from  other  sources  are  properly 
credited  in  the  foot-notes.  It  is  hoped 
that  justice  will  be  found  done  in  some 
degree  to  the  courage,  zeal,  fortitude, 
and  other  soldierly  qualities  of  the  men 
of  "Forrest's  Cavalry,"  for  that  has  been 
the  main  purpose  of  the  work. 

N.  B.  Forrest. 


Preface.  ix 

ginal  matter  such  as  seldom  or  never  has  been  available  in  the  pre* 
paration  of  cotemporaneous  history.  And  we  may  claim  that  we 
have  related  no  important  event  without  carefully  consulting  many 
representations  of  it,  written  at  widely  separated  points,  by  Federal 
as  well  as  Confederate  officers.  At  the  same  time,  we  have  care- 
Mly  avoided  all  embroidery  of  the  narrative  with  florid  phrases  or 
romantic,  picturesque  descriptions,  preferring  to  present  the  inci- 
dents of  a  remarkable  story  in  the  simplest  phraseology.  This  has 
been  our  constant  effort.  Having  to  enter  largely  into  details  of 
daily  marches,  occurrences,  and  incidents  possessed  of  little  interest 
for  the  general  reader,  we  have  striven  to  do  this  as  tersely  as  pos- 
sible. 

If  we  have  done  all  we  could  to  set  in  strong  light  the  courage 
and  other  prominent  military  virtues  of  the  Confederates,  we  do  not 
believe  we  shall  be  found  wanting  in  a  just  acknowledgment,  on  all 
proper  occasions,  of  the  good  qualities  of  their  adversaries. 

General  Forrest's  note,  affixed  to  the  preceeding  page,  shows  to 
what  extent  he  accepts  the  responsibility  for  the  statements  of  this 
''^ork.    It  remains  to  be  added,  that  he  did  not  have  an  opportuni- 
ty to  revise  that  chapter  of  it  which  touches  upon  the  battle  of  Shi- 
loh,  and  therefore,  is  only  responsible  for  so  much  as  was  written 
from  his  notes,  in  regard  to  the  incidents  of  the  night  of  the  6th 
of  April.     The  responsibility  for  all  of  narrative  and  commentary  in 
that  chapter  (IV.)  belongs  to  the  one  whose  initials  are  affixed  to 
this  paper.     The  same,  indeed,  may  be  said  in  regard  to  all  the  mili- 
tary criticisms  found  in  any  part  of  the  work. 
New- York,  October  i,  1867.  T.  J. 

P.  S. — ^We  had  prepared  a  great  deal  of  documentary  matter  to 
present  in  the  Appendix.  Also,  a  series  of  sketches  of  the  principal 
officers  who  served  under  General  Forrest ;  but  the  size  to  which  our 
volume  (700  pages)  has  extended  has  made  their  exclusion  inexora- 
ble ;  but  we  trust  the  actions  and  services  of  those  officers  will  be 
lound  set  forth  in  a  satisfactory  manner  in  the  body  of  the  work,  as 
leading  members  of  Forrest's  Cavalry. 

New-York,  January  22,  1868. 


i 


Contents. 


INTRODUCTORY   SKETCH. 


Aacatrj.  PamUgF,  mi  Birhplin  of  Gcicnl  Fan 
.V J  1 —  1 .  Finiilj,  leJl  ^p^J— . 1.:- 


«l— Eaily  Dealh  b( 


NaiTDW  Ejoh  &Dia  Dealh  by 
utcuinc  ColloD-Fluilu^Fcni 


I  Ljbois^Voli 

IcmoHd  la  1h^1:^°ikr  Biulneu  Field  of 
lumboal  Eiploti        ~  -    -    - 


m  Btdfard  ForreM  i  PlinU 


Kandolph 


[andolph  with  Compuy — Invited 

Icoeral  Polk— Went  to  Kf  ntixky  lo  purduM 
nul  of  Louisville,  Ky. — On  redim  ftirrned  x  1 
Von  Dmsebon— Fight  inlh  Gunboat  CouBtog 
■dded  to  BitDliaa— Brilliant  AftiiciitSacraine 
nl  Officen  in  Battle— Hade  uolher  doK  R< 
Bivcr— SubsMuenllyoccupiMi  with  '  '  *' 
Tilleevacualeti  Februaiy  7lh.  iB£i— rurru 

Henry— Met  aod  diued  off  Federal  Rec 
Piny  defeited  by  Eagcmeu  of  hi*  Ml 


>i  no  1»  Jane,  iSAi— ReMinnEloMemp 
CaptaiD  J.  S.  White'a  Company— Weni 
flepnMnt  of  Cavalij  by  Go«i "-— - 


lo  Fort  Donelion— Too 


CHAPTER  11. 

ipngnphicil  Sketch  of  Fort  Donelion— Conilrtictian  of  a  larger  Syilem  of  Eiterior  Ijne* 

"S^K.  JohMon,  Buckner,  an3l  Floyd— March''(^(i>D''FedmrD?»isfwi>  fi™n  F«l  HoirT— 
Forrett't  Skirviuh  on  iith  FebniUT — Diipoojlioa  of  Confederate* — Offensive  Arrangement 
'Frdenl  Fone— Bafled  Aiaull  on  Hciman'i  Fouiion  on  the  i^ih  February:  alioea 
~'  '  *"  '  lale  CoDllict  between  Gunlxuta  and  Water- BattericL  iHemoon 
d  anoncConfedtntae  by  their  Succeu — CouticU  of  CDntederaM 
t^iHTajt,  and  ixiermtnaiuxi  to  salJy  and  attack  Federals  on  Morning  of  ijth — Resolute 
and  SucctMfiil  Sortie  made  by  Pillow"!  Division  al  Daybreak— Buckner  delays  hii  More- 
inenta  until  after  nine  a^m- — Brilliant  Chajee  npon  and  Capture  of  Battery  by  Forrest'* 
Rcgimoit— McOemand'i  and  Wallace's  Diviiiona  driven  irestwaid  of  Wpn'i  Feny 
Koad  by  two  r.n.,  and  Confederate  Left  uncovered— Pillow  withdraws  Contedeiaia  from 
the  Field— Counal  of  Wai,  Nighlof  ijth,  and  Determination  to  capitulate— Foireat  uices 
pouibility  of  Escsipcaadiiltiinately  ia  allowed  to  rnake  the  Attempt  with  his  Command— 
TtiKmem]  by  a  Peiunal  Remnndtsanee  that  Enemy  had  not  reinvealed  the  Left— E^ 
Reeled  Ecrcas  oTConunind  without  MideMation — Commenlarics ] 

CHAPTER  III. 

Alnmi  iJ  People  in  cooRqnence  of  actual  IMiaitei  and  esgicnted  Reptrtt— CendiKt  o<  ■ 
State  Senator— Panic  m  a  Conledtnle  Cavalry  RefEment  neat  Charlotte— Foi™st"i  Re- 
uiMBtfcd)iTtlHHnaiScaK(«faT«Br "-- ^-^ -■ 


xii  Contents. 


^KGM, 


aboQt  500  Men — General  Johnston,  ^tting  NashWDe,  directed  Forrest  to  report  to  Gene- 
ral Flovd,  who  ieft  Colonel  Forrest  m  Coimnsnd — Found  place  abandoned  or  Staff-Offi- 
cers— WarehooMS  iull  of  Sapplies  and  Ordnance  Stores — Spoliation  by  a  Mob  of  Men 
and  Women — Sapplies  removed  to  the  Railroad-:— Removal  by  Rail  of  six  hundred  Boxes 
oi  Qochine,  quarter  of  a  million  Pounds  of  Bacon,  amd  forty  Wagon- Loads  of  Ammuni- 
tion— Final  Evacuation  of  Nashville  by  Confederates—Forrest  repaired  to  Murfreesboro— 
Regiment  reassembled — Field-Officers  elected— Ordered  to  luka — Confederate  Army 
concentrated  at  Corinth,  General  Johnston  in  Command — Federal  Army  established  at 
Pittsburg  Landing — Buell's  en  rouU  for  satme  point — Confederate  General  resolved  to 
take  the  Offensive — Inauspidous  Delay  of  Twenty-four  Hours  ou  the  March — The  two 
Armies  in  presence  of  each  other 99 

CHAPTER  IV. 

Confederates  in  Battle  Order  by  Dawn — In  Movement,  Hardee's  Corps  in  advance — ^Topo* 
naphical  Sketch  of  Theatre  of  Battle — Federal  Forces  and  Dispositions  at  the  moment — 
Sherman's  auid  Prentiss's  Divinons  taken  completely  bv  surprise — First  Federal  LJne 
swept  awajr — ^Their  Encampments  and  Artillery  captured — General  Gladden  killed — All 
Federal  Fprces  engaged  and  Imced  back— OMtinate  Fighting,  and  Death  of  General 

iohnston — Federal  Position  carrinl,  with  Loss  of  Artillery  and  3000  Prisoners— ^Immense 
lumber  of  Stragglers  under  the  River- Bank — Federals  finally  driven  to  the  Ridge  over- 
hanging Pittsburg — Timely  Arrival  of  fresh  Federal  Troops  at  Night — Cessation  of  Bat- 
tle—Picket Service  of  Forrest's  Cavalry— Federals  take  tne  Offensive — Obstinate  Battle 
until  two  P.M.  7th  of  April — Confederates  withdbraw  in  admirable  Order — Not  pursued — 
Combat  of  Forrest  on  tne  Sthr^Severely  wounded — Commentaries 1 14 

CHAPTER  V. 

General  Forrest  assigned  to  a  Cavalry  command  at  Chattanooga— Sketch  of  the  Eighth  Texas 
Cavalry — Exdumge  Regiments — Planned  an  Expedition  against  the  Federal  Forces  in 
Middle  Tennessee — Incarceration  at  Murfreesboro  of  a  number  of  Prominent  Citizens- 
Attack  on  the  Outworks  at  Murfreesboro— Fearless  Demeanor  of  the  Women  of  the 
place — Capture  of  General  Crittenden  and  Garrison — Release  of  Imprisoned  Citizens- 
Favorable  effect  of  success  on  his  Command — Paroled  all  Prisoners  except  Officers — At- 
tempt to  Surprise  Federal  Cavalry  Regiment  at  Lebanon — Dashed  at  the  Pickets  around 
Nashville — Burned  Bridges  and  Captured  Out-posts  in  Vicinage — Eluded  Pursuit  by  Gene- 
ral Nelson— Remained  at  McMinnville  until  loth  of  August — Visited  Chattanocwa — For- 
rest Rdoined  at  Sparta — Made  Brigadier-General — General  Brags  preparing  for  Ken- 
tucky Campaign — Forrest  actively  afield  Burning  Bridges  and  Reducing  Outposts — 
Menaced  by  a  Superior  Force — Narrow  Escape  of  Command — Reported  to  General 
Bragg  at  Sparta— Harassed  General  Buell's  Rear-Guard— Assigned  to  Duty  with  Polk's 
Corps — Munfordsville  Surrendered  to  the  Infiintry— Strategy  of  General  Bragg— Picket 
Service  in  advance — Forrest  ordered  to  turn  over  Command  of  Brigade  and  Repair  to 
Murfreesboro  to  Organise  New  Levies  in  that  quarter 158 

CHAPTER  VL 

General  Forrest  established  his  Headquarters  at  Murfreesboro,  Tenn. — Tennessee  Militia 
and  new  Levies  at  Lavergne  surprised  and  dispersed  by  the  Federals — Enemy  returned 
to  Nashville,  closely  followed  b^  Forrest — Confederate  Pickets  established  close  around 
Nashville — Battalions  and  Regiments  formed  of  new  Cavalry  Levies — Major-General 
Breckinridge  assumed  Command  in  Middle-Tennessee — Forrest  proposed  to  attack  Nash- 
ville with  Uifiuitry  and  Cavalry — Assent  given.  Movement  inaugurated — Federals  pressed 
irithin  Trenches  and  Assault  to  be  made.  Operation  countermanded— Animated  Skirmish 
on  Franklin- Nashville  Road — General  Bragg,  having  returned  from  the  Kentuckv  Cam- 
paign, established  Army  Headquarters  at  Murfreesboro — Major-General  Wheeler  ap- 
pmnted  Chief  of  Cavalry— General  Forrest  assigned  to  the  Command  of  a  Brigade — Di- 
rected to  prepare  for  Expedition  into  West-Tennessee — Unsuitable  Condition  of  Arms 
for  sudi  a  service  reported  to  General  Bragg — Brigade  took  Post  at  Columbia 187 

CHAPTER  VII. 

Set  out  for  Expedition  into  West-Tennessee — Effected  Passage  of  Tennessee  River  at  Qif- 
ton — Successful  Affair  with  Federal  Force  at  Lexington,  West-Tezmessee — Whole  Fede- 
ral Command  engaged  either  killed,  capturedf  or  dispersed— Captured  Section  of  Ruled 
Guns,  which  Forrest's  Artillery  used  for  the  rest  of  tne  War— Boldly  invested  Jackson, 
occupied  by  a  largely  Superior  Force— Capture  of  Outposts  and  Destruction  of  Railwavs 
in  vicinity — Skirmishes  in  front  of  Jackson — Federal  Forces  driven  behind  their  Intrencn- 
ments — Forrest  retired  from  position  to  operate  against  Federal  Communications — Di- 
vided Force  for  that  purpose— Capture  of  1  renton  by  Forrest,  with  laive  number  of  Pri- 
soners :  also  many  Supplies— Resumption  of  March  Northward — Block-Houses  and  Gar- 
risons taken — Large  Extent  of  Railway  Tr^Ales  destroyed  with  Guarding  Block- Houses — 
General  Forrest,  leaving  Force  to  destroy  Railroads,  pressed  forward  to  Union  Citjr— > 
Captured  there  several  nundred  Prisoners  in  Intnmched  Position—Large  Hostile  Force 
afield  to  intercept  bis  Exit  frxmi  We^^Tenne^lee    Began  to  retrace  Stepe— Difficult  Pah- 


Contents.  xiii 


PAGE 

safe  of  the  Doable  Bridees—Battle  of  Parker's  Cross-Roads  or  Red  Mound— Death  of 
the  Gallant  Lieutenant-Colonel  Napier — Federals  worsted  amd  capitulating  #»  mtasu — 
Sodden  Appearance  of  Hostile  Re]!nforceroents  in  Confederate  Rear— Fe^rails  resume 
their  Arms  and  the  Battle— Critical  Situation  of  General  Forrest— Han>y  Eztricatiott— 
Repasiage  of  the  Tennessee— Summary  of  Results 193 

CHAPTER  VIII, 

LeSstablishment  on  Picket  Service,  with  Headquarters  at  Columbia.  Tenn.— Disastrous  Ex- 
pedition under  General  Wheeler  ajninst  Dover— Forrest's  Brigade  lost  one  fiHtrth  its 
number  in  the  A&ir — Inclement  Weather  and  Suffering  of  Troops — Arrival  of  Maior- 
General  Van  Dom  at  Columbia  with  additional  Force — Confederate  One  advancea  to 
Spring  Hill— Battle  of  Thompson's  Station — Capture  of  the  greater  part  of  the  Federal 
Force  ensued,  aaoo  Officers  and  Men— Confederate  some  days  later  retire  behind  Duck 
Kiver  before  Jheavy  Federal  Force— Successful  Afbir  at  Brentwood— The  entire  Garrison, 
7S9  Persons,  captured— Block- House  and  Railroad  Bridge  destroyed — Confederate  Recon- 
notssance  in  Force  upon  Franklin — Loss  of  the  Galfamt  Captain  Freemaa-^Found  the 
Federals  in  superior  Force  and  prepared — Retuni  to  Spring  Hill 313 

CHAPTER  IX. 

f  orrest's  Brij^e  ordered  to  North- Alabama — Junction  with  Roddy,  and  Aibir  at  Town 
Creek— Dibrell's  Diversion — Federal  In&ntry  retire — Desolation  of  the  Comitry — Inau- 
nration  of  Federal  Cavalry  Raid  under  Colonel  Streight — Ptompt  Pursuit  by  Forrest- 
Night  Combat  in  Sand  Mountain— Series  of  Sharp  Fights  to  Blountsville — Reduced 
Monben  of  Confederates — Heroic  Services  of  Miss  Emma  Sanson  at  Black  Creek,  Ala- 
bsma— Federal  Ambush  defeated  at  Turkeytown — Colonel  Streight  overtaken  and  Sur- 
Roder  of  1365  Federals  to  Inferior  Numbers  under  Forrest— Another  Detachment  Sur- 
rt&deiednear  Rome— Rejoicing <^  People  of  Rome— Commentaries 249 

CHAPTER  X, 

f >^  Repoft  of  another  Federal  Raid— Forrest  returned  to  Middle-Tennessee— Reifstab- 
lished  Headquarters  at  Spring  Hill— In  Chief  Command  of  Cavalry  on  that  Flank- 
Services  of  the  Eighth  and  Tenth  Tennessee  Cavalry — ^Jackson's  Divisoo  detacJied — Suc- 
cttidfbl  Ambuscade  by  Colonel  Dibrell— Reconnoissance  in  Force  of  Franklin — Handsome 
Ai&ir  of  Fourth  Tennessee  with  two  Federal  Regiments — Colonel  Stames's  Demonstra- 
tioD  npon  Triune — Forrest's  brilliant  Reconnoissance  in  same  quarter— Middle-Tennessee 
evacuated— At  Chattanooga — Forrest's  Cavalry  in  East-Tennessee — Pegram's  Division 
joined  FiHrest- Expedition  of  Eighth  Tennessee — Forrest's  Cavalry  returned  to  Chatta- 
«»8a- »7f 

CHAPTER  XI. 

Topoeraphical  Sketch  of  Theatre  of  War— Federal  Army  thrown  across  southward  of  the 
Tennessee  River — Bragg  evacuated  Chattanooga — Thomas's  Corps  in  McLemore's 
Cove— Failure  of  projected  Attack  by  Confederates — Isolation  of  Crittenden's  Corps  not 
profited  by — Operations  of  Forrest's  Cavalry — The  general  Offensive  taken  by  Bra^g — 
Battle  of  the  19th  September— Arrival  of  Longstreet— Confederate  Army  subdivided  mto 
Wings— Battle  of  the  aoth  September— Commentauries ^00 

CHAPTER    XII. 

General  Forrest  pursued  Enemy  upon  Missionary  Ridge — Observes  and  reports  state  of  Tu- 
mult and  Disorder  in  Chattanooga— Urges  immediate  Advance  upon  £nemv — Obtained 
View  of  inaction  on  Field  of  late' Battle  of  Confederates— Reports  by  Dispatcnes  the  Con- 
fosaon  arooi^  Federals — Major  McLemore  penetrated  to  within  three  miles  of  Chattanoo- 
ga, and  captures  Prisoners— Pegrara  threatened  Rossville,  but  too  weak  to  attack  Enemy 
m  strong  Position — Enemy  work  vigorously  in  trenches  around  Chattanoon— Forrest  re- 
called to  Red  House  Bridge — .^rmy  in  motion — Forrest  again  threw  his  Force  in  Chatta- 
nooga Vallgr— Drove  in  Pickets  and  occupied  Approaches — Dibrell  seised  Point  of  Look- 
out Moontain — Obliged  to  maintain  Position  by  severe  Fighting — Forrest's  Command  with- 
drawn to  Tyner's  Station — Ordered  to  meet  Enemy  crosung  Hiawassee — Combat  at- 
Crossing  of  Hiawassee — Pursuit,  with  Skirmish,  through  Athens  and  Philadelphia  to 
Ij5^««V«,  Tennessee — Captured  Federal  Camp  at  Philadelphia — Received  Orders  to  return 
to  Qevdand— Ordered  to  transfer  all  Troops  save  Dibrell's  Brinde,  to  General  Wheeler, 
km  Expedidan— Regarding  Order  in  derogation  of  his  Position,  Forrest  presents  his  views 

^'-f  to  General  Bragg— On  Leave  of  Absence— Interview  with  President  Davi*— 

to  »  Command  «  Cavalry  in  North'Missiasippi  and  Wett-TeimcMf  1 19» 


I 


riv  Contents. 

CHAPTER    XIII. 

PAGB 

Bogiiming  of  a  New  Epoch  in  General  Forrest's  Career — Welcomed  to  New  Field  by  General 
J.  E.  Johnston — Undertook  an  Elxpedition  to  glean  the  Military  Resources  of  West-Ten- 
nessee— Smallness  of  his  Available  Conunand-<^elerity  and  Boldness  of  Movement  to 
Jackson — Joined  by  3000  Unarmed  Men — Formidable  Plans  of  the  Enemy  for  his  Inter- 
ception— Combat  at  Estenaula — Lav^e  Quantities  of  Subsistence  and  other  Supplies  Col- 
lected—Fight at  Jack's  Creek— Brilliant  Affiiir  of  Forrest's  Escort  with  Federal  Regi- 
ment —  Near  Approach  of  Numerous  Hostile  Bodies  of  Troon»— Sharp  Conflict  near 
Summerville — Handsome  Coup  de  Main  and  Passage  of  Wolf  Kiver  at  La&yette — De- 
monstration upon  Collierville — Established  Force  around  Como,  Miss. — Commentaries..  361 

CHAPTER  XIV. 

Forrest  made  a  Maior-General — Assi^ment  to  "  Forrest's  Cavalry  Department"— Headquar- 
ters at  Oxford,  Mississippi — Affiiir  of  the  Deserters  there — The  Federal  Cavalry  Raid  into 
Mississippi,  under  General  W.  S.  Smith — Skirmishing — Sava^  Waste  of  the  Conntrr  by 
the  Enemy^Federals  begin  to  retire — Series  of  Sharp  Skirmishes — Engagement  at  Oko- 
kma — Federal  Defeat  in  a  succession  of  Combats — Death  of  Colonel  Jem«y  Forrest ;  also, 
of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Barksdale — Running  Fight,  and  complete  Federal  Rout 381 

CHAPTER  XV. 

Small  Brigade  of  Kentuckians  added  to  Command — Another  Division  organized  and  assigned 
to  Brigadier-General  A.  Buford— Aflfair  at  Yazoo  City— Another  Expedition  into  West- 
Tennessee— Ruse  and  Capture  of  Union  City — Forrest  made  successful  Descent  upon 
Paducah — Death  of  Colonel  A  P.  Thompson  in  abortive  Assault  upon  Federal  Earth- 
works— Large  Quantity  of  Supplies  secured  and  carried  off— Fruitless  Demonstration  upon 
Columbus,  Ky. — Second  Descent  (Buford)  upon  Paducah — Handsome  ASaxr  of  Colonel 
Neely's  at  Bolivar — Splendid  Conduct  of  McDonald's  (Crews's)  Battalion  near  Sommer- 
ville — Measures  taken  for  the  Capture  of  Fort  Pillow 403 

CHAPTER  XVI. 

Forrest  in  Movement  upon  Fort  Pillow — Description  of  the  Position — First  Stage  of  the  At- 
tack, resulting  in  the  Death  of  Federal  Commander,  Major  Booth— Forrest,  making  close 
Reconnoissance,  had  two  Horses  killed  under  him  —Confederate  Sharp-Shooters  envelop 
and  command  Position — Outworks  amd  Position  seized  close  to  P^uai^ts — Surrender  de- 
manded— Approach  of  Federal  Transports  with  Troops — Forrest  took  Means  to  drive  off 
Succor — Capitulation  refiised — Assault  made — Parapets  stormed — Garrison  fled  to  River- 
Bank  for  Relief  under  Guns  of  Naval  Vessel — Gunboat  failed  to  render  Aid — Results — 
Commentaries 434 

CHAPTER  XVIL 

Chalmers  detached  with  Command  to  Okolona,  to  meet  menaced  Operations— Public  Recep- 
tion of  Forrest,  Staff,  and  Escort,  by  Citizens  of  Brownsville — Reestablished  Headquar- 
ters at  Jackson— Occupied  with  Collection  of  War  Resources  of  West-Tennessee — Chal- 
mers ordered  to  Oxford — Buford  reached  Jackson  with  Division — Sharp  Affiir  at  Bolivar — 
Established  Headquarters  at  Tupelo  the  5th  of  May^^ommand  increased  by  Bri^de  of 
State  Troops— Chalmers  detached  on  the  26th  of  Ma1^  with  McCulloch's  and  Neely's 
Brigades  and  Walton's  Battery — Forrest  marched  with  Buford's  Division  to  the  Relief^of 
Roddy— Return  to  meet  heavy  Federal  Column  advancing  from  Memphis — Concentration 
of  Forces  at  Baldwin— Rucker's  Brigade  engaged  Federal  Cavalry  near  New- Albany — 
General  S.  D.  Lee  at  Baldwin — Confederate  Troom  ordered  Southward,  to  concentrate 
with  Reenforcements — Federals  intercept  Forrest's  line  of  March  to  Tupelo— Lyon's  Bri- 
gade pushed  up  to  feel  Enemy 454 

CHAPTER  XVin. 

Sketch  of  Theatre  of  War — Confederates  first  engaged — Forrest  takes  the  Offensive — Threw 
small  Force  to  harass  Federal  Rear— Desperate  Fighting — Transient  Checks — Federals 
defeated  and  driven  from  the  Field— Pursuit  and  Incidents— Commentaries 46S 

CHAPTER  XIX. 

Rapid  March  of  Chalmers  from  Monte  Vallo— Mabry's  Brigade  added  to  Forrest's  Cavalry- 
Correspondence  between  Generals  Forrest  and  Wsahbume — Forrest,  anticipating  a  strong 
Hostile  Movement,  reported  the  Facts  to  his  Superior — Approach  of  Enemy  under  Major- 
General  A.  F.  Smith— llie  Country  devastated  by  the  Federal  Army — Major-General  S. 
D.  Lee  in  Command  of  Confederates— Affair  at  Pinson's  Hill,  also  at  Barrow's  Shop — 
Forrest  Reconnoitered  the  Federal  Position — Battle  of  Harrisburg,  July  14th — Confede- 
fates  worsted,  but  Federals  refuse  to  advance  fitmi  their  Intrenchments — Retreat  oS  Gen- 
eral Smith  on  the  zsth  of  July— Federal  Amboecade  at  Town  Creek — Commentaries. 4S4 


Contents.  xv 

CHAPTER  XX. 

PAGV 

with  Dej^artment  Commander;  also  Governor  of  Mississippi  —  Command 
di^ribated  for  Defensive  Purposes — llieatre  of  Operations  transferred  to  Oxford,  Miss>— 
Operations  of  General  Chalmers  in  that  Quauter — Confederates  pressed  by  lanely  Supe- 
rior Force — Federal  Devastations — Forrest  made  Counter-Movement  upon  Memphis*^ 
£xtenp<mzed  Bridge — Confederates  penetrated  Memphis  to  the  Gayosa  House — Success 
of  the  Operation — Federal  Forces  withdrawn  from  quarter  of  Oxford  to  succor  Memphis — 
General  Focrest  established  his  Headquarters  at  Grenada,  Miss. 590 

CHAPTER  XXI. 

Forrest's  Cavalry  reorganized— McCuIloch's  Brigade  detached — Repair  of  Mobile  and  Ohio 
Railroad  to  Corinth — Expedition  into  Middle  Tennessee — Happy  Ruse  and  Capture  of 
Scroog  Worics  at  Athena,  Alabama— Succ^sfiil  Attack  upon  Works  at  Sulphur  1  restle — 
I>estrttctkm  of  Trestle  and  Laige  Railroad  Bridges — Federals  in  Superior  Force  take  the 
I>efenatve  at  Pulaski— Demonstration  in  Quarter  of  Tullahoma— Country  alive  with  Fed- 
eral Corps  called  forth  by  Forrest — Forrest  divided  Forces — His  Operations  from  Sprii^ 
Hill  to  Columbia — Failure  to  Capture  Huntsville — Dangerous  Rising  of  the  Tennessee 
River— Difficulties  of  Ferris^e  surmounted— Handsome  A^Eur  of  Colonel  Kelly  at  East- 
port-^-General  Forrest  planned  Expedition  for  the  Destruction  of  Federal  Depots  at  John- 
soQville — Chalmers's  Demonstration  against  Memphis — Commentaries. 554 

CHAPTER  XXII. 

Cannsugn  to  Kentucky  Border — Buford's  Successful  Operations  against  Federal  Gunboats  and 
Transports — Captiure  of  United  States  Steam  Gunboat  Undine  and  Transports  Venus,  Ma- 
zei^a,  and  ChMseman — Operations  of  Forrest's^  Cavalry  Afloat — Successful  Operations 
^amst  Federal  Depot  at  Johnsonville — Destruction  of  Warehouses.  Gunboats,  and  Trans- 
ports— Description  of  Scene — Summary  of  Results — Forrest  ordered  to  join  General  Hood 
m  Middle  Teimessee — Abortive  Efibrt  to  pass  the  Tennessee  at  Perryville — Wretched 
Condition  of  the  Roads — Forrest's  Cavalry  assembled  at  Florence,  Alabama — Hood's 
Army  concentrated  there.. 58^ 

CHAPTER  XXIII. 

Skelcli  of  Genera]  Hood's  Plans  and  Movements— <JSeneral  Forrest  ordered  to  him — Confede- 
rate Force*— The  Campaign  Opened— Operations  antecedent  to  Franklin — Battle  of  Frank- 
linr— Advance  upon  Nashville — Detached  Operations  of  Forrest  aroimd  Murfreesboro— 
Battle  of  Nashville — Retreat  of  Confederate  Forces— Forrest  in  Command  of  Rear-Guard — 
Brilliant  Character  of  his  Operations— Safe  Repassage  of  the  Tennessee  Rivei^Commen- 


610 


CHAPTER  XXIV. 


Headqnartera  at  Corinth — Rucker's  and  Bell's  Bri^des  furiooghed,  others  sent  to  Okolona — 
Headquarters  at  Verona — General  Forrest  assigned  to  Command  of  Cavalry  of  the  De- 
portment— Reorganized  Divisions  under  Generus  Chalmers,  Jackson,  and  Buford — Made 
a  Lieutenant-General — Formidable  Preparations  for  a  Federal  Raid— Major-General  Wil- 
son's Movement  against  Monte* Vallo — Conflicts  in  that  Quarter— Forrest  in  Collision 
with  the  Enemy— A&irs  at  Boiler's  Creek  and  Dixie  Station— Stirrine  Personal  Com- 
bats— Fenced  into  Selma— Dispositions  for  Defense— Sel ma  stormed  by  Wilson,  and  Coo- 
federates  disp«TBed— Adventures  of  General  Forrest  and  Escort— Headquarters  at  Gainea- 
ville— Forrest's  Cavalry  lay  down  their  Arms  under  Parole— Concluding  Observationa . . .  6ss 


i 


^ 


Introductory  Sketch. 


Introductory  Sketch. 


^waAy,  PareHtagt,  and  Birthplact  of  General  Forrest— Early  Death  of 
Falher—HU  hf other  and  her  large  Faintly  left  dependent  upon  his 
taiorfor  their  Support— Characteristic  Iiuident  of  Yguthhood—De- 
frived,  by  necessity  of  his  condition,  of  any  sitbstanlial  opportuniff 
to  he  edueated~-Success  of  his  Labors — Volunteered  to  go  to  Texas 
w  the  "  War  of  Independence' — Returning  to  Mississippi,  engaged 
in  Business  in  Hernando — Attacked  in  the  Public  Square  fy  four 
trmed  Men,  -whom  he  ditcomfiled— Incidents  of  the  Homicide  of 
Morse  by  Dyson — Removed  to  the  broader  Business  Field  of  Mem- 
phis— Narrow  Escape  from  Death  by  Steamboat  Explosion — Success 
i'k  Business — Quells  Mob  and  rescues  the  intended  Victim  from  the 
GalloTvs — Twice  elected  Alderman — Became  an-  extensive  Cotton- 
Planter — Personal  Appearance. 

July,  1^21,  to  June,  1^26. 

It  will  be  expected  that  a  work  of  this  kind  should  give 
some  insight  of  the  origin,  life,  and  character  of  the  leading 
personage  who  figures  in  tts  pages,  at  a  period  anterior  to  the 
notable  events  which  have  brought  him  renown.  In  complin 
ance  with  that  natural  expectation,  it  becomes  proper  to  state 
ihat  Nathan  Bedford  Forrest  was  bom  on  the  r3th  day  of  ' 
July,  A.D.  1821,  near  Duck  river,  at  a  small  wayside  hamlet 
known  as  Chapel  Hill,  in  what  was  then  Bedford  county,  Ten- 
nessee." 
His  father,  William  Forrest,  having  married  Mariam  Beck,. 

•  But  ii  DOW  within  the  borders  of  Manhall  county. 


i8  Introductory  Sketch. 

their  first-born  were  twins,  one  of  whom  was  Nathan  Bedford. 
A  paternal  ancestor,  his  great-grandfather,  Shadrach  Forrest 
—of  English  descent — it  is  known,  emigrated  from  West-Vir- 
ginia, about  1730,  to  Orange  county,  in  the  colony  of  North- 
Carolina.  His  second  son,  Nathan,  was  the  grandfather  of 
the  General  Remaining  where  he  had  settled  in  North- 
Carolina  until  1806,  the  great-grandfather  then  removed,  with 
the  larger  part  of  a  numerous  family  of  children  and  grand- 
children, to  the  wilds  of  Tennessee,  and,  after  tarrying  for  a 
time  in  Sumner,  finally  established  his  home,  surrounded  by 
his  descendants,  in  Bedford  county.  Previous  to  their  depar- 
ture from  North-Carolina,  Nathan  Forrest  had  married  a  Miss 
Baugh — of  Irish  origin — and  their  eldest  son,  William,  was 
born  about  1800.  Growing  to  manhood  in  Tennessee,  he 
married,  as  we  have  said,  Mariam  Beck,  whose  family — of 
Scotch-Irish  descent-— emigrating  from  South-Carolina,  were 
among  the  earliest  settlers  in  Bedford  county. 

Thus  it  will  be  seen  Nathan  Bedford  Forrest  is  of  pure, 
though  mixed,  British  stock,  and  springs  directly  from  those 
hardy,  stout-handed  pioneer  families  who,  ever  far  out  on  the 
border,  wrested  the  wilderness  from  the  savage  by  their  ready 
rifles  ;  and,  felling  the  thick  forests,  let  in  the  vivifying  sun- 
light upon  the  virgin,  teeming  soil— creating  mighty  States, 
filled  with  an  energetic,  intelligent,  manly  people,  the  masses 
of  whom,  American  born,  are  the  lineal  offspring  of  the  origi- 
nal  British  emigrants  to  the  colonies. 

The  pecuniary  affairs  of  William  Forrest  having  gone  to 
wreck,  he  removed,  in  1834,  with  his  now  large  family  of 
young  children,  from  Tennessee  to  the  vicinage  of  Salem,  in 
Tippah  county,  North-Mississippi,  a  region  just  then  opened 
to  emigration  by  its  purchase  from  the  Chickasaw  Indians  by 
the  Federal  Government.  It  was  here  the  father  of  Bedford 
Forrest  died,  early  in  1837,  leaving  his  son,  as  yet  not  sixteen 
years  of  age,  the  head  of  a  family  embracing  his  widowed  mo- 


Introductory  Sketch.  19 

ther,  six  brothers,  and  three  sisters,  and  to  these  was  ^dded, 
four  months  later,  his  brother  Jeffrey — z,  posthumous  child. 

The  impoverished  condition  of  his  father  had  debarred  the 
young  Bedford  from  almost  the  opportunity  to  receive  even 
a  rudimentary  education  ;  for  his  labor  was  absolutely  neces* 
sary  from  his  outset  from  childhood  for  the  support  of  the 
family.     His  education,  therefore,  was  of  the  scantiest  charac- 
ter, affording  no  development  of  the  native  capacities  of  the 
man,  and  being  such  only  as  was  to  be  acquired  at  a  primary 
school  of  the  neighborhood,  for  a  short  time,  in  Middle  Ten- 
nessee, and  subsequently  in  Mississippi,  during  the  winter 
months  of  1836  and  1837,  when  the  interval  between  the  har- 
vest and  planting  seasons  suffered  him  to  attend  a  school 
The  untimely  death  of  his  father,  however,  now  made  that 
labor  even  more  essential  than  ever  for  the  support  of  the 
near  kindred  left  dependent  upon  his  hands,  and  for  the  most 
part  too  young  to  be  of  the  least  aid  in  the  toilsome  struggle 
with  adverse  fortune  which  was  his  lot  for  several  years  fol- 
lowing that  untoward  event.     But  though  deprived  of  every 
advantage  of  fortune  but  a  robust  constitution  and  a  resolute 
soul,  he  faced  his  duties  with  all  that  force  of  character,  those 
varied  resources  of  head  and  hand,  and  the  same  manful  traits 
which  twenty-five  years  later  were  displayed  in  so  conspicuous 
a  manner  by  him  as  a  cavalrjT commander,  whether  as  the  colo- 
nel of  a  regiment  or  a  lieutenant-general.   Striving  diligently  in 
manifold  ways  to  gain  the  means  requisite  for  the  comfortable 
maintenance  of  those  intrusted  to  his  charge,  this  youth,  by  his 
unflinching  industry,  clear,  good  sense,  and  thrifty  manage- 
ment, had  wrenched  success  from  every  counter  force,  and 
consequent  comparative  prosperity  for  his  household,  as  early 
IS  1840. 

But,  meanwhile,  sickness  had  sorely  harassed  the  family, 
and  typhoid  fever  had  proved  fatal  to  two  of  his  brothers  and 
his  three  sisters,  including  the  one  twin-born  with  himselC 


20  Introductory  Sketch. 

He,  too,  had  been  assailed  by  this  wasting  disease,  and  well- 
nigh  succumbed  to  its  prolonged  grasp  upon  his  system,  A 
superb  constitution,  however,  annealed  by  toil  and  exposure, 
empowered  him,  now  about  twenty  years  old,  to  wage  tri- 
umphant battle  with  this  enemy,  and,  after  a  protracted  con- 
valescence, he  was  happily  restored  to  sound  health. 

An  incident  that  happened  soon  after  the  death  of  his 
father  is  so  characteristic  of  the  man  into  whom  Bedford 
Forrest  was  developed  that  it  should  not  be  omitted  here. 
A  neighbor  had  an  ox  which  lived  at  free  quarters  upon  the 
Forrest  farm,  throwing  down  fences  and  ravaging  the  grow- 
ing corn  at  will.  So  injurious  were  these  habits  of  the  trou- 
Uesome  brute  that  they  became  insufferable.  The  attention 
of  the  owner  was  repeatedly  called  to  these  depredations. 
He  was  urged  to  take  measures  to  put  an  end  to  this  annoy- 
ance, but  failed  to  do  so,  and  the  ox  continued  as  destructive 
as  ever.  Young  Forrest  then  notified  his  neighbor  that  he 
would  tolerate  these  trespasses  no  longer,  and  therefore 
should  shoot  the  offending  animal  if  ever  again  found  in  one 
of  his  fields.  To  this  an  angry  retort  was  made,  and  a  me- 
nace likewise  to  shoot  whomsoever  might  shoot  the  ox.  In  a 
few  days  following,  the  inveterate  marauder  was  found,  as  usual, 
feeding  in  a  corn-field.  Sending  the  owner  information  of  the 
fact  and  of  his  consequent  purpose,  Forrest  repaired,  rifle  in 
hand,  to  the  scene,  and,  without  delay,  did  what  he  had  said 
he  would  in  such  an  exigency  —  shot  the  roguish  beast 
Scarcely  had  this  been  done,  and  as  he  was  reloading,  the 
neighbor  appeared,  also  armed  with  a  rifle,  hurrying  toward 
the  field  and  manifestly  bent  on  violence,  as  he  had  threat- 
ened. Standing  on  his  own  ground,  and  having  reloaded  his 
piece,  no  sooner  did  his  adversary  attempt  to  surmount  the 
fence  that  limited  the  field  than  the  determined  youth 
brought  his  rifle  to  bear,  and  fired  with  such  steady  aim  that 
the  ball  passed  through  the  clothes  of  the  intruder,  who. 


Introductory  Sketch.  21 

brought  to  his  senses  by  the  report  of  the  gun  and  the  whistle 
of  the  ball,  tumbled  from  the  fence  to  the  ground  exterior  to 
the  field,  and,  speedily  recovering  his  feet,  scampered  off 
homeward  as  fast  as  he  could  run.    And  in  this  affair  in  his 
boyhood  may  be  seen  the  full  promise  of  his  subsequent  sys- 
tem of  military  operations — ^the  same  quick  recognition  of 
the  situation,  the  like  swift  plan  for  meeting  the  exigency,  and 
the  same  resolute  adoption  of  the  cictive  defensive. 

Engrossed  with  the  labors  of  the  farm  and  other  efforts  to 
procure  the  ways  and  means  for  the  subsistence  of  his  de- 
pendent mother  and  her  young  family,  his  only  relaxations 
were  found  in  the  recreation  of  hunting  and  an  occasional 
horse-race :  for,  in  common  with  his  whole  family,  as  far  back 
as  they  are  known,  an  ardent  taste  for  horses  and  dogs  pos- 
sessed him.  And  thus,  trained  to  the  hardest  manual  toil, 
practiced  as  a  hunter  of  the  game  of  the  country,  and  hard- 
ened by  the  manly  exercises  of  the  border,  Bedford  Forrest 
grew  up  to  the  verge  of  manhood. 

About  this  time  the  people  of  Texas  were  engaged  in  their 
contest  with  Mexico  for  independence,  and  the  young  men 
of  the  Southern  States  were  greatly  stirred  by  the  oppor- 
tunity for  adventure  thus  offered  them.     In  all  parts  of  the 
Mississippi  Valley,  therefore,  companies  of  volunteers  were 
mustered.     Having  established  his  kindred  in  a  comfortable 
home,  and  provided  them  with  the  essential  resources  of  a 
comfortable  life,  young  Forrest,  catching  the  infection  of  the 
hour  around  him,  enrolled  himself  as  a  volunteer  in  a  com- 
pany  organized    by    Captain  Wallace   Wilson ;    and    soon 
after,  February,  1841,  started  with  his  comrades  for  Texas. 
At  New-Orleans,  however,  a  serious  mismanagement  of  the 
funds  needful  for  the  transportation  of  the  company  having 
resulted  in  the  dissolution  of  the  organization,  a  large  num- 
ber of  the  members  returned  to  their  homes  ;  but  the  others, 
including  Bedford  Forrest,  now  near  twenty-one  years  old,  ad- 


i 


22  Introductory  Sketch. 

hered  to  their  purpose,  and  made  their  way  to  Houston 
Texas.  There  it  was  found  there  was  no  present  or  prospec 
tive  need  for  the  services  of  these  ardent  young  "  voluntaries, 
and,  by  this  time  being  entirely  destitute  of  money,  the  bani 
was  forced  to  dissolve.  Some,  through  the  aid  of  friends 
were  able  to  return  to  their  homes ;  others  remained  as  set 
tiers  of  the  new  republic.  Bedford  Forrest,  with  his  wonta 
spirit  of  independence,  immediately  sought  occupation  as  : 
laborer  on  a  plantation,  where,  by  his  skill  with  the  ax,  h< 
soon  earned  money  enough  making  rails  to  enable  him  t 
return  to  his  home  in  Mississippi,  after  an  absence  of  abou 
four  months  and  a  half  The  seeds  of  disease,  however,  wer 
carried  back  from  Texas,  and  he  was  again  prostrated  an( 
disabled  by  a  lingering  illness  through  the  autumn  of  tha 
year.  Restored  to  health,  in  association  with  an  uncle,  h< 
next  embarked  in  a  trading  venture  in  horses,  of  whicli 
already,  he  was  an  excellent  judge.  This  knowledge,  and  ; 
sedulous  attention  to  the  business  in  hand,  resulted  in  success 

Returning  in  due  season  to  his  homestead,  he  remaine< 
occupied  in  a  laborious,  thrifty  husbandry  until  the  autumi 
of  1842,  when  circumstances  led  him  to  establish  himself  i] 
business  in  conjunction  with  another  uncle  in  the  county 
town  of  Hernando,  Mississippi,  about  twenty-five  miles  soutl 
of  Memphis.  And  there  he  remained  for  some  nine  years 
an  active,  energetic  man  of  business,  turning  his  small  mean 
habitually  to  a  good  account,  and  noted  for  the  resolutioi 
with  which  he  undertook  as  well  as  the  judgment  with  whicl 
he  carried  out  his  enterprises. 

It  was  during  this  period,  on  the  tenth  of  March,  1845 
that  occurred  one  of  those  tragical  personal  rencontres  s< 
common  in  the  settlement  of  the  Mississippi  Valley,  and  ii 
which  Bedford  Forrest  necessarily  became  the  chief  actor— 
the  scene  being  the  public  square  of  Hernando,  and  the  othe 
actors  three  planters  and  their  overseer. 


Introductory  Sketch.  23 

Without  going  into  the  details  of  the  origin  of  the  quarrel, 
it  will  be  sufficient  to  mention  that  Jonathan  Forrest,  the 
aged  uncle  and  partner  of  Bedford,  having  been  the  "  secu- 
rity "  on  the  bond  of  one  Martin  James,  of  the  vicinage,  as 
the  guardian  of  some  orphan  children,  a  misundei  standing 
and  violent  controversy  arose  between  him  and  another  citi- 
zen of  the  community — one  William  Matlock^  At  length, 
Bedford  was  drawn  into  the  dispute  in  behalf  of  his  elderly 
uncle  ;  and  to  such  a  height  did  the  discord  and  passions  of 
his  opponents  soon  rise  that,  on  the  day  we  have  mentioned, 
William  Matlock,  accompanied  by  his  two  brothers,  James 
and  Jefferson,  and  their  overseer,  one  Bean,  sallied  forth  into 
the  public  square  of  the  town  as  Bedford  Forrest  chanced  to 
be  passing  through  it,  and  all  four  joined  in  an  immediate 
savage    attack,  with    revolvers,    upon    their    single-handed 
enemy.'^ 

Without  word  or  act  of  provocation  from  Forrest,  Jefferson 
Matlock  fired  upon  him.  Unharmed,  Forrest  promptly  re- 
pKed  in  the  same  fashion,  and  the  whole  Matlock  party  taking 
immediate  part  with  the  aggressor,  a  general  engagement 
ensued,  in  the  course  of  which  thirteen  shots  were  exchanged, 
and  the  dread  bowie-knife  of  the  country  was  freely  used. 
Strange  to  say,  however,  the  speedy  issue  was  the  discom- 
fiture of  the  Matlocks,  all  three  of  whom  were  severely 
wounded,  and  their  auxiliary.  Bean,  being  driven  from  the 
field :  but  not,  unfortunately,  until,  firing  at  the  nephew,  he 
had  inflicted  a  mortal  wound  upon  the  uncle,  who,  having 
come  upon  the  scene,  had  really  taken  no  part  in  the>  affray. 
Forrest  himself  was  wounded,  but  not  severely.  /Unsup- 
ported throughout,  except  by  the  natural  sympathy  of  by- 
standers, who  limited  their  aid  to  the  opportune  provision  of 
weapons,  he  had  waged  this  unequal  battle  with  t)ie  dis- 

^fc^.— ^ p,    ^  ..Ml  -■■■■'■'I'll*    »»»>^"  ■"•"•*• 

tinctive  audacity,  coolness,  ana  determination  which  were 

^^^^^^__^^_^.^,^_L^__^_..„,.,_L  -  ■  ■     mill     I     _  .  Mini   !!■  ■■  ■ 

firougnt  to  bear  so  brilliantly^  twenty  years  later,  on  his  shin- 


2/^,  Introductory  Sketch. 

ing  military  career,  and  with  very  much  the  same  notable 
results!) 

So  strongly,  indeed,  were  the  sympathies  of  the  commu- 
nity excited  by  the  courage  displayed  by  young  Forrest  in 
this  affair,  that  the  aggressors,  though  seriously  wounded  and 
worsted,  were  at  once  arrested,  refused  bail,  imprisoned,  and 
subjected  to  a  stringent  prosecution,  from  which  they  were 
only  relieved,  finally,  after  heavy  costs  and  losses,  and  a  pro- 
tracted, harsh  confinement.  He,  too,  was  arrested :  but  after 
a  brief  examination  into  the  circumstances  before  a  magis- 
trates' court,  he  was  speedily  released  as  having  acted  merely 
in  self-defense. 

By  mere  chance,  some  months  later,  he  became  the  witness 
of  another  one  of  those  fierce  border  scenes  of  malice  and 
murder  which  stain  the  early  annals  of  the  South-West,  and 
revived  in  the  nineteenth  century  the  savage  temper  and 
practices  in  private  feuds  of  the  fourteenth/  It  was  only  by  his 
dauntless  nerve  and  coolness  that  he  was  pi^served,  moreover, 
from  being  involved  as  a  participant  in  defense  of  his  life. 
Riding,  one  day,  along  the  highway  from  Hernando  to  Holly 
Springs,  in  company  with  Mr.  James  K.  Morse,  a  well-known 
lawyer  of  the  former  place,  they  were  suddenly  met  in  the  road 
by  a  planter  of  the  neighborhood  in  which  they  were,  James 
Dyson  by  name,  notorious  for  his  lawless,  blood-thirsty  courses, 
and  who  cherished,  it  happened,  a  deadly  grudge  against 
the  lawyer.  Dyson  carried  a  double-barreled  gun,  and,  with- 
out uttering  one  word  or  making  one  gesture  of  warning,  shot 
Morse,  who  fell  without  a  groan  from  his  saddle  to  the  ground, 
with  a  rifle-ball  in  his  heart.  Instantly  turning  the  other 
barrel — loaded,  it  seems,  with  buck-shot — upon  Forrest,  the 
murderous  Dyson  threatened  to  shoot  him  also,  though  with 
no  other  cause  of  animosity  than  that  he  had  witnessed 
the  affair.  But  Forrest  was  not  to  be  thus  "  taken  lightly  by 
the  beard " — ^sudden  and  unexpected  as  had  been  the  deed ; 


Introductory  Sketch.  25 

for  he  had  drawn  and  held  his  revolver,  cocked,  with  a  steady 
aim  at  the  ruffian  who  menaced  him,  and  whom  he  coolly 
warned  that  he  had  "  better  make  sure  work,  for  it  was  now 
a  game  at  which  two  could  play." 

Dyson  then  lowered  his  weapon  and  forebore  his  sangui- 
nary purposes  upon  Forrest,*  who  at  once  became  the  stern, 
inflexible  prosecutor  before  the  law  of  the  murderer,  and  did 
all  in  his  power  to  secure  his  conviction  and  punishment^) 
Dyson  was  arrested,  tried,  and  convicted  of  murder  in  the 
first  degree.  But  the  power  of  money,  so  constantly  potent  to 
shield  crime,  was  successfully  applied,  and  he  subsequently 
escaped  the  rightful  penalty  of  this  murder. 

It  was  not  long  after  this  affair  that  General  Forrest,  on  the 
25th  of  September,  1845,  in  the  twenty-fifth  year  of  his  age, 
^as  married  to  Mary  Ann  Montgomery,  a  descendant  of  the 
same  stock  with  the  gallant  Irish  general  who  fell  in  Decem- 
ber, 1775,  under  the  walls  of  Quebec. 

Continuing  to  reside  and  prosper  in  his  business  undertak- 
ings in  Hernando,  in  1849  Forrest  experienced  his  first  pecu- 
niary disaster.  Having  engaged  in  the  manufacture  of  brick, 
he  was  led  to  become  the  contractor  for  the  erection  of  a 
large  academy  there,  which  resulted  in  a  severe  loss  through 
the  breach  of  trust  of  an  agent  empowered  to  draw  money  for 
Wm  from  a  bank  in  Memphis.  Undepressed,  however,  by 
this  mischance,  he  determined  to  adventure  into  a  broader 
field  for  his  capacities  and  energies.  Accordingly,  in  the 
spring  season  of  1852,  he  quit  Hernando  and  established  him- 
self in  Memphis  as  a  broker  in  real  estate  and  a  dealer  in 
slaves.! 

•  He,  however,  said  afterward  that  t  An  attempt  has  been  made  to  cast 

^  did  so  because  the  remaining  barrel  discredit  upon  General  Forrest  because 

of  bis  gun  only  contained  buck-shot,  of  the  fact  that  he  once  dealt  in  slaves. 

»d  he  feared  they  would  neither  be  Not  onl^  was  this  done  at  the  North, 

^tal  nor  disable  Forrest  at  a  juncture  when  all  persons  promi* 


26 


Introductory  Sketch. 


Successful  in  all  his  undertakings,  which,  if  boldly  planned, 
as  his  means  expanded,  were  always  carried  on  with  a  sound 
judgment  allied  with  marked  vigor  and  decision,  by  1859 
Forrest  had  achieved  a  large  measure  of  success  and  accumu- 
lated a  considerable  fortune.  He  had  previously,  for  several 
years,  cultivated  a  cotton  plantation  near  Memphis.  Now, 
disposing  of  the  larger  portion  of  his  active  business  in  that 
city,  he  bought  two  extensive  plantations  in  Cohoma  county, 
Mississippi,  and  began  planting  on  a  large  scale — ^growing  a 
thousand  bales  of  cotton  in  1861  ;  and  transferring  to  the  cul- 
ture of  his  fields  all  that  natural  intelligence  and  aptitude  for 
affairs  which,  displayed  from  youthhood,  had  developed  in 
scope  as  he  grew  and  with  the  increase  of  his  fortunes,  show- 
ing that  he  is  clearly  one  of  those  men,  who  Schiller  says, 

"  Grow  with  the  circle  wherein  they  move." 

As  we  have  seen,  narrowly  escaping  death,  once  from  a 


nently  connected  with  slavery  had  be- 
come objects  of  a  passionate  dislike ; 
but  even  to  some  extent  with  the  people 
of  his  own  section.  Indeed,  it  has  been 
one  of  the  strangest  of  paradoxes  that, 
while  earnestly  impressed  with  the  be- 
lief that  not  only  the  prosperity  of  their 
section  was  linked  with  the  preservation 
of  slavery,  but  also  the  perpetuity  of 
those  traits  of  which  they  were  proud- 
est, the  Southern  people,  nevertheless, 
in  no  snialf  degree,  looked  with  disfavor 
upon  traffic  in  slaves.  Selling  their 
slaves  at  pleasure  or  purchasing  of  the 
dealer,  they  were  yet  prone  to  dispa- 
rage his  avocation.  This  probably 
arose,  at  first,  from  personal  causes. 
But  there  were  many  dealers  who  over- 
came the  prejudice  by  their  individual 
worth  and  standing ;  and  promipent  in 
this  class  stands  Bedford  Forrest,  who. 


it  may  be  justly  claimed,  carried  on  his 
business  with  admitted  probity  and  hu- 
manity. It  is  notable  that  he  never 
sold  separately  the  members  of  a  fami- 
ly ;  and  made  it  a  rule, 'as  far  as  practi- 
cable, after  acquiring  the  heads  of  a 
family,  to  purchase  the  others,  howso- 
ever widely  scattered,  and  this,  indeed, 
proved  profitable  in  the  end.  Habitu- 
ally kind  as  a  master,  we  are  satisfied 
his  slaves  were  strongly  attached  to 
him.  That  in  Memphis  he  rose  above 
any  prejudices  against  his  calling  is  fiilly 
attested  by  his  personal  influence  in 
the  community ;  by  the  call  upon  him, 
as  will  be  seen,  by  the  Governor  of  his 
State,  after  he  had  enrolled  as  a  pcivate, 
to  raise  a  regiment  of  cavalry  ;  and  the 
ease  with  which  he  made  up  his  regi- 
ment out  of  the  best  young  men  of 
North- Alabama  and  Tennessee. 


* 

Introductory  Sketch.  27 

deadly  disease  and  twice  from  murderous  violence,  previous 
to  his  removal  from  Hernando,  just  at  the  threshold  of  his 
career  at  Memphis,  he  was  once  more  brought  within  the 
closest  contact  with  death,  and  narrowly  escaped  falling  a  vic- 
tim to  the  atrocious  recklessness  of  human  life  and  incapacity 
of  the  officers  of  a  steamboat  upon  which  he  was  a  passenger. 
It  was  in  the  spring  of  1852  ;  the  adjustment  of  some  business 
affairs  having  called  him  to  Texas,  he  was  about  to  return 
homeward.    Arriving  at  Houston,  en  route  for  Galveston,  it 
was  found  his  only  means  of  transportation  was  the  steam- 
boat Farmer,  represented  as  extremely  dangerous  from  age, 
long  use,  and  the  reckless,  bad  habits  of  her  captain.     Anx- 
ious to  reach  Memphis  as  speedily  as  possible,  Forrest  re- 
solved to  venture  the  hazard,  and  accordingly  embarked  just 
as  the  Farmer  was   being  pushed   from   the  landing.     No 
sooner  was  the  boat  well  under  way  than  another  steamer 
made  her  appearance,  and  it  was  evident  there  was  a  race  be- 
tween them.      Soon  after  supper,  being  fatigued,   Forrest 
sought  his  state-room  and  berth,  but  was  not  suffered  to  sleep, 
weary  and  drowsy  as  he  was  after  his  long  ride  across  the 
country.     A  party  of  gamblers  was  established  in  the  saloon 
of  the  boat ;  the  vicissitudes  of  their  game  speedily  brought 
on  a  clamorous  altercation,  and  pistols  were  right  soon  drawn 
and  cocked.     All  this  was  audible  to  Forrest,  who  further 
saw  that,  from  the  position  of  the  brawlers,  he  was  in  immi- 
nent risk  of  being  shot  in  his  berth.     Promptly  rising,  and 
but  partially  dressed,  he  hastened  among  the  desperadoes, 
and,  by  a  few  peremptory  words,  his  resolute  manner,  and  im- 
perious will,  quelled  the  disturbance  just  on  the  verge  of  a 
general  miUe,     This  effected,  walking  out  upon  the  deck 
and  forward,  he  was  startled  to  find  the  chimneys  of  the  Far- 
mer red-hot  as  high  as  the  roof  ef  the  cabin,  which  was  only 
being  kept  from  breaking  into  a  blaze  by  the  constant  dash 
of  water  by  the  bucketful  upon  the  adjacent  timbers  by  all 


28  Introductory  Sketch. 

the  servants  of  the  boat.  At  the  same  time  all  kinds  of  the 
most  combustible  fuel  were  being  lavishly  thrown  into  the 
already  volcanic  furnaces  of  the  steamer,  to  increase  steam 
and  accelerate  her  speed.  To  all  but  the  insensate  captain 
and  the  absorbed  gamesters  the  situation  of  all  aboard  that 
trembling,  overpressed  boat  was  one  of  apparent,  fearful  peril. 
Forrest,  remonstrating  with  the  captain,  sharply  reprobated 
his  criminal  exposure  of  the  lives  of  his  passengers,  some 
of  whom  were  women  and  children,  and  urged  an  immediate 
cessation  of  the  race  and  a  timely  effort  to  reduce  the  steam. 
But,  excited  by  liquor  as  well  as  the  race,  the  captain,  with  a 
coarse  oath,  exclaimed  he  was  one  hundred  yards  ahead  of  his 
rival,  and  would  preserve  that  distance  to  Galveston,  six  miles 
distant,  or  he  "  would  blow  the  old  tub  with  every  soul  on 
board  to  h — 1."  Seeing  that  Jie  was  unable  to  avert  the  im- 
pending catastrophe,  Forrest  walked  to  the  extreme  after  part 
of  the  vessel  and  there  awaited  the  crisis.  Nor  did  he  wait 
long  ;  in  a  few  moments  a  loud  explosion  was  heard  forward, 
and  the  whole  forward  cabin  and  deck,  torn  into  numberless 
shreds  and  fragments  of  beams  and  boards,  were  thrown  with 
fearful  uproar  high  up  in  the  air,  amid  the  harrowing  death- 
shrieks  and  loud  cries  of  anguish  and  terror  of  more  than  a 
hundred  human  beings  who  were  aboard  the  ill-fated  craft  at 
the  time  of  the  explosion.  This  took  place  just  as  the  Farmer 
was  crossing  Rockfish  bar,  where  the  water  fortunately  was 
shallow;  and  the  competitor  in  the  race,  being  near  by  at 
the  juncture,  came  alongside  immediately,  and  the  unhurt  and 
wounded  were  sought  out  and  rescued  from  the  water  or  from 
the  wreck.  Among  those  taken  from  the  hulk  was  Forrest, 
half-clad  as  he  had  happily  left  his  state-room  a  few  moments 
before.  His  only  hurt  was  a  severe  contusion  of  the  shoul- 
der :  but  the  state-room  abandoned  so  timely,  with  his  lug- 
gage, had  been  destroyed.  With  characteristic  energy,  how- 
ever, he  assisted  in  removing  the  survivors  to  the  other  steam* 


Introductory  Sketch.  29 

cr,  with  such  of  the  dead  as  could  be  found,  and  did  what  he 
could,  by  his  presence  of  mind  and  thoughtfulness,  to  alleviate 
the  suffering  of  the  wounded  on  the  way  to  Galveston,  where 
he  disembarked  several  bom's  after  the  disaster.* 

Returning,  without  further  incident  or  delay,  to  his  newly 
opened  field  of  enterprise  at  Memphis,  Forrest  set  to  work  to 
extend  its  area  each  year.  Temperate  in  his  habits,  cool  and 
far-seeing  in  his  outlook,  recognizing  the  possible  with  a  rapid 
glance,  and  bringing  his  good  sense  to  bear  on  whatsoever  he 
pursued,  a  large  measure  of  success  crowned  his  every  effort, 
and  made  him  noted  in  his  community  as  a  man  of  uncom- 
mon aptitude  for  large  and  happy  business  affairs.  As  a 
natural  consequence,  too,  no  small  degree  of  influence  among 
his  fellow-citizens  followed,  and  this  was  strikingly  illustrated 
by  an  occurrence  thereafter  memorable  in  the  history  of 
Memphis. 

In  1857,  there  lived  in  the  city  two  men — ^Joe  and  John 
Able,  father  and  son — who  had  rendered  themselves  gener- 
ally odious  as  gamblers  and  by  their  acts  of  lawless  violence, 
until  the  father,  having  killed  a  man  in  a  public  saloon,  was 
forced  to  abscond  to  escape  justice.  In  June  of  that  year, 
the  son,  John  Able,  and  a  man  by  the  name  of  Everson  were 
seated  together  on  the  "sidewalk"  of  the  Worsham  House,  in 
conversation  touching  or  in  explanation  of  an  insult  which  it 
was  alleged  had  been  offered  by  the  latter  to  the  mother  of 
Able.  Suddenly  the  interview  was  brought  to  an  end  by  a 
heavy  blow  in  the  face  of  Everson,  given  by  Able  with  his 
pistoL  In  the  blow  the  pistol  was  discharged,  and  the  ball, 
passing  through  the  brain  of  the  stricken  man,  he  was  killed 
instantly.  Surrendering  himself  to  the  police,  young  Able 
was  at  once  lodged  in  prison  ;  but  the  intelligence  of  the 
deed  was  soon  broad-spread  through  Memphis.     Other  recent 


*  About  sixty  souls  were  swept  from  mortal  existence  by  this  dreadful  affiur. 
ttdading  the  wretched  captam. 


30  Introduciary  Sketch. 

acts  of  similar  character  had  tarnished  the  repute  of  the  place 
by  the  impunity  with  which  they  had  been  perpetrated,  and 
the  ease  with  which  flagrant  culprits  had  been  able  to  break 
through  the  feeble  meshes  of  the  law.  Recollecting  this,  and 
coupling  with  it  the  past  life  of  the  Abies,  the  populace  swift- 
ly congregated  on  the  streets  and  in  public  places,  and  in  free 
conversation  in  regard  to  this  particular  homicide,  as  well  as 
the  prevalence  and  immunity  of  open  murder  in  their  midst, 
soon  became  so  excited  that,  swept  on  by  their  passionate  re- 
sentment, they  flocked  in  a  dense  crowd  to  the  scene  of  the 
murder.  Surrounding  the  Worsham  House,  they  grew  more 
and  more  angry,  and,  as  on  all  such  occasions,  ringleaders 
being  found  to  begin  the  cry,  the  whole  throng  followed  in  a 
clamorous  demand  for  the  object  of  popular  wrath,  to  the  end 
that  they  might  inflict  summary  and  condign  punishment 
Among  those  attracted  to  the  spot  was  Bedford  Forrest :  but, 
while  the  masses  were  inflamed  by  ungovernable  passions,  he 
had  remained  unaffected  and  loyal  to  the  laws  of  the  land. 
Counseling  with  the  mayor  and  some  other  prominent  citi- 
zens, he  made  his  appearance  upon  a  balcony  of  the  hotel,  and, 
attracting  the  attention  of  the  vast  throng  there  assembled, 
addressed  the  people  in  behalf  of  moderation  and  deliberation ; 
and,  in  order  to  insure  heed  to  this  counsel,  announced  that  a 
mass  meeting  of  the  citizens  was  called  at  the  Exchange 
Building,  at  a  special  hour  the  next  evening,  to  consider 
what  should  be  done  for  the  public  good,  and  for  the  punish- 
ment and  suppression  hereafter  of  these  acts  of  murder.  This 
speech  had  the  desired  effect ;  the  clamor  for  immediate  pun- 
ishment subsided,  and  ceased  as  the  people  gradually  dis- 
persed and  retired  to  their  homes. 

At  the  time  appointed,  however,  vast  numbers  reassembled, 
and  the  large  hall  and  corridors  of  the  Exchange  Building 
were  packed  to  overflowing,  while  the  neighboring  streets 
wcie  thronged  with  groups  of  people,  gradually  growing  as 


i*tB 


Iniroductary  Sketch.  31 

excited  and  clamorous  for  swift  justice  upon  the  murderer  as 
on  the  previous  night     The  mayor  having  been  called  to 
preside,  Forrest  was  one  of  the  \-ice-presidents  ;  but  scarcely 
had  this  organization  been  effected  than  some  one  in  the 
crowd  shouted,  "  Let's  go  and  hang  the  murderer  !'*    Instantly 
thb  was  accepted  as  the  public  judgment  ^mAfiat,  and  in  spite 
of  ever)'  effort  made  by  the  officers  of  the  meeting  and  a  few 
other  prominent  citizens  present  to  restrain  and  turn  them 
aside  from  their  harsh  purpose,  the  infuriated  people  rushed 
forth  and  again  crowded  all  the  approaches  to  the  city  prison. 
Ringleaders,  seizing  the  control,  at  once  demanded  the  keys 
and  access  to  the  object  of  their  vengeance  —  threatening 
force  if  not  instantly  complied  with.    The  universal  echo 
that  resounded  from  the  thousands  around  to  this  demand 
roade  it  apparent  that  resistance  were  useless,  and  the  jailer 
yielded  up  the  keys  to  the  mob-leaders,  who,  entering,  soon 
brought  young  Able  forth,  without  giving  time  even  to  dress. 
Throwing  a  rope  around  his  neck.  Able  was  hurried,  with- 
out delay,,  in  the  direction  of  the  navy-yard,  in  the  relentless 
hands  of  the  master-spirits  of  the  occasion,  followed  by  a 
boisterous  multitude,  heated  by  excitement,  for  the  most  part, 
into  a  fierce  thirst  for  his  life.     It  was  there,  upon  one  of  the 
projecting  beams  under  the  eaves  of  the  rope-walk,  it  had 
been  determined  to  hang  him.     Some  time  was  occupied, 
however,  in  the  preparation  for  the  execution,  biit  the  rope 
^as  finally  and  satisfactorily  adjusted,  and  Able  was  on  the 
eve  of  being  hung  beyond  rescue.     But,  meanwhile,  Forrest, 
^ho  had  remained  for  a  time  in  the  court-hall  in  consultation 
with  those  opposed  to  the  courses  of  the  mob,  hearing  of  the 
delay,  resolved  to  extricate  Able  and  deliver  him  into  the 
custody  of  the  officers  of  the  law,  and  hurried  to  the  navy- 
yard  to  make  the  attempt.     Pressing  through  the  turbulent 
masses  with  much  difficulty  up  to  where  Able  was  standing 
with  the  rope  around  his  neck,  his  mother  and  sister  by  his 


32  Introductory  Sketch. 

side  making  piteous,  tearful  appeals  to  the  implacable  throng 
around  for  the  life  of  their  kinsman,  Forrest  was  still  further 
confirmed  in  his  purpose  by  their  presence,  and  the  dauntless 
bearing  of  young  Able  at  that  instant  of  supreme  peril  Pallid, 
and  slender  to  effeminacy,  and  scarcely  twenty-one  years  of 
age,  he  nevertheless  faced  the  angry  crowd,  intent  on  his 
death,  with  the  utmost  cool  courage,  and  without  the  least 
tremor  in  his  voice  firmly  protested  against  the  impending 
violence  as  unjust  under  the  circumstances  of  extreme  provo- 
cation from  which  he  had  acted,  as  he  could  fully  establish  if 
allowed  a  fair  trial  before  the  law,  which  he  demanded  as  his 
right.  "  Hang  him  !  hang  him !"  were  still  the  loud  and  gene- 
ral cry  of  the  enraged  people.  But  Forrest,  drawing  his 
knife,  with  a  swift  sweep  severed  the  rope,  and,  taking  Able 
by  the  arm,  announced  aloud  his  intention  to  remand  him  to 
the  custody  of  the  rightful  authorities. 

Scarcely  ever  was  a  mob  more  uniformly  animated  by  a 
single  aim,  nor  one  more  inflexibly  bent  upon  its  execution, 
than  that  which  stood  between  Forrest  and  the  city  prison. 
The  attempt,  therefore,  to  snatch  the  victim  from  its  clutches 
at  such  a  moment  was  supremely  dangerous,  and,  under  all 
the  circumstances,  naught  but  the  influence  of  the  resistless 
raagnetis^tn  of  a  robust,  right  royal  manhood  made  success 
possible,  and  averted  a  fearful  tragedy,  of  which  the  lawless 
hanging  of  Able  had  been  the  least  part  Some  few  stout- 
hearted, able-bodied  friends  rallied  around  Forrest  and  his 
charge  at  the  moment,  and  as,  proceeding  to  carry  out  his 
announced  purpose,  he  moved  through  the  press  toward  the 
jail.  At  first,  no  resistance  was  encountered ;  but  right  soon 
the  more  tempestuous  spirits  of  the  mob  gathered  to  a  head, 
rushed  after,  and  with  such  violence  that  Forrest's  little  band 
of  supports  were  swept  away  in  the  torrent,  and  he  was  left 
alone  with  his  self-assumed  charge,  still  held  firmly  by  the 
arm.    Fortunately,  at  the  instant,  he  was  close  to  some  small 


Introductory  Sketch.  33 

piles  of  lumber,  and,  stooping  behind  one  of  these,  the  frantic 
throng  actually  passed  over  Able  and  himself,  but  with  a  nar- 
row escape,  as  several  attempts  were  made  by  ringleaders  to 
strike  them  with  bludgeons  and  knives,  which,  however,  his 
watchful,  wary  habits  enabled  Forrest  to  ward.  Impelled  for- 
ward by  the  weight  of  the  masses  behind  them,  the  leaders 
were  forced  beyond  their  mark,  and  Forrest,  taking  advantage 
of  the  opportunity,  made  directly  for  the  jail,  which  he  happily 
succeeded  in  reaching,  and  restored  Able  to  his  cell. 

Meanwhile,  the  mob  again  surrounded  the  building  and  re- 
demanded  their  victim,  as  strongly  resolved  on  his  immolation 
as  ever.     In  reply  to  a  threat  that  they  would  break  down  the 
door  if  the  prisoner  were  not  delivered  up,  Forrest,  present- 
ing himself  upon  the  steps  of  the  prison,  drew  a  revolver,  and 
declared  it  to  be  his  determination  to  shoot  the  first  man  who 
approached  to  the  door.     The  collected,  stern  courage  of  the 
man,  and  his  previous  intrepidity  in  wresting  Able  from  their 
hands,  made  it  apparent  that  he  would  actually  execute  his 
declaration  if  forced  to  the  exigency,  and  no  one  seemed  in- 
clined to  bring  on  that  issue.     The  ringleaders  quailed,  the 
spirit  of  violence  quickly  ebbed  away,  the  people  again  began 
to  disperse — and  a  little  later  naught  remained  of  the  "  Able 
Mob,"  as  it  had  been  designated. 

The  genuine  worth  and  potential  qualities  of  the  man  who 
could  thus  spring  forth,  take  fully  three  thousand  excited  men, 
as  it  were,  by  the  throats,  and  by  his  own  imperious  will 
force  them  to  recognize  the  plenitude  of  discarded  authority, 
were  now  fully  appreciated  in  Memphis.  Accordingly,  the 
year  following,  Bedford  Forrest  was  put-forward,  wholly  with- 
out his  own  seeking,  for  the  important  office  of  alderman  of 
his  ward,  and  easily  elected.  Serving  out  his  term,  in  June, 
1859,  he  was  as  easily  reelected  ;  but  before  the  close  of  the 
official  year,  having  been  called  away  from  the  city  by  his  af- 
fairs, he  resigned.     But  soon  returning,  he  was  rechosen — 


34  Introductory  Sketch. 

his  own  successor  —  by  the  board  of  aldermen,  upon  whom 
the  election  had  devolved.  Throughout  his  whole  official  life 
an  active  public  servant,  he  was  one  extremely  watchful  over 
every  public  interest  confided  to  the  city  government,  and 
was  ever  animated  by  decided  views  upon  every  question 
touching  those  interests,  as  might  be  abundantly  illustrated. 
One  transaction,  however,  must  suffice.  It  was  proposed  to 
sell  the  stock  of  the  city  in  the  Memphis  and  Charleston  Rail- 
road to  the  extent  of  half  a  million  of  dollars  at  a  certain  rate 
below  par.  This  Alderman  Forrest  strenuously  opposed  as 
manifestly  below  the  real  intrinsic  worth  of  the  stock,  and 
therefore  seriously  detrimental  to  the  people's  interests,  espe- 
cially since  the  stock  was  advancing  in  value.  The  measure, 
however,  was  carried  over  his  obstinate  opposition  and  argu- 
ments, and  the  sale  took  place.  Assured  of  the  correctness 
of  his  views,  Forrest,  seeing  that  the  transaction  was  irrevo- 
cable, did  not  hesitate,  as  a  business  man,  to  secure  as  an  in- 
vestment some  fifty  thousand  dollars  of  the  bonds  at  the  rate 
established  by  the  Board,  which  within  a  year  thereafter  he 
sold  at  a  profit  of  twenty  thousand  dollars.* 
QjThus,  beginning  life  a  fatherless  youth  at  the  age  of  six- 
teen, with  a  comparatively  helpless  family  of  twelve  persons 
dependent  for  their  support  upon  his  labor  on  a  leased  farm 
in  the  rugged  hill-lands  of  Tippah,  denied  the  advantage  of 
even  an  ordinary  English  education,  and  left  to  struggle  with- 
out the  least  extrinsic  aid,  steady,  straightforward,  strong,  and 
self-reliant,  we  find  him  climbing  year  by  year,  with  scarce  a 


*  In  this  connection  it  will  be  in  place  Board  on  any  subject,  br  to  cany  out 

to  dte  the  observations  of  R.  D.  Baugb,  any  measure,  no  matter  how  unpopular 

Esq.,  who  was    Mayor    of   Memphis  it  might  be  at  first,  that  he  did  not  stick 

while  General  Forrest  served  as  an  to  it  and  work  at  it  until  he  carried  it 

alderman :  "  While  alderman,  General  triumphantly  through." — MSS,  Notes, 
Forrest  never  offered  a  resolution  in  the 


Introductory  Sketch.  35 

pause  in  his  ascent)  With  him,  indeed,  it  was  as  Milton 
tells  us: 

"  The  way  found  prosperous  once 
Induces  best  to  hope  of  like  success," 

until,  after  the  lapse  of  little  more  than  a  score  of  years,  he 
stands — in  1861 — ^in  the  front  rank  of  the  prosperous  business 
men  of  the  largest  city  of  his  native  State,  the  owner  of  large, 
well-stocked  plantations,  the  grower  of  one  thousand  bales  of 
cotton  per  annum,  and  possessed  of  a  handsome  estate  be- 
sides in  stocks  ahd  other  personal  property.  ^All  this  ac- 
quired by  his  own  unassisted  endeavor  ;  and  withal,  Jie  was 
now  generally  recognized  by  his  fellow-citizens  as  a  man  of 
growing  mark,  already,  indeed,  one  of  much  public  usefulness, 
and  calculated  by  a  strenuous  temper  and  strong  will  to  sway 
others  and  move  them  for  the  public  wealj 

It  remains  to  be  added  here  :  In  person,  he  is  six  feet  one 
inch  and  a  half  in  height,  with  broad  shoulders,  a  full  chest, 
and  symmetrical,  muscular  limbs.  Erect  in  his  carriage,  his 
average  weight  is  one  hundred  and  eighty-five  pounds.  Dark 
gray  eyes,  singularly  bright  and  searching,  dark  hair,  mus- 
tache, and  beard  worn  upon  the  chin,  a  set  of  regular  white 
teeth,  and  clearly  cut,  sun-embrowned  features  make  him  a 
niuch  handsomer  man  than  any  of  his  pictures,  and  person- 
ally noticeable  before  .the  fame  of  his  successes  as  a  cavalry 
officer  attracted  general  attention  to  General  Forrest 


THE 


Campaigns  of  Lieut.-Gen.  Forrest, 


AND  OP 


FORREST'S     CAVALRY. 


'^:. 


CHAPTER    I. 

^aihan  Bedford  Forrett  a  Planter  in  Mitsissippi  up  to  June,  1861— JP*- 
pairiiig  to  Memphis,  Tenn.,  volunteered,  a  Private  Trooper,  in  Cap- 
tain  y.  S.  Whites  Company — Went  to  Randolph  with  Company— 
Jnvited  to  raise  Regiment  of  Cavalry  by  Governor  Harris  and  Gene- 
ral  Polk — Went  to  Kentucky  to  purchase  Arms  and  recruit — How 
^e  got  the  Arms  out  of  Louisville,  Ky. — On  return  formed  a  Balla- 
/wM  of  Eight  Companies — Ordered  to  Fort  DonelsoH — Fight  with 
Gunboat  Conestoga  on  Cumberland  River — Two  Companies  added  to 
Saltation — Brilliant  Affair  at  Sacramento,  Ky. — Personal  Combat 
xvith  two  Federal  Officers  in  Battle — Made  another  close  Reconnais- 
sance of  Federal  Force  on  Green  River — Subsequently  occupied  with 
the  administrative  Duties  of  the  Battalion — Hopkinsville  evacuated 
February  -jth,  1863 — Forrest  ordered  to  Fort  Donelson—Took  Posi- 
tion at  Fort  Donelson  February  lOth — Ordered  to  make  Reconnois- 
sance  of  Federals  at  Fort  Henry — Met  and  chased  off  Federal  Recon- 
noitering  Party — Trap  laid  to  acatch  nother  Party  defeated  by  Eagtr- 
ness  of  his  Men — Reported  impending  Advance  of  Federal  Army. 

June  1st,  1861,  to  February  izth,  i86a. 

In  the  pages  which  follow  we  have  undertaken  to  present  a 
sketch  of  the  military  career  of  Nathan  Bedford  Forrest,  and 
1  Riemoir,  in  detail,  of  the  campaigns,  marches,  and  battles  of 
those  Confederate  soldiers  whose  remarkable  achievements, 
from  an  early  day  in  the  winter  of  1861-2  to  the  9th  of  May, 
i8fi;,  made  the  name  of  "  Forrest's  Cavalry  "  redoubtable 
to  their  adversaries,  a  high  distinction  with  their  countrymen, 
and  a  designation  proudly  worn  by  all  who  bore  it. 
At  the  outburst  of  the  war  inaugurated  by  the  evacuation 


40  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

by  Major  Robert  Anderson  of  his  post  at  Fort  Moultrie,  in 
Charleston  Harbor,  and  the  hostile  occupation  of  Fort  Sumter, 
he  who  in  the  course  of  a  year  subsequently,  as  will  be  seen, 
became  a  renowned  cavalry  commander  was  living  quietly  on 
his  plantation  in  Coahoma  county,  Mississippi.  Always  a 
strong  and  decided  States  Right  Democrat  in  politics,  he  had 
been  deeply  attached,  however,  to  the  Union,  and  was  earn- 
estly opposed  to  its  dissolution  so  long  as  there  were  reason- 
able hopes  of  an  adjustment  of  the  questions  in  issue  between 
the  sections  consonant  with  the  safety  and  rights  of  his  imme- 
diate State  and  section.  But  that  hope  having  been  destroyed 
by  the  Proclamation  of  President  Lincoln  on  the  15  th  of 
April,  1861  ;  and,  seeing  that  a  great  conflict  was  inevitable, 
he  set  to  work  to  prepare  his  large  private  affairs  for  the 
emergency,  so  that  he  might  at  once  and  thenceforward  take 
an  earnest  part  in  the  struggle  for  the  independence  or  sepa- 
rate political  existence  of  the  Confederate  States.  This  ar- 
ranged as  far  as  practicable,  early  in  June  he  repaired  to 
Memphis  with  the  intention  of  joining  the  Confederate  force 
then  engaged  in  fortifying  the  position  of  Randolph,  Tennes- 
see. On  reaching  Memphis,  however,  following  the  strong 
bent  of  his  nature  for  cavalry,  he  at  once  attached  himself,  as 
a  private  trooper,  to  the  "  Tennessee  Mounted  Rifles,"  a  com- 
pany which  he  found  forming  at  the  time,*  under  Dr.  Josiah 
S.  White,  and  in  less  than  a  week  afterward  he  became  a  part 
of  the  garrison  at  Randolph,  whither  his  company  was  or- 
dered. • 

About  the  loth  of  July,  Private  Forrest  was  called  to  Mem- 
phis by  a  dispatch  from  the  Governor  of  Tennessee,  Isham  G. 
Harris,  at  whose  urgent  desire,  united  with  that  of  Major- 
General  Polk,  Commander-in-Chief  of  the  Confederate  Forces 
in  all  that  quarter,  he  undertook  to  raise  a  regiment  of  volun- 


*  June  14th,  1861. 


Went  to  Kentucky  to  Procure  Arms.  41 

teer  cavalry,  and  the  necessary  warrant  was  g^ven  to  that 
effect 

After  making  this  authority  properly  known  in  Memphis, 
Colonel  Forrest,  with  characteristic  energy  and  comprehen- 
sion of  his  needs,  hastened  to  Kentucky,  for  the  purpose  no^ 
only  of  procuring  arms  and  horse-equipments  in  that  State, 
but  with  a  view,  also,  to  recruiting  there  for  his  regiment 
This,  in  his  judgment,  was  desirable,  inasmuch  as  a  very 
large  portion  of  the  young  men  of  West-Tennessee  had  al- 
ready become  attached  to  other  organizations  of  the  several 
arms  of  the  service.  Visiting  the  towns  of  Paris,  Lexington, 
Mount  Sterling,  Frankfort,  and  intermediate  places,  he  found» 
however,  that,  while  the  mass  of  th^  people,  apparently,  were 
in  strong  sympathy  with  the  Confederate  cause,  comparatively 
few  were  prepared  to  take  up  arms  at  that  moment 

Turning  back  at  Frankfort,  Colonel  Forrest  visited  Louis- 
ville about  the  20th  of  July,  and  there  purchased,  with  his 
own  means,  five  hundred  Colt's  navy  pistols,  and  one  hundred 
saddles  and  other  horse-equipments.  While  thus  engaged, 
receiving  information  that  a  company  of  cavalry  was  being 
organized  for  his  regiment  at  Brandenburg,  Meade  county, 
Kentucky,  he  went  to  that  point  and  mustered  in  the  "  Boone 
Rangers,"  some  ninety  strong,  under  Captain  Frank  Overton, 
which  thus  became  the  first  company  of  a  regiment  subse- 
quently so  conspicuous. 

Returning  to  Louisville,  he  found  it  a  matter  of  no  little 
difficulty  .to  get  his  arms  and  equipments  out  of  the  city,  as 
by  this  time  the  objects  of  his  presence  there  had  become 
suspected,  and  a  strict  surveillance  was  established  over  his 
movements.  But  with  native  address  and  shrewdness,  assist- 
ed by  only  two  gentlemen,*  he  baffled  the  vigilance  of  those 


*  Colonel  Richard  C.  Wintersmith,     son,  Elsq.,  a  Kentuckian,  residing  near 
a  native  of  Kentucky,  but  then,  as  now,     Louisville, 
a  resident  of  Memphis,  and  M.  Garri- 


42  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest 

opposed  to  his  purposes,  and  eluded  all  the  efforts  made  to 
detect  and  arrest  him.  Favored  by  the  happy  chance  that 
his  person  was  not  known,  he  and  his  two  associates  were 
able  to  carry,  from  time  to  time,  the  pistols,  concealed  under 
their  linen  "dusters,"  to  a  livery  stable,  whence  they  were 
subsequently  taken  in  a  market-wagon  to  Mr.  Garrison's  farm 
in  the  country  as  so  many  bags  of  potatoes,  while  the  saddles 
and  other  equipments  were  conveyed,  under  the  guise  of  lea- 
ther, to  a  tan-yard  some  three  miles  south  of  Louisville. 
Meanwhile,  a  detachment  of  Captain  Overton's  company  had 
been  brought  to  the  vicinage  with  the  necessary  wagons  ;  at 
dusk,  these  were  driven  to  the  tan- yard  in  question,  and,  receiv- 
ing the  freight  awaiting  them,  hastened  southward,  taking  up 
the  arms  also  as  they  passed  on  toward  the  mouth  of  Salt 
river.*  These  dispositions  successfully  made,  he  mounted  a 
horse  and  rode  leisurely  in  the  direction  opposite  to  that  in 
which  the  tan-yard  lay  until  he  reached  the  suburbs,  when, 
being  now  quite  dark,  he  swiftly  made  the  circuit  of  the  city 
and  took  the  road  southward  on  the  track  of  his  wagons,  which 
he  soon  overtook  ;  and,  pushing  rapidly  on  with  them  to  Bran- 
denburg, found  the  Boone  Rangers  ready  to  take  the  field. 

Leaving  Brandenburg  the  same  day,  he  proceeded  with  the 
Boone  Rangers,  via  Bowling  Green,  Ky.,  in  the  direction  of 
Clarksville,  Tenn.  Fed  and  received  on  the  way  with  great 
hospitality  by  the  citizens,  they  encamped  the  second  after- 
noon after  leaving  Brandenburg  within  fifteen  miles  of  Mun- 
fordsville.  Here  intelligence  was  received  that  a  Uixion  force 
of  two  companies  of  "Home  Guards"  were  in  wait  at  the 
latter  town  to  contest  his  march.     Many  gentlemen,  relatives 


*  Ab  before  said,  his  presence  and  train  between  Lexington  and  Frankfort, 

business  in  Kentucky  ¥ras  known  to  the  he  heard  the  subject  discussed,  and  the 

Union  leaders,  who  had  a  watch  set  Hon.  John  J.  Crittenden  declared  that 

over  his  movements.    One  day,  in  the  "  Forrest  ought  to  be  arrested." 


Successful  Return  to  Memphis.  43 

and  parents  of  the  members  of  the  Boone  Rangers,  had  ac- 
companied their  beloved  sons  or  young  kinsmen  thus  far,  as 
indeed  for  several  days  thereafter.  These  Forrest  drew  up 
in  a  line  with  his  men,  under  the  Confederate  flag,  forming 
an  imposing  array^  as  the  railway  train  approached  from  Mun- 
fordsville.  So  strong,  indeed,  was  the  appearance  thus  pre- 
sented, that  the  passengers  in  their  report  magnified  this  little 
band  into  a  regiment.  The  result  was,  as  he  drew  near  Mun- 
fordsville,  resolved  to  fight  his  way,  if  necessary,  through  any 
obstacles,  on  making  a  reconnoissance  with  a  squad  of  five 
men,  it  was  ascertained  the  main  force  of  the  Home  Guards 
had  retired.  A  small  body,  however,  had  remained,  and  made 
show  of  resistance,  until  put  to  flight  by  a  prompt  charge  on 
the  part  of  Forrest  and  his  petty  detachment. 

Taking  the  route  by  Bowling  Green*  and  Russellville,  Ky., 
and  Clarksville,  Tenn.,  the  Confederate  flag  flying  at  the  head 
of  his  little  column  all  the  while,  Forrest  reached  Memphis, 
without  incident  or  delay,  about  the  ist  day  of  August,  thus 
achieving  an  operation  seemingly  insignificant,  but  really,  at 
this  juncture,  one  of  much  delicacy  and  hazard,  requiring  for 
its  success  no  small  sagacity  and  resolution.  For,  until  he 
had  crossed  the  Tennessee  river,  a  superior  force  of  Home 
Guards  was  organized  or  mustering  in  every  county  through, 
which  he  passed 

A  fine  company  for  his  regiment  had  been  raised  and  or- 
ganized  in  Memphis  in  his  absence,  under  Captain  Charles 
May,  which  had  been  named  the  "  Forrest  Rangers,"  and  this 
and  the  Boone  Rangers  formed  the  nucleus  around  which,  in 
the  course  of  the  next  six  or  eight  weeks,  was  formed  a  bat- 
talion of  eight  companies.! 


I 


•  The  parents  and  lunsmen  of  the  t  Namely,  Oyerton's  (A)  Company, 
Boone  Rangers  zetumed  from  this  which,  as  mentioned  ubi  supra^  fronv 
place.  Brandenburg,  was  some   90  strongs 


44 


Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 


An  election  for  field-officers,  held  in  the  second  week  of 
October,  of  course  resulted  in  the  choice  of  Forrest  for  the 
Lieutenant-Colonelcy,  while  Captain  D.  C.  Kelly  was  made 
Major.* 

The  day  following  the  final  organization  by  this  election  of 
field-officers,  one  squadron  was  put  in  motion,  under  Major 
Kelly,  for  Fort  Donelson,  (Dover,)  Middle  Tennessee.  In  a 
day  or  two  the  remainder  followed,  and  the  whole  battalion 
was  assembled  at  that  point  during  the  last  week  in  October. 
The  immediate  commandant  there  at  the  time  was  Colonel 
A.  Heiman,  Tenth  Regiment  Tennessee  Volunteers,  and  the 
garrison,  a  small  command  •  of  infantry,  did  not  exceed  four 
hundred  men,  who  were  engaged  throwing  up  fortifications. 
Going  into  camp,  some  four  or  five  days  were  employed  in 
drilling  and  other  camp  duties.  But  a  Federal  gunboat,  the 
Conestoga,  having  made  its  appearance  in  the  Cumberland  as 
high  as  Tobacco  Port,  Colonel  Heiman  ordered  Colonel  For- 
rest to  proceed  with  his  battalion  in  that  direction  to  watch 
this  movement.  Under  these  orders,  having  proceeded  as  for 
as  Canton,  Ky.,  an  order  was  received  from  Brigadier-General 
Lloyd  Tilghman,  commanding  the  defenses  of  the  Cumber- 
land and  Tennessee  rivers,  to  bring  the  command  to  his  head- 
quarters, at  Hopkinsville.  At  that  place  orders  were  again 
given,  about  the  middle  of  November,  to  proceed  to  the  Ohio 
river,  and  report  any  movement  of  a  hostile  character  ob- 
served between  the  Cumberland  and  Green  rivers.     Proceed 


Logan's,  (G,)  45  strong,  was  from  Har- 
fodsburg,  Ky. ;  Kelly  Troopers,  (F,) 
^  men,  from  Huntsville,  and  Trew- 
hitt's,  (E,)  80  men,  from  Gadsden,  Ala. ; 
Bacot's,  (B,)  80  men,  from  South- Ala- 
bama, and  Milner*s,  (H,)  85  men,  from 
Marshall  county,  Ala. ;  Gould's,  (D,) 
90  men,  from  Texas ;  and  May's,  (C,) 


90  men,  from  Memphis  —  in  all,  650 
men,  rank  and  file. 

*  Captain  Hambrick  succeeded  to  the 
command  of  the  Kelly  Troopers,  Ueo- 
tenant  C.  A.  Schuyler  was  appointed 
Adjutant  of  the  battalion,  Dr.  S.  M.Van 
Wick,  of  Huntsville,  Surgeon,  and  J.  P. 
Strange,  of  Memphis,  Sergeant-M ajor. 


Affair  with  Gunboat  Conestoga.  45 

ing  on  this  errand  as  far  as  Princeton,  Ky.,  there  the  main 
body  of  the  battalion  halted,  while  Major  Kelly  was  detached 
with  a  squadron,  with  orders  to  repair  to  the  banks  of  the 
Ohio  and  intercept  a  steam  transport  which  was  to  pass  on 
the  following  day.    Soon  after  the  Major  had  reached  the 
river  and  disposed  his  men  for  the  execution  of  his  orders,  the 
expected  steamer  made  its  appearance,  and  was  speedily 
brought  to  without  resistance.    It  proved  to  be  freighted  with 
sugar,  coffee,  and  considerable  quantities  of  other  army  stores, 
including  blankets,  all  most  desirable  supplies  for  the  Con- 
federates.    Meanwhile,  the  Federal  gunboat  Conestoga  hav- 
ing gone  up  the  Cumberland  river  with  the  object  of  seizing 
some  clothing  in  store  for  the  Confederates  at  Canton,  a  gen- 
tleman of  Smithland,  made  aware  of  it,  hastened,  on  horse- 
back, from  that  place  to  Princeton,  to  give  Forrest  the  in- 
formation, riding  the  distance  of  eighty-four  miles  in  twelve 
hours  with  one  change  of  horses.     Major  Kelly  having  re- 
turned, Forrest  immediately  set  out  with  the  whole  battalion 
for  Canton,  which  place,  thirty-two  miles  distant,  was  reached 
early  the  next  morning,  after  a  fatiguing  night-march  of  eight 
hours.     Scarcely  were  the  Confederates  at  the  village  and 
disposed  for  the  then  novel  operation  of  an  attack  by  ca- 
valry on  a  gunboat,  when  the  Conestoga  came  in  sight.     A 
small  four-pounder  piece  of  artillery,  under  Lieutenant  Sulli- 
van, which  had  been  brought  along  from  Princeton,  was  placed 
in  position,  and  so  masked  as  to  be  hidden  from  view  from 
the  approaching  vessel.     The  greater  part  of  the  men  like- 
wise were  concealed,  while  a  few  were  displayed  with  the 
hope  that  a  party  of  marines  might  thus  be  inveigled  ashore 
and  entrapped     The  Conestoga,  however,  coming  to  anchor 
at  the  Canton  Landing,  remained  there  half  an  hour  without 
landing  any  one  ;  then  she  dropped  back  some  few  hundred 
yards,  anchored  again,  and  prepared  for  action.      Scarcely 
were  her  ports  unclosed  than  the  four-pounder  was  opened 


46  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

upon  her,  and  the  few  men  in  sight  delivered  a  rapid  fire  with 
their  Maynard  rifles  through  her  wide-open  ports  *  Firing  two 
rounds.  Lieutenant  Sullivan,  of  course,  was  obliged  to  with- 
draw :  but,  meanwhile,  the  whole  battalion  joined  in  a  rapid 
fire,  returned  from  the  Conestoga  by  all  the  guns  she  could 
bring  to  bear  upon  the  shore,  which  was  swept  with  grape 
and  canister  from  her  heavy  battery.f  Forrest's  men,  taking 
advantage  of  every  possible  shelter,  directed  their  fire  at  her 
ports,  and  the  people  of  the  country  report  the  Federal  losses 
in  killed  and  wounded  were  some  seventeen.  After  six  or 
seven  hours  of  this  combat,  the  commander  of  the  Conestoga 
closed  her  ports  and  made  off,  leaving  his  opponent  in  pos- 
session of  the  field 

This  affair,  as  may  be  readily  supposed,  was  the  source  of  no 
small  elation  in  this  command  of  untried  soldiers,  especially 
since  it  was  a  decided  triumph  over  a  species  of  adversary 
that  hitherto  had  been  regarded  with  actual  terror  by  the  raw 
troops  of  the  Confederate  service,  on  account  of  the  large 
calibres  of  their  armament  and  their  comparative  invulnera- 
bility. The  effect  upon  the  spirit  of  the  men  was  most  salu- 
tary, giving  them  that  confidence  in  themselves  and  their 
commander  which,  doubtless,  was  sensibly  felt  on  many  sub- 
sequent occasions. 

Immediately  after  the  departure  of  the  Conestoga,  Forrest 
set  out,  by  way  of  Cadiz,  to  return  to  Hopkinsville,  which,  by 
making  a  night  march,  he  reached  on  the  21st  of  November. 


*  These  were  good  marksmen,  name-  stoga  at  her  second  anchorage,  and  fir- 

ly,  Sergeant  Thomas  B.  Sheridan,  after-  ing  in  the  order  named.    Therefore,  the 

ward  a  Major,  Private  R.  H.  Balch,  honor  of  firing  the  first  shot  in  action 

afterward  Lieutenant-Colonel,  Private  by  the  Forrest  Cavalry  may  be  claimed, 

Aaron  Burrow,  and  Surgeon  Van  Wick,  apparently,  by  Alajor  Sheridan, 

killed  a  few  days  subsequently.    They  f  Her  armament  consisted  of  nine 

were  stationed  under  partial  cover,  not  heavy  guns. 
more  than  thirty  yards  from  the  Cone- 


Reconnaissance  to  Green  River. 


47 


and  remained  there  to  the  end  of  the  month,  Brigadier-General 
Charles  Clark  being  in  command  of  the  whole  force  assem- 
bled in  the  vicinage.  It  was  here  his  command  was  increased 
to  ten  companies  by  the  accession  of  Captain  Charles  McDo- 
nald's  company,  "  The  McDonald  Dragoons^*  and  Captain  D. 
C.  Davis's  company  of  cavalry,  from  Huntsville,  Alabama. 

About  the  ist  of  December,  weary  of  the  routine  of  camp 
service,  and  of  short  tours  of  scouting  duty  through  the  sur- 
rounding country,  Colonel  Forrest  applied  to  General  Clark 
for  authority  to  make  a  reconnoissance,  in  force,  to  the  imme- 
diate presence  of  the  enemy  at  or  near  Calhoun,  on  the  north 
bank  of  Green  river,  where  General  T.  L.  Crittenden  was  re- 
ported to  have  assembled  a  force  of  some  10,000  infantry  and 
1200  cavalry.  This  having  been  granted,  he  straightway  took 
the  field,  with  about  450  rank  and  file,  and  scoured  the  region 
between  Green  river  and  the  Cumberland,  approaching  close 
to  Henderson,  but  first  reaching  the  bank  of  the  Ohio  at 
Cayceville.  Twelve  days  were  occupied  with  this  expecjition ; 
twelve  days  of  rigorous  December  weather,  in  the  course  of 
which  these  raw  troops,  wholly  unaccustomed  to  such  expo- 
sure, and  many  of  them  affected  by  the  measles,  suffered 
greatly.  However,  their  commander  bivouacked  with  them, 
shared  their  hardships  ;  and  the  substantial  advantage  of  the 
expedition  was,  that  it  served  to  temper  and  harden  the  young 
men  who  mainly  constituted  the  force,  served  to  develop  their 
martial  qualities,  and  to  accustom  their  chief  to  militiary  com- 
mand and  the  handling  of  men  in  campaign.* 


*  Ueatenant-Colonel,  then  Major, 
t).  C.  Kelly,  and  second  in  command, 
vridng  of  this  expedition,  observes : 
'*The  command  found  that  it  was  his 
(Forrest^s)  single  will,  impervious  to 
vpiment,  appeal,  or  threat,  which  was 
(w  to  be  the  govenung  impulse  in 


their  movements.  Every  thing  neces- 
sary to  supply  their  wants,  to  malce 
them  comfortable,  he  was  qmck  to  do, 
save  to  change  his  plans,  to  which 
every  thing  had  to  bend.  New  men 
naturally  grumbled,  and  were  dissatis- 
fied in  the  execution,  but,  when  the 


48  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

Without  noteworthy  events,  there  were,  nevertheless,  sev- 
eral incidents  connected  with  this  march  which,  though  not 
of  military  moment,  must  be  related  as  characteristic  of  the 
men  engaged  and  of  the  time. 

Near  Marion,  in  Crittenden  county,  Ky.,  just  before  For- 
rest's appearance  there,  a  man,  at  the  instance  of  a  "  Union" 
neighbor,  had  been  arrested,  and  carried  off  from  his  family. 
The  wife  reporting  these  facts  to  the  Confederate  officer,  it 
was  determined  to  capture  the  informer,  which  he  proceeded 
to  do  in  person,  with  a  small  detachment  Unhappily,  this 
attempt  cost  the  life  of  Dr.  Van  Wick,  surgeon  of  the  re- 
giment, who,  riding  abreast  with  Colonel  Forrest  as  they 
approached  the  house,  was  shot  through  the  heart  by  the 
object  of  their  quest,  who  then  made  good  his  escape  rearward, 
and  eluded  all  pursuit.  Dr.  Van  Wick  was  the  first  man  of 
the  regiment  slain.  "He  was,"  says  one  of  his  comrades,  "a 
gentleman  of  the  highest  education  and  refinement ;  his  heart 
warm  with  the  loftiest  patriotism  and  purest  friendship;  a 
skillful  surgeon  and  an  humble  Christian."* 

A  few  days  previously  a  Federal  detachment  had  crossed 
the  Ohio,  from  Illinois,  and  abducted  some  Kentuckians 
charged  with  sympathy  for  the  Confederate  cause.  One  of 
Forrest's  detachments  sent  in  pursuit  of  the  murderer  of  Dr. 
Van  Wick  happened  to  meet  ten  Baptist  clergymen,  who  had 
just  returned  from  Illinois,  whither  they  had  been  to  attend 
one  of  the  yearly  "Associations"  of  their  church.  Well  known 
for  their  stringent  "  Unionism^'  they  were  brought  to  the 
Confederate  commander,  who  at  once  determined  to  use  them 
as  the  means  for  the  recovery  of  the  gentlemen,  then  prisoners, 


work  was  achieved,  were  soon  recon-  a  brief  sketch  of  Dr.  Van  Wick,  all 

died  by  the    pride    they  felt  in  the  efforts  to  obtain  the  requisite  infonnft- 

achievement."  tion  having  failed  of  results. 
*  We  regret  to  be  unable  to  apoend 


On  Outpost  Service. 


49 


northward  of  the  river.  Accordingly,  placing  eight  of  the 
number  under  guard  as  hostages,  he  set  two  at  liberty  on  con- 
dition that  they  should  follow  the  Illinois  kidnappers,  effect 
the  release  of  the  Kentuckians,  and  return  with  them  in  twen- 
tf-ioxa  hours,  remarking,  with  an  emphasis  of  tone  and  lan- 
guage which  carried  assurance  of  seriousness,  that,  unless  it 
were  done,  he  "would  hang  the  remainder  all  on  ont  pole."  At 
the  appointed  time  they  reappeared  at  Marion,  entirely  suc- 
cessful in  their  mission ;  and  they  and  their  associates  were 
then  dismissed,  to  return  to  their  respective  homes  * 

It  was  about  the  20th  of  December,  when  Forrest  and  his 
battalion  returned  to  their  station  at  Hopkinsville,  which,  it 
should  here  be  noted,  was  an  outpost  of  the  main  Confederate 
force  at  Bowling  Green,  holding  in  observation  the  approaches 
from  the  mouth  of  the  Cumberland  and  from  Green  river,  and 
being  at  the  junction  of  the  railroad  from  the  Ohio,  at  Hen- 
derson, with  one  to  Nashville.    The  men  of  the  command 
were  set  to  work  to  arrange  their  camp  for  winter,  and  had 
been  several  days  engaged  building  "huts,"  when  rumored 
movements  of  the  Federals,  looking  to  an  advance  upon  the 
Confederate  lines  into  Kentucky,  led  to  orders  from  General 
Johnston  for  a  cavalry  reconnoissance  for  the  definite  ascer- 
tainment of  the  military  situation.    This  duty  was  assigned  to 
Lieutenant-Colonel  Forrest  and  his  battalion.t    On  the  26th 


*  After  tlus  reconnoissance,  a  report 
of  H  baring  been  required,  one  was 
vritten  \rf  the  Major  of  the  battalion, 
*it  the  dictation*'  of  Colonel  Forrest, 
*^  General  Sidney  Johnston  com- 
P&BKnted  very  highly  for  the  precision 
smI  falne  of  the  information  furnished. 
Tke  writer  of  that  report  observes  : 
"Though  he  (Forrest)  was  indisposed 
to^  ve  of  the  pen  himself,  he  had 
dor  and  exact  ideas  of  what  he  wanted 
*rino^  and  fern  were  more  taajcSSMg  in 


requiring  a  precise  statement  of  the 
ideas  furnished." — MS,  Nates  of  Lieute- 
nant-Colonel D,  C,  JCelfy,  of  HunisvilU, 
Alabama, 

t  Lieutenant-Colonel  James  W. 
Stames,  subsequently  distinguished  as 
one  of  Forrest*s  colonels,  and  for  a 
while  as  a  brigade  commander,  and  Cap- 
tain W.  S.  McLemore,  joined  several 
days  later  at  Greenville,  with  a  detach- 
ment of  fifty  select  men  from  his  batta- 
lion, statiofied  then  at  Russellville. 


50  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest 

of  December,  therefore,  taking  300  of  his  most  effective  men, 
he  was  again  in  movement  in  the  direction  of  Green  river,  by 
way  of  Greenville,  Muhlenburg  county,  the  quarter  of  appre- 
hended hostile  approach.  The  roads,  deep  with  mud  and 
rough  with  ice,  were  excessively  ;5evere  on  the  animals ;  and 
it  was  the  28th  when  the  several  detachments,  moving  and 
observing  on  different  roads,  assembled  at  Greenville.  Hav- 
ing learned  nothing  definite  of  the  enemy  in  that  direction, 
Forrest  concluded  to  reconnoitre  on  the  road  toward  and  also 
in  close  proximity  to  Rumsey,  directly  opposite  to  Calhoun, 
where  it  was  understood  General  Crittenden  was  still  in  force. 
Moving  on  that  road,  with  proper  military  precaution,  but  at 
a  good  pace,  some  eight  miles  beyond  Greenville,  on  the 
morning  of  the  28th,  it  was  there  reported  that  a  detachment 
of  Federal  cav/dry,  some  four  or  five  hundred  strong,  had 
crossed  from  Calhoun  that  morning  to  the  southern  side  of 
the  river  at  Rumsey.  This  news,  quickly  communicated 
among  the  men,  exhilarated  them  perceptibly,  notwithstand- 
ing the  fatigues  of  their  long  march ;  and  with  one  impulse 
the  whole  command  moved  ahead,  at  an  accelerated  gait, 
which  was  soon  increased  to  a  gallop  under  the  inspiration  of 
the  kind  greetings  and  hearty  cheers  of  many  of  the  women 
of  the  country,  from  their  houses  by  the  roadside.  Pushing 
on,  in  this  spirit,  several  miles,  before  reaching  the  small  vil- 
lage of  Sacramento,  the  column  was  met  by  a  beautiful  girl, 
riding  rapidly,  her  features  glowing  with  excitement,  her  fallen 
tresses  swayed  by  the  air,  who  reported  that,  returning  from 
the  village  ahead,  she  had  been  obliged  to  pass  through  the 
Federal  column,  which  was  but  a  very  short  distance  in  fix)nt* 
The  road,  as  before  said,  was  very  rough  and  heavy,  a  gende 


«  This  was  a  Miss  Morehead  of  the  excited  by  the  scene,  waving  her  hat  k 
neighborhood.  Deeply  sympathizing  the  air,  she  urged  the  Confederates  to 
with  the  cause  of  her   section,  and     "  hurry  up ;"  and  rode  back  at  a  giltop 


Affair  at  Sacramento.  51 

rain  having  been  falling  for  the  twenty-four  hours  preceding ; 
but  the  Confederates  dashed  onward  so  rapidly  that  in  a  little 
while  the  rear-guard  of  the  Federal  force  was  overtaken  by 
the  Confederate  advance,  one  mile  from  Sacramento.  Appa- 
rently in  doubt  as  to  the  character  of  the  latter,  the  former 
had  halted  for  some  moments.  This  doubt,  however,  was 
speedily  solved,  as  Colonel  Forrest,  taking  a  Maynard  rifle 
from  the  hands  of  one  of  his  men,  fired  at  their  ranks  as  a 
sort  of  gauge  or  challenge  to  battle.  At  this,  they  retired 
hurriedly  upon  their  main  force,  which,  ascending  through  a 
lane  to  a  wooded  ridge  close  by,  drew  up  in  line  just  along 
its  brow,  at  right  angles  to  the  road,  evidently  ready  to  con- 
test the  further  advance  of  the  Confederates.  Their  posi- 
tion was  highly  advantageous  and  sheltered;  but,  as  soon 
as  Forrest  had  assembled  a  sufficient  force-^bout  150  mcn^ 
— to  satisfy  him,  he,  too,  pushed  onward  through  the  lane. 
The  enemy  opened  a  sharp  fire,  but  the  Confederates  moved 
up  -Steadily,  only  returning  the  fire  when  within  less  than 
seventy-five  yards  of  their  adversary,  who,  giving  some  indica- 

• 

tion  of  a  disposition  to  retire,  Colonel  Forrest  ordered  his  men 
to  fall  back,  with  the  hope  of  drawing  the  Federals  after  him. 
In  this  he  was  successful,  for  they  quickly  advanced,  as  if  aim- 
ing to  turn  his  left  flank.  Just  then  the  remainder  of  the 
Confederates  reached  the  scene ;  dismounting  a  portion  of  his 
men,  armed  with  Sharp's  carbines  and  Sharp's  and  Maynard's 
rifles,  Forrest  also  directed  flank  diversions,  under  Major 
Kelly  and  Lieutenant-Colonel  Stames,  on  their  right  and  left 


fer  several  hundred  3rards  by  the  side  *  The  command  had  become  somii* 
of  Colonel  Forrest,  before  she  was  in-  what  scattered,  having  marched  over 
daoed  Co  return.  Such  was  the  spirit  thirty  miles  that  day,  at  least  ten  ol 
■faicfa  animated  so  many  of  the  South-  which  had  been  at  a  canter  or  full  gal- 
lop. 


52  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest 

respectively,  while  he,  with  the  mounted  men,  bore  down 
directly  upon  the  centre.  This  was  done  with  an  animating 
shout,  and  all  possible  spirit  and  resolution,  but  in  face  of  a 
sharp  fire,  under  which  the  brave  Captain  Merriwether,  tne 
Confederate  guide  of  the  expedition,  fell,  shot  with  two  balls 
through  the  head,  by  the  side  of  the  commander.  Seeing  the 
movement  upon  their  flanks,  despite  the  zealous  efforts  of  a 
few  gallant  officers,  the  Federals  could  not  be  made  to  stand 
the  brunt  of  the  Confederate  charge,  but  broke  in  the  utmost 
disorder  at  such  speed  through  Sacramento  that,  though  hotly 
pursued  by  Forrest  and  his  mounted  detachment  for  some 
time,  only  occasional  discharges  could  be  delivered  firom  his 
shot-guns.  But  gaining  upon  them,  Forrest  and  a  number  of 
his  best  mounted  men  at  last  were  in  the  thick  of  a  stream  of 
panic-struck  fugitives,  many  of  whom,  having  thrown  away 
their  arms  and  accoutrements,  depended  solely  upon  the  speed 
of  their  horses  for  further  safety,  deaf,  in  their  dismay,  to  all 
demands  for  their  surrender.*  On  sped  the  Federals,  and  on 
followed  their  Confederate  adversaries,  with  the  rage  of  a  first 
battle  fierce  upon  them.  And  the  road  was  soon,  and  for 
several  miles,  thickly  dotted  with  the  wounded  and  slain — a 
number  of  whom  had  been  cut  down  by  the  sabres  of  the 
untrained  but  heavy-handed  Confederates  who  followed  For- 
rest that  winter  afternoon.  For  three  miles  beyond  Sacra- 
mento this  bloody  pursuit  was  continued — its  course,  howbeit, 
marked  by  a  hand-to-hand  conflict  between  the  Confederate 
leader  and  two  Federal  officers  and  a  private,  whom  he 
overtook  and  engaged,  his  excited  horse  having  carried  him 
somewhat  in  advance  of  any  of  his  men.  Shooting  the  trooper, 
whose  ball  had  passed  through  his  collar,  Forrest  was  assaulted 


.  *  An  eye-witness  relates  that  appa-  of  surrender  and  offers  of  safety  madt 
rently  no  heed  was  given  by  the  terri-  them.  They  seemed  only  to  look  te 
fied  fugitives  to  the  repeated  demands     security  in  flight 


Affair  at  Sacramento.  53 

simultaneously  by  the  two  officers  with  their  sabres;  but, 
eluding  the  full  force  of  their  thrusts  by  bending  his  body  sud- 
denly forward,  their  sword-points  only  touched  his  shoulder. 
Carried  a  few  paces  ahead  by  the  impetus  of  his  horse,  check- 
ing and  drawing  which  aside  in  time  to  shoot  one  of  his  oppo- 
nents* as  he  came  up,  he  thrust  his  sabre-point  into  the  other,! 
who,  by  this  time,  was  in  his  front  Ordering  his  wounded 
opponents  to  surrender,  they  still  made  show  of  battle,  oblig- 
ing him  to  run  his  sabre  through  one,  (Captain  Bacon,)  and 
disable  the  other  (Captain  Davis)  by  a  heavy  blow  on  the 
sword-arm.  Both  these  officers,  now  gravely  wounded,  fell 
from  their  horses,  which,  riderless,  coming  in  sharp  collision 
at  full  speed,  knocked  each  other  over  at  the  bottom  of  a 
short,  abrupt  hillock,  where,  a  moment  after,  Forrest,  eagerly 
resuming  the  head  of  the  pursuit,  also  came  in  contact  with 
them,  and  horse  and  rider  were  thrown  prone  to  the  earth, 
he  falling  headlong  some  twenty  feet  in  advance  of  the  heap 
of  horses  that  had  wrought  his  downfall.^  Some  of  the 
enemy  who  chanced  to  be  still  behind,  now  dashing  on,  in 
their  reckless  flight,  likewise  encountering  the  fallen  horses, 
too  much  exhausted  to  rise,  were  also  overthrown  in  quick 
succession,  and  added  to  the  floundering  mass  of  fallen  horses 
and  men,  and  the  latter  were  taken  prisoners.  The  main 
force  of  the  fleeing  Federals  being  out  of  sight,  and  their 
camp  and  other  troops  not  being  more  than  three  or  four  miles 
distant,  further  piursuit  was  abandoned.§ 


*Cap(aiii  Bacon.  the  first  time  I  had  seen  the  Colonel  in 
t  Captain  Davis.  the  face  of  the  enemy,  and,  when  he  rode 
tThoe  particulars  are  furnished  by  np  to  me  in  the  thick  of  the  action,  I 
MS.  Botes  of  lieutenant-Colonel  Kelly.  could  scarcely  believe  him  to  be  the 
fUajor  Kelly,  in  notes  written  soon  man  I  had  known  for  several  months, 
aier  the  occurrence,  thus  depicts  Colo-  His  face  flushed  till  it  bore  a  striking 
id  Forrest  as  he  appeared  in  this  com-  resemblance  to  a  painted  Indian  war- 
tit  and  chase  of  Sacramento :  ^'Itwas  rior's,  and  his  eyes,  usually  mild  ia 


54 


Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 


Colonel  Stames  likewise  was  g^reatly  distinguished  in  this 
affair  for  his  personal  courage ;  and  another  individual  combat 
deserves  notice  as  showing  the  spirit  which  animated  these 
raw  Southern  soldiers  in  their  first  battle,  fresh  from  their 
civil  avocations,  and  untrained  in  the  imminent  deadly  perils  of 
war.  Private  W.  H.  Terry,*  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Stames's 
detachment,  riding  with  his  commanding  officer,  after  con- 
spicuous gallantry,  while  engaged  single-handed  with  a  Fed- 
eral trooper  whom  he  was  hammering  with  his  exhausted 
rifle,  was  run  through  the  heart  by  Captain  Davis ;  and  thus 
fell  one  of  the  most  daring  members  of  the  command. 

Nor  must  we  omit  another  incident  of  this  field,  personal 
to  Colonel  Forrest.  Among  those  whom  he  had  felled  to  the 
earth  in  the  pursuit,  there  happened  to  be  a  man  from 
Greenville,  who,  being  found  afterward  severely  though  not 
dangerously  wounded,  was  carefully  carried  back  with  the  Con- 
federate command,  and  delivered  to  his  wife  on  his  parole.* 

The  fighting  and  pursuit  being  at  an  end,  the  Confederate 
commander  set  his  men  about  collecting  the  wounded,  in- 
cluding Captains  Bacon  and  Davis,  who  were  removed  as 
soon  as  possible  to  the  nearest  farm-houses,  and  turned  over 
to  be  nursed  by  the  inhabitants  ;  to  whom,  also,  was  assigned 
the  duty  of  giving  proper  burial  to  the  dead,  which  was  faith- 
fully done.  The  Federal  loss  in  this  encounter  was  compara- 
tively very  severe.    Sixty-five  were  found  dead  on  the  ground, 


tiieir  expression,  were  blazing  with  the 
intense  glare  of  a  panther's  springing 
upon  its  prey.  In  fiict,  he  looked  as 
UtUe  like  the  Forrest  of  our  mess-table 
as  the  storm  of  December  resembles 
the  quiet  of  June.** 

.  *  Of  Captain  McLemore*s  Company, 
jyilUamson  county,  Tennessee. 
\  His  name  was  Williams.    Passing 


through  Greenville,  on  a  subsequent 
expedition,  Forrest  called  and  inquired 
after  his  prisoner,  when  the  wife  and 
children  of  Williams  displayed  so 
much  genuine  feeling  and  gratitude  for 
his  course  that,  as  he  emerged  firom  the 
house,  he  was  seen  to  wipe  a  Yisible 
tear  from  his  eye. — MS,  Nates  ofCU* 
and  Keliy  and  Major  J.  P.  Shrttngu 


Outpost  S^rince.  55 

•        •  ■ 

including  two  captains  and  three  subalterns ;  also  seventeen 
wounded,  some  mortally ;  and  some  eighteen  were  captured. 
A  number  of  wounded  must  have  made  their  escape. 

The  affair  gave  great  satisfaction  to  the  Confederates  en- 
gaged, and  had  an  admirable  effect  upon  the  morale  as  well  as 
the  physical  training  of  the  command. 

Returning  leisurely  to  Hopkinsville,  and  reporting  his  ope- 
rations, Forrest  and  his  men  resumed  their  position  in  camp, 
with  its  routine  duties,  for  several  weeks,  or  until  about  the 
loth  of  January,  1862,  when  General  Clark  again  threw  him 
forward  on  the  road  toward  Calhoun  via  Greenville,  to  ob- 
serve in  that  quarter  the  movements  of  the  enemy,  supposed 
to  be  concentrating  for  an  early  advance  upon  Bowling  Green. 
Assured  by  the  recollections  of  the  combat  at  Sacramento, 
the  Confederate  cavalry  commander  led  his  now  confident 
men  very  close  to  the  Federal  forces  on  Green  river,  and 
carefully  reconnoitered  their  position,  thus  ascertaining  that, 
not  less  than  ten  thousand  strong,  they  were  evidently  on  the 
point  of  an  early  forward  movement.  Reporting  these  facts 
to  his  superior  at  Hopkinsville,  by  a  dispatch  he  was  ordered 
to  return,  burning  the  bridges  on  Pond  river,  a  tributary  of 
Green  river  ;  and  this  was  duly  executed. 

The  several  weeks  ensuing  were  unmarked  by  adventure, 
though  detachments  from  the  command  were  actively  em- 
ployed, from  time  to  time,  scouring  the  country  in  advance  of 
that  outpost ;  and  its  commander  improved  the  time  in  giving 
attention  to  its  interior  administration  and  organization,  in 
which  he  was  exacting  of  all  subordinates,  especially  of  his 
staff  officers,  from  whom  he  required  a  ceaseless  attention  to 
the  wants  of  both  men  and  horses. 

Under  orders  from  headquarters,  in  view  of  threatening 
Federal  movements,  both  from  the  direction  of  Cairo,  up  the 
Tennessee  river,  and  from  Louisville,  General  Clark  evacu- 
ated Hopkinsville,  on  or  about  the  7th  of  February  ;  and  in. 


A 


56  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

this  movement  the  cavalry  under  Lieutenant-Colonel  Forrest 
covered  the  rear  as  far  as  Clarksville,  where  he  was  detached, 
and  ordered  to  report  with  his  own  force  to  Brigadier-General 
Pillow,  from  whom  he  received  orders  to  repair  at  once  to 
Fort  Donelson,  on  the  west  bank  of  the  Cumberland  river, 
and  for  the  attack  of  which  a  large  Federal  force  was  then 
assembling.  Reaching  the  vicinity  on  Sunday,  the  9th  of 
February,  the  regiment  was  not  ferried  across  the  river,  how- 
ever, to  the  fort  side  until  the  next  day.  As  the  senior  cav-^ 
ahy  officer,  he  was  immediately  assigned  to  the  command  of 
all  the  cavalry  present ;  that  is,  his  own  ten  companies,  Lieu- 
tenant-Colonel Gantt's  battalion  of  Tennesseeans,  and  Cap- 
tains Huey's,  Wilcox's,  and  Williams's  Kentucky  companies — 
in  all  not  more  than  eight  hundred  troopers. 

A  camp  was  then  selected  rearward  of  the  intrenched 
lines  ;  forage  was  drawn  and  the  horses  were  feeding  when 
orders  came  from  General  Pillow  to  move  out  at  once  upon 
and  observe  the  road  toward  Fort  Henry,  only  ten  or  twelve 
miles  distant  on  the  Tennessee  river,  and  which,  having  fallen 
into  the  hands  of  the  Federals  on  the  6th,  had  now  evidently 
become  the  base  of  formidable  impending  operations  hostile 
to  Fort  Donelson.  Scarcely  had  Forrest  advanced  three 
miles,  pursuant  to  his  orders,  when  he  encountered  suddenly 
a  squadron  of  Federal  cavalry,  evidently  the  escort  of  staflf 
officers  making  a  reccxinoissance.  This  detachment,  dis- 
mounted as  the  Confederates  appeared,  quickly  springing  to 
their  horses,  made  off  precipitately  to  the  rear,  eagerly  pur- 
sued by  Forrest  to  the  immediate  vicinity  of  Fort  Henry, 
with  a  running  discharge  of  fire-arms  all  the  way,  resulting  in 
the  loss  to  the  Federals  of  several  killed  and  wounded,  a  pri- 
soner, some  twenty  stand  of  arms,  and  a  lot  of  overcoats  and 
cavalry  equipments.  In  examining  the  intermediate  country, 
another  detachment  of  Federal  cavalry  was  observed,  and  an 
ambush  laid  to  entrap  it ;  but  the  men  as  yet  had  not  been 


At  Fort  Donelson.  57 

reduced  to  that  subordination  essential  for  the  nicer  strata- 
gems of  the  fields  and  a  premature  discharge  of  fire-arms 
firom  some  over-eager  men  upon  the  advance  warned  the 
enemy  in  time  to  withdraw  by  rapid  flight.  From  all  the 
movements  within  the  Federal  encampments,  Colonel  Forrest 
was  satisfied  that  General  Grant  was  on  the  eve  of  moving 
against  Fort  Donelson  with  all  his  army ;  and  this  was  re- 
ported to  his  superior. 


i 


CHAPTER  II. 

Topograpkiatl  Sketch  o/FortDonelson — ConttructioH  of  a  larger  System  »/ 
Exterior  Lines  upon  the  Fall  of  Fort  Henry — Concentration  ofReem- 
forcements  andArrivat  of  Generals  B.  R.  fohnson,  Biuknrr,  amd 
Floyd^March  of  two  Federal  Divisions  from  Fort  Henry — Farresfi 
Skirmish  on  isth  February — Disposition  of  Confederates — OffisHsive 
Arrangement  of FederalForce— Baffled  Assault  en  Heiman's  Position 
on  the  lyh  February /  also  on  Confederate  Right — Obstinate  Conflict 
between  Gunboats  and  Heater-Batteries,  afternoon  ofi^h — Coiifidence 
inspired  among  Confederates  by  their  Success — Council  of  Confede- 
rate Generals,  and  Determination  to  sally  and  attack  Federals  on 
Morning  of  \^th — Resolute  and  Successful  Sortie  made  by  Pillov^i 
Division  at  Daybreak — Bucknerdelt^s  his  Movements  until  afiernisu 
AM. — Brilliant  Charge  upon  and  Capture  of  Battery  by  Forresfs 
Regiment — McCUmands  and  Wallaces  Divisions  driven  westward 
of  IVynn's  Ferry  Road  by  tvio  P.M.,  and  Confederate  Left  uncovered— 
Pillow  withdraws  Confederates  from  the  Field-^Coundl  of  IVar, 
JV^tofi$th,  and  Determination  to  capitulate — Forrest  urges  fiossi- 
iilify  of  Escape,  and  ultimately  is  allowed  to  make  the  Attempt  with 
his  Command^Discovered  by  a  Personal  Reconnaissance  that  Enemy 
had  not  reinvested  the  Left — Effected  egress  of  Command  without 
maiestation — Commentaries. 

1  HE  operations  embracing  the  attack  upon  and  suTrender 
of  Fort  Donelson,  in  February,  1862,  are  so  closely  cotmected 
with  the  military  career  of  General  Forrest  that  we  are 
obliged  not  only  to  relate  the  part  which  he  and  his  immediate 
command  bore  in  that  ill-fated  affair,  but  must  adventure 
upon  a  detailed  sketch  of  the  investment,  the  attack,  and  the 
defense  of  the  position,  together  with  such  observations,  from 


Topographical  Sketch  of  Fort  Donelson.        59 

a  military  point  of  sight,  as  have  seemed  fit  and  proper  in 
regard  to  one  of  the  most  important  events  of  the  war. 

The  position  immediately  occupied  by  the  Confederate 
troops  rested  on  the  Cumberland  river  on  the  north.  West- 
wardly,  it  was  limited  by  a  deep  ravine,  with  precipitate  sides, 
through  which  meandered  a  considerable  creek,  swollen  at 
the  time  by  backwater  from  the  river.  A  valley  and  back- 
water slough  separated  it  on  the  east  from  the  county-town 
of  Dover ;  and  a  line  of  rifle-pits,  with  positions  for  field- 
guns,  formed  its  exterior  southward  boundary,  along  the  crest 
of  the  ridge,  about  twelve  hundred  yards  distant  from  the 
river's  edge.  A  field-work  of  an  irregular  bastioned  tracer 
fronting  southward,  surmounted  a  plateau  which  rose  about 
one  hundred  feet  above  the  level  of  the  water,  in  which  direc- 
tion it  commanded  and  protected,  at  close  musket-range,  the 
water-batteries  that  were  established  so  as  to  sweep  the  river 
approach,  which,  by  an  abrupt  turn  in  the  course  of  the 
stream  at  that  point,  is  almost  due  north.  '  Unfortunately  for 
the  Confederates,  this  work  was  commanded  by  a  chain  of 
ridges  southward,  and  by  an  eminence  between  it  and  Dover, 
where  the  Confederate  hospitals  and  depots  were  situated. 
It  was  necessary,  therefore,  to  enlarge  the  intrenched  area 
considerably,  so  as  to  encompass  and  hold  those  otherwise 
menacing  positions.  This  led  to  the  construction  of  a  new 
series  of  intrenchments,  fully  three  miles  in  scope,  along  the 
irregular  ridges  indicated,  and  including  a  space  divided  into 
two  parts  by  the  valley  and  backwater  westward  of  Dover,  the 
communications  between  which  were  so  difficult  as  to  add 
materially  to  the  perplexities  of  the  defense. 

The  ground  in  front  or  southward,  and  environing  these 
lines,  is  a  rugged,  undulating  upland,  densely  wooded,  covered 
with  imdergrowth,  and  broken  into  ridges  by  deep,  narrow 
ravines,  with  a  general  direction  perpendicular  to  the  river. 
Unfavorable  for  the  free  movement  and  maneuver  of  troops, 


6o  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

especially  artillery  and  cavalry,  it  afforded,  however,  excellent 
cover  for  sharp-shooters,  and  strong  positions  for  field-batte- 
ries, once  established  there.  The  declivity,  directly  southward 
of  the  field-work,  was  thickly  spread  with  abatis,  which,  being 
now  inclosed  within  the  new  line  of  infantry  ^paulements,  were 
not  only  useless,  but  an  absolute  hinderance  to  the  operations 
of  the  Confederates  within  their  exterior  intrenchments. 

At  the  time  Fort  Henry  fell,  not  more  than  one  third  of 
these  outer  works  had  been  thrown  up.  An  experienced 
military  engineer,  Major  J.  F.  Gilmer,  was  at  hand,  however, 
to  lay  them  out  and  superintend  their  erection.*  Meanwhile, 
on  the  7th,  Brigadier-General  Bushrod  R.  Johnson,  also  an 
officer  of  military  education  and  experience,  had  likewise 
reached  and  assumed  command  of  the  place.  And,  on  the 
9th,  Brigadier-General  Pillow,  coming  upon  the  scene,  brought 
to  bear  upon  the  works  under  construction  the  natural  energy 
of  his  character.  Much  delay,  however,  was  inevitable,  in 
consequence  of  the  scanty  supply  of  tools.  Nevertheless, 
by  the  night  of  the  12th  the  water-batteries  had  been  greatly 
strengthened  ;  and  the  infantry  cover  placed  in  a  fair  defen- 
sive condition,  though  somewhat  vulnerable  in  the  valley  and 
ravines.  The  heavy  guns  available  had  also  been  mounted  in 
the  water-batteries,  giving  an  armament  of  one  ten-inch  Co- 
lumbiad,  (128-pounder,)  one  rifled  32-pounder,  (64-pound  bolt,) 
eight  32-pounders,  and  three  32-pound  carronades. 

In  the  interim  reenforcements  had  been  gathered  thither 
from  different  quarters.  Brigadier-General  Buckner,  regarded 
as  one  of  the  most  accomplished  officers  of  either  service, 
came  with  one  division  of  these  new  troops,  and  was  assigned 


*  Major  Gilmer  was  Chief-Engineer  time  of  the  secession  of  his    State^ 

on  the  staff  of  General  Sidney  Johnston,  North-Carolina,  was  an  officer  of  repute 

and  subsequently  became  Chief-Engi-  in  the   corps  of  Military  Engineers 

neer  of  the  Confederate  Army.    He  is  U.  S.  A* 
a  graduate  of  West-Point;  and  at  the 


Advance  of  Federal  Farces. 


6x 


to  the  command  of  the  right  wing  or  flank  of  the  defenses, 
while  Johnson  was  placed  in  charge  of  the  left  And,  finally, 
at  daylight,  on  the  13th,  General  Floyd  arrived  with  two 
small  additional  brigades,  making  the  tc^  Confederate  force 
of  all  arms  assembled  somewhat  over  fourteen  thousand 
men*. 

Two  divisions  of  the  Federal  army,  on  the  12th,  had  been 
thrown  forward,  by  two  roads,  from  Fort  Henry  toward  Fort 
Donelson.  These  were  McClernand's,  of  eleven  regiments  of 
infantry,  and  one  or  two  regiments  of  cavalry,  and  at  least 
four  field-batteries ;  and  C.  F.  Smith's,  also  of  eleven  regi- 
ments of  infantry,  including  Birge's  sharp-shooters,  and  four 
or  five  field-batteries — ^in  all  about  fifteen  thousand  men.t 
At  the  same  time  six  regiments  were  dispatched  by  water. 


^  At  Uie  time  of  the  attack  on  Fort 
Henry,  the  garrison  at  Fort  Donelson 
consisted  of  some  artillery  detachments 
and  two  or  three  regiments  of  infantry, 
under  Colonel  J.  W.  Head.  This  was 
reenibrced  on  the  night  of  the  6th  by 
two  thousand  sixhnndred  men,  brought 
by  Colonel  Heiman  from  Fort  Henry ; 
and  later  by  Bnckner  and  Floyd*s  com- 
mands, so  that  on  the  13th  the  force 
concentrated  included  the  following 
regiments,  batteries,  and  companies, 
namely,  the  Third,  Tenth,  Eighteenth, 
Twenty-sixth,  Thirtieth,  Thirty-second, 
Forty-first,  Forty-second,  Forty-eighth, 
Forty-ninth,  Fiftieth,  and  Fifty-third 
Tennessee,  with  an  average  rank  and 
file  of  five  hundred  each ;  and  Colmes's 
lattaHon  of  five  companies  ;  the  First, 
TUrd,  Fourth,  Fourteenth,  Twentieth, 
and  Twenty-sixth  Mississippi  regi- 
ments, with  an  average  strength  of  four 
lumdred  and  sixty-five  effectives;  the 


Second  and  Eighth  Kentucky,  Seventh 
Texas,  Fifteenth  Arkansas,  Twenty- 
seventh  Alabama,  and  Thirty-sixth,  Fif- 
tieth, Fifty-first,  and  Fifty-sixth  Vir- 
ginia, with  an  average  of  three  hundred 
and  seventy-five  effectives ;  and  several 
small  battalions  ;  or,  in  all,  thirteen 
thousand  infantry  ;  Forrest's  regiment 
of  cavalry,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Gantt's 
battalion  of  five  companies,  three  Ken- 
tucky compames,  and  Porter's  and  Ma- 
ney's  Tennessee,  Graves's  Kentucky, 
and  Jackson's,  French's  and  Lucas's 
Virginia  batteries.  The  heavy  guns 
were  manned  by  details  from  infimtry 
regiments. 

t  McClernand's  division  was  consti- 
tuted of  Oglesby's  brigade  of  the  Eighth. 
Eighteenth,  Twenty-ninth,  Thirtieth, 
and  Thirty-first  Illinois  volunteers, 
Swarts's  and  Dresser's  batteries,  and 
Stewart's,  DoUin's,  O'Hamett's,  and 
Carmichael's  (companies  oO  cavalry ; 


62 


Campaigns  of  General  Forrest 


while  seven  more,  known  to  be  ^/i  routed  were  ordered  ta  pro- 
ceed at  once  from  Paducah,  on  their  transports,  to  the  scene 
of  operations  on  the  Cumberland.  These  thirteen  regiments 
constituted  a  third  division,  nearly  ten  thousand  strong,  under 
command  of  General  Lew  Wallace,! 

The  weather  being  mild  for  the  season  and  highly  favora- 
ble, the  land  column  reached  the  vicinity  of  the  theatre  of 
war  early  in  the  afternoon  of  the  day  of  its  departure  from 
Fort  Hehry.  Meanwhile,  Forrest,  who  had  been  sent  forward 
with  his  whole  cavalry  in  observation,  encountered  the  Fede- 
ral advance-guard  about  two  miles  from  the  Confederate  in- 
trenchments.  Promptly  dismounting  his  men,  he  formed  a 
line  of  battle  along  the  crest  of  a  ridge  obliquely  across  the 


W.  H.  L.  Wallace's  brigade  of  Elev- 
enth, Twentieth,  Forty-fifth,  and  For- 
ty-eighth infantry,  Fourth  Illinois  Cav- 
alry, and  Taylor's  and  McAllister's 
batteries  ;  and  of  McArthur's  deml- 
brigade  of  the  Seventeenth  and  Forty- 
ninth  Illinois.  C.  F.  Smith's  division 
was  formed  of  Cook's  brigade  of  Sev- 
enth and  Fiftieth  Hlinois,  Twelfth  Iowa, 
Fifty-second  Indiana,  and  Thirteenth 
Missouri  regiments,  and  of  Lauman's 
brigade  of  Second,  Seventh,  and  Four- 
teenth Iowa,  and  Twenty-fifth  and 
Fifty-sixth  Indiana  regiments,  and,  as 
previously  said,  Birge's  sharp-shoot- 
ers, acting  independently.  [See  official 
reports  of  Gerund  Grants  and  Colonels 
Wallace^  Lauman^  etc,,  etc,y  and  corre- 
spondence of  NevhYork  Tinus  and  Mis- 
souri  Democrat,  Rebellion  Record^  VoL 
IV.,  Doc,  46,  pp.  138  to  182.]  The  New- 
York  Times  correspondent  estimates 
this  colomn  at  twenty  thousand,  in 


round  numbers,  with  fifteen  to  seventeen 
batteries,  and  twelve  to  fifteen  hmi- 
dred  cavalry ;  and  the  St  Louis  Dewtc- 
rnz/ places  the  number  at  eighteen  thou- 
sand. General  Grant,  however,  fixes 
his  strength  at  fifteen  thousand ;  this 
would  give  an  average  to  his  regiments 
of  six  hundred  and  fifty,  which  they 
scarcely  exceeded. 

*  Drawn,  we  infer,  firom  General 
Bucll's  "  Army  of  the  Ohio."  [See  his 
letter  to  General  Halleck,  March  14//!, 
1862,  embodied  in  a  paper  published  im 
New-York,  April  iSth,  1866. 

t  These  troops  were  the  Eleventh, 
Thirty-first,  and  Forty-fourth  Indiana, 
Seventeenth  and  Twenty-fifth  Kentuc- 
ky, Forty-sixth,  Fifty-seventh,  and  Fif- 
ty-eighth Illinois,  Fifty-eighth,  Sixty- 
eighth,  and  Seventy-sixth  Ohio,  First 
Nebraska  and  Eighth  Missouri  r^gi* 
ments  of  infantry.  - 


Skirmish  with  Federal  Advance.  63 

roady  to  command  which  specially  he  placed  May's  and  Ham* 
brick's  companies  of  his  own  regiment,  armed  with  Maynard 
rifles.  In  front  of  his  centre  was  a  narrow  vale  of  cleared 
land,  through  which  the  enemy  must  advance ;  and,  accord- 
ingly, as  this  was  attempted,  he  opened  with  a  lively  fusiladey 
which  led  to  an  immediate  halt,  and  soon  a  retrograde  move- 
ment to  a  neighboring  ridge,  along  which  a  little  later  a  de- 
tour and  advance  by  another  road  were  attempted,  with  an 
evident  purpose  to  turn  his  left.  Observing  this,  his  force 
was  quickly  redisposed  to  confront  and  check  that  movement, 
while  Ma/s  and  Hambrick's  companies,  remounting,  made  a 
gallant  charge  down  the  road  upon  some  Federal  cavalry, 
driving  them  back  upon  the  infantry.  And  soon  after,  Major 
Kelly,  with  three  squadrons,  making  a  vigorous  advance  from 
the  centre,  resolutely  engaged  a  large  infantry  force  in  that 
quarter.  For  several  hours  was  this  maintained,  with  the 
effect  of  keeping  the  whole  Federal  column  in  hesitation  and 
check,  until  about  three  o'clock  p.m.,  when  General  Buckner,  in 
command  during  the  temporary  absence  of  General  Pillow,  di- 
rected Colonel  Forrest  to  return  behind  the  intrenchments. 
The  Federal  column  was  then  pushed  forward  without  further 
resistance,  and,  deploying  along  the  ridges,  in  proximity  to  the 
Confederate  lines,  their  sharp-shooters,  about  dusk,  drove  in  a 
working  party  engaged  in  planting  abatis  in  front  of  Johnson's 
line,  in  the  quarter  of  the  Wynn's  Ferry  road,  killing  one, 
wounding  one,  and  capturing  another  of  his  men  outside  of 
the  trenches.  And  by  the  morning  of  the  13th  they  had 
completely  invested  the  position,  McClernand's  Division  oc- 
cupying the  extreme  right  —  Confederate  left  —  and  C.  F. 
Smith's  holding  the  left — Confederate  right.  Batteries  had 
also  been  established,  without  opposition,  in  the  night  upon 
salient  eminences  along  the  Federal  lines,  at  points  highly 
favorable  for  annoying  the  Confederates,  and  a  regiment  of 


64  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

sharp-shooters,*  a  picked  corps,  had  taken  up  an  advanced 
position,  from  which  it  began  early,  from  easy  range  and  well 
sheltered,  to  give  excessive  disturbance  to  the  Confederates 
at  work  on  their  intrenchments.  But  General  Pillow,  calling 
on  Colonel  Forrest  for  Ma/s  and  Hambrick's  companies,  with 
their  rifles,  these  were  led  to  the  trenches,  accompanied  by 
their  Colonel,  and  matched  with  the  Federal  riflemen  in  an 
animated,  effective  skirmish  for  about  an  hour,  in  which  the 
latter  suffered  so  sharply  as  to  compel  them  to  withdraw  from 
the  conflict  for  several  hours.f 

In  the  mean  time  the  Confederates  had  not  rested  inactive, 
but  labored  in  the  trenches  throughout  the  night  of  the  I2th 
with  very  much  their  whole  force,  General  Bushrod  Johnson 
and  Colonel  Forrest,  as  an  example  and  stimulant,  sharing  in 
the  work  y(ith  their  men.  Every  possible  disposition  was 
made  for  the  most  efficient  defense.  Buckner,  as  before  said, 
commanding  on  the  right,  had  under  him  the  Second  Ken- 
tucky, (Hanson,)  Fourteenth  Mississippi,  (Major  Doss,)  and 
Third,  (Brown,)  Eighteenth,  (Palmer,)  Thirty-second,  (Cook,) 
and  Forty-first  (Farquharson)  Tennessee  regiments,  some 
3588  men,  and  Porter's  and  Graves's  batteries,  each  of  six 
pieces.  Heiman,  on  the  right  of  Johnson's  wing,  held  the 
salient  and  nearly  central  position  of  the  Confederate  line — a 
hill  separated  by  broad  ravines  on  the  right  from  Buckner, 
and  on  the  left  from  Drake's  Brigade  of  Johnson's  command — 
with  a  brigade  formed  of  the  Tenth,  Thirtieth,  Forty-eighth, 
and  Fifty-third  Tennessee  and  Twenty-seventh  Alabama, 


*  Birge's  Regiment,  which  was  anned  the  top  of  a  tree  six  hundred  yards  dis* 

with  choice,  long-range  rifles  and  uni-  tant,  took  a  rifle  from  one  of  his  men, 

formed  xngray,  and,  in  another  instant,  firing,  brought 

t  When  in  the  trenches  on  this  occa-  him  headlong"  to  the  ground. — Mt^ 

tion,  Colonel  Forrest,  observing  a  small  Strangles  MS,  Min. 
portion  of  a  sharp-shooter  exposed  in 


Attack  an  Confederate  Centre.  65 

with  Maney's  Battery ;  and  on  his  left  were  posted,  in  suc- 
cession, the  Fourth  Mississippi,  Fifteenth  Arkansas,  a  small 
battalion  of  Alabama  troops,  another  of  Tennessee  infantry, 
the  Fifty-first  Virginia,  Third  Mississippi,  Eighth  Kentucky 
Regiment,  Seventh  Texas,  Fifty-sixth  Virginia,  and  First  and 
Twenty-sixth  Mississippi  regiments ;  with  the  Forty-second 
and  Twenty-sixth  Tennessee,  Twentieth  Mississippi,  and 
Thirty-sixth  and  Fiftieth  Virginia  regiments  held  in  reserve 
at  different  points  in  rear  of  the  lines,  with  French's,  Green's, 
and  Grey's  batteries,  disposed  at  suitable  intervals.  At  the 
same  time,  two  regiments,  the  Forty-ninth  and  Fiftieth  Ten- 
nessee, formed  the  garrison  of  the  field-work  near  the  river. 

Between  eleven  o'clock  a.m.  and  twelve  m.  on  the  13th, 
during  a  warm  artillery  practice  from  many  of  the  Federal 
batteries  along  their  whole  line,  a  dashing  assault  on  the  sali- 
ent of  Heiman's  position,  occupied  by  the  right  wing  compa- 
nies of  the  Fifty-third  Tennessee,  was  made  by  four  regiments 
of  McClemand's  Division.*    The  left  of  the  attacking  force 
advanced  along  a  ridge  obstructed  by  abatis^  but  the  right 
made  the  assault  handsomely  up  the  hill.     Repulsed  in  their 
first  effort,  the  Federals  were  rallied  and  brought  forward 
with  great  nerve  to  the  charge,  but  to  be  again  driven  back 
with  much  loss.     Federal  officers  on  horseback  urged  their 
men  up  to  within  fifty  yards  of  the  breastworks,  while  a  num- 
ber of  the  Confederates,  mounting  the  parapets,  would  take 
deliberate  aim,  fire,  and  jump  down,  reload,  and  again  deliver 
their  fire  in  the  same  manner.    The  brunt  of  this  attack  was 
borne  by  the  left  of  the  Tenth  Tennessee,  Lieutenant-Colonel 
McGavock,  the   Fifty-third    Tennessee,   Lieutenant-Colonel 
Winston,  and  the  right  of  the  Forty-eighth  Tennessee,  (Voor- 


•  Namely,  Seventeenth,  Forty-fifth,  Hayne.— ^^r^.  Rec,  IV.  Doc  46,  OffictM 
Forty-eighth,  and  Forty-ninth  Illinois  Reports  of  Colonels  Hayne  and  Wallace. 
K^iments,  under  command  of  Colonel 


66  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

hies,)  and  Captain  Maney's  Battery ;  and  during  the  second 
assault,  the  Forty-second  Tennessee,  Colonel  Quarles,  shared 
in  the  perils,  the  losses,  and  the  glory  of  the  repulse.  An 
important  and  distinguished  part  is  justly  to  be  ascribed  to 
Maney  and  his  men,  who  handled  their  pieces,  greatly  ex- 
posed, with  equal  skill  and  courage,  losing  Lieutenants  Bums 
and  Massey,  slain,  and  so  many  of  their  number  were  either 
killed  or  disabled  that  only  enough  were  left  to  man  one  sec- 
tion of  the  battery  after  the  action.*  Graves's  Battery,  on 
the  left  of  Buckner's  position,  also  brought  to  bear  very  ef- 
fectively upon  the  Federal  storming  party,  contributed  to  the 
general  result  While  this  attack  was  going  on  in  the  centre, 
another  was  attempted,  with  more  spirit  than  judgment,  by  a 
demi-brigade  of  Smith's  Division  on  the  Federal  left,  but  it 
was  easily  repelled,  with  some  casualties  to  the  assailants. 
Meanwhile,  too,  the  only  gunboat — an  iron-clad,  the  Caron- 
delet — that  had  yet  arrived,  steaming  up  within  range,  had 
opened  a  fierce  cannonade  upon  the  water-batteries,  throw^ 
ing  about  one  hundred  and  fifty  shot  and  shells.  She  then 
drew  off,  discomfited  and  damaged  by  a  one  hundred  and  twen- 
ty-eight pound  bolt  in  her  engine-room. 

The  weather,  for  several  days  unusually  mild  and  pleasant 
for  the  season,  in  the  afternoon  of  the  13th  changed  suddenly 
and  radically.  It  began  to  snow,  which  later  turned  into  a 
sleet,  and,  during  the  night,  a  keen  north  wind  made  the  cold 
so  excessive  that  both  sides  suffered  acutely,  especially  the 
Confederates,  who  continued  to  strengthen  their  incomplete 
intrenchments  without  intermission. 

That  night  the  Federal  reenforcements,  en  route  by  water, 
reached  the  landing  near  their  left  flank,  and,  disembarking, 
were  put  in  motion  by  midday  on  the  14th,  to  take  position  on 


Notes  furnished  by  General  B.  R.  Johnson,  dated  November  V^S^  i8tf^ 


Attack  by  IronrClads. 


67 


the  line  of  investment  between  Smith's  and  McClernand's 
divi^ons,  which  was  accomplished  by  nightfalK* 

In  the  mean  time,  however,  about  three  p.m.,  the  Federal 
fleet  which  had  convoyed  these  reenforeements  to  their  place 
of  debarkation  made  a  prolonged  and  truly  formidable  attack 
upon  the  water-batteries,  testing  their  defensive  value  to  the 
utmost    Two  wooden  and  four  iron-clad  gunboats  were  en- 
gaged, and  these  last,  at  one  phase  of  the  action,  were 
brought  up  within  three  hundred  yards,  or,  as  it  were,  into 
the  very  teeth  of  their  antagonist  batteries.!    The  cannonade 
was  appalling,  yet  the  conflict  was  bravely  maintained  on 
both  sides.    The  Confederates,  wholly  unpracticed  as  artille- 
rists, and  more  expose^  than  their  adversaries,  fought  with 
ordnance  very  much  inferior  in  weight  of  metal,  with  two  ex- 
ceptions, as  in  all  other  respects,  to  those  employed  against 
them,  a  battery  of  twelve  of  the  heaviest  guns  at  a  broadside. 
For  thirty  minutes  the  battle  raged  at  these  close  quarters, 
when  the  iron-clads  succumbed,  and  one  by  one  dropped  out 
of  action,  badly  crippled  and  worsted  in  the  encounter,  with  a 
heavy  loss  in  killed  and  wounded. 

At  this  juncture,  as  the  flag-ship,  the  St.  Louis,  disabled 
by  a  crushing  shot  in  her  wheel,  began  to  drift  back  before 
the  current,  a  feeling  of  intense  anxiety  filled  the  hearts  of 


•  Oflfidal  Report  of  General  Wal- 
lace, Rd.  Rec.  IV.,  Doc  46.  Also 
correspondence,  ibid,^  of  New- York 
TWr,  etc 

tThc  "iron-clads"  were  the  St 
Loois,  Louisville,  Pittsburg,  and  Ca- 
wodelct,  each  of  thirteen  guns  of  the 
•waTicst  calibre.  The  wooden  vessels 
^erc  the  Tyler  and  Lexington,  of  nine 
K^ns  each,  equally  as  heavy  as  those  on 
the  iron-dads.  The  latter  had  an  ar- 
nor  of  rabbeted  iron  plates,  two  and  a 


half  inches  thick,  upon  sloping  walls  of 
thick  timber,  making  strong  casemates 
All  were  built  and  armed  alike,  with 
three  nine  or  ten-inch  guns  in  the  bow, 
four  heavy  guns  on  each  side,  and 
two  lighter  pieces  in  the  stem.  The 
armament  of  the  Carondelet,  for  exam- 
ple, we  find  included  three  nine-inch, 
four  eight-inch,  smooth-bores,  and  two 
one  hundred  pounder  rifled  guns.  Vide 
Boynton's  History  of  the  Navy  during 
the  Rebellion. 


68  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

the  Confederate  officers  and  men,  and  the  apprehension  was 
fast  forcing  its  way  into  and  chilling  their  souls  that  the  ftew- 
fashioned  armor  of  their  redoubtable  foes  had  indeed  been 
made  impenetrable.  Their  heavy  projectiles,  hurtling  through 
the  air,  tore  up  the  parapets  of  the  water-batteries  in  great, 
gaping  fissures,  almost  burying  the  guns  beneath  the  mass  of 
earth  dislodged.  For  thirty  perilous  minutes  it  seemed  in- 
evitable that  the  Confederate  batteries  must  prove  altogether 
overmatched  by  adversaries  fighting  from  behind  an  impreg- 
nable shelter ;  and,  as  a  consequence,  the  garrison,  taken  un- 
avoidably in  reverse,  in  a  short  while  would  be  exposed  to  an 
insupportable  fire  from  the  rear.  And  already  numerous 
shells,  thrown  with  ease  from  the  wqoden  gunboats  at  long 
range  in  all  directions,  were  falling  and  exploding  with  a  con- 
tinuous din  in  the  valleys  and  on  the  ridges  occupied  by  the 
Confederates,  though  so  far  without  harm  to  men  or  animals. 
Nevertheless,  the  Confederate  artillerists,  standing  to  their 
guns,  worked  them  with  astonishing  intrepidity  and  skill 
under  the  circumstances,  coolly  throwing  back  the  imsettled 
earth  with  their  shovels  as  fast  as  it  incommoded  the  service 
of  their  pieces.  Such,  too,  was  the  interest  of  the  garrison  in 
this  conflict  that  all  whose  duties  did  not  call  them  to  posts 
in  the  trenches  were  eagerly  watching  its  progress,  heedless 
of  exposure  to  themselves.  Among  these  was  Colonel  For- 
rest himself*  Taking  a  position  near  to  the  principal  bat- 
tery, with  profound  solicitude  he  observed  the  spectacle  so 
novel  at  the  time  in  its  character  to  him,  and  was  the  first  to 
dispatch  tidings  of  the  happy  issue  to  General  Floyd.  Grown 
deeply  fearful  previously  of  disaster,  the  reaction  wrought  by 
the  triumph  of  the  batteries  was  broad-spread,  and  many  who 
had  witnessed  the  scene,  sinking   spontaneously  to    their 


*  His    command,    meanwhile,   was     ready  for  action,  in  a  valley  on  the  left, 
drawn  up,  standing  by  their  horses,      near  the  intrenchments. 


Iron-Clods  Defeated. 


69 


knees,  gave  utterance  to  devout  thanks  to  their  Heavenly 
Father  for  the  result.  The  heartiest  cheers  and  shouts  from 
the  great  body  of  the  men  resounded  from  one  end  of  the 
line  to  the  other  as  fast  a&  the  good  news  spread.  The  effect 
on  the  morale  of  oifficers  and  men  was  electrical,  and  all  were 
inspired  with  the  highest  hopes  of  ultimate  success.* 


*  In  the  face  of  his  own  statement  of 
the  heavy  annament  of  these  vessels— 
e^ht  and  nine-inch  smooth-bores  and 
one  hundred  pounder  rifles — ^the  Rtve^ 
rend  Mr.  Boynton,  in  his  quasi-o^oaX 
history  of  the  navy,  is  careless  enough 
to  all^e  that  the  superiority  in  weight 
of  metal  and  number  of  guns  was  with 
the  Confederates.    He  and  other  Fede- 
ml  chroniclers  have  asserted  that  these 
^ressels  only  nsed  their  bow-guns.    As- 
uredly  thb  is  inaccurate,  for  they  were 
forced  up  dose  enough  (three  hundred 
yards)  to  use  their  broadside,  and  we 
ve  satisfied  did  so  ;  that  is,  twenty- 
eight  guns,  either  eight  or  nine-inch 
^nooth-bores  or  one  hundred  pounder 
rifled  pieces.  In  the  Confederate  water- 
batteries  there  were  but  thirteen  pieces, 
eight  of  which  were  thirty-two  pounder 
smooth-bores,  and   three  tliirty-two 
pounder  carronades,  leaving  really  but 
the  ten-inch  columbiad  (one  hundred 
and  twenty-eight  pound  bolt)  and  a 
rifled  thirty-two  effective  against  the 
vmor.    Hence,  granting  that  only  the 
how-guns  were  used — that  is,  twelve 
eight  or  nine-inch  (smooth)  and  one  hun- 
dred pounder  rifled — still  the  superiority 
was  greatly  with  the  naval  ordnance ; 
ibr,  while    they  threw  at  least   nine 
hundred  pounds  of  metal  at  a  broad- 
ade,  the  Confederate  batteries   alto- 


gether could  throw  but  four  hundred 
and  forty-eight  pounds,  of  which,  in 
£ict,  only  one  hundred  and  ninety-two 
pounds  were  efiective  and  did  the  dam- 
age inflicted.  That  in  such  a  conflict 
thirty-two  pounders  were  valueless  Mr. 
Boynton  knew^  for,  at  pages  291-2,  in 
connection  with  a  discussion  of  the  pro- 
per armament  for  a  ship,  he  says  so 
virtually.  He  would  intimate  likewise 
that  there  was  an  advantage  on  the 
part  of  the  Confederates  in  having 
"  land-batteries."  In  so  far  as  they  had 
a  somewhat  plunging  fire,  there  was  an 
advantage,  but  one  partially  neutralized 
by  the  sloping  sides  of  the  gunboats. 
At  sea,  batteries  afloat,  of  course,  tossed 
and  unsteadied  by  the  waves,  are  at  a 
disadvantage,  but  not  so  on  a  river. 
But  the  reverend  historian  chooses  to 
ignore  the  fact  that,  while  the  Confede- 
rate batteries  were  open,  the  Federal 
guns  were  fought  in  casemates  of  a  cha- 
racter that,  (page  519^)  when  he  is  speak- 
ing of  the  energy  with  which  these  ves- 
sels were  built  by  their  constructor,  he 
declared  were  "a  good  defense  against 
such  ^uns  as  were  mostly  found  in  the 
rebel  works  of  the  TVest"  but  which  dwin- 
dled down  into  "light  armor"  when 
(page  530)  he  comes  to  palliate  their  de- 
feat. Only  heavy,  solid  shot  were  of  any 
worth  against  the  vessels ;  grape,  sheU^ 


i 


70 


Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 


Before  this  occurrence,  on  that  morning,  a  council  of  general 
officers  had  met  In  view  of  large  Federal  reenforcements  for 
the  reduction  of  the  position,  it  had  been  determined  to  make 
a  sally  that  afternoon  upon  the  Federal  right  flank  with  the 
Confederate  left  wing,  under  General  Pillow,  and  attempt  to 
reopen  commimications  with  Nashville  and  an  outlet  for  re- 
treat, while  to  General  Buckner  was  assigned  the  duty  of 
covering  that  retreat  with  his  division  when  attempted.  Ac- 
cordingly, the  troops  of  Johnson's  Division  and  Forrest's  Ca- 
valry had  been  disposed  for  such  an  operation,  and  were  held 
for  some  time  in  expectation  of  orders  to  begin  it  But  instead, 
General  Pillow,  becoming  indisposed  to  essay  the  movement 
that  afternoon,  procured  a  countermand  of  the  order  from 
General  Floyd,  and  the  several  regiments  were  remanded  to 
their  respective  positions.* 

Friday  night,  soon  after  dark,  another  council  of  war  was 
called.  Generals  Floyd,  Pillow,  and  Buckner  were  present, 
and  apparently  all  the  brigade  and  regimental  commanders. 
All  now  saw  that,  completely  invested  and  cut  off  from  reen- 
forcements, the  Confederates  must  either  break  through  the 


and  canister  were  the  most  effective 
missiles  against  the  Confederate  batte- 
teries  at  certain  stages  in  the  fight  at 
the  short  range  reached.  Other  Fede- 
ral historians  have  treated  this  affair  in 
the  same  disingenuous  manner,  and  it 
is  not  reputable,  if  not  purblind,  to  write 
history  in  this  fashion. 

♦  Both  Generals  Floyd  and  Pillow 
omit  all  mention  of  this  arranged  plan 
of  attack,  but  General  Buckner  is  spe- 
cific upon  the  point  Colonel  Forrest, 
m  his  report,  likewise  states  that  it  was 
ordered,  and  his  men  and  the  infantry 
moved  out  of  the  intrenchments,  "  but, 
after  maneuvering  a  short  time  and 


some  sharp-shoodng  between  the 
cavalry  and  the  enemy,  were  ordered 
back."  Colonel  Baldwin  also  states 
that  on  the  14th  General  Pillow  di- 
rected the  "  left  wing  to  be  formed  in 
the  open  ground  to  the  left  and  rear 
of  our  position  in  the  lines,  for  the . 
purpose  apparently  of  attacking  the 
enemy's  right;"  that  his  brigade  had 
been  advanced  about  a  quarter  of  a  mile 
with  that  object,  when  General  PiUow 
countermanded  the  movement,  saying 
it  was  "  too  late  in  the  day  to  accom- 
plish any  thing."  And  this  is  further 
corroborated  by  Major  Brown,  of  the 
Twentieth  Mississippi. 


Sortie  Determined.  71 

well-set  toils  of  the  enemy  or  resign  themselves  to  the  fate 
of  ultimate  surrender,  as  the  Federals  could  be  reenforced  at 
pleasure  from  abounding  resoiu"ces.  It  was,  therefore,  unani- 
mously decided  to  make,  at  the  first  streak  of  daylight  on  the 
following  morning,  a  resolute,  in  sooth  desperate,  sortie  upon 
the  enem/s  right  wing,  McClernand's  Division,  with  the  pur- 
pose of  sweeping  it  aside  and  back  behind  the  Wynn's  Ferry 
road  upon  the  other  wing,  so  that  the  road  to  Nashville  by 
way  of  Charlotte  should  be  left  open. 

Pillow  was  to  lead  in  the  inauguration  of  this  operation, 
with  General  B.  R.  Johnson  as  his  second  in  command,  and 
was  to  move  out  of  the  trenches  with  the  whole  force  on  the 
Confederate  left  flank,  (including  the  cavalry,)  except  Hei- 
man's  Brigade*  and  the  garrison  of  the  field-work,t  in  all 
some  seven  regiments.  Heiman's  regiments  were  to  be  re- 
tained in  their  position,  except  the  Thirtieth  Tennessee,  Colo- 
nel Head  ;  that  was  to  repair  to  and  occupy  the  trenches  be- 
longing to  Buckner,  who  was  then  to  proceed  to  the  Confede- 
rate left,  and  likewise  advance  thence,  in  aid  of  Pillow,  upon 
the  enemy  along  and  leftward  of  the  Wynnes  Ferry  road. 
And  this  plan  of  operations  seems  to  have  been  fully  under- 
stood by  all  the  suboitiinates  who  were  to  execute  it.  Colo- 
nel Forrest  having  already  made  himself  well  acquainted  with 
the  surrounding  country,  important  parts  in  the  drama  were 
assigned  to  him  and  his  command. 

After  another  bitterly  cold  night,  by  which  the  men  were 
greatly  harassed,  at  four  o'clock  Saturday  morning,  15th,  the 
hour  appointed  for  the  formation  of  Pillow's  attacking  column, 
Forrest  had  promptly  taken  his  designated  position  on  the 
extreme  Confederate  left,  south-eastward  of  Dover.    Detach- 


•  Tenth,  Thirtieth,  Forty-second,  Forty-eighth,  and  Fifty-third  Tennessee,  and 
Twenty-seventh  Alabama  volunteers, 
t  Forty-ninth  and  Fiftieth  Tennessee, 


A 


72  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

ing  Overton's  Company  to  reconnoitre,  the  enemy  were 
found,  already  formed  in  battle  order,  not  more  than  five  hun- 
dred yards  distant.  And,  meanwhile,  their  sharp-shooters  or 
skirmishers,  early  as  it  was,  had  opened  a  brisk  fire  along  the 
whole  front. 

The  column  assigned  to  this  urgent,  paramount  work  was 
composed  of  Forrest's  Cavalry,  not  exceeding  eight  hundred 
troopers,  Baldwin's,  McCausland's,  Wharton's,  Simonton's, 
and  Drake's  brigades  of  infantry,  fourteen  regiments,  and  two 
small  battalions,  with  an  effective  total  of  not  more  than  six 
thousand  five  hundred  rifles  and  muskets.* 

Some  delay  ensued  in  forming  the  column  in  consequence 
of  the  omission  of  a  brigade  commander  to  communicate  the 
proper  orders.  Nevertheless,  all  were  in  their  assigned  posi- 
tions by  five  A.M.,  when  the  operation  began,  Baldwin's  Bri- 
gade leading  the  infantry,  and  Forrest,  somewhat  yet  in  ad- 
vance, covering  the  left  flank,  with  a  view  at  the  same  time 
to  a  movement  around  the  extreme  Federal  right  As  re- 
ported by  Overton,  the  enemy  were  found  ready  for  the  onset 
The  rugged  character  of  the  ground  and  abundance  of  tan- 
gled brushwood  made  the  advance  tardy,  and  greatly  hindered 
the  deployment  of  the  Confederate  regiments  as  they  reached 
the  scene.  Especially  difficult  was  it  for  the  cavalry  to  act 
with  celerity  and  cohesion,  so  dense  being  the  undergrowth 
that  the  horses  could  scarcely  be  made  to  push  their  way 
through. 

Baldwin  began  the  action,  encountering  Oglesby's  Brigade 


*  Baldwin^s  Brigade  was  formed  of  sissippi,  Eighth  I^entacky,  and  Seventh 

Twenty-first  and  Twenty-foarth  Missis-  Texas ;    and  Drake's,  of  the  Fourth 

sippi;    McCausland's,  of  the  Thirty-  Mississippi,   Fifteenth  Arkansas,   and 

sixth  and  Fiftieth  Virginia  and  Twenti-  Garvin's  Alabama  and  Browder's  Ten- 

eth  Mississippi ;  Wharton's,  of  the  Fif-  nessee  battalions. — MS.  Notes  rf  Gfrne* 

ty-first  and  Fifty-sixth  Virginia  ;   Si-  red  B,  H,  Johnson. 
monton's,  of  the  First  and  Third  Mis- 


Sortie  Inaugurated.  73 

of  McClemand's  Division.  McCausland's  Brigade,  coming 
up  on  the  left,  was  followed  quickly  by  Simonton,  whose  regi- 
ments were  pushed  into  action,  however,  between  Baldwin 
and  Wharton.  The  enemy  fighting  stoutly,  the  rattle  of  mus- 
ketry soon  was  swollen  into  a  deafening  uproar.  The  Fede- 
rals gave  way,  but,  quickly  reenforced  by  W.  H.  L.  Wallace's 
Brigade,  increased  to  six  regiments  of  infantry,*  a  resolute, 
prolonged  resistance  was  made.  The  enemy  being  now  in  a 
favorable  position,  over  seven  thousand,  strong  and  well  sup- 
ported by  an  ample  artillery,  the  combat  grew  fierce  and  ob- 
stinate. Drake's  Confederate  Brigade  had  also  become  en- 
gaged. Both  sides  unquestionably  displayed  excellent  mar- 
tial qualities  and  spirit.  The  Confederates,  though  on  their 
first  field,  pressed  forward  with  the  deliberate  vigor  of  vete- 
rans, and  the  Federals  met  the  shock  of  their  onslaught  with 
uncommon  steadiness.  And  so  splendid,  in  fact,  was  the  cou- 
rage of  the  assailants,  that  a  Federal  chronicler  and  an  eye- 
witness observes  :  "  //  was  only  by  a  bravery  that  equaled  that 
of  the  Confederates  that  they  were  withstood^  The  enemy, 
howbeit,  had  to  yield  the  ground,  and  fall  back  from  ridge  to 
ridge  toward  their  left  flank,  nearly  parallel  with  the  exterior 
Confederate  intrenchments. 

While  the  infantry  were  thus  effectively  engaged,  Forrest 
had  been  moving  steadily  around  the  enemy's  right  until  he 
found  he  had  turned  it.  Thereupon,  changing  direction,  he 
swept  down  upon  the  Federal  flank  and  rear,  just  as  the  com- 
bat had  become  general  with  the  whole  of  McClernand's 
Division. 

This,  at  the  moment,  was  a  most  opportune  auxiliary  to  a 
charge  made  by  the  Confederate  infantry.     It  assisted  notably 


•  To    wit,    Eleventh,  Seventeenth,      and  McAllister's  batteries,  or,  at  leasts 
Forty-seventh,  Forty-eighth,  and  Forty-     4200  men. 
aiDth  Illinois  in£uitry,  with  Taylor's 


k 


74  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

to  break  the  stubborn  stand  made  by  the  enemy,  and  forced 
them  again  to  recede  still  more  to  the  left  or  northward. 
Following  up  eagerly,  he  continued  the  pressure  upon  the 
Federal  right  and  rear  over  some  very  rough  ground  and 
through  thickets,  until  an  open  field  was  reached,  across  which 
could  be  seen  their  flank  greatly  exposed,  as  they  were  falling 
back  in  much  disorder.  Attempting  to  chaise  across  this 
field,  it  proved  marshy  and  impracticable  for  cavalry.  Mean- 
while, the  enemy  had  rallied  somewhat,  and  formed  a  line  at 
the  edge  of  a  second  field  to  the  front  and  right,  with  a  flank- 
ing relation  to  the  left  of  the  Confederate  infantry.  Unable 
to  get  at  their  flank,  as  before  said,  because  of  the  boggy  cha- 
racter of  the  intermediate  ground,  Forrest  so  maneuvered  in 
their  front  and  to  their  right  as  apparently  to  disquiet  them, 
while  the  infantry  made  a  gallant  advance ;  and  again  they 
gave  back,  leaving  the  ground,  as  previously,  thickly  strewn 
with  their  dead  and  wounded.  There  was  now,  after  much 
steadfast  fighting  on  their  side,  a  good  deal  of  disorder  in  the 
Federal  ranks,  and  strong  indications  of  an  impending  panic, 
such  as  so  often  seizes  and  in  a  moment  destroys  brave  ar- 
mies. Believing  that  such  a  crisis  was  at  hand  if  energeti- 
cally pressed,  Forrest,  at  the  moment  in  the  presence  of  a 
superior.  General  Johnson,  requested  permission  to  make  a 
charge  upon  the  disordered  masses  of  the  enemy  in  sight, 
many  of  whom,  indeed,  had  halted  and  hoisted  white  flags, 
while  other  evidences  of  demoralization  were  numerous.  But 
General  Johnson,  apprehensive  of  an  ambush,  regarding  such 
an  advance  at  the  moment  hazardous,  withheld  his  assent,*  and 


•  General  Forrest  is  of  the  belief  that  Lew  Wallace,  in  his  official  report,  ad- 

this  was  the  critical  instant  in  this  bat-  mits  that  about  thi^  time  the  fugitives 

tie,  which,  if  it  had  been  vigorously  im-  were  crowding  back  with  unmistakable 

proved,  must  have  resulted  in  the  com-  signs  of  disaster  ;  and  that  the  cry 


plete  rout  of  the  enemy.    And  General     prevalent,   "  We    are  cut  to  pieces,* 


Wallaces  Division  Engaged.  75 

the  enemy  retreated  in  haste  out  of  sight.  Shortly  after  this, 
moving  somewhat  westward,  with  orders  from  General  John- 
son to  guard  the  left  flank,  Forrest  came  upon  a  battery  just 
preparing  to  quit  its  position,  after  having  several  times  re- 
pulsed the  efforts  of  the  infantry  to  seize  it  A  narrow  ravine 
separated  him  from  this  battery,  and  fallen  timber  and  thick- 
ets concealed  its  supports.  Charging  as  he  delivered  a  volley, 
the  most  of  the  artillerists  who  were  not  disabled  fled  and  left 
the  pieces,  six  in  number,  in  his  hands,  as  also  many  of  the 
horses  and  a  number  of  prisoners,  while  the  ground  was 
thickly  spread  with  dead  and  wounded,  the  effects  of  his 
charge  as  also  of  previous  attacks  on  the  position  by  the  in- 
fantry. 

It  was  about  this  phase  of  the  conflict  that  Wallace's  Divi- 
sion was  brought  up  to  support  McClemand's — that  is,  thir- 
teen regiments,  or  about  8500  fresh  rifles — ^thus  opposing  a 
Federal  force  of  fully  15,500  men,  only  diminished  by  the 
casualties  of  the  morning,  to  Pillow's  force  afield,  including 
Forrest,  of  about  6500  men,  or  less  than  one  half  of  those 
attacked.  For  as  yet  Buckner*s  Division  had  not  advanced, 
as  had  been  arranged  in  the  plan  of  operations  for  the  day, 
beyond  the  trenches  ;  and  Pillow's  men  and  Forrest's  alone 
had  thus  far  been  engaged,  though  they  had  been  substan- 
tially supported  by  a  fierce  and  admirably  served  cannonade 
from  Graves's,  Porter's,  and  Maney's  batteries,  from  three 
several  positions  within  the  intrenchments. 

Cruft's  Brigade,  of  four  regiments,  was  first  thrown  into 
the  vortex  of  the  battle.  This  was  about  ten  A.M.,  and  Ogles- 
by's  Brigade,  breaking  through  his  ranks,  caused  some  dis- 
order ;  and  Cruft's  too,  like  the  rest,  had  to  give  way  before 


vhich  had  for  a  time  a  perceptible  ef-     by  a  forward  movement. — ReK  RiCx 
ffict  on  his  own  men,  so  threatening     IV.  Doc  46,  p.  141. 
ttxA  he  was  induced  to  counteract  it 


76  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

the  vigor  of  the  Confederate  onset,  doing  so,  however,  in  cre- 
ditable order  to  another  position,  whence,  after  a  handsome 
stand,  he  was  likewise  forced  to  retire  to  another  and  com- 
manding ridge  further  leftward.  Thus  the  current  of  battle 
set  stronger  and  stronger  against  the  Federals.*  Meanwhile, 
Thayer's  and  Smith's  brigades,  of  the  same  division,  had  also 
become  engaged.  Meeting  the  men  of  McClernand's  Divi- 
sion in  retreat,  between  ten  and  eleven  o'clock  a.m.,  in  the 
vicinity  of  Wynn's  Ferry  road,  and  rightward  of  Cruft's,  these 
fresh  brigades,  embracing  nine  regiments,  were  thrown  across 
the  path  of  the  triumphant  Confederates,  and  by  their  oppor- 
tune interposition  gave  time  to  McClernand's  broken  batta- 
lions to  rally,  reform,  resupply  their  exhausted  ammunition- 
boxes,  and  resume  the  struggle.! 

Meanwhile,  Forrest,  after  the  capture  of  the  battery,  as 
mentioned,  pressing  onward,  ere  long  found  himself,  with  his 
own  regiment,  rearward  of  a  Federal  force,  strongly  posted  in 
a  deep  road-cut  at  right  angles  to  the  general  line  of  battle. 
Opening  upon  their  right  flank,  he  drove  them  speedily  from 
this  covert  an^d  forced  an  immediate  retreat.  This  was  about 
eleven  a.m.,  and  the  battle  at  the  time  was  raging  with  intense 
heat.  The  whole  Federal  right  wing  had  been  driven  from 
its  position  for  quite  a  mile  :  many  had  thrown  down  their 
armsj  and  fled  away  into  ravines  and  thickets  for  shelter. 
But  their  main  body,  however,  had  receded  doggedly  from 
ridge  to  ridge  in  the  direction  of  their  left  wing  and  upon 
their  advancing  supports,  making  repeated  spirited  efforts  to 
recover  lost  ground.     Still  pushing  on,  Forrest  now  effected 


*  These  details  are  gathered  from  Cruft's  Oi&dal  Report.— ^^•^.  Rec.  IV.  Doc  46, 
pp.  144-5. 

t  Official  Reports  of  Colonels  Thayer  and  Smith  and  their  subordinates. — IHtU 
pp.  155-6. 

X  Nearly  five  thousand  small>arms  were  picked  up  after  the  battle,  Satordaj 
afternoon,  by  the  Confederates. 


Forrest  and  Pillow.  77 

a  junction  with  the  rest  of  his  cavalry,  which  had  been  de- 
tached, operating  conjointly  with  the  infantry ;  and,  about  the 
same  time,  he  was  addressed  by  General  Pillow,  inquiring  as 
to  the  whereabouts  of  General  Buckner,  with  the  remark  that 
as  yet  he  had  heard  no  sound  of  battle  from  the  part  of  the 
field  assigned  to  that  officer.  Colonel  Forrest,  replying  that  he 
had  been  too  busy  himself  to  know  of  the  movements  of  others 
with  whom  he  had  not  been  cooperating,  Pillow  exclaimed : 

"  Well,  then.  Colonel,  what  have  you  been  doing  since  I 
saw  you  last  T 

"  Obeying  orders,  General,  by  protecting  your  left  flank," 
was  the  ready  rejoinder.  And,  for  witness,  Forrest,  pointed 
to  the  captured  guns  'and  prisoners,  just  then  happening  in 
sight  as  they  were  being  sent  within  the  intrenchments. 
After  a  few  kind  words  of  commendation,  the  General  then 
galloped  away  rightward  and  toward  the  trenches,  saying  that 
he  would  go  and  see  in  person  what  was  going  on  in  that 
quarter,  leaving  Forrest  with  orders  to  watch  the  left  flank. 

Very  soon  afterward  the  Fifteenth  Arkansas,  Colonel  Gee, 
hotly  engaged  with  a  greatly  superior  force,  was  repulsed  in  a 
bold  charge  upon  a  Federal  position.  Seeing  this,  Forrest 
rushed  up  with  one  of  his  squadrons  into  the  gap  and  checked 
the  now  advancing  enemy.  The  infantry  at  once  rallied, 
and,  reforming,  moved  up  again  with  such  spirit  and  signal 
courage  that  they  drove  their  lately  successful  foe  from  the 
position.  Several  of  Forrest's  best  men  fell  in  this  affair,  and 
Ms  brother,  Lieutenant  Jeffrey  Forrest,  at  the  head  of  the 
squadron,  having  his  horse  shot  under  him,  received  a  painful 
contusion  by  the  fall,  but,  nevertheless,  kept  the  field  to  the 
last,  severely  as  he  suffered. 

In  the  mean  time,  delayed  a  little  at  the  outset  waiting  for 
Colonel  Head  and  the  Thirtieth  Tennessee  to  take  the  place 
of  his  men  in  the  trenches  on  the  right,  General  Buckner  had 
reached  the  position  rearward  of  the  intrenchments  on  the 


A 


78 


Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 


left,  where  they  are  intersected  by  the  Wynn's  Ferry  road,  and 
immediately  to  its  left,  and  which  had  been  vacated  by  Pil- 
low's men,  who  were  already  in  deadly  but  successful  grapple 
with  McClemand*s  Division  outside  of  the  intrenchments 
further  leftward.  It  was  from  this  point  that  his  division,  as 
arranged  the  night  before  in  council,  was  to  move  out  and 
assail  the  enemy  along  and  to  the  left  of  the  road  just  men- 
tioned, as  nearly  simultaneous  with  Pillow's  attack  as  possi- 
ble. The  situation  of  affairs,  however,  appeared  to  General 
Buckner  to  authorize  him  to  depart  radically  from  the  settled 
plan  of  operations  for  the  day.*  For,  instead  of  launching  his 
division  forthwith  into  the  "^niUe  outside,  deploying  one  of  his 
regiments  in  the  rifle-pits  and  placing  the  others  under  cover 
of  the  neighboring  ridge-crests,  he  brought  Porter's  and 
Graves's  batteries  to  bear  upon  the  enemy  in  his  front  in  an 
animated,  sustained  cannonade.!     Until  nine  o'clock  A.M.  did 


*  A  plan  that  was  of  his  own  sugges- 
tion. 

t  General  Buckner,  in  his  Official 
Report,  which  we  follow  strictly  in  this 
part  of  the  narrative,  states  that  he  had 
regarded  it  as  "  unadvisable  to  attempt 
the  assault  at  this  time,"  or  until  he  had 
to  some  extent  crippled  the  enemy's 
batteries  by  his  artillery,  "  in  view  of 
the  heavy  duty"  which  he  expected  his 
divbion  to  undergo  in  covering  the  re- 
treat of  the  army. 

Unquestionably,  it  was  highly  desira- 
ble that  this  division  should  be  kept 
fresh  and  in  reserve,  if  possibly  conso- 
nant with  the  assured  success  of  the 
sortie  in  which  Pillow  was  engaged. 
But  incontestably,  also,  the  course  was 
fraught  with  extreme  peril  to  the  whole 
operation  of  the  day,  leaving,  as  it  did. 
Pillow  with  but  6500  men,  efaibattled 


with  the  fearful  odds  of  full  15,000  Fede- 
ral infantry  and  a  numerous  artiUery. 
For  were  Pillow  to  be  repulsed,  of 
which,  under  the  drcumstanoes,  there 
clearly  was  a  portentous  risk,  of  course 
the  whole  affair,  the  sxdly  itself  would 
prove  abortive ;  and  Buckner's  provi- 
dence of  his  men,  upon  which  he  founds 
his  delay  to  engage  as  originally  con- 
templated and  arranged,  must  then 
have  been  useless — at  the  deplorable 
cost  of  defeating  the  operatioi],  upon 
the  success  of  which  rested  the  only 
hopes  left  the  Confederates  for  escape. 
A  graver  change  of  the  plan  of  opera* 
tions  by  a  subordinate  can  not  well  be 
conceived  than  this. — See  General  Buck' 
nef^s  Official  Report^  p.  164,  Official 
(Confederate)  Reports  of  Battles^  Rich' 
mondf  Vd^  1862. 


Effective  Use  of  Confederate  Artillery.  79 

he  remain  thus  rearward  of  the  intrenchments,  his  batteries 
handled  with  admirable  coolness,  vigor,  and  effect  unquestion- 
ably upon  the  enemy,  though  provoking  a  furious  return  fire 
bova  their  heavy  rifled  batteries  and  strong  line  of  infantry 
skirmishers,  under  which  the  Confederate  artillerists  suffered 
severely,  but  endured  with  a  courage  that  may  not  be  ex- 
celled. Between  nine  and  ten  a.m.,  however,  at  the  urgent 
instance  of  General  Pillow,  Buckner  threw  out  the  Fourteenth 
Mississippi,  under  command  of  Major  Doss,  deployed  as  skir- 
mishers, to  carry  a  battery  about  three  hundred  yards  distant 
from  the  trenches  ;  and  quickly  supported  the  movement  by 
the  Third  Tennessee,  Major  Cheairs,  and  Eighteenth  Tennes- 
see, Colonel  Palmer,*  while  Pillow  personally  ordered  Colonel 
Cook,  of  the  same  division,  to  move  forward,  on  the  like 
errand,  with  the  Thirty-second  Tennessee.*  The  ground  was 
broken  into  ravines  and  bristling  with  abatis  and  snow-clad 
undergrowth  ;  but,  despite  these  difficulties  and  a  scorching 
artillery  and  musketry  fire,  the  movement  was  executed. 
Terrible  as  was  the  exposure,  and  though  for  a  while  thrown 
into  critical  confusion,  these  regiments  pressed  onward  in 
emulation  of  their  brethren  of  Pillow's  Division,  and  speedily 
obliged  their  immediate  opponents  to  yield  the  coveted  posi- 
tion. But  this  entailed  a  heavy  loss,  and,  notwithstanding 
the  successful  issue,  imder  some  misapprehension  on  the  part 
of  one  of  General  Buckner's  staff-officers,  the  brigade,  Colo- 
nel J.  C.  Brown's,  was  immediately  thereafter  ordered  back 
behind  the  intrenchments  from  which  it  had  so  effectively, 
though  tardily,  sallied.     General  Buckner,  however,  quickly 


*  Official  Reports  of  Colonel  Cook  says  that  he  did  not   advance   until 

and  others  engaged.    It  is  difficult  to  twelve  M.,  and  then  on  his  own  respon- 

fix  the  hour  satisfactorily  of  this  affair,  sibility. 
Cook  places  it  at  ten  A.M.     Harrison 


i 


8o  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

sent  it  forth  again,  under  Colonel  Brown,  while  Porter's, 
Graves's,  and  Maney's  batteries  poured  from  their  guns  a 
concentrated  fire,  sweeping  the  face  of  the  ground  over  which 
the  brigade  was  to  advance.  This  affair,  bravely  led  and  ad- 
mirably pursued  by  the  men,  resulted  in  the  dislodgment  of 
the  Federals  from  two  positions  in  succession,  and  the  cap- 
ture of  a  section  of  artillery,  with  small  loss  comparatively, 
but  including  that  of  the  brave  and  accomplished  soldier 
Lieutenant-Colonel  W.  P.  Moore,  of  the  Thirty-second  Ten- 
nessee, and  of  the  lamented  and  distinguished  Captain  Frank 
M.  Rogers,*  Fourteenth  Mississippi.!  The  Confederates 
were  now  masters  of  this  part  of  the  field,  the  line  of  the 
Wynn's  Ferry  road,  as  Pillow's  Division  was  of  the  remainder 
of  that  flank  of  the  recent  Federal  position. 

By  the  plan  of  operation  for  the  day,  it  will  be  remembered 
that,  in  the  event  of  the  success  of  the  sortie,  Buckner  was  to 
remain  exterior  to  the  trenches  with  his  division  in  position 
on  the  Wynn's  Ferry  road,  in  order  to  cover  the  retreat  of  the 
whole  force,  to  secure  a  route  for  which  had  been  the  main 
object  of  the  attack  and  battle.  But  it  would  seem  that  an 
unfortunate  disposition  to  vary  or  ignore  at  will  the  several 
parts  of  that  plan  affected  the  two  superior  officers  charged 
with  its  execution,  without  regard  to  the  effect  upon  the  ob- 
ject to  be  attained.  And,  therefore,  it  will  be  seen  that  Gene- 
ral Pillow,  wholly  overlooking  what  had  been  thus  deter- 


*  Captain   Rogers  was   an   officer  was  a  fair  example  of  the  class  that 

in  the  celebrated  "First   Mississippi  filled  even  subordinate  grades  in  the 

Rifles  "in  the  Mexican  War.    Subse-  Confederate  service  at  the  outset  of  the 

quently,  while  still  a  young  man,  he  war. 

was  a  popular  Circuit  Judge  in  Mis-  *  lieutenant-Colonel  Gordon,  of  the 

sissippi  for  several  terms.    Chivalrous  Third  Tennessee,   was  also    severely 

and  cultivated,  this  gallant  gentleman  wounded. 


Progress  of  Sortie.  8i 

mined,  ordered  General  Buckner's  Division,  as  well  as  his 
own,  back  to  their  former  positions  m  the  trenches.* 

Just  as  Brown's  Brigade,  Buckner's  Division,  was  becoming 
engaged  for  the  first  time,  Pillow,  having  dispatched  an  order 
to  Forrest  to  leave  Lieutenant-Colonel  Gantt  to  guard  the 
left  flank,  while  he  repaired  to  the  right  with  the  rest  of  his 
cavalry,  the  latter,  proceeding  to  the  point  indicated,  was  met 
by  General  Pillow,  who,  pointing  to  a  battery  formidably 
planted  at  the  head  of  and  sweeping  a  ravine,  inquired  of 
Forrest  whether  or  not  he  could  take  it,  adding  that  it  had 
baffled  several  previous  attempts.     Proud  of  the  superb  con- 
duct of  his  men  in  the  course  of  the  campaign  as  on  that 
morning,  Forrest  confidently  answered,  "  I  can  try ;"  and, 
immediately  turning  off,  drew  his  men  up  for  the  work  in  an 
open  space,  in  a  column  of  squadrons.      But,  as  he  did  so, 
noticing  some  infantry  in  the  trenches,  rearward,  only  about 
four  hundred  yards  distant,  he  sent  an  officer  to  request  its 
support  in  the  charge.     This  was  the  regiment  of  that  excel- 
lent officer.   Colonel   Hanson,   Second    Kentucky,   and  he 
promptly  advanced   to  cooperate.     At  least  two  regiments 
supported   the  Federal  battery.     May's  company  being  in 
advance,  the  order  to  charge  up  the  ravine  was  given,  with 
instructions  for  the  first  and  second  companies  of  the  squad- 
rons severally  to  deploy  to  the  right  and  left  as  they  ad- 
vanced.     Right  courageously  and  well   were  these   orders, 
executed.     It  was  almost  a  desperate  venture  ;    but   this, 
thought  checked  tha  pace   of  none  of  that  brave-hearted 
hand  as  they  pressed  onward,  receiving  in  their  breasts  an 
appalling  volley  from  artillery  and  riflemen.      Hanson  fol- 
bwed  with  equal  ardor  and  eagerness,  but  withholding  the 
fire  of  his  men,  and  determined  to  depend  on  their  bayonets. 


•  Vide  Reports  of  Generals  Buckner  and  Pillow  and  MS,  Notes  of  General 
Joimsoii. 


82 


Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 


Turning  with  his  squadrons  upon  the  battery,  Forrest  charged 
it,  leaving  Hanson  to  engage  the  infantry.  About  the  battery 
a  hand-to-hand  struggle  ensued  for  a  few  moments.  Thfe 
Federals  stood  their  groimd  manfully  and  fought  obstinately. 
Sabres,  pistols,  and  carbines  were  lavishly  used,  with  much 
cost  of  life  and  wounds  on  both  sides.  It  was  here  that  Cap- 
tain May,  after  displaying  the  highest  martial  qualities  and  a 
cool  and  splendid  valor,  fell,  shot  through  the  heart*    As 


*  Charles  May  was  bom  in  Buck- 
ingham county,  Virginia,  in  1818,  of 
highly  respectable  parentage,  whose 
families  had  long  resided  in  that  vici- 
nity. Of  his  early  life  little  is  known, 
further  than  that  he  received  what  is 
called  a  good  English  education  at 
home,  where  he  remained  till  he  was 
seventeen,  when  he  moved  to  Rich- 
mond, and  became  a  merchant's  clerk. 
Thus  employed  two  or  three  years,  or 
until  about  1838,  he  removed  to  North- 
Mississippi,  and  established  himself  at 
the  town  of  "  Commerce,"  at  that  time 
the  county-seat  of  Tunica  county. 
There,  rapidly  winning  the  confidence 
of  his  fellow-citizens,  he  was  succes- 
sively chosen  to  fill  the  most  responsi- 
ble offices  of  the  county,  including  that 
of  Representative  in  the  Legislature 
and  Sheriff!  His  urbanity,  integrity, 
and  intelligence,  combined  with  uncom- 
mon firmness  and  a  knightly  courage, 
gained  Charles  May  firiends  and  influ- 
ence wheresoever  he  was  known.  For  a 
number  of  years  he  was  also  an  active 
planter,  when  finally  he  determined  to 
remove  to  Memphis.  Resigning  the 
shrievalty,  he  took  up  his  residence  in 
Chat  city  about  the  year  1854,  and  at 
onoe  engaged  in  the  livery  business,  to 


which  he  was  attached  very  much  by 
his  love  of  fine  horses,  and  which  he 
conducted  with  success  and  a  marked 
regard  for  conmierdal  probity  and 
honor  down  to  the  breaking  out  of  the 
war  in  the  spring  of  1861. 

Soon  after  the  fall  of  Fort  Sumter, 
Mr.  May  entered  Captain  Charles  Mc- 
Donald's company  of  "  Independent 
Dragoons,"  and,  at  its  organization, 
was  clecte4  junior  second  lieutenant 
He  served  with  this  company  during 
the  term  of  its  enlistment,  a  period  of 
sixty  days,  mainly  in  the  vicinity  of 
New-Madrid.  At  that  time  several 
gentlemen  were  engaged  in  Memphis 
in  the  effort  to  raise  a  company  of  cav- 
alry for  "  Forrest's  Regiment"  After 
collecting  volunteers  sufficient  to  or- 
ganize a  company,  Lieutenant  May  was 
unanimously  chosen  captain  ;  and  the 
company,  in  compliment  to  Colond 
Forrest,  was  named  the  "  Forrest  Ran- 
gers." Captain  May  immediately  begah 
to  drill  and  prepare  his  conunand  far 
active  service.  Thus  engaged  up  totb^ 
25th  of  October,  1 861,  he  then  took  up 
the  line  of  march,  with  his  own  and 
three  other  companies,  to  Fort  Donel- 
son.  There  he  renewed  his  attentMm 
to  the  drill  and  discipline  of  his 


i 


Sanguinary  Conflict 


83 


many  as  fifty  of  the  Federal  dead  lay  immediately  around  the 
pieces  taken.  And  so  sanguinary  was  this  affair,  it  is  credi- 
bly related  that,  at  one  spot,  the  feet  of  the  horses  splashed  in 
the  blood  of  the  slain  and  wounded,  flowing  along  the  surface 
of  the  snow  until  it  froze.  No  more  gallant  charge  than  this, 
indeed,  can  be  found  in  the  annals  of  war ;  and  all  bore  them- 
selves worthily,  officers  and  men  alike.  A  section  of  artillery 
and  about  seventy-five  men  were  taken,  and  some  horses  ; 
whilst  a  little  later  and  further  on,  another  gun  with  hospital 
tents  and  ambulances  were  also  captured,  with  about  sixty 
Confederate  prisoners  recovered. 

Forrest's  horse,  in  the  course  of  the  morning,  had  received 
as  many  as  seven  wounds,  but,  being  an  animal  of  rare  vigor 
and  spirit,  had,  notwithstanding,  borne  up  under  its  rider 
until  now,  when  it  fell  exhausted  from  loss  of  blood.* 

Hanson,  as  before  said,  had  assailed  the  infantry  supports 
of  the  battery,  while  Forrest  charged  the  latter.  His  adver- 
sary being  sheltered  in  timber  and  thick  undergrowth,  he  lost 
some  fifty  of  his  men  as  advancing  at  quick  time,  and  closing 
to  within  fifty  yards  without  the  discharge  of  a  gun.    He  then 


thus  insuring  that  effidency  which  they 
subsequently  displayed  in  so  many  hard- 
iboght  battles,  and  in  none  more  con- 
spicooosly  than  that  which  a  few  months 
later  Dlustrated  their  last  drill-ground 
at  Fort  Donelson — with  the  highest 
phases  of  a  manly  courage,  the  &me  of 
which  was  heightened  by  that  crowning 
act  of  gallantry  just  recounted,  which 
closed  Captsun  May's  brief  career,  and 
left  his  companions-in-arms  a  memory 
cbej  "would  not  willingly  let  die." 

After  he  fell,  this  lamented  officer's 
body  was  immediately  forwarded  to 
Nashrille,  and   thence  for  burial  to 


Memphis,  whose  citizens  received  the 
remains  of  their  gallant  townsman  with 
distinguished  honors,  and  bore  them  to 
their  last  resting-place  in  the  quiet 
shades  of  Elmwood,  followed  by  one  of 
the  largest  funeral  processions  ever  wit- 
nessed in  that  dty.  In  person.  Captain 
May  was  a  little  above  the  medium 
height,  straight  as  an  arrow,  rather 
slender,  but  well  knit,  lithe,  and  agile ; 
blue-eyed,  light-haired,  and  of  gentle 
features. 

*  Forrest's  overcoat  had  no  less  than 
fifteen  marks  of  bullets  in  it 


i 


84  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

opened  a  destructive  fire,  when  they  broke  and  abandoned  the 
position  in  great  disorder.  Graves's  battery  was  then  brought 
up,  and  Hanson  prepared  to  occupy  and  hold  the  point  in 
accordance  with  the  general  plan  of  arrangements  for  the  day  ; 
but  he  also  was  now  remanded  to  the  trenches  by  General 
Pillow. 

In  the  mean  time,  mounting  a  captured  horse,  Forrest  had 
resumed  his  place  with  his  cavalry,  now  some  half  a  mile 
ahead  of  the  infantry ;  and,  riding  in  advance  with  two  troop- 
ers to  reconnoitre,  he  discovered  the  Federals  near  by,  in 
occupatipn  of  a  ridge  four  hundred  yards  distant,  across  the 
Wynn's  Ferry  road.  Wheeling,  he  dashed  down  a  ravine, 
drawing  the  fire  of  a  whole  regiment,  and  his  horse  was 
wounded  in  the  thigh.  Instructing  Major  Kelly  to  repair 
to  the  right  to  ascertain  the  posture  of  affairs  in  that  direc- 
tion, he  rode  his  wounded  horse  slowly  back  toward  the 
trenches ;  but,  as  he  surmounted  a  ridge  exposed  to  a  Federal 
battery,  a  solid  3hot,  passing  through  his  horse  just  in  rear  of 
his  legs,  grazing  his  pantaloons,  covered  his  feet  with  blood, 
and  for  a  moment  left  his  limbs  benumbed.  Now,  once  more 
afoot,  he  made  his  way  back  to  where  the  last  battery  had 
been  captured,  at  which  place  he  found  assembled  several 
companies  of  his  regiment.  This  was  about  2  p.m.,  and 
shortly  after  General  Pillow,  coming  up,  instructed  him  to 
employ  his  men  in  collecting  the  captured  artillery  and  small- 
arms,  and  removing  the  Confederate  wounded  from  the  field. 
Thus  occupied  until  about  dark,  as  many  as  five  thousand 
stands  of  small-arms  and  a  large  quantity  of  blankets  and 
knapsacks  were  gleaned.* 

About  the  same  time  that  Forrest  and  Hanson  carried  the 
last  battery  and  dispersed  its  supports  across  the  Wynn's 
Ferry  road.  Pillow's  whole  division,  reaching  the  scene,  took 


*  Two  hundred  prisoners  also  had  been  taken  during  the  day. 


Confederates  Retire  to  Intrenchments.  85 

part  in  the  subsequent  and  Closing  operations  of  the  day, 
Johnson  striking  the  road  in  question  with  Drake's  Brigade, 
the  left  of  the  division.  At  that  time  there  were  no  Federals, 
except  the  dead  and  wounded,  eastward  of  that  road ;  nor 
nearer  westward  than  on  a  ridge  some  four  or  five  hundred 
yards  distant,  where  a  battery  in  position  with  infantry  sup- 
ports could  be  plainly  seen  separated  from  the  line  of  the  road 
by  a  deep,  cleared  ravine.  Riding  rightward,  Johnson  found 
that  there  were  no  other  Confederate  troops  between  Drake's 
and  the  breastworks.  Some  had  gone  in  for  shelter  under 
the  stress  of  the  recent  severe  fighting,  but  the  main  force 
by  order  of  superior  officers.  He  then  sent  an  aid-de-camp 
to  ask  for  reenforcements ;  but  instead  of  these  came  an 
order  to  retire  within  the  intrenchments.  Johnson,  how- 
ever, repairing  in  person  thither,  suggested  a  continuation  of 
the  battle,  by  a  general  advance  from  the  breastworks  ;  it  was 
then  decided,  after  some  discussion  between  Generals  Floyd, 
Pillow,  and  Johnson,  that  Drake's  Brigade  might  remain  exte- 
rior to  the  trenches,  while  the  other  troops  should  be  estab- 
lished within  the  rifle-pits.  But  a  little  later,  after  Drake  had 
repulsed  a  feeble  attempt  to  dislodge  him,  his  brigade  also 
^•as  again  ordered  in.  And  no  Confederates  now  remained 
on  the  field  except  those  engaged,  as  previously  mentioned, 
collecting  the  spoils  of  war,  and  the  wounded  and  burial- 
parties. 

Meanwhile,  about  the  time  that  Buckner's  Division  had 
begun  to  return  to  the  trenches,  Lauman's  Brigade  of  C.  F. 
Smith's  Division,  led  by  that  distinguished  soldier  in  person,* 


•  General  C.  F.  Smith  was  one  of  the  instructor   and    disciplinarian   of  the 

oottaccomplbhed  officers  of  the  United  greater  part  of  the  most  distinguished 

Stales  Regular  Army.    Graduating  at  officers  on  both  sides  dtiring  the  war, 

West-Point  in  1825^  he  was  a  captain  and  had  won  signal  distinction  also  as 

ia  the  army  and  commandant  of  that  a  soldier  in  the  war  with  Mexico.    Hii 

Kbool  when  General  Grant  entered  it  subordinate  position  at  this  time  was  one 

at  a  cadet    He  had  been  the  tactical  of  the  strangest  anomalies  of  the  war. 


86 


Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 


and  a  battalion  of  sharp-shooters,  in  all  some  three  thousanc 
two  hundred  rifles,  made  a  well-conceived  diversion  on  the 
extreme  Confederate  right  flank — z.  line  of  three  quarters  of 
a  mile — ^which  was  occupied  at  the  time,  as  will  be  recollect- 
ed, by  Head's  Thirtieth  Regiment  Tennessee  infantry,  about 
four  hundred  and  fifty  strong  *    The  point  immediately  as- 
sailed was  held,  however,  by  only  three   companies  under 
Major  Turner,  whose  conduct  may  be  fitly  measured  by  the 
fact  that  the  two  regiments   leading  the  assailing  column 
(Second  Iowa  and  Twenty-fifth  Indiana)  lost  three  hundred 
and  thirteen  rank  and  filcf     Overwhelmed  by  the  force 
opposed.  Major  Turner  coolly  withdrew  his  intrepid   men 
across  a  ravine  to  a  commanding  eminence,  and  renewed  the 
fight  until  reenforced  by  the  Forty-ninth  and  a  battalion  of 
the  Fiftieth  Tennessee,  withdrawn  from  the  field-work  by 
Colonel  Head  in  the  emergency.     The  Forty-second  Ten- 
nessee, Colonel  Quarles,  was  also  detached  by  Colonel  Heiman 
at  a  "double-quick,"  through  freezing  mud  and  snow,  and 
reached  the  scene  in  time  to  cooperate  effectively  in  checking 
the  progress  of  the  enemy  beyond  the  mere  narrow  foothold 
seized  on  t/te  extreme  right  of  the  trenches.     This  was  about 
four  P.M.,  or  near  dark ;  and  by  that  time  the  whole  Confede- 
rate force  had  resumed  their  several  positions,  after  a  day  of 
as  signal  and  brilliant  valor  as  ever  illustrated  or  was  thrown 
away  upon  any  battle-field.  J 


*  Head's  9fficial  report;  also  Lau- 
man's. 

t  See  Colonel  Lamnan's  official  re- 
port of  casualties. — Reb,  Rec.  IV.  Doc. 

46. 

X  As  evidence  of  the  heavy  loss  in- 
flicted on  the  Federals  on  Saturday,  it 
maybe  mentioned  that  on  Monday,  the 
xytii,  Captain  L.  D.  Waddell,  of  Com- 


pany £,  Eleventh  Regiment  Illinois 
volunteers,  wrote  to  his  Either  in  New- 
York  that  only  one  hundred  and  six- 
teen men  of  his  regiment  remained  un- 
injured ;  and  of  the  eighty-five  com- 
posing his  own  company  only  se\'en 
came  out  "The  most  wholesale 
slaughter,"  says  the  Captain,  "  that 
ever  was  heard  o£" 


k 


After  the  Battle.  87 

Conspicuous  among  the  bravest  of  the  Confederates  on 
this  occasion  were  the  officers  and  men  of  the  several  batte- 
ries of  field  artillery,  Porter's,  Maney's,  and  Graves's  compa- 
nies exciting  the  admiration  of  the  whole  army  by  their  effi- 
ciency, their  coolness,  and  their  shining  conduct.  It  was  said 
of  Porter's  guns  that  they  were  always  fired  at  the  "  right  time 
and  to  the  right  place."  Porter,  shot  through  the  thigh  by  a 
Mini^-ball,  as  he  was  carried  bleeding  from  the  field,  exclaim- 
ed to  the  only  unwounded  officer  left  with  his  battery.  Lieu- 
tenant John  W.  Morton,  a  mere  lad  of  nineteen :  *'  Don't  let 
them  have  the  guns,  Morton !"  And  we  are  told  that  that 
beardless  youth  handled  them  with  a  courage  and  intelligence 
which  emulated  the  example  of  his  accomplished  Captain.* 
Nor  were  the  batteries  of  Captains  Guy,  French,  and  Green 
less  admirably  and  effectively  handled  and  fought. 

Forrest,  having  executed  his  orders  last  mentioned,  led  his 
men  at  dark  back  to  their  encampment,  where  he  advised 
them  to  seek  all  possible  repose,  so  that  they  might  be  ready 
to  play  their  part  in  the  operations  of  the  next  day,  which  he 
confidently  anticipated  would  be  successfully  momentous  for 
his  countr)rmen,  inasmuch  as  the  investing  force  had  been 
driven  aside  firom  the  entire  front  of  the  Confederate  left 
flank,  as  fully  as  the  most  sanguine  had  anticipated.  This 
opinion  of  the  results  of  the  day  was  not  confined  to  Forrest 
and  his  men.  In  the  whole  division,  mainly  engaged,  it  was 
thoroughly  shared.  And,  as  a  corollary,  Johnson,  under  or- 
ders from  his  superior,  about  midnight,  drew  that  division  out 
and  massed  it — ^now  including  Heiman's  strong  brigade — in 
column  of  regiments,  in  the  same  position  as  on  Saturday 


*  Ci^itain  Porter  was  an  officer  of  the  United  States  Navy  up  to  the  breaking 
oat  of  the  war.    (See  Index) 


88  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

morning,  to  make  another  sortie,  with  a  view,  if  opposed,  to 
cut  his  way  through  to  Nashville. 

In  the  mean  time,  however,  a  council  of  war  had  been  as- 
sembled by  General  Floyd,  at  Pillow's  headquarters,  to  attend 
which  Forrest  had  been  roused  from  his  slumbers  between 
eleven  and  twelve  o'clock  Saturday  night.  Generals  Pillow, 
Buckner,  and  the  other  superior  officers,  except  Johnson,  were 
present ;  and,  to  Forrest's  amazement,  he  found  them,  as  he 
entered,  discussing  the  subject  of  surrender,  with  the  idea 
predominant  that  the  Federals  had  already  reoccupied  the 
positions  taken  from  them  that  morning^  Forrest,  immedi- 
ately expressing  his  earnest  disbelief  of  this  assumption, 
represented  that  the  battle-field  had  been  widely  examined  as 
late  as  nine  o'clock  that  night  by  reliable  men,  who  reported 
that  they  had  seen  no  traces  of  the  presence  of  any  hostile 
force  ;  and  he  offered  to  send  out  two  other  trusty  scouts  to 
obtain  further  and  conclusive  information  upon  this  vital 
point.*  This  being  assented  to,  the  scouts  were  dispatched, 
and,  returning  in  an  hour,  reported  that  they  could  find  no 
Federals  on  the  Randolph  Foundry  road,  except  the  wounded, 
and  possibly  some  few  stragglers  searching  for  the  killed  and 
wounded.  The  night  was  extremely  cold  ;  and  the  smoulder- 
ing fires  on  the  battle-field  had  been  rekindled  by  the  freezing 
wounded,  which,  seen  by  previous  scouts,  were  mistaken  for 
the  new  fires  of  a  heavy  force.  This  information,  however, 
was  not  received  as  conclusive  against  the  preconceived  sup- 
position that  the  investment  had  been  reestablished,  a  con- 
clusion in  which  those  in  chief  command  were  immutably 
fixed,  though  Colonel  Forrest  continued  to  urge  his  convic- 
tion that  the  whole  force  could  be  safely  withdrawn  by  the 


•  Namely,  Adam  R.  Johnson,  sub-  nant-colonel  of  a  Kentucky  regiment 
Bcqnentiy  a  Confederate  general  officer ;  Two  gentlemen  of  peculiar  gifts  for 
and  S.  H.  Martin,  who  became  liettte-     the  service  in  question. 


Council  of  War.  89 

road  reported  as  unobstructed,  and  though  he  earnestly  in- 
voked full  credence  of  the  reports  of  his  scouts.* 

General  Floyd,  the  senior,  expressed  himself  satisfied  the 
place  was  no  longer  tenable,  and  escape  for  the  main  force 
impracticable ;  but  that  circumstances  peculiarly  personal  to 
himself  determined  him  not  to  surrender,  for  that  he  would 
rather  die  than  become  a  prisoner.  General  Pillow  likewise 
asseverated  his  preference  individually  for  death  rather  than 
capture,  and  hence  his  utter  unwillingness  to  surrender  the 
army.  General  Buckner,  next  in  rank,  remarking  that  at  such 
a  crisis  personal  cojisiderations  should  have  no  influence  with 
an  officer,  expressed  his  own  purpose  to  abide  by  the  fortunes 
of  the  troops ;  and,  if  the  command  devolved  upon  him,  to 
take  upon  himself  the  responsibilities  of  the  capitulation. 
That  step  he  conceived  to  be  inexorably  necessary  in  view  of 
the  fact  that  any  effort  to  cut  their  way  out  as  matters  stood, 
he  insisted,  would  inevitably  result  in  the  sacrifice  of  at  least 
three  fourths  of  the  troops,  a  sacrifice  utterly  unjustifiable. 
That  his  men  were  so  worn  out  by  exposure,  by  watching  and 
fatigue,  and  so  reduced  in  numbers  and  demoralized,  he  could 
not  hold  his  position  half  an  hour  against  the  assault  which 
he  was  satisfied  would  be  made  next  morning  at  daylight. 
That  his  ammunition  was  nearly  expeVided  ;  and  the  men,  for 
several  days  without  regular  or  sufficient  food,  were  not  in 
condition  to  undertake  such  a  battle  and  march  as  would  be 
involved  by  a  successful  sortie.  And,  therefore,  regarding 
delivery  as  hopeless,  any  attempt  toward  that  aim  were  sure 
to  result  in  a  fruitless  massacre.f 

General  Pillow  unquestionably  did  not  regard  the  situation 


•  This  la  the  positive  assertion  of  t  General  Buckner's  official  report, 

General  Forrest,  confirmed,  as  he  al-  dated  Richmond,  August  nth,  1S62.  Il 

fegcs,  by  his  subsequent  personal  re-  is  but  fair  to  General  Buckner  to  ap- 

cannoissance  of  the  ground.  pend  here  the  views  of  a  participant  in 


90 


Campaigns  of  General  Forrest 


as  nearly  so  desperate,  and  favored  an  effort  lo  withdraw  the 
garrison.  But  assuredly  he  yielded  his  judgment  at  the 
supreme  crisis  to  that  of  his  junior,  to  whom  he  passed  the 
command  when  it  was  devolved  upon  him  by  the  abdication 
of  General  Floyd,  their  common  senior.  That  junior,  with 
the  soldierly  decision  due  to  his  conviction  and  his  views  of 
the  situation,  made  immediate  preparations  for  opening  the 
necessary  communications  with  General  Grant,  preliminary  to 
a  surrender ;  and  gave  the  necessary  notice  to  General  John- 
son, then  absent  with  the  column  preparing  to  make  the 
sortie. 

Meanwhile,  Colonel  Forrest,  hearing  the  decision  with  keen 
dissatisfaction,  expressed  to  General  Buckner  his  utter  indis- 
position to  surrender,  since  he  was  thoroughly  convinced  he 
could  readily  carry  his  command  in  safety  to  the  headquarters 


the  operations  at  Fort  Donelson,  which 
appeared  soon  after  in  one  of  the  Mem- 
phis newspapers : 

"  The  surrender  was  admitted  by  all 
to  be  a  military  necessity.  The  troops 
had  been  four  days  and  nights  in  the 
trenches,  exposed  to  the  cold,  with  but 
4ittle  fire  ;  their  feet  were  frosted  from 
standing  in  the  cold  water  and  mud  in 
the  bottom  of  the  ditches  ;  they  had 
received  no  regular  rations,  and  had 
not  had  time,  from  being  closely  con- 
fined to  the  works,  to  prepare  more 
than  one  meal  a  day ;  they  were  tho- 
roughly exhausted.  I  saw  many  sleep- 
ing while  standing  in  place  at  ordered 
arms,  just  before  entering  the  battle 
Saturday  morning.  The  exhausting 
efiects  of  the  battle  on  Saturday,  and 
another  sleepless  night  in  the  cold, 
damp  trenches,  must  be  added  to  their 
weakened  state  of  that  morning.    To 


have  attempted  to  have  cut  our  way 
through  the  enemy's  lines  with  but  ten 
thousand  men  in  this  condition,  having 
fifty  thousand  opposed  to  us — twelve 
thousand  of  whom  were  fresh  troops — 
[two  assumptions  we  have  shown  to  be 
totally  unfounded]  would  simply  have 
resulted  in  the  loss  of  three  fourths  of 
the  entire  command.  ...  I  can 
safely  say,  from  having  walked  a  part 
of  the  way  myself,  that  no  portions  of 
the  force  could  have  marched  ten  miles 
without  being  completely  exhausted 
and  disabled.  The  question  of  siur- 
render  resolved  itself  into  just  this: 
Shall  the  remnant  of  this  gallant  little 
army,  after  defeating  the  enemy  in  three 
of  the  hardest  fought  battles  in  our 
country's  history,  and  covering  itself 
with  glory,  be  sacrificed  to  avoid  the 
humiliation  of  a  surrender  T* 


Colonel  Forrest  Opposes  Surrender.  91 

of  General  Sidney  Johnston.  He  further  declared  he  had 
promised  the  parents  of  many  of  his  young  men  to  protect 
them  when  in  his  power  to  do  so.  Growing  excited,  indeed, 
as  he  spoke,  he  asseverated  he  would  prefer  that  the  bones  of 
his  men  should  bleach  on  the  surrounding  hills  rather  than 
they  should  be  carried  to  the  North  and  cooped  up  in  open 
prison-pens  during  midwinter. 

General  Pillow,  at  this,  suggested  that  Forrest  should  be 
suffered  to  attempt  to  escape.  This  was  sanctioned,  on  ex- 
press condition,  however,  that  he  should  do  so  before  the  flag 
of  truce  had  communicated  with  the  enemy,  and,  upon  this 
conclusion,  Forrest  hastened  to  his  encampment  to  execute 
the  movement. 

Sending  for  his  field  and  company  officers,  he  announced, 
in  brief  terms,  the  situation  and  his  own  fixed  purpose.  Re- 
solved not  to  surrender  himself,  he  declared  that  he  would 
lead  forth  all  who  desired  to  accompany  him,  and  then  in- 
quired how  many  would  make  the  attempt.  The  answer  was 
unanimous  that  they  would  follow  him  to  the  last.  Orders 
were  issued  accordingly  for  an  immediate  movement.  Major 
Kelly  was  dispatched  to  communicate  the  state  of  affairs  to 
Lieutenant-Colonel  Gantt,  who  was  not  present.  The  cavalry 
encampment  was  soon  alive  with  drowsy  troopers,  roused  at 
first  with  difficulty  from  their  profound  slumber  after  four 
days  and  nights  of  sleepless,  fatiguing  service.  As  soon  as 
made  fully  aware,  however,  of  the  exigency,  an  intense  eager- 
ness to  be  in  saddle  and  en  route  took  the  place  of  that  slug- 
gish mood  in  which  they  were  found  at  the  outset ;  and  little 
time  was  lost,  notwithstanding  the  habitual  confusion  attend- 
ing night  movements.  When  the  time  for  departure  was  at 
hand,  as  Colonel  Gantt  had  not  made  his  appearance  at  the 
place  of  rendezvous,  Major  Kelly  was  again  sent  to  hasten  or 
insure  the  movement  of  that  battalion. 

About  four  o'clock  Sunday  morning,  Forrest  was  ready 


/ 


92  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

with  the  main  part  of  his  men  to  begin  their  critical  adven- 
ture, and  took  the  road  through  Dover,  where  he  ascertained 
General  Pillow,  whom  he  had  expected  to  escort,  had  already 
crossed  the  river  fully  an  hour  before. 

About  five  hundred  officers  and  men  formed  the  column 
that  now  followed  Forrest  upon  the  road  by  way  of  Cumberland 
City.     Sending  forward  a  subaltern  and  three  men  to  recon- 
noitre, after  an  advance  of  three  fourths  of  a  mile  they  re- 
turned with  the  intelligence  that  they  had  seen  the  enemy  in 
line  of  battle  moving  around  and  across  their  proposed  road. 
Another  "  scout "  was  ordered,  but  no  one  appeared  willing  to 
volunteer  for  it.     Thereupon,  turning  the  command  over  to 
Major  Kelly,  Forrest  announced  his  intention  to  make  a  recon- 
noissance  himself,  and,  if  killed,  the  Major  would  then  do  the 
best  he  could,  but  musty  in  the  mean  whilcy  advance  along  the 
road  upon  which  they  had  set  out.     Calling  for  his  brother. 
Lieutenant  Jeffrey  Forrest,  they  rode  to  the  point  from  which 
it  had  been  reported  the  enemy  were  seen.    There,  scanning 
closely  and  listening  attentively,  nothing  was  to  be  seen  or 
heard  of  any  hostile  presence.     Then  advancing,  the  sup- 
posed Federal  battle  array  was  speedily  resolved  into  a  line 
of  fencing,  formidably  staked  with  short  rails  into  somewhat 
the  resemblance  of  a  line  of  infantry  in  the  dim  light  and 
gray  atmosphere  of  that  early  hour.    And,  it  may  be  safely 
asserted,  it  was  this  very  fence  which  had  been  seen  and  mis- 
taken for  the  enemy  by  the  scouts  whose  reports  had  had 
such  untoward  weight  in  producing  the  capitulation.*    Colo- 
nel Forrest  and  his  brother,  after  this  important  discovery, 
rode  ahead  up  the  ridge  to  the  rightward  for  three  fourths  of  a 
mile,  to  the  place  where  the  fight  had  commenced  the  morn- 
ing before,  and  there  found  the  blankets  which  his  men  had 
left  on  going  into  action.     Riding  a  little  further,  they  came 


•  This  is  General  Forrest's  conviction. 


Reconnoissance  by  Forrest.  93 

upon  fires,  around  which  were  gathered  a  number  of  wounded 
Federals,  who,  in  reply  to  inquiries,  satisfied*  them  that  none 
but  a  few  scattering  scouts  from  both  sides  had  been  among 
them  that  night.  This  had  been  the  scene,  near  the  extreme 
Federal  right,  of  severe  fighting  early  Saturday  ;  the  Federals 
had  occupied  it  Friday  night,  and  their  fires,  left  burning,  had 
been  kept  alive  by  the  wounded,  driven  to  the  exertion 
through  suffering  from  the  extreme  cold. 

Thus  assured  that  the  road  was  still  open,  Forrest  and  his 
brother  returned  to  the  command,  that  meanwhile  had  con- 
tinued on  the  road  to  the  crossing  of  the  creek  eastward  of 
Dover.  In  view  of  what  he  had  ascertained  in  regard  to  the 
falsity  of  the  reported  presence  of  the  enemy  in  their  old  posi- 
tion, he  would  have  felt  it  his  duty  to  announce  the  facts  to 
General  Buckner  ;  but  this  he  deemed  now  useless,  inasmuch 
as  he  knew  that  already  all  the  steps  for  a  surrender  had  been 
taken,  and  it  were  therefore  altogether  too  late  to  recede 
from  it.  , 

The  creek,  expanded  by  backwater  to  a  breadth  of  about 
one  hundred  yards,  looked  formidable  ;  lined  with  ice,  it  was 
also  supposed  to  be  swimming.  Calling  for  some  one  to  ride 
in  and  test  this  question,  no  one  came  forward  promptly 
enough,  and  their  commander,  with  the  characteristic  self-reli^ 
ant  spirit  of  the  born  leader,  dashed  through  the  ice  as  their 
pioneer,  just  as  but  lately  he  had  been  their  scout.  Passing 
entirely  across,  the  water  proved  not  deeper  than  to  the 
saddle-skirts.  Elated  at  this  happy  occurrence,  the  whole 
command  now  moved  speedily  and  joyously  over,  and  took  up 
the  line  of  march  for  Cumberland  City  at  a  slow  pace,  with 
all  proper  precautions  of  advance  and  rear-guards,  scouts  and 
flankers  ;  the  men,  however,  much  of  the  time  were  forced  to 
dismount  and  walk  to  keep  from  freezing.* 


•  Captain    Gould's    Company    of    ment,  and  was  surrendered.    Why  it 
Tezans  failed  to  accompany  this  move-     did  not  come  out  was  never  explained 


94 


Campaigns  of  Geheral  Forrest. 


General  Floyd,  having  turned  over  the  command,  as  before 
said,  to  General  Buckner,  stipulated  that  he  might  take  with 
him  his  three  Virginia  regiments,  and  this,  it  remains  to  re- 
late, he  eflFected. 

When  it  was  announced  to  the  rest  of  the  forces  that  they 
were  to  be  surrendered!  they  evinced  much  surprise,  espe- 
cially those  of  the  left  wing,  for  they  did  not  feel  they  had 
been  vanquished !  General  B.  R.  Johnson,  who  subsequently 
witnessed  all  the  prolonged  trials  and  hardships  of  the  illus- 
trious "  Army  of  Northern  Virginia"  in  the  trenches  at  Peters- 
burg, says  that  "  the  fatigue,  cold,  and  privation  endured  by 
the  men  "  at  Fort  Donelson  "  were  equal  to  any  thing  I  have 
known  ;  but  there  was  no  repining,"  except,  indeed,  at  the 
hard  fate  of  a  capitulation  after  so  splendid  and  successful 
fighting  as  had  signalized  them  the  day  before — z,  capitulation 
to  men  whom  they  had  clearly  beaten,  notwithstanding  the 
odds  of  two  to  one. 

For  the  details  of  that  sad  conclusion  to  these  operations, 
we  have  now  no  space  in  these  pages,  beyond  the  statement 
that  it  does  not  appear  that  more  than  9500  officers  and  men 
were  actually  surrendered  into  the  hands  of  the  Federal  com- 
mander as  prisoners  of  war  ;  the  remainder  had  either  fallen 
in  the  course  of  the  struggle  or  made  their  escape. 

COMMENTARIES. 

I.  Whenever  the  critical  historian  shall  take  up  and  relate 


*D  its  commander.  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Gantt  subsequently  explained  that  he 
had  misunderstood  the  place  of  rendez- 
vous, and  had  promptly  repaired  with 
his  battalion  to  the  place  he  supposed. 
A  portion  of  Forrest*s  Regiment,  over- 
looked in  rousing  the  men,  followed 
after  sunrise,  without  interruption.  It 
will  be  seen  from  the  foregoing  narra- 


tive that  the  popular  idea  that  Forrest 
and  his  men  "cut  their  way  out"  of 
Fort  Donelson  through  the  Federal 
lines  is  wholly  unfounded  or  a  war 
myth.  It  is  also  an  error  in  certain 
official  reports  that  Captain  Overton's 
Company  of  Forrest's  Regiment  re* 
mained.  That  officer  did,  but  his  com- 
pany came  out. 


Commentaries.  95 

the  campaign  ending  in  the  reduction  of  Fort  Henry  and 
capitulation  of  Fort  Donelson,  he  must  necessarily  consider 
whether  both  might  not  have  been  easily  averted  and  the 
Federal  forces  overwhelmed  by  resources  which  the  Con- 
federates had  within  easy  reach  by  rail.  A  glance  at  the  map 
will  show  any  reader  that  the  Confederates  had  the  interior 
Imes,  so  potential  in  war.  At  Columbus,  Ky.,  there  were 
about  fifteen  thousand  infantry,  and  at  Bowling  Green  as 
many  more  after  Floyd,  Pillow,  and  Buckner  had  been  sent  to 
Fort  Donelson ;  and  there  was  railroad  communication,  with  a 
large  equipage  of  rolling  stock,  between  each  position  and  the 
Tennessee  river,  not  far  above  Fort  Henry,  as  also  a  number 
of  steamers  on  that  stream,  so  that  the  work  of  transportation 
had  been  unusually  easy.  Moreover,  Buell  being  afield,  the 
early  evacuation  of  Bowling  Green  was  a  foregone  conclusion, 
and  the  transfer  of  the  force  there  to  Fort  Henry  placed  them 
in  the  most  advantageous  position  to  cover  Nashville  against 
ulterior  operations.  As  it  was,  Grant,  landing  with  a  petty 
force  of  fifteen  thousand  in  the  very  centre  of  a  force  of 
nearly  forty-five  thousand,  having  the  interior  lines  for  con- 
centration and  communication,  by  railway  at  that,  was  able  to 
take  two  heavy  fortifications  in  detail,  and  place  hors  de  combat 
nearly  fifteen  thousand  of  his  enemy.  But  with  this  matter, 
at  present,  we  have  nothing  further  to  do  than  to  indicate  the 
questions  that  must  arise  and  be  solved. 

II.  Having  permitted  Fort  Henry  to  fall,  and  with  it  suf- 
fered the  loss  of  the  Tennessee  river,  by  an  unpardonable  ad- 
herence to  the  defensive-passive,  the  Confederate  authorities 
committed  another  egregious,  mortal  error  in  persisting  in 
that  baleful  policy  of  the  defensive-passive  subsequently 
on  the  appearance  of  Grant  before  Fort  Donelson  on  the 
afternoon  of  the  12th  of  February,  with  only  two  divisions,  or 
fifteen  thousand  men.  By  daylight  next  morning,  13th,  all 
the  Confederate  reenforcements  it  had  been  determijied  tQ 
throw  into  that  work,  as  was  known  to  its  commander,  had 


i 


g6  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

reached  the  scene.  Hence  the  Confederates  were  stronger 
then  than  they  would  be  at  any  subsequent  period  of  the  de- 
fense, and  in  better  condition  to  fight  successfully.  On  the 
other  hand,  every  day  would  assuredly  increase  the  numbers 
of  the  enemy.  That  is,  delay  insured  a  daily  material  diminu- 
tion of  the  strength  of  the  Confederates  by  ordinary  wear  and 
tear  ;  a  heavy  increase  of  offensive  power  on  the  Federal  side, 
and  the  inevitable  loss  of  the  whole  Confederate  army !  The 
defensive-active,  therefore,  manifestly  should  have  been  adopt- 
ed on  the  13th.  Then  every  man  but  the  heavy  artillery  in 
Fort  Ddnelson  should  have  been  thrown  upon  Grant  en  masse, 
for  only  one  of  the  Federal  gunboats  had  reached  the  vicinity 
on  the  night  of  the  13th.  But  instead  of  this,  the  Confede- 
rate generals  waited  two  whole  days,  and  until  Wallace  reen- 
forced  Grant  with  thirteen  fresh  regiments,  and  then  deter- 
mined upon  and  took  the  offensive.  But  even  then,  as  planned 
in  council,  an  unnecessary  number  of  regiments  were  left  in- 
active in  the  work  during  the  sortie. 

III.  After  it  was  determined  that  the  forces  at  Fort  Donel- 
son  should  not  be  further  reenforced  from  Bowling  Green  than 
by  the  small  divisions  of  Buckner  and  Floyd,  and  that  no 
troops  could  be  drawn  from  Columbus,  Ky.,  surely  it  was  a 
fatal  error  to  attempt  to  hold  Fort  Donelson  and  thus  expose 
so  many  fighting  men  to  be  beleaguered,  with  the  absolute 
certainty  that  an  overwhelming  force  would  be  concentrated 
upon  them.  Far  better  lose  the  position  than  to  sacrifice,  at 
that  time,  fourteen  thousand  men.  Whether  considered  in 
av  ginr^Wu-^jTijlj^  ppiTi^"  ^f  ^ew.  Scarcely  a  greater  blunder 
w^s^ver  committedin^war  affairs. 

IV.  In  regard  to  the  reinvestnieht  by  the  Federals  on  the 
night  of  the  15th,  unfortunately  assumed  to  be  so  by  Generals 
Floyd,  Pillow,  and  Buckner,  aside  from  the  evidence  of  For- 
rest's scouts  and  General  Forrest's  own  personal  reconnois- 
sance  on  the  morning  of  the  i6th,  the  Federal  ofificial  reports, 
though  asserting  that  the  reinvestment  took  place,  contain 


Commentaries.  97 

abundant  evidence  that  they  bivouacked  west  or  north  of  the 
Wynn's  Ferry  road,  leaving  the  Confederate  left  almost  en- 
tirely open.     General  Wallace  says  expressly  that  at  five 
o'clock  he  was  ordered  by  Colonel  Webster,  Federal  Chief  of 
Staff,  to  withdraw,  "  as  a  new  plan  of  operations  was  in  con- 
templation ;"  but  that  he  disobeyed  the  order  and  retained  his 
position,  which,  from  his  description  of  it  and  his  proximity 
next  morning  at  the  time  the  white  flags  were  discovered,  was 
evidently  in  the  vicinity  of  Wynn's  Ferry  road  and  in  front  of 
the  centre  of  the  Confederate  lines.    (See  Reb.  Rec.  IV.  Doc. 
46,  p.  147.)    This,  too,  is  more  plain  by  the  statement  of 
Colonel  Thayer,  one  of  Wallace's  brigade  commanders,  that 
he  encamped  on  the  "  road,"  which  could  only  have  been  the 
Wynn's  Ferry  road.    {Ibid.  p.  156.)     Colonel  Wallace,  Mc- 
Clemand's  Division,  says  that  his  brigade  was  taken  to  the 
rear  and  encamped  in  position  convenient  for  support  of  either 
wing,  and  that  he  marched  thence  "  down  valley  (next  morn- 
ing) into  centre  of  enemy's  works."     (Ibid.  p.  151.) 

V.  The  sources  of  the  failure  to  make  the  attack  of  the 
Confederates  thoroughly  successful  and  decisive  on  Saturday 
are  obviously  these : 

I.  Deviation  on  the  part  of  General  Buckner  from  the 
plan  of  operations  which  in  council  he  had  had  the  soundl 
judgment  to  advise,  and  by  which  it  was  prescribed  that  he 
should  throw  himself  with  his  division  upon  the  enemy  along 
and  leftward  of  the  Wynn's  Ferry  road,  as  nearly  simultane- 
ous with  the  attack  made  by  Pillow  as  practicable.  Had  hct 
done  so.  Lew  Wallace,  finding  employment  in  that  quarter, 
would  have  been  hindered  from  taking  any  part  in  the  com* 
bat  with  Pillow's  forces.  And  McClernand's  Division,  beaten 
hack  as  they  were  before  the  impetuous  onslaught  of  the  Con- 
federates, assuredly  would  hav6  disordered  and  demoralized 
Wallace's  men  while  assailed  in  front  by  Buckner.  Thus  a 
disastrous  rout  must  have  befallen  the  two  divisions  beyond! 
tiie  alnlity  of  Smith  to  counteract. 


98  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest 

2.  The  deviation  of  Pillow  subsequently  from  the  settled 
order  of  the  day  was  likewise  mischievous ;  that  is,  in  the 
event  of  such  a  success  as  was  actually  achieved,  Buckner 
was  to  remain  exterior  to  the  works.  Pillow,  however,  ordered 
him  back  to  his  position  within  those  works. 

VI.  It  is  true  General  Smith  effected  a  lodgment  within 
•  the  Confederate  lines  on  the  extreme  right,  but  the  position 

acquired  did  not  give  an  enfilading  fire,  as  has  been  generally 
alleged.  For,  from  the  nature  of  the  ground,  a  stronger  ridge 
was  now  occupied  in  that  quarter  that  enabled  the  Confederates 
to  reestablish  a  new,  strong  line  connecting  with  the  old  one, 
acting  as  a  traverse  and  defilading  the  leftward  intrenchments. 

VII.  The  Federals  were  beaten  so  badly  by  Pillow,  John- 
son, and  Forrest's  attack,  that  there  is  no  doubt  they  had  no 
expectation  of  a  surrender  ensuing  from  that  day's  work.  So 
beaten,  in  fact,  were  they,  that,  as  General  Lew  Wallace  says, 
he  was  informed  by  General  Grant's  Chief  of  Staff  "  a  new 
plan  of  operations  "  had  been  arranged. 


> 


CHAPTER    III. 


Alarm  af  People  in  tomsequtnee  of  aelual  Disatter  amd  exaggerated  Rf 
fiorts — CMiduet  of  a  Stale  Senator — Panic  in  a  Confederate  Cavalry 
Regiment  near  Charlotte — Ferrett's  Repment  fed  by  the  Munificenee 
of  a  Tennesseean — Reached  Nashville  February  iSlh,  with  about  500 
Men — General  fohneton,  quitting  Nashville,  directed  Forrest  to  re- 
fort  to  General  Floyd,  who  left  Colonel  Forrest  in  Command^Found 
Plau  abandoned  by  Staff-Officers — Warehouses  fuU  of  Supplies  and 
Ordnance  Stores — Spoliation  by  a  Mob  of  Men  and  Women — Sup- 
plies removed  to  the  Railroad^Removal  by  Rail  of  six  hundred  Boxes 
of  Clothing,  quarter  of  a  million  Pounds  of  Bacon,  and  forty  Wa- 
gon-Loads  of  Ammunition — Final  Evacuation  of  Nashville  by  Con- 
federates— Forrest  repaired  to  Murfreesboro — Regiment  reassem- 
bled—Field Officers  elected — Ordered  to  luka — Confederate  Army 
toncentrated  at  Corinth,  General  Johnston  in  Command — Federal 
Army  established  at  Pittsburg  Landing—BuelPs  en  route  for  same 
point — Confederate  General  resolved  to  take  the  Offensive — Inauspi- 
cious Delay  of  Twenty-four  Hours  on  the  March — The  two  Armies  in 
presence  of  each  other. 


February  ifith  to  April  6th,  1S63. 

Having,  as  related  in  the  preceding  chapter,  safely  and 
easily  withdrawn  the  main  part  of  his  force  from  the  Confede- 
late  lines,  Colonel  Forrest  moved  that  afternoon  about  twenty- 
five  railes,  in  the  direction  of  Charlotte,  Dixon  county,  Tennes- 
■ee,  and  encamped.    Reaching  Charlotte  next  moming,  he 


i 


lOO  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

found  its  inhabitants  in  a  state  of  wild  alarm  and  agitation  from 
a  report  spread  by  the  State  Senator  of  the  District,  just  from 
Nashville,  that  that  place  was  assuredly  in  possession  of  the 
Federals,  who  likewise  had  dispatched  a  column  of  some  ten 
thousand  cavalry  thitherward  to  cut  off  retreating  Confede- 
rates. The  Senator's  horse,  white  with  sweat-foam,  g^ve  other 
evidences  of  a  long,  hurried  ride,  but  the  Confederate  com- 
mander was  too  cool  and  circumspect  to  be  misled  by  an  in- 
credible story  from  an  evidently  panic-stricken  civilian.  He, 
therefore,  silenced  the  personage  by  a  stem  threat  of  summa- 
ry punishment  for  the  circulation  of  "  false  intelligence,"  and 
sought,  as  far  as  possible,  to  quiet  the  distress  and  anxiety  of 
the  people  by  exposing  the  improbable  nature  of  the  rumor. 
At  the  same  time,  he  improved  the  occasion  by  having  a  num- 
ber of  his  horses  shod  before  resuming  his  march  that  after- 
noon to  Nashville. 

As  a  consequence  of  the  evacuation  of  Bowling  Green  and 
the  successive  disasters  at  Forts  Henry  and  Donelson,  the 
utmost  consternation  pervaded  the  whole  region  traversed. 
The  roads  were  alive  with  invalid  and  furloughed  soldiers, 
many  of  whom,  having  been  scattered  through  the  country 
and  in  the  hospitals  north  of  the  Cumberland,  were  now  hur- 
rying southward  to  avoid  capture.  This  continued  stream  of 
fugitives  stimulated  the  degree  of  apprehension  among  the 
country  people,  until  many  of  them  also  fled  wildly  from  their 
homes. 

Nor  was  this  disposition  to  panic  confined  to  non-combar  . 
tants  and  the  disabled.  A  regiment  of  cavalry,  subsequently 
distinguished  on  many  a  hard-fought  field,  happening  to  be 
in  that  vicinage,  and  having  heard  of  the  fall  of  Fort  Dond-  ^ 
son,  had  countermarched  at  Charlotte,  and  was  moving  back  f 
toward  Nashville,  not  far  in  advance  of  Forrest.  When  one  '^~ 
mile  beyond  Charlotte,  the  latter  halted,  and  took  the  precait*  L 
tion  to  secure  readiness  for  action  by  discharging  and  reload*  t 


Munificent  Hospitality.  loi 

ing  his  fire-arms  and  redistributing  his  ammunition.  At  the 
sound  of  the  volley  and  rattling  fire  that  ensued,  the  neigh- 
boring regiment,  already  cognizant  of  the  Senator's  story  just 
mentioned,  was  suddenly  seized  with  the  belief  that  the  mus- 
ketry was  of  hostile  origin.  An  instantaneous  and  irrepressi- 
ble panic  spread  and  enveloped  the  whole  force.  Breaking  at 
first  into  a  trot,  a  sharp  gallop  quickly  supervened.  And  be- 
fore long  the  road  was  thickly  sprinkled  with  cooking  utensils, 
provisions,  tents,  and  baggage,  thrown  from  the  wagons  to 
lighten  and  enable  them  to  keep  up  with  the  fast-speeding 
horsemen,  until  the  teamsters  finally,  apprehensive  that  even 
this  would  not  avail,  abandoned  their  wagons  also,  leaving  them 
broken  or  hanging  against  trees  along  the  roadway.  Follow- 
ing shortly  after,  Forrest's  men  came  upon  these  castaways, 
and  collected  almost  enough  provisions  and  other  supplies  to 
replenish  those  that  had  been  necessarily  left  at  Fort  Donel- 
son,  and  which,  to  these  fatigued  and  battle-scorched  troopers, 
were  a  great  windfall 

After  this,  moving  on,  Forrest  halted  for  the  night  some 
eighteen  miles  from  Nashville,  on  the  Harpeth  river,  at  a 
point  where  food  and  forage  were  liberally  supplied  by  a 
gentleman  most  zealous  in  his  devotion  to  the  Confederate 
cause,  in  whose  house  a  sumptuous  supper  was  set  for  the 
Colonel  and  his  officers.  That  night,  after  their  severe  work 
at  Fort  Donelson,  many  of  his  officers  were  disposed  to  enjoy 
the  comforts  of  a  bed  under  this  hospitable  roof ;  but  Forrest, 
ever  watchful,  soon  missing  them  from  the  encampment,  had 
an  roused,  and  inflexibly  required  them  to  remain  with  their 
respective  companies,  the  men  of  which,  with  horses  saddled 
and  arms  by  their  side,  slept  in  the  open  air  on  the  ground, 
at  a  precaution  against  the  possibility  of  surprise. 

Having  ascertained  definitely  by  scouts  sent  out  in  advance, 
a  he  had  anticipated,  that  there  was  no  enemy  at  Nashville, 
enly  on  the  morning  of  the  i8th  he  resumed  his  march  to- 


i 


I02  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest 

ward  that  city,  where  he  arrived  before  midday  with  about 
five  hundred  officers  and  men.  Establishing  his  camp  in  the 
suburbs,  near  the  penitentiary,  he  then  repaired  to  headquar- 
ters and  reported  in  person  to  General  Sidney  Johnston,  The 
General  was  at  the  point  of  leaving  for  Murfreesboro,  and 
therefore  directed  Forrest  to  report  to  General  Floyd,  who 
was  left  to  remove  to  the  rear  all  the  subsistence  and  other 
public  property  that  could  be  done.* 

Reporting  as  directed  without  delay,  orders  were  received 
to  employ  his  command,  as  soon  as  practicable,  to  patrol  and 
guard  the  interior  of  the  city.  So  greatly  fatigued  and  fagged 
were  his  men,  however,  that  he  did  not  execute  this  order 
until  the  next  morning.  But,  meanwhile,  all  possible  exer- 
tions were  made  to  have  his  animals  well  shod.  Appearing 
on  Thursday  morning,  the  20th,  at  headquarters  in  the  city, 
with  his  guards  and  patrol  detachments,  Forrest  found  Gene- 
ral Floyd  about  to  quit  the  place,  en  route  for  Murfreesboro, 
and  orders  were  given  him  by  that  officer  to  remain  until  the 
next  afternoon,  and  then  to  follow. 

Addressing  himself  actively  to  his  duty,  according  to  his 
wont,  first  looking  to  the  question  of  supplies  for  his  men, 
Forrest  found  that  all  the  officers  of  the  quartermasters' 
and  commissary  departments,  except  one,t  had  left  their 
depots,  which  were  now  scenes  of  spoliation  by  a  ravenous 
mob  of  thousands  of  men  and  women,  including  numerous 
well-dressed  people,  evidently  of  the  respectable  classes  of  the 
population.    Riding  among  those  thus  engaged,  he  besought 


*  In  regard  to  the  orders  given  Gene-  command  at  Nashville  to  forward  snb- 

ral  Floyd,  we  have  had  access,  by  the  sbtence  stores  and  whatever  else  of 

kindness  of  Colonel  £.  W.  Munford,  public  property  he  can.    He  is  ooTered 

Aid-de-Camp  on  staff  of  General  John-  by  a  heavy  battery  below  town.    Has 

ston,  of  Memphis,  to  a  memorandum  Bowen's  Regiment,  (infantry,)  Missis- 

in  the  handwriting  of  General  Johnston,  sippi,  Alabama,  and  Tennessee  caTiliy, 

which  says :  "  General  Floyd  is  left  in  t  Patton. 


Mob  Spoliations.  103 

them  to  desist,  so  that  stores  collected  and  essential  for  the 
army  should  be  saved  for  military  purposes,  which  he  felt  he 
would  have  ample  time  yet  to  accomplish  before  the  advent 
of  the  enemy,  and  this  he  explained  to  the  mob.  But  the 
greedy  populace  were  as  deaf  to  his  entreaties  as  heedless  of 
all  mild  efforts  to  clear  the  warehouses  of  their  presence,  and 
he  was  compelled  to  employ  force.  The  order  accordingly 
was  given  to  charge  with  drawn  sabres  and  expel  the  in- 
truders, and  right  effectively  was  it  executed.  The  doors 
were  then  closed  and  barred,  and  Forrest  went  elsewhere,  to 
make  himself  acquainted  with  the  state  of  affairs.  But,  soon 
learning  that  in  his  absence  the  depots  had  again  been  broken 
open  and  were  being  pillaged,  he  returned,  and  once  more 
tried  remonstrance  with  the  marauders,  whereupon  one  of 
the  most  active,  a  stout  Irishman,  suddenly  rushing  upon, 
seized  him  by  the  collar,  swearing  loudly  that  he  and  the 
populace  had  as  much  right  to  the  stores  as  Colonel  Forrest 
or  any  other  person.  Not  the  man  to  be  thus  "  taken  by  the 
beard,"  Forrest's  revolver  was  quickly  brought  down  in  swift 
contact  with  the  ruffian's  head,  breaking  his  hold  and  sending 
him  howling  with  pain  through  the  door.  And  again  the 
depots  were  cleared  and  placed  under  guard  of  small  detach- 
ments of  his  men,  and  again  Forrest  left  to  attend  to  other 
duties. 

But  another  and  even  more  persistent  effort  than  before 
was  soon  made  by  the  mob  to  overmaster  the  guards.  A 
happy  thought  suggested  itself  to  Forrest — to  use  the  effec- 
tive but  harmless  weapon  of  a  steam  fire-engine  in  dispersing 
the  crowd.  Therefore,  quickly  bringing  it  upon  the  scene,  a 
powerful  stream  of  ice-cold  water  was  brought  to  bear  upon 
them.  The  suddenness  and  novelty  of  the  attack  had  an  in- 
stantaneous effect,  and  no  further  trouble  was  afterward  en- 
countered from  these  incorrigible  but  baffled  depredators. 
Trains  were  now  asked  for  by  telegraph.     Drays,  carts,  and 


i 


I04  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest 

all  available  wagons  were  impressed  into  the  service,  and  set 
to  hauling  these  stores  and  a  quantity  of  ammunition  from 
the  arsenal  to  the  railroad  depot  during  Thursday,  Friday, 
and  Saturday,  so  that  by  noon  of  the  latter  day  he  had  ready 
for  transportation  some  six  hundred  boxes  of  clothing,  two 
hundred  and  fifty  thousand  pounds  of  bacon,  forty  wagon-loads 
of  ammunition;  And  the  greater  part  of  these  supplies  were 
actually  sent  off  by  rail,  while  more  would  have  followed  but 
for  an  untoward  break  on  the  road  caused  by  a  heavy  freshet.* 

Directing  Major  Kelly,  with  the  main  part  of  the  command, 
to  begin  the  movement  on  Murfreesboro  Friday  afternoon, 
Forrest  remained,  with  a  small  detachment,  to  save,  if  possi- 
ble, the  remainder  of  the  ammunition.  Thus  was  he  occupied 
through  Saturday  and  until  Sunday  morning,  when  the  ad- 
vance of  General  Buell's  column  made  its  appearance,  about 
eleven  A.M.,  in  Edgefield,  on  the  opposite  bank  of  the  Cum- 
berland. Soon  thereafter  they  were  there  met  by  some  of 
the  citizens,  followed  by  the  mayor,  and  negotiations  for  the 
capitulation  of  the  city  were  initiated.! 

Some  of  the  citizens  now  brought  a  request  from  the  mayor 
to  Colonel  Forrest  to  retire.  As  the  last  load  of  ammunition 
was  already  en  route  from  the  arsenal  to  the  depot,  and  a  little 
later  the  wagon-train  having  taken  the  Columbia  turnpike,  he 
also  rode  away  with  his  little  party  on  the  road  to  Murfrees- 
boro. 

In  this  affair  assuredly  were  displayed  many  of  the  charac- 
teristic traits  which  subsequently,  making  Forrest  so  valuable 
and  distinguished,  carried  him  to  the  grade  of  Lieutenant- 
General  in  the  Confederate  States  service.     Cool  in  the  pre- 


*  Some  five   hundred  barrels  and  t  General  Buell  did  not  come  op 

tierces  of  wines  and  liqaors  belonging  until  Monday  evening,  and  the  formal 

to  the  Confederate  government  were  de-  surrender  took  place  on  Tuesday,  the 

Uroyed  at  the  ndlroad  depot  35th  of  February,  1862. 


At  Mur/reesboro.  105 

sence  of  confusion,  clear  in  his  comprehension  of  the  possible^ 
untiring  in  his  activity  and  personal  energy,  ready  and  afflu- 
ent in  resources  to  remove  or  surmount  obstacles  that  would 
paralyze  most  men,  by  the  exercise  of  these  qualities  on 
Thursday,  Friday,  and  Saturday  he  managed  to  rescue  for 
the  use  of  the  army  large  quantities,  as  we  have  shown,  of 
the  munitions  of  war  that  had  been  abandoned  by  those 
whose  special  duty  it  was  to  remove  them.  And  in  this 
he  rendered  a  service  scarcely  less  in  degree  than  that 
wrought,  with  such  intelligence,  and  endurance,  and  courage, 
in  front  of  Fort  Donelson,  and  little  short  even  of  his  escape 
from  its  ill-starred  precincts  with  five  hundred  brave  and  now 
trained  veteran  troopers. 

Moving  with  his  accustomed  celerity.  Colonel  Forrest 
reached  Murfreesboro  Sunday  night,  and  there  rejoined  his 
men,  now  the  objects  of  general  commendation  for  their  ex- 
ploits during  the  investment  and  their  subsequent  delivery 
from  the  hard  fate  of  a  surrender  after  so  much  admirable 
conduct.  And,  in  this  connection,  it  were  unjust  not  to  say 
that  he  had  been  efficiently  served  by  the  mass  of  his  men 
and  was  happy  in  the  assistance  of  many  of  his  officers. 
Throughout  the  scenes  and  events  we  have  sought  to  sketch, 
Major  Kelly,  his  second  in  command,  was  both  a  willing  and 
capable  soldier,  quick  and  studious  in  the  acquisition  of  mili- 
tary knowledge,  as  also  of  the  highest  courage.  Of  Captain 
May  we  have  already  spoken.  Captain  Frank  Overton,  Lieu- 
tenant Jeffrey  E.  Forrest,  and  his  Adjutant,  Lieutenant  Schuy- 
ler, rendered  special  aid,  while  all  his  officers,  indeed,  were  as 
zealous  as  brave  in  the  discharge  of  their  duties. 

On  the  morning  of  the  23d,  reporting  to  General  Sidney 
Johnston,  Colonel  Forrest  received  orders  to  proceed  to 
Huntsville  with  his  regiment  and  there  refit  for  duty,  with 
the  privilege  of  giving  his  men  a  fortnight's  furlough.  This 
indulgence  gave  the  greatest  satisfaction.     It  was  attended, 


lo6  Campaigns  of  Geneiral  Forres'.. 

moreover,  with  the  best  moral  effect  and  an  enhanced  effi 
ciency ;  for,  at  the  expiration  of  their  furloughs,  all  retume 
with  recruited  outfits,  and  not  a  few  with  comrades  als< 
secured  to  swell  their  ranks  and  share  the  reputation  alread 
beginning  to  cluster  around  "  Forrest's  Cavalry." 

II. 

It  was  on  the  loth  of  March  that  the  regiment  reassemble 
at  Huntsville.  At  the  same  time  a  new  company  (D)  wa 
added  to  its  line,  under  Captain  Jesse  A.  Forrest*  Seven 
days  later  the  regiment  was  ordered  to  and  reached  luki 
Miss.,  on  the  i6th,  and  thence  seven  miles  westward  t 
Bumsville,  on  the  Memphis  and  Charleston  Railroad  Ther 
another  company  (I)  was  added,  under  Captain  C.  N.  Schuj 
ler,t  its  late  Adjutant,  who  had  raised  it,  while  on  furlough,  ii 
Fayette  and  Hardeman  counties,  Tennessee. 

With  ten  companies  now  present,  even  in  the  absence  o: 
Captain  Gould's,  which  had  failed  to  leave  Fort  Donelson,  ai 
election  was  held  to  complete  the  regimental  organization 
hitherto  omitted  in  the  press  of  active  and  urgent  service  ii 
the  presence  of  the  enemy.  Forrest,  of  course,  became  Colo 
nel  by  acclamation,  Major  Kelly  was  raised  to  the  grade  of 
Lieutenant-Colonel,  and  Private  R.  M.  Balch  was  choset 
Major.  Sergeant-Major  Strange  was  then  appointed  Adju 
tant  in  the  stead  of  Lieutenant  Schuyler,  who,  as  before  men 
tioned,  had  become  a  captain  in  the  regiment. 

Nothing  of  stirring  character  or  moment  occurred  for  the 
next  ten  days,  which  were  usefully  occupied,  however,  wit! 
drills,  and  the  training  of  the  men  in  the  several  duties  of  i 
soldier's  life,  and  that  routine  which,  though  irksome,  adds  s( 


♦  Enrolled  at  Memphis,  with  Jesse  t  C.  N.  Schuyler.  Captain  ;  W«  F 
A.  Forrest,  Captain,  and  W,  W.  Joyce  Hancock,  G.  W.  Buckingham,  and  S 
and  D.  C.  Crook  as  Subalterns.  A.  Hoague,  Subalterns. 


Confederate  Forces  at  Corinth.  107 

much  to  the  efficiency  of  military  bodies.  In  the  mean  time, 
also,  the  Confederate  forces  that  had  abandoned  Kentucky 
and  Middle  Tennessee  were  assembled  by  railroad  from 
Huntsville  at  Corinth,  in  North-Mississippi  Major-General 
Polk's  forces,  from  Columbus,  Ky.,  and  West-Tennessee,  had 
likewise  been  concentrated  at  the  same  place,  as  well  as  a 
splendid  corps  under  General  Bragg,  drawn  from  Pensacola 
and  New-Orleans,  with  the  addition  of  some  newly  enrolled 
Mississippi  regiments.  This  force,  at  the  instance  of  General 
Beauregard,  was  reorganized  during  the  last  week  of  March 
into  three  army  corps. 

The  First,  commanded  by  Major-General  Polk,  with  an 
effective  aggregate  of  about  ten  thousand,  was  parceled  into 
two  divisions,  under  Major-General  Cheatham  and  Brigadier- 
General  Clarke  respectively,  of  two  brigjades  each. 

The  Secondy  under  Major-General  Bragg,  was  arranged  also 
in  two  divisions,  commanded  by  Brigadier-Generals  Withers 
and  Ruggles,  with  three  brigades  each,  and  an  effective  force 
of  fifteen  thousand. 

The  Thirdy  commanded  by  Major-General  Hardee,  was 
formed  of  three  brigades  present  at  Corinth,  and  three,  under 
Brigadier-General  Breckinridge,  holding  the  line  of  the  Mem- 
phis and  Charleston  Railroad,  and  numbering  about  thirteen 
thousand  five  hundred  effective  men. 

At  the  same  time,  the  cavalry  had  a  separate  organization, 

about  four  thousand  five  hundred  strong,  but  was  indifferently 

.  armed  for  the  most  part,  as  well  as  very  recently  regimented. 

The  whole  was  under  the  chief  command  of  General  Sidney 
Johnston,  with  Beauregard,  as  second  in  command,  spe-, 
cially  charged  with  the  preparation  of  the  troops  for  an  im- 
pending campaign. 

III. 

While  the  Confederates  were  thus  occupied,  their  adversary 
had  not  been  dilatory.     General  Grant;  under  orders  from  his 


io8  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

superior,  had  proceeded,  with  the  three  divisions  engaged  in 
the  operations  ending  in  the  fall  of  Fort  Donelson,  and  estab- 
lished himself  at  a  point  upon  the  west  bank  of  the  Tennessee 
river,  known  as  Pittsburg  Landing.  Here,  too,  he  had  been 
followed  soon  by  three  other  divisions  of  at  least  the  same 
strength,  namely,  those  commanded  by  W.  T.  Sherman, 
Hurlbut,  and  Prentiss.*  That  is  to  say,  the  Federal  force 
consisted  of  six  strong  divisions,  admirably  armed  and 
equipped,  several  regiments  of  cavalry,  and  an  unusually  large 
number  of  field  batteries  of  the  best  description.  Moreover, 
Buell's  Corps,  of  at  least  five  heavy  divisions,  was  known  to 
be  rapidly  converging  to  the  same  theatre  of  operations.! 

Thus  matters  stood  on  the  evening  of  the  2d  of  April : 
Two  considerable  hostile  armies  had  been  brought  within 
eighteen  miles  of  each  other,  with  no  physical  barrier  such  as 
a  large  river  or  mountain  between  them.  The  one  not  a 
little  elated  by  the  success  achieved  at  Fort  Donelson,  the 
other  anxious  and  impatient  to  efface  the  painful  emotions 
caused  among  their  countrymen  by  that  disaster. 

That  evening,  satisfied  the  time  had  come  to  spring  upon 
tne  enemy  before  Buell  had  effected  a  junction  with  Grant, 
and,  if  possible,  taking  the  latter  by  surprise,  to  crush  him 
before  the  former  had  come  up,  General  Beauregard  proposed 
that  such  an  operation  should  be  attempted  at  once.  J 

Weighing  with  deliberation  and  great  ability  the  reasons  in 
favor  of  such  an  adventure,  as  well  as  those  that  were  op- 
posed— which,  indeed,  were  neither  few  nor  light — General 
Johnston,  about  eleven  o'clock  that  night,  decided  to  put  his 


*  Grant's  original  objective  was  the  t  One  of  these  divisions  (Mitchell's) 
seizure  and  destruction  of  the  railroad  was  diverted  toward  Huntsville. 
junctions  at  Corinth.'  Vide  official  dis-  |  The  present  writer,  the  Adjutant- 
patch  of  Major-General  Halleck  to  Ma-  General  of  the  Confederate  forces,  bore 
jor-General  Buell,  U.S. A.,  dated  March  the  suggestion  from  General  Beaiore* 
4th,  1862.  gard  to  General  Johnston. — ^T.  J« 


Campaign  Preparations.  109 

army  in  movement  the  following  day,  arid  trust  its  fortunes  to 
the  "  iron  dice "  of  battle.  Accordingly,  the  orders  to  that 
end,  issued  at  once  by  his  Adjutant-General,  were  received  by 
his  several  corps  commanders  by  forty  minutes  past  one  on 
the  morning  of  the  3d  of  April,*  while  a  reserve  was  organ- 
ized, at  the  same  time,  of  the  three  brigades  under  Breckin- 
ridge,! to  move  directly  from  Bumsville  and  join  the  main 
body  at  a  petty  cross-road  village  called  Monterey.  And  with 
this  last  force  Forrest  was  to  move. 

On  the  following  day,  the  plan  of  march  and  battle,  as  pre- 
scribed in  the  General  Order  printed  in  the  Appendix,  was 
discussed  and  arranged  between  Generals  Johnston  and 
Beauregard.  :j: 

The  country  to  be  traversed  was  thickly  wooded,  and  the  way 
through  it  was  by  two  or  three  very  narrow  roads,  which  made 
it  a  most  difBcult  affair  to  move  such  a  force  and  the  artillery 
without  confusion  and  hazardous  delay.  This  process  settled, 
the  details  were  explained  orally  to  Generals  Polk,  Bragg,  and 
Hardee  before  midday  by  General  Beauregard,  and  they  were 
then  severally  directed  to  begin  the  movements  at  once,  as 
provided  for  in  regard  to  that  day's  operations.  Nothing 
could  have  been  more  inspiriting  or  of  better  presage  than 
the  enthusiasm  with  which  the  whole  army  received  the  order 
and  entered  upon  the  preparation  for  its  execution.  By  noon, 
the  3d  of  April,  the  whole  Confederate  army  was  under  arms 
and  ready  to  begin  the  march.  But  from  untoward  causes 
the  first  corps,  though  ready  quite  as  early  as  one  p.m.,  did 
not  get  in  motion  so  soon  as  had  been  expected,  and  did  not 
bivouac  as  far  in  advance  as  was  desirable. 


*  That  is,  to  hold  their  several  corps  in  cartridge-boxes  and  sixty  rounds  in 

in  readineM  to  move  at  a  moment's  no-  wagons, 

lice,  with  three  days*  cooked  subsistence  t  Hardee*s  Corps, 

in  thetr  haversacks  and  two  uncooked  |  See  Appendix, 
in  w^om^  ibrty  rounds  of  ammunition 


i 


no 


Campaigns  of  General  Forrest 


Moreover,  the  badness  of  the  roads,  caused  by  the  fall  of  a 
very  heavy  rain  the  night  of  the  3d,  so  retarded  the  movement 
that  Bragg's  Corps  was  not  able  to  advance  the  second  day 
further  than  Monterey,  whereas  it  had  been  confidently  anti- 
cipated by  the  night  of  the  4th  the  whole  army  would  have 
assembled  in  the  vicinity  of  their  antagonist.* 

Meanwhile,  a  force  of  Confederate  cavalry  had  been  pushed 
up,  and  somewhat  injudiciously  though  boldly  landed  in  the 
immediate  front  of  the  Federal  position.  The  original  pur- 
pose was  mainly  to  procure  topographical  information  which 
hitherto  the  Confederate  Generals  had  been  unable  to  acquire 
of  that  region,  and  of  which,  indeed,  they  could  learn  nothing 
definite.!  Yet  such  was  the  spirit  of  officers  and  men,  that 
this  movement  was  made  so  aggressively  that  it  ought  to  have 
warned  the  Federal  General  of  what  was  impending ;  but, 
strangely  enough,  he  remained  imperturbably  indifierent  to 
the  plainest  signs  of  the  looming  tempest. 

Instead  of  being  able  to  attack  Saturday  morning,  as  anti- 
cipated. General  Polk's  Corps  did  not  reach  the  vicinity  of  the 
designated  point  of  concentration  until  quite  as  late  as  two 
o'clock  Saturday  afternoon,  sth  of  April.  At  least  one  division, 
if  not  the  whole  of  Bragg's  Corps,  was  likewise  inexplicably 
tardy  in  movement  on  Saturday,  though  General  Johnston, 
through  his  staff,  had  made  every  effort  to  get  his  troops  in 
position  for  an  attack  that  day.  Supremely  chagrined  that  he 
had  been  balked  in  his  just  expectations,  it  was  evidently  now 


♦  Nevertheless,  it  is  hard  to  compre- 
hend or  rationally  explain  how  it  really 
happened  that  Polk's  and  Bragg's 
corps  were  so  long  in'  marching  the 
short  distance  from  Corinth  to  Mon- 
terey. 

t  For  the  want  of  staff-officers  (To- 
pographical Engineers)  to  make  recon- 
noissances.     They  had  been  applied 


for  and  their  names  designated  to  the 
Confederate  War  Department  by  Gene- 
ral Beauregard  in  the  first  week  in 
February,  1862,  but  were  not  sent  him 
for  sixty  dajrs.  To  the  need  for  sodi 
staff-officers  with  their  armies  the  Con- 
federate War  Administration  was  sin- 
gnlarly  blind  or  heedless  for  at  least  die 
first  3rear  of  the  war. 


Council  of  War. 


Ill 


too  late  for  a  decisive  engagement  that  afternoon,  so  General 
Johnston  called  his  corps  and  reserve  commanders  together, 
and  a  council  was  held  within  less  than  two  miles  of  Shiloh 
Chapel,  the  headquarters  of  the  Federal  General  Sherman.* 

It  was  now  learned  that  many  of  the  troops  had  improvi- 
dently  thrown  away  or  consumed  their  provisions,  and  at  the 
end  of  three  days  were  out  of  subsistence.  General  Bragg" 
promised,  however,  to  remedy  this  from  his  alleged  well- 
stocked  commissariat.  But  General  Beauregard  earnestly  ad- 
vised the  idea  of  attacking  the  enemy  should  be  abandoned, 
and  that  the  whole  force  should  return  to  Corinth,  inasmuch 
as  it  was  now  scarcely  possible  they  would  be  able  to 
take  the  Federals  unawares  after  such  delay  and  the  noisy 
demonstrations  which  had  been  made  meanwhile.  He  urged 
the  enemy  would  be  now  found  formidably  intrenched  and 
ready  for  the  attack.  That  success  had  depended  on  the 
power  to  assail  them  unexpectedly,  for  they  were  superior 
in  numbers,  and  in  large  part  had  been  under  fircf  On 
the  other  hand,  few  comparatively  of  the  Confederates  had 
that  advantage,  while  a  large  part  were  too  raw  and  recently 
enrolled  to  make  it  proper  to  venture  them  in  an  assault  upon 
breastworks  which  would  now  be  thrown  up.  J  And  this  un- 
questionably was  the  view  of  almost  all  present. 

General  Johnston,  having  listened  with  grave  attention  to 
the  views  and  opinions  advanced,  then  remarked  in  substance 


•  The  Federal  Commander-in-Chief, 
it  appears,  had  gone  that  afternoon  down 
the  river  to  Savannah,  some  twelve 
miles  distant 

t  Three  of  Grant's  divisions  had 
been  at  the  taking  of  Fort  Donelson, 
or  at  least  forty  per  cent  of  his  whole 
fcrce. 

1  In  this  advice,  Beauregard  had  a 


precedent  in  the  course  of  at  least  one 
illustrious  soldier  under  very  similar 
circumstances.  In  1810,  Wellington, 
moving  out  to  attack  Massena  at  San- 
tarem,  found  the  French  general  unex- 
pectedly on  his  guard,  and  his  position 
stronger  than  he  was  led  to  believe. 
He  did  not  hesitate  to  withdraw  with* 
out  fighting. 


i 


112 


Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 


that  he  recognized  the  weight  of  the  objections  to  an  attack 
under  the  circumstances  involved  by  the  unfortunate  loss  of 
time  on  the  road.  But,  nevertheless,  he  still  hoped  the  ene- 
my was  not  looking  for  offensive  operations,  and  that  he 
would  yet  be  able  to  surprise  them.  And  that,  having  put 
his  army  in  motion  for  a  battle,  he  would  venture  the  hazard* 
This  decision  being  announced,  the  officers  rapidly  dispersed 
to  their  respective  posts  in  high  and  hopeful  spirits,  notwith- 
standing the  probabilities  that  all  previous  expectations  of  a 
surprise  would  faU  of  accomplishmentf 


*  Before  leaving  Corinth,  an  address 
to  the  Confederate  troops  had  been 
prepared  and  signed  by  General  John- 
ston, which  was  read  at  the  head  of  each 
regiment  of  the  several  corps  on  the 
night  of  the  4th  or  5th  of  April.  This 
order  has  always  been  so  grossly  mis- 
printed that  we  shall  reproduce  a  cor- 
rect version : 

Headquarters  Army  of  the 
Mississippi, 
Corinth,  April  4,  1862. 

Soldiers  of  the  Army  of  the 
Mississippi  :  I  have  put  you  in  motion 
to  offer  battle  to  the  invaders  of  your 
country.  With  the  resolution,  and 
discipline,  and  valor  becoming  men 
fighting,  as  you  are,  for  all  worth  liv- 
ing or  dying  for,  you  can  but  march  to 
a  decisive  victory  over  the  agrarian 
mercenaries  sent  to  subjugate  and  de- 
spoil you  of  your  liberties,  your  proper- 
ty, your  honor. 

Remember  the  precious  stake  in- 
volved. Remember  the  dependence  of 
your  mothers,  your  wives,  your  sisters, 
and  your  children  on  the  result  Re- 
member   the   £ur,  broad,    abounding 


land,  the  happy  homes  that  will  be  de- 
solated by  your  defeat  The  eyes  and 
hopes  of  eight  millions  of  people  rest 
upon  you.  You  are  expected  to  show 
yourselves  worthy  of  your  lineage,  wor- 
thy of  the  women  of  the  South,  whose 
noble  devotion  in  this  war  has  never 
been  exceeded  in  any  time.  With  such 
incentives  to  brave  deeds,  and  with  the 
trust  that  God  is  with  us,  yo\a  generals 
will  lead  you  confidently  to  the  combat, 
assured  of  success. 

(Signed)       A.  S.  Johnston, 

General  Commanding. 

About  the  same  time  another  order 
was  prepared  and  issued  by  General 
Beauregard,  touching  the  conduct  of 
the  troops  in  the  impending  battle, 
which,  republished  in  Europe,  was  clii- 
racterized  as  a  model  for  such  occ^ 
sions.  It,  too,  was  read  at  the  heids 
of  regiments. 

t  Various  melodramatic,  imaginary 
accounts  of  this  council  have  been  pub- 
lished, especially  in  works  of  Federal 
origin.  It  may,  therefore,  be  well  to 
mention  that  it  actually  took  place,  not 
as  has  been  described^  but  abcwt 


L 


General  Johnston  and  Forrest. 


113 


Meanwhile,  Colonel  Forrest,  as  we  have  indicated,  had 
inarched  with  Breckinridge  as  far  as  Monterey.    There  he 
was  detached,  with  orders  to  picket  along  and  immediately 
south  of  Lick  creek,  and  accordingly  slept  Friday  night  with- 
in three  miles  of  its  mouth.    During  Saturday,  having  dis- 
posed his  pickets,  there  was  a  good  deal  of  unimportant  but 
lively  skirmishing  with  those  of  the  enemy  on  the  other  bank. 
A  company  of  Federal  cavalry  having  also  crossed  by  the 
Hamburg  road  to  that  place,  it  was  promptly  driven  back. 
Leaving  his  regiment  under  command  of  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Kelly,  Forrest,  late  in  the  afternoon,  rode,  with  characteristic 
directness  of  purpose,  to  the  headquarters  of  the  Commander- 
in-Chief,  to  ascertain  what  was  on  foot  for  the  next  day,  and  his 
part  in  it.     Meeting  General  Johnston,  with  whom  he  was  a 
favorite  since  Fort  Donelson,  after  some  general  conversation 
and  instructions,  the  General  took  occasion  to  express  his 
strong  confidence  both  in  the  regiment  and  its  Colonel,  and 
his  assurance  that  they  would  do  their  duty  more  than  well  in 
the  impending  battle.    They  then  parted  cordially,  to  meet  no 
more  alive. 


f.M.,  and  was  held  in  the  open  air.  All 
vbo  took  part  met  and  stood  on  foot  in 
^  road,  surroiinded,  at  a  short  dis- 
tance, by  a  number  of  staff-officers. 
Thcjr  were  Generals  Johnston  and 
Beauregard,  Major-Generals  Polk, 
Bragg,  and  Hardee,  and  Brigadier- 
General  Breckinridge.  The  confer- 
coce  wat  of  short  duration,  and,  imme- 


diately  after  the  announcement  of  the 
Commanding  General's  decision,  aU 
repaired  to  their  several  commands. 
There  was  no  further  conference  that 
night  Even  Generals  Johnston  and 
Beauregard  did  not  meet  again  until  on 
their  horses  as  the  movement  was  about 
to  be  inaugurated. 


i 


CHAPTER  IV. 


Con/tderalti  in  Battle  Order  by  Dawn— In  Movetneitl,  Hardens  Corps  im 
advance — Topographical  Sketch  of  Theatre  of  Battle — Federal  Farets 

and  Dispositions  at  the  moment — Sherman's  and  Prentiss's  Divisions 
taken  completely  by  surprise — First  Federal  Line  swept  away — 
Their  Encampments  and  Artillery  captured— General  Gladden 
killed^ All  Federal  Forces  engaged  and  forced  back — Obstinate 
Fighting,  and  Death  of  General  "Johnston— Federal  Position  carried, 
•with  Loss  of  Artillery  and  3000  Prisoners — Immense  Number  of 
Stragglers  under  the  Fiver-Bank — Federals  finally  driven  to  the 
Ridge  overhanging  Piltsburg— Timely  Arrival  of  fresh  Federal 
Troops  at  Night— Cessation  of  Battle— Picket  Service  of  ForresCs 
Cavalry — Federals  take  the  Offensive — Obstinate  Battle  until  Ivo 
P.M.  yth  of  April— Confederates  withdraw  in  admirable  Order—Not 
pursued— Combat  of  Forrest  on  the  8ri — Severely  wounded — Com- 
mentartts. 

April  \tt_  to  June  ist,  1862. 

UeSPITE  the  minute  precautions  urged  in  the  order  fctr 
the  day  against  all  courses  calculated  to  divulge  to  the  enemj 


Confederate  Force.  115 

the  approaching  danger,  there  had  really  been  little  circum- 
spection on  the  part  of  the  Confederate  soldiery,  one  third  of 
whom  were  fresh  levies,  wholly  raw  and  undisciplined.  Fires 
had  been  kindled,  drums,  too,  were  lustily  beaten  in  a  number 
of  regiments,  and  scattering  discharges  of  small-arms  had  been 
kept  up  an  night  in  most  of  the  brigades,  the  men  being  ap- 
prehensive that  otherwise  the  charges  of  their  guns,  possibly 
wet,  would  fail  them  when  needed.  These  with  other  noises 
ought  to  have  betrayed  to  the  Federal  Generals  on  the  first 
line  the  presence  in  front  of  more  than  a  reconnoissance  in 
force. 

By  three  o'clock  Tuesday  morning,  however,  the  Confede- 
rate army  was  all  astir,  and,  after  a  hasty,  scanty  breakfast, 
the  lines  were  formed 

The  Third  Corps,  under  Major-General  Hardee,  6789,  artil- 
lery and  infantry,  augmented  by  Gladden's  Brigade,  2235 
strong,  of  Withers's  Division,  Second  Corps,  constituted  the 
first  line,  of  about  8500  bayonets,  deployed  in  battle  order  on 
the  grounds  upon  which  they  had  bivouacked  * 

The  second  line,  five  hundred  yards  rearward,  of  some 
10,000  bayonets,  was  formed  of  Ruggles*s  and  two  brigades  of 
Withers's  Division  of  the  Second  Corps,  under  Major-General 
Bragg.f  The  artillery  of  both  corps  followed  their  respective 
lines  by  the  Pittsburg  road. 

The  First  Corps,  of  not  more  than  8500  bayonets,  under 
Major-General  Polk,  was  drawn  up  in  a  column  of  brigades 
deployed  in  line  about  eight  hundred  yards  to  the  rear  of 


•  Hardee's  Corps  was  subdivided  10,731  infantry  and  artaicrjL  Ruggles's 
into  Hindman's,  Clebum's,  and  Wood's  Division  consisted  of  Anderson's,  Gib- 
brigades.  Effective  total  of  artillery  son's,  and  Pond's  Brigades.  The  other 
infimtry  of  this  line  was  9024.  brigades,    Withers's    Division,    wtst 

t  The  actual  total  of  this  line  was  Chahners's  and  J»  K.  Jacksoa*B. 


i 


ii6 


Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 


Brstgg  *  It  was  subdivided  into  two  divisions  of  two  brigades 
each,t  and,  with  the  special  reserve  of  three  brigades  under 
Brigadier-General  Breckinridge,  about  6000  bayonets,  consti- 
tuted a  reserve  for  the  support  of  the  attacking  lines  as  might 
be  needed  on  eithqr  flank.  J 

The  cavalry,  about  4300  strong,  was  distributed,  for  the 
most  part,  to  guard  the  flanks.  With  the  exception  of  For- 
rest's and  Wharton's  (Eighth  Texas)  regiments,  lately  regi- 
mented, insufficiently  armed,  and  wholly  without  drill,  the 
nature  of  the  scene  of  operations  rendered  it  almost  valueless, 
and  only  the  two  regiments  mentioned  took  any  material  part 
in  the  actions  of  either  day. 

About  sunrise,  accompanied  by  their  respective  staffs. 
Generals  Johnston  and  Beauregard  met,  in  their  saddles,  at 
the  bivouac  of  the  former,  near  Hardee's  line,  just  about  to 
move  forward.  It  was  now  near  six  o'clock,  and  in  a  few  mo- 
ments later  about  34,000  Confederate  infantry,  with  some  fifty 
guns,  were  in  movement,  with  a  bearing  never  surpassed,  to 
fall  upon  their  enemy — ^an  enemy  as  yet  undeveloped,  but 
known  to  be  ensconced  near  at  hand  in  the  fog  and  forest,  su- 
perior in  numbers  and  equipments,  for  their  many  drums  the 
evening  before  had  plainly  told  their  formidable  strength. 

At  first  a  heavy  white  mist  hung  low  in  the  wooded  valley 
between  Hardee  and  the  supposed  quarter  of  the  enemy,  and 
into  it  plunged  his  sturdy  men,  not  knowing  nor  caring  what 


*  Actual  total  of  infantry  and  artille- 
ry was  9136. 

t  Clark's  Division  formed  of  Rus- 
sell's and  A.  P.  Stewart's  brigades, 
and  Cheatham's  (a  Major-General)  of 
B.  R.  Johnson's  and  Stevens's  brigades. 

X  Breckinridge's  Reserve  was  com- 
posed of  Trabue's,  Bowen's,  and  Stat- 
ham's  brigades,  with  a  total  in£uitry 


and  artillery  of  6439.  We  may  here 
say,  en  passanty  we  vouch  for  the  ac- 
curacy with  which  the  returns  were 
compiled  from  which  we  have  taken 
the  strength  of  these  corps,  for  they 
were  made  with  especial  care  in  the  of^ 
fice  of  the  present  writer,  the  Adjutans* 
General  of  the  Confederate  Army  e»- 
gaged. 


Theatre  of  Battle.  117 

hostile  force  and  appliances  lay  ready  within  to  receive  their 
onset.  To  find  that  force  as  speedily  as  possible' and  over- 
whelm it  was  the  errand  upon  which  they  and  their  emulous 
comrades  were  afield  so  early. 

Here  a  topographical  sketch  of  the  theatre  of  war  may 
serve  to  make  more  readily  intelligible  the  occurrences  and 
vicissitudes  of  the  battle.    Two  streams,  Lick  and  Owl  creeks, 
taking  their  rise  very  near  each  other,  just  westward  of  Mon- 
terey, in  a  ridge  which  parts  the  waters  that  fall  into  the  Mis- 
sissippi from  those  which  are  affluents  of  the  Tennessee,  flow- 
ing sinuously  with  a  general  direction,  the  latter  to  the  north- 
cast  and  the  former  south  of  east,  finally  empty  into  the  Ten- 
nessee  about  four  miles  asunder.*     Between  these  water- 
courses is  embraced  an  area  of  undulating  table-land,  some 
five  miles  in  depth  from  the  river-bank,  from  three  to  five 
miles  broad,  and  about  one  hundred  feet  above  the  low-water 
level  of  the  river.     Intersected  by  a  labyrinth  of  ravines,  the 
drainage  is  into  Owl  creek,  as  the  land  rises  highest  and  ridge- 
like near  Lick  creek.     Adjoining  the  river,  these  ravines, 
deep  and  steep,  have  a  water-shed  in  that  direction.     Recent 
heavy  rains  had  filled  them  all  with  springs  and  small  streams, 
making  the  soil  boggy,  and  hence  difficult  for  artillery  for 
much  of  their  extent     A  primeval  forest,  cumbered  with  a 
great  deal  of  undergrowth,  covered  the  region,  except  a  few 
small  farms,  of  fifty  or  seventy  acres,  scattered  occasionally  here 
and  there.     Pittsburg  Landing — a  warehouse  and  a  house  or 
two  by  the  water's  side — ^lay  three  miles  below  the  mouth  of 
Lick  creek.    Two  roads  leading  from  Corinth,  crossing  Lick 
creek  about  a  mile  apart,  converge  together  about  two  miles 
fi'om  the  Landing.     Other  roads  also  approach  from  all  direc- 
tions.    One  passing  Owl  creek  by  a  bridge,  before  its  junction 


*  Owl  creek  does  not  empty  directly  into  the  Tennessee,  but  into  Snake  creek. 


i 


Ii8  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

with  Snake  creek,  branches,  the  one  way  trending  westward  to* 
ward  Purdy,  the  other  northward  toward  Crump's  Landing,  six 
miles  below  Pittsburg.  Another,  nearer  the  river-bank 
crossing  Snake  creek  by  a  bridge,  also  connects  the  two 
points. 

Though  completely  vailed  at  the  moment  from  the  sight  of 
their  approaching  enemy,  it  appears  a  Federal  force  of  five 
strong  divisions  occupied  the  space  we  have  described,  and 
were  thus  disposed : 

Three  brigades  of  Sherman's  Division,  or  nine  regiments, 
supported  by  eighteen  guns  and  eight  companies  of  cavalry, 
stood  directly  across  the  upper  Pittsburg  road,  facing  south- 
ward. One  of  these  brigades  rested  its  right  at  the  crossing 
of  Owl  creek  on  the  Purdy  road,  and  the  other  two  lay,  the 
one  with  its  right,  and  the  other  with  its  left,  near  a  rustic,  log 
"  meeting-house,"  called  Shiloh.  There  also  were  established 
the  headquarters  of  Sherman.  In  front  of  this  position  were 
a  ravine  and  rivulet,  which  gave  some  natural  strength  if 
merely  held  with  soldierly  circumspection.  As  these  regi- 
ments had  but  lately  come  from  the  depots  and  cantonments 
of  Ohio  and  Illinois,  their  ranks  were  doubtless  full,  and  did 
not  fall  short  of  a  total  of  7000  infantry,  with  18  guns  and  450 
cavalry.*  A  fourth  brigade  of  the  same  division,  by  an 
anomalous  arrangement,  was  posted,  on  the  extreme  Federal 
left,  at  the  crossing  of  the  road  from  Pittsburg  to  Hamburg, 
and  only  about  a  mile  from  the  former  landing.f  The  space 
thus  left  was  filled  by  the  division  of  Prentiss,  of  some  eight 
or  nine  regiments,  which  we  assume  to  have  mustered  as  many 


*  These  brigades  were  McDowell's,  Fifty-third,  Fifty-seventh,  and  Seventy* 

of  Forty-sixth  Ohio,  Fortieth  Illinois,  seventh  Ohio  regiments, 

and  Sixth  Iowa ;  Buckland's,  of  Forty-  t  This  brigade  consisted  of  Fifty-fifth 

eighth,  Seventieth,  and  Twenty-second  Illinois  and  Fifty-fourth  and  Seventi^ 

Ohio  regiments ;  and  Hildebrand's,  of  Ohio,  and  was  at  least  3200  stroma 


Federal  Farces.  119 

as  6ocx>  bayonets,  one  third  of  whom,  however,  at  the  moment 
of  attack  may  have  been  detached  at  the  landing.*  Another 
division,  that  of  McClernand's,  of  twelve  regiments,  ten  of 
which  were  entitled  to  wear  "  Fort  Donelson"  on  their  banners, 
were  in  supporting  distance  of  Sherman  at  the  confluence  of 
the  two  Corinth  roads.     It  assuredly  did  not  fall  below  7300 

men-t 

A  second  line,  to  the  rearward,  was  composed  of  Hurlbut's 
and  W.  H.  L.  Wallace's  (C.  F.  Smith's)  divisions,  the  first  of 
which  was  stretched  across  the  Corinth  road,  and  the  other 
extended  to  the  leftward  in  the  direction  of  Stuart's  Brigade, 
on  Lick  creek.  Five  of  Hurlbut's  regiments  had  fought  at 
Fort  Donelson.  This  division,  in  the  studious  absence  of 
official  data,  we  may  safely  set  down  at  7SCX)  bayonets.J  Six 
of  Wallace's  regiments  also  had  assisted  at  Fort  Donelson, 
and  not  less  than  7600  effectives  did  he  command.  In  fine, 
to  recapitulate : 

^  Regiments.       Men.  Guns 

Sherman's  Division, 12  9,200  18 

Prentiss's         "               8  or  9  6,000  1 2 

McClernand's  "            12  7,300  18 

Hurlbut's         "               12  7,500  18 

Wallace's,  W.  H.  L.,  Division,   .    .           12  7,000  18 


Minimum  Federal  Infantry  force,  . 


37,000        84 


*  The  regiments  of  which  this  division 
vas  fonned  we  can  not  ascertain  with 
precision. 

t  Thanks  to  the  correspondent  of 
the  Cincinnati  GaxetUy  we  are  able  to 
£k  the  complete  force  of  this  division 
as  foilows  :  Harems  Brigade,  Eighth  and 
£%hteenth  Illinots,  Eleventh  and  Thir- 
teenth Iowa;   Marsh's  Brigade,  Ele- 


venth, Twentieth,  Forty-fifth,  and  For 
ty-eighth  Illinois ;  Rait*s  Brigade,  Se- 
venteenth, Twenty-ninth,  Forty-third, 
and  Forty-ninth  Illinois  regiments. 
The  Thirteenth  Iowa  was  1017  strong, 
as  stated  in  official  report  of  the  Colo- 
nel. 

I  It  was  constituted  of  the  Four- 
teenth, Fifteenth,  Twenty-eighth,  Thir- 


i 


I20  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest^ 

We  find  in  such  official  reports  as  have  reached  us  the 
names  of  at  least  sixteen  light  batteries  present  and  engaged, 
also  of  four  or  five  battalions  of  light  cavalry,  which  would 
swell  the  Federal  army,  about  to  be  assaulted  in  their  very 
campSy  to  40,000  men  of  all  arms,  with  not  less  than  37,000 
infantry,  full  forty  per  cent  of  whom  were  flushed  with  their 
recent  success  at  Fort  Donelson.  Nor  was  this  all ;  not  more 
than  four  or  five  miles  from  Tecumseh  Sherman  was  Lew  Wal- 
lace's Division,  over  7000  strong  and  12  guns. 

It  is  bruited  that  both  Generals  Grant  and  Sherman  felt 
and  expressed  premonitions  of  the  attack.  Indeed,  some  feel- 
ing of  that  kind  may  have  been  in  their  minds  ;  for  the  g^eat 
poet  says : 

'*  By  a  divine  instinct  men*s  minds  mistrust 
Ensuing  danger  ;  as,  by  proof,  we  see 
The  waters  swell  before  a  boistVous  storm." 

But  in  that  event  it  is  passing  strange  they  did  not  take 
"even  the  ordinary  precautions  which  habitually  hedge  an  army 
in  the  field.  Instead  of  that,  in  sooth,  there  was  no  line  of 
infantry  pickets  in  advance  of » le  ordinary  chain  of  sentinels ; 
apparently  no  cavalry  exterior  either  to  Sherman  or  Prentiss, 
and  that  invading  army  lay  drowsily  in  its  cosy  encampments, 
as  if  supremely  confident  no  harm  were  threatening  and  no 
disaster  could  befall  it !  Many  as  yet  were  in  their  blankets 
fast  asleep,  many  others  washing  and  dressing,  others  cooking 
their  morning  meal.  Some  were  eating  leisurely  at  bounteous 
mess-chests,  and  the  arms  and  accoutrements  of  all  were 
spread  around  in  the  orderless  fashion  of  holiday  soldiers. 
Meanwhile,  swiftly  forward  through  the  woods   strode  the 


ty-second.  Forty-first,  and  Forty-sixth  Iowa.      They    were   brigaaed    under 

Illinois ;  Twenty-fifth,  Thirty-first,  and  Veach,  Lauman,  and  Williams.    Two 

Forty-fourth  Indiana ;  Seventeenth  and  battalions  of  cavalry  also  belonged  to 

Twenty -fifth    Kentucky,    and    Third  this  division. 


The  Storm  Bursts.  I2i 

Confederates.  With  an  elastic  tread,  inspired  by  hope  and 
the  fresh  April  morning  air,  they  surged  onward  and  foeward, 
until,  the  mist  gradually  lifting,  the  sheen  of  the  white  tents, 
their  goal,  might  be  seen  through  the  trees.  On  poured  the 
living  current  of  the  Confederates.  By  a  ttiischance  their  left 
had  not  been  thrown  sufficiently  near  to  Owl  creek,  so  when 
the  collision  came  it  was  only  with  the  left  brigade  (Hilde- 
brand's)  of  Sherman's  Division  ;  but  it  fell  with  overwhelming 
force  upon  Prentiss  from  flank  to  flank.  Their  sentinels, 
taken  by  surprise,  were  run  in  with  barely  time  to  discharge 
their  pieces.  Just  at  their  heels  came  the  Confederates, 
cheering  heartily  ;  and  so  complete  a  surprise  of  an  army  has 
not  the  like  in  history.  Officers  and  men  were  killed  or 
wounded  in  their  beds,  and  large  numbers  had  not  time  to 
clutch  up  either  arms  or  accoutrements.  Nevertheless,  few 
prisoners  were  taken,  nor  were  many  either  killed  or  wound- 
ed in  the  first  stage  of  the  battle.  Hildebrand's  Brigade  of 
Ohioans,  swept  by  the  violence  of  the  onslaught  from  their 
encampment,  scattered  and  was  heard  of  no  more  as  a  bellige- 
rent organization  on  that  field  ? .  Prentiss's  Division,  rallying, 
was  formed  in  good  time  on  a  neighboring  ridge,  but.  little 
able  to  stand  the  torrent  that  streamed  after  it,  was  swept 
further  back.  Meanwhile,  Sherman's  rightward  brigades, 
which  escaped  collision  with  Hardee,  he  had  had  time  to  form, 
and  with  them  right  manfully  did  he  strive  to  make  head 
against  Ruggles's  Divison  of  Bragg's  Corps,  that  by  this  time 
had  come  upon  the  scene  and  bore  down  vehemently  upon 
them.  As  we  have  said  before,  the  position  held  by  Sherman 
was  one  of  natural  strength ;  with  a  small  water-course  in 
front,  it  afforded  a  converging  fire  upon  the  approaching  Con- 
federates. McClernand,  apprised  of  the  attack,  was  also  ad- 
vancing to  support  him.  Such,  however,  was  the  vigor  of  the 
assault  that  Sherman,  with  the  loss  of  five  or  six  guns,  was 
forced  back  just  as  McClernand  came  up.    They  were  both 


i 


122  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

then  swept  rearward  near  the  line  of  the  cross-road  from  Ham- 
burg to  Purdy.  There  Sherman,  with  McClernand,  gained  a 
foothold,  and,  with  several  batteries  favorably  posted,  made 
another  stand  on  a  thickly  wooded  ridge  with  a  ravine  in 
front  But,  speedily  assailed  by  Ruggles  and  some  of  Polk's 
brigades  with  a  fury  not  to  be  withstood,  the  Federal  line 
again  yielded,  losing  several  pieces  of  artillery,  and  receding 
to  the  position  of  McClemand's  encampment 

Aboiit  forty  minutes  past  seven  a.m.,  hearing  the  uproar  in 
front,  Hurlbut  also  sent  Veach's  Brigade  of  his  division  to 
support  Sherman,  and  with  his  other  two  brigades  moved 
swiftly  to  the  succor  of  Prentiss,  who  had  called  for  aid. 
With  these  went  forward  eight  companies  of  cavalry  and  three 
batteries.  Prentiss's  Division  was  met,  however,  in  broken 
fragments,  which  filtered  through  his  lines  as  he  formed  in 
the  edge  of  a  field,  sheltered  by  timber  and  thick  undergrowth, 
near  the  Hamburg  road,  south  of  the  position  last  taken  by 
Sherman  and  McClernand.  There  Hurlbut  also  was  speedi- 
ly assailed  by  the  Confederates,  now  reenforced  in  that  quar- 
ter by  Chalmers's  and  Jackson's  brigades  of  Bragg's  Corps ; 
and  such  was  the  vehemence  of  the  attack  that  he  was  soon 
swept  back  with  the  loss  of  some  artillery.  Thus  the  whole 
front  line  of  Federal  encampments  was  left  in  the  hands  of 
their  adversary,  filled  with  equipage  and  baggage,  the  most 
abundant  and  luxurious  that  ever  encumbered  any  except  an 
oriental  army.* 

By  this  time  both  Cheatham's  and  Clark's  divisions,  Polk's 
Corps,  were  also  strenuously  engaged,  mainly  on  the  left, 
where  Sherman  was  making  able,  desperate  efforts  to  redeem 


•  The  tents  were  full  of  new,  capa-  CLtnoi  vest-armor^  oi^txXAxmi  or  steel, 

cioas  trunks  ;  in  many  instances  were  whose  owners  had  not  had  time  to  doa 

famished  with  stoves,  and  the  ground  and  test  thenu 
around  was  thickly  strewn  with  a  spe- 


All  the  Federals  now  in  Action.  123 

the  losses  of  the  morning.  Several  of  his  positions,  as  the 
Federals  drifted  riverward,  were  quite  strong,  fronted  by  tan- 
gled ravines  and  affording  thick  cover,  from  which  they  poured 
a  desolating  fire,  that  more  than  once  checked  the  ardent  press 
of  their  adversaries.  But  gathering  volume  and  resuming  the 
onset  with  jfresh  spirit,  the  Confederates  still  drove  their  ene- 
my nearer  the  river. 

Wallace  (W.  H.  L.)  had  soon  become  involved  in  the  battle. 
Manifestly  a  gallant  soldier,  he  fought  his  division,  men  who 
had  been  at  Donelson,  with  decided  stamina,  Stuart's  Bri- 
gade, Sherman's  Division,  had  also  been  attacked,  and  the 
Federal  line  of  battle  was  pushed  back  to  within  a  mile  of  the 
Landing,  and  to  the  ground  of  their  last  encampments. 
There  were  massed  what  remained  of  their  artillery  and  the 
fragments  of  Sherman's,  Prentiss's,  McClemand's,  and  Hurl- 
but's  divisions,  as  well  as  Wallace's  and  Stuart's. 

In  the  mean  time,  from  the  nature  of  the  field — ^the  net-work 
of  ravine?,  the  interlaced  thickets,  and  wide  scope  of  forest — 
the  Confederate  organizations  had  become  greatly  disordered. 
Not  only  divisions  and  brigades  had  been  dislocated,  but  regi- 
ments also ;  and  the  troops  of  all  three  corps,  in  fact,  were  in- 
termingled. For  the  most  part,  confident  of  the  issue  and 
bent  on  pressing  toward  the  enemy,  there  was  yet  a  lack  of 
harmonious  movement.  Superior  officers  led,  with  notable 
courage,  regiments  or  parts  of  brigades,  and  doubtless  stimu- 
lated their  men,  not  a  little  by  their  example,  but  at  the  same 
time  lost  sight  of  the  mass  of  their  commands,  which  were 
thus  not  infrequently  left  at  a  halt  without  orders  and  uncer- 
tain what  to  do.  And  this  was  the  case  with  batteries  also, 
which,  moreover,  were  too  often  employed  singly,* 


*  General  Beauregard,  through  the     teries  in  action  and  fight  them  twelvs 
present  writer,  had  given  special  orders     guns  on  a  point 
Id  Chie£i  of  Artillery  to  mass  their  bat- 


i 


t24  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

General  Johnston,  the  Confederate  Commander-in-Chief, 
was  now  in  the  very  front  of  the  battle.  Assured  of  a  great 
victory  after  the  marvelous  success  of  his  planned  surprise, 
he  now  stimulated  the  onslaught  by  his  personal  presence  on 
the  right,  where  the  press  was  fiercest,  the  resistance  the  most 
effective.  More  than  once  brigades  that  faltered,  under  the 
inspiration  of  his  leading  bore  back  the  enemy  and  wrested 
the  position  fought  for.  As  far  as  can  be  ascertained.  Gene- 
ral Grant  was  not  upon  the  immediate  field  earlier  than  mid- 
day. On  Saturday  afternoon  he  had  gone  to  Savannah  and 
slept  there.  The  sound  of  many  cannon  at  Shiloh  was  his 
first  tiding  of  a  hostile  juncture  at  Pittsburg  Landing ;  but 
even  that  was  scarcely  regarded  as  the  announcement  of  a 
serious  battle,  for  one  of  Buell's  divisions,  Nelson's,  lay  at  Sa- 
vannah,^  and,  as  he  was  leaving  for  Pittsburg,  General  Grant 
merely  ordered  that  division  to  march  thither  by  the  nearest 
road.  However,  as  the  Federal  General  steamed  toward  the 
scene,  the  banks  of  the  river  were  soon  found  alive  with  his 
men,  fleeing  from  the  danger  which  so  early  that  morning  had 
routed  them  from  their  comfortable  beds.*  When,  too,  he 
reached  Pittsburg,  it  was  to  find  his  whole  front  line  surprised, 
overwhelmed,  routed,  and  the  ravines  and  river-bank  adjacent 
packed  with  thousands  of  crouching  fugitives.  These  were 
not  to  be  rallied  nor  reorganized,  not  to  be  incited  to  return 
to  the  side  of  their  imperiled  comrades  who  still  battled  man- 
fully, and  by  cooperation  make  an  effort  to  recover  the  for- 
tunes of  the  day. 

Within  the  hollows  and  on  the  slopes  and  flat  ridges  of  that 
circumscribed  Tennessee  woodland  at  least  sixty  thousand 
muskets  and  rifles  were  now  at  the  dire  work  of  carnage  in 
the  hands  of  sixty  thousand  men,  in  whom  burned  all  the 


*  Agate, — Cincinnati  Gazttte^  Reh,  Ree,  Doc  1 14. 


Death  of  General  Gladden.  125 

"  Fierce  fever  of  the  steel, 
The  guilty  madness  warriors  feel."* 

The  sun  had  dissipated  the  fog,  and  shone  bright  and  warm 
through  the  young  budding  foliage.  But  the  continuous  roll, 
roar,  and  blaze  of  small-arms,  the  hurtle,  shriek,  and  crash  of 
rifle  projectiles  through  the  trees,  the  explosion  of  shells,  the 
louder  discharges  and  reverberations  of  more  than  a  hundred 
cannon,  and  the  hoarse  cheers  and  shouts  of  the  Confederates 
filled  every  nook  of  the  forest  with  the  varied,  commingled 
clamors  of  one  of  the  bloodiest  of  modern  battles. 

Earlier,  General  Gladden,  at  the  head  of  his  brigade,  in  the 
first  line,  had  fallen  mortally  hurt.    A  merchant  in  New-Or- 
leans when  the  revolution  began,  full  of  martial  instincts  as 
veil  as  love  of  the  section  of  his  birth,  A.  H.  Gladden  was 
among  the  first  to  take  up  arms.     With  some  soldierly  expe- 
rience as  an  officer  of  the  gallant  Palmetto  Regiment  of  South- 
Carolina  in  the  war  with  Mexico,  his  military  worth  was  soon 
apparent,  and  he  had  risen  to  the  command  of  a  brigade. 
This  he  disciplined  in  such  fashion  as  to  show  in  what  sol- 
dierly shape  the  splendid  war  personnel  of  his  countrymen 
could  be  readily  moulded  by  men  fit  to  lead  them.     Soon  after 
Gladden  was  cut  down  in  the  rich  promise  of  his  career,  his 
brigade  faltered  under  a  desolating  fire.     Its  new  commander, 
Colonel  Daniel  W.  Adams,  seizing  a  battle-flag,  placed  him- 
self in  front  of  his  staggering  ranks  and  rode  forward  upon 
the  enemy.f     His  men,  animated  by  the  act,  grew  steady,  re- 
sumed the  charge,  and  carried  the  disputed  ground,  with 


♦  Savit  amor  ferri,  et  scelerata  insania  belli, 

Virgil. 

t  Each  Confederate  regiment  had  a     red  field,  of  Hardee's  a  white  medallion 
corps  bottle-flag.     Those  of  Bragg's     on  a  blue  field, 
aad  Polk's  corps  were  a  blue  cross  on  a 


i 


126  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest 

seven  stands  of  colors  taken  from  Prentiss's  Division.  In 
another  part  of  the  field  similar  examples  were  multiplied. 
Brigadier-General  Hindman,  about  ten  a.m.,  pressing  his  bri- 
gade forward,  with  notable  nerve,  constantly  close  upon  the 
enemy,  drew  down  an  overwhelming  storm  of  fire,  under  which 
he  was  severely  wounded  after  conspicuous  conduct,  and  the 
brigade  for  a  time  wavered  and  recoiled.  There  was  abundant 
intrepidity  in  leading  everywhere  ;*  but,  unfortunately  for  the 
Confederate  cause,  too  little  knowledge  of. the  right  way  to 
handle  regiments,  brigades,  divisions,  even  corps,  to  secure 
that  massing  of  troops,  those  weighty  blows  which  achieve 
decisive  victories.  Though,  indeed,  there  were  far  too  many 
stragglers  who  ignobly  shrunk  from  the  victorious  edge  of 
battle,  many  going  back  even  to  Corinth  that  night,  yet  every- 
where there  was  the  largest  measure  of  sturdy  fighting  by 
regiments,  brigades,  and  parts  of  divisions.  But,  notwith- 
standing the  wreck  of  Sherman's,  Prentiss's,  and  McQer- 
nand's  divisions  were  now  crowded  back  upon  the  line  of 
Wallace's  (W.  H.  L.)  and  Hurlbut's  divisions  —  that  is  to  say, 
a  short  line  scarcely  a  mile  from  the  river, — and  though  the 
corps  of  Hardee,  Bragg,  and  Polk,-  with  Breckinridge  not  far 
off,  were  in  their  immediate  front,  there  was  no  concerted  con- 
centration  of  these  triumphant  corps  respectively,  milch  less 
of  the  whole  mass,  for  a  well-timed,  overwhelming  blow  at  the 
now  sorely  crippled,  dispirited  enemy.  And,  as  a  conse- 
quence, with  Sherman  among  them  doing  all  possible  in  the 
exigency,  the  Federals  were  enabled  to  protract  their  defense 
against  the  desultory  onsets  with  which  they  were  assailed 
for  the  next  hour  or  two. 


*  Both  the  division  commanders  of  rals  B.  R.  Johnson  and  Bowen  were  also 
£olk's  Corps  were  woimded,  General  wounded  on  Sunday.  General  Hardee 
Clark  severely,  and  General  Cheatham  likewise  was  slighUy  wounded,  and  Gen- 
had  three  horses  shot  under  him.  Gene-  end  Bragg  had  two  hones  killed. 


Charge  by  Forrest's  Cavalry.  127 

During  the  occurrences  which  we  have  related,  Colonel 
Forrest  had  thrown  his  regiment,  as  soon  as  he  heard  the  in- 
auguration of  the  battle,  across  Lick  creek,  and,  pressing  up, 
held  it  on  the  Confederate  right  flank,  ready  for  orders,  for 
which  he  sent  at  once  to  the  Commander-in-Chief     About 
eleven  o'clock  the  enemy,  as  we  have  seen,  having  been  forced 
back  to  their  second  line,  he  received  an  order  to  move  his 
regiment  onward  to  the  front.     This  he  executed  at  a  gallop. 
Not  finding  the  General  there,  or  further  orders,  he  pushed 
ahead  to  the  point  where  the  infantry  seemed  most  obstinately 
engaged.     It  was  near  the  centre  of  the  line,  and,  on  reaching 
the  scene,  Forrest  found  that  Cheatham's  Division  had  just 
received  a  temporary  check.    With  his  wonted  impatience  of 
the  least  delay,  he  at  onCe  proposed  to  Cheatham  to  join  in 
an  immediate  charge  across  an  open  field  in  their  front     To 
this,  Cheatham,  whose  men  for  several  hours  previously  had 
been  breasting  a  tempest  of  artillery  and  musketry  fire,  de- 
murred for  the  moment,  as  his  men  required  some  rest.     For- 
rest's men,  being  mounted,  were  nearly  as  much  exposed  to 
an  annoying  fire  where  they  stood  —  a  fair  mark  —  as  in  a 
charge,  and  Forrest  determined  to  make  one.     Forming  in  a 
column  of  fours,  the  order  to  charge  was  given,  and  on  they 
dashed;  at  a  splendid  pace,  full  in  the  face  of  a  withering  fire 
of  small  and  large  arms.     A  number  of  horses  fell  in  a  few  in- 
stants, and  several  of  the  men  ;*  but  on  they  sped,  heedless  of 
the  breaks  in  their  column,  up  to  within  forty  paces  of  the 
Federal  line,  when  the  advance  became  entangled  in  an  im- 
practicable morass  across  their  path,  from  which  it  became 
impossible  to  extricate  some  of  the  horses.    The  boldness  of 
this  movement,  however,  appeared  to  produce  some  effect 


*  We  arc  only  able  to  mention  the     greaUy  esteemed  in  society  and  son  of 
one  of  young  John  Apperson,  slain     one  of  the  prominent  citizens  of  Mem« 
at  this  juncture,  a  young  genUeman     phis. 


128 


Campaigns  of  General  Forrest 


upon  the  enemy,  and,  Cheatham  advancing  with  his  indomita- 
ble division  about  the  same  time,  the  Federals,  after  some  re- 
sistance, were  borne  rearward  again  in  a  good  deal  of  confu- 
sion. Forrest  now,  having  made  a  detour  around  the  marsh, 
galloped  through  the  infantry  and  threw  his  regiment  upon 
the  disordered  mass  of  Federals,  with  the  effect  to  scatter 
them  a  good  deal  more  and  hurry  their  pace,  manifestly,  to- 
ward the  river. 

Meanwhile,  to  the  rightward,  the  Confederate  General-in- 
Chief,  taking  part  at  a  critical  juncture  in  the  charge  of  a  bri- 
gade, and  by  his  intrepid  presence  giving  a  resistless  momen- 
tum to  the  onset,  received  a  rifle-wound  in  the  leg, — 2l  mortal 
wound,  as  it  proved,  presently,  for  the  want  of  timely  surgical 
aid.  The  Governor  of  Tennessee,  *by  his  side  when  struck, 
caught  the  fainting  soldier  in  his  arms  as  he  sunk  from  his 
saddle,  exhausted  by  an  apparently  painless  loss  of  blood.* 
A  moment  after,  his  aid-de-camp  and  brother-in-law,  Colonel 
William  Preston,  of  Kentucky,  came  up,  and  Sidney  John- 
ston, with  scarce  a  murmur,  died  in  his  arms.  The  scene 
of  this  untoward  death  was  a  wooded,  secluded  hollow,  and  the 
loss  of  their  chief  was  not  known  to  the  Confederate  army 
until  that  night,  nor  even  generally  then.f 


♦  Governor  Isham  G.  Harris  was  by 
the  side  of  General  Johnston  all  day 
tip  to  the  moment  of  his  death.  On 
Monday  he  remained  with  General 
Beauregard,  except  when,  carrying  or- 
ders to  the  most  critical  parts  of  the 
field.  His  calm,  collected  courage  at- 
tracted general  attention,  as  subse- 
quently on  other  bloody  fields  of  the 
West 

t  It  is  not  within  the  scope  of  these 
pages  to  attempt  such  a  sketch  of  this 
accomplished  General  and  chivalrous 


soldier  as  the  subject  requires.  We  may, 
however,  contribute  one  i2xX  to  the  fu- 
ture biography  of  a  lofty-natured  man. 
In  a  conversation  which  General 
Johnston  had,  late  Saturday  night,  with 
the  present  writer,  he  mentioned  that^ 
though  General  Sumner  had  been  sent 
by  steamer  by  way  of  Panama,  under 
an  assumed  name,  (as  we  knew  and  in- 
formed General  Johnston,)  to  relieve 
him  in  California,  his  former  Adjutant- 
General,  Fitz-John  Porter,  had  been 
authorized  to  write  a  letter  by  the  over- 


Sketch  of  General  Johnston. 


129 


.bout  the  time  of  this  calamity  the  reserves  under  Breck- 
Ige  were  thrown  vigorously  into  action.  Bragg  had  ap- 
1,  through  his  Aid,  Colonel  Urquhart,  for  a  diversion  to 


nail,  to  hold  up  to  him  the  glitter- 
romise  of  the  highest  command 
I  the  gift  of  the  Federal  Govern* 
There   is   no   question   that, 
ti  they  were  led  to  relieve  him 
duty  on  the  Pacific  coast,  it  was 
:heless  the  wish  to  retain  his  ser- 
and,  could  that  have  been  effect- 
would  have  been  Commander- 
cf  of  the  United  States  forces  in 
:ld.    It  will  suffice  here  to  state 
K)rn  in  1803,  in  Kentucky,  Gene- 
hnston  was  about  fifty-nine  years 
\  when  he  fell.    Graduating  at 
Point  in  1826,  he  served  in  the 
until    1834,  when  he  resigned, 
irears  later,  going  to  Texas,  he 
Dccame  Commander-in-Chief  of 
:xas  forces  in  the  war  with  Mexi- 
Quitting  public  life,  however,  after 
I  years,  Sidney  Johnston  became 
ter  until- 1846,  when,  Texas  hav- 
:n  annexed  to  the  United  States, 
ere  being  a  war  on  that  account, 
i  made  Colonel  of  a  regiment  of 
eers  from  the  State  of  Texas,  and 
under    General    Taylor,  with 
he  stood  so  high  that  that  sol- 
rged  upon  his  Government  his 
tment    as  a  Brigadier-General, 
timately,  when    President,   re- 
him  to  the  regular  army  as  a 
of   the   Paymaster's  staff      In 
Mr.   Davis,  then  Secretary  of 
lade  him  the  Colonel  of  the  Se- 
avalry,  just  added  to  the  army, 
the  following  administration  he 
iced  in  command  of  the  large 


force  sent  to  repress  the  insubordinate 
courses  of  the  Mormons,  and  acted 
with  so  rare  a  discretion  mingled  with 
fimmess  as  to  give  great  satisfaction  to 
the  country.    After  that  he  was  assigned 
to  command  of  the  department  of  Cali- 
fornia.   No  man  stood  in  so  high  esti- 
mation generally  in  the  army  at  that 
time,  after  General  Scott  Later,  feeling 
it  his  duty  to  take  part  with  Texas  in 
the  war  for  independence,  he  resig^ned, 
and,  by  the  route  across  through  South- 
em   California,  Arizona,  and   Texas, 
with  great  difficulty  succeeded  in  reach- 
ing the  seat  of  the  Confederate  Govern- 
ment   He  was  at  once  made  the  se- 
cond in  rank  of  the  five  Generals  of  the 
Confederate  Army,  and  assigned  to  the 
command  of  affairs  in  Tennessee  and 
Kentucky.    The  official  announcement 
to  the  army  of  his  death,  expressing  the 
feeling  excited  by  the  event  at  the  time, 
bearing  date  April  loth,  1862,  at  Co- 
rinth, is  as  follows : 

Soldiers  :  Your  late  Commander- 
in-Chief,  A.  S.  Johnston,  is  dead.    A 
fearless  soldier,  a  sagacious  captain,  a 
reproachless  man  has  fallen.    One  who 
in  his  devotion  to  our  cause  shrunk 
ft-om  no  sacrifice  ;  one  who,  am'mated    \ 
by  a  sense  of  duty  and  sustained  by  a 
sublime    courage,   challenged    danger 
and  perished  gallantly  for  his  country 
while  leading  forward  his  brave  columns 
to  victory.     His  signal  example  of  he- 
roism and  patriotism,  if  generally  imi- 
tated, will  make  this  army  invincible. 
A  grateful  country  will  mourn  his  losv 


130  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

his  rightward  against  some  batteries  which  were  distressing 
his  front  and  keeping  his  men  at  bay.  Breckinridge's  bri- 
gades were  drawn  up  on  the  gentler  part  of  the  slope  of  a 
ridge  when  the  order  for  their  advance  was  given.  Clad  in  a 
dark  blouse,  he  sat  on  his  horse,  surrounded  by  his  staff,  more 
like  an  equestrian  statue  than  a  living  man,  except  the  fiery 
gleam  in  his  dark  eyes  as  he  received  the  order.  In  front 
was  to  be  seen  a  Federal  camp  in  the  open  woods,  apparently 
quiet  and  without  an  inmate.  Indeed,  the  stillness  seemed 
ominous,  and  just  ahead  was  an  open  field  bordered  by  a  dense 
thicket.  Through  the  camp  pressed  the  Kentuckians  and 
into  the  open  field,  and  still  there  was  silence  ;  but  not  long, 
for  a  few  steps  beyond  a  hissing  stream  and  flame  of  mus- 
ketry burst  at  their  breasts,  mowing  their  ranks  fearfully  and 
heaping  the  ground  with  the  dead  and  wounded.  There  was 
a  momentary  check  and  they  gave  back  to  the  woods,  while  a 
storm  of  bullets  rattled  through  the  trees  far  behind,  reaching 
in  profusion  even  a  battery  posted  in  another  encampment  a 
half  of  a  mile  to  the  rear.  But  only  for  a  little  while  did 
the  Kentuckians  recede.  Closing  their  thinned  ranks  and 
animated  by  their  officers,  they  retook  the  advance,  and  their 
adversaries  were  forced  back,  yet  with  not  a  little  stubborn- 
ness and  desperate  fighting,  on  favorable  ground. 

By  this  time,  Withers's  Division,  of  Bragg's  Corps,  as  well 
as  Breckinridge's  reserves,  mingled  with  portions  of  Hardee's 
men,  were  all  massed  on  the  Confederate  right  in  the  quarter 
of  Lick  creek.  General  Bragg  also,  as  he  tells  us,  was  there 
in  person  and  assumed  command,*  Giving,  he  says,  "  a  com- 
mon head  and  a  common  purpose  to  the  whole,"  he  launched 


revere  his  name,  and  cherish  his  many  *  General  Bragg's  Report,  p.  198^     , 

Tirtues.  Official  Reports  of  Batdes^  Rkkmmfd^     \ 

(Signed)      G.  T.  Beauregard,  Fo.,  1862. 

General  Commanding. 


Massing  of  Federal  Artillery.  131 

them  with  a  resistless  weight  at  the  enemy,  who  now  gave 
way  and  on  all  sides  were  forced  from  the  line  of  Wallace's 
and  Hurlbut's  encampments,  leaving  behind  more  of  their 
artillery  and  three  thousand  prisoners,  chiefly  of  Prentiss's 
Division,  in  the  hands  of  their  assailants.*  At  the  same 
time,  on  the  centre  and  left,  Polk's  divisions,  with  Ruggles's 
divisions  of  Bragg,  and  some  of  Hardee's  also,  made  no  less 
strenuous  efforts  to  close  the  battle.  Those  of  the  routed 
Federals  who  were  not  killed  or  captured  dropped  back  in 
great  confusion  toward  the  Landing.  Some  were  rallied  upon 
the  ridge  immediately  overhanging  the  Landing,  but  large 
masses  were  added  to  the  already  dense  mob  of  fugitives  hud- 
dled below  the  bank. 

But,  meanwhile.  Colonel  Webster,  chief  of  the  Federal  staff, 
an  officer  of  the  regulars,  who  knew  his  profession,  observing 
the  mortal  peril  of  his  people,  had  gathered  upon  that  ridge 
all  the  guns  available,  including  some  32-pounders  and  a  bat- 
tery of  2opounder  Parrotts,  or  in  all  twenty-two  pieces,  which 
he  manned  with  gunners  from  the  least  demoralized  of  the  run- 
aways.    Soon,  too,  the  remains  of  the  field-batteries  were 
added,  and  some  fifty  guns  were  massed  upon  this  eminence 
about  five  p.m.,  with  a  field  of  fire  sweeping  all  the  approaches 
to  the  river.f    The  position  was  strong  ;  timber  and  under- 
growth gave  shelter  for  the  artillery  and  their  support,  while 
a  deep  ravine  separated  it  from  the  table-land  over  which  it 
dominated ;   tangled  brushwood  obstructed  its  steep  slopes, 
and  on  or  behind  this  position,  as  we  have  said,  took  final  re- 
fuge the  entire  Federal  force  except  the  remains  of  one  of 
Sherman's  brigades,  which  appear  to  have  drifted  off  with 


•  Embracing  the  organizations  of  the        t  Some  Federal  writers  place  these 
Eighth,  Twelfth,  and  Fourteenth  Iowa,     gans  as  high  as  sixty; 

»fu4  17<Av.^<rHtli  Tllinnift  recrimftnta.— P. 


and  Fifty-eighth  Illinois  regiments. — P. 
89  Coppce's  Grant  and  his  Campaigns, 


132  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest 

their  General  to  the  vicinity  of  the  bridge  across  Snake  creek, 
on  the  road  to  Crump's  Landing,  and,  not  being  followed,  he 
established  them  there  undisturbed, — ^with  the  rear  open  foi 
retreat,  in  an  emergency,  northward. 

The  air  now  resounded  with  hearty  shouts  of  natural  ex- 
ultation on  the  part  of  the  victorious  Confederates,  and,  hav- 
ing established  his  headquarters  in  advance  of  Shiloh,  General 
Beauregard,  through  his  staff,  urged  the  forward  propulsioa 
of  the  whole  force  upon  the  shattered  fragments  of  the  enemy. 
Unfortunately,  however,  the  Federal  encampments  were  ple^ 
thoric  with  food  most  tempting  to  hungry  men,  as  well  as 
with  clothing  and  other  alluring  spoil ;  the  thick  woods,  too, 
had  greatly  disintegrated  almost  every  regiment,  so  that  non^ 
of  the  divisions  confronted  in  an  embodied  form  the  last  posi- 
tion that  remained  between  them  and  the  deep,  broad  waters 
of  the  Tennessee.    The  superior  officers  present,  howbeit, 
collected  the  men  immediately  around  them,  of  whatsoever 
corps.    Tired,  hungry,  and  exhausted  as  were  the  Confede-* 
rates,  nevertheless  a  number  of  determined  separate  efforts 
were  made  by  them,  during  the  remaining  hour  of  daylight,  to 
wrench  their  last  foothold  from  their  elsewhere  beaten  adver- 
sary.    But,  meanwhile,  at  five  p.m.,  Ammen's   Brigade,  (rf 
Nelson's  Division,  had  been  thrown  across   the  river  and 
established  by  Buell  as  a  support  of  Webster's  powerful  bat- 
tery ;*  and  the  Federals,  like  a  rat  brought  to  bay  in  a  comer 
from  which  there  is  no  escape,  fought  with  all  the  desperation 
of  that  animal  under  similar  circumstances,  knowing,  more- 
over, that  night  with  its  shield  of  darkness,  and  ample  succw 
were  close  at  hand. 

The  character  of  these  last  assaults  on  the  part  of  the  Con- 
federateSj  and  their  fruitless  results,  with  the  causes  which 


*  Nelson's  Official  Report,  Reh.  Ree,  IV.  Doa  114. 


\  ■ 


^  Abortive  Assaults.  133 

wrought  their  failure,  may  be  best  illustrated  by  what  befell 
Colonel  Mouton  and  the  Eighteenth  Louisiana  Infantry. 
After  four  p.m.  he  was  ordered  to  charge  "a  battery  on  a 
hill,"  some  six  hundred  yards  in  his  front.  Advancing  "  un- 
supported," the  regiment  soon  became  uncovered  and  exposed 
to  a  cross-fire  from  the  battery  and  its  supports.  Neverthe- 
less, these  dauntless  Louisianians,  well  led,  pressed  up  to 
within  seventy  yards  of  the  Federal  guns,  but  were  then 
beaten  back,  leaving  two  hundred  and  seven  of  their  numbers 
either  dead  or  hors-de-combat  on  the  ground.* 

Another  characteristic  essay  was  made  on  the  extreme 
Confederate  right  by  General  Chalmers,  with  his  own  and  a 
part  of  J.  KL  Jackson's  Brigade,  to  press  forward  to  the  Land- 
ing. But  in  attempting,  as  Mouton  had  done,  "  to  mount  the 
last  ridge,"  they  were  met  by  a  "  fire  from  a  whole  line  of  bat- 
teries, protected  by  infantry,  and  assisted  by  shells  from  the 
ganboats."t  The  Confederates,  however,  stoutly  persisted  in 
storming  the  steep  hill-side  despite  the  impediments  with 
which  it  bristled,  and  "  made  charge  after  charge  without  suc- 
cess, until  night  closed  hostilities."  J  This  tells  the  story  of  the 
dosing  scene, — tells  how  a  series  of  disjointed  attacks  at  that 
late  hour  upon  a  battery  of  over  fifty  pieces  by  fragmentary 
bodies  of  men  who  had  already  been  embattled  for  ten  hours 
without  respite,  failed  necessarily.§ 

General  Beauregard,  in  the  mean  time,  observing  the  ex- 


♦  OJiaal  Reports 4>/  Battles,  pp.  307-         §  Official  Reports  of  Battles,  pp.  2H 

311.  to  312,  Richmond,  Va,,  1862 ;  vide  Re- 

t  General  Grant,  in  his  official  re*  ports  of  Chalmers,  Patton  Anderson^ 

port,  alleges  that,  in  effecting  the  re-  Pond,  Gibson,  Hodge,  Moore,  Joseph 

pidse  on  this  last  position,  '*much  is  Wheeler  Deas,  Looney,  Reichard,  Fa- 

4ie  to  the  presence  of  the  gunboats  gan,  Stanly,  Mouton,  Chadwick,  Jones, 

Tykr  and  Lexington."  Clack,  Dubrocoa,  etc. 

I  Official  Report  of  General  Chal- 


134 


Campaigns  of  General  Forrest 


haustedy  widely-scattered  condition  of  his  army,  directed  it  to 
be  brought  out  of  battle,  collected  and  restored  to  order  as 
far  as  practicable,  and  to  occupy  for  the  night  the  captured 
encampments  of  the  enemy.  This,  however,  had  already  been 
done  in  chief  part  by  the  officers  in  immediate  command  of 
the  troops  before  the  order  was  generally  distributed.* 

Foremost  in  the  pursuit  that  followed  the  defeat  of  the 
Federals  at  their  second  line,  it  remains  to  be  said,  were  For- 
rest and  his  regiment  They  assisted  in  the  capture  of  Pren- 
tiss's men,  and,  being  mounted,  as  well  as  comparatively  fresh, 
led  the  advance  upon  the  ridge  where  the  battery  was  estab- 
lished. Despite  the  efforts  of  the  Federal  officers,  such  was 
the  confusion  prevalent  as  Forrest  began  to  skirmish  vigor- 
ously that  he  sent  a  staff-officer  to  report  to  General  Polk 
(from  whom  he  had  last  received  orders)  that,  by  a  strong, 
rapid  forward  movement,  the  enemy  might  be  driven  into  the 
river.  Soon,  however,  the  battery  on  the  ridge  opened  with 
a  general  salvo,  and  the  gunboats  threw  their  ponderous  shells 
in  the  thick  of  the  up-coming  mass  of  Confederates  with  such 
profusion  that  General  Polk  ordered  the  cavalry  to  take  shel- 
ter in  the  wooded  ravine  which,  beginning  at  the  river  just 
above  the  Landing,  extends  around  the  battery-ridge  and  for 
more  than  a  mile  westwardly.  Here,  however,  they  were  ex- 
posed to  a  raking  fire  from  the  gunboats,  and  the  artillery  of 


*  This  was  especially  so,  it  is  to  be 
noted,  with  Bragg's  Corps.  Yet,  odd- 
ly enough.  General  Bragg  in  his  ovm 
official  report  ventures  to  state  that  his 
men,  though  greatly  exhausted,  were 
about  to  charge  with  great  alacrity 
upon  the  last  position,  and  most  pro- 
bably would  have  carried  it,  when 
Beauregard's  order  was  received  re- 


calling them.  It  is  proper  to  state  that 
General  Bragg's  report,  though  bearing 
date  of  30th  of  April,  1862,  and  osten- 
sibly made  to  General  Beauregard 
through  the  present  writer,  was  not 
transmitted  as  addressed,  but  directlr 
by  General  Bragg,  on  the  25th  of  July, 
1862,  to  General  Cooper,  Adjutant- 
General  C.  S.  A.,  Richmond. 


i 


Confederates  hold  tfie  Field.  135 

both  sides  playing  over  their  heads,  until  night  brought  the 
cessation  of  the  conflict  * 

All  the  encampments  that  had  been  occupied  by  the  five 
Federal  divisions  were  now  in  possession  of  their  adversary. 
They  were  full  of  the  rich,  opportune  spoils  of  war,  including 
many  thousand  stands  of  arms,  all  the  blankets  and  baggage 
of  the  whole  force,  their  subsistence,  their  hospital  stores, 
means  of  transportation  to  a  great  extent,  and  large  stores  of 
ammunition.  But  so  great  was  the  lassitude  and  fatigue  of 
the  Confederates  that  all  which  could  be  done  was  to  glean 
food  sufficient  for  their  supper,  for  which,  indeed,  all  were  de- 
pendent upon  what  they  could  thus  find.  The  prisoners,  how- 
ever, were  collected  together  during  the  night  not  far  from 
Shiloh  church,  where  Generals  Beauregard  and  Bragg  estab- 
lished their  headquarters.  There,  after  a  time,  the  former  had 
an  interview  with  his  corps  commanders,  and  received  brief 
oral  reports  of  the  operations  of  the  day. 

Among  the  prisoners  was  General  Prentiss  himself,  who 
had  much  to  say  touching  the  ultimate  issue  of  the  affair, 
which  he  asserted  was  by  no  means  terminated  with  the  dis- 
asters of  that  untoward  day ;  for  Buell,  he  stated,  would 
effect  a  junction  that  night,  the  fight  would  break  out  the  next 
morning  with  renewed  vigor,  and  all  losses  would  be  re- 
covered. At  the  moment,  however,  this  was  regarded  as  idle 
talk,  for  an  official  telegraphic  dispatch,  addressed  to  General 
Johnston  from  near  Florence,  was  forwarded  to  the  field  from 
Corinth,  announcing  that  Buell  was  moving  with  his  whole 


♦  Willie  M.  Forrest,  the  only  child  of  they  came  upon  fifteen  or  twenty  Fedc- 
the  General,  a  lad  of  fifteen  years  of  ral  soldiers.  Firing  upon  the  group 
age,  was  with  his  father  during  the  day,  with  their  shot-guns,  these  boys  then 
bat,  with  two  other  comrades  of  the  charged,  and  captured,  and  led  away 
same  age,  happening  to  get  detached,  some  fifteen  prisoners,  whom  they  de- 
made  their  way  to  the  river,  near  which  livered  up  to  the  provost-marshaL 


A 


136  Campaigns  of  Getural  Forrest. 

force  upon  Florence.  Emanating  from  a  reliable  officer 
placed  there  in  observation,  whose  scouts  had  doubtless  mis- 
taken the  movement  of  Mitchell's  Division  for  the  whole  of 
Buell's  army,  it  was  credited,  and  Buell*s  timely  junction  with 
General  Grant  was  accordingly  deemed  impossible.  There- 
fore the  capture  of  the  latter  was  regarded  at  Confederate 
headquarters  as  inevitable  the  next  day,  as  soon  as  all  the 
scattered  Confederate  reserves  could  be  brought  to  bear  for  a 
concentrated  effort.  Meanwhile,  night  had  shrouded  the 
bloody  field  in  darkness  ;  a  deep  silence  had  settled  upon  the 
scene  of  so  much  carnage, — a  silence  only  broken  through  the 
night  by  the  regular  discharges  of  the  heavy  naval  guns,  the 
explosions  of  the  shells,  and  by  the  low  wails  and  moans  of 
the  wounded,  of  whom  more  than  ten  thousand,  of  both  armies, 
were  spread  over  the  battle-field.  Such,  however,  of  the  Con- 
federate soldiery  as  could  find  shelter  from  a  heavy  rain  slept 
undisturbed  and  hopeful  of  the  fullest  fruition  of  a  great  vic- 
tory on  the  morrow. 

II. 

On  withdrawing  from  the  ravine  in  which  nightfall  had  left 
him,  Colonel  Forrest,  finding  no  superior  at  hand  from  whom 
to  seek  orders,  with  his  habitual  self-reliance  looked  at  once 
for  forage  and  food,  and  happily  found  both  in  a  Federal  camp 
near  by.  Afterward  he  threw  out  a  squadron  as  pickets, 
confronting,  as  close  as  possible,  those  of  the  enemy,  on  a 
stretch  of  a  mile  across  to  Owl  creek.  He  also  dispatched 
Lieutenant  Sheridan,  (May's  old  company,)  with  other  scouts 
clad  in  Federal  cavalry  overcoats,  to  reconnoitre  within  the 
precincts  of  the  enemy's  lines.  Completely  successful,  in 
an  hour  Sheridan  returned  and  reported  that,  reaching 
the  Landing,  he  had  seen  heavy  reenforcements  coming 
rapidly  by  water.  Also,  in  his  opinion,  such  was  the  disor- 
der prevailing  that,  if  an  attack  were  made  in  full  force  at 


Forrest  Reported  Federal  Reinforcements.     137 

,  they  might  be  readily  pushed  into  the  river  !  Forrest, 
a  man  of  prompt  action,  mounted  his  horse  instantly  to 
ey  this  startling  intelligence  to  the  nearest  corps  com- 
ier  ;  and,  soon  coming  upon  Generals  Hardee  and  Breck- 
ge,  made  known  what  his  scouts  announced.  He  also 
tly  added  his  opinion  that  either  the  Confederates  should 
*diately  resume  the  battle  or  quit  the  field  to  avoid  a 
iging  conflict  with  overwhelming  odds.  Hardee  directed 
to  communicate  his  information  to  General  Beauregard, 
arith  that  object  he  rode  forth  again  ;  but  after  a  diligent 
:h  through  the  woods  and  darkness,  unable  to  find  that 
jral,  he  became  so  deeply  solicitous  that  he  hurried  back 
s  pickets.  Finding  all  quiet,  he  again  dispatched  his 
:s  within  the  Federal  lines.  It  was  two  o'clock  a.m.  be- 
:hey  returned  and  reported  the  continued  arrival  of  fresh 
•s.  Again  Forrest  repaired  and  reported  to  General 
ee  the  state  of  affairs,  but  was  instructed  to  return  to 
egiment,  keep  up  a  vigilant,  strong  picket-line,  and  re- 
all  hostile  movements.  All  the  while,  every  few  min- 
through  the  night,  two  gunboats  had  been  sedulously 
ring  their  drpad  "  bolted-thunder"  directly  over  Forrest's 
ac,  murdering  sleep,  weary  and  drowsy  as  all  his  men 


in.  • 

seven  p.m..  Nelson's  other  brigades  had  crossed  the 
essee,  and,  with  the  one  that  so  materially  helped — ^with 
iter's  opportunely  posted  battery — to  save  the  Federal 
from  utter  overthrow,  were  at  once  thrown  forward  by 
ral  Buell  as  a  shield  between  General  Grant's  army  and 
!onfederates.*     Crittenden's  Division  likewise  came  up 


IS  division  was  formed  of  Am-  and  Thirty-sixth  Indiana,  the  First, 
Brace's,  and  Hazen's  brigades,  Second,  Sixth,  and  Twentieth  Ken- 
ing  Sixth,  Ninth,  Twenty-fourth,     tucky,  and  Forty-first  Ohio  regiments. 


A 


138 


Campaigns  of  General  ForresL 


from  Savannah  by  water  not  long  after,  and  was  promptly 
established  in  the  same  manner  on  Nelson's  right.*  More- 
over, Lew  Wallace,  strangely  unable  to  find  the  road  battle- 
ward  amid  the  thunder  peals  of  more  than  a  hundred  cannon 
within  six  miles  of  him,  as  soon  as  the  dusky  shadows  and  the 
quiet  of  night  had  supervened,  found  a  way  to  the  south  bank 
of  Snake  creek  and  to  a  position  there  commanding  the 
bridge,  and  by  chance,  too,  in  the  neighborhood  of  Sherman, 
with  the  shreds  or  odds  and  ends  of  his  own  and  other  divi- 
sions that  had  rallied  around  him.f  One  of  McCook's  bri- 
gades (Rousseau's)  also  reached  the  scene  about  sunrise,  and 
the  other  two  were  near  at  hand.  J 

Thus  were  marshaled  there  or  near  at  hand,  ready  to  take 
the  offensive  against  the  victors  of  the  day  before,  25,000 
fresh  Federal  troops,  three  battalions  of  which  were  regulars. 
On  the  Confederate  side,  to  meet  such  an  onset,  there  was 
not  a  man  who  had  not  fought  steadfastly  for  the  greater  part 
of  Sunday.§  In  addition  to  the  many  stragglers  incident  to 
all  battles,  the  casualties  did  not  fall  short  of  6500  officers  and 
men,  so  that  not  more  than  20,cxx)  Confederate  infantry  could 


♦  Apparently  of  two  brigades,  (Boyle's 
and  W.  S.  Smith's,)  including  Ninth, 
Eleventh  Thirteenth,  and  Twenty-sLxth 
Kentucky,  and  Thirteenth,  Nineteenth, 
Fifty-ninth,  and  another  Ohio  regiment 

t  Smith's,  Thayer's,  and  Whittlesey's 
brigades,  Eleventh,  Twenty-third,  and 
Twenty-fourth  Indiana,  Twentieth, 
Twenty-third,  Fifty-sixth,  Sixty-eighth, 
Seventy-sixth,  and  Seventy-eighth 
Ohio,  Eighth  Missouri,  and  First  Ne- 
braska regiments. 

X  McCook's  Division  was  formed  in 
three  brigades,  Rousseau's,  Johnson's, 
and  Kirk's,  with  the  Sixth,  Twenty- 


ninth,  Thirtieth,  Thirty-second,  and 
Thirty-ninth  Indiana,  Fifteenth  and 
Forty-ninth  Ohio,  Twenty-fourth  Illi- 
nois, and  Seventy-seventh  Pennsylva- 
nia regiments.  We  find  the  details  of 
these  regiments  of  Wallace's,  Nelson's, 
Crittenden's,  and  McCook's  brigades 
in  letter  of  "Agate,"  Rcb.  Rec.  IV. 
Doc  X14. 

§  A  Tennessee  Confederate  regiment 
(Hiirs)  reached  the  field  Sunday,  and 
was  furnished  with  arms  and  accoutre- 
ments picked  up  there.  Its  good 
duct  was  conspicuous. 


Federals  Assume  the  Offensive.  139 

have  been  found  to  answer  to  their  names  that  morning. 
Scattered  widely,  the  regiments  of  the  bngades  of  Bragg's 
and  Hardee's  Corps  had  slept  here  and  there  among  the  cap- 
tured encampments,  wheresoever  they  could  find  subsistence. 
Polk's  Corps  had  been  embodied  to  some  degree,  and  led 
during  the  night  by  their  General  rearward  at  least  a  mile 
and  a  half  beyond  Shiloh  toward  Corinth, 

In  haste  to  efface  the  tarnish  of  the  arrant  disaster  inflicted 
on  his  aiiny  on  Sunday,  with  all  the  attending  completeness 
of  the  surprise,  General  Grant  did  not  await  the  advent  of 
Buell's  other  divisions,  but  directed  the  offensive  to  be  as- 
sumed at  dawn.  An  accomplished  soldier,  martial  by  nature, 
acquainted  with  the  theory  of  grand  operations,  and  well 
practiced  as  a  staff  and  line  officer,  General  Buell  had  known 
how  to  make  soldiers  of  his  men,  formidable  soldiers  to  the 
scorched,  battle-jaded  Confederates  whom  they  were  about 
to  engage.  - 

From  his  line  of  observation,  Forrest  discovered  the  first 
movement  of  the  enemy,  just  before  day,  a  tentative  advance 
of  some  pickets,  as  if  to  feel  for  an  enemy.  His  men  were 
now  generally  clothed  in  Federal  cavalry  overcoats,  found  in 
their  encampment  of  the  night.  These  misled  the  Federal 
pickets,  some  fifty  of  whom  were  presently  captured.  About 
half-past  five  a.m.,  however,  a  swarm  of  skirmishers  were  flung 
boldly  forward  by  Nelson.  These  Forrest  engaged  as  he  fell 
back  slowly  upon  the  infantry, — then  being  collected  some- 
what rearward — and  behind  whom,  at  seven  a.m..  General 
Hardee  directed  him  finally  to  retire.  The  sound  of  so  much 
musketry  at  the  front  by  this  time  had  announced,  plainly 
enough,  the  advent  upon  the  theatre  of  war  of  BuelFs  army, 
and  a  desperate  struggle  for  the  fruits  of  yesterday's  hard- 
earned  triumph.  All,  as  we  have  said,  were  greatly  fatigued, 
and  under  the  influence  also  of  that  extreme  lassitude  which 
follows  every  great  exaltation  ;  nevertheless  the  reaction  was 


i 


i^o  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

immediate,  and  with  the  utmost  alacrity  the  Confederates 
sprang  once  more  into  serried  ranks,  bent  on  a  manful  eflfort 
to  hold  what  they  had  won. 

Chalmers's  Brigade,  with  a  part  of  J.  K.  Jackson's,  under 
Wheeler,  in  advance,  in  front  of  Nelson,  were  the  first  to  be- 
come  engaged.      Nelson  came  out  with  vigor,  and  the  Confe- 
derates  retired  slowly  to  concentrate  their  strength.     By  eight 
o'clock,  Hardee,  however,  had  massed  in  that  quarter  a  num- 
ber of  his  own  corps,  as  well  as  Withers's  Division  of'  Bragg's^ 
and  the  combat  began  in  good  earnest.     Nelson  now  found 
a  lion  in  his  path,  but  Hazen's  Brigade  pushed  forward  with, 
decided  pluck,  and  the  Confederates  were  driven  from  their 
position  with  the  loss  of  a  battery.   A  well-timed  concentration, 
however,  enabled  the  Confederates  to  hurl  Hazen  back  from 
his  prey,  and  in  turn  pressed  Nelson  so  sorely  that  by  nine 
A.M.  he  was  calling  lustily  for  aid.*    In  this  affair  the  Confede- 
rate officers  led  their  ranks  notably.    Chalmers,  seizing  the 
colors  of  a  regiment  as  his  brigade  wavered,  rode  forward,  the 
men  rallied,  and,  resuming  the  offensive,  carried  the  contested 
point.     At  the  same   time,  Colonel  Wheeler  did  the  like 
with  the  flag  of  the  Nineteenth  Alabama  ;t  and  Lieutenant- 
Colonel  W.  A.  Rankin,  of  Mississippi,  lost  his  life,  giving 
a  conspicuous  example  of  determined  courage  to  his  regi- 
ment. 

Nelson  was  reenforced  by  Terrell's  Battery,  (regulars,)  and 
a  portion  of  Crittenden's  Division,  and  an  obstinate  struggle 
for  the  mastery  of  this  part  of  the  field  raged  until  about  one 
P.M.  But  neither  party  gained  any  material  advantage,  except 
Terrell's  Battery  was  so  cut  up  that  he  had  to  assist  as  a  gun- 
ner at  one  of  his  pieces,  and  the  battery  narrowly  escaped 
capture. 


♦  R^.  Rec,  IV.  Doc  114,  p.  397. 

t  SubficquenUy  Major-General  Wheeler  of  the  Cavalry. 


Progress  of  the  Battle.  141 

Crittenden  by  this  time  was  likewise  hotly  engaged  in  the 
mediate  centre,  and  on  his  right  were  arrayed  several  thou- 
id  of  Grant's  trgops,  under  McClemand.  The  Confede- 
es  on  his  front,  at  first  retiring  to  concentrate  at  his  ad- 
ice,  finally  rebounded,  as  upon  Nelson,  with  as  great  ardor 
1  cheering  as  heartily  as  the  day  before  in  the  full  tide  of 
jir  brilliant  success.  And  as  Nelson  was  borne  back,  so 
s  Crittenden  by  the  same  refluent  wave.* 
One  of  McCook's  brigades,  under  Rousseau,  leavened  by 
•ee  battalions  of  regulars,  had  been  on  the  field  as  early  as 
/'light,  on  the  right  of  Crittenden,  neighboring  Sherman  and 
w  Wallace.  His  other  brigades  reached  and  took  position 
>ut  ten  o'clock ;  and  just  about  the  same  time  Polk's  Corps 
ning  up  from  the  rear,  on  the  Confederate  side,  entered 
5  battle  in  splendid  order  and  spirit. 

Grant's  shattered  forces,  on  Sunday  night,  had  been  reor- 
lized  into  three  divisions,  of  a  decidedly  composite  character, 
der  Sherman,  McClemand,  and  Hurlbut.  Four  or  five 
)usand  of  these  men  were  brought  up  under  McClemand, 
we  have  said,  between  Crittenden  and  McCook,  and  about 
I  o'clock,  several  thousand  more,  that  hitherto  had  been  col- 
:ted  and  held  near  the  river,  were  also  added  under  Hurl- 
t,  who,  however,  fusing  them  with  McClernand's  command, 
paired  rearward  again,  at  McClernand's  request,  to  seek 
rther  supportf 

Lew  Wallace,  it  will  be  remembered,  bivouacked  near  the 
rer  and  Snake  Creek  bridge,  and  so  did  Sherman.  No  con- 
lerable  portion  of  Confederates  had  slept  in  that  quarter  of 
e  field,  so  Wallace  and  Sherman  advancing  for  a  while  with- 
it  difficulty,  took  up  a  strong  position  on  a  wooded  ridge, 
fording  shelter  for  Wallace  s  two  batteries,  with  its  right 


•  R^,  Rec,  IV.  Doc  1x4,  p.397.  t  Ibid. 


142 


Campaigns  of  General  Forrest 


protected  by  the  swamps  of  Owl  creek.  However,  by  the 
time  Nelson  was  well  at  work  on  the  Federal  left,  the  Con- 
federates opened  a  light  fire  upon  Wallace  and  Sherman,  who, 
encouraged  by  its  feebleness,  adventured  the  offensive.  But 
their  speedy  greeting  was  a  sheet  of  flame,  lead,  and  canister 
from  the  woods  in  their  front,  where  portions  of  Ruggles's  and 
Breckinridge's  divisions  stood  in  wait.  The  Federals  reeled 
and  rushed  rearward,  followed  nearly  a  mile  by  the  Confede- 
rates ;  but  here,  reenforced  by  McCook,  Sherman  attempted 
to  resume  the  advance.  Now  the  fight  waxed  obstinate,  and 
the  firing,  says  Sherman,  was  the  "severest  musketry"  he  had 
ever  heard.  Rousseau's  Federal  Brigade  here  was  pitted 
against  Trabue's  Kentuckians.  Both  fought  with  uncommon 
determination  to  win,  but  the  Federals  were  repulsed,  and 
Wallace  was  so  pressed  that  his  situation  became  extremely 
critical.*  McCook's  other  brigade  had  joined  in  the  action 
meanwhile ;  and  in  that  part  of  the  field,  including  Grant's 
forces  under  Sherman  and  McClemand,  there  were  fully  twen- 
ty thousand  Federals  opposed  by  not  half  that  number  of  bat- 
tle-battered Confederates.!  The  impetus  of  the  Confederate 
attack  was,  therefore,  slackened  in  the  face  of  such  odds.  Yet 
several  brilliant  charges  were  made,  in  one  of  which,  to  the 
left  of  Shiloh,  General  Beauregard  himself  led  in  person,  carry- 
ing the  battle-flag  of  a  Louisiana  regiment ;  and  Trabue's  Bri- 
gade, having  carried  earlier  an  eminence  near  Owl  creek,  re- 
pulsing every  efibrt  to  dislodge  him,  held  the  position  until 


*  This  is  his  own  statement  It  is  a 
somewhat  noteworthy  fact,  however, 
that  in  the  Federal  reports,  whenever  a 
retrograde  occurs,  it  is  always  a  nei^- 
bar  who  succumbSi  either  on  the  right 
or  left.  One  is  reminded  of  the  homely 
story  of  the  man  of  the  Mississippi  bot- 
toms, who  declared  that  he  was  not 


troubled  by  mosquitoes,  "but  really 
there'*  s  no  living  for  them  just  heiom  at 
my  neighbor's  house  I " 

t  That  is,  Wallace's  Division,  seven 
thousand  strong ;  McCook*s,  at  least 
seven  thousand ;  and  say  six  thousand 
under  Sherman  and  McClemand. 


Retreat  Ordered. 


143 


the  retreat  was  ordered.  Here,  as  on  the  right,  the  Confe- 
derate troops  were  animated  by  the  greatest  intrepidity  on  the 
part  of  their  superior  officers.* 

It  was  now  after  one  o'clock.  The  battle,  kindled  soon  after 
daylight,  had  raged  furiously  from  right  to  left  for  more  than 
five  hours.  And,  notwithstanding  the  odds  of  fresh  troops 
brought  up  against  them,  despite  their  long-continued  engage- 
ment, the  Confederates  had  not  receded  from  the  ground  upon 
which  they  had  been  concentrated  as  soon  as  it  was  apparent 
that  the  battle  was  on  their  hands.f  But  they  were  being 
fearfully  depleted  meanwhile.  Beginning  the  combat  with 
not  more  than  20,oc»  men,  exclusive  of  cavalry,  less  than 
15,000  were  now  in  the  Confederate  ranks.  General  Beaure- 
gard, seeing  the  unprofitable  nature  of  the  struggle,  deter- 
mined not  to  prolong  it.  Directing  his  Adjutant-General  to 
select  a  position,  and  post  such  troops  as  were  available  to 
cover  the  retreat,  he  dispatched  other  staff-officers  to  the 
corps  commanders,  with  the  order  to  retire  simultaneously 
from  their  several  positions,  ready,  however,  to  turn  and  fight 
should  it  become  necessary.  And  accordingly,  about  two 
o'clock,  the  retrograde  movement  of  the  Confederates  was 
inaugurated,  and  carried  out  with  a  steadiness  never  exceeded 
by  veterans  of  a  hundred  fields.^ 

During  the  various  stages  of  the  conflict.  General  Beaure- 


*  Lieutenant  Sandridge,  of  General 
Cheatham's  staff,  seizing  the  colors  of 
a  regiment,  holding  them  aloft,  spurred 
his  horse  to  the  front,  as  did  also  Colo- 
nel  Stanley,  Ninth  Texas,  and  both  at 
a  critical  moment  thus  incited  the  men 
to  advance.  These  are  but  a  few  of 
the  examples  that  might  be  dted. 

t  This  b  manifest  from  the  official 
reports  of  Generals  Nelson,  Lew  Wal- 


lace, and  Sherman.  All  that  Wallace 
claims  is,  that  he  was  able  to  hold  his 
ground  and  repulse  the  Confederates 
up  to  about  two  o'clock.  That  is,  to 
the  hour  when  they  had  commenced  to 
leave  the  field  under  orders. 

X  All  the  Federal  accoimts  place  the 
moment  of  the  retreat  several  hours 
later  than  it  actually  happened,  as 
could  be  demonstrated. 


144  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

gard  tried  to  use  his  cavalry,  but  so  dense  and  broadspread 
were  the  woods  that  they  proved  altogether  fruitless  of  re- 
sults. Colonel  Forrest,  with  ever-useful  instincts,  however, 
was  able  to  render  effective  service  during  the  morning  in 
repressing  straggling,  until,  about  eleven  o'clock,  he  was  or- 
dered by  General  Breckinridge,  in  whose  vicinity  he  happened 
to  be,  to  place  his  regiment  on  the  right  flank,  where  he  soon 
became  engaged  in  a  brisk  skirmish.  Three  times  the  enemy 
endeavored  to  break  that  part  of  the  Confederate  line,  but 
were  repulsed,  as  we  have  related,  until  near  one  o'clock,  when, 
under  an  order  from  General  Beauregard,  Forrest  carried  his 
regiment  to  the  centre,  where  it  was  dismounted  and  took 
part  there  in  repulsing  the  last  onset  made  by  the  Federals  in 
that  quarter,  before  the  retreat  began. 

The  retreat  had  now  commenced  in  earnest,  but  so  stunned 
and  crippled  was  the  enemy  that  no  effort  or  pretense  to  pur- 
sue was  made.*  The  line  established  to  cover  the  move- 
ment commanded  the  ground  of  Shiloh  Church,  and  some 
open  fields  in  the  neighborhood.  Thence  keeping  up  a  vigo- 
rous play  of  artillery  on  the  woods  beyond,  there  was  no 
reply,  nor  did  any  enemy  become  visible.  That  line  was  then 
withdrawn  about  three  fourths  of  a  mile  to  another  favorable 
position.  Meanwhile,  the  retreat  had  been  effected  in  admi- 
rable order,  all  stragglers  falling  in  the  ranks,  and  that  line  was 
abandoned  with  no  enemy  in  sight.  Breckinridge,  assigned 
to  the  duty  of  covering  the  retreat  with  his  division,  was  or- 
dered to  bivouac  for  the  night  at  a  point  not  more  than  four 
and  a  half  miles  from  Pittsburg  Landing.  The  other  corps 
were  now  en  route  for  Corinth,  by  a  road  which  that  night 
was  made  almost  impracticable  for  wheels  by  a  heavy  rain- 
fall.    Colonel  Forrest,  soon  after  the  retreat  began,  moved 


*  General  Grant  states  Sherman  followed  a  short  way,  bat  found  that  the  Con- 
federates had  retreated  in  good  order. 


Federal  and  Confederate  Losses.  iac 

over  with  several  squadrons  of  his  regiment  to  attend  per- 
sonally to  picketing  Lick  creek  through  the  night,  and  to 
guard  against  any  aggressive  movement  from  that  direction. 

The  losses  of  the  Confederates  in  the  two  days*  combats 
are  accurately  and  officially  stated  by  General  Beauregard  at 
1728  killed,  8012  wounded,  and  959  missing^  or  an  aggregate 
of  10^699.  The  Federal  commander,  in  his  brief  report  of 
the  battle,  estimates  his  own  losses  at  only  1500  killed  and 
3500  wounded,  an  evidently  large  understatement,  for  in  the 
official  reports  of  three  of  his  division  generals  we  find  their 
losses  foot  up  in  killed  and  wounded  as  high  as  4614,  with 
4832  reported  missing,  a  number  of  whom  must  have  been 
killed,  as  only  30CX)  were  captured,  and  most  of  them  were  of 
Prentiss's  Division.  What  the  real  loss  of  Grant's  army  was, 
those  who  could  best  do  it  have  not  been  at  the  pains  to  ascer- 
tain. The  divisions  of  Buell  engaged  lost  3753,  much  the  hea- 
viest part  of  which  fell  upon  McCook's  Division  in  the  ob- 
stinate struggle  against  the  Confederate  left  and  left-centre.* 
Of  trophies  the  Confederates  carried  from  the  field  some  twen- 
ty-six stands  of  flags  and  colors,  and  about  thirty  of  the  guns 
captured  on  the  6th.  The  guns  which  figure  in  Federal  sub- 
ordinate reports  as  captured  from  the  Confederates,  with  few 
exceptions,  were  those  lost  on  Sunday  by  the  Federals,  which, 
for  want  of  horses  to  draw  them  from  the  field,  had  been  left 
by  the  Confederates  where  they  had  been  taken. 

IV. 

On  Tuesday  morning  General  Breckinridge  fell  back  to  a 
position  only  three  miles  beyond,  and  there  remained  undis- 


•  Since  the  foregoing  was  written,     writes  in  a  fair  spirit,  estimates  the 
•e  obienre  that  Swinton,  who  always     Federal  loss  at  15,000. 


146  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest 

turbed  for  some  days,  with  the  cavalry  thrown  forward  in 
close  proximity  to  the  Federal  lines.  After  Breckinridge  hsui 
thus  withdrawn,  Colonel  Forrest  found  himself  with  a  squad- 
ron of  about  150  men,  on  Tuesday  morning,  on  the  road 
toward  Monterey,  in  the  presence  of  a  heavy  Federal  infan- 
try force,  advancing  in  three  lines  of  battle.  About  the  same 
time,  a  company  of  Wirt  Adams's  regiment,  under  Captain 
Isaac  Harrison,  a  squadron  of  the  Eighth  Texas  and  some 
Kentuckians,  under  Captain  John  Morgan,  opportunely  came 
up,  making  a  force  of  little  more  than  350  troopers.  The  posi- 
tion, a  ridge,  was  advantageous,  and  Forrest  determined  to 
attempt  to  hold  it  until  his  regiment  could  be  brought  up^ 
Formed  in  line  of  .battle,  the  Confederates  boldly  stood  their 
ground,  as  about  two  battalions  of  cavalry  and  a  regiment  of 
infantry  were  thrown  forward  to  assail  them.  The  infiEmtry 
advanced  handsomely  at  a  charge,  with  their  bayonets  pre- 
sented. There  was  some  confusion,  however,  in  the  Federal 
ranks  in  crossing  a  small  stream  ;  and  Forrest,  with  his  cha- 
racteristic quickness  of  sight  and  plans,  his  wonted  hardihood, 
resolved  to  charge  the  Federals  with  his  force,  as  small  as  it 
was.  His  bugler  sounded  the  charge,  and  forward  dashed 
the  Confederates  from  their  covert  behind  the  crest  of  the 
ridge  in  superb  order  and  spirit,  and  were  almost  upon  the 
enemy  before  the  nature  of  the  movement  was  perceived,  or 
they  had  had  time  to  prepare  for  it  At  twenty  paces  the 
Confederates  gave  a  volley  with  their  shot-guns,  a  formidable 
weapon  at  that  short  distance,  and  rushed  in  with  pistols  and 
sabres.  So  sudden  was  the  onset  that,  despite  their  numbers, 
the  Federal  cavalry  broke  in  disorder,  and  fled  back  through 
the  woods  running  over  their  own  infantry  in  their  panic,  cre- 
ating a  scene  of  singular  confusion  and  tumult  for  some  mo- 
ments. Many  of  the  infantry  were  thus  knocked  down  ; 
many  horses  also  were  transfixed  by  the  bayonets  of  their 
own  infantry.     Scores  of  other  horses  fell  and  threw 


Forrest  Surrounded.  147 

riders  sprawling  and  bruised  upon  the  ground ;  and  all  around 
was  a  medley  of  cavalry  and  infantry,  scattering  and  running 
to  and  fro,  hither  and  thither,  officers  shouting  and  cursing, 
and  the  hurt  groaning.  Before  the  infantry  could  recover 
from  the  condition  into  which  the  flight  of  the  cavalry  had 
thrown  them,  Forrest  was  upon  them  also  with  a  swift  play  of 
sabre  and  revolver,  and  they  broke  as  well  as  the  cavalry. 
The  slaughter  was  considerable,  as  the  flying  infantry  were 
closely  pursued  for  several  hundred  yards  by  their  eager,  ex- 
cited enemy.  Men  are  merciless  on  such  occasions.  The  loss 
inflicted  was  heavy,  while  seventy  were  captured. 

In  the  ardency  and  exultation  of  the  pursuit,  Forrest  pressed 
on  until  he  found  himself  alone  within  fifty  yards  of  the  main 
body  of  the  Federal  expeditionary  force, — ^and  beyond,  indeed, 
a  large  part  of  those  whom  he  had  just  surprised  and  routed. 
Halting,  he  saw  at  a  glance  that  his  men,  perceiving  sooner 
the  situation,  had  very  properly  halted,  and  were  then  falling 
back  with  their  prisoners, — ^which  they  were  doing,  however, 
unaware  of  the  perilous  position  of  their  leader.  Immediately 
observed  by  the  enemy,  now  all  around  him,  Forrest  was  fired 
at  from  all  sides.  One  ball  from  an  Austrian  rifle,  striking 
him  on  the  left  side,  just  above  the  point  of  the  hip-bone, 
penetrated  to  the  spine,  and,  ranging  around,  lodged  in  the 
left  side — a  severe  if  not,  indeed,  mortal  wound,  as  his  surgeon 
apprehended.  His  right  leg,  benumbed  by  the  blow,  was  also 
left  hanging  useless  in  the  stirrup.  Turning  his  horse,  how- 
ever, he  resolved  to  escape,  surrounded  as  he  was  by  hun- 
dreds bent  on  his  death,  and  shouting,  "  Kill  him  !"  "  Shoot 
him  r  "  Stick  him  !"  "  Knock  him  off"  his  horse  !"  all  of 
which  they  literally  sought  to  do.  His  horse,  too,  was 
wounded,  (mortally,  as  it  proved,)  but  still  bore  up  under  his 
daring  rider,  as  he  dashed  out  of  the  throng  of  assailants, 
using  his  revolver  with  deadly  aim  to  clear  his  path.  In  a 
moment  more  his  path  to  the  rear,  at  leasts  was  clear  of  foes : 


148  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest 

but  their  marksmen,  still  within  easy  range,  sent  hundreds  of 
balls  after  him  as  he  galloped  down  the  road  and  over  the 
hilL  Happily,  he  escaped  without  further  hurt,  and  rejoined 
his  command,  halted  behind  the  ridge.  Giving  orders  to  the 
officer  next  in  rank  to  assume  command,  but  to  avoid  further 
action  with  so  large  a  force,  Forrest  now  went  to  the  nearest 
hospital  for  surgical  aid.  There  he  was  advised  by  the  sur- 
geons, who  could  not  discover  the  ball,  to  go  to  the  rear  as 
rapidly  as  possible.  Doing  this,  he  soon  was  at  Greneral 
Breckinridge's  encampment,  and  that  General  ordered  him  to 
proceed  to  Corinth,  for  which  place  he  set  out,  accompanied 
by  his  adjutant.  Captain  J.  P.  Strange.  Soon  the  wound  be- 
came so  painful  that  he  was  f6rced  to  dismount,  and  take  pas- 
sage in  a  buggy ;  but  on  the  rough  roads  to  be  traversed,  that 
speedily  proving  more  painful  even  than  by  horseback,  he  re- 
mounted his  wounded  horse,  and  finally  reached  Corinth  that 
night,  when  the  horse,  who  had  borne  him  so  stoutly  and 
fiuthfuUy,  dropped  and  died  a  few  hours  later. 

On  the  next  day.  Colonel  Forrest,  furloughed  for  sixty 
days,  repaired  to  Memphis.  There  his  good  habits  and 
sound  constitution  enabled  him  to  surmount  what  would  have 
killed  most  men.  However,  on  the  29th  of  April,  learning 
from  Lieutenant-Colonel  Kelly  that  there  was  some  discontent 
in  the  regiment,  originating  in  deficient,  defective  subsistence, 
Forrest,  still  suffering  acutely  from  his  wound,  at  once  re- 
turned to  Corinth  and  rejoined  his  men,  whose  wants,  by  his 
energy,  tact,  and  resources,  he  was  soon  able  to  supply,  as 
well  as  to  repress  the  spirit  of  dissatisfaction  which  had  ger« 
minated  in  his  absence. 

A  week  after  rejoining,  being  one  day  out  reconnoitering 
the  Federal  lines  that  had  now  approached  near  to  Corinth, 
leaping  a  log,  the  exertion  brought  such  an  acute  pain  that  it 
became  necessary  at  once  to  extract  the  ball  which  still  re- 
mained in  his  left  side.    The  operation  was  very  severe,  and 


Commentaries.  149 

made  it  absolutely  necessary  for  him  to  be  again  absent  from 
command  for  a  fortnight. 

COMMENTARIES. 

I.  The  delay  of  the  Confederate  army  in  making  the  march 
from  Corinth  is  a  signal  illustration  of  the  truth  of  Napier's 
proposition,  "  That  celerity  in  war  depends  as  much  on  the 
experience  of  the  troops  as  upon  t/te  energy  of  the  General," 
Nevertheless,  there  were  grave  faults  in  the  handling  of  seve- 
ral of  the  corps  on  the  march.  Moreover,  several  of  these 
did  not  quit  Corinth  as  early  in  the  day  as  they  might  have 
done.  We  know  General  Johnston  was  profoundly  disap- 
pointed and  chagrined  that  his  just  expectations  of  delivering 
battle  on  Saturday  morning  were  thus  baffled. 

II.  The  precise  terrain  occupied  by  the  Federal  army  wa.s 
unknown  to  the  Confederate  General,  who,  therefore,  adopted 
\iit  parallel  order  of  battle  rather  than  the  oblique,  which  has 
generally  been  employed  by  great  captains  since  Frederick 
the  Great  restored  it  to  the  Art  of  War.  Had  General  John- 
ston known  the  actual  position  occupied  by  the  Federal  front 
line,  he  surely  would  have  attacked  by  the  oblique  order ; 
massing  upon  the  Federal  right  (Sherman)  so  as  to  force  it 
hack  south-eastwardly  into  the  cul  de  sac  made,  above  Pitts- 
burg Landing,  by  the  junction  of  Lick  creek  with  the  Ten- 
nessee river.  As  the  attack  was  made,  the  shock  of  the  onset 
only  affected  Sherman's  left  brigade.  Had  it  fallen  with  full 
iorce  upon  his  entire  division,  it  is  manifest  that  that  which 
happened  to  Hildebrand's  Brigade  would  have  befallen  it. 
The  entire  division  must  have  been  swept  away  as  that  brigade 
was,  and  been  driven  rearward  so  rapidly  upon  McClernand's, 
Hurlbut's,  and  Wallace's  (W.  H.  L.)  as  to  give  them  little  or  no 
time  to  form  their  divisions,  and  make  the  stand  which  Sher- 
man's obstinate  resistance  with  two  of  his  brigades,  near  Shi- 
Mi,  enabled  them  to  do. 


i 


150  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest 

III.  Both  sides  have  claimed  the  advantage  f  The  C< 
rates  found  their  pretension  upon  the  facts  of  the  heai 
tures  of  men,  artillery,  and  colors  which  they  carried  fr< 
field,  the  complete  rout  inflicted  on  the  Federals  on  S 
and  their  ability  on  Monday  to  hold  the  ground  upon 
they  had  concentrated  and  made  the  battle  until  tw 
when  General  Beauregard  withdrew  from  an  unprc 
combat ;  withdrew  in  admitted  good  order,  taking  wit 
all  the  captured  guns  for  which  there  was  transpor 
Moreover,  his  enemy  was  left  so  completely  battere 
stunned  as  to  be  unable  to  pursue.  The  Federals  cla 
victory  upon  the  grounds  that,  on  Monday  evening,  th( 
recovered  their  encampments  and  possession  of  the  fi 
battle,  from  which  the  Confederates  had  retired,  leaving  1 
their  dead  and  a  number  of  wounded.  In  this  discus: 
should  be  remembered  that  after  the  Confederates  concer 
on  Monday — or  from  at  least  as  late  as  nine  o'clock  a.m 
the  time  of  their  retreat — ^they  uniformly  took  the  offensi 
were  the  assailants.  All  substantially  claimed  in  rep< 
Federal  subordinate  generals  is  that,  after  having  been  w 
between  nine  a.m.  and  two  p.m.,  they  were  then  able  t< 
their  own  and  check  their  antagonists.*  After  that, 
festly,  there  was  a  complete  lull  in  the  battle  until  aboi 
P.M.,  when,  and  no  sooner,  do  the  Federals  appear  tc 
advanced. 

IV.  General  Beauregard  has  been  blamed  unjustly  foi 
drawing  his  troops  just  as  they  were  being  launched  or 
day  evening  against  the  last  Federal  position  with  such 
bers  and  impetus  by  generals  on  the  spot  as  must  have  ii 
complete  success.  The  reports  of  brigades  and  regir 
commanders  completely  disprove  this  allegation.     His 


*  Vide  reports  of  Wallace,  Nelson,  Crittenden,  etc.,  and  correspond 
*4fBA!.*    R^.  Rec.  IV.  Doc  II4. 


Commentaries.  151 

really  was  not  distributed  before  the  greater  part  of  the  Con- 
federate troops  had  already  given  up  the  attempt  for  that  day 
to  carry  the  ridge  at  the  Landing.     The  true  reason  why  the 
battle  of  Sunday  fell  short  of  the  most  complete  victory  of 
modem  war  by  the  capture  of  the  whole  Federal  army  is  sim- 
ply this :  After  the  combat  was  at  its  height,  about  meridian, 
those  superior  officers  who  should  have  been  occupied  with 
the  concentration  and  continuous  projection  of  their  troops  in 
heavy  masses  upon  the  shattered  Federal  divisions  were  at 
the  very  front  and  "  perilous  edge  "  of  the  battle,  leading  for- 
ward regiments,  perchance  brigades,  into  action,  with  great 
individual  intrepidity,  and  doing  a  great  deal,  no  doubt,  by 
their  personal  example  to  impel  small  bodies  forward.     But, 
meanwhile,  to  their  rear  were  left  the  masses  of  their  respect- 
ive commands,  without  direction,  and  thus  precious  time  was 
lost     The  Confederates  were  not  kept  continuously  massed 
and  employed,  either  corps  or  divisions  ;  mere  piecemeal  on- 
sets were  the  general  method  of  fighting  after  twelve  o'clock, 
with  this  consequence :  Sherman  was  enabled  to  make  several 
obstinate  powerful  stands,  by  which  he  protracted  the  battle 
some  hours.      Had  the  corps  been  held  well  in  hand,  massed 
and  pressed  continuously  upon  the  tottering,  demoralized  foe  ; 
had  general  officers  attended  to  the  swing  and  direction  of  the 
great  war-engine  at  their  disposition,  rather  than,  as  it  were, 
becoming  so  many  heads  or  battering-rams  of  that  machine,* 


•  VuU  Troilus  and  Cressida^  Scene  They   call    this— bed-work,  mappery, 

lIL  Act  I. — Shakespeare.  closet-war  : 

So  that  the  ram,  that  batters  down  the 

"  the  still  and  mental  parts, —  wall, 

That  do  contrive  how  many  hands  shall  For  the  great  swing  and  rudeness  of  hit 

strike,  poise, 

When  fitness  calls  them  on ;  and  know,  They  place  before  his  hand  that  made 

by  tneasure  the  engine  ; 

Of  their   observant  toil,  the  enemies'  Or  those,  that  with  the  fineness  of  their 

weight, —  souls 

Wl^,  this  hath  not  a  finger's  dignity :  By  reason  guide  hb  execution." 


152  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

the  battle  assuredly  would  have  closed  at  latest  by  mid-day. 
By  that  hour,  at  most,  the  whole  Federal  force  might  have 
been  urged  back  and  penned  up,  utterly  helpless,  in  the  angle 
formed  between  the  river  and  Lick  creek,  or  dispersed  along 
under  the  river  bank,  between  the  two  creeks,  we  repeat, 
had  Confederate  corps  been  kept  in  continuity,  closely  pressed 
en  masse  upon  their  enemy  after  the  front  line  had  been  broken 
and  swept  back.  In  that  case  the  Federal  fragments  must 
have  been  kept  in  downward  movement,  like  the  loose  stones 
in  the  bed  of  a  mountain  torrent. 

V.  In  a  remarkable  letter  from  that  distinguished  soldier. 
General  Sherman,  which  we  find  in  the  United  States  Service 
Magazine*  he  virtually  asserts  that,  even  had  General  Buell 
failed  to  reached  the  scene  with  his  reenforcements,  neverthe- 
less the  state  of  the  battle  was  such  at  five  p.m.,  Sunday,  as 
"justified"  General  Grant  in  giving  him  orders,  at  that  hour, 
to  "  drop  the  defensive  and  assume  the  offensive"  at  daylight 
on  Monday  morning.  This  to  be  the  order  of  the  day,  irre- 
spective of  the  advent  of  Buell !  In  other  words.  Grant  had 
resolved  to  become,  on  the  morrow,  the  assailant,  forsooth, 
with  Lew  Wallace's  Division — ^which,  having  found  it  so  hard 
for  the  last  ten  hours  to  find  the  road  across  "  four  miles"  of 
country,  with  the  sound  of  a  great  battle  (and  comrades  in 
lire  peril)  to  "quicken"  its  steps,  was  not  yet  on  the  field 
— ^and  with  such  of  his  own  "  startled  troops  as  Iiad  recovered 
their  equilibrium!*  That  is  to  say,  with  7000  fresh  troops, 
not  yet  in  hand,  added  to  such  commands  as  Sherman's,  which 
he  confesses  in  his  official  report  was  now  of  a  "  mixed  cha- 
racter,"— ^without  any  of  three  of  his  four  bri^des  present — 
and  such  of  the  mass  then  huddled,  demoralized  and  abject, 
under  the  river  bank  since  ten  o'clock,  as  might  have  their 


*  For  January,  1865.    Trading  artide. 


CotntncftiuTtcs. 


153 


*' equilibrium "  reestablished*     That  this  was  the  purpose 
General  Sherman  is  sure  from  a  story  then  told  him  by  Gen- 
eral Grant  of  what  had  happened  at  Fort  Donelson  on  the 
15th  of  February ;  and,  furthermore,  he  is  very  positive  that  he 
did  not  know  Buell  had  already  arrived.     Now,  here  the  spirit 
rather  than  the  ieUer  of  the  renowned  General's  paper  is  to  be 
weighed.    To  be  relevant  to  the  question,  he  steps  into  the 
arena  not  to  discuss  but  settle,  he  must  mean  this  :  That 
the  offensive  was  to  be  taken  by  the  Federal  forces  then  west 
of  the  Tennessee,  if  Buell  did  not  come  to  their  assistance  ; 
further,  when  the  order  was  given  to  him  to  that  end,  he  did 
not  know  General  Buell's  forces  were  in  such  proximity  as 
must  insure  their  advent  upon  the  field  in  large,  substantial 
force  to  make  the  projected  attack.     This  must  be  the  sub- 
stance, "  bolted  to  the  bran,"  of  what  he  utters  ;  for  it  were 
not  pertinent  to  the  issue  nor  frank  to  say  merely  that  Buell 
was  not  there,  when  he  knew  that  Buell  must  be  there  in  due 
season  with  the  requisite  troops ! 


•  As  a  proper  part  of  the  history  of 
this  battle,  we  here  append  the  vivid 
picture  of  the  condition  to  which  Gene- 
ral Grant's  army  was  reduced,  as  we 
find  it  in  the  official  reports  of  Generals 
Buell  and  Nelson.  See  also  the  excellent 
letter  of  "  Agate,"  before  cited  in  these 
pages :  "  At  the  Landing,"  says  Gene- 
nd  Bnell,  "  the  banks  swarmed  with  a 
confused  mass  of  men  of  various  regi- 
ments ;  there  could  not  have  been  less 
than  four  or  five  thousand.  Later  in 
the  day  it  became  much  greater ;  .  .  . 
the  throng  of  disorganized  and  demo- 
ralized troops  increased  continually  by 
fresh  fugitives  from  the  battle,  wAtcA 
iteadify  closed  nearer  the  Landings  and 
tee  were   intermingled  with  teams 


striving  to  get  as  near  the  river  as 
possible.     With    few   exceptions, 

ALL  EFFORTS  TO  FORM  THE  TROOPS 
AND  MOVE  THEM  FORWARD  TO  THE 
FIGHT  UTTERLY  FAILED."      (  Reb,   Rec. 

IV.  Doc.  1 14,  p.  410.)  Says  Nelson : 
"  I  found  cowering  under  the  river-bank 
from  seven  to  ten  thousand  mtiif  frantic 
with  fright  and  utterly  demoralized, 
who  received  my  gallant  division  with 
cries,  *  We  are  whipped  !'  *  Cut  to 
pieces  I*  etc.  They  were  insensible  to 
shame  and  sarcasm,  for  I  tried  both." 
(Ibid,  IV.  p.  413.)  This  was,  be  it 
noted,  at  five  p.m.,  the  hour  General 
Grant  was  giving  the  order  General 
Sherman  alleges. 


d 


154  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest 

We  have  great  respect  for  the  genius,  the  tenacity,  and  the 
shining  courage  of  General  Sherman  ;  we  admit  his  well-won 
fame  ;  we  have  a  long  personal  knowledge  of  the  man  ;  but, 
nevertheless,  we  are  constrained  in  the  interest  of  history  tc 
point  out  facts,  as 

— **  plain  as  way  to  parish  chorch," 

that  show  he  wrote  hastily,  inconsiderately.  Saturday  night 
General  Grant  slept  at  Savannah,  where  both  General  Buell 
and  Nelson's  Division  had  arrived.  Before  the  General-in- 
Chief  left  for  the  battle-field,  he  ordered  Nelson  to  march 
thither,  which,  by  a  forced  march,  was  done  in  four  hours,  or 
which  by  an  ordinary  march  might  have  been  effected  at  most 
in  six.  General  Sherman  says  he  saw  General  Grant  as 
early  as  ten  a.m.,  at  a  moment  of  sore  stress.  When  General 
Buell  reached  Pittsburg  Landing,  not  later  than  three  o'clock. 
General  Grant  was  at  the  Landing,  and  the  two  commanders 
met  there.  By  five  p.m.,  the  hour  Sherman  alleges  the  order 
for  the  offensive  was  given,  Nelson  had  been  long  enough  in 
sight  at  the  Landing  to  throw  a  brigade  across,  and  upon  the 
last  ridge  ;  and  at  that  hour  the  last  assaults  of  the  Confede- 
rates had  not  taken  place,  nor  until  Nelson  was  in  position  to 
help  to  repel  them  !  Very  well.  Would  General  Grant, 
knowing  that  Buell  must  be  up  that  night,  be  likely,  even  at 
ten  o'clock,  to  omit  communicating  such  important  intelli- 
gence to  his  doughty,  right-hand  lieutenant — the  very  "  sinew 
and  fore-hand"  of  his  army — not  only  to  inspire  him  to  still 
more  obstinate  fighting,  but  as  a  solace,  a  relief  of  inestima- 
ble value  at  the  instant }  Or  would  he,  at  five  o'clock,  have 
failed  to  acquaint  that  lieutenant  of  Buell's  presence  at  the 
Landing,  and  Nelson's  on  the  other  bank  }  Finally,  at  a  mo- 
ment when  the  Confederates  were  swarming  down  to  make 
their  crowning  assault  upon  the  last  foothold  of  his  fighting 
wreck,  with  but  a  few  hundred  yards  between  it  and  a  wide 


Commentaries^ 


155 


river,  and  when,  from  what  had  already  happened,  he  could 
scarcely  hope  it  would  not  be  a  concentrated,  terrible  onset — 
could  General  Grant,  as  yet  ignorant  of  that  issue,  be  in  con- 
dition to  give  orders  looking  to  the  offensive  on  the  next 
morning  ?  We  are  sure  not,  as  well  as  that  General  Sher- 
man's memory  has  deceived  him.  The  fact  is,  the  order  of 
which  he  speaks  was  really  given  later  ;  that  is,  when  Gene- 
rals Grant  and  Buell  visited  him  together !  All  who  weigh 
evidence  must  come  to  this  conclusion.  Were  further  proof 
necessary,  it  is  found  in  the  fact  that  neither  Sherman's,  nor 
Lew  Wallace's,  nor  any  of  Hurlbut's  troops  became  really  en- 
gaged on  Monday  before  ten  a.m.  ;  and  that  after  that  hour 
even  Hurlbut,  turning  over  to  McClernand  such  men  as  he 
had  been  able  to  collect,  was  sent  back  to  the  river  to  glean 
and  assemble  the  still  scattered  fragments  of  the  five  dismem- 
bered divisions.* 

General  Sherman  is  inexact  in  other  particulars  ;  as,  for 
example,  he  avers  that  in  great  part  General  Grant's  troops 
were  "green  as  militia,"  and  "nearly  all"  now  heard  "the 
dread  sound  of  battle  for  the  first  time."  On  this  point  we 
have  already  shown  conclusively  that,  with  the  exception  possi- 
bly of  four  at  most,  all  the  regiments  he  had  at  Fort  Donel- 
son  were  at  Shiloh,  or  with  Lew  Wallace.  That  is,  assuming 
his  force  of  all  arms  in  the  five  divisions  engaged  on  Sun- 
day to  be  40,000,  of  that  number  at  least  18,000  must  have 
been  at  Fort  Donelson,  or  forty-five/^  centum.^    Again,  the 


*  As  we  have  said  elsewhere,  anUt 
reduced  to  three  subdivisions,  respec- 
tively tinder  Sherman,  McClernand, 
and  Hurlbut 

t  Since  this  work  was  partially  in 
press  we  have  seen  the  clever  and,  for 
the  7/M/x,  singularly  fair  book,  Swin- 
ton's  Twelve  Decisive  BatOa  of  the  War, 


We  have  ever  found  Mr.  Swinton  the 
justest  as  well  as  the  ablest  Federal 
chronicler,  one  who  could  weave  a  nar- 
rative very  free  from  the  errors  of  bias 
or  carelessness.  He,  we  observe,  ad- 
mits that  Grant  was  superior  in  num- 
bers on  Sunday,  but  has  been  misled 
mto  an  overestimate  of  the  number  of 


k 


156  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

General,  in  touching  upon  the  question  of  the  position  in 
which  they  were  attacked,  alleges  it  proved  to  be  judicious, — 
one  that  confined  the  Confederates  to  a  "  direct  front  attack." 
The  military  student,  looking  at  the  map,  will  not  assent  to 
that  proposition.  For  assuredly  the  Confederates,  as  we  have 
said  ubi  supra,  might  have  massed  their  troops  on  their  left, 
and  upon  Sherman,  with  such  weight  as  to  tear  his  right 
flank  loose  from  Owl  creek,  in  an  instant,  and  sweep  him,  and 
with  him  McClemand,  back  upon  the  river  above  Pittsburg 
Landing. 

General  SJherman  fancies  that  "a  combat  fierce  and  bitter" 
was  necessary  to  "  test  the  manhood  of  the  two  armies."  But 
will  it  not  be  inquired  whether  the  battle  of  Shiloh  furnished 
that  test }  At  the  first  day's  combat  the  weaker  force  sprang 
upon  the  stronger,  nearly  half  of  which  was  flushed  with  a 
recent  brilliant  success,  broke  its  full  ranks  into  fragments, 
routed  it  from  its  luxurious  encampments,  stripped  it  naked 
of  its  cannon,  its  equipage,  and  shuffled  it  back  for  nearly 
three  miles  under  a  steep  river-bank  ;  that  is,  as  far  as  they 
could  go.  For  does  General  Sherman  believe  that  had  that 
river  not  been  there,  with  its  impassable  flood,  the  army  of 
fugitives  who  betook  themselves  by  meridian  to  its  marge 
would  have  halted  that  near  the  field }  or  would  have  done 
otherwise  than  on  another  field,  whereon  he  likewise  did 
stout  fighting,  his  full  share  of  the  battle,  both  with  nerve  and 
skill, — need  we  say  Bull  Run  }  Neither  can  the  battle  of 
Monday  be  adduced  as  a  test  of  relative  manhood.  The  odds 
of  fresh  troops  thrown  forward,  but  held  completely  at  bay 


untried  troops  in  that  army.      He  was  at  Pensacola,  that  is,  not  over  fifty  per 

not  at  his  usual  pains  to  calculate  the  cent ;  and  where,  furthermore,  they  had 

percentage  that  had  been  at  Donelson ;  only  been  exposed  to  artillery  shelling 

and  so  also  does  he  overestimate  the  at  long  range, 
portion  of  Bragg's  Corps  that  had  been 


Commentaries. 


157 


up  to  two  o'clock  by  at  most  20,000  Confederates,  who  had 
already  been  fighting  eleven  hours  the  day  before,  afford  no 
nice  measurement  of  manhood. 

VI.  So  much  has  been  said,  so  much  credited  and  grown 
to  be  the  source  of  irritation  and  ill-feeling  on  the  part  of  the 
triimaphant  section  in  the  late  war,  in  regard  to  the  treatment 
of  their  prisoners  and  wounded  enemies  by  the  Confederate 
officers  and  soldiery,  beginning  with  Manassas  and  not  ending 
with  Fort  Pillow,  that  we  deem  it  of  use  here  to  place  on 
record  the  following  from  a  Federal  newspaper  correspondent 
of  the  day,  {Cincinnati  Commercial:)  "I  am  glad,"  says  the 
writer,  on  the  battle-field,  "  to  be  able  to  say  something  good 
of  an  army  of  traitors.  .  .  .  No  instance  came  to  my 
knowledge  in  which  our  dead  or  wounded  were  treated  in  so 
diabolical  a  manner  as  they  were  reported  to  be  at  Manassas 
and  Pea  Ridge.  They  were  invariably,  whenever  practicable, 
kindly  cared  for."  {Reb.  Rec,  IV.  Doc.  1 14,  p.  416.)  "A.  Heck- 
enlooper  tells  me,"  continues  this  eye-witness,  "  that  one  of 
his  corporals  who  was  wounded  received  many  attentions.  .  . 
An  officer  handed  him  a  rubber  blanket,  saying  that  he  need- 
ed it  bad  enough,  but  a  wounded  man  needed  it  more  ;  others 
brought  him  food  and  water,  and  wrapped  him  in  woolen 
blankets.  Stuh  instances  were  commony  and  among  the  hun- 
dreds of  dead  and  wounded  not  one  showed  signs  of  the  bar- 
barity of  which  the  rebels  are  accused." 


CHAPTER  V. 

General  Forrest  assigned  to  a  Cavalry  command  at  ChattanMga — Sietek 
of  the  Eighth  Texas  Cavalry — Exchange  Jtegimetits — Platuud  am 
Expedition  against  the  Federal  Forces  in  Middle  Tennessee — Imeane- 
ration  at  Murfreesboro  of  a  number  of  Prominent  Citijens — Attack 
on  the  Outworks  at  Murfreesboro — Fearless  Demeanor  of  the  Women 
of  the  place — Capture  of  General  Crittenden  and  Garrison — 'Release 
of  Imprisoned  Citizens — Favoraile  effect  of  success  on  his  Command 
—Paroled  all  Prisoners  except  Officers— Attempt  to  SurprUe  Federal 
Cavalry  Regiment  at  Lebanon — Dashed  at  the  Pickets  around  JVasA' 
ville — Burned  Bridges  and  Captured  Out-posts  in  Vicinage — Eluded 
Pursuit  by  General  Nclson-^Remaintd  at  McMinnvUlt  until  loth  of 
August^-Visiled  Chattanooga-^Forrest Rcjtnned  at  Sparta — Made 
Brigadier-General— General  Bragg  preparing  for  Kentucky  Cam- 
paign— Forrest  actively  afield  Butting  Bridges  and  Reducing  Out- 
posts— Menaeed  by  a  Superior  Force — Narrow  Escape  of  Commamd 
— Reported  to  General  Bragg  at  Sparta — Harassed  General  BueWt 
Rear-Guard — Assigned  to  Duty  with  Polk's  Corps — MunfifrdsvilU 
Surrendered  to  the  Infantry — Strategy  of  Central  Bragg — Picket 
Service  in  advance — Forrest  ordered  to  turn  over  Command  of 
Brigade  and  Repair  to  Murfreesboro  to  Organite  New  Levies  in 
that  quarier. 

June  lOth  to  September  30M,  1861. 

1  HE  arduous  marches,  out-post  service,  skirmishes,  and 
battles  in  which  Forrest's  Reg^ent  had  been  continuously 
employed  during  the  six  months  just  ended  had  sensibly 
winnowed  its  ranks.  Beginning  the  campaign  in  Kentucky 
with  about  six  hundred  effectives,  it  could  not  now  muster 
more  than  three  hundred  rank  and  file.      The  remainder  had 


Coloftel  Forrest  Transferred.  '      159 

£dlen  either  in  battle  or  hospital,  or  were  disabled  by  wounds 
and  diseases  contracted  as  a  consequence  of  their  service  in 
the  field.  Colonel  Forrest  himself  was  suffering  a  good  deal 
from  his  Shiloh  wound,  but  nevertheless  continued  on  duty, 
unwilling  to  be  absent  from  his  regiment  at  the  juncture. 

On  the  loth  of  June,  Colonel  James  E.  Saunders,  a  promi- 
nent citizen  of  North-Alabama,  who,  though  over  sixty  years 
of  age,  had  been  actively  connected  with  the  operations  of  the 
Confederate  Cavalry  for  some  time  previously,  on  the  staflf  of 
Colonel  John  Adams,  in  the  vicinity  of  Chattanooga,  had 
visited  General  Beauregard,  and  urged  that  a  competent  officer 
should  be  assigned  to  command  the  cavalry  operations  which 
looked  to  Chattanooga  as  a  base.  He  designated  Colonel 
Forrest  as  suitable ;  but  General  Beauregard,  who  already 
had  formed  a  high  opinion  of  his  value  as  a  cavalry  officer, 
was  at  first  loth  to  spare  him  from  his  own  immediate  army. 
Recognizing,  however,  the  importance  also  of  the  command 
in  question  in  connection  with  his  own  projected  operation^ 
he  assented  to  the  request.  The  necessary  orders  were  given, 
and  an  application  was  made  at  once  to  the  War  Department 
for  the  promotion  of  Colonel  Forrest  to  the  grade  of  Brigadier- 
General,  as  not  only  essential  to  the  position  to  which  he  had 
found  it  necessary  to  assign  him,  but  as  merited  by  past  ser- 
vices.* Having  received  his  orders,  Colonel  Forrest  made 
some  scanty,  hasty  preparations  for  the  change  of  sphere  and 
journey  involved,  bade  his  old  comrades  farewell  as  their 
Colonel,  and  on  the  nth  of  June,  accompanied  by  Colonel 
Saunders,  set  out  to  repair  to  his  new  and  widening  field  of 
command  and  of  martial  exploits.! 


*  Really,  the  troops  to  the  command  colonels  of  two  of  the  regiments  were 

of  irhich  Colonel  Forrest  was  assigned  senior,  by  commission,  to  him. 

were  senriog  within  the  limits  of  Gene-  t  For  subsequent  history  of  Forreit'i 

nl  Kirby  Smith's  department ;  and  the  Regiment,  see  Appendix  and  Index. 


i 


i6o 


Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 


The  journey  was  made  on  horseback,  with  an  escort,  under 
command  of  Captain  William  Forrest,  of  some  ten  picked 
men  of  his  old  regiment,  with  each  one  of  whom  was  con- 
nected some  story  of  peculiar  gallantry,  and  some  eight  or  ten 
others,  officers  and  men,  who  attached  themselves  to  his  suite. 
Pursuing  the  most  direct  route,  through  North-Alabama, 
Colonel  Forrest  arrived  at  Chattanooga  on  the  i8th  or  19th 
of  June.  Reporting  forthwith  through  the  local  commander, 
General  Leadl^etter,  to  General  Kirby  Smith,  orders  of  as- 
signment were  duly  issued  a  few  days  later.  The  command 
assigned  was  a  brigade  of  cavalry,  composed  of  the  Eighth 
Texas,  Colonel  John  A.  Wharton  ;*  the  First  Louisiana, 
Colonel  John  W.  Scott ;  the  Second  Georgia,  Colonel  J.  K 
Lawton  ;t  and  Helm's  Kentucky  regiment,  commanded  by 
Lieutenant-Colonel  Woodward ; J  a  force,  in  all,  of  about  two 


,  *  This  regiment  was  raised  and  com- 
manded by  the  lamented  Colonel  Terry, 
whose  brief  military  career,  beginning 
as  a  volunteer  scout  at  the  first  Manas- 
sas, was  full  of  distinction.  He  was 
killed  at  Woodsonville,  Kentucky,  in 
a  cavalry  affair,  in  the  &11  of  186 1. 
Colonel  John  A.  Whar  ton  succeeded 
to  the  command.  The  Lieutenant- 
Colonel  was  John  G.  Walker,  a  dis- 
tinguished lawyer,  of  Houston,  Texas ; 
and  the  Major,  Thomas  Harrison,  who 
subsequently  became  a  most  valuable 
and  conspicuous  Brigadier-General  of 
Cavalry.  The  privates  included  a 
large  number  of  the  wealthiest  and 
best-educated  young  men  of  Texas, 
who,  with  many  others  specially  trained 
in  the  business  of  stock-raising  on 
the  vast  prairies  of  that  State,  had 
acquired  a  marvelous  skill  in  horse- 
manship.   The  career  of  this  regiment 


has  been  one  of  the  most  brilliant  in 
the  annals  of  war. 

t  We  have  been  unable  to  gain  any 
details  of  the  history  or  organization  of 
this  regiment  The  privates  were  fine- 
looking  men,  and  better  skilled  in  the 
sabre  exercise  than  any  other  of  the 
command. 

X  The  Colonel  of  this  regiment,  Ben 
Hardin  Helm,  a  graduate  of  West- 
Point,  was  one  of  the  most  gifted  and 
patriotic  young  men  of  Kentucky.  He 
¥ras  about  thirty  years  of  age,  and,  being 
a  brother-in-law  of  President  LincdD, 
had  a  wide  field  for  promotion  open  to 
him  in  the  Federal  service.  Neverthe- 
less, he  chose  to  cast  his  fortune  with 
his  section,  and  fell  brilliantly  at  the 
battle  of  Chickamauga. 

The  greater  part  of  the  officers  and 
men  of  this  regiment  were  of  the  most 
respectable  families  of  Kentucky,  vohin* 


Troubles  Arranged. 


i6i 


thousand  rank  and  file.  The  latter  regiment  had  recently  un- 
dergone a  surprise  and  night  attack  in  the  Sequatchie  Valley, 
under  the  results  of  which  it  was  smarting  at  the  time.  Ele- 
ments of  discord  were  at  work  in  other  portions  of  the  com- 
mand prejudicial  to  their  military  spirit  and  efficiency.  And 
that  fruitful  source  of  trouble  in  armies,  the  question  of  seni- 
ority of  commission,  was  likewise  added,  to  give  their  new 
commander  difficulty  and  concern  in  the  outset  of  his  associ- 
ation with  them.  Colonel  Scott's  Regiment,  hbwever,  some 
four  or  five  days  later,  was  detached,  and  the  First  Georgia 
Battalion,  Colonel  Morrison,  assigned  in  its  stead.  Thus  the 
question  of  rank  was  removed  ;  but,  meanwhile,  another  em- 
barrassment had  arisen  from  the  expiration  of  the  period  for 
which  the  greater  part  of  the  companies  of  Helm's  Regiment 
had  been  enrolled,  twelve  months.  Now  disinclined  to  re- 
enter the  service  in  their  then  organization,  in  a  few  days 
there  only  remained  of  it  some  two  companies. 

Looking  around  for  an  important  object  for  operations,  and 
by  a  successful  expedition  to  raise  the  tone  of  his  force  to  a 
more  healthy  state,  Forrest  determined  to  throw  his  brigade 
into  Middle  Tennessee,  and  there  make  a  descent  upon  a 
Federal  force  which  he  understood  was  established  at  Mur- 
freesboro.     By  the  6th  of  July,  therefore,  his  preparations 


tary  exiles  from  their  comfortable  and 
beaodiiil  homes. 

It  b  proper  here  to  state  that  the  re- 
loctance  of  the  Kentuckians  to  reenroll 
Vis  not  caused  hy  any  desire  or  pur- 
poie  to  leave  the  service,  but  grew  out 
tf  a  wish  to  become  permanently  a  part 
tf  1  Kentucky  Brigade  under  Colonel 
Morgan,  who  had  already  become  dis- 
tbgoished  as  a  partisan  officer.  Colo- 
A  Forrest  and  Morgan  had  an  inter- 


view during  the  last  week  in  June,  at 
General  Kirby  Smith's  headquarters, 
the  result  of  which  was  an  urgent  re- 
commendation to  their  superior  that 
the  First  Kentucky  should  be  transfer- 
red to  Morgan's  command,  while  For- 
rest should  receive  in  exchange  Lieu- 
tenant-Colonel Stame's  Tennessee  Bat- 
talion ;  but  this  exchange  was  deemed 
inexpedient  and  did  not  take  place. 


1 62  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

and  plans  were  matured  for  this  expedition,  and  on  that  day 
he  began  to  cross  the  Tennessee  at  Chattanooga,  with  about 
one  thousand  troopers*  Setting  out  on  the  8th,  he  reached 
Altamont,  near  the  summit  of  the  Cumberland  mountains,  on 
the  loth.  Moving  thence  on  the  road  in  the  direction  of  and 
to  a  point  ten  miles  to  the  north-east  of  Sparta,  h^  there 
effected  an  arranged  junction  with  Colonel  Morrison  and  his 
battalion,  some  three  hundred  strong,  on  the  evening  of  the 
nth,  that  battalion  having  come  across  the  mountain  from 
Kingston,  in  East-Tennessecf  Forrest  now  organized  his 
force,  increased  somewhat  above  thirteen  hundred  men,  for  one 
of  those  operations  for  which  subsequently  he  became  so  well 
known,  and  which  in  time  made  him  a  terror  to  all  outlying 
Federal  detachments. 

At  McMinnville,  late  in  the  afternoon  of  the  12th,  some 
scouts  previously  detached  met  him  and  reported  that  all  was 
quiet  along  the  line  of  railroad  leading  from  Bridgeport  through 
Murfreesboro  to  Nashville,  and  that  apparently  the  enemy 
were  as  yet  wholly  ignorant  of  his  hostile  movements.  It 
was  here  he  made  his  regimental  and  battalion  commanders 
fully  acquainted  with  his  plans  and  expectations,  and  gave 
specific  instructions  as  to  the  conduct  of  the  expedition,  in- 
cluding strict  orders  to  keep  each  command  "  well  closed  up." 
These  details*  arranged,  the  march  was  resumed  and  continued 
to  the  village  of  Woodbury  about  eleven  at  night.  Here  the 
people  were  found  in  a  state  of  deep  excitement  and  distress. 
The  ladies  thronged  the  streets,  and  in  moving  terms  soon 
made  Colonel  Forrest  acquainted  with  the  cause — that  the 


*  Eighth  Texas,  400  men,  Second        t  It  had  seen  field  senrioe  in  EasI- 
Georgia,  450^  a  battalion  of  Tennessee-     Tennessee,  and  joined  the  brigade  vitk 
ans,  under  Major  Baxter  Smith,  120     a  good  character  for  efficiency, 
strong,  and  the  two  companies  of  Ken- 
tuddans. 


L 


Near  Murfreesboro.  163 

Fedoralsi  entering  the  village  suddenly  the  evening  before^ 
had  arrested  and  carried  off  to  Murfreesboro  nearly  every 
man,  old  and  young,  with  menaces  of  summary  pimishment 
Much  affected  by  the  relation  of  the  occurrence,  Colonel  For- 
rest assured  them  that  they  might  confidently  look  for  the 
restoration  of  their  husbands  and  kinsmen  by  the  next  sun- 
set, a  promise  which  he  was  actually  able  to  perform.  This 
had  a  lu^py  effect  All  vied  with  each  other  in  a  liberal  hos- 
pitality, and  an  abundance  of  food  and  forage  were  provided 
for  the  command,  which  was  halted  at  this  point  until  one 
o'clock  on  the  morning  of  the  13th.  Then  the  movement 
was  rapidly  resumed,  Murfreesboro  being  still  eighteen  miles 
distant 

By  five  A.M.,  the  vicinity  of  their  point  of  destination  was 
attained ;  here  the  scouts  sent  ahead  to  reconnoitre  were 
overtaken,  and  reported  the  Federal  pickets  were  only  half  a 
mile  distant  These  Colonel  Wharton,  whose  regiment  was 
in  advance,  was  directed  to  send  forward  a  small  detachment 
k)  capture,  which  was  successfully  accomplished,  and  within 
an  hour  the  pickets,  fifteen  in  number,  were  brought  to  the 
Confederate  leader.*  A  few  moments  later  some  other  scouts 
also  returned,  and  reported  that  they  had  traversed  the  Fede- 
ral encampments,  and  found  all  evidently  unaware  of  the  im- 
pending danger. 

Dispositions  were  therefore  made  for  an  immediate  attack. 
The  whole  force  was  formed  in  column  of  fours,  the  Eighth 
Texas  in  firont    The  orders  were  to  move  at  a  trot  until  in 


*  The  prindpd  scoots  employed  in  furlough  at  the  time.  A  natire  and 
tlKse  operations  were  Captains  Fred  citizen  of  Murfreesboro,  he  was  a  gal^ 
James  and  Nichols,  afterward  a  valu-  lant,  well-educated  gentleman.  He 
ahle  officer  nnder  Colonel  Paul  Ander-  fell  at  the  battle  of  Murfreesboro,  3xst 
ion.  Captain  James  belonged  to  Bragg's  of  December,  1862,  in  sight  of  his  mo- 
Army,  from  which  he  was  absent  on  ther's  house. 


164  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

sight  of  the  Federal  encampment,  when  Colonel  Wharton 
was  to  charge  it,  with  his  regiment  in  column  of  platoons. 
At  the  same  time  the  Second  Georgia  was  to  dash  into  and 
sweep  through  the  main  streets  of  the  town  in  the  same 
order,  capturing  provost-guard  and  all  Federal  officers  and 
men  that  might  chance  to  be  in  the  place,  and  seize  and  secure 
all  supplies  and  any  trains  that  might  be  there.  Major  Smith, 
with  his  battalion  reenforced  by  the  Kentuckians,  was  to  throw 
himself  rapidly  around  upon  the  turnpikes  leading  both  to 
Nashville  and  Lebanon,  and  cut  off  retreat  in  either  direction, 
as  well  as  to  give  notice  of  any  hostile  approach  from  that 
quarter ;  while  Colonel  Morrison  would  get  rearward  and 
there  await  the  turn  of  events,  ready  to  give  aid  wheresoever 
most  needed. 

Moving  with  his  advance,  as  was  ever  his  wont,*  Forrest, 
on  arriving  in  sight  of  the  suburbs  of  Murfreesboro,  saw 
gleaming  in  the  gray,  subdued  light  of  that  early  hour  the 
white  tents  of  a  large  encampment  out  on  the  Liberty  turn- 
pike, about  half  a  mile  eastward  of  the  place,  manifestly  un- 
aware of  the  nearness  of  the  least  periLf  Led  by  their  Colo- 
nel, the  gallant  Texans,  without  waiting  for  the  final  signal 
for  the  charge,  dashed  on  at  a  splendid  pace,  and  in  a  few 
moments  were  in  the  very  heart  of  the  Federal  cantonment, 
the  occupants  of  which  were  at  the  instant  for  the  most  part 
in  their  tents,  but  from  which  they  speedily  emerged.  Many, 
undressed  and  seeking  all  possible  means  of  shelter  from 
their  fierce-smiting  adversaries,  rushed  in  wild    confusion 


*  Instinctively  he  adopted  this  pre-  of  the  Fonrth  Kentucky  Federal  CaTil- 
cept  of  the  art  of  war,  as  enforced  and  ry.  Reb.  Ree,  V.  Doc  88,  p.  286^  Re- 
illustrated  by  Napier  in  his  History  of  port  of  Colonel  Duffield.  There  were 
tki  PifUfuuiar  War,  also  in  the  camp  a  considerate  naoi- 

t  Occupied  by  five  companies  Ninth  ber  of  men  going  to  and  firom  BaeQ^r 

liCichtgan  Volunteers  and  a  squadron  Army. 


Affairs  at  Mur/reesboro. 


165 


through  the  mazes  of  the  encampment,  hotly  pursued  by  the 
eager  Texans,  shouting  as  in  a  hot  chase  on  their  broad  prai- 
ries, and  striking  right  and  left  or  using  the  pistol  freely.* 
At  length  some  of  the  Federal  infantry,  rallied  by  their  offi- 
cers, had  made  a  handsome  stand,  and  by  a  mishap  at  the 
moment  of  the  charge  only  about  six  of  Wharton's  companies 
or  some  two  hundred  men,  had  followed  him,  the  rest  having 
been  led,  with  the  Second  Georgia,  directly  into  the  public 
square. 

The  Texans,  now  brought  under  a  galling  musketry  fire 
from  behind  wagons  and  other  effective  cover,  were  too  weak 
in  numbers  to  carry  the  position.  So  severe,  indeed,  did  the 
fire  become  that  Colonel  Wharton,  painfully  wounded,  felt 
obliged  to  withdraw  from  the  contest,  and  return  on  the  Mo- 
Minnville  road  with  the  prisoners  whom  he  had  taken,  includ- 
ing the  Federal  cavalry  found  in  a  camp  somewhat  detached 
from  the  infantry,  which  had  been  captured  just  as  they  were 
about  to  mount  their  horses.  Major  Baxter  Smith's  Battalion 
also  assisted  in  this  part  of  the  affair.f  In  the  mean  time, 
four  companies  of  the  Eighth  Texas  and  the  Second  Georgia 
Regiment,  cheering  lustily,  had  charged  into  the  public  square. 


*  Among  those  wounded  was  Colo- 
nel Duffield,  the  Federal  commander, 
who  was  probably  shot  by  Colonel 
Wharton  in  person,  when  surrounded 
hjr  many  of  his  men,  whom  he  was  at- 
tempting to  rally. 

t  Colonel  Duffield,  on  the  contrary, 
•ays  that,  apprised  by  the  noise  made 
h]r  the  horses  on  the  macadamized  turn- 
pike, the  Federals  had  been  roused,  and 
vere  drawn  vp  ready  to  receive  this 
cfaaige,  befisre  which,  though  fierce  and 
iapctuous,  they  retired  steadily  and 
B  ifood  order  to  the  centre  of  the  en- 


campment ;  and  there,  after  a  struggle 
of  some  twenty  minutes,  nearly  hand-to- 
hand  fighting,  the  Confederates  were 
repulsed  ;  and,  breaking,  fled  in  the 
wildest  confusion,  pursued  by  the  Fede- 
rals as  skirmishers ;  but  that  the  latter 
suffered  severely. 

Another  account,  however,  says  that 
all  were  asleep  at  the  first  onset,  and 
that  Duffield  was  then  wounded  ;  that 
some  infimtry  were  finally  rallied  and 
made  fight,  but  were  overwhelmed  and 
forced  to  surrender. — Reb.  Rec,  V.  Doc 
8S,p.2S8. 


A 


i66 


Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 


and  surrounded  the  court-house,  which  was  occupied  by  a 
company  of  the  Ninth  Michigan.  The  noise  quickly  brought 
the  inhabitants  of  the  town  forth  from  their  houses,  greatly 
startled  but  presently  delighted  on  finding  their  streets  swarm- 
ing with  the  dear,  gray-clad  soldiers  of  their  cause.  Re- 
gardless of  their  dishabille^  men  and  women  rushed  out  to 
greet  them  with  incoherent  phrases  of  satisfaction  and  glad- 
ness ;  regardless,  too,  of  the  danger,  for  already  scattered  par- 
ties of  Federals  had  commenced  firing  from  fences  and  out- 
houses, while  a  sharp  fire  was  going  on  from  the  court-house. 
So  severe  did  the  fire  become  from  the  court-house,  in  a  little 
while,  that  it  wrought  a  hesitation  in  the  ranks  of  the  assail- 
ants, who  were  in  fact  twice  repulsed.  But  the  women,  mean- 
while, were  mingling  among  the  men,  and  cheering  them  by 
their  smiles  and  heartfelt,  thankful  words.  Indeed,  the  cool- 
est Confederate  was  now  thoroughly  roused  by  the  scene ; 
and  with  a  loud  cheer  of  "  Long  live  the  women  !"  the  Tex- 
ans  and  Greorgfians,  led  by  Forrest,  sprang  forward  in  the  face 
of  a  withering  fire  in  front  from  the  court-house,  while  Morri- 
son brought  up  his  men  to  the  rear,  or  west  side.  The  doors 
were  quickly  battered  down,  the  building  was  carried,  and  the 
garrison  captured  after  their  formidable  defense.  In  the 
charge,  a  German  soldier,  Fred  Koerper,  of  Memphis,  of  For- 
rest's escort,  conspicuous  for  his  bravery,  and  endeared  to  his 
officers  and  comrades  by  his  cheerfulness  and  soldierly  quali- 
ties, was  killed,  to  the  deep  regret  of  all  who  knew  him.^ 


^ 


*  Frederick  Koerper  was  bom  in 
Prussia  in  1829.  His  father,  a  soldier 
of  the  First  Napoleon,  emigrated  to  the 
United  States  in  1839,  with  his  family, 
ind  became  a  resident  of  Cleveland, 
Ohia  Thence,  at  the  age  of  fifteen, 
]Ponng  Koerper  removed  to  Memphis, 
Tennessee ;  and,  a  few  years  afterward. 


to  New*Orleans,  There  he  resided  till 
1856,  when  he  retmned  to  MemphiSk 
where  he  continued  in  bo»neat — a 
popular,  fashionable  barber — until  the 
beginning  of  the  war  in  1S61.  First 
volunteering  in  McDonald^s  coBqnny 
for  sixty  days,  at  the  expiratioa  of  hit 
term  of  service  he  returned^  and  re* 


Release  of  Citizens  from  Jail. 


167 


Both  court-house  and  jail  were  found  filled  with  citizens,  at 
least  one  hundred  and  fifty  in  number,  of  the  place  and  sur- 
rounding country,  including  those  of  Woodbury,  already 
mentioned.  Arrested  and  thrown  into  prison  at  the  instance 
of  infamous  informers,  on  various  pretexts,  six  of  the  num- 
ber, prominent  citizens,  were  at  the  moment  under  sentence 
of  death ;  or,  as  expressed  by  a  Federal  newspaper  corre- 
spondent, were  to  "  expiate  their  crime  on  the  gallows."*  The 
neighborhood  was  filled  with  the  wives  and  families  of  these 
captives,  who  had  followed  after  their  seizures,  and  who  now 
hastened  upon  the  scene  almost  frantic  with  joy  at  the  happy 
release  of  their  husbands  and  kinsmen.  Soon  the  spectacle 
became  so  touching  that  no  one  could  witness  it  unmoved  ; 
and  tears  might  have  been  seen  to  glisten  on  the  weather- 
bronzed,  powder-begrimed  cheeks  of  many  of  Forrest's  fiercest 
riders. 

At  the  same  time,  an  animated,  thorough  hunt  had  been 
made  in  all  directions  through  the  town  for  Federal  officers 
and  men  billeted  in  various  houses.  Suddenly  aroused  from 
their  comfortable  beds  by  the  dread  sounds  of  a  night  attack, 
many  had  sped  and  sought  concealment  elsewhere  ;  but  from 
detected  coverts  they  were  quickly  dragged  forth,  notably  a 
crest-fallen,  unseemly  gang  contrasted  with  the  more  manful 


Dained  at  home  till  a  few  weeks  before 
the  battle  of  Shiloh.  Then  repairing 
to  Bomsville,  Miss.,  he  rejoined  his  for- 
Bier  commander,  Captain  McDonald, 
of  whose  second  company  he  continued 
\  member  until  detached  at  Tupelo,  in 
Jane,  1862,  as  one  of  the  *'  ten  picked 
Men  "  to  accompany  Colonel  Forrest  to 
Chattanooga.  Meanwhile,  at  Shiloh, 
lie  had  shown  notable  courage  and  ad- 


dress in  the  capture  of  a  Federal  colo- 
nel within  the  enemy's  lines. 

"  Always  gay  and  cheerful,"  (says  one 
of  his  comrades,)  "  Fred  Koerper  was 
a  fine,  stalwart  specimen  of  German 
manhood.  And  brief  as  was  his  career, 
it  is  not  too  Inuch  to  say  of  him.  He 
was  one  of  the  best  soldiers  that  ever 
followed  the  banner  of  Forrest" 

•,Reb,  Rec,  V.  Doc  88,  p.  288. 


i 


1 68 


Campaigns  of  General  Forrest 


of  their  comrades,  who,  meanwhile,  were  making  a  persisten.'f 
combat  from  all  available  positions. 

Among  those  lodging  in  the  town  was  the  Federal  com- 
mander, Brigadier-General  Crittenden,  to  effect  whose  capture 
Colonel  Forrest  had  sent  Colonel  Saunders,  with  a  smaD 
detachment,  to  the  inn  on  the  square,  where  it  was  under 
stood  he  had  established  his  headquarters.  After  an  ineffec- 
tual search  through  the  house.  Colonel  Saunders  and  his  party, 
emerging  and  remounting  their  horses,  were  making  their 
way  across  the  square,  when  a  general  fire  was  opened  upon 
them  from  the  windows  of  the  court-house,  and  that  brave 
and  zealous  gentleman  received  a  ball  which  passed  through 
his  right  lung  and  entirely  through  his  body  ;  but,  neverthe- 
less, he  maintained  his  seat  in  his  saddle  until  able  to  ride 
several  squares,  to  the  residence  of  a  citizen,  south-eastward 
from  the  square,  into  which  he  was  taken,  as  all  supposed, 
mortally  wounded.* 

The  court-house  having  fallen  into  his  hands,  and  all  the 
Federals  immediately  in  Murfreesboro  having  been  taken  pri- 
soner or  placed  otherwise  hors  de  combat^  Forrest  made  his 
dispositions  immediately  to  attack  the  Third  Minnesota,  re- 
ported to  be  encamped  on  the  east  bank  of  Stone  river,  about 
one  mile  and  a  half  from  the  town.  This  he  deemed  it  best 
to  do  before  attempting  to  capture  the  smaller  but  more 


*  This  was  the  same  gentleman  at 
whose  instance  Colonel  Forrest  had 
been  assigned  the  command  of  his  bri- 
gade. He  was  not  subject  to  military 
duty,  being  over  sixty  years  of  age,  but 
kept  the  field,  rendering  most  valuable 
service  up  to  the  time  of  his  severe 
wounding,  as  subsequently,  for  he  re- 
covered, and  at  the  present  writing, 
January,  1867,  is  an  admirable  speci- 
men physically  of  cultured  manhood. 


On  the  occasion  in  question,  it  is  pro- 
per to  add,  he  was  accompanied  by  m* 
other  volunteer  aid-de-camp,  Franck 
C.  Dunnington,  £sq^,  formerly  editor 
of  the  Nashville  Union^  also  by  a  well- 
known  citizen  of  Himtsville,  Ala.,  Mr. 
Lawrence  Watkins. 

General  Crittenden  a  little  later  wis 
found  concealed  in  a  private  apartment 
of  the  tavern. 


Attack  an  Murfreesbaro.  169 

strongly  posted  force  that  had  been  rallied  in  the  camp  of  the 
Ninth  Michigan,  fearing  that  otherwise  the  detached  force 
might  effect  its  escape.  Accordingly  he  made  a  rapid  detour 
to  the  right,  so  as  to  defeat  that  contingency.  On  reaching 
the  encampment,  it  was  found  comparatively  evacuated,  the 
Federals  having  just  moved  out  in  the  direction  of  Murfrees- 
boro  to  join  their  comrades  in  that  quarter.  Forrest's  force 
assembled  for  this  affair  consisted  of  the  Georgians,  Major 
Smith's  Tennesseeans,  the  Kentucky  squadron,  and  some 
twenty  men  under  Paul  F.  Anderson.  Seeing  the  Confede- 
rates approach,  the  Federals,  then  about  six  hundred  yards 
southward  of  their  camp,  halted  and  formed  in  line  of  battle, 
some  nine  companies  of  infantry  and  four  pieces  of  artillery. 
Directing  the  Georgians  to  confront  and  menace  the  enemy 
and  engage  with  skirmishers,  taking  Major  Smith  with  his 
men,  including  the  Kentuckians  and  three  companies  of  Mor- 
rison's Georgians,  under  Major  Harper,  Forrest  pushed  rapidly 
around  to  the  right  and  rear  of  the  encampment,  which  proved 
to  be  still  occupied  by  about  one  hundred  men,  posted  behind 
a  strong  barricade  of  wagons  and  some  large  limestone  ledges 
which  afforded  excellent  cover,  difficult  to  carry.  He  there- 
upon ordered  a  charge  ;  this  was  promptly  and  handsomely 
made,  Majors  Smith  and  Harper  leading  their  men.  They 
were  met,  however,  with  a  stubborn,  brave  defense.  Twice, 
indeed,  tlie  Confederates  were  repulsed.  But  Forrest,  draw- 
ing his  men  up  for  a  third  effort,  made  a  brief  appeal  to  their 
manhood,  and,  putting  himself  at  the  head  of  the  column,  the 
charge  was  again  ordered,  this  time  with  success.  The  en- 
campment was  penetrated,  and  the  greater  part  of  the  Fede- 
rals were  either  killed  or  captured.  A  few  only  escaped  to 
the  main  body,  drtfWn  up,  as  before  said,  some  six  hundred 
yards  southward.* 

♦  It  was  in  this  charge  that  there  oc-     grossly  misrepresented,  by  misjudging 
curred    an   inddent  which   has  been     adversaries,  to  General  Forrest's  preju- 


1 70  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

The  Georgians,  hearing  the  struggle  in  the  encampment, 
and  supposing  that  it  proceeded  from  an  attack  made  by  For- 
rest upon  the  rear  of  the  main  Federal  force  in  their  front, 
made  a  dashing  charge,  deployed  in  line,  breaking  through 
the  enemy's  array  in  the  face  of  their  artillery,  sweeping  the 
open  field  across  which  they  charged.  Nevertheless,  the 
casualties  were  very  few,  and,  unchecked,  the  Georgians, 
riding  through  some  infantry,  passed  to  the  rear  of  the 
position. 

Finding,  however,  that  the  enemy,  quickly  reforming  their 
sundered  line,  held  their  ground  fimly — an  elevated  ridge, 
from  which  evidently  they  were  only  to  be  driven  at  much 
cost  of  precious  life — Forrest  promptly  changed  his  plan  of 
operations,  with  that  fertility  of  resource  in  sudden  emergen- 
cies which  has  signalized  his  whole  career.  Placing  Major 
Harper  with  three  companies  so  as  to  hinder  a  retreat  toward 
Nashville,  disposing  Morrison's  other  four  companies  as  skir- 
mishers in  front  to  prevent  a  movement  on  Murfreesboro, 
and  sending  off  on  the  McMinnville  road  the  prisoners  just 
taken,  with  such  captured  munitions  as  could  be  transported 
by  the  wagons  found  in  the  encampment,  Forrest  led  Law- 
ton's  Regiment  and  Smith's  Battalion  rapidly  back  to  Mur- 
freesboro, sending  a  staff-officer  at  the  same  time  for  the 
Eighth  Texas,  which  he  found,  to  his  surprise,  had  been  with- 
drawn some  four  miles  on  the  McMinnville  road. 

It  was  now  about  one  p.m.,  and  as  yet  little  of  a  decisive 
character  had  been  accomplished,  while  among  many  of  his 
officers  there  was  manifest  a  perilous  want  of  confidence  in 


dice.    While  traversing  the  camp,  he  his  pistol  at  the  distance  of  thirtj  paoet. 
was  fired  at  by  a  negro  camp-followery  This  negro  displayed  no  common  de- 
one  of  whose  balls  cat  his  hat-band  ;  liberation  in  his  purpose  to  slay  the 
but,  just  as  the  negro  was  about  to  fire  Confederate  leader, 
the  fifth  time,  Forrest  killed  him  with 


Attack  an  Mur/reesbaro.  171 

the  ability  of  the  command  to  triumph.  Indeed,  so  far  did 
this  spirit  reach,  that  some  officers  urged  Colonel  Forrest  to 
rest  content  with  what  had  been  accomplished  and  quit  the 
field  without  further  and,  as  they  were  satisfied,  fruitless  yet 
costly  efforts  to  carry  the  Federal  position.  But,  instead  of 
heeding  the  suggestions  of  his  subordinates,  Forrest,  dis- 
mounting Major  Smith's  Battalion,  including  the  Kentucki- 
ans,  threw  them  forward,  with  directions  to  engage  in  an 
active  skirmish  with  the  Federal  force  Still  occupying  the 
encampment  of  the  Ninth  Michigan.  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Hood,  of  the  Second  Georgia,  at  the  same  time,  was  directed 
to  lead  that  regiment  to  a  point  leflward  of  the  Federal  posi- 
tion and  prepare  for  a  charge  dismounted,  while  Colonel 
Lawton  was  detained  to  write  a  demand,  to  be  sent  by  a  flag 
of  truce,  for  the  enemy's  immediate  surrender.  All  the  while, 
Smith  and  his  men  were  maintaining  a  brisk  skirmish  ;  and 
just  as  the  Confederate  demand  was  presented,  Wharton's 
Regiment,  under  Lieutenant-Colonel  Walker,  came  oppor- 
tunely in  full  view.  The  effect  was  most  fortunate ;  without 
further  parley,  and  very  much  to  the  surprise  of  a  large  por- 
tion of  the  Confederate  officers,  the  surrender  was  at  once 
made.  This  achieved,  setting  a  portion  of  his  command  to 
collect  the  wagon-train  and  fill  them  with  supplies  most 
necessary,  and  to  destroy  such  as  could  not  be  carried  off, 
Forrest,  with  little  loss  of  time,  sent  Captain  Strange,  his 
Adjutant-Greneral,  to  the  beleaguered  Minnesotians,  with  a 
demand  for  their  surrender,  to  save  the  further  effusion  of 
blood.  At  this,  Colonel  Lester,  their  commander,  asked  for 
an  interview  with  Colonel  Duffield,  of  the  Ninth  Michigan, 
who,  severely  wounded,  was  a  prisoner  of  war  at  the  house  of 
Colonel  Maney,  a  gentleman  of  Murfreesboro,  where  an  in- 
terview and  consultation  between  the  Federal  Colonels  soon 
took  place.  Lester,  however,  still  asked  for  an  hour's  delay, 
to  confer  with  his  officers.     Forrest,  giving  him  thirty  min^ 


172  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest 

uteSy  sent  Captain  Strange  with  him  to  receive  his  final  an* 
swer,  fully  satisfied  that  it  would  terminate  in  a  surrender, 
to  insure  which  he  ostentatiously  displayed  his  several  com- 
mands along  the  path  Colonel  Lester  was  led  in  going  to  and 
returning  from  the  interview  with  Duffield,  so  as  to  make  an 
appearance  of  greater  numbers  than  were  really  present.  As 
anticipated,  Captain  Strange  soon  returned  with  the  intelli- 
gence that  Colonel  Lester  had  consented  to  capitulate. 
Forrest,  now  riding  forward,  received  the  surrender  of  some 
five  hundred  infantry  and  Hewitt's  Battery,  and  the  last  of 
the  Federal  force  that  had  been  in  occupation  of  and  a  terror 
to  the  people  of  Murfireesboro  for  some  time  past  were  now 
in  his  hands. 

The  proximity  of  large  Federal  garrisons  at  neighboring 
towns  and  along  the  line  of  the  raihoad,  which  might  be 
speedily  concentrated  and  attack  or  intercept  his  movements 
with  a  superior  force,  made  it  necessary  for  Forrest  to  be 
now  both  diligent  and  alert,  and  lose  no  time  in  such  a  dan- 
gerous position.  Orders  were,  therefore,  given  to  hasten  the 
destruction  of  all  Federal  supplies  which  could  not  be  re- 
moved, and  by  six  p.m.  the  last  of  his  command  had  filed  out 
of  Murfreesboro  on  their  way  toward  McMinn ville.  The  results 
of  this  affair,  it  remains  to  say,  were  some  1765*  prisoners, 
including  about  one  hundred  clerks,  teamsters,  and  other 
staff*  efnployis,  as  many  as  six  hundred  head  of  horses  and 
mules,  forty  wagons,  five  or  six  ambulances,  four  pieces  of 
artillery,  and  twelve  hundred  stands  of  arms,  which  were 


*  In  addition  to  these  prisoners,  thus  was  supposed,  mortally  wounded,  be- 

turned  loose  on  their  parole,  one  hun-  sought  him  to  parole  them  also,  which 

dred  and  two  straggling  fugitive  Fede-  he  did  in  due  form,  desperately  wound* 

ral  soldiers  came  into  Murfreesboro  on  ed  as  he  was.    It  was  soon  after  this 

the  fourteenth  of  July,  after  Colonel  affair  that  General   Buell    issued    an 

Forrest  had  left,  and  seeking  out  Colo-  order  forbidding  his  men  to  accept  sndi 

ncl  Saunders,  who  had  been  left,  as  paroles. 


Moral  Effects  of  Success.  173 

largely  distributed  among  the  troops  in  lieu  of  those  in  their 
hands  of  an  inferior  character,  many  valuable  supplies  car- 
ried off,  and  a  very  large  quantity  of  stores,  including,  it  was 
said,  thirty  thousand  suits  of  clothing  for  Buell's  Army  * 

The  effect  upon  those  through  whom  it  had  been  accom- 
plished was  immediately  perceptible.  It  infused  a  new  life 
and  energy  at  once  into  their  movements,  inspired  a  self-con- 
fidence which  had  been  materially  shattered  by  previous  mis- 
carriages and  disaster,  gave  an  assurance  of  the  judgment  and 
capacity  in  their  leader  that  had  been  wanting,!  and  made 
that  leader  more  willing  to  trust  himself  in  the  field  with  his 
brigade  hereafter  in  delicate  and  dangerous  operations.  Be- 
sides, it  was  the  beginning  of  that  reputation  for  daring, 
skillfully  conceived  and  executed  forays  and  sudden  assaults 
upon  isolated  positions  which  soon  made  Forrest's  move- 
ments  a  source  of  constant  apprehension  to  all  adversaries 
within  his  reach. 

This  affair,  it  is  worthy  of  note,  happened  on  his  birthday, 
and,  as  may  be  readily  supposed,  nofite  in  honor  of  the  event 
could  have  been  so  acceptable  as  this  martial  success  not 
many  miles  distant  from  the  place  of  his  birth.  On  the  eve 
preceding,  Forrest,  in  a  short  address,  having  acquainted 
his  command  with  the  fact  of  the  approach  of  his  birthday, 
pleasantly  called  upon  them  to  aid  him  to  signalize  it  by  a 
substantial  victory. 

It  must  also  be  related,  as  a  part  of  the  history  of  the  times, 
that  the  vanquished  Federals  had  exercised  a  harsh  and  arro- 
gant dominion  over  the  people  of  Murfreesboro  and  the  sur- 


•  A  Federal  writer  estimates  the  pe-  an  officer  of  rank  who  had  left  Chatta- 

cuniary  loss  to  the  government  of  the  nooga  just  as  Forrest  was  leaving  for 

United  Sutes  at  nearly  a  million  of  this  expedition,  and  which  that  officer 

doUan.— iP/^.  Rec,  V.  Doa  88,  p.  289.  characterized  as  rash,  inconsiderate,  and 

t  The  present  writer  conversed  with  likely  to  lead  to  disaster. 


1 74  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

rounding  country,  who,  non-combatants  as  they  were,  had 
been  made  the  victims  of  constant  wrongful  and  oppressive 
exaction  and  restrictions  discreditable  to  the  age  or  civilized 
warfare.  The  provost-marshal,  churlish  when  not  cruel,  it 
would  seem,  delighted  in  harassing  the  women,  going  so  far 
even  as  to  refuse  them  permission  to  attend  their  churches  or 
to  allow  as  many  as  three  to  collect  in  a  group  on  the  street 
or  elsewhere.  The  proof  of  this  rigorous  tyranny,  we  are 
assured,  was  too  abundant  to  be  doubted.* 

Desiring  to  avoid  the  risk  of  making  invidious  distinctions 
between  those  who  served  under  him  in  this  expedition  with 
so  signal  bravery  and  zeal  in  his  notes  touching  it,  their 
commander  has  limited  his  remarks  to  the  fact  that  the  con- 
duct of  almost  all — officers  and  men — ^was  highly  creditable ; 
that  there  were  numerous  instances  of  conspicuous  coolness 
and  soldierly  bearing,  and  much  ability  for  command  displayed 
by  his  officers. 

After  having  sent  oflF  in  the  direction  of  McMinnville  all 
the  supplies  practicable,  destroying  the  rest,  Colonel  For- 
rest repaired  with  his  prisoners,  late  that  afternoon,  to  Reedys- 
ville,  nine  miles  eastward  of  Murfreesboro,  and  halted  for  the 
night,  having  previously  detached  Major  Baxter  Smith's  Bat- 
talion to  destroy  the  bridges  as  far  southward  as  Christiana. 
Upon  the  return  of  this  detachment,  the  next  morning,  he 
threw  out  other  detachments  in  observation  toward  Lebanon 
and  Nashville,  Shelbyville  and  Winchester,  to  ascertain  defi- 
nitely the  movements  of  the  enemy  after  hearing  of  his  de- 
scent upon  Murfreesboro.     When  this  had  been  done,  he 


•  On  the  other  hand,  a  Federal  wri-  have  before  dted,  of  "  rebel  prisoners,'* 

ter  describes  this  very  Provost-Marshal,  gathered  from  the  countiy,  many  of 

Oliver  C.  Rounds,  as  entirely  too  lax  whom  were  to  "  expiate  their  crimes  on 

and  indulgent,  though  it  is  admitted  the  gallows."— >i?«&.  Rec,  V.  Doc  88^  pw 

at  the  same  time  the  {ail  was  full,  as  we  28SL 


Prisoners  Paroled.  175 

found  that,  with  a  proper  guard  to  insure  the  safety  of  his 
prisoners,  there  were  not  men  enough  remaining  to  drive  the 
captured  artillery  and  train.  Separating  the  Federal  officers 
from  their  men,  and  putting  the  former  in  motion  for  Mc- 
Minnville,  escorted  by  a  company  of  cavalry,  he  drew  up  the 
other  prisoners,  and  promised,  if  enough  would  volunteer  as 
drivers  of  the  wagon-train  and  artillery  as  far  as  McMinnville> 
.that  he  would  there  parole  the  whole  band  and  let  them  make 
their  way  homeward  to  see  their  families.  This  proposition 
was  received  with  hearty  cheers  for  "General  Forrest,"  who 
now  resumed  his  march  and  encamped  that  night  at  McMinn- 
ville.  Here  he  overtook  Colonel  Wharton,  with  a  company 
of  his  regiment  and  some  three  hundred  of  the  men  who  had 
left  the  field,  and  having  in  charge  General  Crittenden  and 
about  two  hundred  and  fifty  prisoners,  the  first  captured  on 
the  day  before.  The  Colonel  was  suffering  from  a  severe 
flesh-wound  in  the  right  arm,  which  had  prevented  him  firom 
returning  with  his  regiment  the  day  before,  when  it  had  been 
called  back  by  Colonel  Forrest. 

As  promised,  the  prisoners,  except  the  officers,  were  now 
paroled.  This  having  been  accomplished  by  eight  o'clock  on 
the  morning  of  the  15  th,  the  number  set  at  liberty  in  that 
manner  was  1700,  including,  as  before  said,  at  least  one  hun- 
dred staff  employes. 

Provided  with  two  days'  rations,  they  took  the  roads  lead- 
ing in  the  direction  of  the  Ohio  river,  manifestly  delighted 
with  the  opportunity  to  be  thus  respited,  by  their  parole,  from 
field  service  for  some  time  to  come.  The  Federal  officers 
retained  as  prisoners,  but  under  a  qualified  parole  not  to 
escape  on  the  way  thither,  with  most  of  the  wagons  and 
the  captured  stores  and  the  artillery,  were  next  dispatched 
under  a  small  vguard  to  the  headquarters  of  General  Kirby 
Smith,  at  Knoxville. 

Satisfied  from  reports  of  scouts  in  all  directions  that  it 


1 76  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

might  be  done  without  hazard,  Forrest  remained  encamped, 
giving  his  men  and  horses  rest  at  McMinnville  until  the  after- 
noon of  the  1 8th,  by  which  time  all  detachments  except  a  few 
scouts  had  returned.  He  then  put  his  column  in  motion  on  Le- 
banon, about  fifty  miles  distant,  where  he  understood  a  detach- 
ment of  five  hundred  Federal  cavalry  were  stationed.  Propos- 
ing to  surprise  them,  he  moved,  with  little  intermission  for 
either  rest,  food,  or  sleep,  to  the  immediate  vicinity  about  dawn 
on  the  20th.  Making  all  necessary  dispositions  at  once  for  the 
occasion,  he  dashed  with  his  now  confident  command  into  the 
place,  but  had  the  keen  disappointment  to  see  that  his  enemy 
had  been  forewarned  and  was  leaving  at  full  speed  by  the 
Nashville  road  with  such  a  start  as  to  make  pursuit  fruitless. 
Posting  pickets  on  all  the  approaches,  so  as  to  guard  against 
the  possibility  of  a  surprise,  Forrest  remained  with  his  com- 
mand in  observation  at  Lebanon  until  the  next  morning,  the 
recipients,  meanwhile,  of  unbounded  hospitality  from  the 
open-handed  people  of  the  place  and  neighborhood.  His 
men  were  fed  not  only  during  their  stay  upon  poultry,  choice 
hams,  and  roasted  pigs,  but  more  than  three  days'  rations  of 
these  dainties  were  supplied  spontaneously  for  the  march. 

After  leaving  Lebanon,  the  line  of  march  brought  the  com- 
mand, about  one  p.m.,  to  the  Hermitage — in  his  lifetime  the 
favorite  home,  and  in  death  the  burial-place  of  the  illustrious 
Jackson.  The  Confederate  leader,  halting  here,  gave  his  men 
an  hour  to  visit  the  precincts  redolent  with  martial  memories 
of  peculiar  interest  and  value  to  the  young  men  of  his  bri- 
gade, and  well  calculated  to  influence  them 

"  To  matchless  valor  and  adventures  high.'* 

And  here,  too,"  a  pleasant  incident  served  to  brighten  the 
wearisome  and  perilous  routine  of  the  expedition.  A  party 
of  ten  or  twelve  young  ladies,  escorted  by  a  few  gentlemen^ 
appeared  upon  the  scene  to  celebrate  in  its  groves  the  first 


Pursuit  by  Federals.  177 

anniversary  of  the  battle  of  Manassas,  and  at  the  same  time  do 
honor  to  the  tomb  and  fame  of  the  great  Tennesseean.  With 
these  charming  daughters  of  the  neighborhood  the  moments 
sped  pleasantly  and  with  happy  effect  upon  their  young  coun- 
trymen. 

Soon  after  leaving  the  Hermitage,  in  the  direction  of  Nash- 
ville, information  was  received  from  scouts  that  the  Federal 
General  Nelson  had  gone,  via  Murfreesboro,  in  pursuit  of  the 
Confederates  with  a  force  of  some  3500  men,  chiefly  infantry. 
It  was  now  determined  to  move  to  Stone  river,  seven  miles 
east  of  Nashville,  where,  coming  upon  the  Federal  pipkets 
around  the  city,  he  charged  and  captured  a  portion,  driving  the 
remainder  into  the  city.     Moving  around,  now,  by  a  left-hand 
road  to  the  Murfreesboro  turnpike,  near  the  lunatic  asylum, 
another  picket  force  was  encountered,  and,  capturing  a  few,  the 
rest  were  driven  in.    At  the  same  time,  an  independent  com- 
mand of  Confederate  guerrillas,  without  concert,  chanced  to 
dash  in  upon  their  pickets,  on  the  Franklin  road,  making  the 
Federals  suppose  that  the  place  was  surrounded  and  threatened 
with  a  serious  assault.     The  long  roll  and  other  signals  of 
alarm  were  therefore  to  be  heard  on  all  sides. 

Gathering  his  force  in  hand,  Forrest  then  swept  down  upon 
a  small  intrenched  outpost  covering  the  bridge  over  Mill  creek, 
four  miles  from  the  heart  of  the  city,  and  carried  it,  taking 
some  twenty  prisoners  ;  and  pursuing  the  rest  up  the  creek  to 
another  bridge,  half  a  mile  southward,  forty  men  were  there 
surrounded  and  captured.  Leaving  a  company  to  destroy  this 
bridge,  he  next  moved  with  celerity  still  further  up  the  creek 
about  one  mile  to  Antioch  Station,  where  the  enemy  attempted 
to  make  a  stand,  but  were  quickly  routed  by  Lieutenant-Co- 
lonel Walker  and  the  Eighth  Texas,  thirty-five  prisoners  and 
their  arms  and  supplies  falling  into  his  hands,  while  the  sta- 
tion-house, some  cars,  and  a  bridge  were  burned.  A  sqiaadron 
was  then  sent  up  the  road  toward  Murfreesboro,  burned  a 


lyS  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest 

large  quantity  of  railroad  wood,  and  captured  some  fifteen  Fe- 
derals ;  having  thus  burned  four  bridges,  and  captured  some 
one  hundred  and  forty-five  of  the  enemy,  with  fifteen  to  twenty 
killed  or  left  wounded  on  the  ground,  without  loss  of  one  Con- 
federate. Forrest  now  moved  over  to  the  Murfreesboro  and 
Nashville  turnpike,  where  he  was  informed  by  his  scouts  that 
Nelson  was  returning  with  his  force  in  all  haste  toward  Nash- 
ville. His  command  by  this  time,  men  and  animals,  were  so 
greatly  jaded  as  to  make  it  injudicious  to  attempt  to  harass 
Nelson  ;  therefore,  turning  aside  by  a  by-way,  known  in  the 
country  as  the  "  Chicken  road,"  he  encamped  his  command 
not  more  than  a  mile  from  the  turnpike.  Here  the  prisoners 
taken  that  afternoon  were  paroled,  and  while  this  was  going 
on  Nelson's  column  had  been  distinctly  heard  for  several 
hours  as  they  passed  along  the  turnpike. 

By  daylight,  the  Confederates  were  again  in  their  saddles, 
and  on  the  way  back  in  the  direction  of  Murfreesboro,     Soon 
apprised  of  this  by  his  scouts.  Nelson  countermarched  and 
pursued.    Forrest,  however,  turned  off  within  six  miles  of 
Murfreesboro,  in  the  direction  of  McMinnville,  while  Nelson 
pushed  on  to  the  former  place,  where,  finding  his  adversary 
out  of  his  reach  and  his  own  infantry  thoroughly  foot-sore  and 
fatigued,  he  gave  up  the  operation  as  useless,  expressing  his 
disgust  in  energetic  terms,  and  denouncing  the  folly  of  at- 
tempting  to  catch  cavalry  with  infantry.     Reaching  McMinn- 
ville in  due  season,  Forrest  halted  until  the  loth  of  August, 
as  the  position  was  one  well  calculated  for  observation  and 
menace  upon  the  movements  of  the  enemy,  and  the  countiy 
abounded  in  supplies  willingly  furnished. 

On  the  loth.  Colonel  Forrest,  having  occasion  to  visit 
Chattanooga,  turned  over  his  command  to  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Hood,  Second  Georgia,  and  repaired  thither  on  horseback 
across  the  Cumberland  mountains.  In  his  absence,  a  Federal 
column  of  three  thousand  infantry  and  eight  hundred  cavalry 


Colonel  Forrest  made  a  Brigadier.  179 

was  found  to  be  moving  on  McMinnville,  and  Colonel  Hood 
was  obliged  to  fall  back  upon  Sparta,  There  Forrest  rejoined 
the  brigade  after  an  absence  of  only  four  days,  in  the  course 
of  which  he  had  ridden  two  hundred  miles  over  the  Cumber- 
land mountains  and  back!  Daily  skirmishes  took  place  for 
the  next  eight  or  ten  days  with  the  Federal  cavalry,  who  had 
followed  to  the  neighborhood  of  Sparta.  The  Confederate 
leader  then  shifted  his  force  over,  iSrst  to  Smithville,  and  then 
to  Woodbury,  thus  gaining  the  Federal  rear. 

Meanwhile,  Forrest  had  received  his  appointment  as  a  Bri- 
gadier-General ;*  and  General  Bragg  had  established  his  head- 
quarters at  Chattanooga,  where  he  was  concentrating  the 
"  Army  of  Mississippi,"  by  railroad,  for  his  subsequent  cam- 
paign into  Kentucky. 

From  Woodbury,  after  halting  a  few  hours,  General  Forrest 
led  his  command  again  in  the  direction  of  Murfreesboro,  now 
reoccupied  by  the  Federals,  and  menaced  the  place  with  an- 
other descent ;  but  on  getting  within  eight  miles,  tiu^ning  di- 
rectly to  the  left  and  striking  the  railroad  near  Manchester, 
some  ten  miles  northward  of  Tullahoma,  he  captured  a  picket 
post  of  twenty  men.  After  that,  moving  along  the  line  of  the 
railroad  branch  to  McMinnville  up  to  within  ten  miles  of  the 
latter  place,  he  destroyed  all  the  intermediate  bridges  and 
otherwise  disabled  the  road.  Learning  definitely  that  the 
Federal  cavalry  at  McMinnville  had  been  strongly  reenforced, 
and  that  two  divisions  of  infentry  also  occupied  the  town, 
Forrest  concluded  to  take  post  in  the  mountain  pass  at  Alta- 
rnont  and  await  General  Bragg.  He  accordingly  took  the 
road  thither,  and  at  dusk  on  the  29th  of  August,  reached 
a  cove  at  the  foot  of  the  Cumberland  mountains,  where  he 
halted  to  send  forward  scouts  to  reconnoitre  the  pass  ahead. 


Commission  dated  2zst  of  July,  1863. 


i8o  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest 

These  returned  next  morning,  about  daylight,  from  the  vicinity 
of  Altamont,  which  they  reported  to  be  in  possession  of 
General  McCook,  with  all  the  passes  in  that  quarter.      Other 
scouts  soon  after  came  in  with  the  intelligence  that  heavy 
columns  of  the  enemy  were  moving  toward  his  position  by 
each  of  the  roads  leading  to  it.*    The  situation  evidently  was 
most  critical — one  from  which  the  Confederate  leader  could 
(Mily  extricate  himself  by  coolness  and  skill   Keeping  his  best 
scouts  out  on  all  the  approaches,  he  rode  to  a  commanding 
point  on  the  mountain  to  get  a  personal  observation  of  the 
enemy's  movements,  and  was  happily  able  to  see  for  at  least 
five  miles  on  the  three  roads  that  entered  the  cove,  and  upon 
each  of  which  he  observed  a  Federal  column  approaching,  as 
had  been  reported.     He  learned,  likewise,  through  another 
scout,  that  Greneral  McCook  was  moving  down  upon  him  di- 
rectly from  Altamont.    There  was  plainly  no  time  for  delay 
or  deliberation ;  therefore,  quickly  forming  his  men  in  column 
of  fours,  he  moved  back  a  short  distance  to  a  dry  creek  that  he 
had  noticed,  the  deep  bed  of  which  fortunately  ran  almost 
parallel  to  the  McMinnville  road.     With  that  decision,  that 
swift  calculation  of  resources  and  chances,  characteristic  of 
the  man,  and  one  of  his  highest  qualities  as  a  leader,  he  did 
not  hesitate  to  throw  his  command  into  this  opportune  shelter. 
Scarcely  had  he  done  so,  when  the  enemy  came  up  the  road, 
and,  halting  in  a  piece  of  woods,  began  to  form  line  not  six 
hundred  yards  from  where  the  Confederates  were  quietly  pass- 
ing, completely  hidden  by  the  high  overhanging  banks  of.  the 
water-course  just  mentioned.!    Having  successfully  effected 


*  Namely,  from  Manchester,  Win«  toils  been  set,  that  a  telegraphic  mea* 

Chester,  and  McMinnville,  uniting  in  sage  was  sent  to  General  Buell,  that 

one  road  in  the  cove,  leading  out  over  Forrest  and  eight  hundred  men  had 

the  mountain  by  Altamont  been  captured. — MS.  NeUs  of  Gtmrai 

t  So  well  and  confidently  had  these  Forrest, 


Ordered  to  Harass  Federal  Rear. 


i8i 


this  movement,  Forrest,  emerging  from  concealment,  took  the 
road  rapidly  northward  toward  McMinnville,  fifteen  miles  dis- 
tant ;  but  when  within  six  or  seven  miles  of  that  place,  he 
turned  off  by  another  road  toward  the  McMinnville-Murfrees- 
boro  turnpike,  leaving  McMinnville  some  four  or  five  miles  to 
the  east.  Striking  that  highway  at  a  point  near  where  he 
found  a  Federal  force  of  infantry  and  artillery  drawn  up  in 
position,  and  sweeping  around,  westwardly,  at  a  gallop,  with  a 
loud  cheer  from  every  trooper,  the  Federals  appeared  so  much 
paralyzed  by  the  suddenness  of  the  encounter  that  they  fired 
only  a  few  scattering  discharges  without  harm  to  the  Confe* 
derates.* 

Free,  now,  of  the  several  Federal  columns  that  for  a  time 
had  almost  cut  off  his  escape,  Forrest  led  his  brigade,  at  a 
less  rapid  rate,  to  Sparta,  in  which  direction  he  understood 
General  Bragg  was  then  moving  with  his  army,  instead  of 
through  Altamont,  as  originally  had  been  arranged.  Bragg's 
advance  was  already  at  Sparta  when  General  Forrest  reached 
there,  on  the  3d  of  September,  but  the  General-in-Chief  be- 
ing still  some  twenty  miles  rearward,  he  repaired  to  his  head- 
quarters in  person,  and,  on  so  doing,  received  orders  to  throw 
his  brigade  upon  and  hold  in  close  observation  the  rear  of 
Buell's  army,  then  in  retreat  by  way  of  Nashville 


*   It  appears  from  the  Federal  ac- 
count, Reb,  Rec,  V.    Doc  196,  p.  600, 
that  the  Federal  troops  here  encoun- 
tered were  only  three  regiments  and 
four  guns  of  Wood's  Division,  that  had 
^etn  encamped  near  McMinnville,  and 
^Hichhad  been  sent,  in  hot  haste,  to  in- 
'^rcept  Forrest    The  Federal  report 
of  this  afifair  is  an  amusing  instance  of 
^  sheer  falsehood    by  which  petty 
^'ttsactiont  were  magnified  into  victo- 


ries. It  was  fortunate  fbr  the  Federals 
their  actual  force,  as  well  as  isolation 
from  near  support,  was  not  known  to 
General  Forrest  at  the  time.  The  close 
proximity  of  all  the  divisions  of  Buell's 
army  had  made  it  his  first  duty  to  dis- 
entangle his  command  from  all  possible 
complication  with  them,  and  hence  his 
purpose  was  to  avoid  collisions  until 
that  was  effected. 


k 


X82 


Campaigns  of  General  Forrest 


II. 

Rejoining  his  command  at  Sparta,  having  received  an 
accession  to  his  force  of  a  section  of  artillery,*  Forrest  was 
speedily  in  motion  again*  Hastening  backward  to  McMinn- 
ville,  he  ascertained  that  Buell's  rear-guards  had  passed 
through  that  place  ten  hours  previously.  Pressing  on,  there- 
fore, with  all  possible  celerity,  he  came  up  with  it  at  Wood- 
bury, and  at  once  began  to  harass  it  all  the  way  thence  to 
Murfreesboro,  which  some  Federal  soldiers  attempted  to  bum, 
and  must  have  accomplished  had  not  Forrest  come  upon  them 
with  such  timely  vigor  as  to  prevent  the  spread  of  a  serious 
conflagration  and  to  save  the  court-houscf  Pressed  inces- 
santly by  the  Confederate  cavalry,  they  had  now  no  time  fo 
more  than  petty  devastations. 

General  Bragg  was  now  in  full  movement  for  Kentucky 
and  to  Forrest's  brigadef  was  assigned  the  duty  of  guardin 
his  left  flank,  with  special  view  to  hindering  observation  oCT 
the  several  stages  as  well  as  line  of  march  of  the  Confederate 
army.     Crossing  the  Cumberland  river  near  by  the  Hermit- 
age, he  soon  encountered  a  Federal  cavalry  force  in  clos^ 
proximity  to  their  army,  and  back  upon  which,  after  a  short 
brush,  he  drove  them.     Hanging  constantly  and  tenaciously 
upon  their  rear,  the  next  morning  Forrest  made  another  attack 
upon  an  exposed  force  at  Tyree's  Springs.     Some  hours  later, 
from  a  favorable  position,  he  was  also  able  to  open  upon  the 


*  Increased  by  the  four  Alabama 
companies  of  his  old  regiment,  under 
Captain  Bacot. 

t  It  is  due  to  that  accomplished,  able 
soldier,  Major-General  Buell,  to  say 
that  he  was  in  no  way  responsible  for 
these  excesses.  He  endeavored  to 
carry  on  the  war  as  became  a  great  and 


civilized  people,  with  the  strictest  re- 
gard for  the  rights  of  non-coinbatantSk 
while  his  habits  of  strict  disdpliiie 
tended  to  repress  these  outrages  and 
violations  of  civilized  war£upe.  But  he 
was  badly  supported  by  many  of  hb 
subordinate  commanders^  not  of  te  re- 
gular army. 


A  Narrow  Escape.  183 

rear  of  the  main  Federal  force  with  his  section  of  artillery,  at 
the  same  time  making  so  strong  a  display  of  his  own  forces 
as  to  cause  the  halt  of  the  enemy's  column  and  wagon-train, 
the  retrograde,  at  a  double-quick  apparently,  of  the  advance, 
and  the  formation  in  line  of  battle  of  very  much  the  whole  of 
Buell's  army,  at  the  cost  of  at  least  four  hours'  delay.  In  the 
mean  tim^,  Forrest  had  quietly  withdrawn  from  his  position 
in  the  woods,  which  the  Federal  artillery  had'  been  shelling 
vigorously  for  several  hours,  and  at  a  trot  made  a  wide  cir- 
cuit, of  about  ten  miles,  with  the  aim  of  getting  aroimd  to  the 
north  of  and  striking  a  blow  at  the  Federal  advance.  It  was 
in  the  course  of  this  movement  the  Confederates  had  a  narrow 
escape  from  one  of  those  casualties  which,  despite  all  possible 
precautions,  so  often  follow  in  the  train  of  and  mar  military 
operations — an  accidental  collision  between  parts  of  the  same 
army.  General  Wheeler,  another  of  Bragg's  cavalry  com- 
manders, having  been  instructed  to  throw  his  force  across 
upon  the  Nashville  and  Bowling  Green  turnpike,  and  at- 
tempt a  blow  in  that  quarter,  had  struck  the  Federal  flank 
while  moving  in  column.  Forrest,  hearing  the  firing,  pushed 
forward  to  mingle  in  the  affair,  but,  hearing  from  his  scouts 
that  a  hostile  force  was  approaching  through  an  old  field 
to  his  right,  he  disposed  his  command  for  an  immediate  col- 
lision. Ordering  Lieutenant-Colonel  Walker  to  charge  at 
once  in  front  with  the  Eighth  Texas,  he  next  moved  around 
with  the  rest  of  the  command,  with  the  purpose  of  sur- 
prising and  falling  upon  the  flank  of  the  approaching  force. 
Colonel  Walker,  executing  his  orders,  had  reached  a  ridge  in 
his  front  and  formed  a  line  for  the  charge,  when  he  happily 
discovered  the  troops  in  his  front  were  Wheeler's  command, 
filing  back  belter  skelter  and  in  much  confusion.  But,  at 
the  same  time,  the  latter  taking  the  Texans  for  the  enemy, 
and  seeing  that  they  were  directly  across  their  outlet,  were 
thrown  into  even  greater  disorder,  and  in  their  efforts  to  get 


i 


184  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

away  soon  ran  upon  the  flank,  where  Forrest  himself  was  ar- 
ranging a  surprise  for  the  supposed  enemy.  For  a  moment 
the  peril  of  a  murderous  conflict  between  the  two  Confede- 
rate cavalry  forces  was  fearfully  imminent,  but  was  fortunately 
averted  by  a  timely  discovery  of  the  real  state  of  affairs. 
Learning  from  General  Wheeler  that  he  had  been  engaged 
with  the  enemy  at  about  the  same  point  where  he  had  aimed 
to  strike,  Forrest  concluded  to  effect  a  junction  at  once  with 
the  main  Confederate  army,  then  moving  on  Glasgow,  Ky., 
where  he  arrived  about  the  8th  of  September,  and  made  a 
verbal  report  of  his  operations  in  person  to  General  Bragg, 
who  then  directed  him  to  report,  with  his  command,  to  Lieu- 
tenant-General  Polk,  commanding  one  of  the  corps  of  the 
army. 

It  will  be  recollected  he  had  been  in  the  field  since  the  6th 
of  July — that  is  to  say,  for  a  period  of  quite  two  months — 
marching  on  an  average  thirty  miles  every  day.  He  had  lost 
in  killed  and  wounded,  or  by  disease  incident  to  the  hardships 
of  the  service  two  hundred  men,  but  in  the  mean  while  had 
killed  or  wounded  fully  350,  and  captured  over  2CX)0  prisoners 
of  war,  including  one  Brigadier-General,  four  or  five  field 
officers,  and  as  many  as  sixty  regimental  officers,  besides  four 
pieces  of  artillery,  two  stands  of  colors,  six  hundred  draught 
animals,  and  a  large  wagon-train.  Incessantly  in  the  saddle 
for  sixty  days,  the  men  and  horses  were  a  good  deal  fatigued. 
Nevertheless,  the  spirit  of  all  was  excellent,  and  an  unabated 
desire  was  generally  prevalent  throughout  the  ranks  to  have 
an  early  opportunity  to  be  thrown  into  a  general  and  decisive 
engagement  with  the  Federal  army. 

Under  orders  from  General  Polk,  Forrest's  Brigade  was 
directed  to  move  that  night  by  the  road  to  Clear  Point,  so  as 
to  pass  Green  river  above  Munfordsville  and  seize  the  Eliza- 
bethtown  and  Bardstown  road.  Reaching  Munfordsville, 
however,  the  following  night,  Forrest  intercepted  an  efifort 


Buell  Eludes  Bragg. 


i8s 


made  by  the  Federals  to  effect  their  escape  from  that  posi- 
tion, and  obliged  them  by  his  movements  to  return  to  their 
fortifications,  which  were  surrendered,  after  some  hard  fight- 
ing, on  the  17th,  to  the  infantry  that  had  come  up  in  the  mean 
time.* 

Bragg's  whole  army  was  soon  after  assembled  at  this  point. 
Buell  was  still  in  the  rear,  and  Munfordsville  was  in  the  direct 
line  of  his  march  to  Louisville,  the  objective  point  of  his 
movement.!  Nevertheless,  for  some  reason  which  surely 
must  ever  be  hard  to  reconcile  with  sound  strategy.  General 
Bragg  here  turned  aside  from  the  main  road  to  Louisville,  and 
left  it  fully  open  to  his  enemy,  with  every  possible  unob- 
structed facility  to  move  by  it  to  that  city  and  there  effect  a 
junction  with  the  Federal  forces,  which,  of  course,  the  Con- 
federate commander  supposed  were  gathered  there  in  view  of 
the  exigencies  of  the  situation.  Indeed,  why  General  Bragg 
did  not  force  his  adversary  to  fight  him  at  or  about  Munfords- 
ville must  ever  remain  a  mystery  in  the  history  of  the  war.  J 

Quitting  Munfordsville,  Forrest's  Brigade  took  the  field 
again,  with  orders  to  destroy  the  bridges  on  the  Louisville  and 
Elizabethtown  Railroad,  and,  after  that,  to  cover  Bardstown 
while  pushing  ahead  toward  Louisville.§ 

From  Elizabethtown  scouts  were  thrown  out  in  the  proper 


•  The  force  capitulated  consisted  of 
the  Seventeenth,  Sixty-seventh,  and 
£ighty-third  Indiana  regiments  and  a 
company  of  the  provost-guard  of  Lou- 
isville. 

t  According  to  Diary  of  Events,  Reb, 
^«f.  v.  p.  84,  General  McCook*s  Divi- 
^  of  Bueirs  Army,  reached  Mun- 
fcfdsville  on  the  21st  of  September. 

r  He  had  Buell  in  the  hollow  of  his 
^"^H"  was  the  remark  to  the  present 
vriter  of  the  most  distinguished  engi- 


neer of  the  Confederate  service,  who 
was  on  the  staff  of  the  Confederate 
army  during  this  campaign. 

§  Continuous  and  prolonged  hard 
service  had  greatly  jaded  General  For- 
rest's horses,  and  the  night  after  leav- 
ing Munfordsville  he  was  severely  hurt 
by  the  fall  of  the  one  he  was  riding.  It 
fell  and  rolled  over  on  him,  bruised 
him  greatly,  and  dislocated  his  right 
shoulder,  causing  much  pain  for  several 
days. 


k 


1 86  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

direction  to  ascertain  the  movements  of  the  enemy,  and  seve- 
ral petty  cavalry  skirmishes  occurred.  The  brigade  was  also 
employed  in  advance  of  Bardstown,  picketing  the  several 
roads  toward  Louisville  and  Frankfort,  until  about  the  25  th 
or  26th,  when  General  Forrest  was  summoned  in  person  to 
General  Polk's  headquarters.  He  there  learned  that  it  was 
General  Bragg's  direction  he  should  repair  immediately  to 
Murfreesboro  to  take  command  of  the  troops  that  might  be 
raised  in  Middle  Tennessee,  giving  special  attention  to  new 
companies  and  organizations,  and  with  such  troops  as  he 
could  thus  assemble  to  harass  the  Federal  garrison  of  Nash- 
ville while  preventing  it  from  drawing  supplies  from  the  sur- 
rounding country. 

Turning  over  his  brigade  to  Colonel  Wharton,  except  the 
four  Alabama  companies,  which  he  was  authorized  to  take  with 
him  as  well  as  his  staff,  Forrest  visited  General  Bragg  at 
Bardstown  about  the  27th  of  September,  and,  in  an  interview 
with  that  officer,  was  given  to  understand  the  troops  he  was 
sent  to  raise  and  organize  should  be  placed  thereafter  spe- 
cially under  his  command. 

Setting  out  now  for  his  new  sphere  of  duties,  he  traversed 
the  distance  from  Bardstown  to  Murfreesboro— one  hundred 
and  sixty-five  miles — in  five  days. 


CHAPTER    VI. 

Caural  Forrest  tstablUked  his  HtadquarUrs  at  Murfrteshoro,  TinM.~~ 
Tenntssu  Militia  and  new  Levies  at  Lavtrgnt  stirprisid  and  dis- 
persed by  the  Federals — Enemy  returned  to  Nashville,  closely  followed 
by  Ferresl— Confederate  Pickets  eslablished  close  around  Nashville— 
Battalions  and  Regiments  formed  of  new  Cavalry  lavies — Major- 
General  Breckinridge  assumed  Command  in  Middle  Tennessee — For- 
rest proposed  to  attack  Nashville  with  Infantry  and  Cavalry — 
Assent  given,  Movement  inaugurated^Federals  pressed  within 
Trenches  and  Assault  to  be  made,  operation  countermanded^ Ani- 
mated Skirmish  on  Franklin-Nashville  Road— General  Bragg,  hav- 
ing returned  from  the  Kentucky  Campaign,  established  Army  Head- 
quarters at  Murfreesboro — Major-Ceneral  Wheeler  appointed  Chief 
of  Cavalry — General  Forrest  assigned  to  the  Command  of  a  Bri- 
gade— Directed  to  prepare  for  Expedition  into  West-Tennessee — 
Unsuitable  Condition  of  Arms  for  such  a  service  reported  to  Gene- 
ral Bra^ — Brigade  took  Post  at  Columbia. 

Octoier  1st  to  December  ^h,  1862. 

General  FORREST  found  but  a  small  force  at  Mur- 
freesboro, mainly  made  up  of  the  Thirty-second  Alabama  and 
Freeman's  Battery  of  four  guns.  At  Lavergne,  however, 
Brigadier-General  S.  R.  Anderson  was  in  command  of  several 
regiments  of  Tennessee  militia  and  about  one  thousand  fresh- 
ly raised  cavalry  ;*  and  Forrest  now  sent  thither  the  Thirty- 
second  Alabama.  The  troops  there  were  raw,  and  the  Fede- 
ral commander  at  Nashville,  fifteen  miles  distant,  had  planned 


■>  Th«  militia  were  about  1700  In  number. 


1 88  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest 

their  surprise  with  the  hope  of  their  capture.  This  plan  was 
well  executed  by  a  march  on  the  night  of  the  6th  of  October, 
and  a  simultaneous  attack,  in  front  and  rear,  on  the  morning 
of  the  7th,  by  a  force  of  400  cavalry  and  26cx>  infantry,  with  a 
battery  of  four  pieces,  under  General  Palmer. 

At  the  first  alarm  the  new  levies  broke  and  dispersed 
through  the  country,  leaving  the  Thirty-second  Alabama  to 
bear  the  weight  of  the  Federal  attack,  which  they  did  right 
gallantly  until  overwhelmed  by  at  least  six  times  their  num- 
bers, and  when  Lieutenant-Colonel  Maury  and  a  number  of 
his  men  were  taken  prisoners.* 

Some  of  the  cavalry  having  reached  Murfreesboro  and  re- 
ported the  disaster.  General  Forrest  hurried  to  the  scene  with 
Bacot's  Battalion  and  Freeman's  Battery.  The  way  thither 
was  swarming  with  fugitives,  very  few  of  whom  had  arms  in 
their  hands ;  many  were  riding  barebacked,  and  very  many 
were  shoeless  and  without  any  other  clothing  than  that  in 
which  they  had  slept.  Deploying  his  veterans,  about  two 
hundred  strong,  across  the  road,  Forrest  pushed  boldly  into 
Lavergne,  but  to  find  it  already  evacuated  by  its  captors. 
Following  closely  to  within  five  miles  of  Nashville,  the  Con- 
federate commander  was  unable  to  do  any  thing  with  his  small 
command  to  retrieve  this  mortifying  affair. 

Howbeit,  he  replaced  the  demoralized  force  that  had  been 
occupying  Lavergne  with  Bacot's  Battalion  and  Freeman's 
Battery,  imposing  upon  the  former  the  duty  of  picketing  the 
approaches  from  Nashville  up  to  the  vicinity  of  the  Lunatic 
Asylum,  and  to  guard  against  another  surprise.  Returning 
then  to  Murfreesboro  for  the  next  four  weeks.  General  For- 
rest addressed  himself  with  all  possible  energy  to  restoring 
the  tone  of  the  troops  that  had  been  routed  at  Lavergne ; 


•  The  Federal  Official  Report  sets  the  pumber  at  175.—^^.  Rec.  V.  Doc  315, 
p.  6^ 


General  Breckinridge.  189 

also  to  the  formation  of  the  widely-scattered  and  incomplete 
organizations  which  he  found  in  Middle  Tennessee  into  com- 
[>ames,  battalions,  and  regiments,  so  that  he  was  able  to  mus- 
:er  at  least  three  thousand  five  hundred  cavalry  by  the  ist  of 
ffovember.  They  were  regimented  as  far  as  possible,  and 
iiree  of  the  most  distinguished  regiments  of  Forrest's  Ca- 
.ralry  take  their  date  from  this  period — that  is,  the  Fourth, 
;Stames's,)  the  Eighth,  (Dibrell's,)  and  the  Ninth,  (Biffle's.)* 
Thirteen  full  companies  had  likewise  been  enrolled  that  were 
lot  as  yet  brought  together  into  a  regiment 

In  the  mean  time,  Major-General  Breckinridge  had  arrived 
It  Murlreesboro  with  a  force  of  some  three  thousand  infantry, 
md  assumed  chief  command.  Forrest's  headquarters  were 
:hereupon  transferred  to  Lavergne.  Meanwhile,  the  Eighth 
Tennessee  and  Gunter's  Alabama  Battalion  had  been  added — 
ibout  the  middle  of  October — ^to  the  force  in  close  observa- 
:ion  upon  Nashville.  And,  during  the  fortnight  following.  Colo- 
nel Dibrell  was  sent  with  his  regiment  several  times  across 
:he  Cumberland  to  scour  the  country  between  Nashville  and 
Grallatin,  to  harass  or  cut  off  Federal  foraging  parties,  and  to 
ascertain  the  truth  of  rumors  in  regard  to  the  movements  of 
I  Federal  relieving  force.  These  expeditions  were  conducted 
ivith  promising  skill,  and  the  conduct  of  the  men  was  excel- 
ent  in  several  skirmishes  with  superior  Federal  detachments, 
jpon  whom  some  loss  was  inflicted,  as  well  as  in  repeated 
jrushes  with  the  Federal  picket-posts  immediately  around 
^lashville. 

The  Confederate  forces  assembled  at  Lavergne  and  around 
Nashville  about  the  Sth  of  November  were  3500  cavalry  and 
»ome  3000  infantry,  under  Brigadier-General  Hanson.t 


•  See  Rosters,  Appendix.  captured  at  Fort  Donelson,  had  only 

t  This  gallant,  accomplished  officer,     been  lately  exchanged  and  promoted. 


i 


I  go  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest 

As  will  be  remembered,  the  movement  of  General  Brag^ 
had  completely  isolated  the  Federal  force  at  Nashville  fronB. 
all  available  support  or  relief,  and,  knowing  that  force  to  b^ 
weak,  General  Forrest  now  proposed  to  his  superior  to  attack 
it  in  concert  with  Hanson's  infantry.  General  Breckinridge 
giving  his  assent,  the  plan  of  attack  was  duly  arranged  for 
the  6th  of  November. 

As  the  greater  proportion  of  his  men  were  raw  and  Ten- 
nesseeans,  Forrest  thought  it  expedient  to  explain  to  them 
beforehand  what  he  proposed  to  attempt,  and  to  invoke  a 
sturdy,  resolute  effort  to  recover  their  State  capital  from  the 
hands  of  invaders.     The  effect  was  evidently  good,  for  an 
admirable  spirit  was  clearly  dominant.     At  the  time  appoint- 
ed, all  needful  preliminaries  having  been  arranged,  the  troops, 
distributed  in  columns,  moving  by  the  Franklin,  Charlotte, 
Nolansville,  and  Murfreesboro  turnpikes,  were  pushed  for- 
ward in  close  proximity  to  the  city,  driving  the  Federal 
pickets  and  cavalry  back  behind  their  works.     Forrest,  at  the 
head  of  about  one  thousand  cavalry,  moving  on  the  Murfrees- 
boro road,  supported  closely  by  Hanson,  was  at  the  Lunatic 
Asylum — six  miles  from  the  heart  of  Nashville — ^by  daylight 
The  rifle-pits  in  advance  in  this  quarter  were  speedily  carried, 
and,  Hanson  having  become  eager  to  engage  his  men,  the 
main  attack  was  ordered.     It  was  now  about  sunrise  ;  the  ut- 
most confidence  animated  both  infantry  and  cavalry,  and  in 
^  few  moments  the  assault  would  have  been  essayed,  when  an 
order  was  received  from  General  Breckinridge  countermand- 
ing the  operation,  under  express  instructions  from  General 
B^^S-     Hanson  was  therefore  countermarched  to  Lavergne. 

However,  leaving  a  squadron  to  picket  that  approach,  For- 
rest moved  the  remainder  of  his  immediate  force  across  to 
the  Nolansville  turnpike,  where  Dibrell  was  in  position  skir- 
mishing with  the  Federals,  who  were  in  theif  works  in  his 
front.     Here  ascertaining  that  a  strong  Federal  force  was 


Skirmish  around  Nashville. 


191 


outside  of  the  lines,  on  the  Franklin  road,  in  front  of  Stames, 
taking  Dibrell's  Regiment  and  Gunter's  Battalion,  with  Free- 
man's Artillery,  General  Forrest  moved  across,  and  was  soon 
engaged  in  an  animated  skirmish  with  the  main  Federal 
force,  artillery  being  freely  used  on  both  sides  at  very  short 
range.  The  Eighth  Tennessee  was  here  brought  to  its  first 
charge,  and  executed  it  so  handsomely,  in  the  teeth  of  two  in- 
fantry regiments  firing  from  behind  a  fence,  that  the  Federals 
retired  rapidly  in  rear  of  their  works.  In  this  affair  Freeman's 
Artillery,  actively  employed,  gave  earnest  of  its  future  bril- 
liant services.  Shot  and  shell  plowed  the  ground  and  covered 
his  gimners,  while  fragments  of  shell  were  scattered  among 
the  guns  and  carriages,  killing  and  crippling  a  number  of 
horses.  For  a  time,  in  fact,  it  seemed  that  the  battery  would 
be  destroyed ;  but  all  stood  staunchly  at  their  posts,  and 
plied  their  pieces  with  coolness,  and  so  skillfully  as  to  make 
this  battery  thenceforward  a  favorite  both  with  the  General 
and  his  men. 

In  obedience  to  the  orders  of  his  superiors,  leaving  Dibrell 
to  hold  and  observe  the  Nolansville  pike,  Stames  the  Frank- 
lin, and  Morgan  the  Murfreesboro  highways,  Forrest  now  re- 
tired to  Lavergne,  deeply  chagrined  that  he  had  been  forced, 
by  orders  given  at  such  a  distance  from  the  theatre  of  opera- 
tions, to  abandon  an  enterprise  the  success  of  which  he  was 
satisfied  was  almost  an  absolute  certainty.* 

In  the  mean  time.  General  Bragg,  having  fought  the  battle 


♦  The  recovery  of  Nashville  at  that 
jmictare  was  so  clearly  fraught  with 
moral,  polidcal,  and  military  advan- 
tages that  those  charged  with  the  gene- 
ral conduct  of  military  affairs  at  Rich- 
mond surely  ought  to  have  initiated 
measares  to  insure  the  operation.  A 
ngle  division  detached  without  possi- 


ble risk  from  the  Army  in  Virginia  for 
a  fortnight,  and  moving  by  rail,  would 
have  easily  compassed  it  It  was  one 
of  those  numerous  omissions  to  seize 
patent  opportunities  which,  in  the  study 
of  this  war  hereafter,  will  amaze  and 
puzzle  the  military  student,  and,  in- 
deed, all  thoughtful  readers. 


i 


192  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

of  Perryville,  had  been  obliged  to  withdraw  from  Kentucky 
and  by  the  latter  part  of  November  had  taken  up  i.  positioi 
with  his  army  in  the  vicinage  of  Murfreesboro.  Genera 
Wheeler  was  then  assigned  to  the  chief  command  of  the 
cavalry,  with  his  headquarters  at  Lavergne,  and  Forrest,  be 
ing  relieved,  was  directed  to  report  to  General  Bragg  in  per 
son.  Thereupon  he  was  assigned  to  the  command  of  a  bri 
gade  constituted  of  the  Fourth,  Eighth,  and  Ninth  Tennessee 
regiments  and  Russell's  Fourth  Alabama,*  with  Freeman's 
Battery,  with  orders  to  take  post  at  Columbia  and  there  pre 
pare  for  an  expedition  across  the  Tennessee  river  into  West- 
Tennessee.  The  arms  of  his  regiments  being  shot-guns  and 
flint-lock  muskets,  altogether  unfit  for  such  an  expedition 
General  Forrest  made  the  fact  known  to  the  Commander-in 
Chief,  who  nevertheless  adhered  to  his  orders,  but  promisee 
that  proper  arms  should  be  provided  for  issue  at  Columbia. 

Accordingly,  on  the  4th  of  December,  Forrest  took  position, 
as  directed,  with  his  brigade,  about  eighteen  hundred  strong, 
at  Columbia. 


*  We  regret  th^t  we  are  unable  to  furnish  any  roster  of  Russell*s  Regimen^ 
after  every  effort  to  procure  one. 


#^4 


^^■}]i- 


"JJlfj-OFLHErTX^'J-^-'^" 


f>^ 


CHAPTER  VIL 

'ft  out  /or  Exptditioti  into  West-TmneMte— -Effected  Piusage  ef'Ten- 
nestee  River  at  Clifton — Successful  Affair  with  Fideral  Force  at 
LfCxingtOH,  West-Tennesste — Whole  Federal  Command enffigediiHtey 
killed,  captured,  or  dispersed— Captured  Section  of  Rifled  Cu»i, 
wkieh  Farresfi  ArHlUry  used  for  the  rest  of  the  War— Boldly /n- 
vesttd  JlKksom,  oceupitd  by  a  largely  Superior  Forte — Capture  of 
Ou^mti  and  Destruction  of  Railways  in  vicinity — Skirmishes  in 
front  of  Jackson— Federal  Forces  driven  tehittd  their  Inlreneh- 
ments — Forrest  retired  from  position  to' operate  against  Federal 
Communications — Divided  Force  for  that  purpose — Capture  of  Tren- 
ton by  Forrest,  with  large  number  of  Prisoners;  also-many 
Supplies — Resumption  of  March  Nortkviard— Blockhouses  and 
Carrisoru  taken — Large  Extent  of  Railway  Trestles  destroyed  with 
Guarding  Blockhouses — General  Forrest,  leaving  Force  to  dettrey 
Railroads,  pressed  forward  to  Union  City — Captured  there  several 
hundred  Prisoners  in  Intrenched  Position — Large  Hostile  Force 
afield  to  intercut  kit  Exit  from  West-Tennessee — Began  to  retrace 
Steps— Difficult  Passage  of  the  Double  Bridges— Battle  of  Parker's 
Cross- Roads  or  Red  Maund^Death  of  the  Gallant  Lieutenant-Colo- 
nel  Napier — Federals  worsted  and  capitulatiug  en  masse — Sud- 
den Appearance  of  Hostile  Reenf or  cements  in  Confederate  Rear — 
Federals  resume  their  Arms  and  the  Battle— Critical  Situation  of 
General  Forrest — Happy  Extrication — Repassage  of  the  Tennessee 
— Summary  of  Results. 

December  loth—iist,  1862. 

_/N  the  loth  of  December,  orders  having  been  received 
om  army  headquarters  to  begin  the  expedition  indicated  ,at 
le  close  of  the  last  chapter,  General  Forrest  again  called  at- 
;ntlon,  in  writing,  to  the  ineffective  condition  of  his  arma- 
lent,  as  welt  as  to  the  fact  that  his  men  were  supplied  with 


194  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

only  ten  rounds  of  caps  for  his  shot-guns,  while  many  of  the 
muskets  vftvQ  Jlintless.   The  reply  was  a  curtly  couched  order 
to  march  without  delay.    Feeling  aggrieved  at  the  manner 
and  scope  of  his  instructions,  as  well  as  profoundly  sensible 
of  the  perils  which  his  command  was  soon  to  encounter  in  the 
passage  of  the  Tennessee  river,  in  mid-winter,  without  any 
means  of  ferriage,  and  subsequent  penetration  into  a  region 
swarming  with  Federal  forces  thoroughly  armed  and  supplied 
— ten  times,  perchance,  his  superiors  in  numbers — Forrest, 
nevertheless,  prepared  for  the  expedition  as  rapidly  as  possi- 
ble.    Unprepared  in  arms  as  his  men  were  to  cope  with  even 
an  equal  force,  in  its  outset  the  operation  had  very  much  the 
appearance  of  an  unavailing  forlorn  hope ;  but  early  on  the 
next  morning  his  entire  force,  as  before  said,  about  eighteen 
hundred  officers  and  men  and  four  guns,  were  in  motion,  with 
a  minimum  of  baggage.     Reaching  the  Tennessee  river  the 
evening  of  the  13th,  at  a  place  called  Clifton,  (below  at  Double 
Island,)  he  effected  a  passage  during  the  following  day,  and 
on  the  iSth,  in  time  to  advance  some  eight  miles  in  the  direc- 
tion of  Lexington,  in  Henderson  county.    An  old,  sodden, 
leaky  flat-boat  had  been  found  at  Clifton,  and  used  for  the 
ferriage  of  the  artillery  and  wagon-train,  while  the  horses  and 
mules  had  been  swum  across ;  the  officers  and  men  exposed 
to  a  cold  pelting  rain  all  the  time,  without  tents  or^other 
shelter. 

On  the  1 6th,  moving  some  eighteen  miles  in  the  direction 
of  Lexington,  Forrest  encamped  to  give  his  men  an  opportu- 
nity to  dry  their  clothing,  and  to  inspect  and  arrange  their 
arms  and  ammunition  for  active  service.  On  inspection  it 
was  found  that  the  greater  part  of  the  small  supply  of  caps 
had  become  wet  and  unserviceable.  But  that  night,  most  op- 
portunely, a  citizen  reached  the  encampment  with  some  fifty 
thousand  shot-gun  and  pistol  caps,  which  the  General  had 
sent  agents  forward  to  procure  within  the  enemy's  lines. 


f 

1 


1 


Federal  Farce  Encountered.  195 

This  was  a  great  relief  and  an  auspicious  circumstance. 
Resuming  the  advance  on  the  morning  of  the  17th,  when 
about  eight  miles  from  Lexington,  his  scouts  and  advanced 
pickets  encountered  those  of  a  Federal  force  moving  by  the 
same  road  to  check  the  Confederate  expedition. 

Directing  Colonel  Starnes  to  engage  and  remove  this  ob* 
stacle  with  his  regiment,  General  Forrest  immediately  led  the 
remainder  of  his  command  by  a  road  to  the  right  at  a  gallop, 
with  the  purpose  of  cutting  off  the  enemy's  retreat  In  this 
movement  the  lead  was  given  to  the  four  veteran  Alabama 
companies  of  the  General's  old  regiment,*  under  Captain 
Frank  Gurley,  with  orders  to  charge  upon  the  Federals  as 
soon  as  he  came  upon  them. 

As  soon  as  his  artillery  had  crossed  a  bridge  about  six  miles 
from  Lexington,  General  Forrest  pushed  on  at  a  gallop  to  the 
verge  of  the  place,  where  the  enemy  were  found  forming,  in  a 
strong  position,  on  an  elevated  ridge. 

Disposing  Dibrell's  and  BifHe's  regiments,  Gurley's  Bat- 
talion, and  his  escort,  for  the  attack,  he  threw  himself  at  once 
with  them  upon  the  left  of  the  Federal  line  and  broke  it; 
then,  turning  to  the  left,  he  again  struck  them  on  the  flank, 
by  which  Colonel  Hawkins  and  his  regiment  of  Tennessee 
(Federal)  cavalry  were  scattered,  and  fled  to  the  rear,  leaving 
the  Eleventh  Regiment,  Illinois  Volunteers,  and  a  section  of 
artillery  to  bear  the  brunt  of  the  onslaught. 

These  troops  Captain  Gurley  charged  with  a  force  of  some 
two  hundred  men  at  most,  and  captured  the  guns,t  one  hun- 
dred and  fifty  officers  and  men,  including  Colonel  Ingersoll 
and  Major  Kerr,  some  three  hundred  small-arms,  mostly 
Sharp's  carbines,  and  a  full  supply  of  ammunition,  with  about 


*  Now  constituting  part  of  Russell's     rifled  (Rodman)  guns,  fiilly  equippe<^ 

Kegiment,  Alabama  Cavalry.  and  were  used  by  General  Forrest  to 

t  These  were  two  three-inch  steel     the  close  of  the  war. 


196  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

two  hundred  horses  and  a  few  wagons.  The  other  portion* 
of  this  force  had  fled  in  the  direction  of  Jackson,  pursued 
hotly  by  Colonel  Starnes  and  the  rest  of  the  comitiand 

The  artillery  of  the  enemy  was  bravely  handled  and  fought ; 
the  men  stood  stoutly  to  their  guns ;  many  fell  at  their  post ; 
and  the  remainder  only  yielded  when  the  Confederates  were 
directly  upon  them  and  further  resistance  useless.  In  their 
capture,  Private  Kelly,  of  Kelly's  Troopers,  Russell's  (Alaba- 
ma) Regiment,  lost  his  life  with  signal  heroism.  He  was  the 
first  Confederate  to  reach  the  battery,  and  laying  his  hand 
Upon  a  piece  just  as  it  was  discharged  he  was  cut  in  twain. 

Colonel  Starnes,  pursuing  closely  in  the  track  of  the  fugi- 
tivesi  captured  some  fifty  of  them,  and  gathered  a  large  num- 
ber of  valuable  arms  with  which  the  road  was  strewn  by  the 
fleeing  Federals.! 

'  Without  further  resistance  the  Confederates  reached  the 
vicinity  of  Jackson  on  the  afternoon  of  the  18th.  Their  com- 
mander, losing  no  time,  at  once  threw  out  skirmishers,  and 
drove  back  the  Federal  picket  line  and  outposts,  to  take 
shelter  behind  their  works,  which  consisted  of  a  heavy  line  of 
infantry  epaulements  connecting  some  five  or  six  open-gorge 
works  for  field-pieces,  that  commanded  all  the  approaches  to 
the  position.  Meanwhile,  troop-trains  were  evidently  coming 
up  rapidly  from  the  north  and  south  ;  citizens  also  reported 
that  heavy  reenforcements  had  recently  been  received. 

General  Forrest,  therefore,  at  eight  o'clock  at  night,  de- 
tached Colonel  Dibrell  and  Major  J.  E.  Forrest,  each  with  a 


•  The  Eleventh  Illinois,  and  Haw-  t   The  Confederate  loss  was  three 

kins*s  regiment  and  the  artillery,  may  privates  killed  and  five  wounded ;    that 

be  set  down  1 100  men.    From  the  offi-  of  the  Federals  about  twenty-five  kiUed 

dal  report  of  Colonel  Jacob  Fry,  Reb,  and  fifty  wounded,  who  fell  into  General 

itec,  vol  VI,  page  283,  Doc  80,  it  may  Forrest's  hands. 
be  inferred  that  300  men  of  the  Fifth 
Ohio  Cavalry  were  present  alsa 


Staiians  Captured. 


197 


red  men,  the  former  to  move  out  on  the  raih-oad  toward 
boldt,  to  seize  the  nearest  station,  capture  any  approach*- 
■ains,  and  break  up  the  intermediate  sections  of  the  road ; 
tter  with  similar  instructions  in  regard  to  the  Mobile  and 
railroad,  south  of  Jackson.  At  the  same  time,  Colond 
was  detailed  to  act  in  the  like  manner  on  the  railway 
ig  to  Bolivar.  These  orders,  promptly  executed,  were  so 
iccessful  that  Dibrell  captured  the  station  some  eight 

north  of  Jackson,  about  two  o'clock  in  the  morning, 
ts  Federal  garrison  of  some  one  hundred  men,  with  their 
and  supplies.      Major  Forrest  seized  the  nearest  station 

quarter,  and  its  guard,  some  seventy-five  men,  theic 
and  munitions ;  and  Biffle  surprised  and  captured  an 
5t  of  some  fifty  men.  Each  detachment  tore  up  suffi- 
of  the  railroad  to  make  a  substantial  obstruction  to  the 
ich  of  trains  from  their  respective  directions,  and  re* 
I  to  their  positions  about  daylight  with  their  captures, 
rms  and  ammunition  thus  happily  acquired  were  imrne- 
f  distributed  in  lieu  of  those  of  inferior  species,  with 

Forrest  had  entered  the  field. 

\  force  in  occupation  of  Jackson  was  estimated  by  the 
is  of  the  vicinage  to  be  fully  is,cxx)  strong  of  all  armsi 
flirty  pieces  of  artillery  in  position.* 


e  actual  Federal  strength  at 
at  the  time  of  the  appearance 
ral  Forrest  before  it  could  not 
:n  less  than  10,000  infantry.  A 
ndcnt  of  the  Chicago  Tribuwy 
from  Cairo,  January  6th,  as  he 
with  thorough  knowledge,  says 
ar  garrison,  5000  strong,  on  the 
of  the  18th  of  December  was 
:d  by  Brayman's  (from  Bolivar) 
cr's  brigades,  and,  on  the  fol- 
lay,  by  two  other  brigades,  or 


5000  men,  sent  by  General  Grant  from 
Oxford.  This  would  make  the  forct 
present  on  Forrest's  approach  at  least 
13,000  men.  But  the  same  correspond* 
ent,  further  on,  says,  General  Sulli- 
van, taking  the  field  to  pursue  the  Con* 
federates,  the  20th  inst,  with  7000  men, 
left  at  Jackson  only  1000  men,  General 
Brayman  having  begun  the  pursuit  ap- 
parently the  day  before. — Ifeb,  Rec,  VL 
Doc  94,  pp.  332,  333. 


i 


198  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

General  Forrest,  on  reaching  the  vicinage  of  the  Federal 
lines,  disposed  his  force  with  a  view  to  deceive  them  in  re- 
gard to  his  numbers.  Posting  his  main  force  in  a  line  across 
the  highway  from  Lexington  to  Jackson,  and  about  four  miles 
to  the  east  of  the  town,  he  placed  detachments  to  command 
^  and  observe  the  roads  from  Jackson  in  the  direction  of  Spring 
Creek  and  Trenton,  and  in  these  positions  the  Confederate 
troops  rested  for  the  night  About  sunrise  the  enemy  threw 
forward  a  strong  line  of  skirmishers,  who  were  promptly  met 
by  the  dismounted  men  advanced  by  the  Confederate  General, 
with  a  display,  on  their  right  and  left  flanks,  of  cavalry,  and  a 
spirited  conflict  with  small-arms  took  place.  Meanwhile,  the 
Confederate  artillery — six  pieces— were  brought  up  and  era- 
ployed  with  such  effect  that  the  enemy  was  speedily  driven  to 
his  intrenchments,  with  a  loss  of  about  thirty  (30)  killed  and 
wounded,  who  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  Confederates.  Near- 
ly simultaneously  with  these  operations,  skirmishers  on  foot, 
flanked  by  cavalry,  had  been  pushed  down  the  Spring  Creek 
and  Trenton  roads,  driving  back  all  the  Federal  force  in  that 
quarter.  Meanwhile,  also,  the  Confederate  cavalry  remaining 
mounted  or  not  employed  as  skirmishers  were  brought  up 
and  ostentatiously  displayed  within  half  a  mile  of  the  in- 
trenchments along  the  whole  line  between  the  Forked  Deer 
river  and  the  highway  to  Trenton,  with  the  object  of  deceiv- 
ing as  to  the  actual  force  investing  the  place.  This  and  occa- 
sional brushes  hotw^QXi  the  skirmishers  were  kept  up  through 
the  day. 

Leaving  Colonel  Russell  with  his  regiment  displayed  in  a 
thin  line  of  cavalry-pickets  in  front  of  the  works,  between 
four  and  five  p.m.  General  Forrest  quietly  withdrew  his  maiq 
force  back  by  the  Lexington  road  as  far  as  Cotton  Plant,  and 
thence  on  a  road  leading  to  Trenton  as  far  as  Spring  creek. 
It  was  here  the  Confederate  commander  now  resorted  to  a 
clever  ruse  to  spread   and   keep  up  false  notions  of   his 


Prisoners  Taken  and  Supplies  Captured.      199 

strength — ^that  is,  he  caused  a  number  of  drums  to  be  beaten 
in  such  manner  as  to  produce  the  belief  of  a  heavy  infantry 
force  in  that  quarter.* 

About  eight  o'clock  at  night,  Colonel  Russell's  command 
was  withdrawn  from  the  vicinage  of  Jackson  and  followed  to 
Spring  creek.  General  Forrest  then  had  his  whole  force  as- 
'  sembled  at  that  position,  with  some  five  hundred  prisoners 
taken  in  the  several  combats  and  surprises  around  Jackson  ; 
his  train  was  enlarged  to  twenty-five  excellent  wagons  and 
teams,  his  artillery  by  a  section,  and  the  main  part  of  the  men 
well  armed  and  munitioned. 

At  five  A.M.,  Colonel  Dibrell  was  detached  with  his  regiment 
and  a  part  of  Biffle's  to  bum  the  bridge  of  the  Mobile  and 
Ohio  Railroad  over  Spring  creek,  which  was  duly  executed, 
with  the  capture  there  of  an  outpost  of  some  one  hundred  in- 
fiuitry,  with  their  arms  and  supplies.  At  the  same  time,  an- 
other detachment  under  Colonel  Stames,  consisting  of  his 
r^ment,  a  squadron  of  Biffle's,  and  Captain  W.  H.  Forrest's 
Independent  Company,!  was  dispatched  to  capture  Hum- 
boldt, which  was  also  effected  about  one  p.m.,  (December  20th,) 
after  a  slight  skirmish.  Two  hundred  prisoners,  four  caissons 
with  their  horses,  about  500  stand  of  arms,  300,000  rounds  of 
small-arm  ammunition,  a  large  supply  of  artillery  harness, 
considerable  quantities  of  subsistence,  quartermasters'  stores, 
and  soldiers'  baggage  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  Confederates. 
These  stores  and  materials  of  war  were  destroyed  except  a 
portion  of  the  best  of  the  arms  and  an;imunition,  and  the 
oussons. 

In  the  mean  time,  General  Forrest  had  pushed  forward  in 
the  direction  of  Trenton  with  his  artilleryj  and  train,  his 


*  These  drums  had  been  recently  man  and  the  captured  Rodman  guns 

iptnred.  under  Captain  J.  W.  Morton,  manned 

t  Not  more  than  750  men  in  all  by  details. 
X  Four  pieces  under  Captain  Free- 


i 


200  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

usual  escort,  and  Major  N.  N.  Cox*s  Battalion,  of  some  one 
hundred  and  sixty  newly-raised  volunteers  from  Hickman 
and  Perry  counties,  of  Middle  Tennessee,  who.  had  joined  on 
the  19th  and  20th.  As  he  did  so,  he  directed  Colonel  Rus- 
sell to  remain  in  position  at  Spring  creek  with  the  Fourth 
Alabama  cavalry,*  to  cover  the  movements  then  on  foot. 
There  Colonel  Russell  was  assailed  in  the  afternoon,  as  his 
commander  had  foreseen,  by  a  brigade,  at  least,  of  some  2000 
infantry.  Making  an  intrepid  defense,  he  repulsed,  however, 
several  attacks,  and  finally,  charging  in  turn,  drove  the  Fede- 
rals back  across  Spring  creek,  capturing  their  ammunition 
and  subsistence-train  and  some  prisoners,  besides  the  casual- 
ties usually  incident  to  a  prolonged  and  resolute  combat  Re- 
maining master  of  the  ground,  he  held  it  until  eight  o'clock 
that  night,  when  he  followed  in  the  direction  of  Trenton,  as 
he  had  been  previously  directed. 

At  one  P.M.  on  the  20th  December,  General  Forrest  reached 
the  vicinity  of  Trenton,  and  without  delay  made  his  disposi- 
tions for  its  capture.  Major  Cox  was  ordered  to  move  with 
his  squadron  by  the  right,  to  secure  a  position  to  the  east  of 
the  town  and  the  railroad  depot,  which  the  enemy  had 
strongly  fortified  by  a  breastwork  made  of  cotton-bales  and 
hogsheads  of  tobacco,  erected  closely  around  it.  Then 
charging  through  the  town  with  his  escort,  Forrest  drove  the 
enemy  before  him  into  their  breastworks.  Within  fifty  yards 
he  and  his  men  approached  without  dismounting, — firing  upon 
the  enemy  and  receiving  their  fire,  with  a  loss  of  two  of  his 
troopers  killed  and  three  wounded.  Now,  withdrawing  to 
a  somewhat  commanding  position  some  two  hundred  yards 
south-eastward  of  the  depot,  the  Confederate  commander  dis- 
mounted his  men  and  disposed  them  quickly  as  sharp-shoot- 
ers in  some  adjacent  houses,  whence  to  fire  upon  the  enemy. 


*  Not  exceeding  400  men. 


Surrender  of  Colonel  Fry.  20 1 

a  number  of  whom  at  the  moment  occupied  the  tops  of  the 

• 

brick  buildmgs  at  the  depot,  favorably  adapted  for  shelter  by 
parapet  walls.  After  a  short  skirmish  the  Federals  were 
forced  to  quit  these  positions,  with  some  loss,  and  seek  better 
cover.  Captain  Strange,  the  Confederate  Adjutant-General, 
was  then  directed  to  bring  up  and  post  the  artillery,  which 
was  done  with  judgment  on  an  elevation  southward  of  the 
depot,  about  three  hundred  yards  distant.  Scarcely  had 
three  rounds  been  discharged,  when  numerous  nondescript 
white  flags  were  displayed  from  all  quarters  of  the  Federal 
fortalice. 

Captain  Strange  was  next  directed  to  arrange  and  receive 
the  surrender,  and,  at  once  advancing  for  that  purpose,  was 
met  by  Colonel  Jacob  Fry,  the  superior  officer 'present,  and 
several  others.  However,  while  the  preliminaries  were  being 
an^nged  by  his  staff-officer.  General  Forrest  went  forward  to 
the  group  thus  occupied.  As  he  did  so,  he  was  directly  ad- 
dressed by  Colonel  Fry>  an  elderly  officer,  with  some  inquiry 
touching  the  terms  which  would  be  given. 

"  Unconditional,"  was  the  Confederate  General's  brief  an- 
swer. 

Then,  Colonel  Fry,  observing  that  having  no  alternative  he 
must  yield,  unswung  his  sword  and  handed  it  to  General  For- 
rest, remarking  sadly  that  it  had  been  in  his  family  for  forty 
years.  Receiving  the  sword  and  handling  it  for  an  instant. 
General  Forrest  returned  it  to  his  opponent,  saying  in  effect : 
"  Take  back  your  sword.  Colonel,  as  it  is  a  family  relic  ;  but 
I  hope,  sir,  when  next  worn  it  will  be  in  a  better  cause  than 
that  of  attempting  the  subjugation  of  your  countrymen." 

While  these  matters  were  taking  place,  an  alarm  of  fire 
was  made  at  the  depot,  and  smoke  was  observed  to  rise  with- 
in the  precincts  of  the  works.  As  it  was  too  long  after  the 
shelling  to  have  been  caused  in  that  way,  if  was  evidently  an 
cfibrt  to  destroy  property  which  was  now  his  spoil  of  war. 


k 


202  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

Forrest,  therefore,  sprang  to  the  narrow  sally-port,  whence 
the  Federal  soldiers  were  already  rapidly  rushing  forth,  and, 
drawing  his  sword,  and  supported  by  Major  Strange,  pistol  in 
hand,  ordered  the  fugitives  to  return  and  extinguish  the  fire 
on  pain  of  death.  Sternly  enforcing  this  order,  the  fire  was 
speedily  quelled.  Turning,  then,  to  Colonel  Fry,  he  further 
declared  his  determination  to  punish  in  the  most  summary 
manner  any  such  perfidy  as  an  attempt  by  the  Federal  sol- 
diers to  set  the  depot  on  fire  and  destroy  the  property  cai>- 
tiwed. 

In  this  brilliant  affair,  it  will  be  recollected  that  General 
Forrest  used  only  his  escort,  Cox's  untried  volunteers,  and 
his  artillery,  or  a  force  of  not  more  than  275  men.  The  re- 
sults— the  legitimate  fruit  of  Forrest's  military  judgment, 
quickness  of  plan,  decision,  and  dash — were  as  follows :  Not 
less  than  400  prisoners  of  war,  including  Cplonels  Fry  and 
Hawkins  and  several  other  field  officers,  300  negroes,  1000 
horses,  mules,  etc.,  13  wagons  and  ambulances,  7  caissons,  20,- 
000  rounds  of  artillery  and  400,000  of  small-arm  ammunition, 
10O9OOO  rations  of  subsistence,  together  with  a  large  amount  of 
cavalry  equipments,  clothing,  and  quartermaster  stores,  and  a 
considerable  quantity  of  soldiers*  baggage — in  value  at  least 
JSOO,ooo.  That  evening  the  several  detachments  under  Colo- 
nels Stames  and  Dibrell  came  up  with  their  prisoners,  and 
the  next  morning  early  Colonel  Russell  effected  a  junction 
also,  so  that  the  whole  command  was  once  more  assembled. 
And  in  lieu  of  flint-lock  muskets  and  shot-guns,  ineffectively 
supplied  with  ammunition,  it  was  now  well  armed,  equipped, 
and  supplied,  as  well  as  somewhat  stronger  than  when  it  had 
entered  West-Tennessee,  despite  the  casualties  of  battle  with 
a  superior  adversary. 

The  paroling  of  prisoners  had  been  commenced  soon  aftei 
the  surrender  of  the  garrison  at  Trenton.  They  numbered 
now  fully  1300,  officers  and  men.     Of  these,  the  officers  and 


Ik 


Advance  toward  Union  City.  203 

Hawkins's  Regiment  were  paroled  and  suffered  to  repair  di- 
rectly, as  they  chose,  to  their  several  homes  <  the  remainder, 
some  800  or  900  men,  were  paroled,  but  required  to  march 
under  a  suitable  escort,  commanded  by  Lieutenant-Colonel 
N.  D.  Collins,  to  Columbus,  Ky.,  there  to  be  turned  over  to 
the  Federal  commander. 

Early  on  the  morning  of  the  21st  of  December,  General 
Forrest,  taking  his  usual  escort,  the  artillery,  and  the  wagon- 
train,  resumed  the  advance  toward  Union  City,  giving  orders 
that  the  command,  after  some  requisite  rest,  should  follow 
with  due  celerity,  while  Colonel  Dibrell  should  remain  in  posi- 
tion at  Trenton  with  his  regiment  uhtil  the  following  day,  to 
cover  the  rear. 

Some  seven  miles  northward.  General  Forrest  came  upon  a 
stockade,  which,  after  capturing  its  garrison  of  thirty  men,  he 
burned,  with  the  railroad-bridge  and  trestle  at  the  same  point. 
As  the  troops  were  occupied  with  this,  the  train  had  been 
sent  on  with  such  soldiers  'as  were  in  charge  of  crippled 
horses — Major  G.  V.  Rambaut,  Chief  Commissary,  in  com- 
mand— and  were  seven  miles  in  advance  when  overtaken  by 
the  General,  who  found  him  halted,  and  such  soldiers  as  were 
with  the  train  drawn  up  in  front  under  arms,  under  the  belief 
that  a  considerable  Federal  force  was  just  in  front ;  and  that 
was  the  fact,  for  the  Confederate  commander,  advancing  with 
his  escort  and  Rambaut's  few  men,  speedily  encountered  a 
force  of  some  250  men,  who,  after  a  short  brush,  were  driven 
into  their  stockade  at  Kenton  Station.  Bringing  up  the  artil- 
lery, placing  it  in  position,  and  disposing  his  small  command 
present}  not  exceeding  125  cavalry,  so  as  to  cut  off*  escape  into 
the  swamps,  adjacent,  of  the  Obion  "  bottom,"  General  Forrest 
summoned  the  enemy  to  surrender,  which  was  peremptorily 
declined.  The  salvo,  however,  from  six  pieces  of  artillery, 
which  speedily  followed  with  a  startling  crash  through  the 
stockade,  quickly  produced  another  conclusion,  and  many 


i 


204  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

white  flags  of  every  possible  description  were  to  be  seen  flut- 
tering in  all  quarters  of  the  work. 

By  this  juncture  the  main  command  began  to  come  up,  and 
were  immediately  set  to  work  to  destroy  the  trestle,  tear  up 
the  roadway,  and  bum  the  stockade.  These  dispositions 
having  been  made,  their  commander  was  again  moving  for- 
ward with  his  escort,  artillery,  and  train,  but  necessarily  mak- 
ing a  detour  of  four  or  six  miles  to  find  a  crossing  for  the  train 
and  artillery  over  the  Obion,  just  beyond  which  he  halted  and 
encamped  for  the  night  of  the  2ist.  The  main  command  mov- 
ing along  the  Mobile  and  Ohio  Railroad,  there  a  continuous 
trestle,  destroyed  it  effectually  by  the  torch  for  seven  miles  that 
afternoon,  capturing  another  stockade  with  a  garrison  of  forty 
men,  and  encamped. 

That  night.  Colonel  Stames,  the  senior  officer  with  the 
troops,  was  specially  instructed  to  destroy,  the  following  day, 
the  entire  track  through  the  bottoms  of  the  Obion,  a  distance 
of  some  fifteen  miles,  including  a  good  deal  of  trestle-work 
fifteen  feet  high,  which  was  thoroughly  accomplished. 

On  the  following  morning,  scouts  from  the  direction  of 
Jackson  reported  that  a  force  of  some  ten  thousand  men  had 
taken  the  field,  and  were  moving  rapidly  northward,  with  the 
purpose  of  intercepting  the  return  of  the  Confederates  across 
the  Tennessee. 

Nevertheless,  the  ever  enterprising  soldier  determined  to 
complete  his  movement  and  continue  his  advance  as  far  as 
Union  City,  yet  some  twenty  miles  distant. 

The  battalion  of  Biffle's  Regiment,  Major  Cox's  Squadron, 
and  Captain  Forrest's  Independent  company,  were  ordered 
forward.  With  this  force,  a  section  of  artillery,  and  his  escort 
detachment,  or  about  four  hundred  men,  and  the  train,  Forrest 
now  pushed  forward  rapidly  that  afternoon  upon  Union  City. 
The  enemy's  pickets  were  met  four  miles  from  the  place,  and 
at  once  driven  in,  rapidly  followed  by  the  Confederates  to  their 


Forrest  Retraces  his  Steps.  205 

fortifications,  which  consisted  of  rifle-pits  commanded  by  a 
small  closed  earth-work.  The  Confederates  pressed  forward, 
taking  position  to  assail  the  works,  with  great  spirit  and  loud 
cheers. 

As  this  happened,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Collins,  who,  it  will 
be  remembered,  was  en  route  from  Trenton  to  Columbus  with 
a  large  body  of  Federal  paroled  prisoners,  came  in  view  about 
half  a  mile  southward,  presenting,,  doubtless,  a  formidable 
hostile  appearance  to  the  beleaguered  Federals,  whose  capitu- 
lation was  at  once  demanded,  and  yielded  with  little  parley. 
Two  hundred  and  fifty  officers  and  men,  strongly  intrenched, 
were  here  surrendered,  with  their  arms  and  supplies. 

Encamping  now  for  the  night,  the  Confederate  leader  set 
his  staff  to  work  paroling  the  prisoners  last  taken.  Those 
in  the  rear,  captured  since  his  departure  from  Trenton,  were 
ordered  to  be  hastened  up,  and  on  their  arrival  were  likewise 
paroled,  some  three  hundred  in  number,  and  the  whole  turned 
over  to  Colonel  Collins,  who  resumed  his  march  the  afternoon 
of  the  23d. 

That  night,  an  officer  was  detached  with  forty  men,  to 
repair  to  Moscow,  some  twelve  miles  distant,  in  the  direction  of 
Columbus,  which  place  he  reached  on  the  following  morning. 
Notwithstanding  it  was  said  to  be  strongly  occupied  and  de- 
fended by  a  stockade,  such  was  the  ardor  infused  by  this  time 
into  the  whole  command,  that  a  charge  was  made,  with  a  loud 
shout,  into  the  ,very  heart  of  the  position,  the  commander  cry- 
ing aloud  for  the  "  artillery  "  to  be  pushed  "  forward."  The 
Federals  thereupon  fled  precipitately  out  of  their  works  in  the 
direction  of  Columbus,  leaving  possession  to  the  Confederates, 
who  then  returned  to  their  command  with  little  delay. 

On  the  return  of  this  detachment,  the  Confederate  General, 
having  fully  attained  the  utmost  northern  limit  of  his  expedi- 
tion, turned  to  retrace  his  steps.  Some  twelve  miles  south  of 
Union  City  he  was  met  by  a  courier  from  Colonel  Starnes, 


2o6 


Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 


with  the  information  that  he  had  destroyed  the  trestle-work  to 
the  south  of  the  Obion  river,  and  was  now  burning  that  on 
the  north.  On  the  24th  and  25  th,  the  entire  command*  was 
thus  employed,  especially  in  demolishing  the  solid  heavy  tres- 
tles between  the  north  and  south  forks  of  the  river. 

This  achieved,  the  men  were  allowed  rest  for  some  hours. 

Meanwhile,  scouts  reported  that  a  Federal  force,  estimated 
to  be  at  least  twelve  thousand  strong,  had  been  concentrated 
at  Trenton. 

On  the  morning  of  the  26th  of  December,  destroying  the 
railroad  bridge  over  the  north  fork  of  the  Obion,  on  the  Pa- 
ducah  branch,  Forrest  then  put  his  whole  force  in  motion  for 
Dresden,  about  twenty-six  miles  distant,  and  encamped  in  that 
immediate  vicinity  that  night  and  during  the  following  day,  to 
give  his  men  and  animals  rest,  and  to  receive  reports  from  his 
scouts.  These  soon  announced  that  the  Federals  were  ad- 
vancing by  the  road  from  Trenton  to  Union  City ;  and,  on  the 
morning  of  the  27th,  that  a  movement  was  being  made  in  force 
up  the  Obion  in  the  direction  of  McLemoresville  and  Hunting- 
ton, with  the  expectation  of  cutting  off  the  Confederates  from 


•  Increased  near  Trenton  by  Napier's 
Battalion,  two  hundred  effectives.  This 
battalion  had  been  enrolled  and  mus- 
tered in,  four  hundred  and  eighty  strong, 
a  month  previously,  for  special  service 
in  Middle  Tennessee.  It  consisted  of 
five  companies,  namely,  **  A,"  William 
E.  De  Moss,  Captain ;  N.  J.  Robinson, 
First  Lieutenant ;  N.  P.  Evans,  Se- 
cond Lieutenant ;  and  N.  N.  Phipp, 
Third  Lieutenant  "  B,"  John  Minor, 
Captain ;  Nesbitt,  First  Lieu- 
tenant ;  Joseph  Williams,  Second  Lieu- 
tenant ;  Andrew  Nesbitt,  Third  Lieu- 
tenant   "  C,"  N.  N.  Hobbs,  Captain ; 


M,  M.  Box,  First  Lieutenant ;  Jesse 
Hobbs,  Second  Lieutenant;  Charles 
E.  Somers,  Third  Lieutenant  "D." 
Thomas  Easley,  Captain;  J.  C.  Mc- 
Auley,  First  Lieutenant ;  — ^  Hall, 
Second  Lieutenant;  William  Frazier, 
Third  Lieutenant  "  E,"  M.  F.  Alex- 
ander.  Captain ;  W.  Dobson,  First 
Lieutenant ;  J.  Dobson,  Second  Lieu- 
tenant Lieutenant-Colonel  Napier 
commanding.  Harris  Wiley  was  his 
Adjutant  This  battalion,  under  orders 
from  General  Forrest,  crossed  the  river 
at  Reynoldsburg  on  the  17th.  For  its 
subsequent  history  see  Appendix. 


Forrest  Crosses  the  Obion.  207 

the  Tennessee  river.  Upon  this,  their  commander,  as  wary  at 
such  a  juncture  as  adventurous  and  daring  at  other  times, 
turned  the  head  of  his  column  and  moved  rapidly  in  the  di- 
rection of  Huntington,  encamping  at  McKenzie's  Station,  on 
the  Memphis  and  Louisville  Railroad,  with  his  command,  ex- 
cept Colonel  Russell,  who  was  thrown  forward  six  or  seven 
miles  nearer  Huntington,  to  seize  and  hold  the  crossing  of  the 
Obion.  Scouts,  about  nine  o'clock  that  night,  reported  that 
the  enemy  had  destroyed  all  the  bridges  over  the  Obion,  south 
of  the  high  road  leading  from  Jackson  to  Paris,  Tennessee ; 
as  also  that  Colonel  Russell  had  come  in  collision  with  a  heavy 
force  on  attempting  to  cross  the  Obion,  but,  nevertheless,  had 
effected  his  passage  and  held  the  position.  Major  Cox  was, 
therefore,  dispatched,  at  a  gallop,  to  seize  the  road  leading 
from  Paris  to  Huntington,  and  to  move  down,  in  direction  of 
the  latter  place,  until  he  should  meet  any  Federal  force,  which 
he  was  to  hold  in  check  until  compelled  to  give  way,  when  he 
would  move  in  the  direction  of  the  Tennessee  river. 

On  being  satisfied  that  a  greatly  superior  force  was  being 
disposed  to  frustrate  his  repassage  of  the  Tennessee,  Forrest 
now  concluded  to  attempt  the  crossing  of  the  Obion  to  the 
right  of  Huntington,  for  which  end,  however,  there  was  but 
one  road  left  available,  with  a  bridge  reported  to  be  impassa- 
ble, and  evidently  so  regarded  by  the  enemy,  since  it  was  left 
unoccupied.  The  train  was  put  forthwith  in  motion  for  what 
are  known  in  that  country  as  the  "double-bridges"  on  the 
McLemoresville  road,  and  they  were  reached  about  eleven 
o'clock  that  night. 

Men  were  set  to  work  with  Forrest-activity  to  cut  timber- 
forks,  with  which  to  stay  and  strengthen  the  bridges  and  tres- 
tles, to  bear  the  artillery  and  train,  and  in  an  hour  this  was 
achieved,  so  that  some  cavalry  were  passed  safely  across. 
All  the  while  it  was  very  dark  and  cold,  and  a  sleety  drizzle 
was  falling.    The  General  drove  with  his  own  hands  the  first 


2o8  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

of  his  headquarter  teams  over  the  slippery,  narrow,  tottering 
bridges,  in  order  to  give  an  example  and  confidence  to  his 
men — a  feat  little  less  perilous  personally,  in  their  minds  at  the 
time,  than  the  passage  of  that  other  bridge  made  famous  to 
all  time  by  the  valor  of  Napoleon.  The  next  two  teams  which 
attempted  to  follow  were  quickly  floundering  in  the  deep 
stream  and  freezing  mud,  from  which  they  were  only  relieved 
with  loss  of  time,  difficulty,  and  exposure  of  the  men. 

Many  of  the  officers  and  men  were  now  greatly  discou- 
raged— indeed,  despaired  of  effecting  a  passage  in  such  utter 
darkness.  But  the  impossible  was  literally  unknown  to  the 
Confederate  leader,  who  ordered  up  and  distributed  five  hun- 
dred men,  with  their  officers,  twenty  men  to  accompany  each 
team.  Too  heavily  loaded  for  safety  and  the  condition  of  the 
road,  the  mud-holes  were  filled  with  considerable  quantities 
of  flour  and  coffee,  though  so  inestimable  to  Confederate 
soldiers.  By  these  means  the  train  was  safely  thrown  across 
by  three  o'clock  in  the  morning  ;  but,  meantime,  the  road  had 
become  so  cut  up  as  to  be  almost  impracticable.  Fifty  men, 
however,  were  then  attached  to  each  piece  of  artillery.  The 
horses  bogged  deeply  and  the  men  waded  waist-deep  in  the 
freezing  mud  and  water ;  but  in  three  hours  all  the  guns  like- 
wise were  upon  the  east  bank  of  the  Obion,  in  condition  for 
action.  By  this  time  Colonel  Russell  and  Major  Cox  had  re- 
joined, and,  moving  on  without  delay  to  McLemoresville,  four 
miles  distant.  General  Forrest  halted  his  troops,  and  gave  men 
and  animals  time  to  feed,  of  which  all  stood  in  need  as  well 
as  of  some  rest.  But  in  an  hour  or  two  reliable  scouts  an- 
nounced that  a  Federal  force — reported,  by  the  country  peo- 
ple, io,cxx)  strong — was  only  twelve  miles  distant,  at  Hunting- 
ton. Therefore,  at  ten  a.m.  on  the  29th,  the  Confederates 
were  again  in  movement  for  Lexington,  by  a  rough,  miry, 
hilly  road,  over  which  the  wagons,  still  heavily  loaded,  and 
the  artillery,  were  drawn  with  much  difficulty. 


Battle  of  Parker's  Cross-Roads. 


209 


Encamping  for  the  night  some  nine  miles  short  of  Lexing- 
ton,  the  Confederate  General  detached  His  brother,  Captain 
Forrest,  with  his  company  toward  Huntington,  to  observe  the 
enemy,  retard  his  march  as  much  as  possible,  and  report  hos- 
tile movements  and  appearances  in  that  quarter.     Captain 
Forrest  encountered  a  column  of  the  enemy  at  or  near  Clarks- 
burg, within  six  miles  of  the  Confederate  camp  and  moving 
in  that  direction.    A  skirmish  ensued,  with  the  loss  of  several 
men  to  the  Confederates,  but  with  more  casualties  to  the  Fede- 
rals.    This  was  speedily  reported  to  General  Forrest,*  who, 
in  the  jaded  condition  of  his  command,  regarded  it  most  judi- 
cious to  remain  in  position  and  risk  a  battle  on  the  following 
morning  with  impending  odds.    Accordingly,  Captain  For- 
rest was  instructed  through  his  courier  to  do  all  that  he  could 
to  check  the  march  of  the  Federal  troops,  disputing  the  road 
as  obstinately  as  practicable,  and  to  make  frequent  reports  of 
the  situation.    During  this  time  the  men  were  left  undis- 
turbed until  four  o'clock  a.m.,  when  they  were  quickly  rousedt. 
ordered  to  saddle  up  and  prepare  for  the  march. 

Speedily  in  motion  toward  Parker's  Cross-Roads,  (or  Red 
Mound,)  about  a  mile  and  a  half  distant.  General  Forrest,  in- 
formed of  the  near  approach  of  his  enemy,  threw  his  command 
in  order  of  battle.  About  the  same  time  the  Federal  column 
made  its  appearance  from  the  north-eastward  and  formed 
promptly  to  attack.! 


•  Through  a  courier,  Private  W.  C. 
HUl. 

1  Colonel  Biffle  had  been  detached, 
about  twenty-four  hours  previously,  to 
capture  a  force  understood  to  be  mov- 
ing,  isolated,  toward  Trenton.  This 
he  overtook  and  captured  (120  officers 
ad  men)  about  seven  miles  east  of 
Trenton.  Greatly  embarrassed  by  his 
opdves,  he  wisely  determined  to  rid 


himself  of  them  by  the  expedient  of  the' 
parole.  So,  sending  them  with  a  flag  of 
truce,  under  Captain  John  S.  Grove<. 
for  the  nearest  Federal  command,  by 
hard  riding  he  was  able  to  efifect  a 
timely  junction  with  General  Forrest 
after  the  battle  had  been  commenced;. 
Colonel  Starnes  likewise  had  been  de- 
tached before,  and,  as  will  be  seen,  ro^ 
turned  during  the  combat  He  had  bee» 


I 


21Q 


Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 


Dibrell's  and  Russell's  regiments  were  at  once  dism< 
and  thrown  forward  as  skirmishers,  the  artillery  was  b: 
up-jsix  pieces — and  placed  in  a  favorable  position  on  s 
in  an  open  field,  within  about  six  hundred  yards  of  the 
ral  artillery  and  supports,  which  were  all  well  posted  w 
skirt  of  woods  with  an  open  field  between  them  and  thi 
federates.  The  Federal  artillery  —  three  or  four  pi( 
meanwhile  had  been  opened  upon  the  Confederate  lin 
spirit.  As  quickly  as  possible  a  vigorous  reply  was 
and  at  the  first  fire  a  Federal  gun  was  dismounted  and 
ral  of  the  gunners  and  horses  killed  or  disabled ;  the 
were  then  withdrawn  speedily  to  better  cover,  their  su 
falling  back  also  toward  Parker's  Cross-Roads.  The  Cc 
rates  followed  eagerly,  the  cavalry — 300  men — disposed 
ly  on  either  flank  of  the  line  of  dismounted  men. 

At  the  cross-roads  the  Federal  force  was  again  formi 


tent  toward  Huntington,  and  had  in  that    killed  and  wounded,  with  sli|^ 
quarter  a  severe  skirmish  with  a  Fede-    his  own  men. 
fil  cavahy  force,  a  number  of  whom  he 


Opening  of  the  Battle. 


211 


parently  in  two  lines,  in  an  open,  undulating  field,  with  their 
front  to  the  north  and  at  right  angles  to  the  highway,  a  bri« 
gade  of  infantry,  a  battery  of  artillery,  and  a  detachment  of 
cavalry,  or  a  total  not  short  of  1800.* 

The  Confederate  force  present  on  the  field  did  not  exceed 
1200  officers  and  men,  with  six  pieces  of  artillery,  as  before 
said. 

Dismounting  his  men,  except  about  200,  who  were  distri- 
buted equally  on  his  right  and  left  flanks,  the  Confederate ; 
commander  disposed  them  in  one  line  of  battle  northward  of 
his  opponent  and  nearly  parallel  to  the  hostile  array,  on 
ground  somewhat  lower,  partly  in  a  peach-orchard  and  partly 
in  an  open  field  —  the  two  lines  about  six  hundred  yards 
apart — ^with  his  artillery  occupying  three  positions,  Morton's 
Battery  in  the  centre,  and  a  section  of  Freeman's  on  each 
flank,  a  few  paces  in  advance  of  the  dismounted  men,  unlksh 
bered  and  ready  for  action.  In  a  few  moments  the  Confede* 
rate  artillery  opened  the  engagement  in  earnest,  q.uickly  driv- 
ing that  of  the  enemy  under  cover  of  a  ridge  in  their  rear. 

General  Forrest  now  pushed  forward  his  entire  line,  as  ar- 
ranged, in  battle  order,  and  brought  his  musketry  to  bear 


*  According  to  the  official  report  of 
CoUmel  C«  T.  Dunham,  the  Federal 
commander,  it  consisted  of  the  Thirty- 
mndi  Iowa  Infantry,  405  rank  and  file ; 
Fiftieth  Indiana  Volunteer  Infantry, 
525  rank  and  file;  the  One  Hundred 
and  Twenty-second  Illinois  Volunteer 
Infimtry,  529  rank  and  file;  detach- 
ments of  Companies  A  and  £,  Eigh- 
teenth Illinois  Infantry,  mounted,  65 
men,  and  30  artillerists  ;  or  a  total  of 
1554  men.  {Reb»  Rec,  VI.  Doc  94,  pp. 
327-31.)  A  correspondent  of  the  Chi- 
cago Tyibune^  however,  writing  at  the 


same  time,  evidently  with  access  to  re- 
turns, reports  the  strength  of  the  Fif- 
tieth Indiana  at  604  men  and  the  One 
Hundred  and  Twenty-second  Illinois 
at  600,  which  would  make  the  brigade 
1824  strong. 

Moreover,  Colonel  Dunham  states 
he  had  learned  at  Clarksburg  that  the 
Confederate  force  was  8000  strong,  with 
12  pieces  of  artillery,  and  that  he  had 
moved  out  to  attempt  "  to  coax  or  forot 
a  fight  out "  of  that  force,  which  he  was 
scarcely  a//  to  do  wUh  as  small  a  font, 
as  he  ri^nsmts  fnsmL 


212  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest 

with  a  heavy,  continuous  fire.  The  enemy  fought  with  stub- 
bornness and  spirit,  but  after  an  hour  were  driven  back  into 
a  skirt  of  woods  eastward  of  the  highway  and  about  half  a 
mile  to  the  south-east  of  Parker's  Cross-Roads.  There  they 
stood  their  ground  stoutly,  and,  indeed,  in  turn  made  a  reso- 
lute, well-led  attempt  to  regain  the  ridge  from  which  they  had 
been  driven,  so  that,  as  the  Confederates  reached  the  crown 
of  that  position,  the  Federal  line  was  found  advanced  to  with- 
in eighty  yards  of  the  crest  also.  But  a  withering  fire  was 
opened  with  all  arms,  and  the  enemy  were  soon  obliged  to  £ill 
back  again  under  shelter  of  the  woods,  leaving  two  pieces  on 
the  ground,  their  horses  killed,  as  well  as  a  number  of  officers 
and  men  killed  and  wounded. 

General  Forrest  now  concentrated  the  fire  of  his  artillery 
upon  the  Federals,  who  had  retired  behind  a  strong  fence  in 
the  woods,  only  about  two  hundred  yards  distant,  killing  and 
disabling  a  number  of  men  and  horses,  and  silencing  all  their 
other  pieces.  About  eleven  a.m.,  they  essayed  another  slight 
advance,  but  were  repulsed  easily.  About  mid-day,  however, 
another  and  very  resolute  forward  movement  was  made  to 
within  sixty  paces  of  our  pieces  and  their  supports,  though 
only  to  be  repulsed  with  slaughter.* 

It  was  at  this  juncture  Colonel  Napier  gallantly,  but  with- 
out the  orders  or  wish  of  his  General,  charged  with  his  bat- 
talion upon  the  position  of  the  enemy,  up  to  the  very  fence 
behind  which  they  were  posted,  there  to  fall  mortally  wound- 
ed with  several  of  his  men.  Thus  an  intrepid  and  promising 
soldier  lost  his  life  through  a  spirit  of  martial  ardor  that  un- 


*The  Federal  commander  says  the  rate*'  fire  having  become  terrible  In  its 

Confederate  batteries  were  so  posted  intensity,  "he**   determined   to   take 

M  to  concentrate  a  fire  upon  several  ''  the  '*  batteries  at  all  hazards^  the  one 

^rtions  of  "  his  "  line  and  to  enfilade  on  the  right  espedally. 
a  part  of  it;  and  tiut  tiie  '^Confede- 


Federal  Reenforcements.  213 

fortunately  impelled  him  forward  without  due  reflection  or 
regard  for  the  instructions  and  combinations  of  his  com- 
mander. 

Finding  that  the  enemy  were  now  weakened  and  doubtless 
discouraged  by  their  heavy  losses,  the  Confederate  com* 
mander  threw  Colonel  Russell  around  by  the  left  to  take 
them  in  flank  and  reverse,  and  meantime  had  several  pieces 
of  artillery  so  posted  as  to  enfilade  both  flanks  of  their  line. 
Apparently  observing  that  the  Confederate  line  had  been  di- 
minished, the  Federal  force  made  another  charge,  which  was 
met  and  foiled  by  a  discharge  of  grape  and  canister  from  the 
whole  Confederate  artillery.  At  the  same  time,  Colonel  Rus- 
sell dashed  forward  upon  their  flank  and  rear,  as  General 
Forrest  moved  forward  in  front.  Under  this  stress  the  ene- 
my's lines  gave  way,  and,  breaking,  the  men  ran  across  the 
road  westward  into  an  open  field,  leaving,  many  prisoners  in 
our  hands.  In  the  mean  time,  the  Confederate  lines  had 
fallen  into  disorder,  and  the  several  companies  and  regiments 
were  intermingled  ;  their  General,  therefore,  found  it  now  ne- 
cessary to  pause  and  reorganize. 

The  enemy  fleeing,  as  before  said,  were  cut  off  and  brought 
to  a  stand  by  Colonel  Stames,  who  at  that  moment  oppor- 
tunely came  up  in  that  quarter  of  the  field,*  and  they  re- 
sumed some  order,  but  numerous  white  flags  were  displayed 
among  them.  The  Confederates  were  now  completely  mas- 
ters of  the  situation,  and  a  staff-officer  was  sent  to  where  the 
white  flags  were  shown  to  receive  the  capitulation.  Scarcely 
had  this  been  done,  however,  when  Colonel  Charles  Carroll, 
of  the  staff  of  General  Forrest,  daslied  up  and  informed  his 
leader  that  a  fresh  and  superior  force  of  Federals  had  reached 
the  field  and  were  forming  to  attack  in  his  rear.     Ordering 


*  As  said,  note  p.  209  anU^  he  had  been  detached  preyions  to  the  bottle. 


i 


214  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

the  proper  disposition  of  his  forces  for  this  unlooked-for  and 
untoward  exigency,  Forrest  galloped  to  the  indicated  quarter, 
and  there,  indeed,  did  he  find,  already  in  battle  order,  about  to 
sweep  down  upon  him,  two  brigades  of  the  enemy.  They 
were,  in  fact,  in  possession  of  the  peach-orchard  and  adjacent 
field,  which  he  had  occupied  at  the  outset  of  the  engagement, 
and  he  was  within  eighty  yards  of  their  line  before  he  could 
discover  them.  Perceived  then  by  a  Federal  officer,  who 
called,  "  Halt  and  surrender !"  Forrest  promptly  replied  that 
he  had  already  done  so  some  time  since,  but  would  move  up 
what  remained  of  his  command  and  surrender  in  form  ;  and 
with  this,  wheeling  his  horse,  galloped  away  in  the  direction 
of  his  troops,  notifying,  as  he  passed,  the  inmates  of  his  hos- 
pital of  the  emergency,  that  they  might  make  their  escape. 
Joining  his  command,  he  at  once  put  it  in  motion,  by  the  left 
flank,  at  a  double-quick.  Scarcely  had  their  rapid  departure 
been  made,  when  the  enemy,  also  at  a  double-quick^  came  in 
view  of  their  discomfited  comrades,  who  immediately  resumed 
their  arms  and  renewed  their  fire.  Major  Cox,  being  at  the 
time  with  his  and  Napier's  men  on  the  extreme  right  of  the 
Confederate  line,  was  unable  to  get  oiBf  the  field,  and  was  cap- 
tured with  about  250  men.  The  horses  of  four  caissons  and 
of  two  brass  six-pounders  were  disabled  as  they  attempted  to 
withdraw  across  the  open  field  under  the  fire  of  1x)th  bodies 
of  the  enemy,  and  had  to  be  abandoned  with  the  loss  of  a 
number  of  drivers  and  artillerists  killed  and  wounded. 

The  new-comers  upon  the  field  charged  onward  with  spirit, 
and,  from  a  position  on  the  ridge  that  Forrest  had  occupied 
with  ^uch  effect  that  mdrning,  poured  into  the  Confederate 
rear  a  rapid  fire  with  at  least  two  field-guns.  Wheeling,  with 
his  escort,  (seventy-five  men,)  and  a  detachment,  some  fifty 
strong,  of  DibrelFs  Regiment,  under  Major  Forrest,  the  Con- 
federate commander  now  made  one  of  his  characteristic  dashes 
at  their  pieces,  dispersed  their  gunners,  and  threw  their  ifi- 


Confederate  Losses.  215 

&ntry  support  into  such  confusion  as  served  materially  to  aid 
his  command  at  the  moment  to  regain  and  mount  their  horses. 
The  horses  of  the  caissons  of  three  pieces  having  taken  fright 
and  carried  them  in  the  direction  of  the  Confederates,  the 
General  seized  and  carried  them  along  with  him. 

Colonel  Stames,  detached  during  the  fight  until  now,  with 
a  mounted  force  of  about  two  hundred  and  fifty  men,  observing 
the  condition  of  afiairs,  happily  and  boldly  fell  upon  the  rear 
of  Dunham's  force,  and  brought  the  whole  Federal  army  to  a 
halt  This  afforded  the  Confederate  troops  time  to  get  beyond 
their  immediate  reach.  Meanwhile,  General  Forrest  had  taken 
post  with  about  two  hundred  men  on  an  eminence  some  eight 
hundred  yards  eastward  of  Parker's  house,  whence  he,  too, 
threw  himself  upon  the  rear  of  Dunham's  Brigade  for  a  part- 
ing blow,  capturing  his  wagon  train,  with  all  the  baggage  of 
that  force,  and  which  were  carried  safely  from  the  field. 

Gathering  his  whole  force  now  well  in  hand,  the  Confederate 
leader  moved  oiBF  in  the  direction  of  Lexington  without  further 
molestation,  and  encamped  at  that  place  about  six  o'clock  that 
evening.  . 

In  the  several  conflicts  of  the  day,  between  the  hours  of 
six  A.M.  and  three  p.m.,  the  Confederate  losses  were  some 
twenty-five  officers,  including  Colonel  Napier,  and  men  killed, 
and  not  to  exceed  seventy-five  wounded,  with  about  two  hun- 
dred and  fifty  captured  by  the  enemy,  three  pieces  and  four 
caissons,  five  wagons,  two  ambulances  and  their  teams,  with 
their  contents — seventy-five  thousand  rounds  of  ammunition  * 

The  casualties  on  the  other  side  were  three  guns  put  /tors 
de  combat^  two  caissons,  fifteen  wagons,  two  ambulances  and 


•  By  an  unfortunate  blunder  on  the  been  safe  to  the  field,  where  it  was  not 

part  of  the  ordnance  officer,  this^the  wanted,  just  as  General  Sullivan  came 

ordnance-train — ^had  been  brought  back  up,  and  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  Fedc- 

from  a   place  where   it  would   have  tals  by  this  mischance. 


i 


2l6 


Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 


their  teams,  carried  off  the  field,  with  some  eighteen  hundred 
knapsacks  and  as  many  blankets,  and  about  one  hundred 
prisoners  taken,  and  subsequently  paroled ;  also,  at  least, 
fifty  killed,  including  several  prominent  officers,  and  one 
hundred  and  fifty  wounded,*  amgng  whom  were  one  of  their 
Colonels  and  a  Lieutenant-Colonel;  and  fully  one  hundred 
animals  either  killed  or  disabled.  All  this,  be  it  noted,  was 
achieved  on  the  Confederate  side  by  a  force  at  no  moment  in 
the  day  exceeding  twelve  hundred  men,  opposed  by  at  least 
eighteen  hundred,  whom  they  vanquished,  and  finally  by  two 
fresh  brigades.! 

So  complete  was  the  demoralization  wrought  on  Dunham's 
Brigade  that  Major  Strange,  General  Forrest's  Adjutant- 
General,  unaccompanied  by  even  an  orderly,  took  possession 
of  their  ordnance-train  and  its  escort  of  twenty-two  men,  who 
had  surrendered  to  him  just  as  General  Sullivan  reached  the 
scene ;  but  soon  after  which  that  gallant  and  able  staff-officer 


*  Colonel  Dunham  sets  his  losses 
down  at  twenty-three  killed,  one  hun- 
dred and  twenty-nine  wounded,  fifty- 
eight  missing — total,  two  hundred  and 
twenty — which  we  are  bound  to  contra- 
dict His  own  description  of  the  fire  to 
which  his  men  were  subjected  is  incom- 
patible, we  submit,  with  his  reported 
loss ;  and  being  utterly  wrong  as  to  the 
number  of  prisoners,  we  have  the  right 
to  assume  equal  inaccuracy  as  to  his 
statement  of  killed  and  wounded  ;  be- 
sides, we  are  assured  by  General  For- 
rest that  he  saw  many  more  dead  than 
twenty-three  on  the  field  in  the  several 
diarges  which  were  made  with  much 
spirit  by  Colonel  Dunham  and  his  men. 

t  Colonel  Dunham  and  the  corre- 
qxmdent  of  the  Chicago  Dribune^  before 


cited,  speak  of  but  one  brigade  as  hay- 
ing come  up ;  Dunham  designates  it  as 
Fuller*s  Brigade,  but  the  latter  men- 
tions the  fact  that  General  Ha3mie*s  was 
also  on  the  field  as  well  as  Fuller*a 
Brigade  ;  and  by  investigation  Haynie's 
conmiand  can  be  traced  to  include  at 
least  the  io6th  and  1 19th  Illinois  Volun- 
teers, the  Iowa  Union  Brigade,  and  the 
7th  Tennessee,  or  at  least  eighteen  hun- 
dred men.    \Reb,  Rec,  VI.    Doc.  94, 

PP-  334  to  335-1  Colonel  Dunham 
claims  that  single-handed  with  his 
brigade  he  had  repulsed  the  Confede- 
rates ;  but  the  correspondent,  giving  full 
credit  for  the  good  fighting,  tells  very 
nearly  the  truth,  that  he  was  thoroughly 
beaten.  See  page  335  of  Doc  just  dted. 


How  Forrest  was  taken  Unaware.  217 

was  himself  captured  while  taking  the  list  and  inventory  of 
his  own  captures.* 

Colonels  Russell,  Biffle,  and  Dibrell,  and  Major  J.  E.  For- 
rest bore  important  parts  in  the  brilliant  combats  of  this  field, 
and  gave  shining  evidences  of  soldierly  capacity.  They  han- 
dled their  men  with  as  much  resolution  as  skill. 

The  lamented  Napier  displayed  an  admirable  courage,  and 
was  able  to  lead  his  raw  troops  into  the  hottest  part  of  the 
battle,  where  he  fell  a  victim  to  an  impetuous,  brave  soul, 
eager  to  do  his  utmost  to  win  a  victory.  Captains  Freeman 
and  Morton,  in  command  of  the  artillery,  were  conspicuous 
for  their  coolness,  their  intelligent,  intrepid  management  of 
their  guns,  and  their  Generat  attributes  the  larger  part  of  the 
loss  inflicted  that  day  on  the  enemy  to  this  and  the  bravery 
of  their  companies. 

It  will  doubtless  be  asked  how  it  happened  that  a  com- 
mander, wary  and  alert,  like  Forrest,  permitted  himself  to  be 
taken  unaware,  as  he.  was  by  General  Sullivan's  fresh  force, 
and  this  is  a  question  that  must  be  duly  answered.  \  He  made 
the  proper  provision  to  guard  against  such  a  contingency  by 
ordering  the  detachment  of  a  battalion  of  the  Fourth  Ten- 
nessee, under  a  good  officer,  to  proceed  to  Clarksburg,  on  the 
Huntington  road,  with  the  object  of  holding  that  approach  in 
dose  observation,  and  as  a  provision  against  the  unannounced 
advent  of  any  enemy  from  that  direction.  Captain  McLemore 
was  accordingly  detailed  with  three  companies,  about  one 
hundred  men,  for  that  service ;  but  unfortunately  the  written 
instructions  given  him,  at  second-hand,  proved  to  be  vague 
and  inexpressive  of  the  actual  purposes  of  the  movement,  and 
fciiled  indeed  to  indicate  any  other  object  than  a  reconnoissance, 
a  juncture  at  Clarksburg  with  Captain  Forrest,  and  their 


*    He  had   just  captured  eighteen     of  twenty-two  men,  and  was  taking  a 
vagons  with  ammunition,  and  a  guard     list  of  his  captures  when  captured. 


k 


2i8  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest 

prompt  return  to  the  main  body.  Moving  across  the  countrj 
on  byways  or  through  the  woods,  some  seven  miles,  to  Clarks- 
burg, McLemore  found  that  Captain  Forrest  had  been  obliged 
to  fall  back  during  the  night  before  a  very  heavy  Federal  force, 
with  infantry,  cavalry,  and  artillery  that  had  followed  south- 
ward before  daylight  The  roads,  too,  gave  evidence  of  the 
recent  passage  of  considerable  bodies  of  troops,  and  a  small 
detachment  of  Federal  cavalry  disappeared  in  the  same  direc- 
tion at  a  gallop  as  the  Confederates  came  up.  Meanwhile, 
hearing  the  sound  of  the  artillery  engaged  at  Parker  s  Cross- 
Roads,  Captain  McLemore  felt  that,  having  executed  his  orders, 
his  presence  was  now  needed  as  soon  as  possible  with  his  regi- 
ment, evidently  in  conflict  at  the  time  with  a  superior  force  of 
the  enemy.  He,  therefore,  rapidly  retraced  his  steps,  not 
taking  the  main  road,  as  he  supposed  it  was  occupied  by  the 
Federals,  but  seeking  to  reach  the  Confederates  by  a  detour 
to  the  right  In  this  some  time  was  necessarily  lost,  from  the 
nature  of  the  country,  and  he  reached  the  scene  only  to  find 
that  Forrest  was  quitting  the  field,  and  that  a  large  Federal 
force  was  interposed  between  him  and  his  friends.  Therefore, 
looking  to  the  safety  of  his  command,  he  made  another  detour 
northward  and  eastward,  and  effected  a  safe  crossing  of  the 
Tennessee  river  at  Perryville  on  the  following  day.  But  for 
this  misunderstanding  of  his  orders  on  the  part  of  subordi- 
nates, Forrest  is  confident  he  must  have  vanquished,  and  so 
disposed  of  Dunham's  Brigade,  before  the  advent  of  Sullivan, 
as  to  have  been  in  condition  to  encounter  the  new  column, 
with  strong  chances  of  victory,  flushed  as  the  Confederates 
were  with  success  and  discouraged  :a&  was  their  enemy  by 
defeat,  while  misled  in  regard  to  his  numbers. 

At  Lexington — twelve  miles  from  the  battle-field — the  Con- 
federate force,  as  before  said,  was  halted,  and  men  and  ani- 
mals were  fed,  while  proper  attention  was  paid  to  the  wound- 
ed.   This  done,  that  night  the  column  was  again  in  motion 


Skirmish  with  Interesting  Force.  219 

toward  Clifton.  Ten  miles  in  that  direction  the  train  and 
prisoners,  sent  ahead  meanwhile,  were  overtaken.  The  pri- 
soners, some  300  in  number,  were  then  paroled  between  that 
and  daybreak  and  turned  adrift  —  disabled  by  their  parole 
until  exchanged — to  find  their  way  back  to  their  comrades. 

Early  the  next  morning,  the  rear-guard  and  scouts  having 
come  up,  the  Confederate  commander  put  his  whole  force  in 
rapid  march  for  the  Tennessee  river,  a  portion  of  the  com- 
mand having  been  sent  in  advance  during  the  night  under 
Major  Forrest,  a  courier  from  whom  met  the  Commanding 
General,  when  ten  miles  on  his  way,  with  the  information  that 
a  heavy  hostile  force  was  confronting  him  some  eight  miles 
from  Clifton.  About  the  same  time,  moreover,  a  scout 
brought  the  intelligence  of  the  approach  of  about  10,000  in- 
fantry and  cavalry  from  the  direction  of  Purdy,  and  moving 
on  what  is  known  in  that  region  as  the  Jack's  Creek-Clifton 
road,  with  the  evident  purpose  of  cutting  oiBF  the  Confederates 
from  that  crossing  of  the  river.  Giving  the  order  to  gallop, 
and  keeping  that  pace  for  fifteen  miles,  Forrest  caught  up 
with  the  main  body  of  his  command  about  eleven  miles  from 
the  river-crossing.  Forming,  without  loss  of  a  moment,  the 
whole  force  in  order  of  battle,  with  a  front  of  one  regiment 
deployed,  the  others  also  deployed  ;  and  following  at  a  distance 
of  two  hundred  yards— the  artillery  immediately  in  the  rear 
and  followed  by  the  train,  with  stringent  orders  to  keep  well 
closed  up  with  the  command  —  General  Forrest  again  ad- 
vanced about  three  miles,  when  the  enemy  (cavalry)  were 
met  drawn  up,  some  1200  strong,  directly  across  his  line  of 
march.  Colonel  Dibrell,  whose  regiment  was  in  advance, 
was  directed  to  charge.  This  he  did  promptly,  cutting  the 
Federals  in  sunder.  Next  Colonel  Starnes  was  thrown  with 
his  regiment  upon  the  leftward  fragment,  and  Colonel  Biffle 
upon  the  one  on  the  right  hand.  Dibrell  continuing  to  push 
that  portion  retreating  before  him,  the  detachments  attacked 


A 


220  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

severally  by  Starnes  and  Biffle  broke  and  scattered  in  all 
directions,  with  slight  show  of  belligerency.  The  road  thus 
cleared,  the  train  and  artillery  now  moved  as  rapidly  as  prac- 
ticable toward  the  ferry.  In  this  rencounter  the  enemy  lost 
some  twenty  killed  and  wounded  and  about  fifty  prisoners.* 

It  was  meridian  when  the  river  was  reached.  Signals  were 
promptly  made  for  skiffs  that  were  on  the  other  bank  ;  they 
were  brought  over,  and  a  party  was  as  swiftly  sent  back  to 
raise  the  flat-boat  which  had  been  sunk  to  conceal  it  after 
the  passage  on  the  15  th  of  the  month.  All  possible  haste 
was  used,  and  the  flat  was  brought  to  the  west  bank.  Mean- 
while, the  animals,  detached  from  the  vehicles  and  artillery, 
were  being  driven  into  the  river  and  made  to  swim  across  to 
the  eastern  bank,  as  also  the  horses  of  the  cavalry — a  process 
which  was  hurried  because  of  the  intelligence  received  that 
the  enemy  was  moving  his  whole  available  forces  by  forced 
marches  upon  the  point. 

It  was  a  spectacle  full  of  life  and  movement ;  quite  as  many 
as  1000  animals  were  at  one  time  in  the  river,  which  was 
about  six  hundred  yards  broad,  with  favorable  banks.  The 
ferriage  of  the  artillery  and  wagons  was  very  much  slower. 
Loaded  upon  the  old  flat,  it  was  poled  up-stream  a  distance 
of  nearly  half  a  mile,  close  to  the  west  bank,  and,  pushed  out 
into  the  stream,  was  caught  and  carried  by  the  current  gradu- 
ally to  the  other  bank  some  distance  below  ;  there  discharged, 
the  process  was  reversed  on  its  return.     In  the  like  way  did 


*  There  was  only  one  casualty  on  the  ball  squarely  in  the  forehead  ;  it  flat- 

Confeclerate  side,  and  so  singular  in  tened  by  the  percussion  without  pene- 

character  as  to  deserve  mention  :  Mr.  traUng  the  bone,  and  Mr.  Thornton  fi^ 

Thornton,  Forage-Master,  standing  not  on  the  ground  without  serious  injury  be- 

fas  from  the  General,  and  calling  his  at-  yond  a  severe  headache, 
tention  to  some  object,  was  struck  by  a 


Fruits  of  Campaign.  221 

the  flat  ply  to  and  fro  until  eight  o'clock  at  night,  when  the 
work  was  completed  and  the  mep  stood  cheerfully  once  more 
in  Middle  Tennessee,  with  five  pieces  of  artillery,  six  caissons 
with  their  horses,  sixty  wagons,  and  four  ambulances  with 
their  teams,  which  had  been  successfully  ferried  in  the  short 
space  of  eight  hours. 

As  will  be  remembered,  it  was  on  the  15  th  of  December 
that  the  passage  into  West-Tennessee  had  been  concluded — 
that  is,  a  fortnight  previously.  In  the  interval,  seldom  in  the 
annals  of  war  had  more  hard,  swift  riding,  as  many  sharp  ren- 
counters, affluent  in  results,  been  crowded  in  the  same  short 
space.  That  command  had  averaged  over  twenty  miles  a 
day ;  it  had  fought  three  well-contested  engagements,  with 
diurnal  skirmishes  ;  had  destroyed  some  fifty  large  and  small 
bridges  on  the  Mobile  and  Ohio  Railroad,  and  had  broken  up 
so  much  of  the  trestle-work  of  that  road  as  to  make  it  useless 
to  the  enemy  for  the  rest  of  the  war  ;  had  captured  and  burned 
eighteen  or  twenty  stockades,  and  captured  or  killed  2500  of 
the  enemy  ;  had  taken  or  disabled  ten  pieces  of  field  artillery, 
and  carried  off  fifty  wagons  and  ambulances  with  their  teams  ; 
had  captured  10,000  stands  of  excellent  small-arms,  1,000,000 
rounds  of  ammunition,  and  had  returned  thoroughly  armed 
and  equipped,  including  blankets,  after  having  traversed  with 
artillery  and  a  heavy  wagon-train  roads  which  in  the  country 
Were  considered  and  pronounced  impracticable  at  that  season 
for  horsemen,  resting  undisturbed  scarcely  one  whole  night 
during  the  fortnight,  and  all  the  while  subjected,  unsheltered, 
to  the  most  inclement  weather  of  mid-winter.  Crossing  the 
river  into  West-Tennessee  with  his  command  wretchedly 
amied  and  equipped,  and  with  only  ten  rounds  of  percussion- 
caps  to  his  shot-guns,  Forrest  returned  stronger  in  numbers 
than  when  he  entered  upon  the  campaign,  admirably  armed,  as 
before  said,  with  a  surplus  of  five  hundred  Enfield  rifles,  some 


i 


222  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

eighteen  hundred  blankets  and  knapsacks,  and  the  raw,  native 
courage  of  his  men  ripened  by  battle  and  the  sharp  hardships 
of  the  expedition  into  the  perfection  of  cool,  confident,  sol- 
dierly valor,  which  makes  men  invincible  except  in  conflict 
with  invincible  odds. 


k 


CHAPTER    VIII. 

R«jlabliihment  on  Picket  Service,  with  Headquurlers  at  ColumNa, 
Tenn. — Disastrous  Expedition  under  General  Wheeler  against  Do- 
ver—Forreifv  Brigade  lost  me  fonrth  its  number  in  the  Affair- 
Inclement  Weather  and  Suffering  ef  Troths — Arrival  of  Major' 
General  Van  Dom  at  Columbia  with  additional  Farce — Confederate 
line  advanced  to  Spring  Hilt — Battle  of  Thompson's  Station — Cap- 
ture of  the  greater  part  of  the  Federal  Force  engaged,  2200  Officers 
and  Men — Confederates  some  days  later  retire  behind  Duck  River 
before  heavy  Federal  Force — Successful  Affair  at  Brentwood— The 
entire  Garrison,  759  Persons,  captured^B lock-House  and  Railroad 
Brid^  destroyed — Confederate  Reconnoissance  in  Force  upon  Frani- 
tin — Loss  of  the  gallant  Captain  Freeman — Found  the  Federals  i» 
superior  Force  and  prepared— Return  to  Spring  Hill. 

January  ist  to  April  ■20th,  1863. 

Having  returned  to  Middle  Tennessee,  as  related  at  the 
close  of  the  last  chapter,  General  Forrest  established  his 
troops  in  cantonments  around  Mount  Pleasant  some  time 
about  the  3d  of  January,  1863,  immediately  after  which  he 
reported  in  person  to  General  Bragg,  at  Shelbyville,*  and  re- 
ceived verbal  orders  to  continue  in  position  at  Columbia, 
charged  with  the  protection  of  the  left  6ank  of  the  Confe- 
derate army,  with  a  line  of  outposts  and  pickets  thrown  for- 


■  The  batUa  of  HarfrcMboro   or     Mquenti;  fallen  back  somewhat  on  Ow 
Stone  RiTcr,  had  been  (ought  on  the     night  of  the  3d  of  Junarr,  1S63. 
JIM  of  December,  and  Bia^  had  inb- 


224  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest^ 

ward  on  the  Harpeth  river  in  the  direction  and  vicinity  of 
Triune  and  Franklin ;  and,  further,  to  harass  the  enemy  as 
much  as  practicable  in  their  use  and  navigation  of  the  Cum- 
berland. 

For  some  eight  or  ten  days  following  the  reestablishment 
of  his  brigade  in  position  at  Columbia,  Forrest's  attention  was 
mainly  directed  to  its  reorganization  and  thorough  prepara- 
tion for  other  field  operations  such  as  were  now  his  passioa 
Meanwhile,  the  men  and  animals  were  given  time  to  recover 
from  the  effects  of  their  late  campaign. 

About  the  loth  of  January,  however,  at  an  interview  with 
Major-General  Wheeler,  Chief  of  Cavalry,  it  was  arranged  to 
undertake  an  expedition  to  Harpeth  Shoals,  on  the  Cumber- 
land, with  the  view  to  a  blow  at  the  Federal  gunboats  and 
transports  in  that  quarter.  Several  of  Forrest's  regiments 
were  employed  in  this  operation,  but  took  no  noteworthy  part 
in  the  capture,  on  the  13th  of  January,  of  the  transports  Hast- 
ing, Trio,  and  Parthenia,  and  gunboat  Major  Siddell,  except 
it  was  a  detachment  under  that  gallant  officer,  Lieutenant- 
Colonel  Holman,  that  crossed  the  river  by  swimming,  and 
burned  a  considerable  depot  of  subsistence  and  quartermas- 
ters* stores  on  the  north  side  of  the  Cumberland.  This  expe- 
dition was  at  the  cost  of  great  suffering  to  the  men  and  ani- 
mals. Rain,  sleet,  or  snow  fell  without  cessation  ;  some  of 
the  men  perished  from  the  extreme  cold,  and  many  were  frost- 
bitten. 

Afterward,  or  for  the  following  fortnight,  the  brigade  was 
only  employed  on  picket  service  ;  but  pushing  their  ap- 
proaches as  near  as  possible  to  Nashville,  the  Federal  garri- 
son of  that  position  was  kept  continually  on  the  alert  and  a 
good  deal  harassed.  On  the  26th  of  January,  General  For- 
rest was  summoned  to  army  headquarters  at  Shelbyville,  and 
had  an  interview  with  the  Commanding  General,  who  in- 
formed him  that  an  expedition  had  been  directed  for  the  cap- 


Defective  Preparations.  225 

ture  of  Fort  Donelson,  under  the  command  of  Major- General 
Wheeler,  who,  already  en  route^  had  taken  a  portion  of  the 
Forrest  Brigade,  which  he  must  follow  and  command.  He 
accordingly  hastened  back  to  Franklin,  made  some  necessary 
arrangements,  and  hurried  to  overtake  the  expedition,  which 
he  eflfected  by  two  days*  hard  riding,  during  bitterly  cold  wea- 
ther, within  fifteen  miles  of  Dover  or  Fort  Donelson, 

Having  ascertained  that  his  own  troops  in  his  absence  had 
been  moved  badly  supplied  with  subsistence,  ammunition,  and 
cooking  equipage.  General  Forrest  at  once  repaired  to  Gene- 
ral Wheeler,  and,  while  reporting  his  own  deficiencies,  in- 
quired into  the  state  of  the  whole  command  in  the  same  re- 
spects.   Thereupon  an  inspection  and  report  of  the  actual 
state  of  affairs  of  both  Forrest's  and  Wliarton's  brigades  were 
ordered    These  inspections  being  made,  it  proved  that  the 
former  was  provided  with  only  fifteen  rounds  of  ammunition 
for  small-arms  and  forty-five  rounds  for  his  four  pieces  of 
artillery,  while  the  other  had  only  twenty  rounds  for  small- 
amis  and  fifty  rounds  for  two  field-guns,  while  the  whole  com- 
mand was  short  in  subsistence  as  well  as  lacking  the  means 
of  cooking. 

In  view  of  this  state  of  affairs.  General  Forrest  submitted 

to  his  superior  that  the  expedition  did  not  promise  results  in 

any  wise  commensurate  with  inevitable  losses  and  possible 

hazard  of  serious  disaster  ;  that  the  men  must  suffer  intensely 

from  the  constant  exposure  to  weather  so  rigorous ;  that  at 

most,  if  successful,  they  could  hope  for  the  capture  of  only 

five  or  six  hundred  men,  and  that  probably  with  the  loss  of  twa 

or  three  hundred  of  their  choicest  men ;  that  we  could  not  hold 

the  works  for  any  time  if  qjaptured,  but  would  be  speedily 

forced  to  quit  them  by  the  Federal  gunboats  which  swarmed 

the  waters  in  that  quarter.    Moreover,  if  not  successful  at  the 

first  onset,  we  would  have  nearly  exhausted  our  ammunition, 

and  be  entirely  out  of  subsistence,  except  such  as  could  be 


J 


226  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest 

gathered  in  the  surrounding  country,  while  we  would  be  at 
least  one  hundred  miles  away  from  our  base  and  depots  of 
supplies,  threatened  with  determined  efforts  on  the  part  of 
the  enemy  to  cut  off  the  command  on  its  way  back  to  its 
position,  it  being  reported  that  Greneral  Jeff  C.  Davis  was  al- 
ready moving  with  that  object  from  Franklin.  Therefore^ 
regarding  the  operation  as  one  fraught  with  great  exposure  to 
miscarriage,  and  indeed  calamity,  one  with  scanty  probable 
chances  of  success  at  best,  he  felt  constrained  to  say  so  and 
to  urge  its  abandonment. 

These  views,  presented  substantially  as  we  have  related, 
passed  without  heed,  and  arrangements  were  made  for  the 
work  in  hand.  Forrest  was  directed  to  move  with  his  force- 
about  800  men*  and  four  guns — along  the  river  road  via  the 
Cumberland  Iron-Works  to  the  vicinity  of  Dover,  which  was 
the  real  position  fortified  and  held  by  the  Federals,  and  not 
the  site  of  Fort  Donelson.  He  accordingly  moved  with  his 
pickets  well  in  advance,  and  he  with  them  in  person.  Mean- 
time, Wharton,  with  the  remainder  of  the  command,  some 
2000  strong,  and  two  pieces,  advanced  by  a  left-hand  road. 
As  the  former  approached  within  a  mile  of  the  iron-works,t 
he  learned  from  a  negro,  escaping  under  the  apprehension  of 
the  Federal  conscription,  that  the  place  was  occupied  by  a 
company  of  Federal  cavalry.  He  therefore  quickened  the 
pace  and  soon  broke  into  a  charge,  surprising  and  capturing 
the  company,  except  three  or  four  men  who  made  their  escape 
despite  precautions.  Pushing  on  as  rapidly  as  possible,  he 
reached  the  immediate  vicinity  of  Dover  about  meridian,  and 
halted  for  orders,  though  throwing  a  skirmish  line  well  for- 
ward.   In  a  little  while  Major-Greneral  Wheeler  came  up,  and 


*  Portions   of  Fourth   Tennessee,     see  battalions,  and  Woodward's  Ken- 
(Stames,)  Fourth  Alabama^  (Russell,)     tuckians. 
Cox's,  Napier's,  and  Holman's  Tennes-        t  Nine  miles  distant  from  Dover. 


Attack  upon  Dover.  227 

assigned  the  rightward  position  to  Forrest,  along  the  crown 
of  a  crescent-wise  ridge  inclosing  Dover  on  the  south-east 
and  eastern  side,  and  about  eight  hundred  yards  removed 
from  a  rifle-pit  around  the  village,  of  similar  outline,  which 
was  commanded  by  a  redoubt  thrown  up  in  the  public  square 
of  the  place,  on  an  elevated  knoll  upon  the  same  level  with 
the  ridge  occupied  by  the  Confederates,  and  which  ridge,  be 
it  noted,  was  separated  from  the  sight  of  the  village  and  in- 
closing epaulement  by  a  narrow  valley  seamed  by  a  deep 
gully. 

Wharton  had  also  reached  the  theatre  of  operations  and 
taken  up  a  position  to  the  west  and  south-west  of  the  place, 
between  the  lines  of  Fort  Donelson  and  a  graveyard  on  an 
eminence,  occupied  by  a  Federal  battery,  immediately  west 
of  Dover.  Arrangements  were  at  once  made  and  watches  set 
to  agree  for  a  simultaneous  attack  by  the  entire  Confederate 
force  about  half-past  two  p.m.* 

At  the  hour  designated,  Forrest  charged — ^his  men  mounted 
-down  the  slope  and  across  the  ravine  upon  the  enemy's 
intrenchments,  which  he  carried,  making  some  few  captures, 
in  the  face  of  a  warm  musketry  fire  and  rapid  discharges  from 
two  brass  field-pieces  from  behind  it,  and  from  a  thirty-two- 
pounder  in  the  redoubt.    The  main  Federal  force,  however, 
e&cted  their  retreat  with  the  artillery  into  the  redoubt  and 
some  adjacent  buildings,  favorably  placed  as  auxiliary  defenses ; 
but  closely  followed  by  their  assailants.  Sharp  and  fast  was  the 
musketry  fire  from  the  parapets  and  buildings,  while  grape  and 
canister  swept  the  line  of  approach.     Forrest  and  his  sturdy 
horsemen  breasted  the  storm  ;  his  horse  was  now  shot,  and  fell 
with  him  prone  to  the  ground,  in  sight  of  his  command,  who, 


*  Meanwhile,  the  Eighth  Texas,  of    serve  and  prevent  reenforcement  of  tke 
Wharton's  Brigade,  had  been  detached     enemy  from  that  quarter. 
fai  tiie  directioii  of  Fort  Henry,  to  ob- 


128  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

supposing  that  he  had  been  killed,  fell  back,  from  under  fire,  to 
the  ridge,  where  their  leader,  unhurt,  quickly  followed,  and  re- 
formed them  for  another  onset,  this  time  dismounting  his  men. 
General  Wheeler  reappeared  at  this  juncture,  and  ejq>lainiiig 
that  General  Wharton  had  been  unable  to  get  ready  to  attack 
simultaneously,  another  assault  was  ordered,  as  watches  were 
again  compared  and  arranged  for  conformity  of  movement 

At  the  time  prescribed,  Forrest  once  more  moved  his  men 
upon  the  works,  which  the  enemy  had  reoccufned  and  held 
with  more  resolution  than  at  first.  But  two  of  the  Confederate 
guns  had  been  so  placed  on  the  ridge  as  to  enfilade  a  part  of  the 
line,  and  the  Federals  were  again  driven  from  the  position 
over  which  their  enemy  rushed,  and  moved  steadily  on- 
ward into  the  town,  though  swept  by  a  well-sustained  rifle 
fire  and  by  the^guns  in  the  redoubt  On  pressed  Forrest  and 
his  Tennesseeans,  Kentuckians,  and  Alabamians,  forcing  the 
Federals  to  quit  the  houses  and  betake  themselves  to  Ae 
redoubt,  the  parapets  of  which  flamed  with  rifle  volleys  aU  the 
while.  It  was  at  this  time  that  Colonel  Frank  McNairy,  of 
Nashville,  a  volunteer  for  the  fight,  on  the  stafi*  of  General 
Forrest,  was  killed,  and  several  valuable  o(hOers  and  a  number 
of  the  best  fighting  men  of  Forrest's  command  were  killed  or 
wounded. 

The  Greneral,  with  his  aid-de-camp.  Captain  C  W.  Ander- 
son, and  ten  or  twelve  of  his  escort,  rode  up  to  within  thirty 
jrards,  however,  and  fired  at  men  behind  these  very  panq>ets ; 
and  here  another  horse  was  slain  under  him. 

His  ammunition  was  now  exhausted,  and  the  men  were 
forced,  of  course,  to  cease  the  conflict  *  The  enemy  were 
quick  to  observe  or  suspect  this,  and  sallying  with  spirit  cap- 
tured twenty-five  or  thirty  Confederates. 

Wharton's  command  moving,  meanwhile,  as  arranged,  drove 
the  Federals  from  the  strong  position  of  the  graveyard,  and 
captured  a  rifled  gun  of  the  battery  posted  there,  killed  a 


Attack  upon  Dover.  22^ 

:  of  the  horses  of  the  other  guns,*  and  penetrated  the 
om  that  quarter,  but  in  effecting  this  had  likewise  ex- 
[  their  ammunition.  It  was  now  dusk,  but  the  moon 
d  shone  brightly  upon  the  scene.  The  Federals,  driven 
small  space,  poured  upon  the  Confederates  a  galling 
i  the  latter  were  obliged,  from  want  of  ammunition,  to 
LW.    There  was  no  alternative. 

Confederate  losses  were  heavy.  Forrest  had  lost  one 
of  his  force,  or  two  hundred  officers  and  men  killed, 
td,  and  captured  ;t  and  Wharton's  casualties  did  not 
rt  of  sixty  killed  and  wounded.^ 
r  the  Confederates  had  been  withdrawn  from  under 
e  Federal  gunboats  came  up  about  eight  o'clock  at 
and  began  a  noisy  cannonade,  expending  a  great 
hells,  but  doing  no  harm  whatsoever  to  the  Confede- 
rho,  an  hour  later,  began  to  retire,  and  encamped  three 
;outh-eastward  of  Dover  for  the  night.  Meanwhile, 
i  had  left  behind  his  trusty  Aid,  Captain  Anderson, 
Woodward's  Battalion,  to  cover  the  withdrawal,  and. 


J^e^.  Rec,  Vol.  VI.  Doc  iiS.  De  Moss.    The  Fourth  Tennessee  also 

which  is  acknowledged  the  suffered   severely,  some   seventy-four 

field-battery  lost   forty-eight  officers  and  men  having  been  killed 

ty-four  horses.  or  wounded.     Its  lieutenant-Colonel, 

tenant-Colonel  D.  W.  Holman  Haines,  a  gallant  officer,  was  disabled 

severely  wounded  in  the  hip ;  for  the  rest  of  the  war  by  a  woupd  in 

Its Summers  and  A.  S.  the  mouth. 

I,   of  his   detachment,   were  |  That  of  the  enemy,  as  reported  by 

tx  the  display  of  conspicuous  the  commsinder,  were  sixteen  killed  and 

;  and  a  private — Hill  Roy—  sixty  wounded.  [See  Reh»  Rec,  VoL  VL 

entioned  as  having  especially  Doc  ii8,  p.  4x7.]    The  defense  was 

1  himself  on  the  field  by  his  made  with  courage ;  the  commander 

age.     Napier's  Battalion  had  was  Colonel  A.  C.  Harding,  Eighty- 

icers — Captains  M.  F.  Alex-  third  Volunteer  Illinois  In&ntry,  who 

'.  J.  Hobson,  and  N.  J.  Robin-  had  a  force  of  six  hundred  of  his  regpp 

ly  wounded  and  captured —  ment  and  a  battery  of  artillery. 
!^  cf  Colonds  Holman   and 


k 


230  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

under  shelter  of  night,  to  bring  off  the  ammunition  of  a  cai 
son,  captured  by  Wharton,  remaining  just  outside  the  work 
This  was  handsomely  done  by  Captain  Anderson,  with  tc 
Keiltuckians  detailed  for  the  purpose,  notwithstanding  tl 
furious  broadsides  of  the  gunboats,  one  of  whose  shells  almos 
covered  Colonel  Woodward  with  the  coals  and  ashes  of 
camp-fire  at  which  he  was  lying,  wounded  by  a  spent  grape 
shot  in  the  knee,  awaiting  the  movements  of  his  commani 
At  nine  o'clock  next  morning,  the  entire  force  took  up  the: 
line  of  march,  by  way  of  the  Cumberland  Iron- Works,  f( 
Charlotte.  The  weather  continued  extremely  cold;  th 
wounded  suffered  intensely.  Marching  some  fourteen  c 
fifteen  miles  on  the  14th,  the  command  was  halted  in  const 
quence  of  the  inclemency  of  the  weather,  and  went  no  furthc 
that  day.  Intelligence  having  been  here  received  by  Genen 
Wheeler,  in  certain  confirmation  of  the  movement  of  a  Feden 
column  under  Greneral  Jeff  C.  Davis  upon  Charlotte,  it  b< 
came  necessary  to  change  his  route,  and  on  the  followin 
morning  the  command,  moving  slowly  along  the  valley  0 
Yellow  creek,  marched  only  twelve  miles,  obliged  by  th 
slippery,  icy  condition  of  the  road  to  leave  it,  and  travers 
the  fields  and  woods,  while  the  commissaries,  with  detacl 
ments,  were  thrown  out  on  either  flank  to  collect  subsistenc 
and  forage,  for  their  rations  had  been  exhausted. 

On  the  i6th  of  February,  to  avoid  collision  with  Davis,  th 
Confederate  column  was  deflected  somewhat  further  to  tb 
right  and  across  the  valley  of  Piney  river  some  twenty  mile 
the  cold  still  extremely  rigorous,  causing  much  suffering  t 
both  men  and  animals.  Forrest  with  his  men  encamped  ths 
night  at  Piney  Factory,  Hickman  county,  and  threw  01 
scouts  to  ascertain  Davis's  precise  position  and  movement 
these  found  the  Federals  about  fifteen  miles  to  the  eastwan 
on  the  Columbia-Charlotte  road.  The  following  morning,  th 
command  reaching  Centreville,  found  Duck  river  reporte 


Return  to  Columbia. 


231 


•*  unfordable."  General  Forrest  calling  for  volunteers  to  test 
the  fact,  Major  J.  M.  Crews,  an  Acting  Inspector-General  on 
his  staff,  dashed  at  once  into  the  surging,  freezing  stream. 
But  as  he  reached  mid-way,  the  water  proved  really  as  deep 
as  was  alleged,  and  his  horse  would  not  swim.  The  Major 
was  washed  from  his  seat,  but,  by  a  happy  chance,  was  present- 
ly drifted  across  and  ashore  by  the  current,  where  he  was  res- 
cued by  some  citizens  ;  and  so  intense  was  the  cold  that  his 
clothes  were  frozen  stiffly  in  a  few  moments  after  he  was 
drawn  from  the  water.  Some  miles  higher  up  the  stream,  a 
ford  was  found  during  the  afternoon,  when  a  crossing  was 
effected,  while  a  portion  of  the  command  was  ferried  over  in 
a  small  boat  at  Centreville.  Beyond  Duck  river  all  risk  of  in- 
terruption by  Davis  was  averted,  and  the  command  •  resumed 
their  old  quarters  at  Columbia  on  the  following  day,  Whar- 
ton returning  to  the  other  flank  of  the  army  with  General 
Wheeler. 

II. 

While  Forrest  was  giving  rest  to  his  men  for  some  days  at 
Columbia,  after  such  fearful  weather-exposure,  and  battle- 
losses,  Major-General  Van  Dom  arrived  from  Mississippi 
with  three  brigades  of  cavalry — about  4500  rank  and  file* — 


•  Annstrong's  Brigside :  First  Ten- 
nessee Cavalry,  Colonel  James  T. 
Wheeler,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Lewis ; 
Forrest's  old  regiment,  Major  £.  B. 
Trezevant;  Second  Mississippi,  Lieu- 
tenant-Colonel James  Gordon,  Major 
J.  L.  Harris;  Saunders's  Battalion, 
Major  Ed.  Saunders ;  Third  Arkansas, 
Colonel  Earle,  Lieutenant  -  Colonel 
Hobson,  Major  Henderson ;  and 
King's  Battery  of  four  pieces.    Whit- 


field's Brigade  :  Third  Texas,  Colonel 
Mabry;  Sixth  Texas,  Colonel  L.  S. 
Ross;  Ninth  Texas,  Colonel  Jones; 
and  Whitfield's  Legion,Colonel  Brooks. 
Cosby's  Brigade  i  Twenty-eighth  Mis- 
sissippi, Colonel  P.  B.  Starke ;  Ballyn- 
tine's  Regiment,  Colonel  J.  G.  Ballyn 
tine,  Lieutenant-Colonel  W.  L.  Max- 
well ;  Second  Kentucky,  Colonel 
Woodward ;  and  First  Mississippi, 
Colonel  Richard  A.  Pinson. 


i 


232  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest 

and  thus  materially  strengthened  the  Confederate  cavalry 
force  on  that  flank,  whose  scene  of  operations,  be  it  noted, 
embraced  one  of  the  most  opulent  communities,  as  also  one 
of  the  best  cultivated  and  productive  regions  of  Tennessee, 
watered  by  Duck  river,  a  very  considerable  stream  when 
swollen  by  heavy  and  continuous  rains,  as  was  then  the  case, 
and  by  its  tributaries. 

In  the  mean  time,  between  the  20th  and  25th  of  February, 
Russell's  Alabama  Regiment  was  detached  from  the  brigade, 
and  Holman's  and  Douglass's  battalions  were  assigned  in> 
stead ;  and  these  two  battalions,  being  consolidated,  formed 
the  Eleventh  Regiment  Tennessee  Cavalry,  while  Cox's  and 
Napier's  battalions,  about  the  same  time,  were  thrown  to- 
gether and  became  the  Tenth  Tennessee* 

It  was  now  determined  to  establish  outposts  and  picket- 
lines  within  sight  of  Franklin  and  Triune,  both  of  which  the 
enemy  occupied  in  force,  while  the  headquarters  of  the  Con- 
federates should  be  thrown  forward  across   Duck  river  to 
Spring  Hill,  twelve  miles  nearer  to  the  former  place ;  and  this 
was  done  by  ferrying  the  stream  on  or  about  the  23d  of  Feb- 
ruary, 1863.    A  series  of  sharp,  spirited  outpost  skirmishes 
ensued  for  the  next  ten  days,  of  which,  however,  we  are  un- 
able to  relate  any  notable  incident,  fraught  as  they  were,  w^ 
well  know,  with  daily  acts  of  splendid  courage  and  hardi-- 
hood. 

On  the  night  of  March  4th,  however,  scouts  returned  with 
information  that  a  heavy  body  of  Federals  was  in  motion  to^ 
ward  Spring  Hill  on  the  Franklin-Columbia  turnpike.  Major- 
General  Van  Dom,  in  chief  command,  made  immediate  dis- 
position for  the  exigency,  determining  to  meet  the  hostile 
movement  some  four  miles  in  advance,  at  Thompson's  Sta- 


*  See  Appendix  for  Rotten  of  Teath  and  Eleventh  TenneaMe  Cavalry; 


BaitU  of  Thompsons  Siaiion.  233 

Hon,  on  the  Tennessee  and  Alabama  Railroad.  Accordingly, 
on  the  next  morning  early,  that  position  was  secured  by  the 
Confederates,  who  then  awaited  the  enemy  in  very  much  the 
following  array. 

Forrest  occupied  the  extreme  right,  his  regiments — some 
2000  strong — deployed  in  line  on  an  eminence  that  bordered 
and  overlooked  a  narrow  valley — about  half  a  mile  wide — 
which  meandered  with  a  general  direction  across  and  per- 
pendicular to  the  railroad  and  several  highways  converging 
from  that  quarter  upon  Franklin,  with  his  artillery--fl  section 
(tf  Freeman's  Battery — posted  on  a  knoll  on  his  right.     On 


ttie  left  of  these,  and  some  paces  retired,  was  Armstrong's 
Brigade,  on  the  crest  of  a  narrow  ridge  which  is  cut  by  the 
tailroad  and  by  the  Columbia  turnpike  further  to  the  east 
Next  on  the  left,  in  line  with  Armstrong,  was  the  Texas  Bri- 
gade, (Whitfield's,)*  King's  Battery  of  four  pieces  planted  in 
two  favorable  positions  on  the  right  and  left  band,  respectively, 
of  the  Columbia  turnpike-f     Across  the  valley  were  two  de- 

*  Annstrong'i  Brigade  abool  t6M  op.  He  had  been  detained  at  the  cron> 
nd  Whit&eld's  say  iSoo  ftrong.  ing  of  Duck  river  and  took  no  part  in 

t  Cc«b]r  had  a>  yet  not  been  broaght     the  combat  aubuqnenUy. 


234  Campaigns  of  General  Forres L 

cided  eminences,  between  or  in  the  gorge  of  which  passed 
the  raikoad  and  Columbia  turnpike,  and  the  Station  was  also 
in  the  valley  between  the  ground  occupied  by  the  Confederates 
and  the  uplands  just  mentioned. 

The  enemy  appeared  about  half-past  nine  A.M.,  moving  on 
the  Columbia  turnpike,  with  five  regiments  of  infantry,  some 
600  cavalry,  and  a  field-battery.*  Posting  the  latter  upon 
the  right  hand  ridge,  the  Federal  infantry  was  deployed  across 
the  pike  and  rightward,  astraddle  the  railroad.  King's  Batte- 
ry opened  vigorously  with  shell,  but  the  Federals  pushed  on 
handsomely,  resolutely  upon  the  Confederate  position,  and  up 
to  within  one  hundred  and  fifty  yards.  Then  Armstrong's 
and  Whitfield's  brigades  sprang  forward  and  met  them,  and  a 
sharp  exchange  of  musketry  fire  took  place  for  full  half  an 
hour  before  the  Federal  line  faltered  and  fell  back. 

Forrest,  with  his  apt  soldier's  eyes,  now  observing  that  no 
enemy  was  likely  to  appear  in  his  front — with  what  Carlyle 
terms  an  "interior  talent  for  war" — determined  to  detach 
Colonel  Starnes  with  two  regiments  to  move  around  by  the 
right  upon  the  Federal  artillery  and  its  supports,  while  he 
with  the  remainder  of  his  force,  present  on  the  field,  led  it 
further  to  the  right  and  rearward,  in  order  to  cut  ofi*  the  route 
of  retreat  upon  Franklin.  Meanwhile,  Starnes,  executing  his 
orders  with  habitual  energy,t  opening  with  a  deadly  fire  of  his 
rifles,  had  driven  the  Federal  artillery  from  their  strong 
vantage  ground  rapidly  to  the  rear,  down  the  turnpike,  and 
forced  the  infantry  across  westward  of  the  railroad  to  another 
position  upon  the  ridge  in  that  quarter,  where  they  made  a 
most  stubborn  stand.  In  the  mean  while,  apparently  observing 


*  Reb,  Rec.  VI.  Doc.  130,  p.  439.  the  battle-ground,  and  was  thoroughly 

t  Major  McLemore,  then  in  com-  acquainted  with  every  foot  of  the  sur* 

mand  of  the  Fourth  Tennessee,  had  rounding  region. 

Deen  bom  within  a  mile  and  a  half  of 


Battle  of  Thompsons  Statiofi. 


235 


Forrest's  movement,  a  considerable  Federal  detachment  fell 
back,  and  took  shelter  behind  a  strong  stone  fence.  From 
this  position  General  Forrest  made  two  sustained  attempts  to 
dislodge  these  men,  who  maintained  it  with  genuine  courage. 
At  the  second  charge,  however,  they  were  overcome,  and 
surrendering,  were  sent  from  the  field,  the  General  having  his 
horse  shot  in  the  aiiair.  Moving  still  rearward  and  to  the  west 
of  the  railroad,  he  succeeded  quickly  in  getting  in  a  position 
to  cut  oflF  the  route  of  retreat  of  the  enemy,  who  still  fought 
with  signal  resolution  and  spirit.  Forming  his  command,  in- 
cluding his  escort,  in  line,  Forrest  now  dashed  forward  with 
it  up  the  steep  slope  of  the  ridge  so  stoutly  held  by  the 
Federal  infantry,  who  poured  a  galling  fire  upon  his  men  as 
they  followed  their  leader.  The  loss  was  heavy,  and  Captain 
Montgomery  Little,  commander  of  his  escort,  fell  by  his  side, 
mortally  wounded.*  Major  E.  B.  Trezevant  was  also  slain, 
near  by,  in  this  final  charge.f 


*  This  escort  was  organized  by  Cap- 
tain little,  at  Shelb3rville,  Tennessee, 
in  October,  1862.  At  first  some  ninety 
strong,  it  reported  at  Lavergne,  and, 
composed  of  the  best  young  men  of 
Middle  Tennessee,  became  General 
Forrest's  personal  escort  thencefor- 
ward.  Montgomery  Little  was  bom 
in  Rowan  comity,  North-Carolina,  on 
the  i8th  of  July,  1825,  whence  his  fami- 
ly emigrated  to  Smith  county,  Tennes- 
see, in  1829.  He  was  left  an  orphan  in 
May,  183 1.  An  elder  brother  secured 
htm  a  good  education,  including  at  least 
one  term  at  Saint  Mary*s  College,  Ken- 
tacky.  Subsequently,  he  resided  in 
Mississippi,  superintending  plantations 
there  for  several  years  and  until  he  re- 
moTed  to  Memphis  and  entered  into 


business  with  his  brother.  He  was  a 
Union  man  up  to  the  outset  of  the  war. 
Captain  Little  was  an  admirable  officer, 
with  superior  martial  aptitudes,including 
notable  resolution  and  decision,  which 
made  him  greatly  trusted  and  his  early 
death  deeply  regretted  by  his  chie£ 

t  Edward  Buller  Trezevant,  son  of 
Dr.  Lewis  C.  Trezevant,  bom  in  Shelby 
county,  Tennessee,  24th  of  July,  1838, 
was  educated  at  St.  James's  College, 
Hagerstown,  Marylamd.  At  the  be* 
ginning  of  the  war  he  was  deputy 
clerk  of  the  Circuit  Court  for  Shelby 
county.  In  the  spring  of  186 1,  at  the 
first  call  to  arms,  he  joined  Captain 
Logwood's  Company — "  The  Memphis 
Light  Dragoons  " — of  which  he  was 
elected    Third    Lieutenant         Soon 


i 


236 


Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 


But  this  did  not  check  the  Confederate  advance,  and  in  a 
few  moments  Forrest  stood  within  thirty  paces  of  the  Federal 
commander,  Colonel  Cobum,  whose  surrender  he  demanded 


the  Company  inarched  to  Randolph, 
where  it  was  organized,  with  five 
others,  into  the  battalion  known  as 
"Logwood's  Battalion."  lieutenant 
Trezevant  subsequently  accompanied 
the  battalion  to  New -Madrid,  Mis- 
souri, and  Columbus,  Kentucky,  with 
the  troops  under  the  command  of. 
General  Pillow,  early  in  September, 
x86x.  He  was  present  in  a  night  at- 
tack upon  the  enemy's  outposts  in  front 
of  Paducah,  in  October;  and  in  the 
battle  of  Belmont,  November  7th, 
where,  with  another  company,  the 
"  Light  Dragoons  "  made  a  successful 
charge  upon  the  Federal  infantry. 

His  health  becoming  very  precarious 
from  incipient  consumption,  about  the 
15th  of  December  Lieutenant  Treze- 
vant resigned,  and  soon  after  repaired 
to  Western  Texas,  the  pure,  dry  air  of 
which  had  been  recommended  by  his 
physician  as  likely  to  restore  his  health. 
Taking  up  his  residence  near  Austin, 
the  chamge  of  climate  seemed,  indeed, 
to  act  like  a  chann,  for  early  in  the 
spring  he  felt  so  entirely  restored,  that 
he  determined  at  once  to  rejoin  the 
army,  and  attach  himself  to  the  com- 
mand of  Colonel  Forrest  About  the 
1st  of  May,  arriving  at  Corinth,  he  re- 
ported at  the  headquarters  of  ^  Forrest's 
Cavalry,"  and  was  assigned  to  duty  as  • 
Sergeant-Major  of  the  regiment 

About  the  20th  of  June,  when  Cap* 
tain  Strange  was  transferred  from  the 
rq;iment— ^th  Colonel  Forrest— Mr. 


Trezevant  was  appointed  to  sncceed 
him  as  Adjutant  In  the  following 
month,  the  Alabama  Companies  having 
been  permanently  detadied,  the  rem- 
nant of  the  regiment,  with  the  addition 
of  a  Louisiana  squadron,was  reorganised 
at  Guntown,  Mississippi,  as  a  battalion, 
of  which  Adjutant  Trezevant  was 
elected  Major. 

Major  Trezevant  served  with  this 
battalion  in  all  its  marches  and  bat- 
tles ;  in  the  afiairs  at  Middleburg,  Me- 
don,  Britton's  Lane,  Inka,  Coring 
etc,  exhibiting  the  best  traits  of  a  sol- 
dier, until  February,  1862,  when,  with 
the  rest  of  Van  Dom's  Cavalry  corps, 
he  crossed  into  Middle  Tennessee.  He 
was  then  transferred,  with  the  rank 
of  Lieutenant-Colonel,  and  placed  in 
command  of  the  Tenth  Tennessee 
Cavalry.  Gallantly  leading  this  regi- 
ment, on  the  5th  of  Mardi,  he  was 
struck  down,  mortally  wounded,  by 
a  rifle-ball  through  tiie  abdomen. 
Borne  to  the  residence  of  Mrs.  Bond, 
at  Spring  Hill,  hard  by,  he  died  there 
two  days  later.  Meanwhile, ''  receiving 
at  the  hands  of  his  hostess,"  says  a  near 
relative,  **  all  the  Irindnrsi  a  patriot 
could  desire,  or  a  Christian  mother  be- 
stow." 

With  a  strongs  well-cultivated  mind, 
were  united  in  Colonel  Trezevant  a 
frankness  and  magnanimity,  wfai^ 
made  him  an  ornament  in  his  social 
drcle,  and  surrounded  him  with  friends. 
Devoting  himself  to  the  acquirement 


Battle  of  Thompson's  Station.  237 

under  the  stress  of  a  leveled  revolver.  Further  resistance 
was  in  vain,  and  his  brave  adversary,  thoroughly  beaten  at  all 
points,  was  forced  to  succumb.  Just  at  this  juncture  a  section 
of  King's  battery  having  been  favorably  planted  to  enfilade 
the  Federal  position,  and  in  the  hurly-burly  of  battle  not 
having  observed  the  surrender  or  cessation  of  fire,  discharged 
two  rounds,  greatly  endangering  Forrest  and  his  prisoners 
before  it  could  be  stopped  by  the  courier  sent  to  notify  Gene- 
ral Van  Dom  of  events. 

Fire  having  now  ceased  in  all  parts  of  the  field.  General 
Forrest  conducted  and  introduced  Colonel  Cobum  to  General 
Van  Dom,  and  then  returned  to  look  after  his  wounded,  col- 
lect and  fitly  care  for  the  dead,  and  reorganize  his  command 
A  portion  of  his  men — mounted — ^meanwhile  had  followed  and 
endeavored  to  cut  ofi*  the  runaway  cavalry,  artillery,  and  some 
of  the  in&ntry,  that  had  fled  from  the  field  before  the  last  part 
of  the  conflict,  but  they  were  obliged  to  return  without  more 
than  some  seventy-five  captured  stragglers ;  the  remainder 
effected  their  retreat  to  Franklin,  though  followed  hotly  to 
within  two  miles  of  that  place. 

The  command  surrendered  consisted  of  the  Thirty-third 
and  Eighty-fifth  Indiana,  Nineteenth  Michigan,  and  Twenty- 
second  Wisconsin  Volunteer  Infantry,  with  an  aggregate  of 
two  thousand  two  hundred* — a  fine  body  of  men,  as  shown 
by  their  stout  fighting. 

It  was  the  Fourth  and  Eleventh  Tennessee  Regiments  of 
Forrest's  command,  as  has  been  noted,  who  drove  the  Federal 
artillery  firom  the  field,  and  their  support  from  their  strong 


of  a  knowledge  of  the  profession  of  a  gentleman.    Altogether,  one  of  the 

aims,  he  soon  became  fitted  for  the  handsomest  young  officers  in  the  army, 
leadership  of  men.      In  person  he  was         *  The  124th  Ohio,  in  reserve  with 

tan,  well  proportioned,  and  erect,  he  the  wagon-train,  was  not  taken :  it  es- 

lad  l^t  hair,  blue  eyes,  and  regular  caped  with  the  wagon-train. — Rek  Ric* 

featorcsi  widi  the  air  and  manners  of  VII.  Doc  130^  p.  441. 


238  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

position — a  cedar-clad  knoll  on  the  left  of  the  turnpike,  to  the 
other  hill ;  and  Starnes,  Edmonston,  and  McLemore  deserve 
much  credit  for  the  vigor  and  ability  with  which  they  handled 
their  regiments,  the  officers  and  men  of  which  displayed  the 
highest  soldierly  qualities ;  as  did  also  Colonel  Biffle,  and 
the  officers  and  men  generally  engaged;  especially  in  the 
closing  charge,  which  is  represented  as  the  "  bloodiest  part  of 
the  fighting"  that  day.* 

The  success  was  acquired  at  the  cost  to  the  Confederates  of 
about  thirty  killed  and  one  hundred  and  twenty-five  wounded. 
The  dead  included  several  valuable  officers,  besides  Major 
Trezevant  and  Captain  Little,  already  mentioned.  Colonel 
Samuel  G.  Earl,  of  the  Third  Arkansas  Cavalry,  was  killed 
leading  his  men  upon  the  enemy ;  so  too  fell  Captain  Alfred 
Dysart,  of  the  Fourth  Tennessee,  in  a  charge,  and  Captain 
William  Watson,  of  General  Armstrong's  staff.f  The  Rev. 
Mr.  Crouch,  a  brigade  chaplain,  also  was  slain  while  inspiriting 
the  men  to  the  discharge  of  their  duty  ;  and  Lieutenant  John 
Johnson,  of  the  Ninth  Tennessee,  was  killed  bearing  the 
colors  of  his  regiment.  Those  falling  were  seized  by  one 
of  the  color-guard— ^Clay  Kendrick — whose  right  arm  being 
severely  shattered,  shifted  the  staff,  and  bore  it  in  his  left  hand 
to  the  close  of  the  battle.  Indeed,  the  conduct  of  all  was 
highly  satisfactory. 

The  results  served  to  make  material  amends  for  the  bloody 
Dover  fiasco — ^the  loss  there  oi prestige:  and  had  the  effect  to 
restore  the  tone  of  the  Confederate  cavalry  in  that  army,  as  well 
as  to  increase  the  confidence  in  General  Forrest's  military  capa- 
cities, and  therefore  enhanced  his  influence  with  his  troopj 
his  ability  to  lead  them  with  even  greater  efficiency. 


*  See  letter  of  Centurion,  before  dted 
t  See  Appendix  for  sketch. 


A  Federal  Advance.  239 

III. 

• 

No  pursuit  of  the  force,  except  that  already  related,  was 
made,  and  the  troops  were  ordered  back  to  their  cantonments 
at  Spring  Hill.  Pickets  and  outposts  were,  however,  main- 
tained  within  close  proximity  to  Franklin.  The  usual  round 
of  daily  iskirmishes  followed,  with  little  profit,  except  that  on 
the  7th  of  March,  Colonel  Stames,  on  outpost  service,  captured 
a  foraging  party,  with  their  train,  very  near  their  lines.  But 
on  the  8th,  his  scouts  gave  intelligence  of  the  advance  of  a 
heavy  Federal  column  from  Franklin  down  the  Columbia 
turnpike.  The  skirmishers  soon  became  warmly  engaged, 
and  a  gallant  stand  was  made  by  Starnes  for  several  hours  at 
a  point  a  mile  northward  of  the  battle-field  of  the  5  th  ;  but 
the  Confederate  forces  retired  finally,  though  slowly  and 
deliberately.  For  some  days  previously  a  heavy  rain  had 
fallen,  and  all  the  affluents  of  Duck  river,  as  well  as  that 
stream,  were  greatly  swollen.  At  and  behind  Rutherford's 
creek  the  Confederates  made  another  stand,  to  secure  time 
to  cross  Duck  river  in  safety  ;  and  all  the  artillery,  but  four 
pieces  retained  for  service  in  that  stand,  and  the  train,  were 
sent  to  the  rear,  to  be  thrown  across  the  river. 

On  the-  loth,  the  Federals,  making  their  appearance  in 
superior  force,  endeavored  several  times  to  force  a  passage  of 
the  creek,  but  were  foiled.  Thus  baffled,  they  made  another 
attempt  some  distance  leftward,  and  were  suffered  to  get  well 
into  the  stream  without  molestation,  when  Captain  Forrest 
attacked  with  vigor,  and  repulsed  them  with  loss.  It  was 
raining  meanwhile,  and  quite  cold.  That  night,  the  artillery 
not  engaged  was  conveyed  across  Duck  river  to  Columbia,  by 
means  of  a  pontoon-bridge,  which  gave  way  immediately  there- 
after, obliging  the  Confederates  to  resort  to  White's  Bridge, 
some  twenty-five  miles  up  Duck  river,  for  means  of  passage. 
To  Forrest  was  assigned  the  service  of  covering  this  move- 


240  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

ment  by  holding  the  line  of  Rutherford's  creek.  Moving  along 
it  accordingly,  the  enemy  keeping  pace  on  the  other  bank,  a 
series  of  spirited  skirmishes  were  kept  up,  with  little  inter- 
mission, across  the  stream,  until  apparently  something  seemed 
to  cause  an  alarm  among  the  Federals,  for  they  suddenly  be- 
gan a  rapid  retrograde  movement,  at  a  double-^uicky  to  Frank- 
lin, as  was  subsequently  ascertained.*  General  Forrest  then 
followed  the  march  of  the  main  body  of  the  Confederates  to 
Columbia,  where  he  took  position  the  12th  of  March;  and 
this  retreat  before  a  greatly  superior  force  was  safely  eflTected 
without  any  loss,  under  circumstances  involving  great  hazard, 
in  consequence  of  the  condition  of  Duck  river. 

IV. 

The  pontoon-bridge  at  Columbia  was  repaired  as  speedfly 
as  possible,  and  headquarters  were  again  pushed  forward  to 
Spring  Hill  on  the  15th  of  March.  General  Forrest  was  now 
assigned  to  the  command  of  a  division  made  up  of  his  brigade 
and  that  of  Armstrong's,  now  including  the  Eighth  Tennessee, 
and  occupied  the  right  of 'the  line,  his  regiments  extending 
between  Spring  Hill  and  Ridge  Meeting-House,  on  the  Frank- 
lin-Lewisburg  turnpike,  with  a  line  of  outposts  and  pickets 
thrown  well  in  advance,  and  stretching  across  as  far  as  to 
the  near  vicinity  of  the  Federals  in  position  at  College  Grove, 
on  Harpeth  river,  and  connecting  at  Thompson's  Station  with 
a  similar  line  furnished  by  the  other  (W.  H.  Jackson's)  divi- 
sion.! 

Frequent  outpost  afiairs  now  took  place,  fruitless  of  conse- 
quences, as  is  usual  in  that  character  of  petty  warfare,  after  a 
campaign  has  well  opened.     The  most*notable  of  these,  and. 


*  Apprehensive,  apparently,  of  a  flank  moTcment 
t  Whitfield's  and  Coshy's  Br%;adea. 


Forrest  in  Command  of  a  Division.         241 

perchance,  of  some  profit  as  a  species  of  sharp  battle-drill,  and 
of  moral  tonic  effect  upon  the  men,  was  a  dash  made  at  the 
Federal  outpost  at  College  Grove  by  three  regiments,  or  de- 
tachments, of  Forrest's  immediate  brigade,  their  commander, 
Colonel  Stames,  leading.  The  enemy  giving  way,  fell  back 
across  the  Harpeth,  and  there  made  a  stout  struggle  for  an 
hour,  in  a  strong  position,  from  which  they  were  finally  routed 
and  forced  back  upon  their  main  body  at  Triune,  with  a  loss 
on  their  side  of  some  thirty  killed  or  captured,  and  on  the 
Confederate  part  of  ten  or  twelve  killed  or  wounded. 

Having  learned,  through  reliable  sources,  that  the  troops 
who  had  escaped  from  the  affair  at  Thompson's  Station,  on  the 
5th  of  the  month,  were  in  position  at  Brentwood  Station,  on 
the  Franklin  and  Nashville  Railroad,  guarding  the  railroad 
bridge  over  the  Little  Harpeth,  nine  miles  rearward  of  Frank- 
lin, General  Forrest  received  permission  from  General  Van  Dom 
to  attempt  a  coup  de  main,  with  his  division,  upon  them.   This 
he  proceeded  to  execute  on  or  about  the  night  of  the  24th  of 
March.    Stames  with  his  own,  under  McLemore,  and  Edmon- 
ston's  regiment,  moved  forward  oa  a  by-way,  crossing  the 
Harpeth  some  six  miles  rightward  of  Franklin,  and  thence 
through  fields  and  woods,  deftly  threading  and  eluding  the 
enemy's  pickets  without  discovery,  to  the  point  of  destination. 
General  Forrest  himself,  with  his  escort — Biffle's  Regiment, 
the  Tenth  Tennessee,  under  Major  De  Moss,  and  Armstrong, 
with  the  First  JTennessee,  Third  Arkansas,  Second  Mississip- 
pi, and  Saunder's  battalion  of  his  brigade,  and  a  section  of 
Freeman's  battery,  under  Lieutenant  Huggins — made  a  detour 
leftward,  by  the  way  of  Hillsboro,  crossing  the  Harpeth  at 
the  Granny-White-Nashville  turnpike,  some  six  miles  north  ol 
Franklin,  whence  he  moved  rapidly  and  directly  upon  Brent- 
wood.    Reaching  the  place  just  at  dawn,  the  General  made 
his  disposition  at  once  for  the  attack,  although  Armstrong- 
impeded  by  the  artillery — ^had  not  yet  come  up,  and  Stames 


242  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

was  not  in  sight*  With  his  force  in  hand,  brushing  some 
pickets  aside,  he  moved  rapidly  around  the  position  by  the 
right  or  east,  with  his  escort  and  Captain  Forrest's  company, 
so  as  to  foil  the  eflfort  to  escape  which  was  already  being  at- 
tempted. Securing  this  position,  he  then  demanded  the  sur- 
render of  the  place,  which  was  made  without  further  parley. 
Armstrong,  in  the  mean  time,  having  come  up  in  their  imme- 
diate front,  deployed  his  line,  and  planted  his  artillery  so  as  to 
command  the  position.  The  troops  capitulated,  as  General 
Forrest  anticipated,  proved  to  be  of  those  that  had  escaped 
from  the  field  at  Thompson's  Station  under  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Bloodgood,  who  had  quit  the  ground  at  the  height  of  the 
conflict,!  and  embracing,  according  to  Federal  accounts,  some 
five  hundred  and  twenty-nine  officers,  men,  and  teamsters, 
with  sixteen  or  seventeen  wagons,  and  three  ambulances  and 
teams  \X  ^^  ^^^  arms  of  the  men,  and  all  the  baggage  of 
Coburn's  late  command,  all  which  was  secured  with  the  loss 
of  one  man  killed  and  two  wounded.  The  Federals,  besides 
prisoners,  lost  about  ten  killed  in  the  skirmish  preceding  the 
capitulation. 

After  the  surrender  had  been  arranged,  Stames  came  upon 
the  ground  with  his  command,  and  the  prisoners  asid  spoils 
of  war,  which  were  abundant,  were  placed  in  his  charge. 
General  Forrest  then  moved  at  a  gallop,  with  the  Tenth  Ten- 
nessee and  Freeman  with  one  of  his  guns,  on  the  road  toward 
Franklin  to  the  bridge,  which  he  found  defended  by  a  stock- 
ade strongly  garrisoned,  the  surrender  of  which,  straightway 


*  It  appears  Colonel  Stames  was  in  t  See  Lieutenant  Badunan's  state- 
position  and  full  view  of  the  place  be-  ment  Reb,  Rec,  VI.  Doc.  130^  p.  440. 
fore  daylight,  but  finding  the  mam  force  X  ^^-  I^oc.  147,  Chaplain  PiUsburfS 
was  not  up,  and  apprehending  some  statement,  p.  482.  The  force  tfms 
tniscauriage  as  the  cause,  moved  to  the  surrendered  included  the  remnant  of 
west  side  of  the  turnpike,  out  of  view,  the  Twenty-second  Wisconsin, 
as  it  happened. 


Brentwood  Coup  de  Main.  243 

demanded  through  his  aid-de-camp,  Captain  C.  W.  Anderson, 
was  curtly  declined.  A  single  shot,  however,  from  Freeman's 
gun,  hurtling  and  crashing  through  the  stockade,  wrought  an 
immediate  change  of  purpose  and  brought  the  display  of 
white  flags.  The  men  at  this  point,  some  230,  the  remnant 
of  the  Twelfth  Michigan  Volunteer  Infantry,  another  of  Co- 
bum's  regiments,  made  the  sum  total  of  prisoners  7591  The 
bridge  and  stockade  being  burned  to  the  ground,  the  objects 
of  *the  expedition  were  fully  accomplished,  making  it  one  of 
the  most  skillfully  executed  of  the  war  if  the  Confederates 
could  effect  their  return  to  their  lines  with  their  prisoners 
and  booty  without  serious  hinderance  or  oflfset 

Detaching  the  First  Tennessee  (Colonel  Wheeler)  to  scour 
the  turnpike  in  the  direction  of  and  as  near  to  Nashville  as 
possible,  the  Confederate  General  now  set  out  on  his  return 
with  the  rest  of  his  force  and  prisoners  by  the  Harding  turn- 
pike, passing  westward  of  Franklin.  Wheeler  pushed,  mean- 
while, to  within  four  miles  of  the  outskirts  of  Nashville,  when 
he  encountered  a  small  wagon-train,  a  gang  of  negro  wood- 
choppers,  and  some  cavalry.  Charging,  he  captured  several 
well-loaded  sutlers'  wagons  and  some  thirty  odd  prisoners, 
whom  he  brought  away,  dispersing  the  rest  and  causing  wild 
consternation  in  Nashville,  as  was  heard  afterward.  This 
done,  turning,  he  made  a  wide  sweep,  and  passed  within 
four  miles  of  Triune.  There,  charging  and  capturing  some 
picket-posts,  which  produced  not  a  little  alarm  in  that  quar- 
ter, he  pushed  on  and  successfully  reached  headquarters  at 
the  Ridge  Meeting-House  with  little  delay. 

Forrest,  in  the  interval,  after  moving  some  seven  or  eight 
miles  from  Brentwood,  had  halted  to  rest  and  break  the  fast 
of  his  men  and  animals,  as  also  to  wait  for  the  captured 
train — under  escort  of  the  Tenth  Tennessee — to  come  up. 
Suddenly  the  alarm  being  given  that  the  latter  had  been  at- 
tacked, some  three  companies  of  the  Eleventh  Tennessee 


A 


244 


Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 


were  hurriedly  mounted  and  dispatched  to  its  relief.  General 
Forrest  leading  the  succor  party.  Not  a  little  confusion  was 
produced,  however,  in  the  Confederate  command  by  this  in- 
telligence, and  the  apprehension  was  that  a  grave  attempt  to 
cut  off  the  retreat  was  on  foot.  General  Forrest,  on  reaching 
the  scene,  found  a  considerable  cavalry  force  in  a  threatening 
attitude,  with  several  of  his  wagons  and  ambulances  already 
in  their  hands.  As  he  charged  boldly  upon  them,  they  cut 
the  draught  animals  from  their  traces  and  fled,  with  littie 
show  of  pugnacity.  Colonel  Stames  coming  up  opportimdy, 
however,  on  their  right  flank,  they  suffered  a  loss  of  at  least 
fifty  in  killed  and  captured.*  The  Federals  engaged  in  this 
affair,  we  learn  from  Federal  sources,  were  detachments  of 
four  volunteer  cavalry  regiments,  545  strong,  under  General 
Green  Clay  Smith,!  who  had  been  detached  by  Greneral  Gran- 
ger from  Franklin  that  morning  to  reconnoitre  and  ascertain 
the  purposes  of  the  Confederate  expedition,  of  which  intelli- 
gence had  reached  that  officer.  Going  to  Brentwood,  th^ 
found  the  bridge,  camp,  and  stockade  in  ruins,  and  the  garri- 
son carried  off  as  prisoners  of  war.  Following  rapidly  on 
Forrest's  trace,  they  came  up  with  the  train  as  related,  when 
matters,  at  first  favorable  for  the  Federals,  were  soon  given 
an  adverse  turn  and  termination  by  the  incisive  tactics  of  the 
Confederate  leader.  J 


♦  The  Tenth  Tennessee  lost  in  this 
afiair  three  killed,  indudixig  Lieutenant 
Andrew  Nesbitt,  company  "E,"  four 
wounded,  and  twenty-five  captured.— 
N(^£S  of  Major  De  Moss, 

t  RA,  Rec,  VI.  Doc.  147,  p.  481. 

X  The  Federal  relation  of  this  afiair, 
just  dted,  is  a  characteristic  example  of 
the  manner  and  matter  of  Federal  news- 
paper accounts  of  war  incidents.  Gene- 


ral Smith  made  no  such  stand,  mudi 
less  did  he  fight  such  odds ;  he  made 
no  such  persistent  pursuit,  as  is  painted 
by  this  correspondent,  after  Gomiqg  up 
with  the  train ;  and  not  one  wagOQ  or 
ambulance  did  he  actually  carry  o£ 
What  we  relate  of  the  affiur  is  takn 
from  the  lips  of  General  Forrest,  abun- 
dantly confirmed  afterward  by  odKr 
accounts  written  by  spectators  at  the 


Attempted  Rescue  Baffled. 


245 


The  march  was  now  resumed  homeward  as  far  as  Hillsbo- 
rough without  further  hinderance.  There  the  main  body  en- 
camped, while  the  prisoners,  under  Captain  Forrest  and  a  pro- 
per escort,  were  sent  forward  the  same  night  in  the  direction  of 
Columbia.  And,  on  the  following  morning,  meeting  no  oppo- 
sition by  the  way,  Forrest  led  his  command  safely  back  to 
their  quarters  near  Spring  Hill.  One  effect  of  this  brilliant 
raid  was  to  bestir  the  Federals  to  somewhat  greater  watchful- 
ness ;  consequently  they  placed  all  the  fords  of  the  Harpeth 
under  strict  watch  and  ward,  with  a  heavy  picket-line  from 
Davis's  Mill  to  Franklin  :  but  a  little  late,  for  Forrest  had  al- 
ready gained  his  ends ! 

After  returning  to  their  quarters  about  Spring  Hill,  the 
usual  routine  of  cavalry  outpost  service  was  resumed,  without 
noteworthy  incident  until  about  the  9th  of  April,  when  Gene- 
ral Jackson — commanding  the  immediate  advance— having 
been  led  to  suspect  and  express  the  opinion  that  the  enemy 
were  evacuating  Franklin,*  General  Van  Dorn  ordered  a 
reconnoissance  in  force  of  the  position  on  the  loth. 

Forrest's  Division  was  ordered  to  assemble  at  the  Ridge 
Meetmg-House,  on  the  Lewisburg  turnpike,  and  move  thence 
by  that  approach  to  Franklin,  while  Jackson  was  to  advance 
by  the  Columbia-Franklin  road ;  and  by  six  o'clock  on  that 
morning  the  movement  began.    By  ten  o'clock  a.m. — Arm- 


time.  See  dispatch  to  Chaitanooga 
ReMf  dated  Columbia,  March  26th, 
1863;  "Centurion's"  letter  to  Atlanta 
Sctdkem  Ccnfederacy,  April  8th,  1863 ; 
and,  besides,  there  is  complete  evidence 
ta  the  document  itself  of  its  gross  ex- 
aggerations. 

*  The  Federals  had  been  closely  ob- 
lenred  hj  the  Confederate  scouts,  and 
bodies  of  troops  were  known  to  have 


gofu  in  the  direction  of  Triune  ;  and  it 
may  also  be  inferred  from  General  Gor- 
don Granger's  telegraphic  report  of  the 
afiair  that  he  had  been  sending  off  some 
of  his  troops,  though  fully  anticipating 
an  attack,  and  having,  therefore,  been 
prepared  for  it  with  Stanley's  Division 
of  cavalry  stationed  on  the  Murfrees- 
boro  road  four  miles  from  Franklin.— 
See  Reb.  Rec.  VI.  Doc  160,  p.  518. 


i 


246  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

strong's  Brigade  leading — Forrest's  Division  encountered  the 
Federal  pickets,  strongly  posted  in  a  wood  extending  on  and 
between  both  avenues  of  approach.  A  sharp  skirmish  then 
took  place.  General  Van  Dom,  at  the  same  time  moving 
with  Jackson's  command,  had  become  likewise  engaged  on 
that  flank.  Armstrong  drove  the  force  in  his  front  before 
him  out  of  the  woods,  across  an  open  field,  and  into  the  town 
where  the  Federals  took  shelter  behind  fences,  in  the  houses, 
and  other  very  favorable  defensive  positions.*  Meantime, 
Colonel  Stames,  who  followed  with  his  brigade  at  an  interval 
of  two  miles,  observing  the  little  resistance  made  to  Arm- 
strong, supposed  there  was  no  risk,  and  omitted  to  throw  out 
flankers  on  his  right  Moving  thus  exposed,  he  was  suddenly 
assailed,  at  a  point  four  miles  from  Franklin,  by  a  strong 
Federal  cavalry  force,  under  General  Stanley,  that  had  been 
thrown  across  from  the  Murfreesboro  road.t  In  this  attack 
the  Fourth  Regiment  United  States  Regular  Cavalry  charged 
at  full  speed  and  captured  Freeman's  Battery,  that  officer,  and 
thirty  of  his  men,  at  the  moment  rearward  of  BiflSe's  Regi- 
ment, but  in  advance  of  the  other  regiments  of  the  brigade. 
So  sudden  and  unexpected  was  the  onset  there  was  no  time 
to  prepare  for  action  ;  the  gunners  and  drivers  not  captured 
quit  their  pieces,  and  some  of  the  caissons,  having  been  turned 
about,  were  driven  into  the  first  regiment  in  the  rear,  causing 
at  first  a  good  deal  of  disorder.  Colonel  Starnes,  at  the  time 
with  Biffle's  Regiment,  hearing  the  firing,  dismounted  it 
quickly,  and,  turning,  made  a  vigorous  counter-attack,  by 
which,  after  a  short  but  sanguinary  struggle,  the  Federals 
were  driven  off  the  field,  leaving  behind  Freeman's  guns  and 
some  of  the  men,  but  unfortunately  retaining  that  gallant  and 


♦  See  Report  of  Captain  Machctt,        t  General  Granger^s  Report  before 
commanding  Fortieth  Ohio  Volunteers,     dted. 
-—Rih,  Rec,  VI.  Doc  160,  p.  519. 


Capture  and  Murder  of  Captain  Freeman.    347 

most  valuable  oflScer  in  their  possession  with  some  thirty  of 
his  men.  And  here  we  must  pause  to  stamp  an  indelible  in- 
&ucny  upon  the  escutcheon  of  the  Fourth  Cavalry — no  less 
than  the  deliberate  murder  by  one  of  its  officers  of  a  prisoner 
of  war,  the  bold  and  skillful  Freeman,  who,  as  before  said,  had 
remained  in  their  hands.  As  his  captors  were  carrying  him 
from  the  field  on  foot,  he  was  ordered  to  break  into  a  run ; 
unable  to  do  this,  an  officer  rode  up  and  shot  him  through 
the  head,  to  prevent  his  recapture.*  We  regret  profoundly  to 
have  to  believe  this  atrocious  deed,  but  are  assured  that  it 
was  perpetrated,  and  under  circumstances  utterly  without  pal- 
liation or  extenuation.! 

Driven  from  the  field,  or,  as  the  Federal  report  says,  "out- 
flanked and  nearly  surrounded,"  the  Federals  fell  back  rapidly 
across  the  Harpeth  river  within  shelter  of  their  fortifications, 
when  Starnes  pushed  ahead  to  support  Armstrong,  who  was 
still  engaged  on  the  outskirts  of  Franklin. 

At  the  same  time.  General  Van  Dom,  with  Jackson's  Divi^ 


*  Captain  Freeman  at  the  beginning 
of  the  war  was  a  lawyer ;  he  entered 
the  army  at  an  early  moment,  as  a  sub- 
ahem  in  a  company  of  volunteers.  His 
artillery  company,  one  of  the  very  best 
in  the  Confederate  service,  was  rabed 
in  Sumner  county,  Tennessee^  He 
was  a  Christian  gentleman,  standing 
high  with  Forrest,  who  was  not  easily 
pleased.  The  officers  and  men  es- 
teemed him  greatly,  and  his  loss,  much 
deplored,  cast  a  gloom  over  the  com- 
mand. Even  General  Forrest  wept  at 
his  grave,  and  all  were  deeply  moved 
as  this  promising  soldier  was  consigned 
to  his  last  home  at  Spring  Hill  on  the 
nth  of  April,  1863.  See  Appendix  for 
brief  sketch. 


A  staff-officer,  who  served  long  with 
Freeman,  in  speaking  of  him  as  an  ar- 
tillery officer,  observed  that  "  his  favor- 
ite guns  were  his  twelve -pounder  how- 
itzers, his  preferred  ammunition  two 
thirds  canister,  and  his  distance  as 
close  as  his  General  would  let  him  go." 

t  The  men  of  Forrest's  Tennessee 
regiments  were  greatly  incensed  by  this 
act,  who  at  once  expressed  their  deter- 
mination to  inflict  complete  vengeance 
upon  the  Fourth  Regulars  for  it,  a  de- 
termination which  was  carried  out  in  a 
measure  on  subsequent  fields — as,  for 
example,  at  Okalona,  and  afterward  at 
Selma,  in  Alabama,  just  before  the  end 
of  the  war. 


248  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

sion,  had  pressed  the  enemy  back  on  the  Columbia  road  with 
equal  vigor  and  spirit,  but,  having  become  exposed  to  a  gall- 
ing fire  from  houses,  fences,  and  rifle-pits,  was  forced  to  re- 
tire. We  find  it  mentioned  that  in  this  quarter  of  the  field 
the  Twenty-eighth  Mississippi  Cavalry  was  engaged  with  con- 
spicuous bravery. 

It  was  now  apparent  the  enemy  had  not  been  evacuating 
Franklin,  as  was  supposed,  and  was  prepared  for  this  attack, 
and  hence  General  Van  Dorn  gave  the  order  for  withdraw- 
ing at  once  to  his  lines  at  and  in  advance  of  Spring  Hill, 
which  were  resumed  that  night  without  any  molestation  from 
the  enemy. 

The  loss  on  the  part  of  the  Federals  in  this  fruitless  af&ir 
is  reported  by  them  to  be  "less  than  one  hundred  ;"  the  Con- 
federate loss  in  Forrest's  Division  was  three  killed,  ten  wound- 
ed, and  thirty  prisoners,  which  was  scarcely  equaled  by  Jack- 
son's Division. 


CHAPTER    IX. 

THE    STREIGHT    RAID. 

Forrest's  Brigade  ordered  to  Nortk-Alaiama — yunction  vrilk  Roddy,  and 
Affair  at  Town  Creek — DibrelPi  Diversion — Federal  Infantry  re- 
tire—Desolation of  the  Country — Inauguration  of  Federal  Cavalry 
Raid  under  Colonel  Sfreight— Prompt  Pursuit  by  Forrest — Night 
Combat  in  Sand  Mountain — Series  of  Sharp  Fights  to  Blounlsville — 
Reduced  Numbers  of  Confederates — Heroic  Services  of  Mi»s  Emma 
Sanson  at  Slack  Creek,  Alabama — Federal  Ambush  defeated  at  Tur- 
key town — Colonel  Streight  overtaken  and  Surrender  ^  1 365  Federals 
to  Inferior  Numbers  under  Forrest — Another  Detachment  surren- 
dered near  Rome — Rejoicing  of  People  of  Some — Commentaries. 

April  3Stk  to  May  yi,  i  B63. 

xJn  the  23d  of  April,  Forrest  received  ordera  from  General 
Bragg  to  move  swiftly  with  his  own  brigade,  by  way  of  Deca- 
tur, Ala.,  to  the  relief  of  Colonel  Roddy,  who,  greatly  over- 
matched, was  being  hard  pressed  by  a  heavy  Federal  column, 
under  General  Dodge,  detached  from  Corinth,  Miss.,  in  the 
direction  of  Tuscumbia,  as  well  as  by  a  cavalry  force  that  had 
moved  up  the  western  bank  of  the  Tennessee  river  from  East- 
port,  under  the  command  of  Colonel  A.  D.  Streight* 
Making  what  preparations  were  needful  for  efficiency,  For- 


*  See  p*^  356  hereinafter.     This     reached   Tuscumbta  on  the    34th  of 
h-Tce  moved  in  tear  of  Dodge,  and     A^iH—Rei.  See.  VL  Dot  173,  p.  SS(L 


250  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

rest  detached  the  Eleventh  Tennessee,  600  strong,  to  proceed 
directly  to  the  Tennessee  river  at  Bainbridge,  where,  cross- 
ing it,  Colonel  Edmondson  effected  a  junction  with  Roddj 
four  miles  eastward  of  Tuscumbia,  and  that  regiment  took  a 
most  creditable  part  in  all  the  skirmishes  which  occurred  west- 
ward of  Town  creek. 

On  Friday  morning,  24th,  the  rest  of  the  brigade*  was  put 
en  route  to  make  the  crossing  eastward  of  Town  creek,  and, 
moving  with  his  habitual  celerity,  Forrest  reached  the  Tennes- 
see  river  at  Brown's  Ferry  on  the  evening  of  the  27th  of  April, 
having  ascertained  definitely  by  the  wayside,  through  trusty 
scouts,  ^hat  the  commands  of  Dodge  and  Streight,  already  at 
Tuscumbia,  were  estimated,  the  former  at  about  10,000,  mainly 
infantry,  with  artillery,  and  the  latter  2200  cavalry  or  mounted 
infantry. 

It  was  also  reported  that  they  gave  indications  of  a  purpose 
to  cross  to  the  north  bank  of  the  Tennessee ;  and  to  meet  that 
emergency,  Dibrell  was  detached  with  the  Eighth  and  Tenth 
Tennessee  and  a  section  of  artillery,  with  orders  to  repair  to 
Florence  and  keep  a  sharp  ward  against  any  such  project 
Confident,  however,  that  their  real  purpose  would  be  developec^- 
southward  of  the  Tennessee  river,  Forrest  pushed  on  with  th^ 
main  body  of  his  force  to  Brown's  Ferry.  There  he  secun 
immediate  facilities  for  ferriage  by  two  steamboats  during  the 
night,  and  pressed  forward  twelve  miles  to  Courtland,  twenty 
miles  west  of  Decatur.  Here  he  learned  that  the  Federals 
were  already  at  Town  creek,  a  bold  stream  which  descends 
from  the  mountains  and  hills  of  North- Alabama  and  empties 
some  seven  miles  westward  into  the  Tennessee,  and  the  pas- 
sage of  which  Roddy  was  then  stiflSy  disputing. 


♦  Dibrell *s,      (Eighth,)      Starnes's,     and  the  Tenth  Tennessee,  under  Lico- 
(Fourth,)    Biffle's   {Ninth)    regiments,     tenant-Colonel  De  Moss. 


Affair  at  Totvn  Creek. 


251 


Losing  no  time,  Forrest  hastened  on  that  night  and  estab- 
lished his  headquarters  on  the  Tuscumbia  road  several  miles 
in  rear  of  Colonel  Roddy,  who  soon  met  him  there,  and  with 
whom  the  plan  of  operations  was  arranged  for  the  next  morn- 
ing. At  the  same  time  an  order  was  sent  to  Dibrell  to  move 
his  force  westward  as  far  as  Bainbridge,  and  there,  opening 
with  his  artillery,  make  a  demonstration  as  if  designing  to 
cross  the  river  and  fall  upon  the  Federal  rear.* 

The  Federal  force — ^about  8000  strong,  of  infantry,  artillery, 
and  cavalry — meanwhile  occupied  the  west  bank  of  Town 
creek  confronted  by  Colonel  Roddy,  whose  force  up  to  the 
advent  of  Forrest  consisted  of  scarcely  1200  men  in  addi- 
tion to  Edmondson's  Eleventh  Tennessee.!  Their  line  of 
encampments  extended  from  the  railroad  northward  to  the 
residence  of  Major  Robert  King,  on  the  Tuscumbia  road, 
and  General  Dodge's  headquarters  were  established  in  the 
old  Dearing  mansion. 

At  dawn,  on  the  28th,  General  Forrest  appeared  upon  the 
§cene  with  and  speedily  disposed  his  forces  for  an  obstinate 
oontest.  Posting  Starnes*s  and  Biffle's  regiments  out  of  range 
of  the  Federal  artillery,  with  his  right  resting  on  the  Tuscum- 
road,  he  assigned  Roddy's  force  to  positions  on  the  left,  to 


♦  This  order  was  successfully  carried 
^>y  Captain   J.  J.   Scanlan,    a  young 
l^adelphian,    who    resided    in    St 
X<mis  at  the  outbreak  of  the  war.    The 
service  was  performed  under  circum- 
stances of  extremest  peril.    The  cross- 
ing was  made  in  a  small  canoe,  when 
the  river  was  excessively  high,  filled 
^  drift,  and   the  night  dark  and 
ttormy.      This    gentleman    first    saw 
service  at  Pcnsacola,  in  the  summer  of 
1861.    Was  subsequently  the  Adjutant 
of  the  Chief  of  Artillery  of  the  Confede- 


rate army  at  Corinth.  He  served  suc- 
cessively on  the  staff  of  several  general 
officers  until  after  the  battle  of  Mur- 
fireesboro,  when,  resigning,  he  took 
service  as  a  private  in  Colonel  Roddy's 
Regiment,  but  later  was  restored  to 
staff  duty  with  the  brigade  commanded 
by  Colonel  Johnson,  of  North- Alabama, 
t  Namely,  Roddy's  (350)  and  Han- 
non's  (400)  Regiments,  and  Baxter's 
(200)  Battalion,  (all  Alabama  cavalry,) 
Julian's  Battalion  also,  (150,)  and  Fer- 
rell's  (Georgia)  Battery  of  four  guns. 


252  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

watch  the  upper  crossing,  known  as  the  "  Shallow  Ford,"  and 
the  Eleventh  Tennessee  was  held  concealed  in  a  woods  north 
of  the  railway,  to  command  the  railroad  bridge,  with  rigid 
orders  not  to  fire  a  gun  unless  the  enemy  attempted  to  seize 
or  cross  that  bridge,  in  which  event  a  stubborn  contest  was  to 
be  made. 

Happily,  much  swollen  by  recent  heavy  rains,  the  stream 
was  nearly  unfordable.    The  rising  sun  was  gilding  the  dis- 
tant mountain-ridge  to  the  south.     All  was  quiet  in  the  en- 
campment opposite,  as  the  Confederate  commander  ordered 
Captain  Morton  to  throw  a  shell  from  one  of  his  steel  guns* 
through  the  Federal  headquarters.     The  aim  was  skillful ;  in 
another  instant  the  inmates  of   the   building   in   question 
swarmed  forth,  and  armed  men  rose  from  the  earth  all  along 
the  Federal  lines — literally  like  those  of  the  Grecian  fablCy 
bom  of  the  dragons*  teeth  sown  by  an  enemy.     Their  artilleryv 
speedily  placed  in  position,  now  began  to  play  upon  that  witl»- 
which  Forrest  as  rapidly  confronted  them  on  a  ridge  severB- 
hundred  yards  distant.     The  Federals  had  eighteen  guns  im- 
position, Forrest  not  more  than  eight  pieces,  of  which  onljr" 
two  were  rifled  and  of  long  range.     The  cannonade  sooiv- 
waxed  violent.     Open  fields  intervened  on  both  sides,  unob-^ 
structed  by  a  single  tree,  except  the  few  that  fringed  the  im— 
mediate  bank  of  the  creek,  and  behind  which  sharp-shooters 
kept  up  a  warm,  incessant  fire  on  both  sides.     For  five  hours 
this  was  maintained,  and  for  a  time  the  artillery  fire  was  very 
severe  and  the  skirmishing  excessively  warm. 

Meanwhile  the  Federal  commander  had  sent  an  infantry 
force  into  an  old  stockade  just  west  of  the  railroad  bridge,  when 
Edmondson's  men  opened  a  premature  fire.  The  enemy,  in 
a  commanding  position,  were  quickly  supported  by  a  battery, 


*  Captured  piece,  it  will  be  remembered. 


DibrelVs  Cooperation.  253 

and  a  fierce,  pelting  storm  of  minie-balls,  of  grape  and  explod- 
ing shells  was  quickly  poured  into  the  woods,  so  that  the 
limbs  of  the  trees  flew  and  fell  around  in  great  profusion,  and 
caused  many  casualties  in  the  Eleventh  Tennessee,  who  stood 
their  ground,  however,  with  admirable  fortitude. 

After  the  combat  had  begun,  one  of  Roddy's  most  skillful 
and  daring  scouts*  returned,  and  reported  the  presence  of  a 
considerable  hostile  cavalry  force  at  Newberg,  some  distance 
to  the  south,  moving  apparently  eastward  toward,  and  on  the 
road  to  Mount  Hope  and  Moulton. 

Seemingly  undisturbed  by  this  intelligence — "as  if  he  had 
no  flank  to  be  turned  " — Forrest  continued  to  battle  with  his 
immediate  adversary.!  For  a  time  the  Federal  artillery — 
superior  in  weight  of  metal  as  in  numbers — was  gaining  some 
advantage  over  the  short-range  guns  of  their  adversary,  but 
the  well-handled  rifled  section  of  Morton's  Battery,  under 
Lieutenant  Sale,  was  soon  brought  into  play  at  long  range, 
with  such  efiect  that  the  Federal  pieces,  cavalry  and  train, 
Were  quickly  withdrawn  out  of  range. 

In  the  mean  time,  Dibrell,  by  a  forced  march,  having  reached 
Ws  original  destination  at  Florence,  had  sent  out  detachments 
to  raise  and  repair  sunken  boats,  and  by  other  ostentatious 
demonstrations  had  made  show  of  a  purpose  to  cross  the  river 
^t  Bainbridge,  Gamer's  Ferry,  and  an  intermediate  point ; 
^hile  through  a  reliable  citizen  he  had  managed,  moreover,  to 
set  afloat  in  Tuscumbia  the  report  of  the  presence  of  General 
Van  Dorn  with  his  whole  cavalry  en  route  for  the  south  bank 
of  the  Tennessee  and  the  rear  of  Dodge's  position^  with  a 
^iew  to  subsequent  operations  against  Corinth.  And  about 
four  P.M.,  he  opened  with  great  din  and  rapidity  with  a  section 
of  artillery  upon  the  camp  which  the  Federals  had  occupied 


*  Mr.  James  Mhoon,  of  Tuscumbia. 

t  Notes  of  Colonel  Saunders,  of  Courtland,  Alabama. 


254  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

at  South-Florence.     This  cannonade,  and  other  intimations 
of  the  threatening  presence  of  a  large  Confederate  force  in 
close  proximity  to  his  rear,  by  this  time  had  reached  General 
Dodge,  whereupon  that  officer  announced  by  a  dispatch  to 
Colonel  Streight  that,  having  now  detained  the  Confederates 
long  enough  to  secure  to  the  latter  time  to  get  well  on  his 
way,  and  inasmuch  as  there  were  reasons  for  apprehending  a 
serious  attempt  to  cut  off  his  own  line  of  retreat  to  Corinth,  he 
should  presently  fall  back,  and  leave  the  other  to  push  forward 
on  his  expedition.    And  accordingly  General  Dodge  began  a 
hurried  retrograde  movement,  the  impress  and  mem<My  of 
which  will  be  hard  to  efface  from  the  beautiful  valley  of  the 
Tennessee.     From  mountain  to  the  river-marge,  from  Town 
creek  to  Tuscumbia,  that  night  it  was  lurid  with  the  flames 
of  burning  fences,  granaries,  meat-houses,  stables,  and  of 
mansions  that  for  years  had  been  the  scenes  of  a  boundless 
hospitality  and  domestic  comfort,  but  of  which,  the  next  mori^' 
ing,  there  remained  little,  save  heaps  of  smouldering  ashes  ao^ 
ruined,  blackened  walls.* 

Several  hours,  however,  before  the  Federal  retreat  begai^» 
another  of  Roddy's  trusty  scouts  had  returned  with  the  it^" 
formation  that  the  cavalry,  whose  movements  had  been  previ" 
ously  reported,  had  advanced  as  far  eastward  as  Moimt  Hop^^ 
sixteen  miles  directly  southward,  and  on  the  Confederate  le^ 
flank.  General  Forrest,  now  assured  that  this  movement  wa^ 
of  grave  character,  promptly  made  all  his  preparations  to  mee'^ 
it,  satisfied  that,  though  he  might  not  have  the  force  to  copers 


♦  Prominent  in  this  and  other  ruth-  those  of  Lagrange  CoDege,  an  old  an^ 

less,  inexcnsable  works  of  desolation  well-founded  seat  of  learning,  with  nu- 

was  the  notorious  ruffian  Colonel  F.  merous  buildings  for  many  studentSy 

K.  Comyn,  who  assumed  for  his  band  all  of  which  were  reduced  to  a  mass  of 

the  designation  of  the  "  Avenging  An-  ruins, 
gels."  Among  the  edifices  burned  were 


Federal  Raid  under  SireighL  255 

ately,  with  Dodge,  he  would  be  fully  able,  howbeit,  to 
and  beat  this  separate  hostile  operation.     Roddy  was 
ed  to  take,  as  soon  as  possible,  his  own  and  Edmondson's 
enth  Tennessee)  Regiment  and  Julian's  Battalion,  and 
'  himself  between  the  cavalry  in  question,  and  the  force 
•  Dodge.   And  before  Dodge's  retreat  had  been  developed 
lertainty,  leaving  several  regiments  to  make  a  show  of 
lued  resistance,  he  fell  back  that  night  to  Courtland  with 
es's  and  Biffle's  regiments  and  the  artillery  *    There  he 
eted  his  preparations  for  the  emergency  of  a  prolonged 
it  as  if  he  had  fully  divined  the  purposes  of  his  enemy, 
ing  Morton's  lightest  section,  and  Ferrell's  battery  of 
^'s  command,  he  directed  that  double  teams  of  the  best 
1  should  be  attached,  and  personally  superintending  the 
ion  of  the  best  and  strongest  harness,  was  ready  for  the 
arly  on  the  morning  of  the  29th,  when  without  delay  he 
t  for  Moulton,  in  which  direction  the  enemy  had  been 
ed  to  be  moving. 

II. 

Moulton,  it  was  found  the  cavalry  in  question  was  cer- 
that  which  had  been  debarked  at  Eastport,  commanded 
onel  Streight ;  as  likewise,  that  he  had  taken  the  road 
I  to  the  south-eastward,  with  the  object,  apparently,  of 
ig  raid  into  the  heart  of  North-Georgia,  and  hence  a 
It  the  communications  of  Bragg's  army.  Therefore, 
t  divided  his  force  into  two  columns,  one  of  which, 
command  of  Colonel  Roddy,  was  ordered  to  follow  di- 
upon  the  trail  of  the  adventurous  raiders  ;t  and  the 
o  make  a  detour  to  the  north-eastward,  so  as  to  cut  off 


;  troops  left  were  Hannon's  t  Roddy^s  and  Edmondson's  Regi- 
t  and  Baxter's  Battalion,  and  ments,  Julian's  Battalion,  and  Ferrell*! 
of  Morton's  Battery.  Battery. 


256 


Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 


any  possible  effort,  under  pressure  from  Roddy,  to  turn  back 
and  escape  by  that  flank.*  The  pursuit — one  of  his  most 
notable  operations — now  began  in  earnest,  Forrest  leading  the 
last-mentioned  subdivision  in  person. 

The  Federal  force  was  of  men  selected  for  this  special 
service,  and  consisted  of  the  Fifty-first  and  Seventy-third 
Indiana,  Eightieth  Illinois,  and  Third  Ohio  regiments,  and 
two  companies  of  Alabama  "  Union  "  Cavalry.  They  were 
transported  by  steam,  on  the  nth  of  April,  down  the  Cum- 
berland,! and  up  the  Tennessee  to  Eastport,  North-Missis- 
sippi, where  their  march  began,  as  far  as  Tuscumbia,J:  in  rear 
of  General  Dodge,  who,  as  has  been  seen,  was  sent  in  advance 
to  vail  the  movement  by  his  demonstrations.  They  were  ac- 
companied by  guides  who  had  lived  in  the  regions  to  be  tra- 
versed, and  had  got  so  well  advanced  as  to  feel  secure  from 
effective  pursuit. 

But  the  swift-riding,  sharp-smiting  Forrest  was  already 
sweeping  down  with  his  chosen  men  upon  them.  Quitting 
Moulton,  and  riding  all  Wednesday  night,  the  Confederate 
General  pushed  after  his  enterprising  enemy,  resolved  to  cap- 
ture or  destroy  him,  reaching  and  encamping,  for  the  last  part 
of  the  night,  in  the  vicinity  of  a  small  village  known  as  Dan- 
ville. Thursday  morning,  30th,  early,  it  was  ascertained  that 
the  Federals  had  encamped  in  Day's  Gap,  on  Sand  Mountain, 
only  four  miles  distant.     Therefore,  giving  instructions   to 


♦  Starnes's  and  Biffle's  Regiments 
and  a  section  of  Morton's  Battery ;  the 
fonner  commanded  by  Major  McLc- 
more,  Colonel  Stames  being  absent,  ill 
at  Columbia. 

t  Probably  went  down  the  Cumber- 
land only  to  Fort  Donelson,  and  thence 
across  by  land  to  Fort  Henry,  on  the 
Tennessee   river,  thence   by  boat  to 


t» 


Eastport.  See  letter  of  "  Centurion, 
in  reference  to  note-book  of  C.  H, 
Applcgate,  Seventy-third  Indiana  Re- 
giment 

X  Reaching  Tuscumbia  on  the  34th 
of  April,  and  left  on  the  morning  of  the 
27th,  via  Russellville,  and  thenoe  to 
Moulton. 


Affair  at  Days  Gap,  257 

Biffle  to  push  forward  rapidly,  with  the  best  mounted  of  his 
own  and  Starnes's  regiments,  (under  McLemore,)  so  as  to  cut 
the  Federals  off  from  any  attempt  to  turn  back  and  escape  in 
that  direction,  Forrest  transferred  his  headquarters  to  the 
other  command,  pursuing  by  the  road.  About  the  same  time 
the  advance-guard  sent  back  ten  prisoners,  just  captured,  and 
reported  that  the  Federals  were  but  one  mile  in  their  front, 
engaged  in  cooking.  Advancing,  the  Confederates  were  soon 
in  full  view  of  their  camp-fires,  and  got  within  four  hundred 
yards  of  the  ground  before  the  enemy  were  aware  of  their 
proximity.  The  discharge  of  the  Confederate  artillery  was 
indeed  the  first  intimation,  apparently,  of  this  fact,  and,  as  may 
be  readily  understood,  produced  the  utmost  confusion,  panic, 
and  hurly-burly  in  their  encampment.  Many  negroes  and  sol- 
diers scattered  in  various  mountain  ravines,  leaving  the  place 
where  they  had  passed  the  night  full  of  wagons,  some  fifty 
broken-down  animals,  cooking  utensils  on  the  fire,  as  also 
large  numbers  of  poultry  and  quantities  of  other  food  newly 
cooked.*  The  Confederate  soldiers,  almost  famished,  were 
forced,  with  great  difficulty,  by  their  officers  to  quit  the  tempt- 
ing stores  thus  broadcast  around  them  ;  and  fully  half  an  hour 
was  lost  at  the  spot  before  the  pursuit  was  renewed.  Captain 
William  H.  Forrest  with  his  company  was  first  dispatched, 
and  very  soon  encountered  the  Federal  rear-guard  in  the 
gorge.  A  rapid  running  skirmish  then  ensued,  for  quite  two 
miles,  when  he  fell,  seriously  wounded  by  a  ball  through  his 
thigh,  breaking  the  bone,  and  at  the  same  time  losing  several 


•  On  the  approach  of  Do<lgc's  co-  he  had  harried  the  country  with  liis 

lumn   the  people  of  the  country  had  cavalry  in  the  mean  time,  and  collected 

Atd  to  the  mountains  south  of  Moulton,  some  fifty  wagons  and  five  hundred 

with  their  wagons,  teams,  animals,  and  negroes,  who  had  supph'ed  themselves 

valuable    movable    proi^erty,    which,  already  with  riding  animals, 
coming  to  the  ears  of  Colonel  Streight, 


258  Campaigns  of  Gefieral  Forrest. 

of  his  men  under  the  galling  fire  he  had  affronted.  The  main 
force  of  the  enemy  were  now  also  in  sight,  strongly  posted  in 
line  of  battle  along  a  commanding  ridge  perpendicular  to  the 
road. 

General  Forrest,  pushing  to  the  front,  obser\'ed  and  com- 
prehended the  situation  at  a  glance,  and  forthwith  disposed 
his  men  for  the  onset. 

Edmondson's  Regiment,  dismounted,  was  deployed  on  a  ridge 
or  spur  parallel  to  that  occupied  by  Colonel  Streight,  and  bi- 
sected by  the  road  ;  Roddy's  Regiment  and  Julian's  Battalion, 
mounted,  were  posted  to  the  rightward  of  Edmondson,  on  un- 
dulating, irregular  ground,  with  orders  to  advance.     Forrest's 
escort,  mounted,  occupied  the  left  flank  of  the  line,  with  in- 
structions to  move  around  on  that  flank,  and  get  a  position  in 
the  rear,  while  Edmondson  took  the  offensive  in  front.     At 
the  same  moment,  two  pieces  of  FerrcU's  Battery  were  pushed 
forward,  and  opened  fire  at  a  distance  of  two  hundred  yards 
from  the  Federal  lines.     This  was  promptly  answered,  but 
Edmondson  advanced  steadily,  to  within  less  than  one  hundred 
yards  of  his  opponents,  under  a  warm  fire.    The  escort,  mean- 
while, had  executed   their  orders,  and  vigorously  attacked 
Streight's  right  flank,  losing  five  or  six  men  killed  or  wounded. 
Roddy  resolutely  charged  on  the  left  flank,  up  to  within  fifty 
yards  of  the  Federal  line,  the  men  of  which  were  lying  down 
concealed.      Rising  now,  they  delivered  a  withering  volley, 
inflicting  considerable  loss.     Roddy's  men,  comparatively  raw, 
gave  way  in  much  confusion,  leaving  forty  out  of  three  hun- 
dred and  fifty  either  killed  or  wounded  on  the  ground.      Fer- 
rell's  guns  by  this  time,  however,  had  been  bravely  pushed 
to  within  sixty  yards  of  the  Federal  position,  and  were  throw" 
ing  a  stream  of  grape  and  canister,  though  with  little  effectr 
as  the  enemy  were  sheltered  by  the  crest  of  the  hill.     At  the 
repulse  of  Roddy's  command,  Colonel  Streight  now  charged* 
and  forced  Edmondson  back,  killing  the  horses  of  the  Confe^ 


] 


Fighting  in  Sand  Mountain.  259 

derate  guns,  which  were  abandoned  to  the  enemy.*  But  both 
Edmondson  and  Roddy's  men  promptly  rallied,  retook  the 
position  previously  occupied,  and  were  there  re-formed  for 
another  struggle,  Roddy  having  dismounted  his  own  regi- 
ment and  Julian  s  Battalion.f  The  loss  of  the  enemy  in 
this  phase  of  the  affair  was  at  least  seventy-five  killed  or 
wounded. 

The  Federal  commander  handled  his  men  with  decided 
nerve.     Massing  them,  by  a  resolute  charge  he  obliged  the 
Confederates  to  fall  back,   quite  three  hundred  yards,  to 
another    position,  which   he  likewise  attacked  with    equal 
spirit,  but  was  this  time  repulsed,  with  small  loss  on  either 
side.      He  then  drew  back  to  the  position  in  which  he  had 
first  awaited  battle ;    and  Forrest  resumed  possession  of  the 
ridge  in  his  immediate  front.      From  these  opposite  ridges 
an  animated  skirmish  was  maintained  between  the  Shari). 
shooters  of  both  forces  until  three  p.m.     Starnes's  and  Biffle's 
regiments    having    been,  meantime,   ordered   up,   now  ap- 
peared upon  the  scene ;  they  were  at  once  dismounted,  and 
disposed  to  take  part  in  an  immediate  grapple  with  the  enemy. 
In  this  line  of  attack,  Starnes*s  Regiment  was  on  the  extreme 
right  and   Edmondson  the  left ;   Biffle  and  Roddy  in  the 
centre,  on  the  right  and  left  of,  and  perpendicular  to,  the  road 
along  which  Ferrell's  Battery  of  four  guns  advanced ;    the 
escort  and  Captain  Forrest's  Company  constituted  a  small 
reserve. 

The  enemy,  however,  did  not  await  the  onset ;  indeed,  they 
had  been  gone  an  hour,  leaving  only  a  thin  line  of  skirmishers, 


•  Section  of  Morton's  Battery,  under  Jeffrey  Forrest's    Regiment      Major 

Lieutenant  A.  W.  Gould.  W.  R.  Julian,  its  commander,  had  seen 

t  This  battalion  was  composed  of  service  during  the  Mexican  war.      It 

Tcnnesseeans    and    Alabamians,  and  lost  very  heavily  in  this  aflair. 
the   nucleus,    subsequently,    of 


Night  Fighting.  261 

atants  in  the  contesting  ranks  *  Always  in  the  thickest  of 
le  M^/ii%  General  Forrest  had  the  good  fortune,  as  in  all  his 
scent  conflicts,  under  the  hottest  fire,  to  escape  unhurt,  but 
e  had  one  horse  killed  and  two  wounded  under  him.f 

At  eight  o'clock  p.m.,  Biffle  was  ordered  with  his  reserve 
>rce  to  move  around  by  the  left  flank,  gain  the  rear  of  the 
nemy,  and  attack  their  horse-holders.  At  the  same  time 
•"orrest  detached  his  escort  on  a  similar  service  around  by 
he  right  flank. 

The  lines  of  the  belligerents  were  by  this  time  brought  to 
athin  thirty  yards  of  each  other — the  Confederates  deployed 
1  single  file,  and  scattered  behind  trees  and  other  objects 
hat  greatly  favored  them.  Soon  was  heard  in  the  Federal 
ear  the  sounds  which  indicated  that  the  several  detachments 
ent  by  the  Confederate  general  for  that  purpose  had  attacked 
he  liorse-holdcrs.  But  the  men,  supposing  it  to  proceed  from 
ioddy  striking  the  enemy  from  that  flank,  were  animated 
vith  a  fierce  enthusiasm.  An  intrepid  charge  of  the  whole 
ine  was  made  with  one  impulse,  and  their  brave  adversaries 
gave  way  utterly  discomfited. 

Some  fifty  of  their  number  were  left  behind,  dead  and 
wounded,  and  many  animals,  as  also  the  section  of  Confede- 
rate artillery  which  they  had  previously  captured  and  carried 
off,  and  some  thirty  wagons ;  and  some  teams  were  found  scat- 
tered through  the  woods. 

The  scene  of  this  prolonged  and  desperate  conflict  on  the 
Wren  mountain-heights  of  North-Alabama  is  remembered 
^  participants,  who  have  mingled  in  the  great  battles  of  the 


•  Letter   of  "  G.  W.  A.,"  of  May  A,  Fourth    Tennessee    Cavalry,  was 

SAf  published  in  Atlanta  Southern  Con-  mortally  wounded,  at  the  head  of  his 

Mwry,  May  8th,  1863.  company,  in  this  charge  ;    and  Major 

t  Captain  Aaron   Thompson^    (of  McLemorc  had  his  horse  shot  under 

^'vshaU  coonty,  Tennestee,)  Company  him. 


26o  Campaigns  of  General  Forres L 

which  in  turn  gave  back,  without  giving  or  receiving  the  fire 
of  the  assailing  Confederates  ;  and  in  a  field-hospital  were 
found  about  seventy-five  of  their  killed  and  wounded,  with 
some  thirty  Confederates. 

Finding  his  adversary  now  evidently  disposed  to  push  on- 
ward and  avoid  further  battle,  General  Forrest  detached 
Roddy  to  return  with  his  own  regiment  and  Julian's  Battalion 
to  Decatur  with  the  prisoners  and  wounded  men,  and  resume 
command  in  that  quarter ;  and  Edmondson  to  make  a  detour  * 
with  the  Eleventh  Tennessee  through  the  valley  in  the  di- 
rection of  Summcrvillc,  on  the  Federal  left  flank,  to  watch 
and  guard  the  passes,  and  to  foil  any  effort  to  turn  and  escape  *: 

in  that  direction.  Biffle  and  McLemore — the  latter  leading 

with  their  regiments,  were  directed  to  push  on  by  the  road 
taken  by  the  enemy,  while  the  Confederate  leader,  heading-^ 
his  escort  and  a  company  of  the  Fourth  Tennessee,  dashed 
ahead  immediately  to  overtake  and  bring  them  to  bay.  After^ 
a  sharp  gallop  of  half  an  hour,  the  Federal  rear-guard  was 
overtaken,  and  a  running  fight  took  place  for  some  miles,  in 
the  direction  of  Blountsville,  Alabama,  when  Streight's  main 
force  was  found  formed  in  a  highly  favorable  position,  half  a 
mile  eastward  of  Long  creek,  with  their  own  section  of 
artillery,  and  that  captured,  placed  at  commanding  points. 
Biffle  and  McLemore  coming  up  with  their  regiments,  were 
dismounted,  and  rapidly  arranged  for  a  charge  as  infantr}', 
Biffle,  with  one  hundred  men,  being  held  in  reser\-e.  It  was 
now  five  P.M.,  or  about  dusk,  as  the  Confederates  resumed  the 
offensive,  and  advanced  to  within  one  hundred  yards  of  the 
enemy.  For  three  houis  the  conflict  was  obstinate  and  reso- 
lute on  both  sides  ;  the  Confederates  gaining  their  way  slw- 
ly,  their  enemy  holding  their  ground  stoutly.  And  at  times^ 
the  lines  were  in  so  close  proximity,  that  the  flashes  of  the 
fire  from  the  small-arms  illuminated  the  features  of  the  com- 


1 

] 


Night  Fighting.  261 

batants  in  the  contesting  ranks.*  Always  in  the  thickest  of 
the  miUc^  General  Forrest  had  the  good  fortune,  as  in  all  his 
recent  conflicts,  under  the  hottest  fire,  to  escape  unhurt,  but 
he  had  one  horse  killed  and  two  wounded  under  him.f 

At  eight  o'clock  p.m.,  BifBe  was  ordered  with  his  reser\'e 
force  to  move  around  by  the  left  flank,  gain  the  rear  of  the 
enemy,  and  attack  their  horse-holders.  At  the  same  time 
Forrest  detached  his  escort  on  a  similar  service  around  by 
the  right  flank. 

The  lines  of  the  belligerents  were  by  this  time  brought  to 

ivithin  thirty  yards  of  each  other — the  Confederates  deployed 

in  single  file,  and  scattered  behind  trees  and  other  objects 

that  greatly  favored  them.     Soon  was  heard  in  the  Federal 

*"ear  the  sounds  which  indicated  that  the  several  detachments 

Sent  by  the  Confederate  general  for  that  purpose  had  attacked 

t-lie  horse-holders.    But  the  men,  supposing  it  to  proceed  from 

l<oddy  striking  the  enemy  from  that  flank,  were  animated 

'With  a  fierce  enthusiasm.     An  intrepid  charge  of  the  whole 

Une  ^^-as  made  with  one  impulse,  and  their  brave  adversaries 

gave  way  utterly  discomfited. 

Some  fifty  of  their  number  were  left  behind,  dead  and 
Wounded,  and  many  animals,  as  also  the  section  of  Confede- 
rate artillery  which  they  had  previously  captured  and  carried 
off,  and  some  thirty  wagons ;  and  some  teams  were  found  scat- 
tered through  the  woods. 

The  scene  of  this  prolonged  and  desperate  conflict  on  the 
barren  mountain-heights  of  North-Alabama  is  remembered 
by  participants,  who  have  mingled  in  the  great  battles  of  the 


•  letter  of  "G.  W.  A.,"  of  May  A,  Fourth    Tennessee    Cavalry,  was 

5th,  published  in  Atlanta  Southern  Con-  mortally  woundcil,  at  the  head  of  his 

federaey^  May  8th,  1863.  company,  in  tltis  charge  ;    and  Major 

t   Captain  Aaron   Thompson^    (of  McLemorc  had  his  horse  shot  under 

Marshall  county,  Tennessee,)  Company  him. 


L 


262  Campaigns  of  General  ForresL 

war,  as  one  of  peculiar,  weird  grandeur  and  exaltation,  impos- 
sible to  paint  with  words.  With  the  thunder  of  artillery,  the 
continuous  peal  of  the  musketry,  ?.nd  their  infinitely  multi- 
plied reverberations  from  mountain  to  valley,  were  mingled 
the  sharp  clangor  of  words  of  command,  the  cheery  shouts 
of  the  men,  and  the  uproar  and  cries  of  afirighted  and  wound- 
ed animals,  added  to  which  there  was  a  splendor  in  the  lurid 
volcanic  flashes  of  the  rapidly  served  artillery  and  the  fiery 
blaze  of  the  musketry,  which  excited  admiration,  attracted 
notice,  even  in  that  moment  of  fiercest  passions,  when  the 
air  was  thick  and  perilous  with  deadly  missives. 

The  Confederate  loss,  howbeit,  was  singularly  light ;  a  few 
were  wounded  and  fewer  killed.  Immediately  the  pursuit  was 
renewed ;  and  for  ten  miles  the  roadway  was  found  strewn 
with  saddles  and  bridles  and  boxes  of  crackers,  from  which 
the  pursuers  drew  a  hasty  ration,  their  only  food  for  hours 
of  hard  riding  and  incessant  fighting.  Mingled  with  crock- 
ery  and  kitchen  utensils,  blankets  and  shoes  and  plated 
ware,  were  to  be  seen  scattered  around  embroidered  skirts, 
and  other  articles  of  female  apparel,  taken  in  sheer  wanton- 
ness, all  cast  away  now  by  the  fugitives,  or  dropped  by  runa- 
way pack-mules,  or  from  wrecked  baggage-wagons. 

The  Federals  were  evidently  demoralized  by  this  time,  and 
began  to  understand  their  peril.  Biffle  was  directed  to  send 
several  men  to  catch  up,  and,  in  the  darkness,  mingle  with 
the  enemy,  so  as  to  ascertain,  if  possible,  their  purposes  as  to 
any  other  stand  that  night.  Meanwhile,  the  Confederates 
followed  slowly,  some  four  miles,  when  one  of  the  men  de- 
tached* returned  with  the  intelligence  that  Streight  stood 
once  more  at  bay,  across  the  road,  within  a  mile  ahead, 
which  was  confirmed  by  another  scout,  half  a  mile  further 


*  Private  Granville  Pillow,  of  Grovels  company,  Biffle*!  regiment 


Night  Fighting.  263 

on.  Moving  up,  with  the  least  possible  noise,  to  the  supposed 
istance  of  a  quarter  of  a  mile,  the  Confederate  commander 
again  dismounted  his  men,  detached  the  horses  from  his  artil- 
lery, and  had  the  pieces  pushed  forward  qaietly  by  hand. 
Biffle  thrown  out  on  the  left,  and  McLemore  on  the  right  of 
the  road,  approached  to  within  one  hundred  and  fifty  yards  of 
their  quarry  before  breaking  the  grim  silence  of  the  night 
with  the  crackle  of  rifle  or  the  din  of  artillery ;  but  that 
now  burst  suddenly  upon  them  evidently  unaware,  for  they 
broke  in  much  confusion  and  some  loss  in  killed  and  wounded^ 
without  return  of  fire.  Swift  pursuit  was  made,  and  some 
captures  effected,  but  it  was  so  dark  that  it  was  difficult  to 
distinguish  friend  from  foe. 

It  was  now  eleven  o'clock,  but  the  darkness  had  been 
somewhat  diminished  by  the  starlight.  Remounting  his  men, 
Forrest  ordered  the  chase  to  be  resumed.  Again  the  way 
was  thick  sown  with  castaway  booty,  equipments,  and  aban- 
doned animals,  while  the  woods  swarmed  with  negroes.  Once 
again  men  were  pushed  ahead  of  the  command  to  overtake 
and  intermingle  with  the  enemy,  and,  as  before,  returned — 
between  midnight  and  one  o'clock  a.m. — and  reported  that 
another  stand  had  been  resolved  on  by  the  Federal  leader, 
who  surely  was  not  wanting  in  courage  or  enterprise.  The 
place  chosen  was  the  southern  bank  of  a  deeply-bedded,  rug- 
ged mountain  rivulet,  and  very  strong,  some  sixteen  miles 
from  the  scene  of  the  first  engagement,  and  six  from  the  field 
of  the  last  skirmish.  The  Confederate  force  quickly  arranged 
for  attack,  McLemore  was  ordered  to  push  across  the  stream 
rightward  of  the  road  ;  the  horses  were  again  detached  from 
the  pieces,  which  were  moved  by  hand,  as  before,  up  the  road 
to  within  short  range,  preceded  by  some  skirmishers  who, 
taking  position,  fired  suddenly  in  the  direction  of  the  Fede- 
rals to  draw  a  return,  in  order  to  reveal  their  exact  locality  to 
the  artillerists,  who  opened  at  the  blaze  with  grape  and  canis- 


264  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

tfer,  while  BijfHc  poured  in  sustained  volleys  of  small*arms. 
McLemore,  gaining  his  position  rightward  in  rear,  also  joined 
in  the  fight  This  was  more  than  they  could  stand,  and  again 
they  gave  way,  leaving  some  killed  and  wounded  on  the 
ground  ;  and  McLemore,  striking  their  flank,  made  some  cap- 
tures of  men  and  horses,  causing  evidently  a  panic  in  their 
sorely  pressed  ranks,  who  now  made  off  hurriedly,  still  in  the 
direction  of  Blountsville.* 

It  was  now  about  two  o'clock  in  the  morning ;  evidently 
both  Federals  and  Confederates  had  come  upon  the  people  of 
this  isolated  region  unexpectedly,  and  the  outburst  and  tumult 
of  the  battle-storm  was  their  first  warning  of  such  fearful 
presence.  As  may  be  readily  supposed,  they  were  filled  with 
wild  terror  ;  the  poor  women  with  their  little  children  fled 
frantically  from  their  houses,  and  were  found  seeking  shelter 
or  crouching,  they  scarcely  knew  from  what  dire  peril,  in  gro- 
tesque hiding-places,  such  as  ash-hoppers,  horse-troughs,  and 
in  recesses  behind  chimneys. 

Content  with  the  work  of  the  past  eighteen  hours,  and  sure 
now  of  the  ultimate  capture  of  his  game,  Forrest  halted  and 
awaited  daylight,  to  water  and  rest  his  fagged,  foot-weary 
horses,  overhaul  his  ammunition,  and  reassemble  his  com- 
mand. 

May  day  dawned  brightly,  the  men  had  been  without  food 
for  more  than  twenty-four  hours,  but,  after  two  hours*  rest, 
cheerfully  renewed  the  pursuit.  Forrest  led  with  his  escort  and 
one  squadron  of  the  Fourth  Tennessee  Regiment,  and  about 
eleven  o'clock  a.m.  reached  Blountsville,  where  the  enemy  had 
halted  to  rest,  and  arrange  their  transportation  henceforward 
exclusively  by  pack  animals  instead  of  wagons.  Their  pickets 
being  at  once  driven  in,  setting  fire  to  their  remaining  wagons 


*  Here  were  found  twenty-five  wounded  Federals  in  charge  of  a  surgeon. 


Capture  of  Prisoners  by  Two  Girls.         265  , 

and  some  stores,  Streight  made  off,  due  eastward,  in  the  direc- 
tion of  Gadsden,  without  offering  to  renew  the  combat.  Ex- 
tinguishing the  fire,  and  replenishing  his  commissariat  and 
ammunition  supply  from  that  abandoned  by  the  Federals, 
with  little  loss  of  time,  Forrest  and  his  men  were  again  in  the 
saddle.  Swift  and  staunch  as  so  many  sleuth-hounds,  relent- 
lessly did  they  now  follow  and  overtake  the  Federal  column 
before  reaching  the  Black  Warrior  river,  ten  miles'  distance 
from  Blountsville,  and  a  running  fight  occurred.  The  ford  was 
rocky,  rapid,  and  difficult,  yet  the  Federals  hazarded  it  rather 
than  venture  the  risk  of  another  trial  of  strength  with  their 
indomitable  pursuer.  But  before  all  were  across,  the  Confe- 
derates were  upon  the  rearward,  killed  and  wounded  some, 
made  a  few  captures,  and  caused  the  drowning  of  a  number 
of  pack-mules.*  A  halt  was  now  ordered  by  the  Confederate 
leader  for  three  or  four  hours,  to  feed  and  rest  his  men  and 
animals.  After  midnight  the  Confederates  were  once  more 
in  movement  at  their  accustomed  pace.  The  enemy,  now 
fully  aware  of  the  urgency  of  their  situation,  were  doing  what 
they  could  to  embarrass  pursuit.  To  this  end  they  destroyed 
a  bridge  over  a  creek  on  the  route,  the  banks  of  which  were 
high  and  sheer,  and  difficult  to  ascend.  Very  little  time  was 
lost,  however,  and  by  daylight  the  Confederates  were  again  in 


•  Just  Ixrforc  reaching  the  Warrior 
river,  two  young  country  girls,  of  sev- 
enteen or  eighteen  years  of  .ige,  ap- 
peared, leading  three  accoutred  horses, 
and  driving  before  them  as  many  Fede- 
ral soldiers,  whose  guns  they  carried 
on  their  young  shoulders.  Asking  for 
the  commanding  officer,  they  related, 
with  much  simplicity,  how  they  had 
captured  these  men,  and  wished  to 
deliver  them.    Their  captives,  in  ex- 


tenuation of  their  situation,  alleged 
that  they  had  no  stomach  for  further 
fighting.  These  brave  girls  were  poor, 
dressed  in  homespun  and  barefooted, 
though  clean  and  neat  They  said 
they  would  be  willing  to  go  on  with 
the  troops,  but  hardly  thought  their 
services  were  at  all  necessary.  The 
General  giving  each  a  horse,  they  went 
off  smiling  and  proud. 


.266  Campaigns  of  General  ForresL 

hot  pursuit  fifteen  miles  to  Wills  Creek  in  the  southern  part 
of  Wills  Valley — coming  upon  the  Federal  pickets,  who  were 
driven  back  upon  their  bivouac  in  which  their  main  force 
were  feeding  and  resting.  Not  making  a  stand,  Streight  re- 
tired rapidly,  leaving  in  the  hands  of  his  ever-urgent  foe  fif- 
teen or  twenty-five  prisoners,  at  least  fifty  negroes,  including 
some  women  dressed  in  Federal  uniforms,  an  abundance  of 
forage,  and  some  horses  and  pack  animals. 

Giving  the  command  several  hours*  respite,  while  his  weary, 
famished  animals  were  feeding,  Forrest,  selecting  his  best 
horses  for  two  of  his  most  appropriate  guns,  prepared  to  move 
for  the  final  struggle  with  not  to  exceed  six  hundred  officers 
and  men.*  It  was  here  also  that  h^  divided  with  his  men  a 
box  of  crackers,  which  he  had  picked  up  and  carried  along  in 
his  ambulance.  Meanwhile,  worn  down  by  three  days  and 
nights  of  scarcely  intermitted  riding  f  and  fighting,  eating 
little  and  at  long  intervals,  the  Confederates  began  to  show 
serious  signs  of  flagging,  and  many,  in  the  last  stage  of  the 
pursuit,  had  fallen  asleep  on  their  horses.  Several  ladies, 
however,  whose  husbands  and  friends  had  been  seized  and 
carried  off  by  the  Federals,  appeared  about  this  time,  and 
filled  the  encampment  with  their  sad  wails  and  appeals  for 
the  restoration  of  their  kinsmen.  This  had  the  happy  effect 
to  rouse  the  men  from  their  lethargy  ;  and  Forrest,  taking* 
advantage  of  the  circumstance,  drew  his  men  up  and  made 
them  a  brief,  stirring  address,  full  of  warm  words  of  confi- 
dence in  their  ability  to  attain  speedily  the  objects  of  their 
mission,  and  the  end  of  their  hardships.  Calling  for  all  who 
were  willing  to  follow  or  fall  in  the  attempt,  the  entire  com- 


*  The  other  two  pieces,  and  all  in-         t  At  no  time  resting  more  than  five 

efTective  animals  and  their  riders  were  hours  out  of  twcnty*four,  suid    twice 

left  behind,  with  orders  to  return  to  only  so  much. 
Decatur. 


Emma  Sanson.  267 

mand  responded  with  cheers  ;  the  women  also  broke  out  into 
shouts  of  joy  and  encouragement ;  and  in  the  eyes  of  many 
of  that  battle-stained,  sun-embrowned,  fierce  array,  we  are 
assured,  the  big  tear  of  deep  emotion  was  seen  to  start, 
glisten,  and  melt.  They  were  then  moved  off  at  a  gallop,  the 
artillery  section  following  at  the  same  speed.  At  this  pace 
the  Federal  column  was  again  overtaken  by  ten  a.m.,  on  the 
2d  ;  and  the  Confederate  General  selecting  fifty  of  the  best 
mounted  men,  with  whom  and  his  escort  he  charged  swiftly 
upon  its  rear  in  the  face  of  a  hot  fira  For  ten  miles  now,  to 
Black  Creek,  an  affluent  of  the  Coosa,  a  sharp,  running  con- 
flict occurred.  The  Federals,  however,  effected  the  passage 
of  the  stream  without  hinderance,  by  a  bridge,  which,  being 
old  and  very  dry.  was  in  flames  and  impassable  as  the  Confe- 
derates approached  ;  besides  which  it  was  commanded  by 
Streight's  artillery,  planted  on  the  opposite  bank. 

III. 

Black  Creek  is  deep  and  rapid,  and  its  passage  in  the  im- 
mediate presence  of  the  Federal  force  was  an  impossibility 
before  which  even  Forrest  was  forced  to  pause  and  ponder. 
But  while  reflecting  upon  the  predicament,  he  was  approached 
by  a  group  of  women,  one  of  whom,  a  tall,  comely  girl  of 
about  eighteen  years  of  age,  stepped  forward  and  inquired, 
"  Whose  command  ?"  The  answer  was,  "  The  advance  of 
General  Forrest's  Cavalry."  She  then  requested  that  Gene- 
ral Forrest  should  be  pointed  out,  which  being  done,  advanc- 
ing, she  addressed  him  nearly  in  these  words  : 

"  You  are  General  I«*orrcst,  I  am  told.  I  know  of  an  old 
ford  to  which  I  could  guide  you,  if  I  had  a  horse — the  Yan- 
kees have  taken  all  of  ours." 

Her  mother,  stepping  up,  exclaimed : 

•'  No,  Emma  ;  people  would  talk  about  you." 


i 


268  Campaigns  of  Getieral  Forrest. 

"  I  am  not  afraid  to  trust  myself  with  as  brave  a  man  as 
General  Forrest,  and  don't  care  for  people's  talk."  was  the 
prompt  rejoinder  of  this  Southern  girl,  her  face  illuminated 
with  emotion. 

The  General  then  remarked,  as  he  rode  beside  a  log  near 
by :  "  Well,  Miss ,  jump  up  behind  me." 

Quickly,  or  without  an  instant  of  hesitation,  she  sprang" 
from  the  log  behind  the  redoubtable  cavalry  leader,  and  sat 
ready  to  guide  him — under  as  noble  an  inspiration  of  unal- 
loyed, courageous  patriotism  as  that  which  has  rendered  the 
Maid  of  Zaragoza  famous  for  all  time.  Calling  for  a  courier  to 
follow,  guided  by  Miss  Sanson,  Forrest  rode  rapidly,  leaping* 
over  fallen  timber,  to  a  point  about  half  a  mile  above  the 
bridge,  where,  at  the  foot  of  a  ravine,  she  said  there  was  a 
practicable  ford.  There  dismounting,  they  walked  to  the  river- 
bank,  opposite  to  which,  on  the  other  side,  were  found  posted 
a  Federal  detachment,  who  opened  upon  both  immediately 
with  some  forty  small-arms,  the  balls  of  which  whistled  close 
by,  and  tore  up  the  ground  in  their  front  as  they  approached. 
Inquiring  naively  what  caused  the  noise — being  answered 
that  it  was  the  sound  of  bullets,  the  intrepid  girl  stepped  in 
front  of  her  companion,  saying,  "  General,  stand  behind  me  ; 
they  will  not  dare  to  shoot  me."  Gently  putting  her  aside, 
Forrest  observed  he  could  not  possibly  sufier  her  to  do  so,  or 
to  make  a  breastwork  of  herself,  and  gave  her  his  arm  so  as 
to  screen  her  as  much  as  possible.  By  this  time  they  had 
reached  the  ravine.  Placing  her  behind  the  shelter  afforded 
by  the  roots  of  a  fallen  tree,  he  asked  Miss  Sanson  to  remain 
there  until  he  could  reconnoitre  the  ford,  and  proceeded  at 
once  to  descend  the  ravine  on  his  hands  and  knees.  After 
having  gone  some  fifty  yards  in  this  manner,  looking  back,  to 
his  surprise  and  regret,  she  was  immediately  at  his  back  ;  and 
in  reply  to  his  remark  that  he  had  told  her  to  remain  under 
shelter,  replied : 


Heroism  of  Emma  Sanson. 


269 


"  Yes,  General,  but  I  was  fearful  that  you  might  be  wound- 
ed ;  and  it  is  my  purpose  to  be  near  you." 

The  ford-mouth  reached  and  examined,  they  then  returned 
as  they  came,  through  the  ravine,  to  the  crown  of  the  bank 
under  fire,  when  she  took  his  arm  as  before — an  open  mark 
for  the  Federal  sharpshooters,  whose  fire  for  some  instants 
was  even  heavier  than  at  first  ;  and  several  of  their  balls 
actually  passed  through  her  skirts,  exciting  the  observation, 
"  They  have  only  wounded  my  crinoline."  At  the  same  time, 
withdrawing  her  arm,  the  dauntless  girl  turning  around,  faced 
the  enemy,  and  waved  her  sun-bonnet  defiantly  and  repeatedly 
in  the  air.  We  are  pleased  to  be  able  to  record  that,  at  this, 
the  hostile  fire  was  stopped  ;  the  Federals  took  off  their  own 
caps  and,  waving  them,  gave  three  hearty  cheers  of  approba- 
tion !  Remounting,  Forrest  and  Miss  Sanson  returned  to  the 
command,  who  received  her  with  unfeigned  enthusiasm.* 

The  artillery  was  sent  forward,  and  with  a  few  shells,  well 
thrown,  quickly  drove  away  the  Federal  guard  at  the  ford, 
which  Major  McLemore  was  directed  to  seize  with  his  regi- 
ment. The  stream  was  boggy,  with  high  declivitous  banks 
on  both  sides,  and  it  was  neccssar)'  to  take  the  ammunition 
from  the  caissons  to  keep  it  dry,  to  pull  the  two  pieces  of 
artillery  across  by  hand,  and  to  force  the  animals  down  the 
steep  slopes,  and  to  take  the  ford,  but,  nevertheless,  the  pas- 
sage was  successfully  effected  in  less  than  two  hours.  Mean- 
time, the   Confederate   General   delivered    his   fair,    daring 


•  The  legislature  of  Alabama,  at 
the  succeeding  session,  donated  to  Miss 
Sanson  a  section  of  the  unappropriated 
public  lands  of  the  State,  as  a  testimo- 
nial of  the  high  appreciation  of  her 
services  by  the  people  of  Alabama ; 
and  directed  the  Governor  of  the  State 
to  provide  and  present  her  also  with  a 


gold  medal,  inscribed  with  suitable 
devices  commemorative  of  her  conduct 
Sec  Appendix  and  Index.  We  trust  the 
people  of  Alabama  will  not  permit  the 
result  of  the  war  to  hinder  the  dis- 
charge of  this  duty  to  a  brave  daughter 
of  the  State. 


270 


Campaigns  of  General  Forrest 


young  guide  back  safely  into  the  hands  of  her  mother,  took  a 
knightly  farewell  inspired  by  the  romantic  coloring  of  the 
occurrence,  and  dashed  after  his  command  to  resume  the 
chase,  as  soon  as  the  passage  of  the  creek  was  effected.* 

Gadsden — three  miles  distant — was  soon  reached,  and  For- 
rest dispatched  a  special  courier  to  Rome.  Ga.,t  evidently  one 
of  the  objective  points  of  the  Federal  expedition,  to  apprise 
the  people  of  its  approach,  and  to  urge  ever)'  effort  to  hold 
Streight  in  check  before  the  place  until  his  advent  upon  the 
scene.     It  was  Saturday  afternoon  as  the  enemy  had  dashed 
into  Gadsden,  to  the  complete  surprise  of  its  citizens,  and  the 
place  was  filled  with  people  from  the  surrounding  country 
whose  horses  were  greedily  seized,  the  prey  of  all  others  mo3 
coveted  at  this  moment  by  Streight  and  his  men.     And  qul't= 
a  number,  consequently,  of  such  animals  were  taken  in  e 
change  for  their  exhausted  mules. 

Here,  selecting  3CX)  of  his  best  mounted  men,  the  Confed. 
rate  General  again  led  in  pursuit,  his  enemy  having  taken  t 
road  up  the  west  side  of  the  Coosa  river  in  the  direction 
Rome.  After  a  race  of  some  nine  or  ten  miles,  about  fi 
o'clock  P.M.  Saturday,  May  2d.  the  Federals  were  again  ov* 
taken  at  a  small  village  known  as  Turkeytown,  and  a  sm 
encounter  followed.     Finding  a  favorable  position,  they  h 


•  As  General  Forrest  reached  the 
point  of  the  road,  on  the  east  bank  of 
Black  Creek,  opposite  Miss  Sanson^s 
house,  she  and  several  ladies  came  to 
the  bridge-head  and  hailed  ;  he  halted, 
and  she  said  she  had  a  request  to  make, 
namely,  that  her  brother,  who  had  hap- 
pened to  be  at  home  on  furlough  from 
the  army  in  Virginia,  had  been  captured 
by  the  enemy  that  morning,  and  she 
begged  for  his  recapture  and  return  to 
her.     "  It  shall  be  done  before  ten 


o'clock  to-morrow  morning."  respoi 

cd  General  Forrest,  a  promise  fulfill      ' 

to  the  letter. 

t  Mr.  John  II.  Wisdom,  of  Gadsd^^^ 
however,  had  previously  hastened  ^ 
the  same  errand,  gave  the  people 
Rome  the  first  warning  of  the  comi  "* 
danger,  f()r  which  a  grateful  pcof—- ^ 
gave  him  a  silver  service. — Sec  letC^  ^ 
"Centurion,"  Atlanu 5'imMrr/f  Confec^* 
racy.  May  I7lh,  1S63. 


Federal  Ambush.  271 

halted  to  feed,  and  at  the  same  time  attempt  an  ambuscade  in 
a  dense  thicket  of  second-growth  pines,  through  which  ran 
the  road — forty  yards  broad — for  half  a  mile  in  a  straight  line, 
and  then  narrowing  and  bending  abruptly  to  the  left,  for  per- 
haps about  one  hundred  yards,  turned  squarely  to  the  right 
again,  dividing  some  fields  in  a  direction  parallel  to  the  origi- 
nal course.     At  the  first  bend,  a  barricade  effectually  closed 
the  road,  and  the  fence  was  thrown  down,  so  that  the  Confede- 
rates would  be  forced  to  take  across  the  field — the  fences  of 
which  were  leveled — over  a  small  ridge,  behind  which  wez*e 
concealed  a  body  of  some  5CX)  Federals,  while  the  pine  thicket 
through  which  they  were  to  be  drawn  was  filled  with  sharp- 
shooters on  either  side  of  the  avenue.    The  ambush  was  skill- 
fully arranged,  and  might  have  resulted  in  the  easy  capture  of 
the  entire  command  under  almost  any  other  than  the  tactics 
of  Forrest.    Their  skirmishers  were  thrown  out  just  in  ad- 
vance of  the  thicket  and  throat  of  the  avenue,  as  if  offering 
battle.     The   Confederates  well  closed  up,  and   moving  by 
column  of  fours,  Forrest   ordered   the  bugle  to  sound  the 
charge,  and,  instructing  his  men  to  fire  with  their  rifles  and 
I>istols  right  and  leftward,  he  led  them  forward  at  a  brisk  pace. 
The  Federal  line  gave  way,  as  planned,  but  such  was  the  speed 
■with  which  Forrest  dashed  ahead,  that  scant  time  was  afforded 
the  sharp-shooters  lining  the  road  to  do  any  damage,  and  the 
Confederates  had  penetrated  the  field  past  the  thicket  before 
the  enemy  supposed  that  they  could  be  half-way  through  the 
tatter.     Observing  now  the  line  in  his  front,  Forrest  charged 
'^orne  upon  it  without  halting,  and  dispersed  the  Federals 
rearward  in  all  directions.     Some  thirty  were  here  captured. 
^*^<i  as  many  as  twenty  wounded  or  killed  ;  among  the  latter 
^^^3^  Colonel  Hathaway,  one  of  their  best  and  favorite  oflScers.* 


Colonel  Hathaway  was  probably     Martin,  Colonel  Biffle*s  Regiment,  a 
"^»^d,  at  the  distance  of  six  hundred     mere  youth  at  the  time. 
^^^  by  the  rifle  of  private  Joseph 


k 


272 


Campaigns  of  Gaieral  Forrest 


The  Confederate  loss  was  very  light,  only  two  privates  wer^ 
killed,  but  these  were  tried  and  gallant  soldiers.* 

It  was  now  dark,  the  enemy  were  in  full  flight,  the  work  of 
demolition  almost  completed,  and.  confident  of  their  carljr 
capture,  the  Confederate  General  caused  the  recall  to  be 
sounded,  and  bivouacked  his  command  for  the  night,  so  that: 
the  men  who  had  been  left  at  Gadsden  might  come  up.  Such, 
however,  was  the  spirit  of  all  who  followed  Forrest  that  these 
proved  to  have  been  not  far  behind,  and  a  good  night's  restz 
was  enjoyed  by  the  men  and  their  fatigued  animals.! 

By  sunrise,  on  the  3d,  the  Confederates,  now  winnowed, 
down  to  scarcely  $00  officers  and  men,  were  again  in  motion, 
and  on  reaching  Dyke's  bridge,  over  the  Coosa,  found  it  in 
ashes.     The  men  were  promptly  dismounted,  and.  stripping, 
carried  the  ammunition  and  pieces  over,  as  at  Black  creek,  by 
hand.     In  an  hour  this  was  achieved,  and  the  chase  renewed 
until  about  nine  o'clock  a.m.,  when  the  Federals  were  again 
overtaken,  at  their  breakfast,  which  was  abandoned  at  the 
sound  of  firing,  leaving  their  hot  coflbe,  mules,  a  number  of 
horses,  saddles,  and  other  spoils.     Their  commander,  how- 
ever, soon  rallied  them  on  a  ridge  in  an  open  field,  but  his 
men  were  evidently  greatly  disconcerted.     Detaching  Major 
McLemore,  with  his  command,  to  move  around  on  their  left. 


*  Priv.itc  Hunt,  of  .Starncs's,  and 
private  Roach,  of  Biftlc's  Regiment. 

t  Among  the  casualties  of  the  affair 
at  Turkcytown,  just  related,  was  the 
capture  of  Sergeant  William  Ilayncs, 
of  the  Fourth  Tennessee,  who  was 
taken  at  once  before  Colonel  Streight, 
and  questioned  as  to  the  strength  of  the 
Confederate  force.  Young  I  laynes  was 
so  solemn -looking  and  truthful  a  jxr- 
sonage  as  to  have  gained  among  his 
comrades  the  sohriqtut  of  Parson.   With 


the  utmost  gravity  he  answered,  that 
Forrest  had  his  own  brigade,  Arm- 
strong's, and  Roddy's,  with  several 
others,  the  names  of  whose  command- 
crs  he  could  not  recall.  Streight  ex- 
claimed, with  a  fierce  oath,  "Then 
they've  got  us."  A  little  later  in  the 
night,  Haynes,  effecting  his  escape,  suc- 
ceeded in  rejoining  his  regiment,  and 
gave  immediate  information  of  the  story 
he  had  imposed  upon  the  Federal  com- 
mander. 


Streight  at  Bay. 


273 


and  Colonel  BifBe  their  right  flank,  they  were  forced  back 
somewhat  on  their  centre,  while  General  Forrest  threatened 
an  advance,  with  his  escort  and  a  detachment,  in  front,  from  a 
skirt  of  woods  which  he  occupied. 

Prone  to  rush  in  upon  an  adversary  and  crush,  by  the  effect 
of  swift,  heavy  blows,  the  Confederate  leader  was  none  the  less 
an  adept  in  the  stratagems  of  war  at  fitting  junctures,  when  he 
took  for  his  example  the  cool,  crafty  Ulysses  rather  than  the 
wrathful  Achilles.  Accordingly,  he  now  sent  forward  an  offi- 
cer of  his  staff — Captain  Henry  Pointer — with  a  flag  of  truce 
and  the  demand  of  the  immediate  surrender  of  the  Federal 
force — ^as  he  declared — "  in  order  to  stop  the  further  and  use- 
less effusion  of  blood." 

Meeting  the  flag.  Colonel  Streight  asked  to  communicate 
directly  with  General  Forrest.  They  met  accordingly  in  the 
woods,  and  a  parley  ensued.  Streight,  howbeit,  declined  to 
capitulate  unless  it  could  be  shown  to  his  satisfaction  that  he 
was  doing  so  to  a  force  at  least  equal  in  number  to  his  own. 
Forrest  replied  in  effect,  he  could  not  humiliate  his  men  by 
any  effort  to  persuade  the  surrender  of  a  force  that  they 
had  been  driving  and  beating  in  every  conflict  for  the  past 
three  days. 

Just  at  this  moment  the  section  of  Confederate  artillery 
came  in  sight  at  a  full  gallop,  remarking  which,  Colonel 
Streight  urged  that  no  more  troops  should  be  brought  up 
nearer  than  a  ridge  about  three  hundred  yards  in  the  rear. 
To  this  Forrest  assented,  and  gave  orders  to  that  end,  but, 
through  an  aid-de-camp,  at  the  same  time  covertly  instructed 
that  the  artillery  should  be  kept  in  movement  in  a  circle,  so 
as  to  appear  like  several  batteries  coming  up,  which  was  so 
adroitly  done  by  Captain  Ferrell  that  Colonel  Streight  soon 
inquired  of  Forrest  how  much  artillery  he  had.  "  Enough," 
was  the  prompt  answer,  "  to  destroy  your  command  in  thirty 
minutes."     Some  further  discussion  ensued,  Colonel  Streight 


274  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

continuing  to  insist  that  he  could  not  surrender  unless  fully 
satisfied  that  he  was  not  succumbing  to  an  inferior  force, 
finally  asked  for  a  delay  of  twenty  minutes  while  he  con- 
sulted his  officers.     But  in  a  quarter  of  an  hour  he  returned 
and  repeated  his  desire  to  be  assured  that  he  was  confront- 
ed by  at  least  an  equal  force.     The  Confederate  commander, 
then  remarking  that  discussion  was  wholly  useless,  asserted 
that  he  had  known  of  this  movement  almost  from  its  incep- 
tion, had  been  prepared  for  it,  and  therefore  had  his  oppo- 
nent completely  in  his  toils,  with  a  river  on  his  right,  which 
was  not  fordable,  a  mountain  on  his  left,  which  shut  him  off 
from  escape  in  that  quarter,  a  force  in  front  with  which  he 
would  not  be  able  to  cope,  and  one  at  his  heels  all  the  while— 
that  had  gained  strength  every  day.   Therefore,  if  he,  Streight^ 
failed  to  capitulate,  the  grave  consequences  must  rest  on  him — 
self     Colonel  Streight,  greatly  perplexed,  still  clung  to  the 
idea  that  he  could  not  surrender  to  a  force  inferior  to  his  own, 
and,  ending  the  interview,  turned  to  repair  to  his  men.     Cap- 
tain Pointer,  at  this,  invited  him  take  a  drink  before  separat- 
ing, obser\-ing  that  it  might  be  the  last  that  he  would  ever 
take.     This  invitation,  pleasantly  made,  was  as  pleasantly  ac- 
cepted ;  the  drink  was  taken,  hands  were  shaken  by  the  part- 
ing antagonists,  and  the  Federal  commander  rode  back  in  the 
direction  of  his  lines,  but  soon  to  meet  on  the  way  the  bearer 
of  a  white  flag  from  his  command,  with  whom  he  returned  to 
the  Confederate  quarter.     He  then  announced  that  his  oflBcers 
desired  to  surrender,  which  he  was  now  ready  to  do  on  con- 
dition : 

1st.  That  all  were  to  be  held  as  prisoners  of  war.* 
2d.  That  the  officers  should  retain  their  side-arms  and  per- 
sonal baggage. 


*  This,  doubtless,  was  stipulated  in     Alabamians  and  guides  would  not  be 
apprehension  that  otherwise  the  Union     treated  as  "  prisoners  of  war." 


I 

J 


The  Surrender. 


275 


These  terms  were,  of  course,  granted  without  discussion. 
It  was  still  thought  to  be  necessary,  however,  to  keep  the 
enemy  deceived  in  regard  to  the  actual  smallness  of  the  force 
that  had  captured  them,  and  this  Captain  Pointer  adroitly 
contrived  by  asking,  at  the  moment,  of  his  commander,  what 
disposition  should  be  made  of  some  three  or  four  imaginary 
bodies  of  troops  at  different  near  points,  and  specific  orders 
were  given  in  that  connection,  which  he  rode  away  as  if  to 
execute.  At  the  same  time  the  Confederate  General  ex- 
plained to  his  prisoners  that,  as  forage  was  very  scarce  at 
Rome,  he  would  only  be  accompanied  thither  by  his  escort 
and  a  regiment. 

These  preliminaries  being  arranged,  the  two  commanders 
repaired  to  the  Federal  headquarters.  A  portion  of  the  ene- 
my were  found  a  mile  distant,  where,  in  a  field,  their  whole  line 
was  finally  formed,  some  1466  officers  and  men,  their  arms 
stacked,  and  the  capitulation  was  completed.* 

Colonel  Strcight  now  made  a  short  address  to  his  men, 
thanking  them  for  their  gallantry  and  endurance,  explained 
the  reasons  which  caused  him  to  surrender,  and  called  upon 
them  to  give  three  cheers  for  the  Union.f 

The  officers  were  then  separated  from  the  men  and  direct- 
ed to  be  escorted  to  Rome,  some  eighteen  or  twenty  miles 
distant,  without  delay,  while  the  men  were  to  bivouac  under 
charge  of  Colonel  Biffle,  who,  assisted  by  a  staff-officer — Cap- 


*  Two  Colonels,  one  I-icutcnant- 
Colonel,  three  or  four  Majors,  1365 
privates. 

t  General  Forrest  was  present,  and 
made  no  objection  to  this  display  of 
feeling  on  the  part  of  brave  men.  The 
foft  should  he  remembered  in  his  favor  by 
those  at  the  North  who  look  upon  him  as 


a  harsh  J  relentless  foe  ;  and  we  do  not 
hesitate  to  assert  that  had  he,  on  the 
other  hand,  fallen  into  the  hands  of 
Colonel  Streight,  no  such  privilege 
would  have  been  extended  as  an  op- 
portunity to  harangue  his  men,  nor 
would  they  have  been  suffered  to  cheer 
for  the  "  Confederate  States.*' 


276  Campaigns  of  Gcfteral  Forrest. 

tain  Pointer — was  instructed  to  collect  the  arms  and  follow  to 
Rome  with  the  prisoners  on  the  next  day.* 

Moving  some  ten  miles  toward  Rome,  the  detachment  sent 
in  advance  by  Streight  from  Turkeytown  to  proceed  direct  to 
that  place  was  met  returning,  baffled.  The  commander,  Cap- 
tain Milton  Russell,  Fifty-first  Regiment  Indiana  Volunteers, 
when  informed  of  the  catastrophe  which  had  befallen  the  main 
command,  was  deeply  moved,  and,  with  an  air  of  sincerity,  and 
with  tears  in  his  eyes,  declared  that  he  had  rather  die  than  be 
subjected  to  such  a  disaster.  He  was  a  man  of  very  fine,  sol- 
dierly presence,  and,  had  all  his  comrades  been  of  the  same 
martial  temper,  their  capture  would  scarcely  have  been  so 
easy.  But  seeing  that  there  was  now  no  alternative,  his  com- 
mand also  laid  down  their  arms,  making  the  number  of  pri- 
soners taken,  in  all,  1700. 

Resuming  the  route  to  Rome,  when  within  four  miles  of  it, 
the  high  hills  which  adjoin  the  place  were  found  alive  with 
militia  scouts  in  observation,  who,  evidently  regarding  the 
approaching  force  as  hostile,  it  was  really  difficult  to  open 
communication  with  them.  But  this  was  at  length  cflTected, 
and  the  people  of  Rome,  to  their  profound  relief,  were  notified 
of  the  happy  results  of  that  day. 

Their  emotion  was  great,  and  proved  nearly  fatal  to  the  ob- 
ject of  their  warm  admiration  and  gratitude.  Insisting  on 
firing  an  artillery  salute,  shotted  guns  were  discharged,  with 
such  carelessness,  and  in  the  direction  of  the  very  road  of 
General  Forrest's  approach  to  the  town,  as  barely  to  miss 
him. 

As  the  Confederates  entered  Rome,  the  streets  were  alive 
with  its  citizens,  including  numerous  refugees  from  Tennessee, 


•  The  Confederates  in  line  at  the  sur-     their   horses  by  the   bridle-rein,   the 
render  were  so  overcome  by  sleep  that,     greater  part  of  them  were  nodding. 
while   standing    dismounted,    holding 


Comntefttaries. 


277 


]  and  some  two  thousand  convalescents 
I  from  the  large  army  hospitals  estab- 
lished there,  who  turned  out  to  wel- 
come and  greet  their  deliverers. 


"  All  tongues  speak  of  him,  and  the  bleared  sights 
Arc  spectacled  to  see  him." 

Many  ladies  of  that  joyous  assem- 
blage met  with  husbands  or  near  kins- 
men among  Forrest's  men  whom  they 
had  not  seen  for  a  year  or  more.  These 
meetings  were  inexpressibly  tender 
and  moving ;  indeed,  the  whole  recep- 
tion was  a  memorable  event  in  the  lives 
of  all  present.  Every  house  was  thrown 
open  to  officers  and  men  with  an  un- 
stinted hospitality,  which  embraced 
even  the  Federal  officers  and  other 
prisoners  to  some  extent,  now  that  all 
danger  from  them  was  fully  averted. 

The  surrender  took  place,  as  before 
said,  twenty  miles  from  Rome,  in  the 
valley  between  the  Coosa  and  Chatoo- 
ga  rivers,  some  two  or  three  miles 
north  of  the  Coosa,  and  at  a  point 
known,  curiously  enough,  as  "  Straight- 
neck  Precinct,"  in  that  country. 

COMMENTARIES. 

I.  The  merits  of  this  operation  are 
unquestionably  very  great  in  every  as- 
pect, and  nothing  handsomer,  of  its 
species,  may  be  found  in  military  an- 
nals.    In  the  last  forty-eight  hours  of  the  expedition,  Forrest 


278  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest 

marched  his  men,  jaded  as  they  and  their  animals  were,  full 
ninety  miles  ;  and  they  had  averaged  forty-one  miles  each  day, 
fighting  for  hours,  several  times  daily  and  nightly,  for  three 
days  previously,  encumbered  with  artillery.  The  most  salutar}' 
moral  effect  was  felt  throughout  the  country  far  beyond  the 
ordinary  capture  of  so  many  Federal  soldiers,  even  by  so  small 
a  force  as  that  which  General  Forrest  led ;  and  it  is  a  fact  wor- 
thy of  note,  that  the  newspapers  of  the  South,  for  a  month 
afterward,  contained  numerous  circumstantial  accounts  of  the 
expedition,  its  stirring  incidents,  and  of  the  final  stratagem 
by  which  the  capitulation  was  brought  about.  The  people  of 
Georgia  were  enthusiastic  in  their  sense  of  the  services  ren- 
dered by  General  Forrest,  as  evinced  in  \'arious  ways,  among 
which  may  be  mentioned  the  proposition  to  change  the  name 
of  Union  county  to  that  of  Forrest,  as  an  act  of  "  monu- 
mental significance."  He  had.  indeed,  averted  the  widespread 
destruction  of  the  principal  bridges  and  manufacturing  and 
transportation  resources  of  that  State,  which  were  of  vital 
value  to  the  people  of  the  whole  South,  and  especially  to  the 
army  of  Bragg.  And  this  had  prevented  occurrences  the 
injurious  character  of  which  would  have  been  incalculable  and 
irremediable. 

2.  Forrest  led  men  to  whom  all  honor  is  due  ;  due  for  quali- 
ties among  the  least  of  which  we  place,  in  sooth,  their  intre- 
pidity in  combat ;  men  whose  acts  of  individual  heroism  can 
make  no  figure  in  battle  reports ;  men  whose  endurance  of 
fatigue,  and  long  abstinence  from  food,  combined  with  their 
unbroken  spirit,  were  indeed  mar\^elous  ;  and  all  of  them  ap- 
pear to  have  been  thoroughly  imbued  with  his  own  ardent, 
indomitable  spirit. 


CHAPTER  X. 

'^i^^e  Riport  ef  another  Federal  Raid— Forrest  returned  to  Middle  Ten 
nessee — Reestablished  Headquarters  at  Spring  Hill^ln  Chief  Com- 
mand of  Cavalry  on  that  Flank — Services  of  the  Eighth  and  Tenth 
Tennessee  Cavalry — ^aetson's  Division  detached- — Snccessftil  Atnbtis- 
^ade  by  Colonel  Dibrell — Reconnaissance  in  Force  of  Franklin — Iland- 
~stmie  Affair  of  Fourth  Tennessee  wifh  two  Federal  Regiments — Colo- 
xel  Starnes's  Demonstration  upon  Triune — Forrests  brilliant  Rtcon- 
xoissance  in  same  qnarler^Middle  Tennessee  evacuated^At  Chaita- 
mooga — Forrest's  Cavalry  in  East-Tennessee — Pegram's  Division 
joined  Forrest — Expedition  of  Eighth  Tennessee — Forres fs  Cavalry 
retHrned  to  Chattanooga. 

May  4//j  to  August  31st,  1B63. 

^-'OLONEL  BIFFLE  came  up  on  Monday,  4th,  with  the 
main  body  of  the  prisoners  ;  and  all  were  now  turned  over  to 
the  local  commander,  who  put  them  c/i  route  for  Richmond  by 
nil,  by  way  of  Atlanta,  on  the  following  day. 

The  fourth  and  fifth  were  sjicnt  in  refitting  the  command 
'ot  the  field,  especially  in  shoeing  the  horses.  These,  be  it 
noted,  were  generally  of  the  best  "  blooded  stock"  of  Middle 
Tennessee  and  Kentucky ;  but  the  hardships  of  the  expedition 
had  been  so  extreme  and  prolonged,  that  it  had  perceptibly 
^Kted  them,  leaving  all  greatly  jaded  and  foot-sore.  Many 
also  were  now  taken  with  the  "scours"  and  cramp,  which 
proved  so  fatal  in  a  few  moments  that,  of  the  five  hundred 
^  fifly  with  which  the  command  reached  Rome,  not  more 


28o 


Campaigfts  of  General  Forrest. 


than  two  hundred  and  fifty  remained.*  Selecting  the  best  of 
the  captured  horses,  many  of  which  proved  to  be  excellent 
animals,  seized  by  the  roadside,  Forrest  was  able,  by  the 
morning  of  the  6th,  to  remount  his  command,  and  refurnish 
his  artillerj'  in  an  effective  manner. 

The  citizens  of  Rome  had  been,  meanwhile,  preparing  for 
a  formal  complimentary  ceremony  and  festival,  to  be  given  on 
the  afternoon  of  the  6th,  in  honor  of  the  event  of  their  relief 
from  the  consuming  visitation  which  had  been  prepared  for  that 
thriving  and  enterprising  community.  But  on  the  night  of 
the  5th,  General  Forrest  was  informed,  at  ten  o'clock,  by  some 
citizens,  that  a  heavy  Federal  cavalry  column  \vas  penetrat- 
ing the  country  from  Tuscumbia,  in  the  direction  of  Talladega, 
Alabama,  by  \vay  of  Jasper  and  Elyton.  He  was,  therefore, 
obliged  to  forego  the  arranged  entertainment  and  further  rest 
for  his  men  and  animals,  much  as  it  was  still  needed,  and 
undertake  possibly  another  arduous  campaign,  for  which  all 
the  necessary  orders  were  at  once  issued.  By  eight  o'clock 
A.M.,  on  the  6th,  Forrest  and  his  men  were  on  the  road  to 

Gadsden.f 

At  that  place,  at  three  p.m.,  on  the  7th,  scouts,  who  had 
been  left  in  obser\-ation,  were  met,  and  they  reported  that  no 
such  movement  as  the  one  alleged  was  on  foot,  and  that  Dodge 
had  unquestionably  returned  as  far  westward  as  luka.  As- 
sured of  the  accuracy  of  this  information,  Forrest  then  turned 


^  The  artillery  of  the  command  had 
left  Courtland  with  one  hum!rcd  and 
twenty  select  horses,  of  which  only 
twenty-five  remained. 

t  The  residue  of  the  captured  ani- 
mals, after  remounting  his  command, 
some  sixteen  hundred  horses  and  mules, 
Forrest  sent  under  escort,  direct  to 
Chattanooga,  with  the  urgent  request. 


addressed  to  General  Bragg,  that  they 
should  be  sent  to  North- Alabama  for 
distribution  among  those  from  whom 
the  most  of  them  had  been  taken  br 
Colonel  Streight,  as  he  traversed  the 
country;  and  this  was  actually  done, 
though  only  four  hundred  and  fifty  sur- 
vived,  such  had  been  the  hardships  they 
had  undergone. 


Forrest  at  Arfny  Headquarters.  281 

the  head  of  his  column  northward,  by  the  roads  through 
Brookville,  Peach  Grove,  and  Summerville,  as  the  nearest 
route  to  his  base.  Arriving  at  Decatur  on  the  loth,  he  re- 
crossed  at  once  to  the  north  bank  of  the  Tennessee.*  On 
the  nth,  the  command  was  turned  over  to  Colonel  Biffle,  with 
orders  to  take  post  at  Athens,  Alabama,  whither  the  detach- 
ments from  the  brigade  were  likewise  directed  to  repair. 

General  Forrest  then  proceeded  by  rail,  by  way  of  Hunts- 
ville,  to  army  headquarters,  still  at  Shclbyville,  to  report  to 
General  Bragg  the  results  and  details  of  his  expedition. 

At  Huntsville  his  arrival  was  the  occasion  of  an  intense 
expression  of  public  gratitude.     The  people  turned  out  en 
fnasse,  and  emulated  each  other  in  manifestations  of  their 
sense  of  what  Forrest  had  achieved  by  his  pursuit  and  cap- 
ture of  the  Federal  marauders.! 

Arriving  at  Shelbyvillc  on  the  13th,  he  reported  imme- 
diately to  General  Bragg,  who,  receiving  him  with  unwonted 
'^svarmth,  cordially  testified  his  full  recognition  of  the  value  and 
Scope  of  his  recent  ser\-ices.     He  said,  indeed,  that  he  should 
"Urge  his  promotion  to  the  grade  of  major-general,  with  the 
view  of  intrusting  to  him  the  chief  command  of  the  cavalry 
'^vith  that  army.     To  this,  however,  Forrest  replied  that  he 
preferred  the  promotion  to  that  position  of  another  officer, 
>ivhom  he  suggested,  as  having  more  capacity  for  the  functions 
which  properly  belonged  to  the  rank  of  major-general. 

We  learn,  too,  that  the  whole  army,  officers  and  men,  testi- 
fied in  various  ways,  while  he  was  among  them,  their  satisfac- 
tion and  appreciation  also  of  what  General  Forrest  had  ac- 


*  Two  companies  had  been  mean-  t  One  substantial  and  appropriate 

m-hilc  sent  from  Gadsden,  back  by  the  testimonial  was  the  gift  of  a  fine  horse  ; 

route   of  the  pursuit,  to  collect  and  another  had  been  given  by  the  people 

bring  away  all  the  wounded,  and  such  of  Rome,  Ga. 
captured  stock  and  teams  as  had  been 
left  behind. 


/ 


282  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest, 

complishcd.  Of  these  demonstrations  it  is  fit  to  note  a  sere- 
nade by  the  One  Hundred  and  Fifty-fourth  Tennessee  Infan- 
try, enrolled  at  Memphis,  Tennessee.  Both  Forrest  and  the 
regiment  had  long  been  anxious  that  it  should  be  converted 
into  cavalry,  and  assigned  to  his  command  ;  and  as  they 
thronged  around  his  quarters  the  cry  was,  that  the  One  Hun- 
dred and  Fifty-fourth  might  now  be  mounted  with  Streight's 
captured  horses.  Forrest  was  called  upon — after  the  Ameri- 
can fashion,  that  even  went  with  the  citizens  into  the  army — 
for  a  speech,  which  he  made,  and  while  no  orator,  and  wholly 
unused  to  addressing  crowds,  he  expressed  himself,  we  are 
assured,  with  notable  felicity  in  his  unaffected  but  clear  nar- 
ration of  the  stirring  events  which  had  characterized  his  late 
operations,  which  all  around  were  anxious  to  hear.* 

After  passing  several  days  at  army  headquarters,  Forrest 
finally,  on  the  14th,  received  orders  to  return  to  Spring  Hill, 
and  assume  the  command  of  the  cavalry  on  that  flank  of  the 
army.  General  Van  Dorn  having  been  killed  during  his  ab- 
sence. It  was  on  the  i6th  that  he  arrived  at  Spring  Hill,  and 
entered  upon  his  new  command,  having  in  the  mean  time 
directed  all  of  his  brigade  to  reassemble  there. 

As  will  be  remembered,  Forrest,  just  before  crossing  the 
Tennessee  fiver  to  the  southward,  had  detached  the  Eighth 
and  Tenth  Tennessee,!  under  Colonel  Dibrell,  with  a  section 
of  artillery,  to  make  a  diversion,  by  a  show  of  passing  the 
river  as  far  westward  as  Bainbridge  or  Florence,  in  rear  of 
the  Federal  column.  As  has  been  noted,  that  service  was 
effectively  performed,  and  aided  materially  in  hastening  the 
retreat  of  Dodge  in  great  haste,  he  being  apprehensive  that 
otherwise  his   communications  with  Corinth  would   be   cut 


*  MS.  Notes  of  Colonel  J.  E.  Saun-        t  At  the  time  under  command  of 
dexv  Major  Forrest. 


Dctaclied  Operaiiotis.  283 

off.    The  Tenth  Tennessee  was  then  ordered  back  as  far  as 
Decatur,  to  guard  and  hold  that  crossing,  while  Colonel  Dibrell 
remained  with  his  own  regiment  and  the  artillery,  to  watch 
the  river  in  that  quarter  until — within  a  few  days — an  order 
was  received  from  General  Bragg  to  throw  the  greater  part  of 
the  regiment  across  the  river,  and  take  position  at  Fulton, 
Miss.,  so  as  to  intercept  the  Strcight  expedition,  should  it 
attempt  to  effect  a  passage  back  through  the  country  in  that 
direction  to  Corinth.    The  Tennessee  was  crossed  at  Garner's 
Ferry  by  swimming  the  horses ;  and  a  detachment  of  three 
hundred  of  the  Eighth  Tennessee,  under  Captain  McGuiness,* 
were  at  Fulton — seventy-five  miles  from  the  ferry  in  question 
— early  the  second  day  after  departure.     Meanwhile,  intelli- 
gence of  the  success  of  Forest's  pursuit  having  been  received 
by  Dibrell,  the  detachment  of  his  regiment  was  safely  with- 
drawn from  its  greatly  exposed  position  at  Fulton,  eluding  a 
strong  Federal  force  that  had  been  thrown  out  to  cut  it  off, 
by  making  a  wide  detour  through  Pikeville  and  Russellville, 
Alabama,  at  which  last  place  a  junction  was  effected  with 
Colonel  Roddy  and  the  Tenth  Tennessee. 

The  latter  regiment  had  likewise  been  actively  engaged  in 
the  interim  ;  it  had  formed  part  of  a  force  with  which  Colonel 
Roddy  pursued  the  notorious  marauder  Cornyn,  and  had  lost 
some  eight  or  ten  men  in  an  affair  with  him  at  or  near  Ham- 
burg, or  the  Tennessee  river. 

II. 
It  was  the  i6th  of  May  when  General  Forrest  assumed  the 


•  Colonel  Dibrell  was  run  over  by  a  narrow  escape  from    capture  by  tlie 

horse  at  the  river,  and  so  much  hurt  Federals,   who  had    taken    the    field 

that  he  was  obliged  to  remain  behind  meanwhile,  to  cut  off  the  return  of  the 

for  several  days ;  when  attempting  to  Confederates  from  Fulton. 
follow,  though  in  great  pain,  he  had  a 


284  Campaigfis  of  G enteral  Forrest 

command  to  which  he  had  now  been  assigned,  with  his  head- 
quarters at  Spring  Hill.  At  the  time,  the  Confederate  forces 
in  that  quarter  were  Brigadier-General  W.  H.  Jackson's  Divi- 
sion, Cosby's  and  Whitfield's  Brigades,  and  Brigadier-Gene- 
ral Armstrong's  Brigade,  to  which,  in  a  day  or  two,  was 
added  Forresf  s  own  brigade,  now  under  command  of  Colonel 
Stames. 

Rearranging  his  forces,  Armstrong  was  assigned  to  the 
command  of  a  division  constituted  of  his  own  and  Stames's 
Brigades,  the  composition  of  which  was  severally  changed  in 
some  particulars.*  A  few  days  later,  however,  Jackson's  Di- 
vision was  detached  and  directed  to  return  to  their  old  theatre 
of  operations  in  Mississippi,  and  Forrest  was  left  with  the  di- 
visional command  under  Armstrong  and  Stames's  brigades. 

For  the  rest  of  May,  the  ser\'ice  of  the  divison  was  exclu- 
sively that  of  picket  dutyf  in  the  immediate  proximity  of  the 
Federals,  who  were  in  heavy  force  at  Franklin,  with  a  strong 
outpost  at  Triune.  This  service,  while  without  important 
events  to  chronicle,  was  occasionally  varied  with  adventures; 
among  which  we  note  one,  on  the  Carter's  creek  road  leading 
to  Franklin,  on  the  night  of  the  31st  of  May,  in  which  a  de- 
tachment of  the  Eighth  Tennessee  figured.  The  enemy  in 
that  immediate  quarter  had  shown  enterprise  and  adroitness 
on  several  recent  occasions,  and  had  surprised  and  captured  a 
considerable  part  of  a  Texas  regiment  on  outpost  ser\'ice 
there,  through  a  stratagem  contrived  by  a  Federal  officer,  who 
resided  in  the  vicinity.  Anticipating  an  attempt  at  a  similar 
coHp^  the  officer  in  command  of  the  Confederate  outpost  ex- 
posed his  picket-line  to  the  view  of  Federal  scouts  who  were 


•   The  Eighth  Tennessee  was  trans-  t  Connecting  on  the  right  with  the 

ferred  to   Armstrong's    Brigade,  and  Fourth  Georgia,  Colonel  Aven*,  Crew's 

Colonel  Dibrell  was  assigned  to  the  Brigade,  \Vheeler*s    Cavalry,  at    Be- 

command  of  the  brigade.  thesda. 


Successful  Stratagem.  285 

noticed  in  observation  ;    but  after  dark,  the  flooring  of  the 
bridge  over  Carter's  creek  was  noiselessly  taken  up,  and  the 
pickets  drawn  back  into  a  cedar  thicket,  from  the  position  held 
when  observed  Scarcely  had  these  arrangements  been  made, 
when   a  Federal  detachment,  intelligently  led  through  the 
fields  and  woods  across  the  stream,  some  distance  from  the 
bridge,  reached  the  turnpike  in  rear  of  the  point  that  had 
been  occupied  at  sunset  by  the  Confederates.      Here  the  am- 
buscade prepared  was  opened  upon  their  party  from  their  rear, 
when,  of  course,  they  broke,  with  a  rush,  for  the  bridge,  and 
fell  headlong  into  the  trap  there  set  for  them.     Evidently,  a 
number  of  horses  and  men  must  have  been  crippled,  from  the 
many  evidences  of  blood,  skin,  and  hair  that  were  to  be  seen 
on  the  bridge  timbers  next  morning.     There  were  no  more 
attempts  on  the  part  of  the  enemy  to  surprise  pickets  for  some 
time,  and  this  little  affair  served  for  a  while  to  amuse  the  men 
si.round  their  camp-fires.* 

About  the  3d  of  June,  the  enemy  were  observed,  apparently 
transferring  their  main  force  from  Franklin  to  Triune.f    This 
led  the  Confederate  General  to  move  forward,  on  the  next 
tiioming,  to  reconnoitre  the  former  place  in  strong  force,  so  as 
to  ascertain  precisely  to  what  extent  the  position  ^^as  still 
occupied.     Starnes's  Brigade,  with  Forrest  at  its  head,  ad- 
^"anced  by  the  Franklin  and  Columbia  turnpike,  while  Arm- 
strong moved  up  by  the  Lewisburg  road.    On  both  routes  the 
Federal  pickets  were  met  within  three  miles  of  Franklin. 
Starncs,  turning  their  right  flank,  captured  ten  and  killed 
several ;  Armstrong  driving  in  the  line  in  his  front,  the  ad- 
vanced-guard of  Dibrell's  Regiment  followed  to  the  very  edge 


*  Ms.  Notes  of  General   Dibrcll,         t  That  is,  the  right  wing  of  Rose- 

who  thinks  the  Confederate  officer  in  crans*s  army.    See  Reb,  Rec,  VII.  Dog 

^'^"Wund  was    Captain     Swearingen,  4,  p.  6. 
with  his  company  K. 


286  Campaig7is  of  General  Forrest 

of  the  town.  The  Federals,  however,  rallied,  and  charged,  in 
turn,  with  the  Seventh  Kentucky  regiment  of  cavalry,  forcing 
their  bold  assailants  back  again. 

About  one  quarter  of  a  mile  eastward  of  the  suburbs  of 
Franklin,  on  an  eminence  commanding  all  the  approaches  to 
the  place,  the  Federal  engineers  had  built  a  strong  and  exten- 
sive field-work,  well  garnished  with  artillery.  This  opened 
upon  Armstrong  with  much  vigor,  while  their  cavalrj- — three 
battalions* — were  drawn  up  between  the  forks  of  the  Lewis- 
burg  and  Columbia  turnpikes,  close  to  and  southward  of  the 
place.  Having,  meanwhile,  disposed  his  main  force  behind  a 
chain  of  ridges  skirting  the  position,  with  his  artillerj'  posted 
on  an  elevation  leftward  of  the  Columbia  road,  Forrest  ordered 
a  charge  to  be  made  upon  the  cavalry  just  mentioned,  by  com- 
panies G  and  H  of  the  Eighth  Tennessee,  Captains  Gore  and 
Burns — accompanied  by  their  ever  adventurous  leader — gal- 
lantly leading  their  men,  with  admirable  spirit,  and  (gashed 
across  an  open  field,  in  easy  range  of  the  Federal  works,  in 
the  face  of  an  adversary  greatly  superior  in  numbers.  It  was 
a  hazardous  operation,  but  was  successful ;  and  the  Federals, 
giving  way  before  it,  took  refuge  in  the  streets  of  Franklin. 

Soon  after,  mistaking  a  signal-flag,  flying  on  the  fort,  foi 
one  of  truce,  Forrest  ceased  fire  with  his  artillery,  and  sent 
forward,  under  a  white  flag,  to  inquire  the  cause  or  purpose. 
In  the  mean  time,  also,  approaching  in  person  the  quarter  of 
the  fort,  with  the  view  of  meeting  his  own  flag  on  its  return  as 
soon  as  possible  ;  but  when  within  eighty  yards  of  a  garden- 
hedge,  a  Federal  officer  rose  to  his  feet  behind  it,  and,  with  a 
gesture  of  repulsion,  exclaimed :  "  General  Forrest,  I  know 
you,  and  don't  want  to  see  you  hurt ;  go  back,  sir  !"t      For- 


*  See  Reh,  Rec.  VII.  Doc.  4,  p.  5.  he  had  captured  at  Murfreesboro,  in 

t  General  Forrest  has  since  under-     July,  1862. 
stood  that  this  officer  was  one  of  those 


Penetrated  Franklin.  287 

rest,  raising  his  hat  in  salute,  rode  rearward  some  fifty  yards, 
when  turning,  he  saw  the  same  officer  standing  where  he  had 
left  him,  with  a  considerable  detachment,  looking  after  him, 
within  short  musket-range,  and  he  again  saluted  in  recognition 
of  their  forbearance.  By  this  time  his  own  flag  of  truce  had 
returned,  with  the  information  that  the  one  noticed  was  only 
a  signal-flag.  This  ascertained,  taking  a  detachment  of  two 
companies  of  the  Eighth  Tennessee  and  a  section  of  Morton's 
guns,  he  entered  the  town  by  the  street  leading  from  Carter's 
creek.  Formed  across  this  street,  with  the  artillery  in  the 
centre,  unlimbered,  and  pushed  forward  by  hand,  they  boldly 
entered  the  town,  driving  all  opposition  before  them,  and  took 
and  held  possession  of  the  place  for  some  hours.  Breaking 
open  the  jail,  some  Confederate  prisoners  were  found,  and  re- 
leased, while  the  numerous  sutlers'  stores,  with  which  the 
town  abounded,  were  soon  found  and  thoroughly  sacked. 

Meanwhile,  Armstrong  moved  across  the  Harpeth,  around 
and  rightward  of  the  fort,  with  a  detachment  of  his  brigade — 
Woodward's  Battalion  and  part  of  the  First  Tennessee — to 
reconnoitre  the  approach  from  Triune,  and  speedily  encoun- 
tered four  cavalry  regiments*  coming  from  that  direction.  A 
vigorous  skirmish  ensued  ;  but  so  great  was  the  disparity  be- 
tween the  forces  opposed,  he  was  forced  to  fall  back — though 
fighting  stubbornly — across  the  river,  losing  eighteen  killed 
or  wounded  out  of  thirty-eight  of  his  escort.  By  the  time  he 
reached  the  river,  Colonel  Hobson  had  advanced  with  his  regi- 
ment of  Arkansians,  on  hearing  the  sound  of  fire-arms,  and 
covered  Armstrong's  safe  passage  across  it.  Forrest,  too, 
having  heard  the  clangor  of  the  engagement,  leaving  one  regi- 
ment in  observation  on  the  Columbia  turnpike,  hurried  toward 
the  scene  with  the  remainder  of  his  force.     But  Armstrong 


•  Fourth  and  Sixth  Kentucky,  and  the  Second  Michigan  and  Ninth  Penn- 
sylvania.   Rib^  Hec.  VII.  Doc.  4,  p.  5. 


i 


288  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest 

having,  meanwhile,  returned  to  the  west  side  of  the  Harpeth, 
and  it  being  now  certain  that  the  enemy  was  rccnforced 
heavily  from  Triune,*  Forrest  drew  off  with  Starnes's  Brigade 
and  encamped  in  a  position  on  disputed  ground,  about  three 
miles  from  Franklin,  where  there  was  abundance  of  forage, 
that  neither  party,  hitherto,  had  attempted  to  seize.  At  the 
same  time,  Armstrong  was  sent  back  with  hjs  brigade  to  re- 
sume its  usual  picket-line  that  night. 

On  the  following  day — the  8th — the  Fourth  Tennessee  still 
remaining  in  position,  about  nine  o'clock  a.m.,  two  Federal 
regimentsf  were  observed  advancing.  A  company  of  the 
Fourth  was  thrown  well  forward  to  meet  it,  and  then  to  fall 
back  rapidly,  so  as  to  draw  the  Federals  into  an  ambush  that 
had  been  carefully  arranged.  This  was  partially  successful, 
and  some  loss  was  inflicted  on  the  Federals,  who  withdrew, 
leaving  the  Fourth  in  possession  of  the  field.t 

Some  eight  or  ten  days  subsequently,  General  Bragg  having 
expressed  a  desire  that  a  reconnoissance  should  be  made,  to 
develop  the  Federal  force  at  Triune,  Starnes's  Brigade  was 
detached  for  that  object,  and  performed  the  service  with  the 
nerve  and  thoroughness  that  characterized  the  operations  of 
Colonel  Starnes.  After  driving  in  and  capturing  a  number  of 
their  pickets  at  Triune,  he  moved  round  and  made  a  demon- 
stration on  Nashville  ;  returning  from  which,  he  destroyed  the 
railroad  bridge  at  Brentwood,  which  the  Federals  had  rebuilt 
since  its  destruction  in  April. 

Several  days  later — the  20th — taking  his  whole  force,  ex- 


•  The  Federal  force  at  Franklin  .ind  t   Brownlow's  East-Tcnncssee  (Fc* 

Triune  consisted  of  at  least  three  divi-  deral)  Regiment  and  the  Seventh  Ken- 

sions,  namely,  those  of  Morgan,  R.  S.  tucky. 

Grainger,  and  Baird.  {Reb.  Kec,  VII.  %  Colonel  P'aulkner,  Seventh  Ken- 
Diary,  p.  7.)  Also,  Stanley's  Divi-  tucky,  was  seriously  wounded. — Rtbm 
sion  of  Cavalry.  Rcc.  VII.  Doc  4,  p.  6. 


Bold  Demonstration  upon  Triune.  289 

pt  a  strong  picket-line,  and  Avery's  and   Crew's  Georgia 
jiments  of  Crew's  Brigade,  Wheeler's  Cavalry — his  neigh- 
rs  on  the  right — who  volunteered  to  take  part  in  the  opera- 
n,  Forrest  again  beat  up  the  quarters  of  his  enemy  at 
iune.      Moving  across  the  Harpeth  to  the  junction  of  the 
lapel  Hill  and  Shelbyville  roads,  he  there  met  Colonel  Ro- 
rt  Johnson's  Regiment,  Federal,  Tennessee  cavalry,  and 
er  a  sharp  skirmish  drove  it  back  into  their  lines.  Starnes's 
igade  following  closely,  Forrest,  with  his  escort — several 
npanies  of  the  Eighth  Tennessee  and  a  section  of  Morton's 
ttery — now  boldly  approached  to  within  four  hundred  yards 
the  main  Federal  encampment,  upon  which  he  opened  with 
artillery.    Thoroughly  imposed  upon  by  the  boldness  of 
\  movement,  the  Federals  retired  precipitately  to  their  line 
rifle-pits  surrounding  Triune,  in  rear  of  their  encampment, 
1  began  a  fierce  uproar  with  artillery  from  several  batteries 
position,  which  was  altogether  harmless  to  the  Confederates, 
o  were,  meanwhile,  greatly  amused  at  the  utter  misappre- 
asion  of  their  strength  which  manifestly   possessed  and 
ayed  the  Federal  officers  and  their  men.  The  ground,  howbeit, 
s  highly  favorable  for  the  success  of  this  brilliant  act  of  au- 
city.      But  at  length,  in  these  daring  movements,  the  Con- 
lerate  chief  stirred  up  the  covert  of  an  infantry  brigade,  and 
ovoked  a  withering  fire,  before  which  he  immediately  drew 
5  men  out  at  a  run  rearward  ;  for,  if  impetuous  and  adventu- 
us  to  the  verge  constantly  of  rashness,  he  was  peculiarly 
lick  to  recognize  when  he  had  reached  the  extreme  limit  of 
periment  with  his  adversary,  and  prudence  required  a  change 
policy.     Now,  satisfied  that  he  had  ventured  quite  as  far  as 
as  at  all  prudent,  Forrest  began  to  draw  off  his  whole  force, 
hen  the  Federal  cavalry  pursued,  and  some  sharp  skirmishes 
>ok  place  as  the  Confederates  leisurely  retired.      Assuredly, 
le  Federal  commander  of  the  forces  at  Triune  can  not  look 
^  upon  this  afiair  without  mortification ;  and  it  is  a  signal 


290 


Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 


instance  of  what  may  be  done  in  war  by  coolness  and  confi- 
dence, allied  with  boldness  and  enterprise.  Among  the  mate- 
rial results  of  the  affair,  were  several  hundred  horses  and  mules, 
and  half  as  many  fat  cattle,  found  at  pasture.  Dispersing  their 
infantry  guard.  Major  Jeffrey  Forrest  drove  them  off  success- 
fully from  close  proximity  to  the  Federal  lines.* 


III. 

It  was  now  the  last  week  in  June,  and  orders  came  from 
army  headquarters  to  break  up  the  outposts  at  Spring  Hill 
and  to  repair  without  delay  with  his  division  to  Shelbyville. 
On  the  night  of  the  25th,  accordingly,  the  march  began  via 
Riggs*s  Cross-Roads.  Detained  by  high  water  some  twelve 
hours  on  the  26th,  an  order  from  General  Wheeler,  Chief  of 
Cavalry,  reached  General  Forrest  at  Bigbyville,  to  direct  his 
further  movements  so  as  to  intercept  the  other  cavalry  of  the 
army  on  the  turnpike  from  Murfreesboro  to  Shelbyville. 
When  within  ten  miles  of  Shelbyville,  however,  the  sounds 
of  a  considerable  skirmish  were  audible  in  the  direction  of 
the  road  just  mentioned,  and  Forrest  directed  Armstrong  to 
push  on  rapidly  for  the  scene.     Executing  this  order  with 


*  General  Rosecrans,  in  his  plans  as 
in  his  correspondence  with  his  govern- 
ment, strangely  overrated  the  numbers 
of  the  Confederate  cavalry,  which  he 
affirms  to  be  fiue  to  one  of  his  own. 
This  estimate,  we  observe,  is  accepted 
as  correct  by  Federal  historians,  when 
in  fact  nothing  could  be  more  inexact. 
The  fact  is,  General  Rosecrans  does  not 
appear  to  have  been  inferior  in  cavalry 
to  General  Bragg  at  all.  Assuredly  not 
after  the  lOthofMay,  1863.  Writing  to 
the  Federal  Quartermaster-General  on 
that  day,  he  says  he  had  : 


Cavalry  horses  on  hand,    .        .    6S37   \ 
Mounted  infantry,      .        .        .    193S    { 

8475 
Deducting  25  per  cent  for  un- 
serviceable horses, .        •       .2119 

635^ 
He  had  also  orderlies  and  escorts,  vnA 

8384^ 

General  Bragg  could  not  possibly  1^ 
that  time  have  turned  oat  more 
6000^  including  those  on  escort 


Confederates  in  Retreat.  291 

celerity,  Armstrong  found  the  Federal  cavalry  engaged  with 
and  driving  Wheeler's  force  along  a  dirt-road  half  a  mile  from 
and  parallel  with  the  turnpike  before  mentioned.  So  fast,  in- 
deed, were  the  Confederates  falling  back  toward  Shelbyville, 
that  Forrest  found  it  impossible  to  effect  the  junction  indi- 
cated ;  he  therefore  put  his  column  at  a  gallop  for  the  next 
eight  miles,  hoping  to  overtake  Wheeler  at  Shelb3rville,  or  at 
least  in  rear  of  the  works  there.  But  even  in  this  expectation 
he  was  disappointed,  for  such  was  the  pressure  of  the  Federal 
cavalry,  that  Wheeler  had  been  driven  south  of  Duck  river 
before  Forrest  could  reach  Shelb)rville.  Informed  of  this  fact, 
Forrest  then  made  a  circuit  rightward  of  that  place  through  the 
mud  and  heavy  rain,  and  crossing  the  river  at  a  bridge  about 
four  miles  to  the  west  of  it,  encamped  five  miles  beyond,  on 
the  Lafayette  turnpike.  On  the  following  day,  28th,  he  came 
up  with  the  main  Confederate  army,  in  position  at  Tullaho- 
ma.  Here  he  received  orders  to  picket  and  scout  with  his 
division  the  approaches  from  the  northward. 

A  detachment  from  the  Eighth  Tennessee,  200  strong, 
imder  their  gallant,  able  Colonel,  was  immediately  thrown  out 
eastward  toward  Hillsboro  and  thence  southward  to  Deck- 
ard's.  Federal  pickets  were  met  by  Colonel  Dibrell  in  the 
vicinity  of  the  former  place,  which  he  ascertained  was  occu- 
pied* by  the  Federals,  while  a  large  force  had  gone  thence  to 
Deckard  —  facts  which  he  immediately  transmitted  to  his 
chief.  General  Forrest,  by  couriers.  Colonel  Starnes  was  also 
detached  meanwhile  with  his  brigade  to  develop,  if  possible, 
the  movements  of  the  enemy  in  the  direction  of  Shelbyville. 
This  brigade  encountered  a  strong  Federal  force,  attached  to 


*  This,  really,  was  a  brigade  of  mount-  flicted  a  good  deal  of  damage  to  the 

ed  infimtry,  under  Colonel  Wilder,  sent  railroad  in  rear  of  General  Bragg.— 

to  the  rear  of  Bragg's  army,  and  which,  Rib.  Rec.  VII.  Diary,  p.  21. 
Aovkig  with  onoommon  celerity,  in* 


292  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest 

Crittenden's  Corps,  a  few  miles  in  front  of  Tullahoma,  on  the 
30th,  where  a  skirmish  took  place,  in  which  the  gallant  Stames 
was  mortally  wounded.* 

Late  in  the  afternoon  of  the  same  day.  General  Forrest  was 
instructed  to  ascertain  the  movements  of  the  enemy  on  the 
road  from  McMinnville.  It  was  raining  heavily  at  the  time, 
but  the  General  preferred  to  make  this  reconnoissance  him- 
self with  his  escort,  some  sixty  strong.  Setting  out  about 
three  p.m.,  the  black  felt  hats  and  oilcloth  cloaks  of  his  men 
gave  them  the  appearance  of  Federal  cavalry — ^a  circumstance 
that  enabled  him  before  dark  to  pass  the  advanced-giiard  of 
a  Federal  column,  with  whom  there  was  a  short  parley  as  they 
met.  Coming  upon  the  main  body  of  the  enemy  about  half 
a  mile  rearward,  he  was  discovered,  as,  not  more  than  one 
hundred  yards  distant,  he  turned  to  withdraw,  and  was  fired 
upon  by  a  Federal  battalion.  Nothing  daunted,  he  dashed 
resolutely  back  over  the  road  he  had  traveled,  killing  and  cap- 
turing several  of  the  detachment  he  had  previously  passed ; 
and,  returning  to  headquarters,  reported  the  presence  of  the 
Federals  on  that  road,  with  an  evident  purpose  of  turning  the 
Confederate  right  flank,  which  obliged  General  Bragg  to  ^^ 
sume  his  movement  southward  immediately. 

While  Bragg  was  aiming  to  pass  Elk  river  near  Deckaid, 
Forrest  was  ordered  to  cover  the  movement  from  the  north- 
east quarter,  and  to  obstruct  any  endeavor  from  that  directicm 
to  cut  off  the  Confederates  by  seizing  the  pass  in  the  Cum- 
berland near  Cowan.    This  brought  the  division,  during  the 


*  On   the   Tullahoma  •  Manchester     cavalry  officer.    We  rq;ret  tbat  all  ov 
road.    At  the  time  of  his  death  he  was     efforts  to  procure  the  material  for  % 


with  his  skirmish  line,  encouraging  the  sketch  of  him  and  his  portrait  have  becft 

men  to  stand  their  ground  against  the  abortive.    He  was  a  man  of  inflneiiceli 

great  odds  pressing  down  upon  them,  his  community,  and  a  physidaa  bdvi 

Colonel  Stames  was  a  most  valuable  the  war. 


\ 


1 


Confederates  at  Chattanooga.  293 

first  of  July,  in  sharp  collision  with  several  bodies  of  Federal 
cavalry,  that  were  severally  beaten  back.  The  Confederate 
army  being  now  in  possession  of  the  pass,  and  Forrest's  men 
and  horses  having  been  virtually  without  food  for  twenty-four 
hours,  he  led  them  to  Cowan,  hoping  to  find  there  both  sub- 
sistence and  forage,  but,  on  arriving  at  the  spot,  was  disap- 
pointed. Those  who  were  there  before  him  had  consumed 
alL  Gleaning  the  neighborhood,  however,  he  was  able  to 
secure  a  meal  for  his  men,  and  a  feed  for  their  horses,  imme- 
diately after  which  they  were  again  in  their  saddles,  and  the 

division  was  thrown  out  northward  toward  Pelham,  to  cover  a 

■ 

pass  five  miles  from  Cowan  through  which  Hardee's  Corps  was 
moving.  Hardee  having  effected  the  passage  of  the  moun- 
tain into  Sequatchie  Valley,  followed  by  Forrest's  Cavalry  as 
far  as  University  Place,  on  the  3d  of  July,  Dibrell,  now  in 
command  of  Stames's  Brigade,  was  directed  to  hold  the  pass 
for  the  next  twenty-four  hours,  while  Armstrong  was  sent 
ahead  to  Jasper  to  cover  the  corps  on  that  flank.  On  the 
4th,  no  Federal  force  having  appeared,  Dibrell  withdrew  at 
ten  A.M.,  and  followed  to  the  Tennessee  river.  During  these 
movements,  repeated  short  but  spirited  skirmishes  occurred 
between  the  several  regiments  of  both  brigades  and  the  ene- 
my, in  which  the  Confederates,  including  the  artillery,  fought 
with  their  wonted  spirit  and  efficiency  ;  but  these  we  are  un- 
able to  relate  in  detail. 

The  army  having  been  now  withdrawn  to  the  south  side  of 
the  Tennessee  and  concentrated  at  Chattanooga,  Forrest's 
Division  followed,  and  went  into  cantonments  near  by,  where, 
for  the  following  fortnight,  the  conditions  of  the  campaign  or 
inaction  of  the  enemy,  gave  it  opportunity  to  rest  and  refit ; 
fcveral  changes  also  took  place  in  the  organization  of  its  bri- 
gades.*   About  the  24th  of  July,  however,  the  division  was 


*  The  Eighth  Tennessee  wa^  trans-     Brigade  in  exchange  for  McDonald's 
Icrred  from  Armstrong's  to  Dibrell's     Battalion — Forrest's  old  regiment  — 


294 


Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 


ordered  to  Kingston,  East-Tennessee,  across  to  the  north 
bank  of  the  river.  General  Forrest  at  the  same  time  being 
assigned  to  the  chief  command  of  the  Confederate  cavalry 
in  East-Tennessee.*  The  field  of  service  assigned,  a  wide 
and  arduous  one,  involved  the  picketing  not  only  of  all  the 
approaches  from  the  Sequatchie  Valley  to  the  Tennessee 
river  eastward  of  Chattanooga  and  of  the  various  crossings 
of  the  river,  but  the  watchful  observation,  also,  of  Bumside's 
movements.  Numerous  small  affairs  occurred,  but  were  un- 
important in  results. 

IV. 

Meanwhile,  the  Eighth  Tennessee  had  been  detached  on 
an  expedition  to  Sparta,  beyond  the  Cumberland  mountains, 
chiefly  with  the  object  of  giving  the  men  an  opportunity  to 
visit  home  and  their  families  in  that  vicinity,  from  whom 
they  had  been  so  long  separated.  The  Federals  were  in 
strong  force  at  McMinnville,  twenty-six  miles  distant,  and  the 
vicinage  of  the  Confederates  very  soon  provoked  a  conflict 
On  the  8th  of  August,  a  Federal  brigade — Minty's — attempt- 
ed to  surprise  and  capture  the  regiment  at  a  time  when  en- 
camped some  two  miles  north  of  Sparta,  and  when  not  more 
than  300  of  the  men  were  present  This  attack  was  made 
with  so  much  dash  that  the  escape  of  any  of  Dibrell's  pickets 
was  due  to  the  fleetness  of  their  horses,  coupled  with  the  pre- 


vhich  at  the  same  time  was  strength- 
ened by  the  addition  of  two  surplus 
companies — McDonald's  and  Allen's — 
hitherto  attached  to  the  Eleventh  Ten- 
nessee Cavalry. 

*  In  addition  to  Forrest's  division 
proper,  consisting  of  Pegram's  Division, 
made  up  Pegram's  brigade,  command- 
ed by  Colonel  J.  J.  Morrison,  of  the 


First  and  Sixth  Geor^a,  Sixty-sixth 
North-Carolina,  Second  Tennessee,  and 
Huwald's  Battery,  of  Scott*s  Brigade, 
strength  1000,  composition  tmknowi^ 
and  of  Rucker's  Legion  of  Twelfth,  (six 
companies,)  Lieutenant-Colonel  Day, 
and  Sixteenth  battalion,  (seven  com- 
panies,) Lieutenant-Colonel  Neal,  iioo 
aggregate. 


Colonel  DihreWs  Fight  with  Minty.  295 

sence  of  mind  of  their  commanding  officer,  Captain  Leftwich. 
The  noise  of  the  collision  with  the  outpost  gave  time  barely 
to  the  regiment  to  form  and  take  up  hastily  a  position  behind 
a  neighboring  creek — an  affluent  of  Calf-Killer  river — the  ap- 
proach to  which  was  through  a  narrow  defile,  made  by  a  spur 
of  the  mountains  of  one  side  and  the  steep  banks  of  a  water- 
course on  the  other,  and  across  a  bridge  over  Wild  Cat  creek, 
in  immediate  advance  of  which  Colonel  Dibrell  took  post  him- 
self with  the  men  present  of  two  companies.*  The  Federals, 
coming  on  DibrelFs  deserted  camp,  fancied  the  whole  regi- 
ment had  been  dispersed,  and  dashed  on  with  loud  yells  in  hot 
pursuit,  to  pick  up  stragglers  and  increase  the  supposed  panic. 
The  defile  just  mentioned,  debouched  into  an  open  space  just 
in  front  of  the  bridge,  and  when  about  100  Federals  (Fourth 
Michigan)  had  emerged  into  it,  the  Confederates  poured  upon 
them  a  volley  that  swept  fifty  men  from  their  seats  and  laid  a 
number  of  horses  writhing  on  the  ground.  Those  who  escaped 
made  a  gallant,  desperate  effort  to  dash  forward,  but  were 
shot  or  driven  back  in  great  confusion.  Another  regiment 
(the  Fourth  Regulars)  now  charged  with  spirit  upon  the  posi- 
tion, and  their  onset  was  formidable  ;  but  the  consuming  rifles 
of  Dibrell's  men,  well  posted,  with  a  converging  fire  upon  the 
bridge-head  and  approach  thereto,  swept  through  their  ranks, 
and  few  reached  the  bridge  ;  the  others  strewed  the  ground  or 
fell  back,  some  quitting  their  horses  and  escaping  on  foot. 
The  Federal  commander,  now  dismounting  his  men,  made  an- 
other advance ;  but  no  sooner  did  he  reach  the .  open  ground, 
than  a  voUey  from  the  Eighth  Tennessee  sent  all  back  under 
cover  again.  The  Federals,  then  withdrawing,  attempted  to 
turn  the  position  by  crossing  the  river  below  the  mouth  of 
the  creek,  at  Meredith's  Mill,  where,  in  anticipation  of  such  a 


•  Companies  G  and  ^,-~Colonel  DthrelVs  Notes. 


A 


296  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

movement,  they  were  met  by  a  small  detachment  and  fired 
upon  from  a  covert,  with  the  effect  of  checking  that  movement 
also.  Meanwhile,  leaving  one  company  to  skirmish,  Dibrell, 
knowing  the  country  and  all  its  fastnesses  thoroughly,  led  the 
rest  to  another  position,  into  which  he  hoped  to  draw  his  ad- 
versary. Here  he  was  joined  by  manyx)f  the  citizens  of  the 
surrounding  country,  who,  with  their  old-fashioned  hunting- 
rifles,  and  Champ  Ferguson,  the  celebrated  partisan— ^also  a 
resident  of  the  country — came  up  with  ten  or  fifteen  of  his 

« 

men.  The  women,  too,  brought  supplies  of  cooked  food,  with 
that  considerate  providence  for  the  needs  of  their  countrymen 
that  everywhere  distinguished  the  women  of  the  South  during 
the  war. 

Finding,  from  the  reports  of  scouts,  that  the  enemy  had 
disappeared,  Dibrell  remounted  and  went  forth  with  his  men 
to  pursue,  coming  in  sight  of  their  rear-guard,  at  a  fast  trot, 
near  Sparta;  but,  as  the  weather  was  very' sultry,  it  was  not 
considered  expedient  to  pursue  further  than  some  twelve 
miles.  So  well  had  his  command  been  sheltered,  that  Di- 
breirs  loss  did  not  exceed  six  or  eight  captured  and  as  many 
killed  and  wounded  ;  that  of  the  Federals  was  heavy  in  both 
men  and  animals.  This  affair  having  been  reported  to  Gene- 
ral Forrest,  he  sent  Colonel  McLemore,  with  about  200  of  the 
Fourth  Tennessee  and  some  ammunition,  to  strengthen  Di- 
brell's  command. 

Keeping  his  command  on  the  alert  and  actively  moving 
near  the  enemy  at  McMinnville  for  the  next  fortnight,  Dibrell 
kept  careful  watch  to  guard  against  the  possibility  of  sur- 
prise. In  this  way,  on  the  17th,  his  scouts  encountered  a 
large  cavalry  force,  several  thousand,  again  under  Colonel 
Minty,  moving  in  the  direction  of  Sparta,  only  three  miles 
trom  the  Federal  encampment,  and  having  one  of  Dibrell's 
negroes  as  a  guide,  who  was  thoroughly  acquainted  with  the 
whole  region.     Dibrell  was  encamped  at  the  moment  at 


DibrelVs  Second  Conflict  with  Minty.        297 

Sperry  s  Mill,  on  the  north  bank  of  the  Calf-Killer  river,  two 
miles  from  Sparta,  as  was  known  to  his  adversary,  who  had 
divided  his  force,  one  detachment  taking  the  road  through 
Sparta  and  up  the  south  side  of  the  river,  while  the  main 
body  moved  up  the  north  bank.     Informed  of  the  emergency, 
Dibrell  had,  meanwhile,  made  his  dispositions  embracing  a  re- 
occupation  of  his  battle-ground  of  the  9th  of  August,  a  mile 
from  his  present  encampment ;  but  scarcely  were  his  men 
mounted  than  the  Federal  advance  was  at  the  river.     A  small 
detachment  of  the  Fourth  Tennessee,  posted  at  the  ford,  met 
and  repulsed  an  attempt  made  to  pass  it.     By  this  time  the 
Fourth  Tennessee  had  been  placed  in  the  position  held  by 
the  Eighth  Tennessee  on  the  9th,  just  in  time  to  beat  back 
a  feeble  attempt  of  the  enemy,  who,  now  more  wary  than 
previously,  was  indisposed  to  venture  into  the  open  ground, 
but  kept  up  a  heavy  fire  from  long  range  until  dark.     The 
Eighth  Tennessee',  in  the  mean  time,  had  taken  position  at 
the  only  ford  for  six  or  eight  miles,  at  Meredith's  Mills,  and 
there  held  the  Federals  completely  at  bay,  though  many  times 
larger  in  numbers.     Repeated  attempts  were  made  by  the 
enemy  to  force  the  ford,  the  approach  to  which  was  over  an 
open  lawn,  and  their  check  was  easily  effected  until  dusk,  with 
considerable  loss  to  the  Federals.    After  dark.  Colonel  Di- 
brell deemed  it  expedient  to  take  up  another  and  even  stronger 
position,  two  miles  distant  and  safe  from  the  possibility  of  be- 
ing turned — that  is,  on  the  summit  of  the  Cumberland  moun- 
tain, where  Frost's  turnpike  crosses  it.     Accordingly,  McLe- 
more  withdrew  from  his  position  to  join  Dibrell.     As  he  did 
so,  the  Federals,  on  the  watch,  pursued  and  struck  Captain 
McGregor's  company,  (G,)  but  were  immediately  and  hand- 
somely repulsed,  with  some  loss,  by  the  brave  McGregor. 
Taking  up  now,  without  further  interruption,  the  position  on 
the  mountain,  Dibrell  awaited  quietly  the  movements  of  his 
opponent,  who,  it  appears,  indisposed  to  prolong  the  expedi- 


298 


Campaigns  of  General  Forrest 


tion,  retired  from  the  neighborhood  the  next  morning,  having 
sufiered  severely,  and  left  Dibrell  in  undisputed  ^ssession  of 
the  district. 

Soon  after  this  affair,  the  22d,  General  Forrest's  orders  were 
received  to  return  to  his  headquarters  at  Kingston,*  and  the 
movement  was  commenced  that  afternoon.  At  the  time,  a 
number  of  the  men  and  officers  were  absent  on  furlough  at 
their  homes  ;  others  were  permitted  to  go  for  their  winter 
clothing,  and  some  few  officers  and  men  had  become  disaffect- 
ed and  averse  to  returning  to  the  army,  so  that  the  Eighth 
Tennessee  recrossed  the  Cumberland  200  rank  and  file  less 
than  it  had  when  it  reached  Sparta.! 

In  the  interim,  the  other  portions  of  the  division  had  not 
been  inactive.  A  squadron  of  the  Eleventh  Tennessee,  dis- 
patched across  the  mountain  to  Wartburg,  in  Morgan  county, 
to  observe  the  enemy  reported  to  be  moving  in  that  neighbor- 
hood, had  there  encountered  a  heavy  Federal  column  of  all 
arms.  In  attempting  to  reconnoitre  the  position.  Captain 
Perkins  became  involved  with  his  single  company  with  Bird's 
Brigade  of  cavalry,  which  he  charged  with  characteristic  dar- 
ing and  threw  into  confusion.  Afterward  he  made  good  his 
retreat-J  Pegram's  Division  had  also  been  kept  on  the  alert 
watching  the  various  passes  in  the  mountains. 

On  the  31st  of  August,  orders  having  been  received  by 
General  Forrest  to  that  effect,  he  began  the  evacuation  of 


♦  About  this  time,  Hamilton's  Batta- 
lion of  partisans  had  joined  Dibrell, 
some  105  strong. 

t  The  Lieutenant-Colonel  of  the  re- 
giment, who  was  subsequently  sent  to 
collect  these  men,  gathered  as  many  as 
20a  Instead  of  rejoining  his  regiment, 
he  took  the  field,  as  a  partisan,  in  Ken- 
tucky, where  he  was  captured  and  re- 


mained a  prisoner  until  the  spring  of 
1865,  when  he  was  exchanged,  his 
health  permanently  destroyed.  Among 
the  deserters  were  a  captaiii  and  two 
subalterns.  —  General  DibrelTs  MS. 
Notes, 

X  Lieutenant-Colonel  Holman's  MS. 
Notes. 


Parr  est  Evacuates  East-Tennessee.  299 

East-Tennessee  with  all  his  force  except  Scott's  Brigade.  That 
was  left  to  hold  the  bridge  at  Loudon,  with  orders  to  bum  it 
on  the  approach  of  the  enemy  in  force,  which  was  ultimately 
done  after  a  sharp  skirmish. 

COMMENTARY. 

General  Rosecrans,  as  we  have  stated — note,  ante^  page 
290— insisted  that  his  enemy  outnumbered  him  in  horsemen 
five  to  one.  Giving  his  own  effective  mounted  force,  exclu- 
sive of  2028  orderlies  and  escorts,  at  63 56^  he  provided  Gene- 
ral Bragg  with  no  less  than  31,780  cavalry.  We  simply  notice 
this  to  show  the  loose  manner  in  which  even  an  army  com- 
mander may  sometimes  think  and  write  about  grave,  impor- 
tant questions. 


CHAPTER    XI. 

BATTLE      OF     CHICKAMAUGA. 

Topographical  Sketch  of  Theatre  of  War— Federal  Army  thrown  acroa 
southward  of  the  Tennessee  River—Bragg  evacuated  Chattanooga — 
Thoma^s  Corps  in  McLemore's  Cove— Failure  of  projected  Attack 
by  Confederates — Isolation  of  Crittenden's  Corps  not  profited  iy — 
Operations  of  Forresfs  Cavalry-^The  general  Offensive  taken  by 
Bragg— Battle  of  the  i<)th  September^Arrival  of  Longslreet — Confe- 
derate  Army  subdivided  into  Wings— Battle  of  the  nolh  September- 
Commentaries.  ' 

vJn  arriving  at  Chattanooga,  Forrest's  command  was  soon 
distributed  in  the  several  quarters  wheresoever  the  Command- 
ing General  determined  that  cavalry  were  wanted  to  cover  the 
movements  of  the  Confederates  in  the  coming  evacuation  of 
that  position  ;  and  to  observe  the  movements  likewise  of 
Rosecrans,  who  now  revealed  a  manifest  purpose  to  cross 
the  Tennessee  river  westward  of  Chattanooga,  with  the  object 
of  striking  a  blow,  by  way  of  Will's  Valley,  at  Bragg's  com- 
munications. 

And  here  a  topographical  sketch  of  the  whole  theatre  of 
impending  operations  becomes  necessary.  Chattanooga,  as 
may  be  seen  at  a  glance  on  the  map,  is  in  the  mouth  of  the 
narrow  valley  formed  by  Lookout  Mountain  and  a  lateral 
spur  to  the  eastward,  known  as  Missionary  Ridge.  Lookout 
Mountain,  jutting  abruptly  upon  the  Tennessee  river,  a  little 
west  of  Chattanooga,  and  stretching  southwardly  into  Georgia, 


Theatre  of  War.  301 

rises  a  broad,  heavily-wooded  range,  2400  feet  above  the  level 
of  the  sea,  with  sides  of  towering  rock-cliffs  springing  from 
steep,  densely-wooded  bases,  and  surmounted,  in  a  distance  of 
fifty  miles,  by  only  two  practicable  wagon-roads,  the  first  twen- 
ty-six and  the  other  forty-two  miles  from  Chattanooga,   Pigeon 
Mountain,  another  spur,  branching  from  Lookout,  about  forty 
miles  from  Chattanooga,  and  extending  northward,  terminates 
in  the  low  hills  near  the  road  from  Chattanooga  to  Lafayette, 
making  a  larger  and  broader  valley  than  Lookout,  in  the  upper 
portion  of  which,  called  McLemore's  Cove,  the  west  branch 
of  the  Chickamauga  has  its  sources.     Immediately  west  of 
Lookout  is  Will's  Valley,  opening  upon  the  Tennessee,  about 
six  miles  from  Chattanooga,  and  the  other  limit  of  which  is 
Sand  Mountain,*  a  chain  of  precipitous,  barren,  wooded  ridges, 
scantily  watered,  with  a  few  steep  but  practicable  wagon- 
roads  across  it  from  the  Tennessee  river.    The  Georgia  State 
Railroad,  passing  around  the  northern  extremity  of  Mission 
Ridge,  and  down  the  valley  of  the  east  branch  of  the  Chick- 
amauga, by  way  of  Ringgold,  connects  with  the  East-Ten- 
nessee road  at  Dalton,  thirty-eight  miles  from  Chattanooga. 
A  wagon-road  leads  from  the  latter  place,  in  a  south-eastward 
course,  across  Mission  Ridge,  at  Rossville,  by  way  of  Lafay- 
ette, to  Rome,  a  distance  of  sixty-five  miles.     Lafayette,  east- 
ward of  Pigeon  Mountain,  is  twenty-eight  miles  distant  from 
Chattanooga,  and  Lee  and  Gordon's  Mills,  where  this  road 
crosses  West-Chickamauga,   is   half-way  between  the  two 
points.     From  Caperton's  Ferry,  nearly  opposite  Stevenson, 
on  the  Tennessee,  forty  miles  westward  of  Chattanooga,  as 
well  as  from  the  intermediate   ferries  at  Shell  Mound  and 
Bridgeport,  as  we  have  mentioned,  indifferent  wagon-roads 
cross  Sand  Mountain  to  Trenton,  and  other  points  southward 


*  The  northern  portion  of  which  is  known  in  the  country  as  Raccoon  Mountain. 


302  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

in  Will's  Valley,  and  thence  connect  with  the  two  roads  that 
lead  over  Lookout  Mountain,  the  northward  one  of  which, 
passing  through  Cooper's  Gap  into  McLemore's  Cove,  and 
onward,  by  way  of  Dug  Gap,  in  Pigeon  Mountain,  to  Lafay- 
ette, as  well  as  that  via  Alpine,  opened  a  short  and  easy  line 
of  march,  under  proper  military  conditions,  upon  the  Confe- 
derate communications  at  Dalton,  or,  indeed,  as  far  south  as 
the  bridge  over  the  Oostenaula  at  Resaca. 

As  early  -as  the  27th  of  August,  some  Federal  cavalry, 
fording  the  river  above  Caperton's  Ferry,  repaired  thither, 
and  assisted  in  constructing  a  pontoon-bridge  across  the  Ten- 
nessee at  that  point,  by  the  29th,  upon  which,  in  the  course 
of  the  30th  and  31st,  Davis's  and  Johnson's  Divisions  of  Mc- 
Cook's  and  Negley's  Division  of  Thomas's  Corps  made  the 
passage  to  the  southern  bank,  and  began  the  march  thence 
without  delay  upon  the  roads  we  have  indicated,  over  Sand 
Mountain  ;  while,  by  the  4th  September,  the  remaining  divi- 
sions of  both  Thomas  and  McCook  had  been  thrown  across 
at  Shell  Mound  and  Bridgeport*  Tidings  of  these  move- 
ments, carried  to  General  Bragg  by  citizens  of  the  country  as 
early  as  the  ist  September,  it  appears,  were  discredited  until 
verified  by  the  presence  of  a  Federal  cavalry  force  at  Wau- 
hatchie,  in  Will's  Valley,  within  seven  miles  of  Chattanooga ; 
and,  as  before  said,  Rosecrans's  purposes  were  now  apparent.! 

On  the  night  of  the  3d  September,  Lieutenant-General  D. 
H.  Hill  began  the  evacuation  with  his  corps,  on  the  road  to 
Lafayette.     Polk  followed  on  the  same  road  on  the  7th,  t  but 


*  Thomas  and  McCook's  Official  well-informed  writer  evidently.  Gene- 
Reports,  Rdf,  Rec.  VIL  Doc.  42,  pp.  ral  D.  H.  Hill  confirms  this  statement 
227,  232.  in  his  Official  Report. 

T  Vide''  Historicus,"  Richmond  Whig,  %  Hindman's  and  Cheatham's  Divi- 

reprmted   ibid.    Doc   212,  p.  689,  a  sions. 


McLemoris  Cove. 


303 


halted  at  or  near  Lee  and  Gordon's  Mills ;  and  Buckner's 
Corps,  from  East-Tennessee,  recently  assembled  at  or  near 
the  mouth  of  the  Hiawassee,  was  likewise  drawn  to  the  same 
point* 

By  the  9th,  Negley's  Division,  closely  supported  by  Baird, 
of  Thomas's  Corps,  forcing  Cooper's  and  Stevens's  Gaps,  in 
Lookout  Mountain,  very  strong  positions,  left  undefended, 
poured  down  into  McLemore's  Cove,  and  on  the  loth  took 
post  within  a  mile  west  of  Dug  Gap.f  At  this  Hill  was  sum- 
moned back  from  Lafayette,  with  Cleburne's  Division,  to  hold 
the  passes  in  Pigeon  Mountain,  with  orders  ultimately  to 
send  or  lead  it  to  form  a  junction  with  Hindman's  Division, 
Polk's  Corps,  in  an  operation  against  the  Federals  in  McLe- 
more's Cove.  Circumstances,  however,  making  the  timely  co- 
operation of  Cleburne  impossible,  Buckner  was  substituted 
with  his  two  divisions,  on  the  morning  of  the  loth,  and  came 
up  with  Hindman  after  four  o'clock  that  afternoon,  at  Mor- 
gan's Farm-house,  in  the  Cove,  four  miles  from  Davis's  Cross- 
Roads,  where  Baird's  Division  of  Thomas's  Corps  was  at  the 
time.  But  no  collision  occurred  ;  nor  was  an  attack  made,  as 
late  as  daylight  on  the  nth,  by  which  time  Cleburne,  sup- 
ported by  Walker's  Division,  J  had  taken  up  a  position  in  Dug 
Gap,  to  cooperate  with  such  movement  at  that  hour.§  Yet 
no  conflict  ensued  even  then,  though  the  Commanding  Gene- 
ral, after  having  ordered  Polk  to  cover  Hindman's  rear,  had 
repaired  at  daylight  in  person  to  the  position  held  by  Cle- 


•  Stewart's  and  Preston's  Divisions. 

t  Two  brigades  of  Baird's  Division 
^vere  in  support  at  Davis's  Cross-Roads. 
The  position  occupied  by  Negley  was 
^  &vorabIe  for  fighting,  he  repre- 
sented in  a  note  at  the  time  to  Baird, 
if  supported. 

\  A  splendid  command,  five  brigades 


recently  arrived  firom  Mississippi,  whi- 
ther it  had  gone  fi-om  Charleston  and 
Savannah  in  May,  1863,  but  one  of  the 
brigades,  (Gist's,)  of  which  was  absent, 
however,  at  Rome,  until  the  20th. 

§  Vide  General  Bragg's  Official  Re- 
port ;  also  General  Thomas's  Report, 
Jieb.  Rec.  VIL  Doc  42,  p.  228. 


304  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

burne,  whose  division  and  Walker's  demi-corps  at  noon  were 
again  directed  to  advance  and  make  an  attack.  Hill  accord- 
ingly made  his  dispositions  ;  his  skirmishers  and  those  of  the 
enemy  had  already  come  in  collision  ;  and  Cleburne's  battle- 
scarred  veterans,  deployed  in  line,  were  about  to  spring  for- 
ward with  their  habitual  ilaity  when  the  movement  was  sus- 
pended from  headquarters.  Meanwhile,  however,  Hindman's 
and  Buckner's  proximity  had  become  known  to  the  enemy ; 
and  Hindman  advancing  to  the  attack  in  the  afternoon,  Neg- 
ley  and  Baird  began  to  retire.*  Then  the  order  to  Hill  to  ad- 
vance was  renewed,  and  its  execution  commenced  with  spirit; 
but  the  Federal  general,  skillfully  withdrawing  rapidly  at  the 
first  onset,  refused  battle,  and,  night  being  at  hand,  under 
favor  of  the  darkness,  fell  back  upon  the  hills  in  front  of  Ste- 
vens's Gap ;  and  was  able  to  escape  that  destruction  f  which 
a  skillful  combination  and  timely,  vigorous  use  of  Confederate 
resources,  readily  available,  had  made  the  inevitable  conse- 
quence of  this  singularly  wrong-headed  isolation.  J 

In  the  mean  time,  McCook,  after  crossing  the  river,  as  we 
have  related,  moving  over  Sand  Mountain  by  several  routes, 
by  the  9th  had  assembled  his  corps  in  the  direction  of  Alpine, 
in  the  vicinity  of  Winston's  Gap,  in  Lookout  Mountain,  forty- 
two  miles  from  Chattanooga,  and  where,  that  afternoon,  about 
the  time  Thomas's  leading  division  had  descended  into  Mc- 


♦  Baird  had  "  closed  upon  Negley's  Cove,  Polk's  and  Buckner's  Corps— at 

Division  at  the  Widow  Davis's  house,  least  twenty  thousand    bayonets  and 

at  8  A.M.,"  on  the  i  ith. — Reb,  Rec,  VII.  fifty-six  guns — were  at  or  near  Lee  and 

Doc  42,  p.  228.  Gordon's  Mills,  and  Hill  at  La&yette 

t  General  Hill's  Official    Report —  and  Dug  Gap,  with  over  8000  bayo- 

Land  We  Lovty  Vol.  I.  No.  6,  p.  395.  nets,  all  within  easy  distance  for  swift 

X  The  danger  of  the  situation  for  the  concentration,  and  such  movements  as 

Federals  becomes  apparent  when  it  is  might  have  made  extrication  or  escape 

observed  that  at  the  time  Thomas  es-  impossible.    See  Commentaries,  pw  546, 

tablished  his  advanced  divisions  in  the  fmnoanU 


Crittendeits  Isolation. 


3<>5 


Lemore's  Cove,  he  received  orders  to  diverge  further  by  push- 
ing rapidly  to  Alpine,  and  eastward  to  Summerville,  to  inter- 
cept Bragg,  thfen  supposed  by  Rosecrans  to  be  in  full  retreat. 
Reaching  Alpine  on  the  loth,  McCook,  however,  discovering 
indications  that  Bragg,  after  all,  was  not  really  retreating,  and 
that  his  own  isolated  situation,  therefore,  might  become  dan- 
gerous, halted,  and  during  the  nth,  I2th,  and  13th,  awaited 
developments  before  venturing  beyond  to  Summerville.* 
Previous  to  these  events,  another  of  Rosecrans's  Corps — Crit- 
tenden's— had  crossed  the  Tennessee  at  Bridgeport,  Shell 
Mound,  and  the  mouth  of  Battle  Creek,  eighteen  or  twenty 
miles  westward  of  Chattanooga,  and  advancing  on  the  9th  to 
that  place  found  it  to  be  evacuated.  Here  Crittenden  re- 
ceived orders  to  push  forward  with  the  utmost  vigor  on  the 
road  to  Dalton,  by  way  of  Ringgold,  Rosecrans  evidently 
holding  his  adversary  of  little  account. 

When  the  evacuation  of  Chattanooga  had  been  commenced, 
Forrest  was  directed  to  leave  Pegram,  with  his  division,  to 
cover  that  movement,  and  to  hasten,  with  Armstrong's  Divi- 
sion, toward  Rome,  to  assist  in  repelling  Mitchell's  Federal 
cavalry,  reported  in  movement,  in  that  direction.  Making 
forced  marches,  he  found  Wharton,  with  his  division  of 
Wheeler's  Cavalry,  at  Summerville,  and  there  learned  that 
the  enemy  were  just  then  ascending  the  mountain  near 
Alpine.t     Going  forward  with  some  twelve  hundred  of  his 


*  McCook  could  now  only  effect  a 
jonction  with  Thomas,  either  by  a 
invch  of  some  thirty-four  miles,  forc- 
ing his  way  to  and  through  Lafayette, 
vhere  Bragg  had  meantime  concen- 
trated his  whole  force  ;  or,  that  being 
out  of  the  question,  by  marching  back 
into  Will's  Valley,  and  northward  about 
%  milei^  through  most  difficult  moun- 


tain roads  and  passes.  Fortunately  foi 
the  Federal  commander,  the  Confede- 
rate General  was  neither  able  to  take 
in-the  true  situation,  nor  gather  its  ad- 
vantages. 

t  Three  Frigades  of  Stanley's  Caval- 
ry, supported  immediately  by  several 
Infantry  Brigades  of  McCook's  Corps. 


3o6  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

men,  in  conjunction  with  Wharton's,  the  Federals  were  prompt!./ 
encountered  and  checked.  Here,  orders  were  received,  how- 
ever, recalling  Forrest's  force  to  Lafayette.  •  Putting  it  in 
movement,  he  hurried  ahead,  under  special  instructions,  to 
have  an  interview  with  General  Bragg,  whom  he  found  near 
Lee  and  Gordon's  Mills,  and  orders  were  then  given  him  to  re- 
pair northward,  to  ascertain  definitely  the  movements  of  the 
enemy  in  the  direction  of  Chattanooga. 

Late  that  afternoon,  (the  loth,)  he  discovered  that  Critten- 
den's Corps — Palmer's  and  Van  Cleves's  divisions  at  least— 
whose  movements  we  have  partially  indicated,  had  advanced 
just  across  the  Chickamauga,  at  Red  House  Bridge,  nine 
miles  from  Chattanooga,  on  the  Ringgold  road.  This  intelli- 
gence he  at  once  dispatched,  both  to  General  Polk — whose 
force  was  but  six  miles  distant  from  the  enemy  at  the  moment 
— and  to  the  Commander-in-Chief  in  the  same  vicinity.  From 
the  well-known  position  of  both  Thomas's  and  McCook's 
corps,  it  was  quite  manifest  Crittenden  was  dislocated  from 
support,  while  within  six  miles  of  one  half  of  the  Confederate 
army  on  the  field,  and  within  easy  reach  of  the  rest  There- 
fore, assured  in  his  own  mind  of  the  certainty  of  an  immediate 
overpowering  movement  against  Crittenden,  Forrest  at  once 
procured  guides,  and  made  all  his  dispositions  for  a  circuit,  on 
his  part,  to  the  rear  of  the  Federals,  and  the  seizure  of  the 
Red  House  Bridge  ;  and  this,  too,  he  communicated  through 
stafi'-officers  to  his  superiors.  Meanwhile,  so  transparently 
critical  and  precarious  was  Crittenden's  position,  that  the  Con- 
federate pickets  in  that  direction,  and  the  men  around  their 
camp-fires,  were  talking  of  his  destruction  as  an  afiair  fore- 
doomed.*    Hearing  nothipg,  however,  from  headquarters, 


*  That  General  Bragg  was  satisfied  from  the  letters  of  his  staff-q^oers  «> 
of  the  wide  separation  of  the  several  General  Hindman,  during  the  after* 
corps  of  his  enemy  is  apparent,  not  only     noon  of  the  loth,  bat  also  from  the  ^ 


Forresi's  Combat  at  Tunnel  Hill. 


307 


about  midnight,  Forrest  rode  thither  to  have  an  interview 
with  General  Bragg,  but  found,  on  reaching  the  point  where 
he  had  expected  to  meet  him,  that  he  had  gone  to  Lafayette, 
whither  all  the  infantry,  then  in  the  quarter  of  Lee  and 
Gordon's  Mills,  were  also  under  orders  to  repair. 

Upon  this,  hastening  back,  he  immediately  disposed  his 
present    coivnand — Scott's    Brigade,    some    nine    hundred 
troopers,  with  four  pieces  of  artillery — directly  astride  of 
Crittenden's  path,  just  as  the  Federals  were  ready  to  move  at 
daylight    With  this  handful  of  men,  the  advancing  column 
was  resolutely  confronted.    Seizing  every  favorable  position 
for  a  skirmish,  and  using  his  artillery  freely  and  boldly,  many 
Federals  went  down  as   Scott's  men  doggedly,  held  their 
ground,  and  only  receded  before  the  inexorable  weight  of  the 
numbers  opposed.     For  two  hours,  indeed,  one  position  was 
stubbornly  maintained  in  the  neighborhood  of  Ringgold  ;  but 
forced  at  length  to  give  way,  they  fell  back  finally  to  Tunnel 
Hill,  where  Forrest  made  another  stand.   Pegram,  who  during 
this  movement  had  hung  on  the  Federal  right  flank,  and  be- 
tween it  and  Lafayette  with  the  remainder  of  his  division,  now 
joined,  and  Dibrell  came  up  with  his  brigade  from  Dalton, 
where  he  had  been  sent,  on  reconnoissance,  after  the  expedition 
to  Alpine.     The  position  was  strong;  and  thus  reenforced, 
dismounting  his  men,  for  the  most  part,  and  handling  them 
as  infantry,  Forrest,  presently  bringing  the  column  to  bay. 


that  he  amioaiioed  in  council,  on  the 
niorning  of  the  X4th,  that  McCook  was 
evca  then  as  £ur  off  as  Alpine,  Thomas 
>n  McLemore's  Cove,  and  Crittenden 
tt  Lee  and  Gordon's  Mills.  That  is  to 
*>y,  Rosecrans's  right  and  left  wings 
^ere  more  than  forty  miles  apart,  with 
a  (fimcolt  noontain  interposed,  while 


his  centre  was  a  day's  march  from  sup- 
port by  one  wing,  and  three  dajrs*  by  any 
available  road  from  the  other.  Imagine 
Napoleon,  Frederick,  or  the  Duke  of 
Wellington,  with  such  an  opportunity  I 
Vide  General  D.  H.  HUl's  Official  Re- 
port, Zjand  We  Lave^  Vol  I.  No.  6^ 
p.  396. 


3o8 


Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 


was  able  to  stay  its  further  advance.*  In  this  he  was  mate- 
rially aided  by  Pegram,  who  wielded  his  men  with  especial 
coolness  and  skill.  Conspicuous  among  the  incidents  of  this 
combat,  was  an  encounter  by  Colonel  Hart  and  thirty-eight  or 
forty  of  the  Sixth  Georgia,  who,  at  an  urgent  instant,  charging 
upon  a  largely  superior  force  of  infantry,  drove  them  back,  and 
captured  at  least  fifty  prisoners.  The  enemy  m>w  began  to 
retire,  on  the  road  by  which  he  had  approached,  as  far  as 
Ringgold,  where,  as  if  bent  on  destruction,  he  turned  the  head 
of  his  column  westward,  toward  Lee  and  Gordon's  Mills,  in 
the  vicinity  of  which  he  was  permitted  to  cross  and  take  the 
position  which  Polk  and  Buckner  had  been  directed  to  relin- 
quish. There,  nevertheless,  this  corps  was  still  isolated,  and  ex- 
posed to  an  overwhelming  attack  for  several  days  thereafter.f 


♦  General  Forrest  was  again  wounded 
in  this  affair,  but  so  sound  and  vigorous 
was  his  constitution,  that  he  kept  the 
field,  little  disturbed  by  it 

t  It  will  be  difficult  to  account  for 
General  Bragg's  strategy  in  permitting 
these  movements  of  Crittenden :  for  no- 
thing could  have  been  easier  for  the  Con- 
federate General  than  the  concentration 
of  almost  his  entire  force,  and  its  in- 
terposition in  such  manner  as  to  have 
effectually  barred  Crittenden's  escape 
from  a  battle,  with  odds  so  g^eat  as  to 
have  made  his  perdition  certain.  Bragg, 
it  seems,  did  indeed  make  some  unskill- 
ful dispositions  and  inadequate  fitful 
movements  to  that  end ;  but  mainly  after 
Crittenden  had  established  himself  on 
the  west  bank  of  the  Chickamauga,  and 
narrowed  the  break  in  his  communica- 
tion with  the  rest  of  the  Federal  army. 
At  six  o'clock  P.M.  on  the  12th,  Bragg 
called  Polk's  attention  to  Crittenden, 


and  expressed  the  expectation  that  the 
opportunity  should  be  improved  at  day- 
light on  the  13th ;  and,  in  subsequent 
dispatches  of  the  same  evening,  ordered 
and  urged  Polk  to  make  a  quick  and 
decided  attack.    ( Vide  Bragg's  Official 
Report,  pp.  9  and  la)    But  no  attack 
was  made,  for  some  unexplained  reasooi 
further  than  that  General  Bragg  says, 
on  proceeding  to  the  fi-ont,  early  on  the 
13th,  he  found  that  Crittenden  had  re- 
crossed  the  Chickamauga,  and  formed 
a  junction — ^without  saying  when   that 
had    been    effected — namely,    several 
hours  before  his  order  to  Polk  had  been 
written.      {Vide  Crittenden's  Report 
Ra,  Rec.  VIL  Doc  18,  p.  5261)    Thi 
fsict  is,  the  Confederate  movements  weit 
singularly  infelicitous  and  feeble  prece- 
ding the  battle.     None  of  the  UundefS 
of  the  enemy  were  turned  to  tut  leait 
profit      That    « Soul  of  Armies,"  «* 
Napier  terms  it,  **  the  mind  of  a  f(<^ 


Federal  Forces. 


309 


^orps.    McCook's.       14,345. 


>  recapitulate  :*  At  dawn  on  the  13th,  the  Federal  army 
posted  as  follows : 

Davis's,  Johnson's,  and  Sheridanli 

Divisions  of  Infantry — 9  brigades^  48 

or  54  guns ;  also,  Mitchell's  3  brigades 

of  Cavalry  were  at  or  near  Alpine, 

*  Georgia. 

Baird's,  Brannan's,  Negley's,  and 
Reynolds's  Divisions — 12  brigades  of 
Infantry,  and  72  guns,  at  Pond  Spring 
and  on  hills  in  front  of  Stevens's  Gap, 
and  rearward  in  the  g^p. 

Palmer's,  Van  Cleves's,  and  Wood's 
Divisions — 9  Brigades  of  Infantry,  and 

or  54  guns,  at  and  westward  of  Lee 
and  Gordon's  Mills. 


*orps.    Thomas's.       24,072. 


orps.    Crittenden's.     13,975. 


JL/l 

l^an< 


is,  52,392  infantry  and  artillery,  which,  added  to  Minty's 
iVilder's  Brigades  of  Cavalry  and  the  three  under  Mitchell 

McCook,  (in  all  at  least  7500  cavalry,)  made  an  effective 
iral  aggregate  of  all  arms  of  60,000,  with  at  least  170  guns. 
,  exclusive  of  Steedman's  Division — three  brigades — of 
Ion  Granger's  "  Reserve  Corps,"  at  the  moment  about  to 
\  the  Tennessee  at  Bridgeport  and  Shell  Mound,  and  by 
d  marches  to  attempt,  by  way  of  Chattanooga,  to  effect  a 
:ion  with  Rosecrans.f 


in,"  or,  indeed,  one  of  even  mode- 
aptitude  for  war,  was  wholly 
ig ;  and  never  in  military  history 
patent  opportunities  so  strangely 
dered,  as  on  the  part  of  the  Con- 
tes.  While,  on  the  other  hand, 
rategy  of  Rosecrans  was  equally 
—so  faulty  indeed,  that  it  must 
ended  in  complete  disaster,  but 
*  prodigious  want  of  skill  on  the 
f  his  adversary. 

Ve  had  originally  somewhat  larger 
ites,  but  have  changed,  as  we  go 


to  press,  to  agree  with  the  figures  given 
in  the  table  appended,  p.  549  Harpei^s 
Pictorial  History  of  the  Great  ReMlion^ 
taken,  not,  however,  directly  from  the 
official  returns,  but  second  hand  from 
the  statement  of  a  staBT-officer.  W^hy  do 
not  Federal  writers  get  at  the  returns  ? 
The  Confederate  numbers  are  made  up 
directly  from  the  official  statements  of 
brigade  and  division  commanders. 

t   Granger's   Official   Report,   R^ 
Rec,  VII.  Doc  1S4,  p.  532. 


3IO 


Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 


That  officer  having  now,  howbeit,  ascertained  Bragg's  posi- 
tion and  movements  somewhat  nearly,  had  ordered  McCook 
up  from  Alpine  to  the  support  of  Thomas.*  But  so  difficult, 
indirect,  and  tortuous  were  the  mountain  roads  to  be  traversed, 
that  none  of  McCook's  Division  reached  McLemore's  Cove 
sooner  than  the  afternoon  of  the  17th  ;  and,  consequently,  up 
to  that  time,  the  posture  of  affairs  was  still  fraught  with  down- 
right advantages  for  the  Confederates,  whose  General,  for  a 
week  previously,  had  had  at  his  disposition,  as  we  have  shown, 
a  for9e  of  3S,cxx)  bayonets,  as  many  as  7500  cavalry,  rank  and 
file,  and  some  150  guns,t  with  Longstreet's  Corps,  known  to 
be  near  at  hand.  And  as  it  had  been  in  his  power,  on  the 
loth,  to  have  concentrated  this  force  upon,  and  destroyed 
Crittenden,  and  then  Thomas  in  detail,  so  after  the  12th,  for 
at  least  four  days,  it  had  been  equally  within  the  compass 
of  his  resources,  by  short  movements,  to  have  swiftly  brought 
his  army  into  a  compact  mass,  and  by  throwing  it  promptly 
westward  of  the  Chickamauga,  about  Alexander's  Bridge, 
might  have  flung  its  whole  weight,  with  crushing  effect,  upon 
Crittenden,  whose  debris^  driven  back  in  confusion  upon  Tho- 
mas, would  have  subjected  that  corps  to  be  taken  at  disad- 
vantage, in  advancing  to  the  succor  of  Crittenden — ^as  doubt- 


♦  Received  on  the  night  of  the  13th. 
Reb.  Rec,  VII.  Doc  43,  p.  221. 

t  Subdivided  as  foUows  :  Polk*s 
Corps,  composed  of  the  divisions  of 
Cheatham  and  Hindman,  numbering 
i>out  iii5oo  infantry  and  artillerists, 
and  84  guns ;  Hill's  Corps,  composed 
of  the  divisions  of  Cleburne  and  Breck- 
inridge, about  8100  infantry  and  artil- 
lerists, and  24  guns  ;  Buckner's  Corps, 
composed  of  Stewart's  and  Preston's 
Divisions,  say  8486  infantry  and  artille- 
rists, and  40  guns ;  Walker's  Demi — 


or  "  Reserve  "  Corps,  consisting  of  five 
brigades,  one  of  which  (Gist's)  was  ab> 
sent  at  Rome,  present,  say,  5000  infuitiy 
and  artillerists,  and   20  guns;    also, 
Bushrod  Johnson's  Brigade,  (at  Ring- 
gold,) about  761  infantry  and  artille- 
rists, and  4  guns ;    Wheeler's  Cavalry, 
constituted  of  Wharton's  and  Martin's 
Divisions,  about  4000  rank  and  file,  and 
—   guns;     Forrest's    Cavalry,  Arm- 
strong's and  Pegram's  Divisions,  abo*' 
3500  rank  and  file,  and  13  guns* 


Rosecrans  Concentrates.  311 

less  would  have  been  undertaken — and  insured  his  disastrous 
defeat  likewise,  with  the  passes  in  his  rear  blocked  up  by  Mc- 
Cook's  Division  coming  up  from  Alpine.  But  the  Confederate 
leader,  if  not  wholly  blind  to  these  patent  opportunities,  failing 
to  grasp  them  with  decision,  suffered  them  all  to  glide  away 
as  so  many  sunbeams  from  a  child's  hand.  Instead  of  any 
strenuous  surprise,  he  kept  his  forces  moving  from  point  to 
point,  with  little  or  no  concert,  but  with  some  show  of  menace 
of  a  front  attack,  at  Lee  and  Gordon's  Mills,  where  the  banks 
of  the  stream  were  steep  and  rocky,  and  impracticable  for 
artillery  except  at  one  bridge  and  ford  near  by.  In  fact,  each 
day  opened  with  plans  of  operations,  promising  decisive  results, 
that  at  sunset  were  invariably  left  unperformed ;  and  in  the 
interim  his  adversary  was  leisurely  repairing  those  previous 
errors  which  we  have  pointed  out,  and  massing  his  forces  for 
a  counter  attack. 

McCook,  on  the  17th,  as  we  have  said  before,  brought  two 
of  his  divisions  into  the  cove ;  and  to  make  room  for  them. 
Thomas,  gaining  distance  northward,  closed  in  that  direction 
upon  Crittenden ;  and  the  several  corps  of  the  Federal  army 
now  stood  extricated  from  the  imminent  peril,  to  which  they 
had  been  severally  exposed  for  a  week,  to  be  attacked  and 
beaten  in  detail.     By  the  same  time,  however.  General  Bragg 
had  been  made  stronger  by  five  small  brigades  which  had  ar- 
rived at  Ringgold  by  railrold  from  Virginia  and  Mississippi, 
forming  a  column,  that,  in  the  absence  of  General  Hood,  was 
placed  under  command  of  Brigadier-General  Bushrod  Johnson.* 
In  the  interval,  Forrest's  Cavalry  had  been  actively  em- 
ployed, and  had  had  frequent  sharp,  brilliant  dashes  with  the 
Federal  cavalry,  especially  Wilder's  Brigade,  and  on  several 


•  Gregg's  and    McNair's  Brigades,     and  Robertson's  Brigades,  of  Hood's 
from  Mississippi,  and  Benning's,  Law's,     Division,  Longstreet's  Corps. 


312  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

occasions  with  the  infantry.  One  of  these  affairs — ^with 
Wilder — occurred  on  the  12th,  near  Leet*s  Tan-yard,  east  of 
the  Chickamauga,  and  Pegram,  who  commanded  the  Confede- 
rates— Hart's  Sixth  Georgia  and  Rucker's  Legion,  (Twelfth 
and  Sixteenth  Tennessee  Battalions) — maintained  for  several 
hours  a  hand-to-hand  conflict  of  notable  obstinacy  and  gal- 
lantry ;  after  which,  he  bivouacked  within  a  quarter  of  a  mile 
of  the  scene,  Scott's  Brigade,  likewise,  had  had  several  wdl- 
fought  though  brief  encounters ;  and  Armstrong's  Division, 
also,  was  actively  and  usefully  employed  in  its  several  positions. 

Having  thus  carried  the  story  of  the  special  operations  of 
Forrest's  Cavalry  down  to  the  edge  of  the  battle  of  Chicka- 
mauga, it  will  become  necessary  to  embrace  in  the  narrative 
of  the  events  of  the  next  four  or  five  days  the  operations  of 
all  the  forces  engaged. 

As  we  have  seen,  Rosecrans,  by  this  time — the  morning 
of  the  i8th-^— had  brought  together,  in  the  valley  of  the  Chick- 
amauga, at  and  southward  of  Lee  and  Gordon's  Mills,  the 
bulk  of  his  army.  Bragg,  on  the  other  hand,  had  massed  his 
corps  mainly  around  Lafayette,  with  a  provisional  division  of 
six  brigades  at  Catoosa  Station  and  Ringgold  ;  and  with  his 
army  thus  disposed,  resolving  to  take  the  offensive,  he  issued 
the  order  to  that  grave  end. 

To  the  troops  assembled  at  Catoosa  and  Ringgold,  formed 
into  a  temporary  division,  as  before  mentioned,  under  Bush- 
rod  Johnson,  were  assigned  the  initiative  by  an  immediate 
movement  across  the  Chickamauga,  at  Reed's  Bridge,  about 
four  and  a  half  miles  northward  of  Lee  and  Gordon's  Mills, 
and  thence  promptly  southward  upon  the  Federal  position ; 
Walker  crossing  at  Alexander's  Bridge,  two  miles  nearer  the 
enemy,  was  to  support  Johnson. 

Buckner's  Corps,  the  next  affluent  to  the  battle  stream, 
was  to  enter  it  by  way  of  Tedford's  Ford,  still  nearer  the 
Federal  position.     Polk  was  to  swell  the  tide,  at  or  near  the 


Confederates  in  Motion.  313 

same  point,  after  having — during  the  first  part  of  the  movement 
— menaced  an  irruption  upon  the  enemy  at  Lee  and  Gordon's 
Mills.  At  the  same  time,  Hill  was  to  cover  the  Confederate 
left  flank  from  any  hostile  operation  in  that  direction  ;  and  by 
an  advance,  just  south  of  Lee  and  Gordon's  Mills,  to  ascertain 
whether  or  not  the  Federals  were  reenforcing,  and,  in  that 
event,  was  to  attack  them  in  flank.  The  "  utmost  promptness 
and  persistence"  in  the  execution  of  all  these  movements 
were  enjoined.* 

IL 

Johnson  was  early  in  motion  on  Friday  morning,  with  four 
brigades,!  some  4300  bayonets  and  12  guns.  Forrest  covered 
this  column  on  the  front  and  right  flank,  with  a  small  force, 
constituted  of  only  Martin's  Battalion  of  Kentuckians  and  his 
escort,  and  came  in  contact  with  the  Federal  cavalry  at 
Keeler's  Mill,  on  Peavine  Creek.  Swiftly  dismounting  his 
men,  a  sharp  skirmish  took  place ;  but  Johnson  pressing  up, 
and  throwing  forward  his  skirmishers,  the  enemy  were  swept 
back  without  material  impediment  to  Reed's  Bridge,  where 
another  sharp  affair,  with  severe  loss,  occurred,  before  the 
bridge  was  seized  ;  and  the  infantry  began  to  cross  about 
three  p.m. 

Here  the  other  portion  of  Pegram's  Division,  except  Scott 
and  a  part  of  his  brigade,^  came  up,  and  Forrest,  crossing  at 
a  ford,  southward  of  the  bridge,  scoured  the  country  westward 
for  more  than  a  mile  ;  while  Johnson,  after  advancing  west- 
ward to  Jay's  Saw-Mill,  there  turning  the  head  of  his  column, 


*  Bragg's  Official  Report  4700  rank  and  file  ;  and   Culpcpcr**, 

t  Namely,  Johnson's  own    Brigade,  Bledsoe's,  and  Everett's  Batteries, 

onder  Colonel  John  S.  Fulton  ;   and  \  Scott  had  been  detached  in  obser- 

McNaJr's,  Gregg's,    and    Robertson's  vation  of  the  Chattanooga  road, 
brigades,  with  an  efiective  aggregate  of 


i 


314  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest 

pushed  boldly  southward,  on  the  road  by  way  of  Alexander's 
Bridge,  to  a  point  about  a  mile  in  front  of  Dalton's  Ford,  and 
within  half  a  mile  of  Vinyard's  House  on  the  Chattanooga- 
Lafayette  Road,  where,  after  a  warm  skirmish,  it  being  quite 
dark,  he  bivouacked  for  the  night,  in  line  of  battle,  facing  the 
south-west.  This  position  was  one  of  isolation  and  hazardous 
proximity  to  the  bulk  of  the  Federal  army,  as  may  be  readily 
comprehended  ;  but  throwing  up  some  hasty  obstructions  in 
his  front  against  cavalry,  Johnson  took  the  further  precaution 
of  keeping  one  third  of  his  men  under  arms  all  night  Law's 
Brigade  having  come  up  from  Ringgold,  meanwhile,  was 
formed  into  a  division  with  Robertson's  Brigade  under  Gene- 
ral Law,  and  that  and  Johnson's  were  placed  under  the  gene- 
ral command  of  Major-General  Hood,  who  had  joined  at 
Reed's  Bridge. 

Forrest  at  the  same  time  bivouacked  in  the  rear  of  Hood's 
Division,  at  Alexander's  Bridge,  from  which  he  had  driven  a 
body  of  Federal  cavalry,  capturing  some  thirty  officers  and 
men ;  afterward  he  relaid  the  floor  of  the  bridge  that  had 
been  torn  up,  and  lay  on  the  west  bank  of  the  stream. 

Walthall's  Brigade,  Liddell's  Division,  had,  however,  carried 
that  position  about  three  p.m.,  with  the  severe  loss  of  one  hun- 
dred and  five,  rank  and  file,  killed  and  wounded  ;  but  finding 
the  flooring  removed,  Liddell  had  sought  a  crossing  a  mile  and 
a  half  to  the  north,  at  Byrom's  Ford,  where  no  resistance  was 
made,  nor  to  his  advance  to  a  position  in  front  of  the  bridge, 
and  of  Forrest's  position  for  the  night. 

Buckner,  as  instructed,  also  marching  that  morning  from 
the  vicinage  of  Lafayette,  had  approached  Tedford's  and  Dal- 
ton's  (Hunt's)  Fords  late  in  the  afternoon,  and  seized  the  high 
grounds  c6mmanding  both,  with  batteries  in  position  above 
and  below  them  to  cover  the  crossings, — Stewart's  Division 
at  the  former  and  Preston's  at  the  latter  ;  and  after  nightfall 
a  brigade  from  each   (Gracie's  and  Clayton's)  was  thrown 


Eve  of  Battle. 


315 


across  to  the  west  bank,  the  other  brigades  remaining  east- 
ward of  the  stream  all  night. 

Hindman  and  Cheatham,  Polk's  Corps,  meanwhile  had 
taken  posts  nearly  opposite  Lee  and  Gordon's  Mills,  as  ar- 
ranged in  the  plan  of  operations,  and  slept  the  night  of  the 
1 8th  on  the  east  bank  of  the  Chickamauga,  as  likewise  the 
divisions  of  Hill's  Corps ;  that  is,  Breckinridge  at  Glass's  Mill 
and  Cleburne  in  the  vicinity  of  Anderson's  farm-house, 
some  four  miles  south  of  Lee  and  Gordon's  Mills,  fronting  the 
enemy's  extreme  right. 

Armstrong's  Division  of  Forrest's  Cavalry  was  still  with 
Polk's  Corps ;  and  Dibrell's  Brigade  had  had  several  hand- 
some skirmishes  in  that  quarter. 


Thus  it  will  be  observed  that  on  the  night  of  the  i8th,  or 
at  least  by  dawn  on  the  19th,  the  bulk  of  the  Confederate 
army  still  lay  eastward  of  the  Chickamauga,  and  separated  by 


3i6  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

that  stream  from  the  remainder,  ten  small  brigades  with  some 
forty  guns,  and  about  sixteen  hundred  cavalry  under  Forres^ 
which  were  in  the  immediate  presence  of  three  strong  Federal 
corps  and  a  heavy  cavalry  force.  Clearly,  this  was  a  position 
fraught  with  extreme  jeopardy  for  the  Confederates,  had  their 
enemy  been  handled  by  a  general  more  vigorous  and  with 
less  inaptitude  for  war  than  Major-General  Rosecrans.  The 
battle,  howbeit,  was  at  hand,  with  forces  opposed,  of  numbers, 
courage,  martial  qualities,  and  aspirations,  which  assured  that 
it  would  be  one  of  the  most  sanguinary,  the  most  obstinate 
of  the  war.  The  Confederates  had  in  the  field,  placed,  as  we 
have  shown,  not  to  exceed  38,000  rifles  and  muskets,  exclu- 
sive of  Forrest's  Cavalry,  3500  rank  and  file,  fighting  mainly 
as  infantry ;  4000  cavalry,  Wheeler  s,  and  150  guns.* 

The  movements  of  the  Confederates,  which  we  have  related, 
caused  some  changes  that  afternoon  and  night  in  the  dispo- 
sition of  the  Rosecrans  army ;  so  that  while  Wood's  Division 
remained  in  its  position.  Van  Cleves*s  Division  of  the  same 
Corps,  Crittenden's,  was  formed  on  Woods's  left,  or  north- 
eastwardly, along  Chickamauga  :  and  Palmer,  on  a  prolonga- 
tion of  the  same  line,  leftward  of  Van  Cleve.f  After  four  p.m., 
Thomas,  with  his  whole  corps  at  Crawfish  Spring,  was  order- 
ed forward,  by  a  road  at  the  foot  of  Mission  Ridge,  to  take 
up  a  line  on  the  Chattanooga-Lafayette  road,  leftward  of 
Crittenden,  which  movement  he  executed  in  a  characteristic, 
soldierly  manner  that  night ;  his  advanced  Division,  Baird's, 
being  at  Kelly's  Farm, J  nearly  west  of  Reed's  Bridge,  at  day- 
light, and  soon  after  took  up  a  position  at  the  forks  of  the 
road,  facing  Reed's  and  Alexander's  bridges  ;  Brannan  was 


•  *  Aggregate  infantry  and  artillery,         f  Crittenden's  Official  Report 
43>53i*    Cavalry,  750a     See  Appen-         %  General  Thomas's  Offidal  Repoft 
dix  and  Index.  ^Reb,  Rec,  VII.  Doc  43,  p.  228. 


Battle  of  the  I  ^th  September.  317 

formed  a  little  later  on  Baird's  left,  and  in  supporting  dis* 
tance  ;  and  the  other  divisions  were  moving  promptly  toward 
the  same  field.  McCook,  at  the  same  time,  during  the  night, 
moved  up,  and  concentrated  his  divisions  about  Crawfish 
Spring,  until  ten  a.m.  on  the  19th,  when  'Davis's  and  John- 
son's Divisions  were  ordered  northward  to  reenforce  Tho- 
mas.* 

These  corps  numbered  52,392  combatants,  and  as  many  as 
7500  cavalry,  with  not  less  than  160  guns  ;t  and,  meanwhile, 
Steedman's  Division  of  three  and  a  half  brigades.  Granger's 
reserved  corps,  had  likewise  been  brought  up  from  Shell 
Mound  and  Bridgeport,  since  the  13th,  to  the  vicinity  of 
Reed's  Bridge.^ 

III. 

As  previously  ref^ed,  Forrest  bivouacked  at  Alexander's 
Bridge,  the  night  of  the  i8th.  It  remains  to  be  added 
that  he  had  ridden  with  General  Hood  to  General  Bragg's 
headquarters,  about  nine  p.m.,  and  received  instructions 
to  develop  the  enemy  on  the  extreme  Confederate  right, 
as  soon  as  possible  the  next  morning,  reporting  all  hos- 
tile movements  to  the  nearest  commander ;  he  was  also 
assured  of  prompt  reenforcements,  in  the  event  he  brought 
on  a  general  engagement,§  and  General  Walker  was  spe- 
cially instructed  to  answer  his  requisitions  in  such  con- 
tingency. ||  Promptly  in  the  saddle,  with  Pegram's  Divi- 
sion, Forrest  repaired  swiftly  northward  to  Jay's  Saw- 
Mill,  about  three  quarters  of  a  mile  westward  of  Reed's 


•  McCook's  Official  Report,  %  Reb,  Rec.   Vol.  VII.  Doc  43»  P- 

t  We  give  the  aggregate  as  we  find  246.                                        * 

it  in  Federal  sources.  The  bayonets  in  §  General  Forrest's  MS.  Notes. 

the  Mr^O/j  maybe  estimated  at  not  R    General    Walker's    Official    Re- 

^ng  below  46,000^  which  would  give  port 

3600  officers  and  2S00  artillerists. 


3i8  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

Bridge,  where  he  encountered  a  heavy  Federal  force,  cw- 
dently  too  strong  for  Pegram  single-handed.*  Dispatching 
an  aid,  Captain  Anderson,  for  Armstrong's  Division,  as  yet 
some  six  or  seven  miles  southward  with  Polk's  Corpsi  and 
calling  on  Walker  for  the  support  of  an  infentry  brigade;,  he 
nevertheless  dismounted  his  small  force,  except  Rucker,  de- 
jloyed  them  at  once  as  riflemen,  and,  advancing  boldly  to  the 
issue,  brushed  back  for  some  five  or  six  hundred  yards  the 
line  of  Federal  skirmishers  by  the  vigor  of  his  onsetf  But 
now  the  Federals,  assuming  the  offensive,  threatened  to  over- 
lap the  Confederate  flanks  ;  and  Rucker  was  ordered  to 
charge,  mounted,  with  his  two  battalions  (Twelfth  and  Six- 
teenth Tennessee)  along  the  crown  of  an  open  ridge,  to  meet 
the  hostile  movement,  and  right  gallantly  was  the  service 
performed.  Breaking  through  the  picket-line,  he  dashed 
down  upon  the  Federal  force  behind,  but  had  to  give  back 
under  the  fierce  fusilade  that  he  provoked,  and  under  which 
many  of  his  saddles  were  emptied,  but,  nevertheless,  he  did 
not  return  without  some  prisoners. 

Forrest,  now  riding  along  in  front  to  reconnoitre,  observed 
two  strong  Federal  lines  in  battle  array,  their  left,  in  his  front, 
nearly  due  west  of  Reed's  bridge,  their  right  stretching  far  to 
the  southward,  in  the  direction  of  Crawfish  Spring ;  and  in- 
telligence of  this  was  immediately  sent  to  headquarters,  with 
an  urgent  request  that  his  left  should  be  speedily  and  strong- 
ly reenforced. 

It  was  now  ten  o'clock  a.m.,  when  the  Federals  threw  for- 
ward a  lavish  line  of  skirmishers,  and  it  may  be  said  the  over- 
ture of  the  battle  of  Chickamauga  began.    The  conflict  speedi- 


*  Pegram's  old  Brigade  was  under  t  The  Federals  thus  assailed  appear 
General  H.  B.  Davidson.  Scott*s  Bri-  to  have  been  Croxton's  Brigade,  of 
gade  was  still  absent  Brannan's  Division. 


k 


Forrest  and  Walker  Engaged.  319 

ly  became  warm,  and  was  maintained  with  pertinacity  on  both 
sides,  the  advantage  somewhat,  however,  with  the  Confede- 
rates'. DibrelFs  Brigade,  of  Armstrong's  Division,  coming 
up  about  twelve  o'clock,  was  placed  in  line  bn  the  left  of  Pe- 
gram's  troops,  dismounted  and  acting  as  infantry.  No  sooner 
had  this  disposition  been  made,  than  a  heavy  body  of  the  ene- 
my bore  down  upon  Dibrell  with  a  pressure  that  forced  him 
back  to  a. rocky  ridge  which  Forrest  had  previously  held. 
Just  at  this  moment,  Huggins's  and  Huwald's  batteries — 
eight  guns — came  up  and  we;fe  posted  so  as  to  be  brought  to 
bear  with  salutary  effect,  the  Federals,  however,  advancing  so 
closely  as  to  require  the  drastic  use  of  canister.  Armstrong 
had  now — about  one  p.m — brought  up  his  other  brigade, 
which,  being  dismounted  like  the  rest  of  Forrest's  Cavalry  on 
the  field,  was  posted  on  the  extreme  right.  Wilson's  Brigade, 
of  Liddell's  Division,  likewise  had  arrived  previously,  under 
the  guidance  of  one  of  Forrest's  stafT-ofBcers  sent  to  urge  its 
advent ;  and,  thus  reenforced,  the  offensive  was  resumed  with 
renewed  determination.  '  Just  then  a  line  of  Federal  skir- 
mishers was  observed  to  extend  southward  of  their  main  line, 
and  these  Armstrong  turned  by  a  sweep  to  the  right,  while 
Wilson  threw  his  brigade  of  Georgians  handsomely  against 
the  Federal  lines,  the  fire  from  which  was  now  terrific.  Breast- 
ing it  resolutely,  however,  Wilson  pressed  forward,  and,  in 
conjunction  with  Forrest's  men,  once  more  swept  back  the 
enemy  in  his  front  some  four  hundred  yards  in  confusion, 
capturing  a  battery  of  four  guns,  when  he  was  brought  to  a 
stand  by  a  staunch,  strongly-planted  Federal  line.  The  forces 
driven  back  were  probably  two  Federal  brigades,  but  John- 
son's Division,  of  McCook's,  and  Reynolds's  Division,  of 
Thomas's  Corps,  just  at  this  juncture  were  added  to  the  Fede- 
ral divisions  already  in  action  in  that  quarter,  so  that  Thomas 
now  had  at  his  disposition  not  only  three  of  his  own  divisions, 
but  likewise  one  of  McCook's  and  Palmer's  divisions,  of  Crit- 


i 


320  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

tenden's  Corps — that  is  to  say,  five  divisiotis,^     Thus  fonni- 
dably  strengthened,  the  tide  was  quickly  turned  in  favor  of 
the  Federals  ;  for  Thomas  is  of  the  muscular  school  of  sol- 
diers, who  strike  heavy-handed,  quick  blows ;  and  the  eager 
Confederates  were  in  turn  driven  back  over  the  ground  they 
had  lately  gained,  leaving  it  thickly  strewn  with  deplorably 
many  brave  officers  and  men,  but  the  survivors  carried  off  the 
captured  artillery.     Meanwhile,  on  his   own  responsibility, 
Forrest  had  ordered  up  Ector's  Brigade,  of  Walker's  Corps, 
and  formed  it  in  line  rightward  of  Wilson.!     Govan's  and 
Walthall's — the  other  brigades  of  Walker's  force — were  like- 
wise brought  upon  the  scene  by  Walker,  and  led,  with  his 
wonted  gallantry,  into  action.  J    Thus  far  the  battle  had  been 
confined  to  the  narrow  arena,  scarcely  a  mile  and  a  half  in 
length  and  less  than  one  in  depth,  just  in  front  of  Jay's  Saw- 
Mill  and  west  of  Reed's  Bridge,  and  the  whole  face  of  which, 
an  undulating  plateau,  was  clad  with  an  oak  forest  interspersed 
with  patches  of  dense  undergrowth.     The  Federals  had  al- 
ready thrown  up  cover,  from  behind  which  the)r*  poured  forth 
a  broad,  hot  torrent  of  musketry-fire,  as  well  as  grape,  shells, 
and  canister  from  a  numerous  artillery,  before  which  the  Con- 
federates, as  yet  consisting  only  of  Forrest's  two  small  divi- 
sions of  dismounted  cavalry  —  less  than  3000  rifles  —  eight 
guns,  and  four  of  Walker's  brigades  and  sixteen  guns — ^in  all, 
8cxx)  fighting  men  and  24  guns    first  faltered  and  then  re- 
ceded, but  to  take  breath,  close  their  ranks,  and  again  spring 
forward,  and  with  the  furious  impact  of  their  charge  were  able 
to  burst  through  two  Federal  lines  and  capture  many  prison- 


*  VuU  Thomas's  Official  Report,  Reh»  mander  to  notice  the  fact  that  Walker's 

Rec,  VIL  p.  229.  two  divisions,  which  had  been  formed 

t  Walker's  Official  Report  and  designated  as  a  reserve  corps  in 

\  It  may  serve  to  illustrate  somewhat  the  plan  of  battle,  became  the  first  in- 

the  character  of  the  Confederate  com-  £uitry  employed. 


Cheatham  Engaged.  321 

crs  from  as  many  as  seven  regiments  of  the  regular  service, 
and  all  the  artillery  in  that  immediate  front ;  but  there  stood 
behind,  in  grim  array,  a  third  line,  whose  wide-stretched  flanks, 
overlapping  the  Confederates,  threatened  to  envelop  them,  and 
to  escape  which  they  were  again  obliged  to  retire  hastily.* 

While  these  events  were  thickening,  Cheatham  —  Polk's 
Corps — crossing  the  Chickamauga  about  seven  a.m.  with  his 
five  brigades  at  Dalton's  Ford,t  and  moving  rightward  and 
northward  a  short  distance,  formed  line  of  battle  and  awaited 
orders,  that  only  reached  him  as  late  as  twelve  o'clock  m.» 
through  an  aid-de-camp  of  the  Commanding  General.  Di- 
rected to  reenforce  Walker,  he  hastened  to  the  Confederate 
right,  and  at  one  p.m.  bad  taken  his  position  astraddle  the 
road  from  Alexander's  Bridge,  just  in  rear  of  Liddell,  with  a 
frontage  of  three  brigades,^  with  the  other  two  in  reserve.§ 
Making  these  dispositions  with  celerity,  Cheatham  at  once 
advanced  his  Tennesseeans  with  their  habitual  dash,  and  they 
were  soon  in  conflict,  with  a  formidable  counter-movement, 
pressing  Walker  and  Forrest  back.  Three  of  Thomas's  divi- 
sions, ||  two  of  Crittenden's,^  and  Johnson's  Division  of  Mc- 
Cook's  Corps  were  now  in  this  quarter  of  the  field,  and  a  fiery, 
sanguinary,  fluctuating  conflict  followed  and  raged  for  several 
hours,  in  which  Walker's  and  Forrest's  men  bore  their  share, 
as  previously  related.  At  one  time  the  Federals  were  forced 
back  fully  three  fourths  of  a  mile,  only  gaining  a  foothold 
again  when  strongly  reenforced  and  sheltered  by  breastworks. 


•  Aggregate  of  Forrest,  3500;  of  R  Baird's,  Brannan's,  and  Reynolds'*. 

Walker,  557$  ;  total,  9075.  T  Palmer's  and  Van  Cleve's.  Thomas. 

t  Jadcson's,  Maney*s,  Strahl's,  Prcs-  does  not  mention  the  presence  of  Van 

ton  Smith's,  and  Wright's.  Cleve,  but  Crittenden  does,  and  that 

%  Jackson's,  Preston   Smith's,  and  he  took  part  early  in  the  fight  on  the- 

Wright's.  Federal  extreme  left 

I  Maney's  and  Strahl's. 


322  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

Then  the  tide  turned  once  more,  and  the  Confederates,  rolled 
back,  were  followed  vehemently  by  great  odds.  The  brunt 
of  this  was  borne  for  a  time  upon  front  and  flank  by  Maney's 
and  Strahl's  brigades,  disposed  on  a  commanding  ridge,  and 
Turner's  Battery,*  the  immediate  support  of  which  was  a 
picked  battalion  under  Major  Dawson,  of  the  One  Hundred 
and  Fifty-fourth  Tennessee.  From  this  admirably  fought 
battery,  at  short  range,  a  rapid,  withering  discharge  of  grape 
and  canister  mowed  wide  swarths  through  the  Federal  masses. 
Forrest,  however,  observing  the  extreme  exigency,  had  also 
brought  up  two  of  his  own  batteries.  Muggins's  and  Huwald's — 
eight  guns — with  the  Fourth  and  Eighth  Regiments  and 
Shaw's  Battalion  Tennesseeans  of  Dibrell's  Brigade  on  the 
Federal  left  flank  at  close  quarters — eighty  yards — ^and  with 
them  effectually  stayed  and  turned  back  the  wave  that  hitherto 
had  swept  all  before  it ;  and  nothing  could  exceed  the  cool, 
.  splendid  courage  of  these  stout-hearted  officers  and  men,  as 
likewise  of  Dawson  and  his  battalion,  and  of  Turner  and  his 
battery — all  Tennesseeans  save  Turner  and  his  men. 

Meanwhile,  Cleburne's  Division,  Hill's  Corps,  after  having 
been  held  eastward  of  the  Chickamauga  until  late  in  the  after- 
noon, was  then  ordered  to  pass  the  stream  at  Tedford's  Ford 
and  report  to  General  Polk,  who,  about  four  p.m.,  gave  orders 
that  the  division  should  be  formed  at  once  in  line  rearward  of 
the  Confederate  right,  which  was  promptly  done  about  dark, 
the  line,  a  mile  in  extent,  facing  the  west  and  its  right  resting 
just  in  advance  of  Jay's  Saw-MilLf    The  ground  immediately 


♦  The  commander  of  this  battery  t  Cleburne's  OflScial  Report    Polk's 

was  Lieutenant  W.  B.  Turner,  of  Salis-  Brigade  with  Keys's  Battery  on  the 

bury,  N.  C,  distinguished  for  his  cool-  right,  Wood's  Brigade  and  Semple*s 

ness,  courage,  and  skill  on  that  day.  Battery  the  centre,  and  Dibrell's  Bri- 

The  commander  of  the  support,  the  gade  with  Douglass's  Battery  the  left. 
gallant  Major  J.  W.  Dawson,  of  Mem- 
phis, was  severely  wounded 


Cleburnis  Division  in  Action.  323 

in  front  was  a  gentle  acclivity,  covered  with  open  woods  ex- 
cept in  thp  centre  which  was  an  inclosed  field.  In  front,  some 
three  hundred  yards,  Cheatham's  Division  intervened  between 
Cleburne  and  the  enemy  in  that  quarter,  posted  in  strong 
force  behind  breastworks.  Notwithstanding  the  lateness  of 
the  hour — ^six  p.m. — Cleburne  was  now  ordered  to  advance  to 
the  attack  over  the  ground  that  had  been  so  frequently  and 
obstinately  contested,  and  Cheatham's  Division  moved  for- 
ward in  concert.*  A  furious  tempest  of  missiles  rained  down 
upon  the  advancing  Confederates,  and  for  half  an  hour  the 
firing  was  the  heaviest,  says  Cleburne,  that  he  had  ever  heard 
In  sooth, 

"  Such  a  din  was  there, 
As  if  men  fought  on  earth  below 
And  fiends  in  upper  air." 

It  was  very  dark  the  while,  and  each  adversary  was  directed 
in  his  aim  by  the  flashing  line  of  flame  of  his  opponent,  and 
hence  the  aflair  was  less  sanguinary  than  noisy  and  resplen- 
dent Keys's  and  Semple's  Batteries  were  run  up  to  within 
sixty  yards  of  the  Federal  line  and  fired  with  rapidity.  Polk's 
Brigades  of  Cleburne's,  and  Jackson's  and  Smith's,  of  Cheat- 
ham's divisions,  were  likewise  pushed  up,  when  the  enemy, 
Johnson's  and  Baird's  Divisions,  gave  way,  leaving  in  the 
hands  of  the  Confederates  several  pieces  of  artillery,  as  many 
caissons,  some  300  prisoners,  and  the  colors  of  the  Seventy- 
seventh  Indiana  and  Seventy-ninth  Pennsylvania  ;  but,  unfor- 
tunately, at  the  cost  of  the  life  of  Brigadier-General  Preston 
Smith,  an  officer  who  had  no  superior  in  that  army  for  a  shin- 
ing courage,  while  none  of  his  grade  excelled  him  in  the  quali- 
ties of  a  commander ;  and  by  his  side  fell  two  gallant,  excellent 


*  Some  Federal  writers  make  Cle-     lier.    They  have  no  warrant  for  it  what- 
bume  take  part  in  the  battle  much  ear*     soever. 


324  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

officers,  Captain  John  Donelson,  his  Adjutant-General,  and 
an  Aid,  Captain  Thomas  H.  King.  For  more  than  a  mile 
the  Federals  receded  before  Cleburne  halted,  readjusted  hil 
disordered  lines,  and  bivouacked  his  division  upon  their  arm^ 
as  did  Cheatham  likewise.* 

Meanwhile,  though  the  main  conflict  had  been  in  the  quar- 
ter of  the  field  we  have  sketched,  there  had  been  handsome 
fighting  elsewhere.  Preston's  and  Stewart's  Divisions,  Buck- 
ner's  Corps,  after  crossing  at  Tedford's  and  Dalton's  Fords  al 
daylight  on  the  19th,  remained  inactive  in  line  of  battle  in 
that  vicinity  until  in  the  afternoon,  when  the  latter  was  di- 
rected to  repair  in  the  direction  of  the  firing,  rightward.  Ap- 
plying for  more  specific  orders  from  General  Bragg,  just  at 
hand,  Stewart  was  answered  that  Walker,  much  cut  up  and 
menaced  with  being  outflanked,  needed  aid ;  that  General 
Polk  was  in  chief  command  on  the  immediate  field  of  battle, 
and  circumstances  there  must  govern.  Moving  up  to-  the 
scene,  unable  to  find  Polk,  Stewart,  without  delay,  threw 
Clayton's  Brigade  into  action.  It  was  their  first  engagement, 
and  their  .movements  from  the  outset  were  worthy  of  the 
veteran  brigades  assembled  on  that  field.  It  was  Wright's 
Brigade,  the  left  of  Cheatham's  Division,  that  Clayton  chanced 
to  succor  by  his  advance.  Wright's  Brigade,  the  left  of  which 
having  just  been  turned,  had  been  driven  back  by  gjreat  odds, 
with  the  loss  of  its  battery.  For  an  hour  Clayton's  Alabamians 
were  in  action  with  steadfast  courage,  as  may  best  be  measured 
by  the  fact  that,  in  that  hour,  nearly  four  hundred  of  their  offi- 
cers and  men  had  been  killed  or  wounded.  In  the  mean  time^ 
Brown's  Brigade  was  also  thrown  forward  to  relieve  Claytoiit 
whose  brigade  was  withdrawn  to  replenish  its  ammunition. 
Brown's  Tennesseeans  were  veterans,  and,  despite  an  intense 


*  Cleburae*s  and  Cheatham*!  Official  Reporta, 


Stewart's  Division.  325 

ind  an  intervening  jungle  of  undergrowth,  they  drove  the 
line  of  Federals,  for  several  hundred  yards,  back  upon  the 
id  line,  which,  sustained  by  artillery,  was  holding  a  gentle 
\.  Pressing  still  onward,  this  position,  also,  was  carried, 
iras  not  held,  as  a  largely  superior  force  threatened  on  the 

;  five  Federal  rifled  guns,  however,  were  carried  ofT,  and 

:  others,  the  horses  of  which  had  been  shot,  were  left  be- 

This,  it  is  to  be  added,  was  achieved  with  no  slight 

and  Bates's  fresh  brigade  was  now  substituted  in  its 
1,  in  an  impetuous  attack,  before  the  shock  of  which  the 
rals  soon  gave  up  one  position  after  another.*     Clay- 

Brigade  also  was  soon  led  forward  ag^n,  and,  in  con- 
ion  with  Bates,  followed  the  enemy  for  half  a  mile  wcst- 

of  the  Chattanooga  road,  when,  threatened  by  a  heavy 
nulation  of  the  enemy's  masses  on  both  flanks,  the  Con- 
ate  line  fell  leisurely  back,  just  about  sunset,  reformed 
raid,  and,  facing  the  road  just  mentioned,  and  disposing 
ines  for  emergencies,  Stewart  bivouacked  for  the  night,+ 
Ive  pieces  of  artillery  were  abandoned  to  Stewart's  Divi- 

and  at  least  four  of  these  were  secured  as  well  as  several 
Ired  prisoners,  including  a  Lieutenant-Colonel  of  the  staff 
ajor-General  Thomas  ;  but,  at  the  same  time,  the  loss  in- 
•A  was  severe  in  all  three  brigades, 
eanwhile,  the  battle  had  extended  further  leftward  also ; 
ther  division — Preston's — of  Buckner's  Corps,  and  Hood's 
livis ions— Johnson's  and  Law's — after  having  been  held, 
Tt  up  in  line  around  the  curved  crest  of  a  ridge  about  one 
sand  yards  eastward  from  Vinyard's  house,  from  seven 
to  two  P.U.,  then  had  their  skirmish  line  driven  in  on 


t  would  seem   that  the  tactical  apprehend  prolonged  the  f^ht  and  fn- 

;ement  of  this   division   in  thU  creased  the  loues.    Notlung  b  gained 

i*  open  to  critidsin.    This  way  by  driblet  fighting;. 

ding  it  in,  brigade  b;  brigade,  we  t  Stewart't  Official  Report. 


326  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

Johnson's  front,  and  a  sustained  attack  followed,  which  was 
repulsed  with  the  material  aid  of  Bledsoe's  and  Everett's  Bat- 
teries.    Hood  then  ordered  Johnson  to  attack  in  turn,  which 
was  done  promptly.     Trigg's  Brigade,  much  impeded  by  a 
thicket  and  dense  woods,  and  dislocated  in  its  brigade  organi- 
zation, soon  became  hotly  engaged ;  while  Johnson's  own  bri- 
gade, under  Colonel  Fulton,  had  gone  forward  six  hundred 
yards  before  it  was  fired  upon.     McNair's  Brigade  became 
intermingled   with    Gregg's,   but  all   pressed  gallantly  and 
persistently  forward,  with  a  well-maintained  battle  line,  to 
the  Chattanooga  road  at  a  point  north  of  Vinyard's  house. 
Robertson's  Brigade  of  Texans,  of  Law's  Division,  was  also 
advanced  in  a  spirited  charge,  and  poured  a  galling  fire  into 
the  enemy,  who  by  this  time  had  been  driven  westward  of  the 
road  conjointly  by  Gregg  and  McNair.     In  the  mean  time,  too^ 
Fulton's  ranks  were  swept  by  a  heavy  fire  of  musketry  and 
artillery  from  an  elevated  position,  but,  after  an  hour's  €tub- 
bom  conflict,  the  Federals  in  his  front  were  forced  westward 
of  the  road  into  an  open  woods  ;  but  they  were  not  permitted 
to  tarry,  for  Fulton's  Regiment,  still  advancing,  gaining  the 
cover  of  a  wood  leftward  of  a  Federal  battery,  presently  car- 
ried it  by  a  handsome  movement,  gallantly  conducted  by  Lieu- 
tenant-Colonel R.  B.  Snowden,  of  the  Twenty-fifth  Tennessee. 
The  Federals,  however,  received  reenforcements,  and,  moving 
suddenly  northward  on  the  Chattanooga  ^oad,  the  left  and 
rear  of  Fulton's  Brigade,  poured  a  volley  into  it,  causing  the 
whole  brigade  to  fall  back  swiftly  eastward  of  the  road  again, 
leaving  some  seventy  prisoners  and  the  captured  guns  in  the 
enemy  s  hands.    The  Thirtieth  and  Forty-first  Tennessee 
regiments,  however,  were  readily  halted  by  Captain  W.  T. 
Blakemore,  of  Johnson's  staff,  and,  under  Colonel  Walker, 
bravely  resuming  the  offensive,  before  long  drove  the  in- 
trusive column  back.    While  Hood's  command  was  thus  en- 
gaged, about  three  p.m.,  Trigg's  Brigade,  of  Preston's  Division» 


J 


Combat  on  the  Confederate  Left.  327 

was  sent  by  Buckner  to  the  support  of  Robertson,  Law's  Di- 
vision, then  sorely  pressed  by  heavy  infantry  masses  and  the 
blighting  fire  of  a  battery  from  behind  an  earthwork.  Mov- 
ing up  to  where  Robertson's  Texans  were  thus  holding  an  un- 
equal contest,  at  Trigg's  first  volley  at  short  range  the  Federals 
broke  and  were  driven  to  cover,  gallantly  pressed  and  followed 
by  the  Sixth  Florida.  Here  some  misunderstanding  led  to 
the  diversion  and  separation  of  the  other  regiments  of  the 
brigade,  so  that  the  Sixth  Florida,  left  without  support,  was 
necessarily  withdrawn  to  escape  annihilation  under  the  pitiless 
fire  to  which  it  was  now  exposed  in  front  and  on  both  flanks. 
But  it  was  now  twilight,  and  darkness  coming  on  rapidly,  fur- 
ther conflict  was  staid  in  that  quarter  of  the  field,  and  the 
Confederates  rested  on  their  arms. 

The  Federals  encountered  by  Stewart,  Bushrod  Johnson, 
and  Law,  and  finally  by  Trigg's  Brigade,  were  Negley's  Divi- 
sion, Thomas's,  Davis's  Division,  McCoOk's,  and  Wood's  Di- 
visions, of  Crittenden's  Corps,  with  a  brigade  of  Sheridan's 
Division,  that  came  up  last  and  opportunely  saved  Wood  from 
disaster,  as  General  Rosecrans  affirms.  Brannan,  also,  late 
in  the  afternoon  was  transferred  from  the  left  to  this  part  of 
the  field.  Thus  it  will  be  seen,  as  General  Rosecrans,  in  fact, 
observes,  that  the  whole  Federal  army  of  three  corps  was 
brought  "opportunely  and  squarely  into  action"*  on  the  19th, 
save  two  brigades  of  Sheridan's  Division  and  Mitchell's  Ca- 
valry. But  not  so  with  the  Confederates.  Their  General,  it 
would  seem,  did  not  make  amends  for  the  defective  operations 
of  the  previous  week,  and  his  deplorable  failure  to  avail  him- 
self of  transparent  opportunities,  by  diligence  or  the  rapid 
movement  of  his  forces,  once  the  battle  had  been  delivered 
and  accepted.    For,  after  having  been  kept  nearly  all  day 


•  ^'S^Rosecrans's  Official  Report— ^^^.  Rec,  VII.  p.  223. 


J 


328  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

southward  of  Lee's  and  Gordon's  Mills,  its  artillery  engaged 
in  the  exchange  of  a  noisy  artillery  practice  with  some  heavy 
guns,  doubtless  left  by  the  enemy  in  that  quarter  for  that  ob- 
ject, while  all  the  Federal  army  but  two  brigades  had  gone 
northward,  Breckinridge's  Division  (3395  bayonets*)  was  only 
ordered  across  the  Chickamauga  so  late  as  to  enable  it  to 
reach  a  position  just  on  the  right,  in  rear  of  Cleburne,  the 
other  division  of  his  corps,  at  eleven  o'clock  at  night ;  and 
Hindman's  (5621  bayonetsf)  was  likewise  suffered  to  remain 
eastward  of  the  Chickamauga  until  the  middle  of  the  afternoon 
before  it  was  ordered  across  and  to  a  position  in  the  quarter 
where  Bushrod  Johnson  had  been  engaged,  which  was  not 
reached  until  after  sunset,  when  the  conflict  had  ceased,  though 
one  brigade  (Manigault's)  had  a  brief  skirmish  with  some  Fede- 
rals in  its  front.  Moreover,  two  of  Preston's  brigades,  fully 
30CX)  effective  men,  had  likewise  been  kept  unemployed. 
That  is  to  say,  while  Rosecrans  promptly  and  energetically 
engaged  with  aU  his  infantry  save  a  brace  of  brigades,  Bragg, 
numerically  his  inferior,  at  best,  by  8000  fighting  men  and  20 
guns,  had  so  tardily  and  unskillfully  handled  his  resources  as 
to  lose  the  services  of  more  than  12,000  veteran  infantry,  or 
more  than  thirty  per  cent  of  that  arm  of  his  army. 

III. 

BATTLE  OF  SEPTEMBER  20TH. 

Lieutenant-General  Longstreet,  arriving  at  Catoosa  Station 
in  the  middle  of  the  afternoon  of  the  19th,  repaired  as  soon  as 
practicable,  eleven  p.m.,  to  army  headquarters.  There,  General 
Bragg  acquainted  him  with  his  purpose  to  give  battle  the  next 
morning,  by  an  initial  movement  on  his  right,  "  to  be  followed 


•  Aggregate,  3769.  t  Aggregate,  6i02, 


Confederate  Dispositions.  329 

in  succession  toward  the  left,"  so  that  the  whole  line  should  be 
wheeled  upon  the  extreme  left  as  a  pivot.*  Moreover,  that,  for 
the  occasion,  he  had  arranged  his  forces  into  two  grand  divi- 
sions, or  "  wings,"  the  command  of  the  right  one  of  which  was 
assigned  to  Lieutenant-General  Polk,  and  of  the  left  to  Lieu- 
tenant-General  Longstreet.  General  Polk  was  likewise  in- 
formed of  this  disposition  of  the  forces  and  plan  of  battle. 
His  command  embraced  Hill's  Corps,  Walker's  Reserve  Corps, 
and  Cheatham's  Division  of  his  own  corps,  while  his  right 
flank  was  supported  and  covered  by  Forrest's  two  cavalry  di- 
visions. Longstreet's  wing  was  composed  of  Buckner's  Corps, 
Hindman's  Division  of  Polk's  Corps,  Johnson's  Provisional  Di- 
vision, and  Hood'sf  and  McLaw'sJ  Divisions  of  Longstreet's 
own  corps. 

In  consequence  of  a  radically  defective  staff  organization, 
that  bane  throughout  ttie  war  of  all  Confederate  operations, 
and  other  causes,  the  orders  in  regard  to  the  rearrangement 
of  the  Confederate  army,  and  the  inauguration  of  the  battle 
at  daylight,  were  not  communicated  to  several  of  the  officers 
of  highest  rank  on  the  field  in  time  to  secure  prompt  in- 
telligent action  with  their  troops  under  these  orders.  Hill, 
whose  corps  was  to  begin  the  combat,  after  an  ineffectual 
search  for  General  Bragg,  learned  only  about  midnight,  from 
his  Adjutant-General,  on  returning  to  his  own  headquarters, 
of  the  subdivision  of  the  army  into  wings,  and  that  his  own 
corps  fell  under  the  command  of  General  Polk,  who  wished  to 
see  him.  Making  a  fruitless  effort  to  find  that  officer,  he  re- 
turned to  his  troops,  and  remained  unaware  of  the  orders  to 


*   Doubtless  with  the  expectation  of  Kershaw's  and  Humphrey's  brigades, 

cutting  o£f  Rosecrans's  retreat  to  Chat-  (without  artillery,)  which  did  not  reach 

tanooga.  the  field  until  late  in  the  afternoon  of 

t  Under  command  of  General  Law.  the  20th. 

I  HcLaw's  Division  was  made  up  of 


i 


330  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

begin  the  conflict  at  dawn,  until  apprised  of  the  fact  at  eight 
A.M.,  by  General  Bragg  in  person,  who  visited  his  lines  at  that 
hour.  Buckner,  likewise,  was  left  equally  ignorant  of  the  plan 
of  operations  until  informed  of  it  by  General  Longstreet  on 
the  morning  of  the  20th  *  Walker  and  Cheatham,  however, 
receiving  their  orders  direct  from  General  Polk's  headquarters, 
were  both  under  arms  at  the  hour  prescribed  for  the  attack, 
ready  to  advance ;  but  neither  received  orders  to  that  effect 
for  several  hours  later,  f  Forrest,  moreover,  who  was  not  em- 
braced in  the  wing  organization,  did  not  receive  any  orders  or 
instructions  until  after  sunrise.:]: 

Meanwhile,  the   Confederates  were  occupying  very  much 
the  same  positions  in  which  the  cessation  of  hostilities  the 
night  before  had  left  them ;  and  hence  little  order  or  regu- 
larity in  line  of  battle  had  been  attained  at  or  for  an  hour  after 
daylight.     At  that  hour,  indeed,  while  the  right  wing  was  in 
line  facing  nearly  westward,  Buckner  s  Corps,  the  right  of 
Longstreet's,  lay  almost  at  right  angles  to  it,  fronting  near- 
ly northward,  with  a  part  of  Stewart's  Division  overlapping 
the  left  of  Cheatham,  so  that  the  latter  could  not  move  for- 
ward.    Breckinridge,  not  brought  up  before  the  morning  of 
the  20th,  just  before  daylight,  as  will  be  remembered,  was 
placed  on  the  right  of  Cleburne,  of  the  same  corps,  and  ovi 
the  right  of  Polk's  wing,  with  his  right  brigade  (Adams's) 
stretching  across  the  road  leading  from  Reed's  Bridge  to  the 
highway  to  Chattanooga,  at  Glenn's.     Walker  furnished  the 
reserve  for  the  right  wing,  and  Forrest  was  drawn  up  on  the 
right  of  Breckinridge,  with  his  two  small  divisions  stretching 
northward,  some  two  miles,  to  the  Chickamauga,  with  Dibrell's 
Brigade,  Armstrong's  Division,  immediately  on  the  right  01 


•  Buckner's  Official  Report  t  VU£  their  Official  Reports. 

X  Forrest's  Official  Report  and  MS.  Notes. 


k. 


Federal  Dispositions.  331 

Adams's  Infantry  brigade.*  Hindman's  Division  formed  the 
extreme  Confederate  left,  with  his  left  resting  within  half  a 
mile  of  Vinyard's  house.  On  his  right  lay  Bushrod  Johnson 
drawn  up  in  several  lineS ;  and  Wheeler  covered  that  flank 
with  a  portion  of  his  cavalry,  at  the  same  time  having  the  rest 
holding  watch  and  ward,  southward,  over  hostile  movements 
through  the  passes  and  fords  in  that  quarter. 

On  the  part  of  the  Federals,  Rosecrans  had  assembled  his 
corps  commanders  at  his  headquarters — Mrs.  Glenns's,  on 
his  right — ^the  night  of  the  19th.  Hearing  their  report,  he 
then  made  known  his  dispositions  for  the  next  morning  ;  and 
at  or  soon  after  daylight,  it  would  seem  that  his  forces  pre- 
sented a  continuous,  well  furnished  front,  extending  north- 
eastwardly, from  Rosecrans's  headquarters  to  the  Reed's 
Bridge  road,  and  to  a  point  within  a  quarter  of  a  mile  east- 
ward of  the  junction  of  that  road  with  the  Chattanooga  high- 
way, with  a  strong  line  of  reserves.  Since  sunset,  moreover, 
they  had  not  remained  idle,  but  were  actively  at  work  in  the 
construction  of  breastworks  of  logs  and  rails,  and  the  sound 
of  the  labor  had  been  plainly  heard  by  the  Confederates  all 
night.  Of  their  line,  Baird's  Division  formed  the  extreme  left, 
while  Sheridan's  of  McCook's  Corps  occupied  the  right, 
flanked  by  Wilder's  Cavalry.f  The  sun  had  risen  bright  and 
clear,  but  a  dense  mist  lay  low  in  the  valley  between  the  two 
armies,  concealing  them  from  each  other. 

As  has  been  mentioned,  it  was  General  Bragg's  purpose  to 
begin  the  combat  at  daylight.  Circumstances,  in  part  as  yet 
not  satisfactorily  explained,  as  we  have  seen,  led  to  a  delay  of 
some  hours  after  that  time. 


♦  Scott  was  still  absent,  watching  the  mauga,  for  subsistence  and  forage  du- 

movements  of  Granger,  and  Rucker*s  ring  the  night,  but  rejoined  before  the 

Legion  and  Martin's  Kentuckians  had  combat  began, 

been  sent  to  the  rear,  across  Chicka-  t  Vide  a  well-written  newspaper  artl- 


k 


332  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest 

In  the  mean  time,  Forrest  had  ordered  Scott  to  keep  the 
approach  from  Rossville  closely  reconnoitered.  Pegram,  di- 
rected to  hold  the  rest  of  his  division  mounted,  was  also  in- 
structed to  seize  the  road  leading  sd\ithward  from  Rossville  to 
Lee  and  Gordon's  Mills,  by  a  strong  detachment,  and  doing 
so,  reported  before  the  conflict  began  that  there  was  no  enemy 
in  that  quarter.  Armstrong's  Division  was  dismounted  as 
riflemen,  except  the  First  Tennessee  (Colonel  Wheeler)  and 
one  battalion,*  which  were  reserved  to  act  as  cavalry. 

At  length,  between  nine  and  ten,  the  final  orders  to  begin 
-,  the  battle  were  received  on  the  right  Forrest  being  directed 
to  move  and  keep  in  line  with  Breckinridge's  Division,  he  ad- 
vanced, with  Pegram's  Division  in  reserve.  Within  half  a 
mile,  a  brigade  of  Baird's  Division  was  struck,  and  a  warm 
skirmish  ensued.  Breckinridge,  about  the  same  time,  came 
in  contact  with  the  enemy  in  his  front,  his  left — Helm's  Bri- 
gade— becoming  furiously  engaged  with  a  force  behind  strong 
breastworks.  The  Second  and  Ninth  Kentucky,  and  three 
companies  of  Forty-first  Alabama,  having  no  troops  on  their 
left  by  an  accident,  and  from  the  form  of  the  Federal  works, 
were  brought  under  an  enfilading  as  well  as  front  fire,  that 
shattered  their  ranks,  and,  despite  the  admirable  courage  that 
twice  incited  these  brave  men  to  storm  the  position,  they  were 
forced  to  retire,  but  not  until  Robert  C.  Anderson,  color- 
bearer  of  the  Second  Kentucky,  was  slain,  as  he  planted  his 
flag  on  the  enemy's  works.  The  loss,  however,  was  fearful, 
including  that  of  their  accomplished  commander,  Brigadier- 
General   Ben   Hardin   Helm,  mortally  wounded-f      During 


dc,  reprinted  Reh.  Rec,  VII.  Doc  42,  p.  Hewitt,  Captains  Madeira,  Rogers,  aofl 
243,  the  critical  portion  of  which  we  Leedman,  Second  Kentucky,  axKl  Cap- 
note  ew/orian/ as  very  sound,  tain    Daniels,  Ninth    Kentucky,  and 

*  A  battalion  of  Forrest's  old  regi-  many  other  officers  were  alto  killed 

mcnL  outright 

t   Lieutenant-Colonel     James     W. 


Battle  of  the  20th  September.  333 

this  bloody  afiair  the  remainder  of  the  brigade,  more  fortunate, 
had  advanced  across  the  Chattanooga  road,  and  captured  a 
section  of  Napoleon  guns  in  position.  It  was  then  withdrawn, 
and  the  brigade  reassembled  rearward,  under  Colonel  Lewis, 
Sixth  Kentucky.*  Adams  and  Stoval,  meanwhile,  pressing 
steadily  to  the  front,  in  their  part  of  the  field,  with  little  im- 
pediment from  skirmish  lines,  which  they  brushed  aside,  had 
reached  the  road  just  mentioned,  Adams  capturing  a  battery,, 
the  supports  of  which  he  had  dispersed.  Satisfied  that  the 
Federal  line  was  substantially  turned  by  these  brigades, 
Breckinridge  now  changed  their  front  to  one  at  a  right  angle 
to,  and  astride  the  Chattanooga  road,  facing  southward,  Slo- 
comb's  Battery  cooperating.  Advancing  along,  and  to  the 
eastward  of  this  road,  Stoval  in  a  short  distance  developed 
the  extreme  Federal  left — Baird's  Division,  strongly  in- 
trenched— ^and  under  an  enfilading  as  well  as  terrible  direct 
fire,  stubbornly  withstood,  was  repulsed,  and  fell  back  in  good 
order  only  a  few  hundred  yards.  Adams,  rightward  of  the 
road,  soon  encountered  a  Federal  line — Beatty's  Brigade, 
Negley's  Division — drawn  up,  fronting  northward,  and  in  rear 
of  the  intrenchments  developed  by  Stoval,  which  he  broke 
through  by  the  impetuosity  of  his  attack ;  but  a  second  and 
stronger  line — at  least  three  brigades! — stood  behind,  sup- 
ported by  artillery,  that  was  an  overmatch  for  Adams's  single 
brigade.  The  meeting  was  bloody ;  and  the  Confederates 
being  foiled,  were  thrown  back  in  confusion,  leaving  the  in- 
trepid Adams  severely  wounded  in  the  hands  of  the  enemy.J 
Slocomb,  meanwhile,  fighting  his  guns  from  a  favorable  posi- 
tion, with  his  wonted  resolution  and  courage,  the  brigade  was 


*  Fourth  and  Sixth  Kentucky  and  |  The  gallant    Major  Loudon  But- 

■even  companies  Forty-first  Alabama.  ler,  Nineteenth  Louisiana,  was  also  left 

t  See  General  Thomas's  Official  Re-  dead  on  the  field, 
port,  Hfk  Rtc,  VII,  Doc  43,  p.  23a 


334  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

rallied  in  his  rear,  when,  being  severely  cut  up,  he  was  forced 
to  withdraw  and  refit 

Soon  after  Breckinridge  had  set  his  division  in  motion, 
Cleburne  received  orders  to  advance,  keeping  aligned  with 
Breckinridge  ;  this  caused  some  confusion.  Polk's  and  the 
right  of  Wood's  brigades,  already  within  short  canister  range 
of  a  line  of  breastworks  along  the  crest  of  a  ridge  ui  their  im- 
mediate front,  were  mowed  down  for  some  moments  by  a  fire 
that  they  could  not  withstand,  and  they  gave  way.  Polk's 
men,  however,  finding  partial  shelter  behind  the  crest  of  a 
neighboring  ridge,  renewed  and  protracted  the  fight  for  an 
hour  and  a  half,  until  their  ammunition  was  exhausted,  with  a 
loss  of  three  hundred  and  fifty  killed  and  wounded*  Mean- 
while, the  left  of  the  division  had  become  entangled  with 
Stewart's  Division,  so  that  Deshler's  Brigade  for  a  while  was 
retarded  from  advancing.  Wood's  regiments,  however,  were 
able  to  push  forward  upon  the  southern  angle  of  the  breast- 
works in  their  front,  but  having  to  cross  an  open  field  swept 
by  an  oblique  fire  from  small-arms  and  artillery,  they  were  re- 
pulsed, with  the  loss  of  six  hundred  officers  and  men  killed 
and  wounded  in  a  few  moments.!  About  the  same  time,  Desh- 
ler,  having  made  an  inefiectual  efibrt  to  form  a  connection 
with  Polk's  line,  was  thrown  forward,  to  fill  up  the  gap  left  by 
the  repulse  of  Wood,  when  he  was  shot  through  the  chest  by 
a  shell.  Overmatched,  evidently,  by  the  enemy  thus  encoun- 
tered in  their  fortifications — comprising,  apparently,  the  divi- 
sions of  Johnson,  Palmer,  and  Reynolds — Cleburne  retired  to 


*  The  gallant  Captain  Hugh  S.  Otey,  sion,  Major  McGaughey,  Sixteenth 
of  Brigadier-General  Polk's  stafT,  Cap-  Alabama  Cavalry,  Major  Carr,  Thirty- 
tains  W.  J.  Morris,  McKnight,  Second  second  Mississippi,  Major  Hawldos, 
Tennessee,  Adjatant  Greenwood,  First  Hawkins's  Sharp-Shooters,  Major  Gib- 
Arkansas,  and  Captains  Beard  and  son,  Gibson's  Battalion,  all  officers  dis- 
(ieorge  Moore  were  slain  here.  tinguished  by  former  service. 

t  Four  field-officers  fell  on  this  occa 


Severe  Losses  of  Walkers  Corps. 


335 


a  strong  position  rearward,  some  three  hundred  yards  from 
the  point  at  which  his  brigades  had  been  baffled  in  their  onset, 
and  reorganized. 

Walker's  demi-corps,  as  will  be  remembered,  had  been  con- 
stituted the  reserve  of  the  right  wing,  and,  as  soon  as  Breck- 
inridge was  repulsed.  Hill  had  recourse  to  it  for  a  brigade  "  to 
fill  up  the  gap  made  by  Helm's  withdrawal"  The  whole 
command,  however,  was  led  up  in  line  of  battle  by  Walker,  for 
some  of  the  distance  at  a  double-quick  ;  nevertheless,  an  hour 
elapsed  between  the  discomfiture  of  Helm's  Brigade  and 
Walker's  arrival  on  the  scene,  such  was  the  general  mal-dis- 
position  of  the  Confederate  forces  of  that  wing  for  battle- 
emergencies  *  These  troops  were  now  distributed  by  bri- 
gades to  relieve  diff*erent  portions  of  the  right  wing.  Col- 
quitt, thrown  forward  by  General  Hill,  sought  to  relieve  the 
pressure  on  Breckinridge's  right,  and  was  quickly  under  a  de- 
structive enfilading  and  front  fire,  that  brought  to  the  ground 
in  less  than  half  an  hour  fully  a  third  of  his  martial  brigade^ 
and  fell  himself  mortally  wounded,  while  all  his  field-officers 
save  two  were  wounded.f  With  shining  valor  did  the  officers 
an  I  men  of  this  brigade  make  hopeless  head  against  the  fury 
of  the  battle  in  their  front  and  flank,  but  finally  had  to  yield 
and  retire — but  fighting  manfully — to  the  position  from  which 
their  advance  had  been  made.  Ector  and  Wilson,  moved  for- 
ward at  the  same  time  in  support  of  Colquitt,  unable  to  render 
any  substantial  relief,  were  likewise  obliged  to  retire.^    Walt- 


*  Gist*s  Brigade  joined  that  morning 
from  Rome,  Ga.,  and  Walker's  troops 
i\ere  now  divided  into  two  divisions, 
Liddeirs  and  Gisfs,  the  latter  com- 
l>osed  of  Ector's,  Gist's,  (under  Colonel 
P.  H.  Colquitt,  Fourth  Georgia,)  and 
Wilson's  brigades. 

t  No  more  excellent  soldier  than 


Colquitt  fell  at  Chickamauga.  As  a 
colonel,  he  had  shown  what  could  be 
achieved  with  proper  care,  military  in- 
stincts, and  views  of  discipline  in  bring- 
ing volunteer  troops  up  to  the  highest 
soldierly  standard  of  regulars. 

%  See  Wilson's    Report,  Battle    o( 
Chickamauga,  p.  x8i. 


i 


336 


Campaigns  of  General  ForresL 


hall's  Brigade,  LiddelFs  Division,  sent  leftward  in  support  of 
Brigadier-General  Polk,  encountered  speedily  an  overpower- 
ing flank  and  front  fire,  before  which  it  too  had  to  give  way 
with  heavy  loss.*     Nor  did  the  remaining  brigade — Govan's— 
meet  with  more  success.     Detached,  like  the  others,  without 
support  or  apparent  cooperation,  to  try  to  get  rearward,  on 
the  right  of  the  Federals,  beyond  the  highway,  it  likewise^ 
after  penetrating  some  distance,  was  presently  obliged  to  re- 
cede rapidly  to  escape  destruction.!    And  thus,  after  an  hour 
of  gallant,  costly,  bootless  fighting.  Walker's  troops,  like  their 
comrades  of  the  right  wing,  stood  repulsed  or  baffled  despite 
the  utmost  degree  of  courage.J 

During  these  operations  of  the  right  wing,  Stewart  received 
orders  from  General  Bragg,  about  eleven  a.m.,  to  attack  with 
his  division,  one  brigade  of  which — Brown's — he  immediately 
threw  forward,  as  it  chanced  at  the  same  time  and  in  line  with 
Wood's  Brigade,  of  Cleburne's  Division.    Clayton's  and  Bates's 
brigades,  drawn  up  as  a  second  line,  soon  followed,  facing  to- 
ward the  south-west,  as  a  support,  and  both  lines  sturdily 
rushed  onward  at  a  double-quick,  in  the  face  of  an  appalling 
fusilade,  blended  with  grape  and  canister.     But  the  troops 
rightward  of  Brown  did  not  keep  up  long,  and,  breaking,  left 
his  right  flank  bare  to  so  blighting  a  cross-fire  from  small- 
arms  and  artillery,  from  behind  breastworks  within  fifty  yardSf 
that  the  two  regiments  on  the  right  of  this  gallant  brigade. 


*  Here  the  brave  and  accomplished 
Lieutenant-Colonel  Reynolds,  Thirtieth 
Mississippi,  was  killed. 

t  See  Liddell's  Report 

\  Surely,  it  was  not  sound  tactics 
thus  to  disintegrate  Walker  and  throw 
his  brigades  separately  into  action,  and 
no  other  result  could  reasonably  have 
been  anticipated  than  what  happened. 


Really,  they  were  not  engaged  as  "  sup* 
ports,**  but  substitutes  for  brigades 
equally  strong,  that  had  just  been  beat- 
en by  the  same  enemy  in  the  same 
formidable  positions.  General  Walker 
seems  to  have  had  the  correct  view  as 
to  the  proper  conduct  of  afDurs  on  the 
occasion.  See  his  Offidal  Report,  Bat- 
tle of  Chickamauga,  p.  57. 


operations  of  Confederate  Left.  337 

• 
grievously  shattered,  could  only  be  rallied  on  the  position 
from  which  it  had  advanced,*  whither  the  other  regiments 
were  necessarily  withdrawn,  though  they  had  penetrated  be- 
yond the  road  and  turned  the  battery  which  had  been  played 
so  fearfully  upon  their  comrades.  Bates's  and  Clayton's  Bri- 
gades, encountering  the  same  formidable  fire,  were  soon  so 
cut  down  that  the  whole  division  was  checked  and  withdrawn 
a  short  distance  rearward,  under  cover,  to  escape  destruction. 
Here,  however,  in  a  little  while,  it  was  reorganized  and  re- 
formed, with  Bates  on  the  right,  Clayton  in  the  centre,  and 
Brown's  Brigade,  under  Colonel  Cook,  Thirty-second  Tennes- 
see, on  the  left. 

Preston's  Division,  of  the  same  corps,  had  likewise  moved 
against  the  enemy  at  the  same  time  with  Stewart,  Trigg's 
Brigade  in  advance,  followed  by  Gracie  and  Kelly  somewhat 
later.  Their  first  field  of  conflict  that  day  was  on  the  Bro- 
therton  farm,  with  a  strong  Federal  force  in  position  in  some 
fields  northward  of  the  house,  whence  the  enemy  opened  with 
so  vigorous  and  sustained  a  fire  of  shot  and  shell  that  the  fur- 
ther advance  of  Preston  in  that  direction  was  not  attempted 
for  several  hours. 

Johnson's  Division,  which  lay  leftward  of  Stewart,  supported 
by  Law's  two  brigades,  had  thrown  up  cover  during  the  night. 
About  the  time  Breckinridge  and  Forrest  began  the  attack  on 
the  right,  Johnson's  skirmishers  were  driven  in,  and  then  fol- 
lowed a  spirited  attack  upon  his  lines,  but  which  he  easily  re- 
pelled by  a  prompt,  combined  use  of  small-arms  and  artillery. 
And  when  Stewart  was  ordered  to  attack,  Johnson  received 
similar  orders  from  General  Hood.  His  immediate  adversary 
was  found  posted  behind  several  lines  of  breastworks  along 
the  highway  in  the  vicinity  of  Brotherton's  house,  with  other 


*  General  Brown  was  here  disabled  by  a  severe  wound. 


338  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest 

lines  in  front  and  to  the  left  of  it,  with  a  battery  in  an  open 
field  southward  of  the  house.    Traversing  a  wood  swept  by  a 
scathing  fire  of  musketry  and  artillery  for  some  six  hundred 
yards,  the  left  of  the  division  drove  the  Federals  from  around 
the  house,  killing  and  capturing  a  large  number.     Posting  a 
battery  in  a  favorable  position,  which  opened  frontward  and 
rightward,  Johnson  again  moved  forward  with  his  infantiy 
upon  a  line  of  works  still  ahead.     His  advance  was  gfreeted 
with  a  fire  so  sustained  and  galling  that  McNair's  Brigade 
wavered  for  a  moment  and  began  to  fall  back,  but  was  quickly 
rallied  and  led  forward  again  by  its  officers.    The  whole  divi- 
sion, closely  supported  by  Law,  now  pressed  on  with  such 
vigor  that  the  enemy  broke  and  left  their  works  precipitately, 
severely  punished,  however,  especially  by  a  fire  from  Johnson  s 
left — several  Texan  and  Tennessee  battalions,  under  Majors 
Robertson   and  Vanzant.      Pushing  steadily  the  advantage 
gained,  Johnson,  keeping  his  division  well  in  hand,  had  now 
carried  it  some  distance  through  the  forest  westward  of  the 
road,  and  emerged  upon  some  open  ground  and  fields,  over 
which  the  Federals  were  falling  back  under  cover  of  several 
batteries  planted  around  the  crest  of  a  ridge  in  front  and  on 
the  right,  while  leftward  another  battery,  on  an  eminence 
southwest  of  Dyer's  House,  bore  upon  and  harassed  Johnson  s 
left  and  front.     The  scene  at  this  moment  is  described  as 
having  been  one  of  peculiar  exciting  interest     In  the  lan- 
guage of  a  prominent  participant :  "  The  resolute  and  impetu- 
ous charge,  the  rush  of  our  heavy  columns,  sweeping  out  from  1 
the  shadow  and  gloom  of  the  forest  into  the  open  fields,  the  '' 
onward  dash  of  artillery  and  mounted  men,  the  retreat  of  the 
foe,  the  shouts  of  the  hosts  of  our  army,  the  dust,  the  smoke, 
the  noise  of  firearms,  the  whistling  balls  and  grape-shot  and 
of  bursting  shell,  made  up  a  battle  scene  of  unsurpassed 
grandeur." 

In  three  lines  Johnson  passed  on  with  an  impetus  that  was 


The  Confederate  Left  Wing.  339 

rresistible,  and  the  enemy's  centre  was  shattered  into  many 
ragments. 

Simultaneously  with  Johnson,  Hindman's  Division*  likewise 
advanced  at  a  double-quick,  and  became  hotly  engaged  within 
four  hundred  yards  with  some  five  or  six  Federal  brigades 
posted  on  very  strong  gfround ;  but  just  at  a  juncture,  it  would 
seem,  when  McCook,  commanding  Federals  in  that  quarter, 
dad  been  ordered  to  deplete  that  wing  by  sending  two  bri- 
^des  at  once,  and  a  third  soon  thereafter,  to  reenforce  the 
left,  even  at  the  expense  of  withdrawing  their  whole  right.t 
Deas  and  Manigault  led  in  Hindman's  onset,  with  Anderson 
supporting.  Dashing  with  a  splendid  impetuosity  at  the 
ijreastworks  confronting  them,  these  were  carried.  Behind 
was  a  gently  rising  ridge,  upon  which  were  twelve  guns  in 
i>attery,  and  another  line  of  infantry  cover  on  the  slope  of  the 
lill  in  their  front  Resuming  the  offensive,  the  Confederates 
:arried  this  obstacle  also  after  a  short  struggle,  in  the  course 
>f  which  Manigault's  Brigade,  brought  under  a  severe  enfilad- 
ng  fire  of  artillery  and  small-arms,  suffered  greatly,  and  was 
itaggered  for  a  time,  but,  rallying,  as  became  their  accom- 
Dlished  Brigadier,  and  their  own  martial  virtues  and  repute, 
esumed  the  onslaught  and  seized  the  breastworks  in  their 
ront  and  the  Federal  artillery  in  that  part  of  the  line.  Deas 
00,  in  pressing  onward  to  the  summit  of  the  hill,  was  brought 
o  bay  before  a  battery,  when  the  weight  of  Anderson's  Bri- 
gade was  thrown  into  the  balance,  and  the  position  was  car- 
•ied,  the  artillery  all  captured,  and  the  Federals  either  killed, 
raptured,  or  dispersed,  not  to  reorganize  on  the  field. 


*   Anderson's,   Dea*s,    Manigault's  gade  repeating  rifles,  or  some  six  M- 

yngades,  501  officers,  5621  bayonets  and  gades  at  least,  with  say  9000  effective 

irtillcrists,  and  12  guns,  men  and  36  guns. — Vidt  Rch^  Rtc.  VIL 

t  Two  brigades,  Davis's  Division,  Doc  43,  p.  234. 
>heridan*s  Division,  and  VSTOder's  Bri- 


340  Campaigfis  of  General  Forrest. 

Longstreet's  entire  wing  was  now  engaged.  Handled  for 
the  most  part  with  more  concert  and  concentration  than  the 
right,  its  assaults  feU  with  gfreater  weight  and  eflfect  upon  the 
enemy  in  its  front,  embracing  two  of  McCook's  and  two  of 
Crittenden's  divisions,  with  Wilder's  picked  brigade  and  a 
numerous  artillery. 

On  the  Confederate  right,  the  attack  beginning  by  divisions 
"  in  succession,"  as  ordered,  and  made  in  single  lines,  was 
subsequently  maintained  with  little  unity  of  aim  and  offensive 
means,  while  Rosecrans  accumulated  his  masses  there  to  re- 
sist and  foil,  ''at  all  hazards,"  his  adversary's  obvious  but 
meagrely  sustained  purpose  —  to  cut  off  his  retreat  upon 
Chattanooga. 

Resuming  the  narrative  of  operations  on  that  part  of  the 
,field,  at  the  time  that  Breckinridge  and  Forrest  had  been 
balked  in  their  unsupported  effort  to  turn  the  Federal  left, 
we  have  first  to  relate  that,  about  eleven  a.m.,  Peg^ram,  in  ob- 
servation toward  Rossville,  reported  to  Forrest  the  near  ap- 
proach of  Granger  from  that  direction.    Fronting  this  move- 
ment promptly  with  Armstrong's  men  dismounted  and  six- 
teen guns,  (two  borrowed  from  Breckinridge,)  while  Pegram 
harassed  the  left  flank,  Forrest  became  quickly  and  warmly 
engaged  with  this  new  enemy,  and  forced  Granger  to  deflect 
some  distance  westward  from  the  road,  but  was  too  weak  to 
prevent  his  final  junction  with  Thomas,  to  whom  were  thus 
carried  4500  fresh  bayonets  and  twelve  guns. 

After  this  there  was  a  lull  in  the  operations  of  the  Con- 
federates throughout  their  entire  right  wing  for  more  than 
two  hours,  or  as  late  as  half-past  three  p.m. — two  hours  of  as 
precious  time  as  were  ever  squandered  on  a  battle-field,  while 
Longstreet  was  driving  the  Federals  from  every  position  with- 
in his  reach  on  the  left 

We  are  definitely  told  by  Generals  Hill  and  Qebume  it 
was  half-past  three  p.m.  when  General  Polk  ordered  a  general 


operations  of  Confederate  Right.  341 

ice ;  but  again  there  was  delay,  delay  caused  by  the 
e  of  General  Jackson  (Cheatham's  Division)  to  place  his 
de  in  a  gap  in  the  line  to  which  it  had  been  repeatedly 
ed,  and  as  early  as  midday.* 

this  advance,  so  inexplicably  postponed  as  late  as  about 
*.M.,  Forrest's  command,  operating,  dismounted,  as  rifle- 
was  on  the  right.  Breckinridge  came  next,  on  the  left, 
:wo  of  Cheatham's  brigades  filling  the  gap  between  his 
tid  Cleburne.  Very  soon,  from  Forrest  on  the  right  to 
me's  left,  the  right  wing  of  the  Confederates  was  again 
!y  engaged  with  Thomas,  who  had  now  accumulated 
his  command,  be  it  noted,  his  own  four  divisions,  two 
)ns  and  at  least  two  brigades  of  Crittenden's,  and  John- 
Division  of  McCook's,  with  Granger's  4500  bayonets,  or 
than  eight  divisions,  mustering  quite  35,000  combat- 
notwithstanding  the  heavy  casualties  of  preceding  con- 

^ 

rest,  pressing  forward  westwardly  toward  the  highway 
ittanooga,  found  a  strong  Federal  force  drawn  up  be- 
.  fence  that  skirted  it  on  the  eastward,  supporting  a  bat- 
f  six  guns,  which  swept  the  field  between  his  men  and 
ederals.  Halting  only  long  enough  to  reconnoitre,  he 
ed  a  skirmish  line  in  front  in  the  field  in  question  and 
:shed  the  rifled  section  of  Huggins's  Battery  in  the  same 
>n,  from  which  they  were  brought  to  bear  upon  the 
il  battery  as  Armstrong's  Division  charged  with  im- 
ity,  and  the  enemy  gave  back  to  another  line  some  two 
id  yards  westward,  but  not  until  they  had  inflicted  a 
le  loss  upon  the  assailants.     Establishing  his  line  in 


icral  Hill's  Official  Report—  Rec,  Docs.  43  and  184,  pp.  233-4-8, 

p  Ijrve^  Vol.  I.  No.  6,  p.  401.  529-534.    These  divisions  before  the 

Reports  of  Generals  McCook,  battle  numbered  an  effective  aggregate 

en,  Granger,  and  Hazen. — Reb,  of  45,190,  infantry  and  artillery. 


342  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

the  road  just  abandoned  by  his  adversary,  Forrest  formed  his 
men  under  an  angry  fire  from  Federal  musketry  and  field- 
pieces,   that  thinned   his  ranks  to  a  fearful  extent.     But 
nevertheless,  there  was  no  faltering  with  .these  doughty  Ten- 
nesseeans,  the  men  of  Forrest's  old  brigade  and  of  his  old  re- 
giment, nor  on  the  part  of  their  brave  compeers  of  Arm- 
strong's own  brigade.     They  retorted  the  fire  which  they  had 
provoked  with  surpassing  spirit,  and  pressed  upon  the  foe 
slowly  but  steadily.     Dibrell,  adjoining  the  infantry  on  his 
left,  had  gained  a  position  within  seventy-five  yards  of  the 
Federal  battery,  and  Huggins  was  westward  of  the  road,  when 
the  former  noticed  and  reported  to  Forrest  that  the  Confede- 
rates on  his  left  had  been  repulsed  and  were  falling  back,  un- 
covering his  flank.*  Withdrawing  his  own  battery  rearward  to 
a  ridge,  Dibrell  was  now  ordered  to  hold  his  ground,  but  was 
soon  enfiladed  by  the  Federals,  who  had  pressed  the  infantry 
back ;  and  Forrest,  too,  had  now  to  recede  to  shelter  from  the 
tempest  behind  the  embankment  that  bordered  a  ditch  in  the 
centre  of  the  field  just  west  of  the  highway.     But,  happily,  at 
the  same  time  his  artillery  opened  with  such  salutary  effect 
that  the  further  advance  of  the  enemy  was  stayed     In  this 
phape  of  the  combat  the  Fourth  and  the  Ninth  (Biffle's)  Ten- 
nessee suffered  more  than  the  other  regiments  ;  but  all  were 
alike  conspicuous  for  the  most  admirable  courage,  while  the 
Fourth  Tennessee,  under  McLemore,  and  the  Eighth,  under 
Captain  McGuinis,  maintained  their  stand  after  the  infantry 
on  the  left  gave  way  until  they  were  almost  enveloped  by  the 
enemy,  and  were  ordered  back  by  Generals  Forrest  and  Di- 
brell, and  but  for  the  mishap  to  the  infantry  at  that  juncture. 


*  Biffle  rejoined  with  liis  regiment     of  several  months  in  West-Tennesic^ 
(Ninth  Tennessee)  during  the  battle     and  took  part  in  the  combat 
from  arduous,  stirring  detached  service 


Confederate  Right  Wing.  343 

in  a  few  moments  Dibrell  assuredly  would  have  carried  the 
battery  almost  within  his  grasp. 

In  the  mean  time,  as  we  have  said,  there  had  been  a  general 
advance  of  the  Confederate  right  wing.  Breckinridge's  Divi- 
sion, as  in  the  morning,  taking  the  right  of  the  infantry  con- 
joined with  Liddell's  Division,  made  a  superb  assault  upon 
the  Federal  left,  while  Cleburne  pressed  strenuously  forward 
in  the  centre,  with  Cheatham's  Division  moving  close  behind 
as  a  reserve.  At  first  the  resistance  was  obstinate,  and  at 
points  favorable  for  the  enemy.  Thomas,  strongly  posted, 
well  sheltered  by  breastworks,  and  superior  in  numbers  to  his 
assailants,*  made  a  stout,  bloody  fight  to  the  last  tenable  mo- 
ment ;  and  on  his  left,  where  he  had  massed  his  forces  in 
heavy  lines,  the  Confederates,  as  we  have  seen,  faltered,  and, 
giving  way,  uncovered  Dibrell's  Brigade,  (Forrest's  dismount- 
ed cavalry,)  and  forced  them  to  fall  back  to  the  embankment 
we  have  mentioned.  Seeing  this  misadventure,  Forrest,  leav- 
ing  his  own  men  thus  well  intrenched,  hurried  leftward,  and, 
throwing  hunself  among  the  infantry,  aided  their  officers  to 
rally  them.  This,  indeed,  was  speedily  attained,  the  offensive 
was  finally  and  handsomely  renewed  at  all  points,  and  the 
Federal  lines  were  surmounted  in  all  their  formidable  extent 
by  the  onrushing  Confederates,  Just  before  this,  however,  it  is 
proper  to  mention  that  it  was  known  to  the  Federals  under 
Thomas  that  a  disastrous  rout  had  befallen  their  right,  and 
this  doubtless  aided  somewhat  to  shorten  the  struggle  and 
added  to  the  disorder  that  now  supervened  for  the  most  part 
in  their  ranks. 

In  this  last  and  crowning  attack,  Brigadier-General  Lucius 
Polk  fought  his  brigade,  of  Cleburne's  Division,  with  brilliant 


*  Thomas,  we  repeat,  had  still  intact     report  and  that  of  Hazen  as  cited  be- 
behind   his  lines,  except  from  battle     fore,  p.  54l« 
casualties,  eight  divisions.    See  his  own 


344  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

efficiency,  and,  aided  by  Keys's  and  in  part  by  Douglass's 
batteries,  run  into  position  by  hand,  carried  three  lines  of 
breastworks  in  succession  ;*  while  at  the  same  time,  far  and 
wide,  the  field  was  the  theatre  of  acts  of  heroism  in  officers  of 
all  grades  and  of  the  private  soldiery  that  were  never  sur- 
passed. 

The  entire  Federal  army  was  now  to  be  seen  by  the  last 
rays  of  daylight  rapidly  escaping  in  swarms  up  the  ravines 
and  slopes  of  Missionary  Ridge.  But  no  pursuit  was  organ- 
ized or  ordered,  and,  darkness  being  at  hand,  the  Confederates 
of  that  wing,  including  Forrest's  command,  bivouacked  on  the 
ground,  very  much  where  the  close  of  the  battle  had  carried 
them. 

Returning  to  the  Confederate  left  wing,  it  remains  to  relate 
of  events  in  that  quarter  that,  after  McCook  had  been  routed 
from  his  early  positions,  as  we  have  previously  narrated,  an 
impetuous,  concerted  pressure  was  maintained  by  all  of  Long- 
street's  Divisions,  sothat  little  time  or  opportunity  was  given 
to  the  Federals  to .  rally  and  mass  for  a  combined  resistance, 
that  might  otherwise  have  resulted.  Howbeit,  some  five  bri- 
gades, at  least,  of  the  Twentieth  Corps,  McCook's,  gained  a 
footing  on  a  wooded  height — a  spur  of  Missionary  Ridge — be- 
tween the  farms  of  Villetoe  and  Snodgrass.  Johnson's  Divi- 
sion was  brought  up  to  assail  this  position,  supported  by  Hind- 
man  on  the  south,  while  Kershaw,  Preston,  and  Stewart  at- 
tacked from  the  northward.  Buckner  also  carried  up  and 
brought  to  bear  with  his  troops  twelve  guns,  and  Johnson  was 
effectively  aided  by  Dent's  and  Everett's  batteries.  The 
struggle  was  stubborn  and  the  results  varying,  with  fluctua- 
tions of  success  and  check  for  the  Confederates  for  several 


*  Vide  General  Cleburne's  Official     Moore,  Third  and  Fifth  Confederate, 
Report    Captains  Beard  and  George     fell  at  this  thne. 


Results  and  Commentaries.  545 

hours,  or  until  about  five  p.m.,  when,  completely  flanking  the 
enemy,  the  Confederates,  with  a  simultaneous  onset  and  loud 
shouts,  sweeping  all  before  them,  were  complete  masters  of 
the  field,  and  their  adversaries  finally  and  completely  routed. 
Many  prisoners  were  captured  on  the  spot  and  a  number  of 
guns.  It  was  now  sunset,  and  Longstreet  ordered  his  forces 
to  bivouac  where  they  were,  so  that  stragglers  might  be  col- 
lected, ammunition-boxes  refilled,  and  all  be  held  ready  for 
a  vigorous  pursuit  on  the  following  morning.  Among  the  re- 
sults accomplished  by  that  wing  on  the  20th  were  the  capture 
of  40  cannon,  some  3000  prisoners,  and  10  regimental  colors. 
Its  losses  were  commensurate  with  these  satisfactory  achieve- 
ments, being  1089  officers  and  men  killed,  6406  wounded,  and 
272  missing,  or  an  aggregate  of  7867  casualties  out  of  22,882 
officers  and  men  engaged.* 

Of  the  operations  of  this  day  little  else  remains  to  be  told 
than  that,  during  the  action,  the  main  body  of  Wheeler's  Ca- 
valry was  assembled  on  the  east  bank  of  the  Chickamauga,  at 
Glass's  Mills,  far  to  the  southward  of  the  field,  and  was  there 
confronted  for  a  time  by  a  Federal  cavalry  force  with  artillery, 
which  Wheeler  assailed,  by  crossing  the  stream  dismounted, 
and  drove  off  with  some  few  captures.  At  three  p.m.,  moving 
up  to  Lee  and  Gordon's  Mills,  there  too  he  had  a  brush,  and, 
following  up  with  spirit,  overtook  and  captured  about  looo 
prisoners  from  the  enemy,  now  flying  from  Longstreet's  troops 
over  the  mountain.! 

COMMENTARIES. 

Reserving  for  a  future  occasion  and  another  work  an  elabo- 
rate examination  of  the  strategy  of  this  campaign  and  the 
tactics  of  the  battle  of  Chickamauga,  we  shall  restrict  present 


Longstreet's  Official  Report  t  Wheeler's  Official  Report 


346  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

commentary  to  a  few  observations  that  appear  to  be  essential 
here. 

I.  General  Bragg's  correspondence  with  his  subordinates  in 
regard  to  the  operation  projected  against  the  part  of  Thomas's 
Corps,  isolated  and  imperiled  in  McLemore's  Cove,  as  given 
in  his  official  report  of  the  battle  of  Chickamauga,  suppressed 
the  more  important  parts  of  that  correspondence,  and  is 
therefore  calculated  to  mislead.  General  Bragg's  information 
at  fii'st,  when  he  ordered  the  movement,  was  correct — ^that  is, 
that  the  force  exposed  was  about  four  or  five  thousand.  Un- 
fortunately, he  permitted  that  estimate  to  be  unsettled  in  his 
mind,  and  displaced  by  apprehensions  that  possibly  a  much 
stronger  force  might  be  there — in  fact,  one  that  jeopardized 
the  force  he  had  detached  to  crush  it.  Hence,  through  his 
Chief  of  Staff,  General  Mackall,  he  wrote  two  dispatches  (not 
given  in  his  report)  to  General  Hindman,  evincing  that  appre- 
hension in  clear  terms.  One,  written  after  his  arrival  at  Dug 
Gap,  as  late  at  eleven  a.m.  on  the  i  ith,  is  in  these  words  :  "  If 
"  you  find  the  enemy  in  such  force  as  to  make  an  attack  ira- 
"  prudent,/^//  back  at  once  on  Lafayette  by  Catlett's  Gap,  from 
"which  obstructions  have  been  removed.  Send  your  deter- 
"  mination  at  once,  and  act  as  promptly."  In  the  other  note, 
Hindman  was  thus  addressed :  "  The  enemy,  estimated  at 
"  twelve  or  fifteen  thousand,  is  forming  line  in  front  of  this 
"place,*  (Dug  Gap.)  Nothing  heard  of  you  since  Captain 
"Pressman,  engineer,  was  with  you.  The  General  is  most 
"  anxious,  and  wishes  to  hear  from  you  by  couriers  once  an 
"hour.  .  .  .  The  enemy  are  advancing  from  Graysville 
"  to  Lafayette.     Dispatch  is  necessary  to  us." 

Unfortunately,  General  Hindman  was  misled  by  the  very 
boldness  of  Negle/s  movement,  and  regarded  it  as  a  blind  to 


*  That  is,  Negley's  and  Baird's  Divisions,  11,000  stroi^ 


Commentaries.  347 

mask  the  movements  of  the  main  body  of  the  enemy  mean- 
while, and  so  suggested  to  his  chief,  who,  however,  from  spe- 
cific information  ought  to  have  comprehended  it  was  not  so, 
and  that  the  force  in  McLemore's  Cove,  at  most,  could  not  be 
greater  than  Thomas's  Corps — (it  was  actually  less  than  half 

of  it)  —  FOR  HE  KNEW  THAT   McCoOK  WAS   AT  AlPINE,  AND 

Crittenden  quite  as  far  off  northward.  At  half-past 
seven  p.m.,  on  the  lOth,  he  had  the  right  appreciation  of  the 
situation ;  for  an  Adjutant-General  of  his  staff  wrote  to  Hind- 
man  as  follows :  "  The  enemy  is  now  divided.  Our  force  at 
or  near  Lafayette  is  superior  to  that  of  the  enemy.  It  is  im- 
portant now  to  move  vigorously  and  crush  him!\  (Signed, 
Kinloch  Falconer.) 

But  unhappily,  he  could  neither  keep  this  state  of  affairs 
in  his  view  nor  square  his  operations  by  it.  He  vacillated 
and  left  a  subordinate  to  decide,  who  did  not — could  not — 
have  the  same  knowledge  of  the  actual  situation  that  he  had 
as  General  in  Chief. 

2.  Unquestionably,  General  Bragg  is  not  alone  responsible 
for  the  failure  to  strike  and  crush  Crittenden's  Corps  on  the 
occasion  we  have  described.  But  it  would  appear  that  he  did 
not  give  General  Polk  the  order  to  move  against  that  corps 
until  six  P.M.  on  the  12th,  whereas  he  knew  of  its  movements 
at  midnight  (if  not  earlier)  on  the  loth.*  He,  therefore, 
yjzsttd  forty-two  precious  hours  before  he  decided  upon  doing 
what  was  surely  apparent  to  the  veriest  tyro  in  war  operations. 
Crittenden,  in  fact,  had  already  taken  position  at  Lee  and 
Gordon's  Mills.  Bragg  had  now,  however,  subordinated 
operations  against  the  enemy  in  McLemore's  Cove  to  the 
attack  upon  Crittenden  ;  for,  in  his  orders  to  General  Polk,  he 
expressly  urged  that,  Crittenden  being  crushed,  "  we  can  turn 


•   Vide  letter  of  Colonel  Brent,  A.  A.  G.,  to  General  Hindman,  in  General 
Bragg*s  Official  Report,  p.  9. 


348  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

on  the  force  in  the  cove."  That  he  knew  the  enemy  was  still 
divided  is  apparent ;  for,  in  a  subsequent  note,  Colonel  Brent 
observes  to  General  Polk :  "  The  eijemy  is  approaching  from 
the  south,  and  it  is  highly  important  that  your  attack  in  the 
morning  should  be  quick  and  decided."  General  Bragg  ex- 
presses in  his  report  his  disappointment  that  his  orders  for 
the  attack  were  not  executed  on  the  morning  of  the  13th, 
but  does  not  communicate  his  reasons  for  not  concentrating 
his  whole  force,  as  he  might  have  done,  either  that  after- 
noon or,  in  fact,  for  at  least  the  next  three  days,  upon  the 
same  corps  (Crittenden's)  at  Lee  and  Gordon's  Mills.  Nor 
does  he  mention  why  he  preferred  to  wait  until  Rosecrans 
had  brought  up  his  three  widely-separated  corps  and  united 
them  (not  sooner  than  the  17th)  at  and  south  of  Lee  and 
Gordon's  Mills  !  Bragg,  assuredly,  was  not  waiting  for  reen- 
forcements. 

3.  Granger's  movement  should  have  been  intercepted.  No- 
thing had  been  easier  than  the  capture  of  that  entire  force. 
Forrest  kept  his  superiors  promptly  advised  of  its  approach 
from  Rossville,  and  Thomas  was  too  busily  engaged  to  spare 
any  succor  had  Granger  been  attacked  in  proper  force.  To 
hold  his  own  ground  was  all  that  Thomas  could  do. 

4  An  examination  of  the  returns  of  Confederate  killed  and 
wounded,  of  the  troops  engaged  on  the  right,  will  show  one  of 
the  bloodiest  engagements  in  the  annals  of  war.  Wilson's 
Brigade  lost  fifty  per  cent,  and  the  average  was  fully  thirty- 
six  per  cent.  This  was  because  divisions  were  thrown  into 
action  and  fought  by  driblets.  Nor  was  that  all ;  largely 
superior  in  that  quarter  of  the  field,  as  we  have  shown — 
Thomas  having  eight  divisions  at  his  command,  the^  Fede- 
rals also  were  intrenched,  and  against  these  intrenchments 
the  Confederates  were  hurled  in  charge  after  charge,  when, 
if  properly  handled,  they  might  in  full  force  have  turned 


Commentaries.  349 

these  works  as  was  done  at  one  time  by  Generals  Breckin- 
ridge and  Forrest. 

5.  It  will  scarcely  escape  the  general  reader  that  General 
Bragg  was  singularly  inert  on  the  morning  of  the  21st  of 
September,  not  to  speak  of  the  evening  of  the  battle,  in  follow- 
ing up  and  pressing  his  adversary,  of  whose  utterly  demoralized 
condition,  as  has  been  seen,  he  had  explicit  information.  In 
the  conclusion  of  his  report  of  the  operations  of  his  own  corps 
at  the  battle  of  Shiloh,  he  uses  this  significant  language  :  "  In 
"  this  result  we  have  a  valuable  lesson  by  which  we  should 
"  profit — never  on  a  battle-field  to  lose  a  moment's  time,  but, 
"  leaving  the  killed,  wounded,  and  spoils  to  those  whose  spe- 
"  cial  business  it  is  to  care  for  them,  to  press  on  with  every 

"  AVAILABLE  MAN,  GIVING  A  PANIC-STRICKEN  AND  RETREATING 
"  FOE  NO  TIME  TO  RALLY,  AND  REAPING  ALL  THE  BENEFITS  OF 
"  A  SUCCESS  NEVER  COMPLETE  UNTIL  EVERY  ENEMY  IS  KILLED, 

"  WOUNDED,  OR  CAPTURED."  It  is  unfortunate  that  he  could 
not  remember  his  own  fluent  precept  when  he  had  so  signal 
and  early  an  opportunity  to  illustrate  its  justness  ;  and  by  his 
course  has  rather  illustrated  once  more,  in  a  notable  manner, 
how  much  easier  it  is  to  preach  than  practice. 


s 


SiSSSSS^^TS^ 


CHAPTER  XII. 

Central  Forrest  pursued  Enemy  upon  Missionary  Ridge— Otserva  aad 
reports  state  of  Tumult  and  Disorder  in  Chattanooga — Urges  immt- 
diate  Advance  upon  Enemy — Obtained  View  of  inaction  on  Eieldtf 
late  Battle  of  Confederates — Reports  by  Dispatches  tht  Confusion 
among  Federals — Major  McLemgre  penetrated  to  within  three  miles 
of  Chattancoga,  and  captures  Prisoners — Pegram  threattned  Rass- 
ville,  but  too  weak  to  attack  Enemy  in  strong  Position — Enemy  wtrk 
v^orouily  in  trenches  around  Chattanooga — Forrest  recalled  l»  Red 
House  Bridge — Army  in  motion — Forrest  again  threw  his  Farce  in 
Chattanooga  Vallejf^Drove  in  Pickets  and  occupied  Approaches— 
Dibrell  seized  Point  of  Lookout  Mountain — Obliged  to  mainiain 
Position  by  severe  Fighting — Forrest's  Command  withdrawn  la 
7'yner's  Station — Ordered  to  tneet  Eiumy  crossing  Hiawassee — Com- 
bat at  Crossing  of  Hiawassee — Pursuit,  with  Skirmish,  tkra*^ 
Athens  and  Philadelphia  to  Loudon,  Tennessee — Captured  Federal 
Camp  at  Philadelphia — Received  Orders  to  return  to  Cleveland 
— Ordered  to  transfer  all  Troops,  save  Dibrelts  Brigade,  to  General 
Wheeler,  for  Expedition — Regarding  Order  in  derogation  of  his  Pe- 
tition, Forrest  presents  his  views  in  writing  to  General  Bragg— 0* 
Leave  of  Absence — Interview  with  President  Davis — Assigned  It  M 
Command  of  Cavalry  in  North- Mississippi  and  West-Tennessee 

September  z\st— November  ii^tk,  1863. 

IJENERAL  Forrest  had  his  command  in  the  saddle  at  four 
A.M.  on  the  2ist,  and  taking  Dibrell's  Brigade,  at  once  ascended 
Missionary  Ridge.  Throwing  the  Fourth  Tennessee — under 
McLemore — across  into  the  valley,  westward,  with  the  other 
regiments  he  moved  through  the  woods,  along  the  crest, 
northward,  in  close  pursuit,  while  Armstrong  swept  along  the 


Forrest  on  Missionary  Ridge.  351 

slopes,  eastward,  toward  Rossville,  with  Pegram  still  on  his 
right  in  the  same  direction,  and  north-eastward  also.  Dibrell 
coming  upon  the  Federal  rear,  captured  several  hundred,  and 
drove  the  rest  into  Rossville. 

Climbing  a  tree,  about  seven  p.m.,  Forrest  sought  to  satisfy 
himself  of  the  situation,  and  discovered  the  enemy  in  a  dis- 
ordered retreat  into  Chattanooga,  which  lay  in  full  view  be- 
neath him,  a  scene  of  wild  chaos  and  tumult.  This  state  of 
affairs  was  immediately  communicated,  in  written  dispatches, 
both  to  Generals  Bragg  and  Polk,  upon  whom  it  was  urged 
that  an  immediate  advance  must  be  successful,  while  every 
moment  was  precious,  or,  to  use  his  own  language  in  one  of 
these  notes,  "  every  hour  lost  was  the  loss  of  one  thousand 
men."  Meanwhile,  similar  information  had  been  communi- 
cated by  Lieutenant-Colonel  Paul  Anderson,  of  Wheeler's  Ca- 
valry, who  had  also  been  thrown  out  on  Missionary  Ridge  by 
General  Longstreet  to  McFarland's  Gap,  whence  he  reported 
by  an  officer,  and  several  couriers  subsequently,  that  the 
enemy  were  rushing  toward,  and  into,  Chattanooga,  a  dis- 
organized multitude. 

After  some  time  spent  in  these  observations  and  reports, 
Forrest  again  moved  forward  over  very  rough  ground,  still 
capturing  numerous  stragglers,  and  finding  the  woods  thickly 
strewn  with  arms  and  accoutrements,  ambulances  and  cais- 
sons, wagons  and  their  teams.  Among  the  captured  was  a 
vidette,  who  pointed  out  a  Federal  officer  in  a  tall  tree,  which 
had  been  conveniently  fitted  up  as  an  observatory,  command- 
ing a  complete  view  for  miles  in  all  directions.  Displacing 
this  observer  from  his  lofty  perch,  Forrest,  taking  his  position 
and  his  glasses,  had  immediately  under  his  eyes  the  whole 
situation.  Rearward,  on  the  field  of  the  recent  conflicts,  the 
whole  Confederate,  army  still  lay  torpid  at  the  Federal  breast- 
works, as  if  gorged  with  carnage,  and  languid  from  the  ardent 
battle-fever  of  the  day  before ;  while  frontward  he  saw  that 


352  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

the  pontoon-bridge  across  the  Tennessee  was  broken,  and  the 
streets  of  Chattanooga  were  blocked  up  with  Federal  troops, 
impacted  with  artillery  and  caissons,  ambulances,  baggage- 
wagons,  and  beef-cattle,  a  floundering,  tumultuary  mass.  This 
state  of  affairs  he  likewise  communicated  to  Generals  Bragg 
and  Polk,  in  repeated  dispatches,  dictated  to  his  staff  from  his 
outlook.      After  which,  descending,  he  again  moved  north- 
ward, to  a  point  about  five  miles  in  a  line  from  Chattanooga, 
and  overlooking  the  town.  Here  he  found  in  position  a  strong 
Federal  force,  one  too  strong  to  be  assaulted  by  his  men. 

In  the  mean  time,  McLemore  had  led  the  Fourth  Tennessee 
so  eagerly  forward,  that  he  had  penetrated  within  three  miles 
of  Chattanooga,  in  the  midst  of  large  bodies  of  Federals,  who, 
however,  were  so  panic-stricken  as  not  to  recognize  his  expo- 
sure, and  were  only  anxious  to  get  to  the  river-bank.  Seeing 
the  danger,  however,  Forrest  recalled  his  Lieutenant,  who 
came  slowly  back,  full-handed  with  prisoners.  • 

During  these  events,  Armstrong  and  Pegram  had  become 
sharply  engaged  in  front  of  the  gap  at  RossviUe,  where  Tho- 
mas had  concentrated  the  wreck  of  Rosecrans's  forces  that 
had  preserved  a  semblance  of  organization,  but  were  able  to 
effect  nothing  substantial  up  to  four  p.m.,  when  Forrest  was 
informed  by  General  Bragg  that  he  had  put  his  infantry  in 
movement  toward  Chattanooga,  by  the  Red  House  Bridge 
road,  at  which  point  he  would  be  found  that  night,  and  all  the 
approaches  to  which  were  to  be  picketed  by  his  cavalry. 

In  the  mean  time,  the  sounds  were  audible  from  Chatta- 
nooga of  vigorous  labor  on  the  fortifications,  and  large  work- 
ing parties  were  already  to  be  plainly  seen  engaged  in  their 
trenches,  as  Forrest  quit  his  position  of  observation  on  the 
ridge,  and  descended  toward  the  Chickamauga,  in  the  quarter 
designated  He  was  deeply  chargrined  and  depressed  in  view 
of  the  strange  delay  and  inaction,  since  the  battle,  in  following 
up  a  great  victory ;  for  he  could  but  apprehend  that  all  chances 
for  substantial  profit  were  gradually  fading  away. 


i 


Forrest  in  Front  of  Chattanooga.  353 

His  men  and  horses  had  now  been  for  nearly  three  days 
almost  without  food  or  forage ;  so,  establishing  his  picket- 
lines  as  directed,  he  fell  back  several  miles  in  pursuit  of  sub- 
sistence ;  and  at  ten  o'clock  p.m.,  rode  to  General  Bragg's 
headquarters.  The  Commander-in-Chief,  receiving  him  gra- 
ciously, had  much  to  say  in  commendation  of  his  action  during 
the  battle ;  after  which,  Forrest  was  directed  to  hold  his  com- 
mand in  readiness,  next  mornini^v^  ^  general  advance  on 
Chattanooga,  f  l^ 

At  eight  o'clock  a.h.,  szd,  Forrest  ajpin  assembled  his 
whole  force  on  MissionaA^^idM ;  b^t.id|K  some  delay,  he 
could  discover  no  tracei^of  a  material  ad4Bice  by  the  main 
body  of  the  army.  Yet,  with  characteristic  disposition  for 
action,  he  did  not  hesitate  to  descend  into  the  valley  of  the 
Chattanooga,  ■where  he  soon  came  in  collision  both  with 
Federal  cavalry  and  infantry  pickets,  all  of  whom  were  driven 
promptly  back  to  within  half  a  mile  of  Chattanooga  itself; 
this  was  done  with  his  men  dismounted,  and  extending  in  a 
line  with  a  scope  of  nearly  two  miles,  sweeping  all  before  it 
Having  achieved  this,  he  took  up  positions  covering  and  across 
the  roads  from  Chattanooga,  in  the  direction  of  Rossville  and 
Cleveland,  and  detached  Dibrell  with  his  brigade,  to  seize  and 
hold  the  road  around  the  northern  end  of  Lookout  Mountain, 
for  which  Dibrell  had  a  stout  fight,  losing  several  officers,  and 
some  fifty  or  more  of  his  men  killed  and  wounded. 

These  movements  having  been  effected  and  positions  taken, 
at  one  p.m.  McLaws  came  up  with  a  division  of  Longstreet's 
Corps.  Forrest,  calling  at  once  on  General  McLaws,  pro- 
posed they  should  adventure  an  attack  in  the  still  (^moralized 
condition  of  the  eftemy.*  ■  This  tbe  la^te}-  did  not  feel  author- 


*  In  illustralion  of  the  condition  in  sad,  Tode,  with  a  score  of  hii  brave  ri- 
■*bich  the  Federals  were  left,  we  may  ders,  to  within  seventy-five  yard*  of  *- 
iutance  tlie  fact  that  Forrest,  on  Ae     work  conunanding  the   Konnlle  rMdr 


354  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

ized  to  attempt  under  his  orders,  which  prescribed  picket 
service  simply. 

Meanwhile,  several  serious  attempts  had  been  made  to  dis- 
lodge Dibrell,  which  had  only  been  defeated  by  hard,  brave 
blows,  Dibrell  keeping  his  regiments  dismounted.* 

It  was  now  apparent  that  no  general  operations  against  the 
place  were  to  be  undertaken  that  day — the  second  after  the 
battle  ;  and  as  Dibrell  was  short  of  ammunition,  and  his  men 
and  horses  almost  famished,  Forrest  asked  that  the  brigade 
might  be  relieved  by  one  of  infantry.  With  that,  too,  General 
McLaws  felt  unable  to  comply  under  his  orders.  The  position 
was  too  important  and  valuable  to  be  given  up,  so  Dibrell  was 
left  to  maintain  it  until  twelve  m.  on  the  23d,  by  which  time 
it  was  recognized  by  his  superiors  that  Forrest's  Cavalry  re- 
quired some  relief  from  outpost  service,  and  an  opporunity  to 
find  food  and  forage.  For  that  purpose,  therefore,  the  com- 
mand  was  withdrawn  to  Tyner's  Station,  on  the  East-Chicka- 
mauga,  nine  or  ten  miles  from  Chattanooga. 

Here,  however,  after  twenty-four  hours'  rest  and  relaxation 
from  actual  contact  with  the  enemy,  orders  were  received  to 
detach  Pegram,  with  Rucker's  Legion  and  Scott's  Brigade  of 
his  division,  to  picket  the  Tennessee  river,  eastward  from 
Chattanooga,  on  that  flank,  to  the  mouth  of  the  Hiawassee, 
some  thirty  miles  or  more  ;  and  Forrest,  taking  Armstrong's 
and  Davidson's  Brigades,  was  to  move  beyond  Cleveland  to 
meet  and  check  a  movement  on  the  part  of  Bumside,  as  was 
supposed,  looking  to  a  junction  with  Rosecrans.  At  Cleve- 
land he  was  also  reenforced  by  Hodge's  Brigade,  some  eight 
hundred  strong,  stationed  in  that  quarter.  The  enemy  were 
reported  to  be  at  Charleston,  twelve  ipiles  distant,  throwing 


and  so  uncertain  was  the  aim  of  the  *  Fourth,  £ighth,Tenth,  and  Elerentfa 
<volley  provoked,  that  not  a  man  was  Tennessee  regiments,  and  Shaw's  Bat* 
luirt,  though  Forrest's  horse  was  shot.      talion. 


Combat  at  Htawassee.  355 

)  a  work  on  the  east  bank  of  the  Hiawassee.  Detaching 
avidson,  rightward,  to  cross  that  stream  above  the  place,  and 
rmstrong  to  pass  it  at  Kincannon's  Ferry,  some  six  miles 
dow,  and  thence  to  get  in  rear  on  a  road  between  Charles- 
n  and  Athens,  Forrest,  after  giving  his  lieutenants  time  to 
ake  the  necessary  circuits,  as  he  supposed,  moved  by  the 
rect  road  with  Dibrell  and  Hodge,  and  Morton's  and  Hug- 
ns's  Batteries.    Federal  pickets,  met  four  miles  in  advance 

the  river,  were  brushed  back  to  their  main  force,  drawn  up 
i  the  west  bank  of  the  Hiawassee.  An  attack  was  immedi- 
ely  ordered,  for  Forrest  wastes  little  time  in  his  operations, 
id,  after  a  short  but  sturdy  resistance,  the  Federals  were 
reed  to  retire  to  their  fortifications,  eastward  of  the  stream, 
[lich  is  some  two  hundred  and  fifty  yards  broad  at  this  point, 
it  shallow,  and  with  an  excellent  ford,  across  which,  under 
►ver,  secured  by  eight  pieces  of  artillery  that  had  been  prc- 
ously  placed  in  a  favorable  position,  the  Confederates  dashed 
>ldly  in  face  of  the  Federals.    Dismounting  his  men  as  soon 

they  reached  the  other  bank,  they  were  formed  as  infantry, 
v\  pushed  up,  with  the  loss  of  eight  or  ten  men  killed  and 
Dunded  before  the  Federals  abandoned  the  position  in  rapid 
treat  toward  Athens,  along  the  railroad,  closely  pursued.   • 
Armstrong,  failing  to  get  in  their  rear,  was  able,  however, 

strike  their  left  flank  at  or  about  Breville,  and  gave  them 
I  exciting  chase  for  the  next  five  or  six  miles,*  his  own  men 
instantly  intermixed  with  the  enemy  in  the  ardor  of  the  pur- 
lit,  and  some  sixty  of  the  Federals  were  killed  or  captured, 
ibrell  and  Hodge,  likewise,  caught  up  with  the  Federal  rear 

Athens,  where  the  provost-guard  was  captured  by  Arm- 
rong.  The  enemy  were  now  reenforced  by  Woolford's  Bri- 
ide,  but  they,  nevertheless,  made  little  or  no  stand,  and  the 
irsuit  was  continued  beyond  Sweetwater,  between  which 
id  Philadelphia,  Dibrell's  Brigade,  just  as  it  was  takihg  the 
vance  for  the  day,  became  engaged  in  an  animated  combat 


356  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

with  a  strong  cavalry  force  that  suddenly  made  battle.     Mc- 
Lemore  at  this  wasi  deployed  forward  into  line  at  a  gallops 
under  a  heavy  fire,  in  an  open  fiel4,  with  a  section  of  Hoggin's 
Battery,  while  the  other  regiments  were  promptly  disposed 
for  the  emergency  of  a  serious  affair ;   but  the  Federals  de* 
clined  to  accept  battle,  and  quickly  made  rearward  again,  as 
rapidly  as  before,  and  as  rapidly  followed,  to  Philadelphia,  and 
thence  on  to  Loudon,  where  the  Eighth,  Ninth,  and  Eleventh 
Tennessee  came,  to  some  (extent,  in  a  conflict  with  the  enemy, 
having  several  men  wounded,  respectively,  but  none  killed 
At  Philadelphia,  the  Federal  camp  was  captured,  with  all  their 
cooking  utensils  on  the  fire.     Among  the  incidents  of  this 
pursuit,  one  can  not  be  left  unrecorded,  for  it  is  a  signal,  yet 
not  extreme,  illustration  of  the  spirit  that  animated  the  youth 
of  the  South  throughout  the  war — a  spirit  that,   but  for 
astounding,  perverse  mismanagement,  must  have  insured  the 
success  of  the  struggle  of  the  Southern  people  for  independ* 
ence.   As  McLemore  charged  up,  imder  fire,  with  the  Foturth 
Tennessee,  as  we  have  related,  at  a  gallop,  the  pony  of  young 
Neil  S.  Brown,*  a  lad  of  seventeen  years,  was  shot  in  ^thc 
front  ranks  of  the  regiment     Horse  and  rider  fell  together  to 
the  ground,  but  the  gallant  youth,  springing  to  his  feet,  rifle 
in  hand,  and  not  halting  a  moment,  ran  forward  in  even  line 
with  his  older,  mounted  comrades,  and  took  an  active,  con- 
spicuous part  in  the  brief  fight  that  happened. 

The  pursuit  was  not  extended  beyond  Loudon,  orders  hav- 
ing been  received  by  Forrest  to  withdraw  his  command  to 
Cleveland,  and  transfer  all  but  one  brigade  to  General  Wheel- 
er, for  an  expedition  to  the  rear  of,  and  upon,  Rosecrans's  com- 
munications. »  Giving  the  necessary  orders,  on  arriving  at 
Cleveland,  for  proper  compliance  with  the  instructions  of  the 


*  Son  of  Governor  Neil  S.  Brown,  of  Tennessee. 


Greater  Part  of  Forres  fs  Cavalry  Detached.   357 

Commanding  General,*  Forrest  then  addressed  himself  imme- 
diately to  the  task  of  reorganizing  the  brigade  left  him,  which 
had  become  essential  after  so  long  a  period  of  hard  marches, 
frequent  combats,  severe,  prolonged  outpost  service  in  face  of 
the  enemy,  and  a  great  battle.  To  that  end,  he  issued  com- 
prehensive orders,  prescribing  duties  and  preparations  for  fu- 
ture service,  while  stringently  proscribing  straggling,  depre- 
dations; and  all  irregularities. 

Circumstances  connected  with  this  reduction  of  his  com- 
mand gave  it  so  much  the  bearing  of  injustice  and  disparage- 
ment, that  General  Forrest  felt  it  best  to  frankly  present  this 
aspect  of  it  to  his  superior ;  both  in  writing,  and  likewise  in  a 
personal  interview  did  he  do  this,  going  to  army  headquarters 
a  day  or  two  subsequently  for  that  purpose.  He  had  a  con- 
versation with  General  Bragg,  who  assured  him  that  his  old 
command  should  be  recomposed  at  the  conclusion  of  Wheeler's 
expedition.  With  this  understanding,  and  there  being  no 
service  impending  of  importance  on  the  immediate  flank 
where  his  present  force  was  posted,  Forrest  now  applied  for 
a  leave  of  absence  for  ten  days,  to  go  to  Lagrange,  Georgia, 
on  the  railroad,  southward,  to  see  his  wife,  for  the  first  time 
for  eighteen  months. 

On- the  Sth  of  October,  however,  when  at  Lagrange,  he  re- 
ceived an  order  dated  the  3d,  placing  him  hereafter  under  the 
command  of  General  Wheeler.  In  view  of  assurances,  so  re- 
cent, of  a  different  arrangement,  made  upon  a  statement  of 
circumstances  and  occurrences  connected  with  their  previous 
service  together,  in  the  ill-fated  expedition  against  Dover,  in 
February,  1863,  General  Forrest  was  extremely  dissatisfied ; 
for  he  felt  that  his  usefulness  s^  a  cavalry  soldier,  if  again 


*  DibreU*s  Brigade  and  Huggins's     gades  were  directed  to  report  to  Gene- 
Battery  were  selected  to  remain.   Arm-     ral  Wheeler  at  Cottonport 
Krong's,  Davidson's,  and  Hodge's  Bri- 


358.  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

placed  under  Wheeler,  must  be  destroyed.  He  therefore  dc- 
^termined  to  resign  his  commission  as  a  brigadier-general, 
and  seek  to  serve  his  country  in  some  other  sphere,  in  which 
he  might  be  more  efficient  than  he  could  possibly  hope  to  be 
under  conditions,  as  arranged — so  unexpectedly  to  him — by 
General  Bragg. 

A  month  before,  many  of  the  prominent  people  of  We*- 
Tennessee  and  North-Mississippi  had  made  appeals  to  him  oi 
such  urgency  to  come  to  their  section,  and  attempt  to  assem- 
ble their  scattered  resources  for  defense  and  offense,  that  he 
made,  at  the  time,  an  application  for  assignment  to  that  field 
of  duty ;  and  in  resigning,  it  was  his  purpose  to  go  thither,  con- 
fident that  he  could  soon  be  at  the  head  there  of  a  fine  com- 
* 

mand,  the  main  elements  of  which  were,  as  yet,  substantially 
lost  to  the  service. 

The  President  of  the  Confederate  States  was  at  the  head- 
quarters of  the  army  when  Forrest's  resignation  reached  it, 
and  wrote  him  an  autograph  letter,  in  gracious  and  grace- 
ful language,  announcing  that  he  could  not  accept  his  resigna- 
tion, nor  dispense  with  his  services,  and  appointed  an  inter- 
view at  Montgomery,  Alabama,  some  days  later,  on  his  return 
from  Mississippi,  whither  he  was  about  to  go. 

At  the  time  designated.  General  Forrest  repaired  to  Mont- 
gomery, and  met  the  President,  with  whom  he  had  a  prolonged, 
characteristic,  and  satisfactory  conversation,  resulting  in  an 
assurance  that  he  should  be  transferred  to  North-Mississippi, 
with  such  forces  as  Greneral  Bragg  could  possibly  spare ;  and 
Mr.  Davis  wrote  to  that  effect  to  that  officer.  The  President 
also  gave  expression  to  some  general  views  as  to  the  conduct 
of  operations  in  that  quarter ;  after  which,  Forrest  returned  at 
once  to  army  headquarters,  going  in  the  suite  of  Mr.  Davis  as 
far  as  Atlanta. 

Promptly  seeking  audience  with  General  Bragg,  Forrest 
was  promised  that  he  should  take  to  his  new  field  of  com- 


Forrest  Transferred  to  Mississippi.  359 

mand  and  action,  in  addition  to  his  escort  company,  McDo- 
nald's and  Woodward's  Battalion  and  Morton's  Battery ;  but 
on  the  following  morning,  on  receiving  the  written  order  in 
the  premises,  it  proved  that  Woodward's  Battalion  was  with- 
held. This  force,  all  told,  embraced  three  hundred  and  ten 
rank  and  file,*  and  four  guns,  with  which  he  repaired  imme- 
diately to  Rome,  where  two  days  were  spent  in  fitting  it  up 
for  the  march  across  the  country,  via  Talladega,  Tuscaloosa* 
and  Columbus,  Mississippi,  to  Okolona,  where  it  arrived  on 
or  about  the  i8th  of  November,  1863. 

Taking  the  railway,  via  Selma,  Forrest  proceeded  as  soon 
as  possible  to  the  same  point,  so  that  he  might  at  once  begin 
the  assemblage  of  the  means  for  such  operations  as  he  hoped, 
before  long,  to  set  on  foot  in  that  region. 

His  command,  remaining  with  the  army,  parted  with  their 
leader  with  profound  regret,  especially  the  brigade  composed 
of  the  Fourth,  Eighth,  Ninth,  Tenth,  and  Eleventh  Tennessee 
Cavalry.  These  regiments  he  had  organized,  and  commanded 
through  his  West-Tennessee  campaign  in  December,  1862,  at 
the  combat  at  Thompson's  Station,  and  in  the  pursuit  and 
capture  of  Streight.  Always  successful  under  his  lead,  they 
had  acquired  so  supreme  a  confidence  in  their  General,  and 
his  genius  for  cavalry  operations,  that  they  had  come  to  re- 
gard him  as  without  an  equal  in  their  arm  of  the  service ;  and 
with  this  were  blended  feelings  of  strong  personal  attachment, 
though  he  had  ever  been  rigid  and  stringent — nay,  exacting 
with  them,  in  all  substantial  matters  of  soldierly  duty  and  con- 
duct, to  the  verge  even,  at  times,  of  transient  discontent.  He 
had  led  them  in  their  charges,  had  exposed  his  life  in  their 


•  Escort     company — 2    officers,    5  officers,  91  enlisted  men.      Morton's 

non-commissioned  officers,  60  privates,  Battery,  4  officers,  67  enlisted  men,  pre- 

prcscnt   McDonald's  Battalion,  16  offi-  sent ;    or  effective  total,  280 ;    aggre« 

ceri,  148  privates,  present ;    absent,  5  gate,  310  present. 


i 


360  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

sight,  repeatedly,  to  secure  knowledge  essential  for  the  success 
of  operations  in  which  they  were  to  be  employed.  They  were^ 
therefore,  unwilling  to  serve  under  another  commander  in  his 
stead  if  it  could  be  averted ;  and  to  that  end  a  respectful  pe- 
tition was  addressed  to  the  Commanding  General,  praying 
they  might  be  transferred  with  him,  if  possibly  consistent  with 
the  necessities  of  the  service.  This  transfer,  however.  General 
Bragg  doubtless  was  not  able  to  make,  in  view  of  the  need  for 
good  cavalry  with  his  own  army. 


CHAPTER    XIII. 

'fanning  of  a  Nrw  Epoch  in  General  ForrtsCi  Career — Welcomed  to 
New  Field  by  General "}.  E.  Johmton — Undertook  an  Expedition  to 
glean  the  Military  Resources  of  West-Tennessee — Smallness  of  his 
Available  Command— Celerity  and  Boldness  of  Movement  to  fack- 
son — "Joined  by-^ixa  Unarmed  Men — Formidable  Plans  of  the  Enemy 
for  his  Interception — Combat  at  Estenaula — Large  Quantities  of 
Subsistence  andother  Supplies  Collected— Fight  at  yack^s  Creek — Bril- 
liant  Affair  of  Forrest's  Escort  v/ith  Federal  Regiment — Near  Ap- 
proach of  Numerous  Hostile  Bodies  of  Tro^s — Sharp  Conflict  near 
Summemille — Handsome  Coup  de  Main  and  I^assage  of  Wolf  River 
at  Lafayette — Demonstration  ujton  ColliervUle — Established  Foret 
around  Como,  Miss. — Commentaries. 

From  November  i$tA  to  December  31st,  1863. 
vV  E  now  enter  upon  a  new  epoch  in  the  military  career  of 
General  Forrest^  and  upon  the  chronicle,  too,  of  operations 
lade,  in  the  main,  with  troops  other  than  those  with  whom 
e  had  laid  the  broad,  deep,  stable  foundation  of  the  reputa- 
ion  built  up  in  the  course  of  the  war  by  "  Forrest's  Cavalry," 
mong  enemies  as  well  as  friends. 

As  related  in  the  preceding  chapter,  Forrest  reached  Oko- 
^na  on  or  about  the  15th  of  November,  and  his  small  body 
f  veterans  a  few  days  earlier.  Meanwhile,  on  his  way  thither, 
e  had  met  the  Department  Commander,  General  Joe  John- 
ton,  at  Meridian,  and  explained,  in  full,  his  views  and  the 
cope  of  projected  operations.  That  officer,  giving  him  a 
ordial  welcome  within  his  department,  expressed  his  appro* 


( 


362  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest 

bation  of  his  projects,  and  at  once  caused  the  proper  orders 
to  be  issued,  including  instructions  to  General  Stephen  D. 
Lee,  at  the  time  Chief  of  Cavalry,  to  second  his  undertakings 
in  all  possible  ways. 

At  the  time  three  small  cavalry  brigades  constituted  the 
Confederate  force  in  all  North-Mississippi.  These  were  ex- 
tended in  a  line  of  outposts  across  from  Panola  along  the 
south  bank  of  the  Tallahatchie  river  via  Rocky  Ford,  and 
thence  eastward  to  the  Mobile  and  Ohio  Railroad,  about  Sal- 
tills,  or  mayhap  Baldwin,  and  active  scouts  well  in  advance  in 
watchful  observation  of  all  the  approaches  from  the  north- 
ward, or  hostile  quarter.*  At  the  same  time,  the  Federals 
were  in  strong  force  at  Memphis  and  Corinth,  with  a  cordon 
of  posts  along  the  line  of  the  Memphis  and  Charleston  Rail- 
road, between  the  two  points,  with  rapid  means  of  inter-com- 
munication and  mutual  succor.f 

Preliminary  to  the  extended  operations  which  he  hoped  to 
be  able  to  undertake.  General  Forrest's  first  design  was  to 
throw  himself,  through  the  Federal  line,  into  West-Tennessee, 
and  bring  to  bear  his  personal  influence- and /r<fj//]g^^  upon 
the  scattered  fighting  elements  abounding  there,  and  thus 
bring  them  together  in  numbers  suflScient  to  make  an  effec- 
tive offensive  force. 

To  cover  his  passage  across  the  formidable  barrier  of  the 
fortified  line  of  the  Memphis  and  Charleston  Railroad,  it  was 
arranged  with  General  S.  D.  Lee  that  two  of  the  three  bri- 
gades previously  mentioned  should  be  assembled  at  New- 
Albany,  whither  Forrest  and  Lee  repaired  on  the  28th  or  29th 
of  November,  and  where,  also,  Brigadier-General  R.  V.  Rich- 


•  

*  One  brigade,  subdivided  for  conve-  Brigadier-General  Ferguson  and  Cdo- 

nience  into  two  demi-brigades,  (Mc-  nel  Ross,  with  their  brigades,  were  on 

Culloch*s  and  Slemmons,)    under  Gen-  the  right  of  Rocky  Ford, 

eral  James  R.  Chalmers, was  on  the  left ;  f  At  least  10,000  men  available. 


TVesi-Tennessee  Expedition.  363 

ardson  was  directed  to  be  at  the  same  time,  with  his  brigade 
of  West-Tennessee  Partisans,  to  form  part  of  the  expedition  as 
auxiliary  to  the  veteran  troops  brought  from  Chickamauga. 
This  brigade  was  reported  to  be  2000  strong,  but  on  inspec- 
tion and  muster,  on  the  30th,  only  two  hundred  and  forty, 
officers  and  men,  appeared  in  the  ranks  ;  the  rest  had  gone  to 
their  homes  on  various  pretexts,  chiefly,  as  they  represented, 
for  clothing  and  remounts.  Moreover,  the  long  march  from 
North-Georgia  to  Okolona  had  so  materially  afiected  his  veteran 
command  that  there  were  only  effective  horses  left  for  a  sec- 
tion of  Morton's  Battery ;  and  some  fifty  of  his  troopers  had 
to  be  left  behind,for  want  of  mounts,  thus  reducing  his  force 
of  trained  soldiers  to  250,  rank  and  file,  and  forming,  with 
Richardson's  Partisans,  a  force  in  all  of  barely  500  officers 
and  men,  for  the  expedition. 

For  more  than  forty  days  the  weather  had  been  very  rainy, 
so  that  the  whole  country  was  saturated  with  water,  and  all 
the  water-courses  overflown.  The  Tallahatcjiie  was  so  swol- 
len that  a  bridge  had  to  be  built ;  this  consumed  three  days, 
and  its  passage  was  not  eflected  until  the  3d  of  December, 
when  Ferguson  led  the  advance  northward,  by  way  of  Rip- 
ley, with  his  own  and  Ross's  Brigades.  Meanwhile,  Chal- 
mers, with  a  demi-brigade  under  McCulloch,  had  crossed  at 
Rocky  Ford,  to  unite  with  Ferguson ;  and  the  other,  under 
Slemmons,  crossing  at  Panola,  was  advancing  to  threaten 
the  railroad  westward  of  Lagrange,  and  occupy  the  enemy  in 
that  quarter.  Ferguson,  approaching  Saulsbury  on  the  rail- 
road seven  miles  eastward  of  Grand  Junction,  encountered  a 
Federal  picket-post  some  six  miles  southward  of  the  place, 
which  he  pressed  vehemently  back  upon  their  main  body. 
Bringing  up  the  artillery,  including  Morton's  section,  he  then 
opened  with  such  spirit  that  that,  too,  speedily  abandoned  the 
position,  and  left  it  open  for  the  passage  of  Forrest,  who  here 
parting  with  General  Lee  and  the  convoy,  boldly  launched  his 


364  Campaigms  of  Gemeral  FarresL 

little  force  into  West-Tennessee  without  loss  of  time;  bis 
only  impeditnenia  being  five  ordnance  wagons.  Throwing 
out  scouts  along  the  railroad  on  the  right  and  left  to  ascer- 
tain and  follow  after  him  with  all  possible  reliable  information 
of  the  movement  of  the  enemy  cm  his  rear,  he  poshed  cm  that 
evening  to  Van  Boren,  some  ten  miles  on  the  road  to  BoGvar. 
and  encamped  there  for  the  night  At  four  o'clock,  scoots 
returning,  reported  that  there  were  no  troops  in  pursuit,  and 
Forrest  resumed  his  movement,  reaching  Bolivar  at  eight  ^i^^ 
on  the  5th.  Here  Forrest  and  his  men  were  received  by  die 
people  with  profound  pleasure,  and  a  sumptuous  provision 
was  made  for  the  entertainment  of  men  and  horses.^ 

After  a  halt  at  Bolivar  of  only  two  hours,  during  which  an 
old  raft  pontoon-bridge  was  repaired  so  as  to  afford  a  practica- 
ble means  of  crossing  the  Hatchie,  and  detaching  scouts  in 
the  direction  of  Memphis,  Corinth,  and  intermediate  points, 
to  keep  him  advised  of  any  hostile  movement  contrived  to 
intercept  his  exit  from  the  State,  Forrest  was  again  in  mo- 
tion. 

It  was  late  in  the  afternoon  of  the  next  day,  6th,  that  he 
entered  Jackson,  where  he  was  welcomed  by  the  whole  popu- 
lation with  deep  feeling,  and  where,  as  at  Bolivar,  an  abun* 
dance  of  forage  and  subsistence  had  been  provided. 

Previous  to  leaving  Okolona,  knowing  that  Colonel  Tyrce 
H.  Bell,  under  orders  from  Generals  Bragg  and  Pillow,  was 
then  in  West-Tennessee,  for  the  purpose  of  collecting  absen- 
tees from  the  several  regiments  with  Bragg's  army  from  that 
region,  Forrest  had  dispatched  a  courier  to  him  with  instruc- 
tions to  meet  him  at  Jackson,  and  he  was  there  accordingly 
with  a  small  force  already  collected.    At  the  same  time,  quite 


•  The  General  and  his  staff  being     ccived  the  hearty  gratulations  of  many 
entertained  at  the  hospitable  mansion  *  friends, 
of  Colonel  J.  J.  Neely,  where  he  re- 


Federal  Dispositions  365 

a  number  of  persons  had  been  engaged  throughout  West- 
Tennessee  in  seeking  to  raise  commands  for  themselves,  and 
more  than  a  half-score  of  them  had  enrolled  detachments 
varying  from  twenty-five  to  two  hundred  in  number.  These 
detachments  Colonel  Bell  was  directed  to  bring  together  at 
once,  while  General  Richardson,  with  his  headquarters  at 
Brownsville,  twenty-eight  miles  west  of  Jackson,  .was  required 
to  take  steps  to  assemble  the  numerous  absentees  from  his 
organization,  and  every  practicable  measure  for  gleaning  the 
fighting  resources  of  the  section  was  put  on  foot  without 
delay. 

Meanwhile  the  Federals  were  not  idle.  News  of  Forrest's 
irruption  had  been  dispatched  in  all  directions,  and  the  Fede- 
ral commandant  of  the  district,  Major-General  Hurlbut,  had 
set  to  work  to  organize  a  large  force,  which  he  hoped  so  to 
dispose  as  to  hem  in  the  Confederate  leader,  and  cut  off  his 
escape  or  return  to  his  base.  And  to  this  end,  Forrest  soon 
learned — ^about  the  15  th — that  Federal  cavalry  in  large  num- 
bers from  Memphis  had  been  thrown  out  along  the  Memphis 
and  Charleston  road,  while  a  strong  column  was  about  to 
move  down  upon  him  from  Columbus,  Kentucky,  another 
firom  the  direction  of  Fort  Pillow,  and  yet  another  was  ap- 
proaching from  the  quarter  of  Corinth.  In  all  these  direc- 
tions trusty  scouts  were  pushed  in  close  observation,  to  ac- 
quire early  information  of  all  serious  hostile  combinations  and 
movements  ;  and  meanwhile  all  possible  efforts  were  made  to 
advance  the  objects  for  which  the  expedition  had  been  under- 
taken, with  such  success  that  Colonel  Bell,  by  the  night  of  the 
23d,  had  collected  some    1600  or   1700  officers  and  men.* 


*  It  may  serve  to  illustrate  the  cha-  region  in  small  detachments  of  twenty- 

racter  of  the  times,  somewhat,  to  relate  five  or  thirty  men,  and  bivouacked  fisr 

here,  that  Colonel  BelPs  men  were  as>  .  weeks  in  the  woods  under  the  rude 

•embled  in  the  dense  forests  of  that  primitive  shelter  known  among  the  sol- 


366  Campaigns  of  General  FarresL 

Richardson  had  brought  his  brigade  up  to  about  lOCX)  men, 
and  Lieutenant-Colonel  D.  M.  Wisdom  had  reported  at  Jack- 
son with  about  150  of  Colonel  J.  E.  Forrest's  old  regiment 

By  this  time  scouts  reported  the  presence  of  a  cavalry  force 
both  at  Sommerville  and  Bolivar,  together  some  2000  strong, 
with  infantry  still  numerously  posted  on  the  line  of  the  Mem- 
phis and  Charleston  road  ;  that  the  column  from  Corinth  had 
reached  and  encamped  at  Purdy,  the  night  of  the  22d,  mov- 
ing on  the  road  to  Jack's  creek,  while  those  coming  from  the 
northwapd  were  as  far  southward  as  Trenton  and  McLemores- 
ville.* 

Meanwhile,  Richardson,  on  the  22d,  had  been  ordered  to 
put  his  brigade  in  motion  southward,  and  throw  it  across  the 
Hatchie  at  Estenaula,  and  accordingly  had  marched  early  on 
the  23d.  After  passing  the  river  in  question  on  the  24th, 
scouts,  about  one  p.m.,  reported,  at  Miller's  Farm-house,  the 
proximity  of  a  hostile  force  from  the  direction  of  Bolivar. 
Richardson's  men,  with  few  exceptions,  were  raw ;  scarcely  any 
of  them  had  ever  been  under  fire,  and  less  than  300  were 
armed.  But,  nevertheless,  he  promptly  determined  on  a  col- 
lision. Neely's  Regiment,  Fourteenth  Tennessee  Cavalry,  in 
advance,  was  at  once  formed  in  line  in  a  field  eastward  of  the 
road,  with  Hall's  Company  deployed  as  skirmishers  ;  and  the 
first  skirmish  of  the  expedition  began.  The  Federals  opposed 
were  the  Seventh  Illinois  Cavalry,  Colonel  Prince,  some  6cx) 
strong  ;  and  Hall  being  quickly  driven  in,  a  charge  with  the 
whole  Federal  force  was  evidently  about  to  be  made.  Rich- 
ardson attempted  a  futile  effort  to  meet  this  with  a  counter- 
charge with  his  armed  troopers  ;  but  in  face  of  the  disparity 
engaged,  his  men  wavered,  and  then  breaking,  scattered  in 


diers  by  the  name  of  Shebang,  that  is,     stretched  as  a  roo£ — MS.  Notes  c/C^o* 

a  pole  resting  on  two  forks,  over  which .    tul  Thomas  y.  Freeman, 

a  blanket    or   captured  oildoth  was        *  8000  infantry  and  cavalry. 


Affair  at  the  Estenaula.  367 

confusion,  to  the  deep  chagrin  of  their  commander.  Mean- 
while, Neely,  who  at  the  time  was  detached  from  his  imme- 
diate regiment,  rearward,  at  the  river  crossing,  hearing  of  the 
disaster,  took  up  a  position  covering  it,  and  was  there  re- 
enforced  by  some  of  the  brigade  under  Lieutenant-Colonel 
H.  C.  Greer ;  and  there,  too.  General  Richardson  repaired. 
Very  soon  the  Federals  made  their  appearance,  and  a  skir- 
mish began  immediately,  which  lasted  for  an  hour,  howbeit, 
without  much  loss  to  either  side.  It  was  now  after  sunset, 
and  a  full  moon  had  risen  bright  and  clear,  that  Christmas 
eve,  shedding  almost  the  light  of  day  on  the  scene.  But  the 
Federals,  apparently  satisfied  that  the  Confederate  position 
was  not  to  be  forced,  withdrew,  quickly  followed  by  a  detach- 
ment led  by  Colonel  Neely,  to  reconnoitre  their  movements.* 

About  meridian  the  day  before,  scouts  having  announced 
that  the  Corinth  column,  unable  to  approach  by  the  direct 
road  in  consequence  of  the  overflow  of  the  Forked  Deer 
river,  was  moving  up  by  the  Jack's  creek  way,  Forrest  thought 
it  prudent  to  throw  out  a  counter-movement  to  hamper  that 
of  the  enemy  until  he  could  remove  his  wagon-train  and  cat- 
tle south  of  the  Hatchie ;  and  besides,  the  isolation  of  this 
force  was  a  provocation  to  a  blow  that  it  was  not  in  his  nature 
to  resist.  Therefore,  Lieutenant-Colonel  D.  M.  Wisdom  was 
detached  the  afternoon  of  the  23d,  with  his  own  and  Mc- 
Donald's battalions,  and  a  detachment  of  Kentuckians,  under 
Lieutenant-Colonel  Lannum,  in  all  not  exceeding  5c»,  rank 
and  file,  to  move  forward  to  Jack's  creek,  and  oppose  all  practi- 
cable resistance  sufficiently  long  to  cover  the  passage  of  the 
Hatchie ;  and  then  to  draw  off  and  swiftly  follow  after  the 
main  body. 

Early  on  the  morning  of  the  24th,  Colonel  Bell  was  like- 


•  MS.  Notes  of  Captain  V.  B.  WaddelL 


368  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest 

wise  directed  to  take  up  the  line  of  march  southward,  with 
the  fresh  levies  and  Morton's  artillery,  the  train  of  forty  wa- 
gons and  teams  that  had  been  collected  in  the  country,  a  large 
band  of  beef  cattle  and  hogs,  and  make  every  eflTort  to  get 
them  safely  boyond  the  Hatchie  as  rapidly  as  possible,  which 
he  proceeded  to  execute  with  characteristic  energy  and  intel- 
ligence.   These  dispositions  having  been  made,  Forrest  him- 
self turned  his  horse's  head  southward  again  at  six  p.m.,  and 
brought  up  the  rear  of  his  command  with  his  staff  and  escort 
Meanwhile,  Colonel  Wisdom,  having  encamped  south  of 
Mifflin,  about  fifteen  miles   from  Jackson,  the  night  of  the 
23d,   in  immediate  proximity  to   several  regiments  of  the 
enemy's  cavalry,  attacked  them  before  daylight — ^the  Federals 
being  also  in  motion  at  the  moment — and  a  spirited  skirmish 
occurred.    The  attack  was  so  sudden  that  the  Federals  at 
first  had  recoiled,  scattering  oilcloths,  uniform  caps,  blankets* 
and  even  their  arms  by  the  roadside,  as  the  sharp  crackle  of 
the  Confederate  rifles  burst  unexpectedly  upon  the  silence 
of  the  sombre  forest  at  that  early  hour.     But  soon  rall)ring, 
and  day  having  dawned,  an  animated,  noisy  conflict  was  kept 
up  for  several  hours.    The  Federals  were  of  at  least  double 
the  force  of  the  Confederates,  and  at  last  made  an  effort  to 
turn   their  adversary's   left  flank,   which    Colonel    Wisdom 
promptly  met  and  baffled  with  a  counter-movement,  with  %o 
picked  men,  handled  by  Lieutenant  John  O.  Morris,  Adjutant 
of  Colonel  Lannum's  detachment,  who  was  mortally  wounded ; 
but  not  until  he  had  made  his  splendid  courage  and  martial 
aptitudes  notable  to  all  his  comrades.*     Foiled  in  this  at- 
tempt, the  Federals  extended  their  whole  force,  and  sought  to 
envelop  the  much  shorter  Confederate  line,  with  so  much  per- 
sistence that  it  became  but  an  act  of  prudence  to  draw  out, 


*  The  gallant  and  soldierly  conduct  of  this  young  Kentuckian  ezdted  general 
admiration  and  remark. 


Farrest^s  Escort. 


369 


which  was  accordingly  done  in  the  direction  of  the  north- 
western corner  of  McNairy  county.  McDonald's  Battalion* 
under  Major  Allin,  covered  the  movement,  and  a  junction 
was  effected  with  the  main  body  of  Forrest's  command  beyond 
the  Hatchie  early  the  next  morning,  traversing  the  distance 
of  thirty  miles  in  eight  hours,  during  a  dark,  rainy  night.* 

As  will  be  recollected,  Forrest  caught  up  with  his  forces  at 
the  Hatchie,  while  Colonel  Neely  was  in  advance  reconnoiter- 
ing   the  position  of  the  Federals.     That  officer,  not  long 
absent,  returning,  reported  that  the  enemy  were  encamped 
some  two  miles  southward  of  Miller's  house,  or  four  or  five 
miles   distant.     Thereupon   Forrest  directed   Richardson  to 
move  forward  that  night,  and  establish  himself  just  beyond 
Miller's,  to  which  point  he  also  transferred  his  own  headquar- 
ters immediately,  while  sending  forward  his  escort  company, 
under  Lieutenant  Nathan  Boon,  to  make  a  close  aggressive 
reconnoissance.    This  was  done  with  the  characteristic  daring 
and  thoroughness  which  distinguished  that  gallant  band,  of 
whom  we  have  heard  more  than  one  prominent  officer  remark, 
•*  Tfuy  are  ever  ready  to  undertake  what  their  chief  so  often 


*  The  Federal  Cavalry,  it  ai^ears, 
consisted  of  the  Seventh  Kansas,  (Jay 
Hawkers,)  Third  Michigan,  and  a  regi- 
ment of  Alabamians,  commanded  by  a 
Colonel  Meisner,  who,  shortly  after- 
ward,  returning  through  Purdy,  quar- 
tered himself  in  the  comfortable  house 
of  Colonel  Wisdom's  father,  an  elderly 
gendeman  residing  there,  making  the 
whole  £un3y  the  victims  of  his  ruffian 
insolence  and  brutality,  as  well  as  plun- 
dering them  of  absolutely  all  their  com. 
Evidently  he  was  the  peer  of  Turchin, 
Comyn,  and,  in  his  smaller  sphere,  of 
Bader.— ^5:  NoUs  of  Coioml  D.  M, 
fPisdom* 


The  following  incident  will  fllustratti 
the  spirit  of  Forrest's  men  :  Major 
Phil  Allin,  of  McDonald's  Battalion, 
having  had  his  horse  shot  under  him, 
was  left  horseless  in  the  charge  that 
was  being  made.  Private  Argyle  Pow- 
ell of  the  battalion,  near  him  at  the 
moment,  exclaimed,  "  Wait  a  moment. 
Major;  I'll  bring  one  from  the  Yan- 
kees yonder  f  and  dashed  on ;  but 
returning  in  a  little  while,  led  up  to 
the  Major  a  fine  horse  and  a  Federal 
prisoner,  with  the  remark,  "  Here's  the 
horse  I  promised  you,  Major,  and  a 
Yankee  to  boot" 


370  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

looked  to  them  to  do — the  fighting  of  a  full  regiment!'  Indeed, 
every  member  of  that  choice  body  of  the  youth  of  the  coun- 
try manifestly  acted  on  all  occasions  with  the  fullest  apprecia- 
sion  of  the  fact  that,  though 

"  There  may  be  danger  in  the  deed, 
'Twas  fraught  with  honor  too." 

In  this  instance,  not  satisfied  with  a  mere  reconnoissance, 
Lieutenant  Boon  charged  down  upon  the  Federal  pickets 
and  drove  them  so  vigorously  back  that  the  Federal  com- 
mander, fancying  doubtless  there  was  a  formidable  movement 
behind,  broke  up  his  encampment  immediately,  and  retreated 
hurriedly  that  night  to  Sommerville,  leaving  cooking  utensils 
on  the  fire,  considerable  quantities  of  forage,  and  the  vicinity 
strewn  with  dead  hogs,  poultry,  and  other  plundered  subsist- 
ence supplies. 

Christmas  came,  an  unusually  fair  and  sun-bright  day  for 
the  season,  a  delightful  relief  from  the  gloomy,  soaking  wea- 
ther for  some  time  preceding,  and  the  main  part  of  the  com- 
mand  was  suffered  to  remain  inactive  until  late  in  the  after 
noon. 

In  the  mean  time.  Colonel  Bell  had  been  occupied  all  the    -^ 
night  before,  and  until  mid-day  the  25  th,  in  crossing  the  river 
with  his  large,  heavily-laden  trains  and  cattle,  having  the  use 
of  only  one  small  ferry-boat,  so  frail  and  unsteady  that  it  was  1^ 
once  capsized,  with  the  loss  of  one  man  and   two  horses   I 
drowned,  and  a  load  of  bacon.    The  weather  was  intensely   \ 
cold,  and  the  freezing  mud  and  water  almost  unbearable ;  but, 
inspired  by  the  energy  and  conduct  of  Colonel  Bell,  his  nicn 
labored  cheerfully  to  the  last,  or  until  their  task  was  £uthfully 
accomplished.* 


*  Some  200  head  of  beef  cattle,  300     remembered,    were    ferried    by    tlM 
hogs,  and  over  3000  troops,  it  will  be     means. 


Federal  Forces.  3*71 

• 

In  the  interval,  Forrest's  scouts  had  been  actively  scouring 
the  country  in  all  hostile  quarters,  and  had  reported  that 
Colonel  Prince  was  now  at  Sommerville  with  his  own  regi- 
ment, Seventh  Illinois,  and  a  squadron  of  the  Ninth,  or  some 
750  troopers  ;  that  as  many  as  1000  more  were  in  the  vicinity 
of  Bolivar,  and  an  equal  force  near  Middleburg,  on  the  Missis- 
sippi Central  Railroad,  with  numerous  large  infantry  detach- 
ments still  spread  along  the  whole  line  of  the  Mississippi 
Central  Railroad  eastward  of  Moscow,  with  three  large  trains 
^eld  at  Lagrange  full  of  infantry,  ready  to  be  dispatched 
whithersoever  needed  to  bar  Forrest's  way  back  to  the  Con- 
federate lines.  It  was  apparent  from  the  disposition  of  these 
brces,  however,  that  they  expected  him  to  attempt  to  force 
lis  way  southward  in  the  same  direction  from  which  he  had 
penetrated  northward.  He  therefore  resolved  to  move  ^by 
Bvay  of  Sommerville,  and  seek  egress  from  these  strongly  set 
toils  westward  of  Moscow,  or  in  the  unexpected  quarter  of 
Memphis. 

This  involved  a  conflict  with  the  Federals  at  Sommerville ; 
md  Richardson's  Brigade,  already  somewhat  increased  by 
accessions  of  men  since  crossing  to  the  south  bank  of  the 
Hatchie,  was  put  in  motion  that  afternoon,  by  way  of  White- 
^e  and  a  cross-road  further  southward,  to  come  upon  the 
Federal  rear,  while,  at  a  concerted  time,  Forrest  would  fall 
upon  them  by  the  Jackson-Sommerville  road.  Halting  for 
the  night  at  Whiteville,  Richardson's  men  were  entertained 
b  the  houses  of  that  village  with  a  hospitality  so  considerate 
and  large  that  it  may  not  be  passed  unnoticed  in  these  pages, 
and  the  memory  of  which  will  be  ever  cherished  by  the  sur- 
vivors of  those  weather-beaten  soldiers  who  were  made  so 
nrelcome  at  the  bright,  glowing  firesides  and  well-spread  tables 
rf  the  people  of  Whiteville.  Resuming  his  march  before  day 
m  the  26th,  and  turning  off  rightward  at  Boyle's  house  to- 
vard  Sommerville  from  Bolivar,  Richardson,  soon  after  sun- 


yf2  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

rise,  learned  from  scouts  that  the  country  was  swarming  with 
Federals  on  all  sides  ;  but,  moving  on  as  directed,  his  ad- 
vance-guard developed  a  Federal  cavalry  force  in  the  head  of 
a  lane  near  Armors,  five  miles  from  Sommerville.     His  orders 
for  such  an  exigency  were  to  occupy  the  enemy  as  long  as 
practicable  in  a  skirmish  with  his  armed  men,  embracing,  it 
will  be  recollected,  not  more  than  300  rifles,  to  give  Forrest 
time  to  come  upon  their  rear  ;  and  this  was  promptly  unde^ 
taken,  his  unarmed  men  being  held  in  a  ravine  rearward 
Richardson's  men  were  posted  with  fields  on  their  right  and 
left  and  a  wood  in  front,  in  which  the  Federals  took  cover  and 
opened  thence  with  their  carbines  at  easy  range.     Neverthe- 
less, the  afiair  was  apparently  without  profit  to  either  side^ 
save  that  it  brought  the  delay  for  which  the  Confederates 
fought,  and  they  were  able,  more  by  noise  than  accuracy  of 
range,  to  keep  the  Federals  harmless  at  arm's  length,  though 
several  times  more  numerous  and  thoroughly  armed.     How- 
ever, the  situation  was  somewhat  dangerous,  and  Richardson 
detached  Captain  Wise  A.  Cooper,  of  one  of  his  battalions, 
with  thirty  men,  to  move  by  way  of  a  ravine  rightward  and 
get  into  position  to  open  upon  the  Federal  rear. 

Forrest,  meanwhile  moving  on  the  direct  road  from  Este- 
naula  to  Sommerville,  on  reaching  a  point  five  miles  from  the 
latter  place  heard,  through  scouts,  of  this  movenient  toward 
Bolivar,  and  hearing  also  the  firing  in  thai  direction,  pressed 
rapidly  forward  with  some  300  men,  and,  taking  a  by-road 
branching  to  the  south-eastward  two  miles  from  Sommerville^ 
was  speedily  on  the  scene,  but  with  only  150  of  his  men — his 
escort  and  a  detachment  of  McDonald's  Battalion — ^who  had 
kept  up,  so  jaded  were  many  of  the  horses  now  firom  long 
continuous  exposure  to  bad  weather. 

As  before  observed,  the  position  of  the  Federals  was  shd- 
tered,  and  thus  far  they  had  the  advantage.  But  Richardson 
ostentatiously  brought  out  his  unarmed  men,  under  Lien-  h 


Affair  near  SommervUle. 


373 


tenant-Colonel  Hugh  D.  Greer.  These  were  handsomely 
led  over  the  crest  of  a  hill  with  a  loud  shout  as  a  vigorous, 
sustained  fusilade  was  delivered  by  the  riflemen  in  front 
The  effect  was  happy,  for  the  Federals,  deceived  by  the  num- 
bers thus  appearing  upon  the  flank,  gave  way.  Forrest's  men 
struck  heavily  and  fast  at  the  same  time,  and  the  rout  was 
complete.  Still  there  was  some  loss  to  the  Confederates ; 
three  of  Forrest's  escort  were  killed  and  several  severely 
wounded,  and  among  the  slain  was  First  Sergeant  A.  H. 
Boon,  who  was  stricken  by  the  side  of  his  brother — Lieu- 
tenant Boon  —  while  fighting  with  signal  gallantry  in  the 
miUe^  when,  carried  together  by  the  ardor  of  the  combat,  into 
a  group  of  fifteen  or  more  Federals.* 

The  pursuit  was  kept  up  for  several  miles,  but  without  mar 
terial  results,  as  the  enemy  had  broken  and  dispersed  in  so 
many  different  directions.!  They  left  on  the  ground,  how* 
ever,  some  seven  or  eight  dead,  as  many  as  thirty  wounded^ 
and  eighty  prisoners  were  captured,  while  their  whole  train 
of  six  wagons,  loaded  with  subsistence  and  ammunition,  and 


•  Lieutenant  Boon  was. wounded  at 
the  same  time.  Not  less  noteworthy 
was  the  conduct  of  private  Harry 
Rhodes,  at  the  time  orily  seventeen 
years  old,  who,  boldly  attempting  to 
capture  three  Federal  troopers,  was 
shot  painfully  in  the  under-jaw,  and,  in 
the  struggle,  thrown  to  the  ground,  was 
savagely  beaten  over  the  head  with 
their  pistols  until  seemingly  insensible 
or  dead.  Vet,  in  that  condition,  watch- 
ing his  opportunity,  he  sprang  to  his 
feet,  and,  severely  hurt  as  he  was,  shot 
two  of  his  assailants  dead  and  captured 


t  In  the  pursuit  after  a  party  of  these 
fugitives,  a  Confederate  officer,  as  he 
was  about  to  turn  back,  shouted  after 
them,  "Get  out  of  our  country,  yott 
worthless  rascals !"  In  the  rear  of  the 
Federals,  on  a  horse  rather  the  slowest 
of  the  lot,  was  a  trooper,  who,  turning 
his  head  to  the  rear,  exclaimed,  in  the 
unmistakable  brogue  and  with  the 
ready  wit  of  his  countrymen :  "  Faith^ 
and  by  Jasus,  an*t  it  that  same  we're 
tr^ng  to  do  jist  as  fast  as  we  can  Y^ 


»*u. 


374  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

one  ambulance,  and  about  one  hundred  horses  and  mules  fell 
into  the  hands  of  the  Confederates. 

Passing  through  Sommerville,  where  Colonel  Bell  joined 
with  the  train  and  its  precious  supplies,  the  march  was  re- 
sumed in  the  direction  of  Whitehall,  on  the  Memphis  road, 
six  miles  westward,  which  was  reached  that  night  about  eight 
o'clock.  Here  a  detachment  of  some  700  men,  including  50 
with  firearms,  under  Colonel  Faulkner,  was  organized  to  pro- 
ceed, under  the  special  conduct  of  Major  Strange,  Forrest's 
trusty  Adjutant-General,  by  the  highway  to  Memphis,  cross- 
ing Wolf  river  at  Raleigh  Ferry,  and  making  a  demonstra- 
tion in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  Memphis,  as  if  designing  to 
attack  that  city,  sweep  by  to  Hernando,  and  on  to  Como,  Mis- 
sissippi, sixty  miles  southward  of  the  former  place.  And  we 
may  add,  this  operation  was  successfully  carried  out,  to  the 
great  consternation  of  the  Federals  and  their  following  in 
Memphis,  as  the  Confederates  passed  within  four  miles  of  it ; 
moreover,  it  served  to  divert  attention,  as  General  Forrest 
calculated,  from  the  points  toward  which  his  valuable  trains 
were  being  rapidly  convoyed. 

It  appears  there  was  but  one  bridge  remaining  over  Wolf 
river  between  Lagrange  and  Memphis  —  that  at  Lafayette 
Station  —  which,  however,  was  not  in  practicable  condition 
until  the  day  before,  when  it  was  made  so  by  the  Federals  for 
convenience  in  throwing  troops  across,  and  their  rapid  commu- 
nications with  reference  to  the  envelopment  of  Forrest ;  and 
this,  fortunately,  had  been  ascertained  by  Colonel  Thomas  H. 
Logwood,  of  Memphis,  who  happened  to  be  in  the  region  just 
northward  of  the  river  recruiting  a  cavalry  regiment  Satis- 
fied of  this  important  fact  by  a  personal  reconnoissance,  Log- 
wood sent  an  officer  to  intercept  and  acquaint  Forrest  with 
the  fact  at  Oakland.  This  opportune  information  determined 
the  daring  Confederate  leader  to  attempt  to  seize  the  bridge 


Seizure  of  Bridge. 


375 


by  a  coup  de  main^  and  use  it  for  the  passage  of  his  trains  and 
main  force.* 

After  giving  his  men  and  horses  some  little  rest,  of  which 
they  now  stood  in  great  need,  Colonel  Bell  was  ordered  to 
advance  hurriedly,  with  some  200  hundred  armed  men,  on  the 
bridge  in  question 'at  Lafayette  Station,  and  if  possible  sur- 
prise and  seize  it.  About  the  same  time  some  200  more  of 
Forrest's  armed  force  had  been  thrown  out  well  leftward,  as 
if  aiming  to  effect  a  passage  of  Wolf  river  somewhere  between 
Moscow  and  Lagrange,  and  thus  cover  his  real  line  of  march. 
A  detachment  of  100  good  men  constituted  the  rear-guard, 
and  Forrest  with  his  escort  took  charge  of  the  train  and  stock, 
which  were  now  boldly  pushed  forward  close  after  Belt 

It  was  eleven  o'clock  a.m.  on  the  27th  as  Bell,  well  advised 
by  the  recpnnoissance  of  Colonel  Logwood  and  Lieutenant 
Williamson  of  the  situation,  approached,  under  the  happy 
cover  of  a  dense  wood  on  the  north  bank  of  the  stream,  to  the 
immediate  vicinity  of  the  bridge  to  be  secured.  It  was  com- 
manded by  a  closed  work  within  thirty  feet  of  it,  on  the  south 
bank,  and  manned  by  several  hundred  riflemen.  Neverthe- 
less, without  parley  or  hesitancy,  the  vigorous,  determined 
Bell  threw  his  men  upon  it,  and  they  splendidly  charged 
rcaoss,  on  the  timbers  of  the  bridge,  under  a  volley  from  the 
fortlet.     Only  a  single  volley  was  fired  ;  the  Federals,  observ- 


*  Meanwhile,  also,  Logwood  de- 
tached Lieutenant  John  A.  Williamson, 
with  a  small  party,  to  make  a  closer  re- 
oonnoissance  under  cover  of  the  night 
That  officer,  with  consummate  adroit- 
neasy  crept  between  the  Federal  pickets 
and  the  bridge,  and  found  that  the  floor- 
ing had  been  removed  and  was  piled  up 
on  the  southern  bank,  under  fire  from  a 
work  commanding  the  bridge.    While 


thus  employed,  a  body  of  Federal  horse 
came  up  on  the  south  bank,  which,  on 
being  challenged,  replied,  "  Reenforce- 
ments  for  Colonel  Prince."  The  guard 
was  then  turned  out,  light  struck,  the 
bridge-floor  relaid,  troops  passed  over 
and  went  their  way  as  the  flooring  was 
again  removed.— iWi".  Notes  of  Colond 
Logufood, 


Affair  at  ColliervUk.  377 

ibodied,  to  open  a  vehement  skirmish,  and  to  fall  back,  when 
>tly  pressed,  westward  along  the  road,  and  leaving  someof  his 
ier  men  at  Lafayette  to  simulate  country  people,  and  give 
Ise  information  of  the  concentration  of  his  whole  force  and 
\  movement  toward  CoUierville  to  attack  Memphis,  Forrest 
Dved  by  the  "  State  line"  road  to  that  place,  closely  pressed, 
rough  mud  and  rain,  by  the  enemy,  until  about  ten  o'clock 
night.  Then  the  enemy  came  up  with  him  near  to  that* 
ice,  and  a  sharp,  noisy  skirmish  ensued  forian  hour  or  more, 
the  uproar  of  which  the  artillery  in  the  Federal  work  there 
^k  a  boisterous  part. 

Several  prisoners  were  taken  on  both  sides  about  this  time, 
long  others,  Captain  John  Mann,  Forrest's  Chief  Engineer, 
10,  by  a  mistake,  fell  into  the  Federal  hands,  and,  in  reply  to 
tne  inquiries,  managed  cleverly  to  leave  the  impression  that 
meral  Stephen  D.  Lee  was  in  the  vicinity  with  his  entire 
jralry  force,  and  with  that  apprehension  the  Federal  com- 
mder  retreated  immediately  to  Lafayette,  and  there  halted 
•  the  night,  leaving  Forrest  in  possession  of  the  vicinity  of 
►llierville  at  midnight,  after  having  driven  the  Federals  to 
*ir  interior  fortifications. 

In  the  mean  time  it  had  ceased  to  rain,  and,  the  wind  chang- 
j  to  the  north,  it  had  become  very  cold.  Having  now  gained 
Ricient  time  for  the  movement  southward  of  his  train,  he 
nied  the  head  of  his  column  toward  Holly  Springs,  and 
s  at  Mount  Pleasant  by  daylight  on  the  28th,  after  a  con- 
uous  night  work  of  marches  and  battle.  He  stood  now  on 
e  ground,  having  accomplished  in  full  measure  what  to 
)st  men  would  have  seemed  fatally  rash,  perilously  vain  to 
empt. 

The  enemy  made  no  further  attempt  to  pursue,  as  Forrest 
w  proceeded  by  short,  slow  marches  across  the  country  to 
»mo,  Panola  county,  Miss.,  having  been  met  on  the  way,  on 
5  29th,  by  Brigadier-General  Chalmers,  advancing  with  his. 


37^  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

ing  the  swarming  numbers  in  the  onset,  and  not  the  unarmed 
condition  of  the  main  force,  did  not  stand  for  another,  but, 
breaking,  took  to  flight  down  the  road  eastward  toward  Mos- 
cow, leaving  their  strongly  fortified  position,  commanding  the 
bridge,  in  Colonel  Bell's  possession,  and  leaving  four  of  thdr 
number  dead  on  the  ground.  The  flooring  was  quickly  re- 
laid,  while  Colonel  John  Newsom  was  sent  in  pursuit,  with 
some  fifty  troopers,  to  keep  up  the  appearance  of  vigorous  ag- 
gressive purposes,  and  was  so  fortunate,  besides,  as  to  encoun- 
ter a  troop-train  within  two  miles,  which  he  attacked  with  such 
effect  as  to  drive  it  back  with  the  loss,  it  is  said,  of  some  fifty 
killed  and  wounded ;  and,  pursuing  to  Grisham's  creek,  he 
burned  the  railroad  bridge  over  that  stream. 

By  four  p.m.,  27th,  Forrest  had  succeeded  in  bringing  up 
his  train  and  stock,  relaid  the  bridge,  and  effected  the  cross* 
ing  to  the  south  bank  of  Wolf  river  without  the  least  mishap. 
This  accomplished,  he  threw  out  an  armed  detachment  osten- 
tatiously upon  Moscow,  with  orders,  if  pressed,  to  fall  back 
toward  Memphis,  and  thus  attract  the  Federals  from  his  trains 
and  cattle,  which,  with  the  msdn  body  of  unarmed  m^n,  took 
the  road  toward  Holly  Springs,  via  Mount  Pleasant,  without 
delay,  with  orders  to  make  a  night  march.  At  the  same  time, 
leading  his  escort,  some  300  other  armed  men,  and  Morton's 
artillery,  down  the  road  westward  to  Collierville,  whence  a 
heavy  force  was  reported  to  be  advancing.  Within  two  miles 
of  Lafayette  he  met,  engaged,  and  drove  back  a  detachment 
of  some  300  cavalry.  These  he  charged,  after  his  usual  prompt 
fashion,  and  brushed  back,  just  as  scouts  returned  from  Mos- 
cow and  Lagrange,  and  reported  the  movement  of  heavy  bodies 
ol  infantry  and  cavalry  from  that  quarter.  The  fair  Christ- 
mas weather  had  not  continued,  and,  for  more  than  twelve 
hours,  a  torrential  rain  had  been  falling.  But  every  possible 
device  was  to  be  put  in  play  to  prevent  these  forces  from  pur- 
suing his  heavily  laden  teams.     So,  throwing  out  the  scouts 


Affair  at  CoUiervUk.  377 

embodied,  to  open  a  vehement  skirmish,  and  to  fall  back,  when 
hotly  pressed,  westward  along  the  road,  and  leaving  someof  his 
older  men  at  Lafayette  to  simulate  country  people,  and  give 
false  information  of  the  concentration  of  his  whole  force  and 
its  movement  toward  CoUierville  to  attack  Memphis,  Forrest 
moved  by  the  "  State  line"  road  to  that  place,  closely  pressed, 
through  mud  and  rain,  by  the  enemy,  until  about  ten  o'clock 
at  night.  Then  the  enemy  came  up  with  him  near  to  that* 
place,  and  a  sharp,  noisy  skirmish  ensued  for  an  hour  or  more, 
in  the  uproar  of  which  the  artillery  in  the  Federal  work  there 
took  a  boisterous  part 

Several  prisoners  were  taken  on  both  sides  about  this  time, 
among  others.  Captain  John  Mann,  Forrest's  Chief  Engineer, 
who,  by  a  mistake,  fell  into  the  Federal  hands,  and,  in  reply  to 
some  inquiries,  managed  cleverly  to  leave  the  impression  that 
General  Stephen  D.  Lee  was  in  the  vicinity  with  his  entire 
cavalry  force,  and  with  that  apprehension  the  Federal  com- 
mander retreated  immediately  to  Lafayette,  and  there  halted 
for  the  night,  leaving  Forrest  in  possession  of  the  vicinity  of 
CoUierville  at  midnight,  after  having  driven  the  Federals  to 
their  interior  fortifications. 

In  the  mean  time  it  had  ceased  to  rain,  and,  the  wind  chang- 
ing to  the  north,  it  had  become  very  cold.  Having  now  gained 
sufficient  time  for  the  movement  southward  of  his  train,  he 
turned  the  head  of  his  column  toward  Holly  Springs,  and 
was  at  Mount  Pleasant  by  daylight  on  the  28th,  after  a  con- 
tinuous night  work  of  marches  and  battle.  He  stood  now  on 
safe  ground,  having  accomplished  in  full  measure  what  to 
most  men  would  have  seemed  fatally  rash,  perilously  vain  to 
attempt 

The  enemy  made  no  further  attempt  to  pursue,  as  Forrest 
now  proceeded  by  short,  slow  marches  across  the  country  to 
Como,  Panola  county,  Miss.,  having  been  met  on  the  way,  on 
the  29th,  by  Brigadier-General  Chalmers,  advancing  with  his 


378  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

m 

command  to  assist  in  covering  his  return.  It  was  the  first 
day  of  the  year  1864  when  the  last  of  the  command  arrived 
at  Como,  and  Major  Strange  and  Colonel  Faulkner  reached 
there  about  the  same  time,  without  the  loss,  during  their  wide 
circuit,  o(  one  man.  The  weather  being  intensely  cold,  and 
the  troops  without  tents,  the  several  regiments  were  scattered 
about  so  as  to  secure  quarters  for  their  men,  as  far  as  possible, 
in  the  vacant  houses  and  cabins  on  the  abandoned  plantations 
in  the  neighborhood,  of  which  the  course  of  the  war  had  left 
a  large  number. 

COMMENTARIES. 

1.  It  should  be  recollected  that  General  Forrest  effected 
his  withdrawal  from  Jackson,  and  this  march  of  one  hundred 
and  forty  miles  with  3CXX)  unarmed,  raw  men,  a  large  wagon- 
train,  his  artillery,  and  all  their  cattle  under  convoy  of,  at 
most,  600  armed  men.  When  he  began  the  movement,  he 
was  thoroughly  encompassed  with  foes,  some  20,000  strongs 
according  to  General  Hurlbut's  official  admission.  Under 
these  circumstances,  his  troops  fought  successfully  five  com- 
bats— ^at  Jack's  creek,  Estenaula,  Sommerville,  Lafayette,  and 
Collierville — ^losing  during  the  expedition  not  more  than  30 
killed,  wounded,  and  captured,  and  inflicting  a  loss  upon  the 
enemy  of  fully  50  killed  and  150  wounded  and  captured,  or, 
in  all,  200  at  least 

2.  While  the  mass  of  even  the  armed  force  at  General  For- 
rest's disposition  were  raw  and  untried,  there  were  with  him 
a  number  of  officers  who  had  seen  a  good  deal  of  service,  and  a 
great  deal  of  credit  for  the  success  of  the  expedition  is  attrib- 
uted to  them  by  their  General  Both  his  staff  and  his  officers 
behaved  with  distinguished  courage  and  notable  efficiency, 
and  all  his  plans  were  ably  seconded  by  his  immediate  stafii 
namely.  Major  J.  P.  Strange,  his  Adjutant-General,  Captain 
Charles  W.  Anderson,  A.  D.  C,  and  Major  G.  V.  Rambaut, 


Commentaries.  379 

• 

A.  C.  S.,  while,  as  on  all  previous  occasions,  his  young  son 
Willie,  now  his  Aid,  also  was  a  devoted,  effective  servitor. 
At  the  same  time,  nothing  could  be  more  admirable  than  the 
conduct  of  the  men.  There  was  no  drooping  on  their  part 
under  the  extreme  fatigue  and  exposure  to  the  unusually  in- 
clement weather  of  the  season  which  they  had  been  suddenly 
called  out  from  their  homes  to  undergo  before  they  could  be 
properly  supplied  with  either  clothing  or  blankets.  All  these 
privations  and  severe  hardships  these  young  men  endured  with 
a  fortitude  which  we  are  told  is  that  formidable  and  shining 
quality  which  most  distinguishes  veterans  from  raw  troops. 

3.  Forrest,  entering  West-Tennessee  at  Saulsbury  on  the 
4th  of  December  with  only  some  500  men,  two  guns,  and 
five  ordnance  wagons,  quit  it  at  Lafayette  Station  on  the 
27th  with  3500  men,  well  mounted,  40  wagons  and  teams 
loaded  with  subsistence,  200  head  of  beef  cattle,  300  hogs, 
and  his  artillery  intact. 

4.  It  is  proper  to  add,  that  the  success  of  this  handsome 
operation  was  assisted  unquestionably  by  General  Lee's  at- 
tack upon  Moscow,  on  the  afternoon  of  the  4th  of  December, 
with  McCulloch's  and  Ross's  Brigades.  This  affair,  though 
it  failed  to  accomplish  the  main  purposes  for  which  it  was  or- 
dered— the  destruction  of  the  railroad  bridge  at  that  point  over 
Wolf  river  and  the  capture  of  the  garrison — served  to  inflict  a 
heavy  loss  upon  a  strong  column  of  the  Federals,  taken  by  sur- 
prise, and  doubtless  kept  at  a  stand  subsequently  in  that  quar- 
ter a  force  that  was  destined  to  pursue  Forrest,  a  force  which 
otherwise  might  have  brought  his  expedition  to  a  premature 
close,  far  short  of  the  satisfactory  results  which  we  have  just 
enumerated. 

5.  A  Federal  writer  sums  up  the  results  of  the  Confederate 
General's  operations  on  this  occasion  in  these  terms :  "  For- 
rest, with  less  than  4000  men,  has  moved  right  through  the 
Sixteenth  Army  Corps ,  has  passed  within  nine  miles  of  Mem- 


380  Campaigns  of  General  FarresL 

phis,  carried  off  over  100  wagons,  200  beef  cattle,  3cxx>  con* 
scripts,  and  innumerable  stores,  torn  up  railroad  track,  cut 
telegraph  wire,  burned  and  sacked  towns,  (?)  run  over  pickets 
with  a  single  Derringer  pistol,  .  .  .  and  all  too  in  the 
face  of  io,OCX)  men."  {Correspondent  Cincinnati  Commercial^ 
Memphis,  January  12,  1864.)  We  find  the  Federal  forces 
sent  into  West-Tennessee  were  General  Smith,  from  Colum- 
bus, Ky.,  with  2SCX)  cavalry  and  5000  infantry,  and  two  bri- 
gades from  Memphis,  respectively  under  Mower  and  Mizner. 


CHAPTER  XIV. 

Forrest  maJe  a  Major-Cenerat^Assigntnmt  io  "  Forres  ft  Cmialry  Dt- 
partment"-~HeadquarUrs  at  Oxford,  Mississippi— Affair  of  Hi* 
Deserters  there—The  Fekerai  Cavalry  Raid  into  Mississippi,  under 
General  W.  S.  Smith— Skirmishing— Savage  Waste  of  tht  Country 
iy  the  Enemy^Federals  begin  to  retire— Series  of  Sharp  Skirmisht* 
— Engagement  at  Okolena— Federal  Defeat  in  a  succession  of  Com- 
bats—Death of  Colonel  Jeffrey  Forrest;  also,  of  Lieuienant-Ct- 
lonel  Barksdale— Running  Fight,  and con^lete  Federal  Rout. 


January  let  to  February  aSM,  1864. 
UURING  the  absence  of  Forrest  in  West-Tennessee,  there 
had  been  a  change  of  department  commanders.  General 
Joseph  E.  Johnston  had  been  relieved  from  duty  by  the  Pre- 
sident, and  Lieutenant-General  Polk  placed  in  his  stead,  and 
to  that  ofGcer  the  telegraphic  report  of  the  aggregate  results 
of  the  expedition  was  made,  in  brief  but  expressive  terms. 
General  Polk  in  reply,  acquainted  him  with  the  fact  he  had 
been  promoted  to  the  grade  of  Major-General  in  the  Confede- 
rate provisional  army*  and  that  he  would  be  assigned  to  a 
proper  district,  embracing  all  the  Confederate  forces  in  North- 
Mississippi  and  West- Tennessee. 
The  next  ten  days  were  devoted  assiduously  to  the  work  of 


noteirorihy  coincidence  that      iSi3,  the  very  daj  be  entered  Wert- 
in  for  this  rank  was  actu- 
ally iuned  the  4th  daj  of  December, 


382  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

organization  of  the  valuable  war /^rf^««^/ gathered  in  the 
cesses  of  West-Tennessee ;  and  on  the  13th  of  January,  For- 
rest repaired  to  General  Polk's  headquarters,  at  Jackson,  Mis- 
sissippi, leaving  Brigadier-General  Chalmers  in  command  in 
his  absence. 

It  was  then  the  command  of  a  district  was  formally  assigned 
him,  that  is,  "  Forrest's  Cavalry  Department,"  embracing 
all  cavalry  commands  in  West-Tennessee  and  North-Missis- 
sippi, to  the  southern  boundaries  of  the  counties  of  Monroe, 
Calhoun,  Chickasaw,  Yallabusha,  Tallahatchie,  and  that  part 
of  Sunflower  and  Bolivar  lying  north  of  a  line  drawn  from  the 
south-east  corner  of  Tallahatchie  county  to  the  town  of  Pren- 
tiss, on  the  Mississippi  river.  At  the  same  time,  he  secured 
arms  and  ammunition  for  his  troops,  and  returned  to  prepare 
his  command,  as  soon  as  possible,  not  only  for  an  effective  de- 
fense of  the  territorial  limits  assigned  him,  but  for  active  and 
extended  offensive  operations. 

But  many  and  grave  or  delicate  difficulties  and  hinderances 
had  to  be  met  and  overborne  in  this  work.  The  regiments 
and  companies  brought  out  from  West-Tennessee  were  chiefly 
skeleton  organizations  ;  these  had  to  be  consolidated  and 
moulded  into  more  compact  and  efficient  forms,  somewhat  at 
the  expense. of  the  military  aspirations  and  cherished  ambi- 
tion of  some  valuable  officers.  There  were  great  contention 
and  competition  for  the  commissions  at  stake  under  the  reor- 
ganization, and  this  bred  a  state  of  discontent  and  disorgani- 
zation among  the  men.  Hitherto  in  the  habit  of  staying  in 
the  field  very  much  at  their  own  will  and  pleasure,  the  sol- 
diery, moreover,  became  very  restless  under  the  restraints 
imposed  in  this  respect  by  their  new  commander,  and  until 
his  firm  hand  and  strenuous  will  were  made  apparent,  they 
straggled  numerously  from  their  colors,  and  returned  even  by 
large  squads  to  their  homes.  But  detachments  of  his  veteran 
troops  were  promptly  sent  out  to  gather  and  bring  back  these 


Reorganization, 


383 


men  to  their  duty,  as  well  as  all  absentees  that  were  encoun- 
tered. By  the  2Sth,  however,  the  more  serious  obstacles  hav- 
ing been  overcome,  on  that  day  Forrest  issued  an  order  an- 
nouncing the  limits  and  scope  of  his  command  ;*  another, 
giving  the  names  and  functions  of  his  staff  ;t  and  a  third,  pro- 
mulgating the  provisional  organizations  determined  upon,  both 
as  to  regiments,  battalions,  batteries,  and  brigades. 

Four  brigades  were  formed  respectively  under*  Brigadier- 
General  Richardson  and  Colonels  McCulloch,  Bell,  and  Jeflfrey 
Forrest,  while  McCulloch's  and  Forrest's  Brigades  were  or- 
g^anized  into  a  division,  commanded  by  Brigadier-General  J, 
R.  Chalmers.t  These  details  having  been  adjusted,  Major- 
General  Forrest  removed  his  headquarters  to  Oxford,  Missis- 
sippi, as  a  more  central  and  favorable  point,  in  view  of  a  pos- 
sible necessity  for  cooperation  with  other  Confederate  forces 
against  a  rumored  movement  from  Vicksburg,  northward. 


•  See  Appendix. 

t  Ibid, 

X  The  first  brigade  was  constituted 
of  the  Twelfth,  (Lieutenant-Colonel  J. 
U.  Green,)  Fourteenth,  (Colonel  J.  J. 
Necly,)  Fifteenth,  (Colonel  F.  M.  Stew- 
art,) Sixteenth,  (Colonel  Thomas  H. 
Logwood,)  and  Seventeenth,  (Major 
Marshall,)  regiments,  and  Street's  and 
Bennett's  battalions,  all  West-Tennes- 
see troops,  under  the  command  of  Bri- 
gadier-General R.  v.  Richardson — 
1500  rank  and  file. 

The  second  brigade.  Colonel  Robert 
McCulloch  (Second  Missouri)  com- 
manding, was  composed  of  the  Second 
Missouri  Regiment,(Lieutenant-Colonel 
R.  A.  McCulloch,)  Willis's  Texan  Bat- 
talion, (Lieutenant-Colonel  Leo  Willis,) 
Colonel  W.  W.  Faulkner's  Kentucky 


Regiment,  Keizer's — Franklin's— Ten- 
nessee Battalions,  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Alexander  H.  Chalmers's  Battalion 
Mississippi  Cavalry,  and  the  fragment 
of  the  Second  Arkansas  Cavalry,  (Cap- 
tain F.  M.  Cochran.) 

The  third  brigade,  Colonel  T.  H. 
Bell  in  command,  formed  of  Colonels 
Russell's,  Greer's,  Newsom's,  Wilson's, 
and  Barteau's  (Second)  Tennessee  re- 
giments— 2000  rank  and  file. 

And  a  fourth  brigade  was  made  up  of 
McDonald's  Battalion  and  the  Seventh 
Tennessee,  (Veterans,)  McGuirk's  Re- 
giment, Third  Mississippi  State  troops. 
Fifth  Mississippi,  (Lieutenant-Colonel 
Barksdale,)    and   DufiTs   (Nineteenth) 

0 

Mississippi  Battalion,  with  Colonel  J. 
£.  Forrest  as  Brigade  Commander* 


384  Campaigns  of  General  ForresL 

The  rest  of  the  forces  were  withdrawn  to  the  south  bank 
of  the  Tallahatchie,  and  concentrated  for  the  most  part  at 
Panola,  under  the  command  of  Brigadier-General  Chalmers. 

Among  other  disturbing  elements,  fomenting  and  k&ping 
up  discontent,  was  the  extreme  want  of  clothing  among  the 
new  troops,  who  had,  as  will  be  remembered,  been  brought 
away  so  hurriedly  from  their  homes  beyond  the  border  ;  and 
the  disposition  to  leave  camp  without  permission,  checked  for 
a  time,  breaking  out  again  with  renewed  violence,  prevailed 
presently  to  such  a  degree  as  to  render  severe  measures  im- 
perative. Among  those  who  thus  abandoned  their  colors, 
were  nineteen,  who  went  off  together  in  a  body.  Promptly 
pursued,  captured,  and  brought  back  in  ignominy,  their  com- 
mander, giving  orders  that  in  consequence  of  their  flagrant, 
defiant  desertion,  the  whole  detachment  should  be  shot,  issued 
the  necessary  instructions  regulating  the  ceremonies  of  an 
early  execution.  Their  coffins  were  made,  their  graves  dug, 
and  the  culprits  advised  to  make  their  peace  with  their  Maker 
and  the  world.  News  of  the  affair  having  become  bruited 
abroad,  the  clergy,  prominent  citizens,  and  ladies  of  Oxford 
waiting  on  the  General,  made  urgent  appeals  to  him  to  spare 
the  lives  of  their  misguided  countrymen.  Some  of  the  offi- 
cers of  high  rank  also  felt  it  their  duty  to  inform  the  General 
of  their  serious  apprehension  of  a  mutinous  resistance  on  the 
part  of  the  soldiery,  to  the  attempt  to  execute  so  many  of 
their  comrades.  But  Forrest,  apparently  unmoved  by  inter- 
cessions, was  unswerved  by  the  suggestion  of  a  mutiny,  and 
inexorably  adhered  to  his  orders  ;  the  preparations  for  the 
execution  being  proceeded  with,  even  to  the  presence  before 
the  troops  of  the  prisoners,  blindfolded,  seated  on  their  cof- 
fins, and  the  firing  party  drawn  up  before  them  waiting  for  the 
command,  "  Fire !"  before  he  granted  a  reprieve,  and  remand- 
ed them  to  prison,  through  one  of  his  staff-officers.  The  les- 
son was  not  lost  on  any  one  who  beheld  the  spectacle.    It  is 


JONESBORO 


BOONEVIUC 


Federal  Forces  Afield.  385 

true,  the  lives  of  these  men  had  been  spared  after  all  this  dis- 
play of  an  inflexible  purpose  not  to  do  so ;  but  it  was  seen 
and  felt,  at  the  same  time,  that,  on  another  occasion,  should 
the  spirit  of  desertion  continue  unstayed,  Forrest  would 
prove  absolutely  inexorable,  howsoever  disagreeable  might  be 
the  duty  to  him. 

Several  days  later,  or  about  the  7th,  General  Polk  notified 
Forrest  that  a  Federal  column,  under  Sherman,  had  taken  the 
field  from  Vicksburg,  in  the  direction  of  Jackson,  while  an- 
other had  been  put  on  foot  up  the  Yazoo,  which  Forrest  was 
to  look  after  by  establishing  a  part  of  his  force  in  observation 
at  Grenada.  Accordingly,  Colonel  Jeffrey  Forrest  was  imme- 
diately dispatched  thither  with  the  Fourth  Brigade,  about 
1000  strong. 

At  the  same  time,  through  scouts  and  private  correspon- 
dents in  Memphis,  the  General  ascertained  that  extensive 
preparations  were  being  made  in  that  city  for  a  large  cavalry 
movement,  of  which  he  gave  immediate  intelligence  to  his 
superior. 

This  was  quickly  followed,  about  the  8th,  by  the  informa- 
tion than  an  infantry  column,  (brigade,  or  i6cx)  men,)  with 
perhaps  200  cavalry,  a  battery  and  supply-train,  had  moved 
southward  from  Memphis,  by  way  of  Hernando,  toward  Pa- 
nola, and  another  from  Collierville,  on  the  Memphis  and 
Charleston  Railroad,  toward  Holly  Springs.  To  meet  these 
hostile  movements,  Chalmers  promptly  disposed  his  troops  to 
g^ard  the  crossings  of  the  Tallahatchie  ;  McCuUoch  at  Pano- 
la, Bell  at  Belmont,  Richardson  at  Wyatt  and  Toby-Tubby 
Ferry,  with  McGuirk  at  Abbeville. 

It  at  once  occurred  to  Forrest  that  the  cavalry  preparations 

^t  Memphis  were  designed  for  a  cooperative  movement  with 

that  of  Sherman,  whose  common  objective  would  be  about 

Meridian,  and  that  the  force,  already  afield  from  Memphis, 

Was  a  mere  feint  to  occupy  attention.     Nevertheless,  Chat 


38^  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest 

mers  was  directed  to  detach  a  brigade  to  meet  it,  and  McCul- 
loch  was  dispatched  accordingly.* 

Thus  stood  affairs  on  the  evening  of  the  nth,  when  Cap- 
tain Thomas   Henderson,   Chief   of   Scouts,    reported    the 
march  of  a  large  cavalry  force  from  Memphis  toward  Holly 
Springs,  both  by  the  Germantown  and  Bylialia  roads.    At 
this  Chalmers  was   instantly  instructed  to  concentrate  his 
entire  force  at  Oxford,  as  soon  as  possible ;  and  this  move- 
ment was  made,  but  not  finally,  until  several  skirmishes  oc- 
curred in  front  of  Wyatt  and  Abbeville,  in  which  the  Fede- 
rals were  foiled  in  apparent  efforts  to  pass  the  river  at  those 
points,  the  most  persistent  of  which  (at  Wyatt)  was  by  Faulk- 
ner's Kentuckians  during  the  night  of  the  1 3th.     But,  mean- 
while, as  was  soon  reported  by  scouts,  the  main  Federal  co- 
lumn had  been  moving  around  northward  of  the  river,  across 
the  country  toward  Pontotoc,  fully  confirming  Forrest's  fore- 
cast as  to  its  ultimate  objective — the  rich  prairie  region  at 
and  southward  of  Okolona.     Therefore,  Chalmers  was  further 
directed  to  move  at  once,  so  as  to  keep  on  their  right  flank, 
to  which  end  his  command  was  in  movement  for  Houston, 
forty-five  miles  south-west  of  Oxford,  late  in  the  afternoon  <rf 
the  14th. 

Forrest  also  set  out  with  Bell's  Brigade,  his  escort,  and  the 
artillery,  that  morning,  for  Grenada,  whence  he  had  previously 
directed  Colonel  Forrest  to  move  swiftly  eastward,  with  his 
brigade,  upon  West-Point,  on  the  Mobile  and  Ohio  Railroad, 
in  the  menaced  region,  and  from  that  place  to  establish  a  line 
of  couriers  to  Houston,  so  as  to  open  communication  with 
Chalmers. 


*  General  Forrest,  as  early  as  the  move  in  the  direction  of  Okolona  ^ 

9th,  expressed  the  opinion,  in  a  tele-  Meridian,  and  gave  orders  to  keep  ^ 

graphic  dispatch  to  General  Chalmers,  force  in  hand  to  grapple  with  sodi  * 

that  it  was  the  purpose  of  the  enemy  to  movement. 


Forres fs  Dispositions.  387 

Chalmers  encountered  heavy  roads,  and  the  rains  continu- 
ing, the  ways  grew  so  difficult  that  it  became  prudent  to  leave 
the  artillery  and  train  to  be  brought  up  by  details,  and  to 
press  on  with  the  troops,  by  which  means  he  arrived  at  Hous- 
ton the  i6th,  and  at  Palo  Alto  on  the  17th,  and  there  enter- 
ed upon  the  fertile  prairie  region  of  Mississippi,  abounding  in 
forage  and  subsistence.  The  salutary  effect  upon  the  com- 
mand was  soon  apparent.  To  quote  the  graphic  language  of 
a  staff-officer  with  it :  "  The  bountiful  supplies  of  forage 
which  the  prairies  furnished  gladdened  the  hearts  of  our  hun- 
gry horses,  whose  rations  had  been  of  the  scantiest  .  .  . 
When  we  came  in  sight  of  the  first  stack-yard,  with  its  good- 
ly array  of  huge  fodder-ricks,  and  saw  a  little  way  off  the 
teeming  cribs,  a  shout  of  joy  went  up  from  the  head  of  the 
column,  which  was  continued  down  the  whole  line,  as  if  we 
had  indeed  reached  the  promised  land."* 

In  the  mean  while  the  Federal  column  had  been  traversing 
'  the  country  in  a  line  through  Pontotoc,  but  there  trending  to- 
ward Okolona.  And  Forrest,  after  having  gone  to  Grenada,  had 
pushed  across  rapidly  on  the  i8th  to  Starkville,  a  village  some 
twenty-five  miles  west  of  Columbus,  and  opened  communi- 
cation likewise  with  Chalmers.  He  also,  on  the  i8th,  had 
thrown  Colonel  Forrest  forward  toward  Aberdeen,  to  harass 
and  delay  the  enemy  as  much  as  practicable. 

Chalmers,  on  the  i8th,  moving  but  a  short  distance,  halted 
at  Tampico,  where  large  supplies  of  public  forage  had  been 
accumulated,  and  on  the  following  day  joined  Forrest,  still  at 
Starkville.  In  the  mean  time.  Colonel  Jeffrey  Forrest,  strik- 
ing the  path  of  the  Federals  at  Aberdeen,  had  become  in- 
volved in  a  series  of  light  skirmishes,  as  they  pressed  his  bri- 
gade back  toward  West-Point    In  view,  therefore,  of  the  pos- 


*  MS.  Notes  of  Captain  Walter  A.  Goodman,  A.  A.  G.,  which  haTe  been  of 
exceeding  value  to  the  present  writer.  ^ 


388  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

sible  purpose  on  the  part  of  the  Federal  General  to  throw  his 
force  across  at  Aberdeen,  and  move  down  the  east  bank  of 
the  Tombigbee,  Forrest  detached  Bell's  Brigade,  under  Colo- 
nel Barteau,*  early  on  the  morning  of  the  20th,  to  cross  that 
stream  at  Columbus,  and,  moving  up  toward  Aberdeen,  op- 
pose any  such  an  enterprise.  This  movement  Colonel  Barteau 
conducted  with  much  judgment ;  and  finding  that  the  Fede- 
rals had  been  massed  as  far  southward  as  West-Point,  he  took 
up  a  position  at  Waverly,  and  prepared  to  throw  himself 
back  to  the  west  bank,  during  the  night  of  the  20th,  and 
strike  the  Federal  left  flank. 

These  dispositions  being  made  of  a  part  of  his  force,  For- 
rest marched  from  Starkville  at  sunrise  on  the  20th,  with  the 
rest — McCulloch's  Brigade  and  six  hundred  of  Richardson's, 
(under  Neely,)  and  the  artillery,  to  the  support  of  Colonel 
Forrest,  who  was  receding  toward  West-Point  as  slowly  as 
was  practicable,  without  becoming  involved  in  a  serious  action 
with  the  largely  superior  force  pressing  him  back. 

The  theatre  of  approaching  operations  was  one  that  called 
for  prudence  and  judgment  on  both  sides.  To  the  east^^d 
was  the  Tombigbee,  a  navigable  river,  swollen  with  rains  at  the 
time  ;  to  the  west,  and  for  miles  running  nearly  parallel  with 
it,  from  twelve  to  fifteen  miles  distant,  was  the  Sook-a-toncha, 
a  branch  of  the  Oka-tibby-ha,  a  considerable  stream,  which, 
after  receiving  the  waters  of  a  number  of  prairie  creeks,  wis 
crossed  by  the  Mobile  and  Ohio  Railroad,  five  miles  soutb 
of  West-Point,  as  it  flowed  nearly  due  east  to  empty  into  tkc 
Tombigbee,  not  far  above  Columbus.  As  will  be  seen  by 
reference  to  a  map  of  the  country,  these  streams  form  a  com- 
plete cMl'desac,  into  which  Forrest  hoped  to  draw  and  hold 
the  Federals  until  General  Lee  should  come  upon  the  scene» 


*  Colonel  Bell  being  tick. 


Affair  at  Siloam.  389 

and  enable  the  Confederates,  by  taking  the  ofFensive  vigorous- 
ly, to  cut  off  their  retreat  or  escape.  By  the  road  upon  which 
Forrest  moved,  the  Sook-a-toncha  was  only  to  be  crossed  at 
a  bridge  about  thirty  yards  in  length,  some  four  miles  west  of 
West-Point,  the  only  approach  to  which  was  over  a  long,  nar- 
row, thrown-up,  dilapidated  causeway,  while  the  banks  of  thd 
stream,  on  either  hand,  were  steep  and  miry.  These  condi- 
tions made  it  hazardous  for  the  Confederates  to  advance  be- 
yond it  in  much  force.  Nevertheless,  on  reaching  the  posi- 
tion, about  two  P.M.,  Forrest  pushed  adventurously  forward 
through  and  several  miles  beyond  West-Point,  until  he  met 
Colonel  Jeffrey  Forrest  holding  the  Federals  at  bay  in  the 
prairie.  Their  lines  extended  in  formidable  proportions  across 
the  highway.  It  was  not  Forrest's  policy  to  fight  as  yet,  but 
merely  to  maneuver  for  delay  until  S.  D.  Lee  came  up  with 
recnforcements  that  must  be  near  at  hand ;  therefore,  after 
some  very  light  skirmishing,  he  withdrew  through  West- 
Point  and  behind  the  creek  again  ;  not  a  little  annoyed,  how- 
ever, at  the  necessity  for  doing  so,  and  thus  delivering  up  so 
much  more  of  that  opulent  region  to  the  ruthless  ravages  of 
the  enemy,  whose  track  to  the  northward  was  marked  far  and 
wide  by  a  heavy,  dark  pall  of  smoke  in  the  air,  from  the 
buildings  which  had  been  burned  or  were  burning. 

Disposing  his  forces  to  hold  the  bridge  we  have  mentioned, 
Forrest  at  once  led  a  portion  of  McCuIloch's  Brigade  to  a 
point  called  Siloam,  some  four  miles  higher  up  the  creek, 
where  it  was  reported  that  the  Federals  were  making  an  effort 
to  cross,  and  thus  turn  his  position.  It  was  not,  however,  a 
serious  movement ;  but  a  small  party  had  already  crossed  the 
stream,  and,  taken  by  surprise,  some  were  killed,  and  the  rest, 
twenty-three  in  number,  were  captured.  That  night  the 
whole  country  northward  was  illuminated  by  burning  home- 
steads, cotton-gins,  granaries,  and  stack-yards,  inspiring  the 
Confederates  with  a  passionate  resolution  to  do  all  in  the 


390  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

power  of  men  to  punish  such  an  unmanly  method  of  war« 
fare.* 

On  the  morning  of  the  2ist,  a  force  was  again  thrown  to 
the  north  side  of  the  bridge,  where  it  was  quickly  attacked, 
but  with  light  loss  to  either  side,  though  there  was  a  pro- 
longed, incessant  noise  and  rattle  of  firearms  until  about  noon, 
when  the  enemy,  after  several  attempts  to  force  the  position, 
drew  off.  Forrest  followed  at  once,  with  his  ever-staunch 
escort,  to  satisfy  himself  of  the  actual  situation  ;  then  calling 
up  one  hundred  of  Faulkner's  Kentuckians,  he  discovered  to 
his  chagrin  that  the  Federals  were  apparently  in  retreat. 
McCuUoch's  and  Colonel  Forrest's  brigades  were  now  ordered 
to  advance ;  and  with  this  force  he  pressed  closely  at  their 
haunches,  leaving  orders  for  General  Chalmers  to  collect  all 
remaining  troops,  and  with  them  guard  the  bridge  and  the 
crossings  northward  of  it  against  any  possible  hostile  flank 
movement  from  the  northward. 

The  Federals  were  soon  found  in  position  in  some  post- 
oak  timber,  at  the  edge  of  the  prairie,  fouf  miles  northward 
of  West-Point ;  but  dismounting  and  deploying  as  skirmish- 
ers, the  Confederates  quickly  drove  them  rearward  some  five 
miles,  with  a  loss  of  some  fifteen  killed  and  wounded,  when 
they  again  halted,  and  formed  in  battle  array  across  the  mouth 
of  a  lane,  in  which  there  was  a  narrow,  slippery  bridge  and 
causeway,  over  a  narrow  slushy  that  could  not  be  turned. 
About  150  Confederates  had  been  thrown  across  it  when  the 
Federals  charged  with  vigor ;  but  Forrest,  seeing  the  peril, 
with  characteristic  audacity  led  a  counter-charge,  while  Mc- 
Culloch,  alive  to  the  exigency,  threw  forward,  on  foot,  at 
double-quick,  a  number  of  men,  who  rushed  across  with  a 


•  MS.  Notes  of  Captains  Goodman  the  extent  to  which  these  ravages  were 
and  F.  F.  Aden.  Even  Federal  writers  carried.  They  were  a  disgraoe  to  the 
have  been  unable  to  find  excuses  for     age. 


Heavy  Fighting.  391 

loud  shout.  The  Federals,  however,  again  gave  way  to  their 
main  line  in  a  wood,  a  short  distance  northward.  For  a  few 
moments  the  situation  was  dangerous,  the  fighting  sharp ; 
and,  as  was  his  way.  General  Forrest  was  in  the  heart  of  it, 
killing  with  his  ready  pistol  a  Federal  trooper  who  was  in  the 
act  of  shooting  him. 

The  main  force  of  the  Federals  now  confronted  did  not 
number  less  than  4CXX)  men.  Forrest,  dismounting  the  Con- 
federates, not  more  than  1000  troopers,  immediately  threw 
them  forward  as  riflemen  to  give  battle,  and  a  warm  engage- 
ment began.  The  Federals,  however,  fell  back  slowly  through 
the  woods,  for  a  mile,  into  the  prairies  to  a  strong  position 
behind  a  stout  picket-fence,  quite  half  a  mile  long.  Promptly 
detaching  a  regiment  to  move  round  by  the  right  and  turn 
this  formidable  barrier,  he  moved  upon  it  with  his  men  in  two 
lines,  as  soon  as  the  regiment  in  question  became  well  en- 
gaged. The  Federals  giving  way,  Forrest's  men  rushed  up 
to  the  fence,  and  from  behind  it  delivered  a  galling  fire  upon 
their  rear.  Up  to  this  time  Forrest's  losses  that  day  had 
been  about  80  killed  and  wounded,  while  that  of  the  enemy 
may  be  set  down  at  200,  including  75  prisoners  taken. 

Remounting  his  men,  Forrest  now  pursued  with  such 
celerity  as  might  be.  The  roads  and  whole  face  of  the 
country,  thoroughly  soaked  by  long-continued  rains,  were  so 
fearfully  cut  up  by  the  feet  of  the  Federal  cavalry-horses  and 
their  swarming  train  of  loose  and  pack-animals,  accumulated 
in  the  course  of  the  movement,  as  to  make  pursuit  barely 
possible.  The  enemy,  however,  were  so  encumbered  with 
plunder  and  negroes  that  they  too  were  greatly  impeded,  and 
their  retreat  so  slow  that  Forrest,  with  the  impetuous  force 
of  his  nature,  was  able  to  bring  his  advance  into  more  than 
one  sharp  collision  that  afternoon  with  the  Federal  rear-guard, 
which  hid  been  made  heavy,  and  evidently  now  of  their  best 


392  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

« 

Meanwhile,  Bell's  Brigade  (Barteau)  had  crossed  by  seven 
o'clock  that  morning  to  the  west  bank  of  the  Tombigbec, 
near  Waverly.  Coming  in  presence  of  the  enemy,  and  moving 
boldly  northward,  it  was  kept  between  them  and  the  river  as 
far  that  day  as  the  vicinity  of  Egypt  Station,  on  the  Memphis 
and  Ohio  Railroad,  where  Barteau  encamped,  after  foiling  a 
dangerous  effort  by  the  Federals  to  envelop  his  command  in 
its  isolated  position,  happily  discovered  in  time  to  be  met  with 
decision. 

Forrest  kept  up  the  pursuit  until  after  the  darkness  was  so 
great  as  to  make  it  judicious  to  halt ;  and,  besides,  both  men 
and  animals  needed  rest  and  food  ;  moreover,  there  was  dan- 
•ger  of  a  collision  between  detachments  of  his  forces,  as  indeed 
did  happen.  In  an  attempt  made  by  Forrest  to  traverse  a 
field  with  his  escort,  so  as  to  intercept  a  body  of  the  enemy, 
he  became  entangled  in  some  ditches,  so  that  a  number  of  the 
Confederates  getting  ahead  by  the  road,  as  he  came  up  in  the 
darkness,  they  mistook  each  other  for  the  enemy  they  pur- 
sued, and  both  parties  fired,  killing  one  man,  and  a  ball  passed 
through  the  General's  clothes.  Under  these  circumstances, 
the  command  was  ordered  into  bivouac  on  the  ground  from 
which  the  Federals  had  just  retired,  leaving  around  a  good  deal 
of  subsistence  and  forage, — and  camp-fires,  that  were  greatly 
enjoyed  by  the  weather-beaten,  jaded,  hungry  Confederates. 
During  the  night  the  whole  country  northward- was  lurid  with 
the  flames  of  burning  mansions,  outhouses,  and  forage. 

By  four  o'clock  on  the  morning  of  the  2  2d,  McCuUoch's  and 
Jeffrey  Forrest's  Brigades  were  once  more  in  pursuit  toward 
Okalona,  about  fourteen  miles  distant.  Instructing  his  bro- 
ther, Colonel  Forrest,  to  take  a  left-hand  road  when  within 
nine  miles  of  Okolona,  and  throw  his  brigade  over  on  the 
Pontotoc  road,  so  as  to  cut  off,  if  possible,  the  enemy's  retreat 
in  that  direction,  the  General  dashed  ahead  with  his  staff  and 


Combat  at  Okolona.  393 

indomitable  escort,  to  acquaint  himself  as  soon  as  possible  with 
the  state  of  affairs  in  front 

Barteau,  as  we  have  mentioned,  encamping  somewhat  fur- 
ther northward,  was  also  in  motion  with  Bell's  Brigade  at  an 
early  hour,  and  moved  parallel,  as  before,  with  and  in  danger- 
ous proximity  to  the  Federals  had  they  been  handled  with  a 
resolution  or  skill  commensurate  with  their  great  numerical 
advantage,  for  the  Confederate  brigade  did  not  now  muster 
over  1200  men.  The  Federals  thronged  into  and  through 
Okalona,  while  Barteau  took  up  a  position  about  three  fourths 
of  a  mile  eastward  of  the  railroad,  toward  which  he  gradually 
advanced  his  line  until  within  some  six  hundre'd  yards  of  the 
eastern  edge  of  the  place  to  a  position  in  the  prairie. 

Meanwhile,  Forrest  had  overtaken  and  harassed  the  Fede- 
ral rear-guard  for  several  miles  southward  of  Okalona,  and 
pressed  them  into  the  place,  on  the  western  suburbs  of  which 
the  Federals  were  seen  drawn  up  in  strong  force  in  several 
lines,  as  if  for  battle,  their  right  on  an  elevation  across  the 
Pontotoc  road,  and  their  left  resting  in  an  open  woods.  Dis- 
covering BelFs  Brigade,  at  the  same  time,  in  the  position  we 
have  indicated,  he  hastened  thither,  and  as  he  made  his  ap- 
pearance on  the  front,  the  effect,  we  are  told,  was  profound. 
Every  countenance  was  irradiated  with  confidence,  courage, 
and  enthusiasm,  which  found  immediate  expression  in  loud 
cheers  and  prolonged  shouts  of  mingled  joy  and  defiance,  and 
Forrest  gave  immediate  orders  for  the  brigade  to  advance  to 
meet  an  offensive  movement  on  the  part  of  the  Federals,  as 
was  his  habitual  tactics.  The  Confederates,  advancing  with 
spirit  through  and  north  of  the  town,  mounted,  began  to  fire, 
with  their  long  rifles,  as  they  came  within  one  hundred  ya^ds 
of  the  enemy  ;  but  the  short,  breech-loading  firearms  of  the 
Federals  gave  the  latter  one  more  advantage,  that  told  percep- 
tibly, and  the  Confederates,  the  most  of  whom  young  men  in 
their  first  action,  were  staggered  for  some  moments,  which 


394  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

Forrest  observing,  ordered  to  be  cured  by  an  immediate  charge 
of  Russell's,  Wilson's,  and  Newsom's  regiments  on  foot,  while 
he,  with  Barteau's,  (Second  Tennessee,)  mounted,  swept  around 
to  attack  the  Federal  right  flank,  an  attack  which  was  made 
with  excellent  spirit,  and  followed  up  by  the  dismounted  men 
with  equal  fire.  Happily,  about  this  moment  also,  McCul- 
loch's  Brigade  was  seen  by  friend  and  foe  coming  up  from  the 
southward  at  a  rapid  pace,  and  this  doubtless  aided  to  throw 
the  Federals  into  the  confusion  that  ensued,  and  their  rapid 
retreat  along  the  Pontotoc  road.  The  Federal  loss  in  this 
affair  was  light,  only  about  thirty  killed,  wounded,  and  cap- 
tured ;  that  of  the  Confederates  trivial,  notwithstanding  the 
superior  character  of  arms  used  by  the  enemy. 

The  chase  now  became  general  and  eager,  Forrest  leading 
with  his  escort  and  the  Second  Tennessee,  but  swiftly  fol- 
lowed by  the  other  regiments  as  fast  as  they  could  mount. 
For  the  next  four  miles  Forrest's  best  mounted  men  wefe 
constantly  up  and  in  conflict  with  the  worst  mounted  fugi- 
tives, and  many  of  the  latter  in  that  distance  were  either  . 
killed  or  captured  ;  seven  pieces  of  their  artillery  and  their 
caissons  were  abandoned,  with  their  horses  dead  and  cumber- 
ing the  road  or  fallen  in  the  ditches.  Meanwhile,  in  th^ 
keenness  of  the  pursuit,  the  Confederates  became  greatly 
scattered,  and  the  men  of  the  several  regiments  were  neces- 
sarily so  intermingled  that,  for  the  time,  there  was  no  dis- 
tinct regimental  organization. 

The  Federals  having  ^ow  gained  a  position,  six  or  seven  miles 
from  Okolona,  the  natural  features  of  which  were  highly  favora- 
ble for  defense,  rallied  and  made  a  stubborn  stand.  They  oc 
cupied  a  high  ridge,  thickly  covered  with  small  post-oaks  and  a 
dense  undergrowth,  which  sloped  down  steeply  into  marshy 
valleys  on  either  hand,  that  covered  both  flanks,  and  they  had 
besides  thrown  up  obstructions  across  the  road  which  ran 
along  the  crown  of  the  ridge.     Jeffrey  Forrest's  Brigade,  ua- 


Death  of  the  Gallant  Colonel  Forrest.        395 

able  to  strike  the  road  in  the  Federal  rear,  as  had  been  hoped 
had  meantime  come  up,  and  McCuUoch's  also,  and  these  two 
brigades  were  ordered,  the  first  to  move  to  the  right,  the 
second  to  the  left  of  the  highway,  and  assail  the  enemy's  posi- 
tion. Colonel  Forrest,  placing  himself  at  the  head  of  his  bri- 
gade, deploying  Duff's  Mississippians  and  his  own  regiment 
of  Tennesseeans  and  Alabamians,  under  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Wisdom,  made  the  onset  with  splendid  spirit.  Both  brigades 
swept  forward  at  an  equal  pace,  and  quickly  carried  the  first 
line  of  cover  in  the  face  of  a  withering  fire  ;  but  behind  was  a 
second  position,  strongly  furnished,  from  which  streamed  a 
hissing  torrent  from  the  Federal  breech-loaders,  that  cut 
down  many  of  the  dauntless  men  who  breasted  it.  Among 
others,  Colonel  Forrest  fell  mortally  wo\inded,  shot  through 
the  neck,  within  fifty  yards  of  the  Federal  stronghold.  His 
men,  for  the  most  part  as  brave  and  staunch  as  ever  rode  in 
battle,  faltered  for  some  instants  as  they  saw  their  beloved 
leader  fall.  Moreover,  the  Federal  fire  at  the  juncture  con- 
centrated upon  a  narrow  front,  at  that  short  range,  was  warm 
and  wasting.  Meanwhile,  General  Forrest,  informed  of  his 
great  bereavement,  rushed  to  the  spot  and  dismounted.  Jef- 
frey Forrest  was  the  youngest  of  the  family,  and  was  its  pride, 
Its  Benjamin.*  The  now  distinguished  brother  had  been  lavish 
with  his  means  for  his  education,  so  that  the  younger  bro- 
ther's many  natural  gifts  had  had  liberal  opportunities  for 
culture,  opportunities  which  had  been  happily  improved. 
His  premature  death,  with  so  much  promise,  valor,  and  sol- 
dierly capacity  blighted  in  the  flower,  was  an  almost  madden- 


•  We  may  add  here  that  General  who  were  always  near  him,  ready  to 

Forrest  was  materially  assisted  to  his  give  the  most  implicit  obedience  to  his 

taccess  tiy  the  fraternal  devotion  with  orders,  and  to  execute  any  of  his  wishes 

which  he  was  served  on  all  occasions  at  any  exposure,  risk,  or  hardship,  with 

by  his  brothers,  some  four  in  number,  a  courage  and  will  equal  to  his  own. 


396  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

ing,  almost  mortal  blow  to  the  elder  brother,  and  the  scene 
of  passionate  tenderness  and  grief  that  took  place  made  a 
profound  impression  upon  all  spectators.  Colonel  Forrest 
was  not  yet  dead,  and  his  mortal  existence  terminated  in  the 
arms  of  General  Forrest,  whose  soul,  at  that  supreme  instant, 
was  moved  by  such  an  access  of  sorrow  that  it  served  even 
to  hush,  for  some  ten  minutes,  the  storm  of  the  battle ;  for, 
says  Colonel  Russell,  who  commanded  a  regiment  present : 
"The  moment  was  too  sacred  for  angry  passions  to  have 
sway,  and,  catching  its  inspiration,  I  ordered  the  men  to 
cease  firing,  that  all  might  join  in  sympathy  with  our  suffer- 
ing General." 

"  After  nature  had  triumphed  for  a  while,"  continues  Colo- 
nel Russell,  "he  rose' up,  and,  casting  aside  those  reflections 
which  had  unmanned  him  for  a  few  moments,  by  a  strong 
mental  effort,  Forrest  was  himself  again." 

Remounting  in  stern  silence,  Forrest,  taking  in  the  situ- 
ation at  a  glance»  ordered  his  staff  and  escort  to  follow,  and, 
shouting  in  a  loud,  passionate  voice,  "  Gaus,  sound  the 
charge  !"*  dashed  with  them,  (some  eighty  strong,)  with  the 
fury  of  a  Scandinavian  Berserk,  upon  the  enemy  in  front, 
just  as  they  were  remounting  to  retreat.  His  spirit  speedily 
animated  all  who  followed — especially  the  brigade  of  his  dead 
brother — with  the  same  emotion,  and  for  some  moments  there 
was  sore  havoc  in  the  Federal  mass,  as  it  flowed  rearward, 
heavily  packed  in  the  narrow  road,  for  a  mile  to  another  posi- 
tion, even  stronger  and  better  prepared  for  defense,  where 
they  drew  up  and  again  offered  battle,  with  the  evidences  of  a 
more  determined  purpose  to  make  a  sturdy  defense,  from  be- 
hind rail  and  log  breastworks,  which  had  been  arranged,  of  no 
slight  defensive  character.     The  greater  part  of  Forrest's  Bri- 


*  Jacob  Gaus  was  the  name  of  his  favorite  orderly  bugler. 


Stubborn  and  Sanguinary  Combat  397 

gade,  now  under  Colonel  Duckworth,  was  dismounted  on  the 
right  of  the  road  and  thrown  forward  to  storm  the  cover. 
General  Forrest  took  part  with  and  led  the  Forrest  Brigade, 
augmenting  their  ardor  by  his  presence.  The  Fifth  Missis- 
sippi, led  by  Lieutenant-Colonel  James  A.  Barksdale,  rising 
the  crest  of  the  hill,  just  rightward  of  the  road,  were  met  by 
a  scathing  volley  that  fearfully  thinned  their  ranks,  and  their 
intrepid  commander  fell  mortally  smitten  while  animating 
them,  as  well  by  his  shining  conduct  as  by  words,  to  be 
steadfast  and  press  on.  Even  as  his  life  ebbed  away,  he  re- 
peated the  word' "  Charge !"  and  almost  to  the  last  moment 
urged  them  forward.  Elsewhere  on  the  line  the  defense  was 
equally  stubborn  and  bloody,  and  the  assault  equally  strenu- 
ous, detachments  of  all  the  regiments  of  the  brigade,  led  by 
their  field-officers,  taking  part  with  emulous  courage. 

The  Federals,  however,  were  forced  back,  but  only  for  half 
a  mile,  where  the  ground  afforded  another  favorable  position, 
with  abundance  of  rails  available  for  another  temporary  breast- 
work ;  here  again  they  turned  angrily  and  once  more  con- 
fronted their  indomitable  pursuers.  McCulloch  was  now  up 
with  his  Texans  and  Missourians,  who  charged  forward,  shout- 
ing that  their  colors  should  not  lag  behind  any  on  that  field ; 
Forrest's  Brigade  also,  though  deprived  of  so  many  of  their 
favorite  officers  either  killed  or  wounded.  Therefore  the  con- 
flict for  the  position  was  short  but  very  sanguinary.  The 
Federals,  evidently  in  stronger  force  than  previously,  fought 
well ;  but  such  was  the  fierceness,  the  weight  of  the  attack 
that  they  yielded  the  ground,  suffering  a  good  deal  as  they 
retired,  especially  the  Fourth*  Regulars  and  the  Sixth  and 
Ninth  Illinois  Cavalry.  The  Confederate  losses  also  were 
severe  before  the  position  was  carried. 

A  mile  beyond,  a  cluster  of  log  cabins  and  out-buildings, 
and  some  strong  fencing,  afforded  another  rallying  point  for 
the  hard-pressed  Federals,  who  promptly  seized  the  oppor- 


398 


Campaigns  of  General  ForresL 


tunity,  and  again  stood  at  bay.  Forrest  and  his  escort  were 
with  the  advance,  and  active  in  the  onslaught  Disposing  the 
Second  and  Seventh  Tennessee  on  the  right,  and  McCuUoch's 
Brigade  on  the  left,  an  attack  followed  with  little  delay.  The 
musketry  was  again  deadly  to  both  sides,  and  Forrest's  horse 
fell  under  him,  pierced  with  five  balls,  besides  which  his  saddle, 
struck  three  times,  was  shattered  under  him.*  Pressing  on, 
however,  on  foot,  with  the  men,  so  many  of  whose  best  officers 
were  now  disabled,  a  trooper,!  observing  the  situation  of  their 
leader,  dismounted  and  gave  up  his  own  horse,  which  was 
taken  as  promptly  as  it  was  offered,  but  was  likewise  killed 
before  Forrest  had  ridden  it  one  hundred  and  fifty  yards,  for- 
tunately, just  as  oile  of  his  own  horses,  a  favorite  and  con- 
spicuous iron  gray  gelding,  was  brought  to  him  from  the  rear.| 
It  was  about  this  juncture,  too,  that  the  gallant  Col.  McCul- 
loch  was  painfully  wounded  in  the  hand,  and  had  to  quit  the 
field — an  untoward  occurrence,  for  at  the  mishap,  his  brigade, 
for  a  while,  was  brought  to  a  stand,  and  Forrest  found  himself 
in  advance,  with  scarcely  300  officers  and  men  from  all  the 
different  regiments  engaged,  and  including  some  of  his  escort ; 
but  with  this  small  force  he  nevertheless  hung  close  upon  the 


*  We  may  here  relate  an  authentic 
occurrence  which  must  show  how  un- 
founded are  the  allegations  that  For- 
rest was  a  ruthless  enemy  in  battle. 
After  this  position  was  carried,  as  he 
was  passing  a  hut,  on  which  a  hospital 
flag  was  flying,  his  attention  was  at- 
tracted by  a  cry  of  agony,  and  he  en- 
tered. The  cry  proceeded  from  a  Fed- 
eral soldier,  deserted  by  his  surgeon, 
wno  had  left  the  amputating  saw  fast 
in  the  marrow  of  the  bone  of  his  leg. 
With  his  habitual  presence  of  mind, 
the.  Confederate  General  saturated  a 


cloth  with  chloroform  and  applied  it  to 
the  nostrils  of  the  sufferer,  and  leaving, 
sent  his  surgeon.  Dr.  Cowan,  to  com- 
plete the  amputation,  and  the  man  got 
well. 

t  Private  J.  B.  Long,  Jackson,  Tenn. 

I  This  horse,  twelve  3rears  old,  and 
sluggish  on  ordinary  occasions,  became 
superbly  excited  in  batUe,  and  was  as 
quick  to  detect  the  presence  of  a  Uue 
coat  as  any  Confederate  soldier,  and 
then  as  ready  to  make  battle,  which  he 
did  by  laying  back  his  ears,  and  rushing 
at  the  offending  object  with  open  montk 


Closing  ConflicL  399 

enemy's  rear,  and  just  at  sunset  came  upon  them,  drawn  up  in 
four  strong  lines*  upon  an  elevated  ridge,  in  the  western  skirt 
of  a  field  of  the  area  of  about  one  hundred  acres,  ready  to 
descend  upon  the  Confederates,  who,  in  the  eagerness  of  their 
pursuit,  debouched  well  into  the  field.  The  Federals  stood 
in  fine  soldierly  array,  and  the  spectacle  was  imposing  though 
inauspicious  for  the  petty  band  of  Confederates  that  had  been 
so  defiantly  thrust  into  the  centre  of  the  field.  In  a  moment 
Forrest  appreciated  the  jeopardy  of  the  juncture,  exposed  as 
his  men  were  in  that  open  field,  to  be  ridden  over  and  cut  to 
pieces,  if  overtaken  by  disaster,  for  they  were  all  dismounted, 
except  himself  and  several  field  officers,  not  having  halted  to 
remount  in  the  heat  of  the  chase.  He  therefore  hastily  drew 
them  back  across  and  immediately  behind  a  gully  which  fur- 
rowed the  field.  There  he  formed  them  in  line  as  quickly  as 
possible,  to  meet  the  approaching  onset.  At  the  same  time 
he  appealed  to  these  stout-hearted  men,  who  had  shared  so 
fully  with  him  in  the  fierce  ardor  of  that  afternoon's  work,  to 
stand  their  ground  steadily.  They  shouted  cheerily  in  answer : 
the  Federal  bugles  sounded  the  charge,  and  at  this  prompting, 
the  first  line  we  have  mentioned,  dashed  down  the  slope  in 
excellent  order,  to  within  sixty  yards  of  the  Confederates, 
who,  at  that  distance,  poured  into  it  a  scorching  volley,  which 
sent  it  reeling  rearward,  and  strewed  the  ground  in  front  with 
a  number  of  dead  and  wounded  horses  and  men.  Again  the 
bugle  gave  the  shrill  charge  signal,  and  the  second  line  de- 
scended handsomely  at  full  gallop,  the  impetus  of  which  was 
only  broken  at  forty  yards,  by  a  volley  from  the  steadfast 
Confederates  ;  the  third  line,  now  thrown  forward,  was  buf- 
feted back  in  the  same  manner,  but  not  until  it  had  been 
permitted  to  approach  within  twenty  yards,  when  a  deadly 


*  Doubtless  a  regiment  in  each. 


400 


Campaigns  of  General  Forrest 


fire  shattered  its  firm  array,  and  cumbered  the  ground  with 
horses  and  men.  The  remaining  line,  the  largest  and  most 
menacing,  was  now  put  in  action,  with  such  persistence  that, 
notwithstanding  it  was  promptly  met  by  a  warm  fusilade,  the 
mass  of  it  pressed  up  to  the  gully  we  have  mentioned,  and 
many  even  sprang  across  and  broke  through  the  Confederate 
ranks.  By  this  time  the  Confederate  rifle  ammunition  was 
exhausted,  and  the  men,  throwing  down  their  guns,  betook 
themselves  to  their  revolvers,  in  the  desperate  hand-to-hand 
struggle  that  now  came  to  pass,  no  fiercer  than  which  occurred 
during  the  war,  and  whose  stirring  incidents  have  left  an 
indelible  impression  in  the  memory  of  all  surviving  partici- 
pants.* 

Just  at  this  juncture,  Lieutenant-Colonel  McCuUoch  oppor- 
tunely brought  up  McCuUoch's  brigade,  and  meeting  the 
portion  of  the  enemy  that  had  broken  through,  and  passed  to 
the  rear  of  Forrest's  position,  killed  and  wounded  a  number, 
among  others,  an  aid-de-camp  of  General  Grierson,  whose 
conspicuous  bravery  during  the  action  so  attracted  the  ad- 
miration of  the  Confederates,  that  Forrest  directed  special 
attention  to  be  paid  to  his  remains.  The  enemy  were  now 
broken  and  dispersed ;  many  captures  were  made,  though 
night  and  darkness  rapidly  supervened. 


*  And  here  again,  we  may  relate  one 
of  those  battle  scenes  which  are  char- 
acteristic  of  Forrest  and  the  young  men 
he  trained  and  led.  Major  Thomas  S. 
Tate,  of  Memphis,  casually  on  his  staff, 
became  involved  in  a  personal  combat 
with  a  Federal  officer,  when,  without 
any  weapon,  save  an  empty  carbine, 
and  in  another  moment,  doubtless, 
would  have  been  shot  by  his  opponent 
with  a  revolver,  though  he  was  in  the 
act  of  hurling  his  otherwise  useless  gun 


at  that  opponent's  head.  Happily  for 
his  staff-officer,  Forrest  saw  his  dflem- 
ma  in  time  to  ride  up,  and  with  a  sweep 
of  his  sabre,  nearly  severed  the  Federal 
officer's  head  from  his  shoulders.  The 
man  toppled  to  the  ground,  and  as  be 
did  so,  Tate,  taking  the  revolver  fironi 
his  hand,  swung  himself  into  the  va- 
cated saddle,  and  with  the  weapon  thus 
appropriated  took  an  active  part  in  the 
mtlie. 


Federal  Losses.  401 

Gradually  Forrest's  men  came  up,  and  at  eight  p.m.  General 
Gholson  arrived  upon  the  field  with  a  brigade  —  only  JOQ 
strong — of  State  troops. 

The  Federal  losses  were  not  less  than  600  killed  and 
wounded,  and  3cx>  prisoners.  Forrest's  casualties  were  pro- 
portionately severe,  some  fifty  killed,  and  one  hundred  and 
fifty  wounded  ;  they  were  enhanced,  however,  by  embracing 
his  brother  and  others  of  his  choicest  officers. 

On  the  morning  of  the  23d,  early.  General  Gholson  was 
directed  to  take  up  the  pursuit  with  his  troops,  which  he  did 
as   far  as    Cherry   Creek,   capturing  some  fifty  stragglers. 
Here,  too,  some  scouts,  who  happened  to  be  in  the  country, 
fired   into   the  Federal  flank,   making  the   impression  that 
Forrest  was   upon   them    in   that   quarter ;   the  immediate 
result  was  a  panic  and  scurry  along  the  several  roads  to- 
wards  Memphis,  as  fast  as   their  jaded  animals  could  be 
driven.     At  Tippah  River,  where  the  boat  was  destroyed,  and 
a  halt  became  necessary  for  the  construction  of  a  temporary 
bridge,  some  scouts  having  again  fired  upon  the  demoralized 
enemy  from  the  surrounding  bushes,  a  rush  was  made  into 
the  stream,  in  so  frantic  a  manner,  that  many  horses  and  some 
men  were  drowned,  and  thence  forward  to  Memphis,  there 
was  little  organization  left  in  this  command,  which,  scarcely  a 
fortnight  before,  had  left  Memphis  7000  strong,  and  as  splen- 
didly equipped  a  corps  of  cavalry  as  ever  took  the  field. 

Meanwhile,  having  set  parties  to  bury  the  dead,  both  Con- 
federate and  Federal,  and  pressed  wagons  to  remove  the 
wounded,  of  both  sides  alike,  to  the  hospitals  at  Okolona, 
Forrest  left  the  field  with  his  staff  and  escort,  and  reestab- 
lished his  headquarters  at  Starkville  on  the  24th. 

Meanwhile,  Major-General  Lee,  on  the  morning  of  the  22d, 
had  arrived,  with  Brigadier-General  W.  H.  Jackson's  divison 
at  Chalmer's  headquarters,  behind  the  Sook-a-toncha,  and  hear- 
ing of  the  retrograde  movement  of  the  Federals  northward, 


i 


402  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

• 

had  concluded  rightly  that  they  were  effectually  baffled  for 
the  present,  and  therefore  he  fell  back  as  far  as  StarkviOe^ 
where  he  waited  Forrest's  arrival.  They  had  an  immediate 
interview  and  consultation  in  regard  to  operations  for  the 
future,  and  touching  their  several  resources  for  mutu2d  sup- 
port On  the  26th,  Chalmers's  Division  had  reassembled  at 
Starkville,  and  on  the  following  day,  General  Forrest  trans- 
ferred his  headquarters  to  Columbus,  Mississippi. 

COMMENTARIES. 

It  must  be  recollected  that  the  splendid  success  which  at-  . 
tended  Forrest's  encounter  and  discomfiture  of  this  large, 
splendidly  appointed  veteran  Federal  force  was  achieved  by 
not  more  than  half  the  numbers  thus  beaten  ;  achieved,  too, 
with  troops,  the  greater  part  of  whom  were  the  raw,  imdis- 
ciplined  young  men,  whom,  less  than  sixty  days  before,  he  had 
gathered  to  his  standard  in  West-Tennessee.  In  that  short 
time  he  had  been  able  to  impregnate  them  with  his  ardent, 
indomitable  spirit,  and  mould  them  into  the  most  formidable 
instruments,  in  his  hands,  for  his  manner  of  making  war. 


^r-  :-)^. 


CHAPTER    XV. 

Small  Brigade  of  Kmluckiam  added  to  Command— Another  DiviswH 
organised  and  assigned  to  Brigadier-General  A.  B-uford~-Affair  at 
Yaxoo  City — Another  Expedition  into  West-Tennessee — Ruse  and 
Capture  of  Union  City — Forrest  made  successful  Descent  upon  Pa- 
ducah — Death  of  Colonel  A.  P.  Thompson  in  abortive  Assault  upon 
Federal  Earihworks-^Large  Quantity  of  Supplies  secured  and  car- 
ried off— Fruitless  Demonstration  -upon  Columbus,  Ky. — Second  De- 
scent Ifiuford)  upon  Paducah— Handsome  Affair  of  Colonel  Netty's 
at  Bolivar— Splendid  Conduct  of  McDonald'' s  {Crewis)  Battalion 
near  Sommerville— Measures  taken  for  the  Capture  of  Fort  Pillow. 


March  1st  to  April  lolk,  1864. 

In  the  first  week  of  March,  Forrest's  command  was  aug- 
mented by  three  regiments  of  Kentuckians,  who,  having  served 
hitherto  as  infantry,  were  now  sent  into  his  department  to  be 
mounted  and  transferred  to  the  cavalry  arm.  They  were  so 
greatly  reduced,  however,  alt  three  together  did  not  number 
more  than  700  effectives,  about  one  third  of  whom  had  received 
horses  already — the  remainder  were,  as  yet,  to  be  horsed. 
Brigadier-Genera!  A.  Buford  came  with  them,  and  was  as- 
signed to  the  command  of  the  Second  Division  of  Forrest's 
Cavalry,  which  was  assembled  at  Tibbee  Station,  on  the  Mo- 
bile and  Ohio  Railroad.  Buford  assumed,  command  on  the 
8th  of  March,  when  the  division  consisted  of  the  Third  (Col- 


404 


Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 


onel  A.  P.  Thompson)  and  the  Fourth  (Colonel  T.  H.  Bell) 
brigades,  together  not  exceeding  28cx>  effectives.*     * 

Chalmers  commanded  the  other,  or  First  Division,  with 
headquarters  at  Mayhew  Station,  (four  miles  south  of  Tibbee,) 
where  the  Second  Brigade,  McCuUoch  commanding,  was  es- 
tablished on  the  6th  ;  also  the  Seventh  Tennessee  Cavalry,  of 
the  First,  or  Richardson's  Brigade,  the  other  three  regiments 
of  which  had  been  previously  detached  in  the  direction  of  Gre- 
'  nada.t 

Meanwhile  Richardson,  after  having  taken  post  at  Grenada, 
was  called  to  Yazoo  City — 75  miles  southward — to  cooperate 
with  a  force  attached  to  Major-General  Lee*s  command,  against 
a  Federal  expedition  which  had  made  a  lodgment  there,  and 
established  water  communication  with  its  base  ;  and  on  the 
4th,  he  had  effected  a  junction  in  that  vicinity  with  Brigadier- 
General  Ross,  and  his  brigade  of  Texan  cavalry.  The  posi- 
tion, strongly  fortified  by  the  Federals,  was  garrisoned  by  one 
regiment  of  white,  and  two  of  negro  troops,  J  and  these  were 
supported  by  two  gunboats,  which  could  throw  shells  over  and 


•  Third  Brigade  wm  constituted  of: 
Third,  (Lieutenant-Colonel  G.  A,  C. 
Holt;)  Seventh,  (Colonel  Ed.  Cross- 
land  ;)  Eighth,  (Colonel  H.  B.  Lyon ;) 
Faulkner's  Kentucky  regiments,  and 
Jeffrey  Forrest's  Regiment,  (Lieuten- 
ant-Colonel Wisdom,)  about  1200  rank 
and  file,  or  X004  effective  enlisted  men. 
The  Fourth  Brigade  of:  Second,  (Col- 
onel B.  R.  Barteau,)  and  Sixteenth, 
(Colonel  A.  N.  Wilson,)  and  Russell's 
Tennessee  regiments — 1254  effective  en- 
listed men,  or  about  1600  rank  and  file. 

t  The  First  Brigade  was  formed  of : 
Seventh,  (Colonel  W.  T.  Duckworth, 
at  Mayhew ;)  Twelfth,  (Lieutehant-Col- 
oocl  J.  U.  Green ;)  Fourteenth,  (Col- 
onel J.  J.  Neely ;)  and  Fifteenth,  (Col- 


onel F.  M.  Stewart,)  Tennessee  regi- 
ments, (detached  at  Grenada.)  Secoad 
Brigade  of:  Second  Missouri,  (Lieu- 
tenant-Colonel R.  A.  McCuUoch ;) 
Willis's  Texan  Battalion*  (Lieutenant- 
Colonel  Leo  Willis ;)  First  Mississippi 
Partisans,  (Major  J.  M.  Parks ;)  Fifth 
Mississippi  Cavalry,  (Major  W.  B.  Pee- 
ry ;)  Nineteenth  Mississippi  Battalion, 
(Lieutenant-Colonel  W.  L.  Duff';) 
Eighteenth  Mississippi  Battalion, 
(Lieutenant-Colonel  A.  H.  Chalmers ;) 
and  McDonald's  Battalion — (General 
Forrest's  old  regiment — (Lieutenant* 
Colonel  J.  M.  Crews.) 
\  Reb.  Rec.  VIIL  D(»c  109,  pp.  45$- 

458' 


Affair  at  Yazoo  City.  405 

into  the  town  with  ease.  Nevertheless,  the  attack  was  ar- 
rajiged  between  Generals  Richardson  and  Ross,  that  evening, 
and  made  on  the  next  morning,  apparently  with  far  more  of 
courage  and  spirit  than  of  method  and  judgment.  The  Fed- 
erals were  speedily  driven  from  one  of  their  exterior  works, 
through  the  town,  which  became  the  scene  of  a  sharp  combat 
with  the  Federals,  who,  from  behind  houses,  cotton-bales,  and 
fences,  inflicted  considerable  loss  upon  their  juncovered  assail- 
ants— chiefly  the  Tcnnesseeans — including  the  gallant  Ma- 
jor Gwinn  Thurman,  commander  of  the  Fourteenth,  who  was 
killed,  and  Captain  Thrall,  of  the  artillery,  and  Captain  — 
Adams,  of  Richardson's  staff*,  who  were  wounded.  But  sev- 
eral fortified  positions,  exterior  to  and  commanding  the  place, 
were  still  in  possession  of  the  Federals,  who  could  not  be  ex- 
pelled without  a  loss  incommensurate  with  their  value,  and 
which  they  declined  to  surrender  when  demanded  by  General 
Ross  ;  hence  it  was  determined  to  withdraw  the  whole  Con- 
federate force  from  under  fire.  There  was  no  lack  of  courage, 
but  clearly  an  absence  of  concert  and  of  sustained  movement, 
in  this  operation  ;  and,  worst  of  all,  a  divided  command, 
for  though  General  Richardson  claimed  to  be  the  senior,  he 
waived  the  chief  command  in  deference  to  the  fact  that  Gen- 
eral Ross  had  a  superior  knowledge  of  the  theatre  of  opera- 
tions, and  commanded  a  brigade  of  veterans  acquainted  with 
the  ground.  It  would  appear,  therefore,  that  each  brigade 
Was  handled  in  the  attack  as  a  separate  force,  with  little  regard 
to  the  movements  or  purposes  of  the  other — an  incongruity  in 
War  utterly  hostile  to  success.  Howbeit,  by  ten  o'clock  a.bi. 
the  next  day,  the  Federals  had  evacuated  the  position,  and 
withdrawn  down  the  river — a  proceeding  unquestionably 
Wught  about  by  the  attack  of  the  day  before,  even  though 
it  had  miscarried.*    The  Confederate  forces  were  then  sun- 


*  We  ascertain  the  object  of  this  ex-     least  a  brigade  of  cavalry,  and  thos  di- 
pedition  was  to  draw  to  that  pomt  at     minish  the  force  that  else  might  have 


\ 


4o6  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

dered,  and  Richardson  marched  back  to  Grenada,  in  which 
vicinity  his  brigade  remained  until  the  15th,  when  it  joined  its 
proper  division,  then  en  route  for  Panola.* 

For  a  week  after  Forrest  established  his  headquarters  at 
Columbus,  he  occupied  himself  actively  with  the  duties  of  ad- 
ministration, and  his  order-books  of  the  period  show  a  wide 
range  of  judicious  measures,  embracing  the  detachment  of 

ft 

small  commands  under  discreet  and  zealous  officers,  to  collect 
absentees,  or  persons  owing  military  duty  in  different  sections 
of  Mississippi,  and  for  the  suppression  of  Tory  marauders  in 
Alabama,  and  of  the  illicit  distillation  of  grain  within  the  limits 
of  his  command,  the  provision  of  ammunition  for  all  arms,  and 
all  that  could  possibly  tend  to  the  enhancement  of  t^ie  effi- 
ciency of  his  force,  either  in  relation  to  organization  or  equip- 
ment. At  the  same  time  he  had  determined  to  make  another 
mroad  across  the  line  of  the  Memphis  and  Charleston  Rail- 
road into  West-Tennessee,  and,  if  possible,  into  Western 
Kentucky,  to  which  he  was  incited  by  several  motives : 

1st.  Bufords  Kentuckians  were  in  pressing  need  of  clothing 
and  equipments,  and  one  third  were  on  foot,  while  the  horses 
of  many  of  the  rest  were  indifferent ;  he  therefore  desired  to 
give  that  command  an  opportunity  to  refit  in  their  own  State. 

2d.  The  Tennesseeans  brought  out  in  December  were,  also, 
for  the  most  part,  in  great  need  of  clothing,  and  had  left  their 
homes  so  suddenly  as  to  make  it  important  they,  likewise, 
should  be  indulged  in  a  brief  visit  to  that  region. 

Meanwhile,  on  the  13th,  Chalmers's  Division,  at  the  time 
commanded  by  Colonel  McCuUoch,  was  ordered  by  General 


been  employed  to  prevent  a  junction  of  *  General  Richardson,  however,  had 

General    Smith's    cavalry   force   with  been  relieved  from  duty  with  it  on  the 

Sherman,  about  Meridian,  a  junction  I2th,  and  the  command  devolved  od 

which,  as  we  learn,  was  very  effectually  Colonel  J.  J.  Neely, 
baffled,  nevertheless. 


Again  en  route  for  West-Tennessee.         407 

Forrest  to  return  to  Panola,  each  regiment  taking  in  its  route 
thither  a  different  road,  to  sweep  the  country  as  far  southward 
as  Grenada,  and  gather  up  all  persons  irregularly  or  improperly 
absent  from  the  army. 

All  needful  preparations  for  the  contemplated  expedition 
northward  having  been  completed  by  the  15  th,  Buford's  Di- 
vision— ^Thompson's  and  Bell's  Brigades — the  Seventh  Ten- 
nessee, and  McDonald's  Battalion,  under  Lieutenant-Colonel 
'  Crews,  were  in  motion  on  that  day.  The  route  was  widely 
different  from  that  taken  in  December  previously,  due,  doubt- 
less, to  the  point  of  departure.  It  was  near  Corinth  that 
West-Tennessee  was  now  entered,  Faulkner's  Regiment  hav- 
ing been  thrown  out,  however,  on  the  left  flank,  to  cross  the 
line  at  Pocahontas,  and  thence,  through  Bolivar,  on  to  Den- 
mark, westward  of  Jackson,  which,  as  in  December,  was  the 
point  of  direction  for  the  main  force,  and  Forrest  was  there  as 
early  as  the  20th,  five  days  after  leaving  Columbus,  one  hun- 
dred and  fifty  miles  distant. 

Here  one  of  his  battalions  was  detached  in  the  direction 
of  Memphis,  to  hold  vigilant  watch  over  and  report  all  Fed- 
eral movements  or  approaches  from  that  direction,  while  Bu- 
ford  (not  yet  up)  was  directed  on  the  22d  to  send  thither  all 
his  dismounted  men  (under  a  competent  oflBcer)  who  were 
unable  to  make  the  march  northward,  as  also  Colonel  Wilson, 
with  five  companies  of  his  regiment,  to  occupy  the  place  dur- 
ing the  expedition.  This  arranged,  on  the  afternoon  of  the 
22d,  Forrest  repaired  to  Trenton  with  his  staff,  escort,  the 
Seventh  Tennessee  and  Faulkner's  Regiments,  Buford  en- 
camping the  same  evening  at  Spring  Creek,  twelve  miles 
north-east  of  Jackson. 

On  the  23d,  the  Seventh  Tennessee,  McDonald's  Battalion, 
and  Faulkner's  Regiment — less  than  500  men — ^were  detached 
under  Colonel  Duckworth,  to  move  upon  Union  City  and  cap- 
ture any  Federal  force  there.    Approaching  the  place  before 


4o8  .    Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

daylight,  on  the  morning  of  the  24th,  the  Confederate  com- 
mander discovered  by  the  light  of  some  burning  buildings,  ex- 
terior to  the  position  occupied  by  the  Federals,  that  they  were 
strongly  intrenched  in  a  square  redoubt.     A  close  and  vigor- 
ous investment  ensued,  however,  and  for  several  hours  there 
was  a  good  deal  of  sharp-shooting,  while  Faulkner's  Kentuck- 
ians  made  a  charge  to  within  twenty  or  thirty  yards  of  the 
work,  the  gallant  Lieutenant-Colonel   Lannum  recei\'ing  a 
very  severe  wound  on  the  occasion.     Without  artillery,  and 
the  force  within  the  works  being  fully  equal  in  numbers  to  his 
own,  Colonel  Duckworth  now  resorted  to  the  nise  of  presenting 
a  peremptory  demand  for  the  surrender  of  the  position,  in  the 
name  of  General.  Forrest,  as  if  that  redoubtable  Confederate 
were  present,  conducting  the  operations.    The  Federal  com- 
mander—  Colonel   Hawkins — who  once  before  (December, 
1862)  had  fallen  into  Forrest's  hands,  asking  delay,  and  time 
to  consider  "  so  grave  a  matter  as  the  surrender  "  of  his  post, 
besought,  moreover,  a  personal  interview  with  Forrest,  which, 
of  course,  was  impracticable,  while  there  was  danger,  also,  of 
reenforcement.*     Duckworth,  therefore,  cleverly  answered  in 
the  name  of  his  chief,  as  before,  that  other  important  military 
movements  would  not  allow  a  moment  for  deliberation  ;  that 
the  answer,  therefore,  must  be  immediate  and  conclusive; 
that  he  (Forrest)  was  not  in  the  habit  of  meeting  officers  in- 
ferior in  rank  to  himself,  under  flag  of  truce,  but  would  send 
Colonel  W.  L.  Duckworth,  an  officer  of  equal  rank,  clothed 
with  power  to  arrange  terms,  and  any  arrangement  made  by 
him  would  be  strictly  observed.    The  interview  took  place. 
Hawkins  plead  for  delay,  but  Duckworth  was  obdurate  ;  the 


•  General  Brayman,  with  a  reenforce-  hearing  of  the  disaster,  returned  to  Ce- 
ment of  2000  men,  actually  came  to  lumbus,  Ky.,  and  Cairo. — Su  Reb,  Rec* 
within  six  miles  of  Union  City  that  af-  VIIL  Doc.  I,  pp.  6  and  49. 
temoon,  after  the  surrender,  but  there 


Descent  upon  Paducak.  409 

capitulation  was  therefore  /made  at  eleven  a.m.,  and  475  men, 
with  their  arms  and  ammunition,  camp  and  garrison  equipage, 
and  300  horses,  were  the  results  of  this  adroitlp-managed 
stratagem.* 

Meanwhile,  Forrest,  with  his  escort  and  Buford's  Division, 
was  pressing,  by  rapid  marches,  toward  Paducah,  before  which 
he  arrived  about  two  p.m.  on  the  25  th.  Federal  scouts  had  been 
thrown  out  that  morning,  it  is  stated,  but  finding  no  enemy 
approaching,  had  returned  and  reported  the  roads  clear. 
Presently  Forrest  presented  himself,  however,  and  dashed  into 
the  town  with  his  advance-guard,  forcing  the  Federals  to 
betake  themselves,  in  hot  haste,  to  their  stronghold.  Fort  An- 
derson, a  large  inclosed  earthwork,  constructed  for  such  an 
emergency,  in  the  western  suburbs  of  the  town,  about  one 
hundred  yards  removed  from  the  river  bank,  and  surrounded 
by  a  broad,  deep  ditch,  fringed  with  a  strong  abatis. 

In  this  movement,  Buford  had  been  directed  to  dismount 
one  hundred  of  his  men,  and  throw  them  forward  leftward,  in 
the  direction  of  the  fort,  to  reconnoitre  and  feel  the  defensive 
means  of  the  enemy  in  that  quarter,  while,  as  before  recited, 
Forrest  charged  with  his  escort  rightward  upon  the  pickets 
and  drove  them  back,  down  the  main  street,  into  the  town. 
It  was  not  his  purpose  to  attack  the  fort,  and  he  gave  no 
orders  looking  to  such  a  step.  But  speedily  was  heard  the 
sound  of  rapid,  heavy  firing  of  small-arms  and  artillery  in 
that  direction,  and,  on  sending  Captain  Anderson,  his  aid,  to 
ascertain  the  cause,  that  officer,  returning  in  a  few  moments, 
reported  that  an  attack  had  been  made  by  Colonel  Thomp- 


*  It  is  but  justice  to  say  that  Lieu-  intelligent  conduct  of  the  flag  of  truce, 

tenant  W.  S.   Pope,  Adjutant  of  the  contributed  largely  to  the  success  of  the 

Seventh    Tennessee,  and    Lieutenant  Confederates  on  this  occasion,    Lieu- 

W.    M.    McConnell,  of   Henderson's  tenant  Pope  subsequently  fell  at  Tish- 

Scouts,  by  their  presence  of  m'nd  and  emingo  Creek. 


4IO  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

son,  with  about  four  hundred  men  of  the  Third  and  Seventh 
Kentucky,  which,  though  gallantly  led  and  made,  had  been 
repulsed  with  the  loss  of  that  distinguished  officer. 

The  work,  as  before  said,  was  of  a  formidable  class,  gar- 
nished with  at  least  six  pieces  of  artillery,  and  at  this  time  all 
the  Federal  troops  at  Paducah  had  taken  refuge  in  it — ^from 
700  to  locx)  in  number,  embracing  detachments  from  the  Six- 
teenth Kentucky  Cavalry,  the  One  Hundred  and  Twenty- 
second  Illinois  Infantry,  and  the  First  Kentucky  Negro  Artil- 
lery, with  the  provost-guard  of  the  place.*  The  attack  was 
made  by  Colonel  Thompson  and  his  Kentuckians,  with  all  the 
lustrous  valor  with  which  men  are  inspired  to  fight  for  the 
recovery  of  homes  and  firesides  ;  but  it  was  deplorably  thrown 
away ;  their  ranks  were  speedily  thinned  by  the  hot  tide  of  mus- 
ketry and  grape  that  seethed  over  the  stout  parapets,  which 
they  had  vainly  aspired  to  scale,  and  the  life-blood  of  Albert  P. 
Thompson  was  poured  out  within  sight  of  the  place  of  his  birth, 
the  house  of  his  father,  the  home  of  his  proud,  useful  manhood, 
the  field  of  his  professional  distinction.  The  fire  concen- 
trated upon  this  band  of  Kentuckians  was  too  consuming  to 
be  endured  ;  and  Colonel  Crossland,  who  succeeded  to  the 
command,  distributed  his  men  promptly  among  the  nume- 
rous houses,  from  the  upper  stories  and  roofs  of  which  they 
poured  a  deadly  fire  over  the  parapets  of  the  works. 

Made  aware  of  the  situation,  Forrest  sent  a  positive  order 
to  Buford  not  to  attempt  to  storm  the  Federal  position,  and 
at  the  same  time  causing  a  bugle  to  be  sounded  in  indication 
of  his  wish  for  a  parley,  presented  a  formal  demand  for  the 
surrender  of  the  place,  in  order,  as  he.  stated  in  his  note,  to 
avoid  the  unnecessary  efiusion  of  blood,  inasmuch  as  he  had 


*  The  lowest  Federal  estimate  is  646,  while  one  places  the  force  at  lOOOb 
Vide  Reb,  Rec,  VIII.  Doc  127,  p.  502, 


Surrender  of  Federals  Demanded.  411 

an  overwhelming  force  at  his  command,  a  device  that  more 
than  on<!e  he  had  found  very  efficacious  in  previous  opera- 
tions.* At  the  time  of  his  attack  upon  the  fort,  two  Federal 
gunboats,  the  Peosta  and  the  Paw  Paw,  had  taken  an  active, 
efficient  part,  from  positions  highly  favorable,  in  repelling  it, 
and  probably,  indeed,  it  was  by  a  shell  from  one  of  these  that 
Colonel  Thompson  was  slain.  They  greatly  added,  it  was 
evident,  to  the  strength  of  the  work  ;t  and  Colonel  Hicks, 
the  Federal  Commander,  flushed  with  his  recent  advantage. 


•  We  find  this  note  embodied  in  the 
report  of  Colonel  Ilicks,  Heb,  Rec, 
VIII.  Doc  I,  p.  73,  as  follows  : 

"  Headquarters  Forrest's 
Cavalry  Corps,  Paducah,  Ky., 
March  25,  1864. 

Colonel  Hicks,  Commanding  Fede- 
ral Forces  at  Paducah : 
Colonel  :  Having  a  force  amply 
sufficient  to  carry  your  works  and  re- 
duce the  place,  and  in  order  to  avoid 
the  unnecessary  effusion  of  blood,  I 
demand  the  surrender  of  the  fort  and 
troops,  with  all  public  property.  If 
you  surrender,  you  shall  be  treated  as 
prisoners  of  war  ;  but  if  I  have  to 
storm  your  works,  you  may  expect  no 
quarter.  (Signed) 

N.  B,  Forrest, 
Maj.-Gen.  Com.  Con.  Troops." 

The  menace  with  which  the  forego- 
uig  summons  is  concluded  has  been 
Tiolently  denounced  at  the  North,  as 
something  infamously  unusual  in  war  ; 
and  some  of  the  witnesses  examined 
t>y  the  Congressional  Committee, 
though  affecting  to  be  as  learned  as  a 
*'  Cathedral  Doctor,"  in  regard  to  the 


law  and  customs  of  war  in  such  cases, 
were  very  harsh  in  their  condemnation, 
ignoring  the  fact  that  the  laws  of  war 
really  subject  those  who  prolong  a  vain 
defense  of  a  fortified  place  to  be  put  to 
the  swprd,  when  it  shall  be  carried  by 
storm;  and,  further,  that  on  several 
occasions,  as  late  its  the  Napoleonic 
wars  in  Spain,  this  stern  right  of  war 
was  exercised.  Forrest  having  no  in- 
tention whatsoever  of  attempting  to  as- 
sault the  fort,  (without  artillery  as  he 
was,  except  four  small,  useless  moun- 
tain howitzers,)  simply  resorted  to  this 
demand,  including  the  threat,  as  a  sim- 
ple, legitimate  brutum  fulmen.  Un- 
questionably, it  was  proper  for  him  to 
seek  to  impress  the  Federal  Com- 
mander with  the  idea  that  he  had  such 
a  force  at  his  back  as  made  further  de- 
fense unjustifiable,  because  hopeless  ; 
and  hence,  one  that  would  lay  them 
liable  to  severe  treatment  in  the  event 
he  were  forced  to  do  that  (storm  the 
place)  which  he  had  no  idea  of  doing, 
as  was  shown  by  the  fact  that  he  made 
no  attempt  to  storm  it  afterward. 
t  Vide  Reb,  Rec,  VIII.  Doc   127,  p. 

504. 


i 


412  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

promptly  answered   the  demand  of  his  capitulation  with  a 
defiant  refusal. 

Meanwhile,  the  Confederates  had  complete  possession  of 
the  town  itself;  the  streets  of  which  the  guns  of  the  fort  and 
gunboats  were  sweeping  with  incessant  discharges  of  solid 
shot,  shell,  and  grape,  doing  a  great  deal  of  damage  to  the 
buildings.  Scattered  in  detachments,  Buford's  men  never- 
theless began  to  collect  in  the  various  stores,  warehouses,  and 
stables,  the  clothing,  supplies,  and  horses,  for  which  the  opera- 
tions had  been  chiefly  undertaken  ;  and  other  parties  were  set 
to  destroy  such  public  property  and  war  material  as  could  not 
be  removed,  including  the  quartermaster's  depot  and  offices, 
railroad  depot  with  all  the  rolling  stock,  and  the  Marine  Way 
with  the  steamer  Dacotah,  on  the  stocks  for  repairs.*  Imme- 
diately fronting  and  contiguous  to  the  river,  there  was  a  row 
of  buildings,  mainly  used  for  army  purposes,  and  into  these 
Forrest  promptly  threw  detachments  of  Russell's  Tcnnessee- 
ans  and  his  own  escort,  with  long-range  rifles,  which  were 
brought  to  bear  upon  the  apertures  of  the  gunboats  with  an 
accuracy  so  deadly,  that  they  were  driven  to  seek  shelter  under 
the  fort.  Other  parties  of  riflemen,  occupying  a  number  of 
buildings  in  proximity  to  the  fort  itself,  annoyed  the  garrison 
with  such  effect  that,  while  there  was  considerable  destruc- 
tion of  buildings  and  property,  chiefly  occupied  or  owned  by 
the  Federal  government  and  its  friends,  by  the  virulent 
cannonade  now  turned  upon  the  town,  the  Confederates, 
nevertheless,  had  ample  opportunity  to  glean  the  place  tho- 
roughly for  such  military  supplies  as  were  wanting.f 


•  Reb.  Rec,  VIII.  Doc  127,  p.  508.  unaware  that  there  was  any  tmoe,  just, 

t  The  allegation  that  these  sharp-  doubtless,  as  the  commanders  of  the 

shooters  were  advanced,  while  the  flag  gunboats   were    ignorant  of    it,  andt 

of  truce  was  up,  is  unfounded,  though,  therefore,  did  not  cease  their  cannomttiL, 

we  doubt  not,  some  of  them  exercised  The  truce  did  not  last  more  th^n  thrct 

their  skill  on  the  gunboats  at  that  time,  quarters  of  an  hour. 


The  Confederates  Withdrawn^  413 

Forrest  having  closely  reconnoitered  the  work,  in  the  inter- 
val while  his  sharp-shooters  were  actively  harassing  its  garri- 
son from  the  tops  and  upper  stories  of  the  adjoining  houses, 
became  fully  satisfied  that  to  storm  it  would  involve  a  greater 
sacrifice  of  valuable  life  than  would  be  justified  by  the  capture 
of  the  force  that  defended  it,  withdrew  all  his  troops  without 
making  any  other  effort  to  assault  the  work  than  that  which 
had  so  unfortunately  resulted  in  the  loss  of  Colonel  Thomp- 
son. Therefore,  the  highly  wrought  narratives  with  which 
the  Northern  newspapers  of  the  day  abound,  of  successive 
charges — four  or  five  in  number — upon  the  fort,  by  serried 
masses  of  Confederates,  up  even  to  the  very  "  mouths  of  the 
guns,"  and  upon  "the  walls  of  the  fort"  to  be  ignominiously 
beaten  back  by  negro  soldiers  with  clubbed  muskets,*  and 
at  the  cost  of  hecatombs  of  their  dead  and  wounded,  are 
mean,  extravagant  fictions,  as  groundless  as  the  infamous  sto- 
ries of  Confederate  atrocities,  set  afloat  in  the  like  channels,  at 
the  same  period,  to  infuriate  the  Northern  people. 

Such  were  the  salient  events  and  incidents  which  charac- 
terized the  affair  at  Paducah,  on  the  afternoon  of  the  2Sth  of 
March,  when  that  place  was  in  possession  of  the  Confederates, 
from  a  little  after  two  until  eleven  p.m.  Then  Forrest  with- 
drew his  main  force  some  four  miles  southward,  and  encamped, 
taking  with  him  some  fifty  prisoners,  about  four  hundred 
horses  and  mules,  and  a  very  large  supply  of  clothing  and 
quartermaster's  subsistence  and  military  supplies,  including 
saddles  and  other  horse  equipments,  for  the  procurement  of 
which,  as  we  have  said,  the  expedition  had  been  mainly  made. 


*  It  would  seem  that  negro  courage  ultaneouslj  struck  in  the  forehead  by  a 

and  prowess  were   chiefly  worthy  of  musket-ball,  fired  by  an  ardent  young 

notice  by  these  veracious  chroniclers.  African,"  while  "colored  soldiers"  are 

Therefore,  Colonel    Thompson,  after  those  specially  notice  i  as  resorting  to 

having  been  torn  to  pieces  by  a  shell,  clubbed  muskets. 
most  needs  be  dramatically  and  *'  sim* 


414 


Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 


Another  object,  however,  was  to  confuse,  distract,  and  defen- 
sively occupy  the  Federal  forces  that,  for  some  time  previously, 
had  been  used  to  harass  and  despoil  the  people  of  West-Ten- 
nessee and  North-Mississippi ;  and  this,  too,  was  accomplished 
in  a  high  degree,  for  the  most  exaggerated  notions  prevailed 
among  Federal  officers  of  rank  in  regard  both  to  the  strength 
of  Forrest's  forces  and  his  purposes.* 

The  morning  of  the  26th,  though  largely  reenforced  during 
the  night,  and  his  ammunition  replenished,  the  Federal  com- 
mander, apprehensive  of  another  attack,  threw  out  detach- 
ments from  his  fortress,  and  set  fire  to  a  large  number  of 
buildings,  including  some  of  the  best  dwelling  and  business 
houses  of  the  place,  which,  in  that  event,  might  be  occupied 
by  hostile  sharp-shooters,  to  his  annoyance.!     But  it  will  be 
remembered  that  Forrest  had  already  begun  to  retire,  having 
really  accomplished  the  purposes  for  which  the  expedition 
had  been  undertaken,  and  hence  this  waste  of  property  was 
the  fruit  of  an  idle  apprehension.    At  nine  a.m.,  however,  on  the 
26th,  Forrest  sent,  under  a  flag  of  truce,  a  proposition  for  an 
exchange  of  prisoners,  to  the  extent  of  those  who  had  been 
captured  by  Faulkner  at  Union  City,  and  those  taken  in  his 
own  operations  of  the  day  before  ;  but  this  was  declined,  for 
alleged  want  of  authority.! 


•  VicU  evidence  of  Major-General 
Hurlbut  before  Congressional  Com- 
mittee^  Reb,  Rec,  VIII.  Doc  i,  pp. 
40,  41.  General  Sherman  says,  how- 
ever,  in  one  of  his  characteristic  dis- 
patches at  the  time,  that  it  was  in  just 
such  operations  he  wanted  to  see 
Forrest  kept  employed,  to  divert  the 
Confederate  cavalry  from  other  opera- 
tions, the  results  of  which  he  dreaded 
more,  namely,  a  concentrated  attack 
on  his  conmiunications  as  he  pressed 
Johnston  back  upon  Atlanta.    There  is 


no  doubt  the  proper  quarter  for  For* 
rest*s  operations  had  been  upon  Sber* 
man's  long,  exposed,  vulnerable  line  of 
communications.  General  Johnston  li2<l 
urged  upon  the  Confederate  authorities 
such  a  use  of  his  force,  but  they  had 
other  views ;  and  not  having  been  dios 
employed,  Forrest  did  that  in  his  sphere 
which  could  most  distract,  harass,  and 
hurt  his  immediate  enemy, 
t  Reb.  Rec.  VIIL  Doc  127,  p.  5091 


Confederates  Furloughed.  415 

Meanwhile,  the  main  Confederate  force  was  already  in 
motion  southward,  via  Mayfield.  There  the  Third  and 
Seventh  Kentucky  regiments  were  detached  by  squads  to  re- 
pair to  the  several  neighborhoods  in  South-West  Kentucky, 
in  which  they  had  been  enrolled,  to  visit  their  kindred,  from 
whom  they  had  been  long  separated,  and  at  the  same  time  to 
beat  up  recruits — with  orders,  however,  to  reassemble  by  the 
end  of  the  month  at  that  place,  where  General  Buford  re- 
mained, with  some  three  or  four  hundred  of  the  Second 
Tennessee  and  Eighth  Kentucky,  to  await  their  return.  For- 
rest then  moved  southward  with  the  other  regiments  of  the 
force — taking  separate  roads  severally — and  sweeping  the 
country  between  the  Obion  and  Tennessee  rivers,  for  absen- 
tees  and  other  persons  subject  to  military  service,  horses 
suitable  for  cavalry  and  artillery,  and  for  government  arms  in 
the  hands  of  citizens.  BelFs  Brigade,  however,  was  left  at 
Trenton,  in  which  vicinity  it  belonged,  to  give  the  officers  and 
men  not  only  an  opportunity  to  see  their  families  and  friends, 
and  to  procure  summer  clothing,  but  also  to  recruit. 

Buford*s  Kentuckians  having  returned  promptly  to  their 
colors,  he  reached  Trenton  on  the  3d  of  April,  and  established 
the  headquarters  of  his  division  there,  under  orders  to  avail 
himself  diligently  of  the  resources  of  the  surrounding  country, 
to  mount,  equip,  and  recruit  both  the  brigades,  as  far  as  possible. 
To  that  point,  likewise,  were  dispatched  the  detachment  of 
dismounted  Kentuckians,  unable  to  accompany  the  expedition 
Ihat  had  been  left  meanwhile  at  Jackson.  Faulkner's  Regi- 
ment also  rejoined,  and  he  was  further  instructed  to  hold  his 
command  "  in  readiness  to  move  at  the  shortest  notice,"  with 
ten  days'  subsistence  constantly  on  hand.* 


«  MS.  letter  of  Major  Strange,  A.  A.  G.,  to  General  Buford,  March  31st  and 
April  5th,  1864. 


i 


4i6 


Campaigns  of  General  Forrest 


While  at  Trenton,  Buford  having  noticed,  in  a  Northern 
newspaper,  the  statement  that  the  horses  which  had  been 
recently  carried  off  from  Paducah  belonged  exclusively  to  the 
citizens,  while  those  of  the  United  States  had  escaped  by  their 
adroit  concealment  in  the  old  foundry  or  rolling-mill,  in  the 
outskirts  of  the  town,  acquainted  Forrest  with  the  circum- 
stances, and  requested  and  obtained  authority  to  return  at 
once  with  the  Kentucky  Brigade,  or  some  800  men,  and  com- 
plete his  remounts. 

Setting  out  on  the  8th,  Buford  was  in  the  vicinity  of 
Columbus  on  the  12th,  when  he  detached  his  escort,  (Captain 
Tyler,)  Seay's  Company  of  the  Seventh,  and  Home's,  of  the 
Third  Kentucky,  under  Captain  J.  C.  Home,  to  make  a 
vigorous  demonstration  on  the  position.  One  of  his  staff- 
officers  (Lieutenant  D.  E.  Myers)  also  accompanied  the 
detachment,  to  carry  a  flag  of  truce,  to  demand  the  surrender, 
as  if  his  superior  were  present  with  his  whole  force,  with  the 
hope  of  thus  drawing  thither  reenforcements,  and  distracting 
the  movements  of  the  Federal  forces.*     Other  detachments 


*  The  demand  was  couched  in  the 
following  language : 

Headquarters  C.  S.  Forces,  ) 

Before  Columbus,  Ky.,     > 

April  13,  1864.  ) 

To   the    Commanding   Officer  U.  S. 

Forces,  Columbux,  Ky. : 

Fully  capable  of  taking  Columbus 
and  its  garrison  by  force,  I  desire  to 
avoid  the  shedding  of  blood,  and  there- 
fore demand  the  unconditional  surren- 
der of  the  forces  under  your  command. 
Should  you  surrender,  the  negroes  now 
in  arms  will  be  returned  to  their  mas- 
ters. Should'  I,  however,  be  compel- 
led to  take  the  place,  no  quarter  will  be 
shown  to  the  negro  troops  whatever; 


the  white   troops  will  be  treated  fl 
prisoners  of  war. 

I  am,  sir,  yours, 
(Signed)  A.  Buford, 

Brigadier-GeneraL 
As  is  seen  above,  only  three  sman 
companies  were  engaged  in  the  ezp^ 
dition,  and  it  must  be  apparent  the 
language  of  the  foregoing  note  was  re- 
sorted to  as  a  legitimate  stratagem  ^ 
alarm  the  Federals  to  the  utmost  ^ 
the  safety  of  the  troops  thus  menae^ 
and  thus  attract  reenforcements  thei«» 
and  divert  them  from  Buford*s  real  ob- 
jective, Paducah,  whither  he  was  nW 
ing  at  the  time  with  his  main  force. 


BuforcTs  Descent  upon  Paducah.  417 

were  also  thrown  out,  to  make  ostentatious  display  of  force 
in  the  country,  especially  at  points  on  the  Tennessee  River. 
And  on  the  14th,  Buford  suddenly  appeared  at  Paducah,  about 
one  o'clock  p.m.,  by  the  Paducah  road,  with  his  advance-guard, 
while  his  main  body  entered  on  the  Mayfield  way.  The 
Federal  force  now  at  Paducah  had  been  increased  to  quite 
three  times  that  of  Buford,  and  at  least  four  gunboats  were 
likewise  present,  with  several  near  by.  Nevertheless,  the 
Confederates  boldly  entered  and  occupied  the  town,  the 
Federals,  in  part,  taking  shelter  in  the  fort,  and  the  remainder 
occupying  a  position  covered  by  the  river  bank — supported 
by  several  of  the  gunboats.  Thus  stood  matters,  when 
Buford  proceeding  to  execute  his  plan  of  operations,  ac- 
cordingly sent  a  squadron  of  cavalry  to  the  rolling-mill,  to 
search  for  horses,  and  set  Lieutenant-Colonel  Shacklett,  of 
the  Eighth  Kentucky,  to  investigate  the  quartermaster  and 
subsistence  store-houses.  The  horses,  some  140  excellent  stock, 
were  soon  found  concealed,  as  had  been  anticipated,  but,  for 
the  most  part,  the  subsistence  and  other  supplies  had  been 
removed  across  the  river  that  day,  in  anticipation  of  an 
attack.  Meanwhile,  a  furious  bombardment  had  been  opened 
on  the  town,  from  fort  and  gunboat,  but  no  movement  was 
made  on  the  part  of  the  Federal  commander  to  throw  his 
troops  from  their  cover.  Buford's  next  measure  was  now 
to  beguile  his  adversary  with  the  apprehension  of  a  serious 
^  attack,  so  he  formally  notified  the  Federal  commander  of  his 
\  intention  to  attack  him,  and  granted  a  truce  of  one  hour,  for 
the  purpose  of  moving  the  women  and  children.  This  was 
Accepted,  and  the  navy  officers  began  to  remove  the  women 
*tid  children  to  the  Illinois  shore.  Meanwhile,  Buford  began 
^o  withdraw,  with  his  main  force  and  spoils,  leaving  Faulkner 
^o  threaten  the  place  for  some  hours  longer,  and  then  retire 
Westward,  on  the  road  to  Blandville,  to  continue  the  decep- 
Uon  as  to  the  objects  and  the  strength  of  these  Confederate 


41 8  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

movements.  Buford  himself  fell  back  slowly  to  Dresden,  on 
the  1 8th,  and  established  his  headquarters  there  until  the 
30th,  under  orders  from  General  Forrest,  for  the  purpose 
of  recruiting  and  procuring  additional  artillery  and  cavalry 
horses.* 

III. 

While  the  events  we  have  related  in  the  preceding  sections 
of  this  chapter  were  passing,  other  portions  of  Forrest^s  com- 
mand elsewhere  had  not  been  inactive,  nor  without  incidents 
that  properly  belong  to  this  memoir. 

It  will  be  recollected  that,  as  Forrest  led  Buford's  Division 
and  several  of  Chalmers's  regiments  and  battalions  toward  the 
Ohio  river,  Chalmers  was  sent  to  establish  himself  with  the 
main  part  of  his  division  about  Panola,  Mississippi.  But  about 
the  time  Forrest  was  leaving  Jackson,  he  ordered  that  Necly's 
Brigade!  should  likewise  enter  West-Tennessee,  and  take 
post  at  or  about  Brownsville,  and  that  McCuUoch's  Brigade 
should  be  thrown  forward  across  the  Tallahatchie  to  Water- 
ford,  some  eight  miles  south  of  Holly  Spring.  Accordingly, 
Neely,  getting  in  motion  on  the  25 th  of  March,  was  at 
Bolivar  on  the  29th,  and  there  encountered  and  completely 
routed  a  Federal  force  under  the  notorious  Hurst,  that— 
leader  and  men — had  become  as  conspicuous  for  their  craven 
conduct  in  the  presence  of  armed  enemies,  as  for  rapacity 
and  brutal,  cruel  outrages  toward  the  defenseless  citizens  of 
the  country  which  they  desolated.  This  band  of  merciless 
marauders,  trusting  to  their  supposed  superior  numbers,  boldly 
approached  Bolivar,  with  a  confidence  that  was  speedily 
dissipated  when  it  became  apparent  that  the  Confederates 
intended  to  fight,  and   Hurst  attempted  to  withdraw ;  but 


^  6uford*s  Official  Report,  with  other  MS.  accoonts  of  the 
t  ReoenUy  Richardson's  Brigade. 


Neelys  Affair  at  Bolivar.  419 

Neely,  pursuing  promptly  and  hotly,  killed  about  twenty  and 
captured  some  thirty,  and  their  wagon-train,  (five  wagons 
and  teams,)  and  two  ambulances,  with  their  contents,  includ- 
ing 50,000  rounds  of  ammunition,  much  needed,  as  it  hap* 
pened,  by  the  Confederates,  at  the  moment.  The  main 
part  of  these  miscreants,  however,  effected  their  escape  by 
way  of  Sommerville,  to  Memphis,  from  the  lines  of  which, 
we  are  told,  they  did  not  emerge  for  the  rest  of  the  war  as  a 
band.  Previously — 27th — Chalmers,  having  learned  that 
Grierson  had  been  detached  with  a  heavy  cavalry  force  from 
Memphis,  to  operate  upon  Forrest's  rear,  ordered  McCuUoch 
to  leave  two  battalions*  to  guard  the  crossing  of  the  Talla- 
hatchie, and  advance  with  the  remainder  of  the  brigade  toward 
the  Tennessee  border.  With  this  command,  General  Chal- 
mers crossed  into  West-Tennessee,  at  or  near  Lagrange,  on 
the  29th,  and  was  at  Bolivar  early  on  the  next  day.  Mean- 
while, the  prisoners  accumulated  in  the  course  of  the  expe- 
dition, at  Jackson,  some  600  in  number,  were  detached, 
en  route  for  Demopolis,  Alabama,  under  a  strong  escort,  in 
the  direction  of  Corinth.  But  rumors  being  rife  of  the  move- 
ment of  large  bodies  of  Federal  troops  in  that  quarter,  with 
the  purpose  of  intercepting  and  recapturing  the  prisoners,  the 
officer  in  command  returned  rightward,  toward  Pocahontas, 
and  Chalmers's  Division  likewise  was  detached,  to  insure 
their  safe  conduct  beyond  the  dangerous  ground  of  the  line 
of  the  Memphis  and  Charleston  Railroad.  But  so  thick  and 
specific  were  the  rumors  of  the  presence  in  that  direction  of 
considerable  hostile  forces,  that  Forrest  could  not  keep  aloof, 
and  made  one  of  his  characteristic  expeditions.  It  had  been 
reported  that  a  force  of  some  6000  Federals  were  at  Purdy. 
making  his  escort,  he  rode  swiftly  to  that  vicinity,  with  the 


ItHneteenih  Mississippi  (DufTs)  and  First  Mississipin 


420  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

purpose  of  engaging  them  in  such  a  series  of  skirmishes  as 
should  check  their  movements.*  The  information,  however, 
was  untrue.  Meantime,  the  prisoners  were  safely  convoyed 
across  the  border,  and  Chalmers's  Division  returned  north- 
ward,— McCulloch's  Brigade  to  Jackson,  and  Neel/s  to 
R-ownsville  and  Sommerville. 

As  will  be  recollected,  as  Forrest  moved  northward,  McDo- 
nald's Battalion,  after  the  affair  of  Union  City,  was  sent  to 
reconoitre,  and  report  all  hostile  movements  from  the  direction 
of  Memphis.     Having  performed  this  service  without  notable 
incident,  and  returned  to  Bolivar,  Forrest  detached  Lieutenant- 
Colonel  Crews,  its  commander,  to  repair  to  the  western  part 
of  Fayette  county,  and,  while  keeping  twenty  men  of  each 
company  in  the  ranks,  to  furlough  the  rest  for  a  few  days  to 
visit  their  friends  and  refit,  especially  clothing.     Accordingly, 
being  in  camp  several  miles  west  of  Sommerville  on  the  night 
of  the  2d  of  April,  with  only  sixty  men  present.  Colonel  Crews 
received  intimation  that  a  strong  Federal  cavalry  force  was 
en  route  eastward  from   Raleigh,  on  the  Sommerville  road 
He  therefore  moved  out  early  next  morning  to  observe  this 
movement,  and  at  one  p.m.,  within  twelve  ox  fifteen  miles  of 
Raleigh,  encountered  and  was  fired  upon  by  the  enemy^s  ad- 
vance-guard, at  Royster's  farm.     Exposing  his  colors  and  a 
few  men  upon  the  crest  of  a  hill,  as  ostentatiously  as  possible^ 
Colonel  Crews  kept  concealed  the  smallness  of  his  real  force, 
while  he  reconoitered  from  some  high  ground  in  advance. 
The  enemy,  as  he  discovered,  evidently  apprehensive  of  the 
situation,  had  also  halted,  and  were  drawn  up  in  a  long  line 
of  battle,  along  the  crown  of  a  high  ridge  just  in  advance^ 
behind  a  fence,  with  a  company  detached  on  each  flank  to 
cover  it  from  any  movement.    Taking  advantage  of  adjoining 
woods,  Colonel  Crews  detached  Lieutenant  Christopher  D. 


•  Dispatchof  Major  Strange,  A.  A.  G.,  to  General  Chalmers,  Mardi  3iat,  1864^ 


A  Brilliant  Affair.  421 

Steinkuhl,  of  Memphis,  with  twelve  men  to  the  right,  and 
Lieutenant  T.  H.  Mayer  with  ten  men  to  the  left,  with  orders 
to  approach  under  cover,  and  attack  and  dislodge  the  Federal 
flank  detachments  at  all  hazards.     Dismounting  a  small  squad 
at  the  same  time  to  engage  the  Federal  sharp-shooters,  who 
were  annoying  those  of  the  Confederates  exposed  to  view,  and 
as  Lieutenants  Steinkuhl  and  Mayer  and  their  little  detach- 
ments intrepidly  attacked  as  directed.  Crews  charged  down 
the  main  road  with  less  than  forty  men  mounted.     It  was  a 
rash,  desperate  venture,  but  the  splendid  daring  and  confi- 
dence with  which  it  was  undataken  and  conducted  so  misled 
the  enemy,  that  two  Federal  regiments  gave  way  for  several 
hundred  yards,  and  took  a  defensive  position,  reenforced  by 
two  more  regiments,  among  some  houses  and  in  a  wood. 
Crews  now  moved  boldly  around  to  his  right,  as  if  seeking 
to  take  his  adversaries  in  reverse,  in  that  quarter  where  Lieu- 
tenant Steinkuhl  was  already  creating  some  disturbance  by 
his  presence.     But  as  soon  as  he  was  out  of  view.  Colonel 
Crews  turning,  returned  to,  and  reappeared  in  front  of,  the 
last  position  taken  up  by  the  Federals.     Thoroughly  deceived 
by  these  displays  of  force,  incredible  as  it  may  seem,  and  evi- 
dently mistrustful  of  the  situation,  the  whole  Federal  force 
immediately  fell  back  in  haste  to  Raleigh.     It  is  said,  also^ 
that  General  Grierson,  moving  on  another  road,  with  another 
force  equally  large,  was  inoculated  with  the  same  apprehen- 
sion, and  a  rapid  retreat  into  Memphis  was  the  result,  with 
the  destruction  of  all  the  bridges  behind  them,  leaving  Crews 
in  possession  of  the  field.    The  Confederate  loss  was  merely 
two  men  and  one  horse  wounded,  while  that  of  the  enemy  was 
five  killed,  six  wounded,  a  captain,  a  non-commissioned  ofiicex; 
and  one  private  captured.* 


*  MS.  Notes  of  Lieutenant-Colonel    grossly  exaggerated  narration  of  thii 
Crews.     That  we  have  not  given  a    afiair  b  fully  shown  by  the  ttatemeat 


422 


Campaigns  of  General  Forrest 


Bell's  Brigade  of  Buford's  Division,  now  about  i/oo  strong, 
and  McCuUoch'sof  Chalmer's  Division,  had  meanwhile  assem- 
bled at  Jackson.  Ever  since  his  advent  into  West-Tennessee, 
Forrest  had  been  distressed  by  well-authenticated  instances, 
repeatedly  brought  to  his  notice,  of  rapine  and  atrocious  out- 
rage upon  non-combatants  of  the  country,  by  the  garrison  at 
Fort  Pillow.  And  a  delegation  of  the  people  of  the  town  of 
Jackson  and  surrounding  region  now  waited  upon  and  ear- 
nestly besought  him  to  leave  a  brigade  for  their  protection 
against  this  nest  of  outlaws.  According  to  the  information 
received,  the  garrison  in  question  consisted  of  a  battalion  of 
whites,  commanded  by  Major  Bradford,  (a  Tennesseean,)  and 
a  negro  battalion  imder  Major  Booth,  who  likewise  command- 
ed the  post.  Many  of  Bradford's  men  were  known  to  be  de- 
serters from  the  Confederate  army,  and  the  rest  were  men  of 
the  country  who  entertained  a  malignant  hatred  toward  Con- 
federate soldiers,  their  families  and  friends.  Under  the  pre- 
tense of  scouring  the  country  for  arms  and  "  rebel  soldiers," 
Bradford  and  his  subalterns  had  traversed  the  surrounding 
country  with  detachments,  robbing  the  people  of  their  horses, 
mules,  beef  cattle,  beds,  plate,  wearing  apparel,  money,  and 
every  possible  movable  article  of  value,  besides  venting  upon 
the  wives  and  daughters  of  Southern  soldiers  the  most  oppro- 


bf  Major-General  Stephen  A.  Hurlbut, 
before  the  Congressional  Committee  as 
follows :  "  Forrest  moved  up  and  cross- 
ed the  line  of  the  Charleston  and  Mem- 
phis Railroad  toward  Jackson,  Tennes- 
see, and  occupied  it  General  Grierson 
was  directed  to  go  out  with  his  cavalry, 
feel  him,  attack  him,  and  cripple  him 
«s  much  as  possible.  He  went  out,  and 
reported  that  he  was  a  little  too  strong 
for  him,  and  he  could  not  touch  him. 
My  effective  force  at  Memphis  consisted 


of  2200  cavalry,  2100  white  in&ntry, 
and  2400  colored  in£cintry."  {Reb.  Rec, 
VIIL  Doc  I,  p.  40.)  Thus  it  b  ad- 
mitted that  Grierson  went  forth  into 
the  country  2200  strong,  and  returned 
after  finding  that  the  Confederates  were 
**  a  little  too  strong  for  him.*'  But  we 
have  shown  he  came  in  conflict  with  no 
part  of  Forrest's  command  but  Crews 
and  his  sixty  men.  This  may  appear 
incredible,  but  nevertheless  may  be  re- 
lied on. 


Fort  PiUow.  423 

brious  and  obscene  epithets,  with  more  than  one  extreme  out- 
rage upon  the  persons  of  these  victims  of  their  hate  and  lust 
The  families  of  many  of  Forrest's  men  had  been  thus  grie- 
vously wronged,  despoiled,  and  insulted,  and  in  one  or  two 
cases  fearfuUy  outraged,  and  many  of  his  officers,  uniting  with 
the  citizens  of  the  country  in  the  petition,  begged  to  be  per- 
mitted to  remain,  to  shield  their  families  from  further  molesta- 
tion. Of  course  this  was  impossible ;  but  Forrest  determined 
to  employ  his  present  resources  for  the  summary  suppression 
of  the-  evil  and  grievances  complained  of,  by  the  surprise,  if 
possible,  and  capture,  at  all  hazards,  of  Fort  Pillow ;  and  the 
orders  necessary  to  that  end  were  issued  on  the  loth  of  April; 
Bell's  and  McCuUoch's  Brigades,  with  Walton's  Battery — ^four 
mountain  howitzers — ^being  selected  for  the  operation. 


i 


CHAPTER    XVI. 

FORT       PILLOW. 

Forrest  in  Afmiement  upon  Fort  Pilloiv — Descriplion  of  the  Positioi*— 
First  Stage  of  the  Attack,  resulting  in  the  Death  of  Federal  Cm- 
mander.  Major  Booth — Forrest,  making  close  Feconrtoissance,  kai 
two  Horses  killed  under  him^-Confedtrate  Sharpshooters  envele^ 
and  command  Position — Ouiivorks  and  Position  seised  close  to  Pa- 
rapets— Surrender  demanded-^Approach  of  Federal  Transports  vi& 
Troops — Forrest  took  Means  to  drive  off  Succor— Capitulation  re- 
fused— Assault  made — Parapets  stormed — Garrison  fled  to  Rrntr- 
Bank  for  Relief  under  Guns  of  Naval  Vessel— Gunboat  failed  tt 
render  Aid^Results — Commentaries. 


April  wth  audizth,  1864. 

x\S  we  have  stated  in  the  last  chapter,  a  long  course  of 
brutal,  infamous  conduct  on  the  part  of  Bradford's  Battalion 
toward  the  non-combatant  people  of  West-Tennessee  had  de- 
termined General  Forrest  to  break  up  their  lair,  and  capture 
or  destroy  them  before  leaving  that  section  of  the  country  for 
other  operations.  To  Bell's  and  McCulloch's  Brigades  and 
Walton's  Battery  of  mountain-howitzers,  as  we  have  said,  had 
this  service  been  assigned,  and  they  were  immediately  put  io 
motion  by  way  of  Brownsville.  Leaving  Jackson  on  the 
morning  of  the  nth,  Forrest  overtook  General  Chalmers  »' 
Brownsville  at  two  p.m.,  and,  to  add  another  to  the  chances 
of  success,  ordered  that  officer  to  push  ahead  with  the  troops 


Fort  Pillow.  425 

>y  a  forced  march,  so  that  they  might  be  in  close  proximity 
o  Fort  Pillow  by  daylight  the  next  morning.  The  distance 
^as  thirty-eight  miles  ;  it  was  raining,  and  so  dense  the  dark- 
less after  midnight,  that  it  was  difficult  to  distinguish  the 
cad  or  "  to  see  a  file-leader."  Nevertheless,  such  was  the 
ager  spirit  of  the  hardy  riders  who  followed  Chalmers,  that 
hey  —  McCuUoch's  Brigade  in  advance  —  pushed  on  that 
nurky,  wet  night  "  without  halting,  except  now  and  then  to 
xamine  a  shaky  bridge."*  Hence,  just  before  dawn,  the  * 
dvance-guard,  Captain  Frank  J.  Smith's  company  of  the  Se- 
ond  Missouri  Cavalry,  surprised  the  Federal  pickets  and 
aptured  all  except  one  or  two,  who,  escaping  to  the  Fort 
1st  at  sunrise,  gave  the  first  warning  of  the  danger  impend- 

Fort  Pillow,  first  established  in  1861,  by  the  State  of  Ten- 
essee,  on  the  east  bank  of  the  Mississippi  river,  about  three 
nd  a  half  miles  above  or  north  of  Fulton,  was  so  fortified  by 
le  Confederate  States  engineers,  under  the  orders  of  Gene- 
il  Beauregard,  in  March  and  April,  1862,  that  it  effectually 
affled  the  formidable  efforts  of  the  Federal  navy  to  pass  it. 
lut  about  the  last  of  May,  1862,  the  Confederates  having 
een  forced  to  evacuate  Corinth,  the  line  of  the  Memphis  and 
!harleston  Railroad,  and  hence  Memphis,  Fort  Pillow  was 
Iso  abandoned.  The  Federals  at  once  occupied  it,  but  ap- 
arently  never  with  any  considerable  force.  And  they  never 
^furnished  the  water-batteries,  which  the  Confederates  had 
ismantled  on  retiring  from  the  position,  limiting  their  mea- 
ures  apparently  to  holding  the  position  against  the  contin- 


*  MS.  Notes  of  Captain  Walter  A.  post ;  nevertheless,  at  least  one  man 

Goodman,  escaped.    See  also  statement  of  Lieu- 

t  Guided  by  a  citizen  of  the  neighbor-  tenant    Leming,   Reb.  Rec.  VIII.  Doc, 

ood,  Captain  Smith  was  able  to  lead  I,  p.  23. 
is  company  to  the  rear  of  their  picket* 


426 


Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 


gency  of  its  becoming,  otherwise,  a  point  from  which  small 
Confederate  expeditions  or  partisans  might  constantly  distress 
if  not  interrupt  the  navigation  of  the  Mississippi  river.  For 
of  this  there  was  peculiar  danger,  from  the  fact  that  the  steam- 
boat channel  at  that  point  runs  within  short  musket-range  of 
the  eastern  bank  of  the  river,  while  that  bank  affords  admira- 
ble shelter  and  a  plunging  fire.*  But,  evidently  feeling  safe 
against  any  serious  enterprise  of  any  sort,  the  Federals  n^- 
lected  ordinary  military  precautions  for  the  defense  of  the 
place  against  just  such  an  assault  as  the  one  we  have  now  to 
narrate.  The  lines  of  works  erected  by  the  Confederate  en- 
gineers in  1 86 1-2  to  defend  the  land  approaches  were  upon  a 
very  extended  scale,  with  a  strong  profile  calculated  to  resbt 
siege  artillery.  That  is,  far  too  large  to  be  of  the  least  use  or 
value  to  a  garrison  so  small  as  that  which  the  Federals  habitu- 
ally  kept  there,  and,  besides,  several  points  upon  it  completely 
commanded,  at  a  distance  not  exceeding  six  hundred  yards, 
the  immediate  position  upon  which  the  Federals  had  freshly 
thrown  up  breastworks  that  were  relied  on  with  so  much  ill- 
judged  confidence  as  an  impregnable  fastness  against  any 
hostile  operation  which  could  possibly  be  undertaken  by  the 
Confederates.!    The  Federal  works  were  constructed  with 


*  Major-Gcneral  Hurlbut,  in  his  evi- 
dence before  the  Congressional  Com- 
mittee at  Cairo,  Illinois,  April  24th, 
1S64,  thus  precisely  discusses  the  war 
value  of  the  position  to  both  sides : 
"  The  steamboat  channel  at  Fort  Pillow 
runs  right  under  the  bluf!^  and  brings 
every  boat  as  it  passes  within  musket- 
shot  of  the  shore,  and  a  couple  of  guns 
mounted  up  above  them  would  stop 
most  effectually  the  navigation  of  the 
river  and  drive  away  any  of  the  tin-clad 
gunboats  we  have,  for  a  plunging  fire 


would  go  right  through  them  and  they 
could  not  get  elevation  enough  to  strike. 
The  whole  life  of  the  army  below,  espe- 
cially while  these  large  movements  weit 
going  on,  depended  upon  an  uninter- 
rupted communication  by  the  river,  and 
the  stopping  of  that  communication  ^ 
two  or  three  days  might  deprive  us  ^ 
the  necessary  supplies  just  at  the  mo* 
men  they  were  required." — R^  Kt^ 
VIII.  Doc  I,  p.  41. 

t  "  I  received  a  report  from  hift 
(Major  Booth,)  that  he  could  hold  tbt 


Fort  Pillow.  427 

the  trace  and  in  the  position  exhibited  in  the  map  opposite — 
that  is,  upon  the  highest  part  of  the  bluff  chosen  for  occupa- 
tion, and  inclosing  the  north-west  angle,  formed  by  the  river 
and  Coal  creek,  upon  the  last  of  which  it  jutted  abruptly, 
while  a  bench  of  some  forty  feet  lay  between  it  and  the  imme- 
diate river-bank  at  that  stage  of  the  water.  Eastward  there 
was  a  gradual  slope  from  the  crown  next  the  river  for  from 
twenty  to  sixty  yards,  when  the  descent  became  sudden  into  a 
narrow  gorge  that  separated  it  from  a  labyrinth  of  hills  and 
ridges,  divided  from  each  other  by  a  network  of  interlacing, 
narrow  ravines,  and  this  slope  was  broken  by  several  crooked 
and  deep  gullies,  affording  well-covered  approaches  for  an 
enemy  to  within  thirty  to  one  hundred  yards  of  the  interior 
intrenchments.  Southward,  this  eminence  also  fell  off  gently 
for  about  two  hundred  yards  and  then  rapidly  into  a  narrow 
valley,  the  course  of  which  was  perpendicular  to  the  river, 
and  in  which  were  a  number  of  trading-houses  and  other 
buildings,  known  as  the  "  town."  This  slope,  as  will  be  seen 
in  the  diagram  annexed,  was  seamed  by  a  ravine  which  gave 
hostile  access  to  within  one  hundred  and  fifty  yards  of  the 
southern  face  of  the  works.  Immediately  exterior  and  paral- 
lel with  the  face  of  the  works  commanding  this  part  of  the 
ground  were  four  rows  of  cabins  and  tents,  the  outer  line  of 
which  (cabins)  was  not  more  than  sixty  yards  distant  from 
the  ditch,  and  rightward  from  these,  stretched  around  to  the 
north  for  some  two  hundred  yards,  a  rifle-pit  along  the  eastern 
verge  of  the  acclivity.  The  parapets  of  the  inner  works  were 
about  eight  feet  high,  with  a  ditch  six  feet  deep  and  twelve 
broad.  The  armament  consisted  of  two  ten-pounder  Parrott 
tifled  guns,  two  twelve-pounder  howitzers,  and  two  six-pound- 


post  against  any  force  for  forty-eight    ffurlkU,  Rcb,  Rec,  VIIL   Doc  I,  p. 
hours.*'  —  Evidence   of  Major- General    41. 


i 


428  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

er  rifled-bore  field-pieces,  and  the  whole  garrison  did  not  ex- 
ceed 580  men.* 

Upon  the  capture  of  the  pickets,  McCuUoch's  Brigade  was 
pressed  rapidly  on,  with  instructions  to  take  up  a  position 
southward  of  the  Fort,  and  as  near  as  possible  to  the  river- 
bank  and  the  work.     Bell's  Brigade,  as  prearranged,  was  like- 
wise ordered  up  ;  Wilson's  Regiment  to  deploy  directly  in 
front  and  occupy  the  close  attention  of  the  garrison  by  an 
immediate,  vigorous  skirmish,  while  the  rest  of  the  brigade 
should  seek  to  penetrate  to  the  river  northward,  along  Coal 
creek,  and  invest  and  attack  from  that  side,  understood  to  be 
very  weak  and  vulnerable.     These  movements  were  executed 
with  care,  and  the  many  advantages  of  the  ground  were  aptly 
used  by  the  Confederates  to  avoid  unnecessary  exposure  as 
they  gradually  brushed  the  small  force  of  Federal   sharp- 
shooters back  from  their  advanced  positions.     McCulloch,  on 
his  side,  soon  seized  a  position  with  his  left  flank  on  the  river- 
bank,  about  half  a  mile  southward  of  the  Fort,  the  remainder 
of  his  line  disposed  in  the  ravines  extending  around  and  to- 
ward the  north-east,  in  close  proximity  to  a  high  ridge  upon 
which  were  the  old  lines  of  the  Confederate  works,  the  most 
elevated  point  upon  which  was  occupied  at  the  time  by  a 
Federal  detachment     And  thus,  as  had  been  predetermined, 
he  awaited  to  hear  the  sound  of  Bell's  musketry  on  the  north 
as  his  signal  for  an  attack  from  the  south. 

But  Bell's  movement  had  been  barren  of  results :  for  it  was 


*  Made  up  as  follows :  First  Bat-  section  Company  D,  Second  U.  S. 
talion,  Thirteenth  Tennessee  Cavalry,  Light  Artillery,  (colored,)  i  commis- 
Majbr  William  F.  Bradford  command-  sioncd  officer  and  40  men — that  is,  ag- 
ing, 10  officers  and  285  enlisted  men ;  gregate  white  troops,  295  ;  colored, 
First  Battalion,  Sixth  U.  S.  Heavy  Ar-  262  ;  or,  in  all,  557.—-^^.  Rec.  VIU- 
tillery,  (colored,)  8  commissioned  offi-  Doc.  I,  p.  62. 
cers  and  213  enlisted  men;  and  one 


Forrest  Reconnoitres.  429 

found  impracticable  to  reach  the  river  along  Coal  creek,  and 
a  new  plan  of  attack  had  to  be  arranged.  This  brought  delay, 
and  meantime,  after  a  ride  of  seventy-two  miles  since  six 
o'clock  the  day  before,  Forrest  came  upon  the  field  with  his 
staff,  escort,  and  a  detachment  under  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Wisdom. 

It  was  about  nine  o'clock  as  General  Fbrrest  reached  the 
ground ;  and  about  the  same  hour  Major  Booth,  the  Federal 
commander,  and  his  adjutant  by  his  side,  were  killed.*  Los- 
ing no  time,  Forrest  pressed  immediately  to  the  front  to  re- 
connoitre, as  was  his  wont,  trusting  that  important  duty  to  no 
other  eyes  than  his  own.  And  so  thoroughly  was  this  duty 
accomplished,  that  he  had  two  horses  killed  and  another 
wounded  under  him  before  he  was  satisfied,  or  saw  enough  of 
the  ground  to  warrant  him  in  forming  a  final  plan  of  opera- 
tions. It  was  thus  he  discovered  the  ravine,  previously  men- 
tioned, leading  up  in  near  vicinity  to  the  southern  face  of  the 
Fort,  which,  if  seized,  would  afford  complete  immunity  from 
the  fire  of  the  Federals,  as  they  could  not  depress  their  small- 
arms  or  artillery  so  as  to  command  it ;  while  two  ridges,  from 
four  to  five  hundred  yards  distant,  eastward  and  north-east- 
ward from  the  enemy's  position,  gave  the  Confederate  sharp- 
shooters excellent  cover,  from  which  they  completely  com- 
manded the  interior  of  the  Federal  works,  and  might  effect- 
ually silence  their  fire. 

Orders  were  therefore  given  immediately  to  "move  up."! 
Bell  threw  his  brigade  forward  until  he  gained  a  position  in 
which  his  men  were  well  sheltered  by  the  conformation  of  the 
ground.  And  at  the  same  time  McCuUoch  advanced  and 
gallantly  carried  the  intrenchments  on  the  highest  part  of  the 


•  Reh,  Ree,  VIII.  Doc  I,  p.  23. 

t  Forrest's  favorite  phrase  in  such 


430 


Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 


ridge  immediately  in  front  of  the  south-eastern  fisure  of  the 
work.  The  Federals  fell  back  without  further  stand  to  their 
main  work  and  the  rifle-pit  in  its  front,  closely  pressed  by 
McCuUoch,  who  seized  and  occupied  the  cluster  of  cabins  (m 
the  southern  face  of  the  work,  which,  as  we  have  said  before, 
were  about  sixty  yards  from  it,  foiling  an  attempt  on  the  part 
of  the  enemy  to  burn  the  buildings  *  He  also  carried  and 
occupied  the  rifle-pits.  The  positions  thus  secured  were  fiital 
to  the  defense,  for  the  Confederates  were  now  so  placed  that 
artillery  could  not  be  brought  to  bear  upon  them  with  much 
effect,  except  at  a  mortal  exposure  of  the  gunners.  Moreover, 
the  line  of  investment  was  now  short  and  complete,  extending 
from  the  river-bank  south  of  the  fort,  to  Coal  creek  on  the 
north,  so  swollen  at  the  moment  by  backwater  as  to  be  im- 
passable, while  rearward  of  the  advanced  line  were  numerous 
sharp-shooters  favorably  posted  on  several  commanding  ridges 
ready  to  pick  off  any  of  the  garrison  showing  their  heads 
above,  or  indeed,  any  men  moving  about  within  the  circuit  oC 
the  parapets.  Fully  satisfied  of  his  ability  to  carry  the  posi- 
tion without  difficulty  or  delay,  but  desiring  to  avoid  the  loss 
of  life  that  must  occur  in  storming  the  works,  Forrest  deter- 
mined to  demand  the  surrender  of  the  place.     Accordingly, 


*  "  They  (the  Confederates)  kept  up 
a  steady  fire  by  sharp-shooters  behind 
trees,  and  logs,  and  high  knolls.  .  .  . 
They  began  to  draw  nearer  and  nearer 
up  to  the  time  our  (Federal)  men  were 
all  drawn  into  the  fort  Two  compa- 
nics  of  the  Thirteenth  Tennessee  Ca- 
valry were  ordered  out  as  sharp-shoot- 
ers, but  were  finally  ordered  in.  We 
were  pressed  on  all  sides.  I  think 
Major  Booth  fell  not  later  than  nine 
oVlock.  His  adjutant,  who  was  then 
acting  post -adjutant,  fell  near  the  same 


time.    Major  Bradford  then  took  tbe 
command.  . .  .  Previous  to  this,  Major 
Booth  had  ordered  some  buildings  in 
firont  of  the  fort  to  be  destroyed,  as  the 
enemy's  sharp-shooters  were  endeavor- 
ing to  get  possession  of  them.    There 
were  four  rows  of  buildings,  bat  only 
the  row  nearest  the  fort  was  destroyed; 
the  sharp-shooters  gained  possessioa 
of  the  others  before  they  could  be  de- 
stroyed." Evidence  of  Lieutenant  McJ. 
Leming,    Adjutant    Bradford's  Batta- 
lion, Reh,  Ree,  VIII.  Doc  i,  pp.  t^  ^ 


Surrender  Demanded. 


431 


causing  the  signal  for  a  cessation  of  hostilities  to  be  given,  he 
deputed  Captain  Walter  A.  Goodman,  Adjutant-General  on 
the  staff  of  General  Chalmers,*  to  bear  a  flag  of  truce  with  a 
formal  demand  in  writing,  couched  substantially  in  these 
terms: 

That,  having  the  fort  surrounded  by  a  force  sufficiently 
strong  to  take  it  by  assault,  wishing  to  avoid  the  unnecessary 
destruction  of  human  life,  he  was  prompted  to  make  a  demand 
for  its  surrender.  That  if  this  demand  was  acceded  to,  the 
gallantry  of  the  defense  which  had  already  been  made  would 
entitle  all  its  garrison  to  be  treated  as  prisoners  of  war.f 

This  was  written  and  dispatched  from  a  point  on  an  emi- 
nence included  in  the  old  Confederate  lines,  from  which  For- 


*  Captain  Thomas  Henderson,  com- 
manding  scouts,  and  Lieutenant  Frank 
Rodgers  likewise  accompanied  the  flag. 

t  In  his  MS.  Recollections  of  Fort  Pil- 
low, Captain  Goodman  says :  "  I  have 
no  copy  of  this  or  of  any  of  the  corre- 
spondence that  ensued,  before  me,  but  I 
am  satisfied  that  my  recollection  of  the 
sobstance  of  the  different  notes  is  cor- 
rect ;  and  I  remember  the  proposition 
in  the  first  to  treat  the  garrison  as  pri- 
soners of  war,  provided  they  were  sur- 
rendered, the  more  clearly  because, 
when  the  note  was  handed  to  me,  there 
was  some  discussion  Slbout  it  among 
the  officers  present,  and  it  was  asked 
whether  it  was  intended  to  include  the 
negro  soldiers  as  well  as  the  white ;  to 
which  both  General  Forrest  and  Gene- 
ral Chalmers  replied,  that  it  was  so  in- 
tended; and  that  if  the  fort  was  sur- 
rendered, the  whole  garrison,  white  and 
black,  should  be  treated  as  prisoners 
of  war.    No  doubt  as  to  the  meaning 


and  scope  of  this  proposition  was  ever 
expressed  or  intimated  in  any  of  the 
notes  and  conversations  which  followed 
it  under  the  flag  of  truce."  The  com- 
munication in  question,  as  printed  in 
the  Reb,  Rec.YIll.  Doc  i,  p.  24,  does 
not  difler  in  substance  from  that  which 
we  give : 

"Headquarters  Confederate 
Cavalry,  near  Fort  Pillow, 
April  12,  1864. 

As  your  gallant  defense  of  the  fort 
has  entitled  you  to  the  treatment  of 
brave  men,  (or  something  to  that  effect,) 
I  now  demand  an  unconditional  sur- 
render of  your  force,  at  the  same  time 
assuring  you  that  they  will  be  treated 
as  prisoners  of  war.  I  have  received  a 
fresh  supply  of  ammunition,  and  can 
easily  take  your  position. 

(Signed)         N.  B.  Forrest. 

To  Major  L.  F.  Booth,  Commanding 
U.  S.  Forces.** 


432  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

rest  commanded  a  full  view  of  the  interior  of  the  Federal 
works,  and  of  their  whole  defensive  resources  ;  but  so  close 
already  were  the  Confederates,  that  their  flag  of  truce  ii'as 
brought  to  a  halt  from  the  Fort  before  it  had  advanced  beyond 
the  line  held  by  the  left  of  McCulloch's  Brigade,  and  the  con- 
ference that  followed  actually  took  place  just  at  the  left  of 
that  line. 

Booth,  as  we  have  seen,  had  been  dead  for  several  hours, 
and  the  command  had  fallen  into  the  feeble  hands  of  Major 
William  F.  Bradford,  a  West-Tennesseean,  and  commander  of 
the  odious  Thirteenth  Tennessee  Battalion.  Nevertheless, 
the  answer  received,  after  some  delay,  bore  the  name  of  Major 
L.  F.  Booth,  and,  in  effect,  required  an  hour  for  consultation 
with  his  officers  and  those  of  the  gunboat,  in  regard  to  the 
demand  for  the  surrender  of  his  post  and  the  vessel  This 
communication  having  been  delivered  to  General  Forrest,  who 
had  meantime  established  himself  at  a  point  in  the  valley 
about  four  hundred  yards  southward  from  the  flag,  he  imme- 
diately replied,  in  writing,  that  he  had  not  asked  for,  and  did 
not  expect  the  surrender  of,  the  gunboat ;  but  for  that  of  the 
fort  and  garrison,  and  that  he  would  give  twenty  minutes  for 
a  decision.  Moreover,  so  great  was  the  animosity  existing 
between  the  Tennesseeans  of  the  two  commands,  he  added, 
that  he  could  not  be  responsible  for  the  consequetices  if  obliged  to 
storm  the  place. 

Pending  the  delivery  and  consideration  of  this  communica- 
tion, and  during  the  period  of  the  truce,  the.  smoke  of  several 
steamers  was  discovered  ascending  the  river ;  and  speedily  one, 
crowded  with  troops,  and  her  lower  guards  filled  with  artillery, 
was  distinctly  seen  approaching,  near  at  hand,  and  manifestly 
bearing  directly  for  the  beleaguered  fortress.*    Apprehensive 


•  These  were  the  Olive  Branch,  with    the  Hope  and  the  M.  R.  Cheek.-nM 
General  Shepley  and  troops  on  board ;    Rec,  VIIL  Doc  i,  pp.  177,  S-g. 


iX- 


1 


Approach  of  Relief  Prevented.  433 

tempt  would  be  made  to  land  reenforcements  from 
mers,  Forrest  promptly  dispatched  his  aid-de-camp, 
iharles  W.  Anderson,  with  a  squadron  of  McCul- 
adc,  down  the  ravine,  through  the  "  town,"  to  occupy 
enches  constructed  by  the  Confederates  in  1862, 
bluff  at  the  river,  above  the  mouth  of  that  ravine, 
clow  the  southern  face  of  the  invested  work.  That 
us  staff-officer,  promptly  moving  his  detachment  in 
f  the  Fort,  swiftly  took  up  the  designated  position, 
I  sight  also  of  the  gunboat  New  Era.  And  the 
nch  in  her  course  soon  came  so  near  that  by  open- 
i  volley  on  the  mass  of  men  with  whom  she  was 
,*avy  loss  of  life  must  have  been  inflicted  ;  but  Cap- 
rson,  limiting  himself  strictly  to  preventing  the 
any  reenforcements  during  the  truce,  caused  two 
dmonitory  shots  to  be  fired  at  the  pilot-house,  with 
late  effects  of  making  her  sheer  off  to  the  opposite 
pass  on  up  the  river.* 


irly  legitimate  movement  ing  to  gain  time  by  negotiations  with 

large  part  the  gravamen  the  hope  of   receiving  succor.     The 

;c    made  with   so    many  Federal  commanders  made  no  signal^ 

cts,  and  so  widely  bcliev-  says  General  Shcpley,  {Reb,  Rec,  VIIL 

th,  that  Forrest  acted  in  Doc  i,  p.  78,)  of  any  kind  to  the  Olive 

violated  the  flag  of  truce.  Branch,  but  permitted  it  to  approach 

allegation  could  be  more  to  the  immediate  vicinity  of  the  New 

I  this  connection*     The  Era — that  is,  past  the  Fort,  it  may  be 

IS  made  under  the  eyes  noted — before  it  was  boarded  from  that 

>r  Bradford  and  Captain  gunboat,  and  told  to  "  proceed  imme- 

)  expressed  no  objections,  diately  to  Cairo,  and  send  four  or  five 

tcps  to  resist  or  check  it  hundred  rounds  of  ammunition,  and 

ecessary  consequence  of  stop  all  boats  coming  dovm."    {Vide 

approach,  while  the  truce  Evidence  0/ General  Skepley  and  Captain 

icse  steamers  at  a  time  Thornton, — Rec,  Reb,  VIIL  Doc  I,  pp. 

er  was  full  of  transports  78,  79.)    It  is  to  be  noted  as  somewhat 

ps,  and  when  the  com-  singular  that  while  these  Federal  Com- 

Fort  was  manifestly  seek-  missioners  are  lavish  with  their  harsh 


434  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

Meanwhile,  Forrest's  second  communication  having  been 
carried  into  the  Fort  by  one  of  the  Federal  officers,  several  of 
his  comrades  remaining  with  the  flag,  in  conversation  with  the 
Confederates,  expressed  their  belief  that  Forre3t  really  was 
not  present,  and  that  his  name  was  used  as  a  mere  ruse,  such 
as  had  been  practiced  so  successfully  several  weeks  before  at 
Union  City.     One  of  these  officers  having  also  professed  to 
be  acquainted  with  the  Confederate  General  by  sight.  Captain 
Henderson  immediately  rode  to  where  Forrest  was — in  the 
ravine  southward  of  the  Fort — and  informing  him  of  this  sus- 
picion, suggested  that  the  enemy  might  surrender  the  sooner 
if  he  were  to  go  forward  and  satisfy  them  of  his  actual  pre- 
sence.    He  therefore  rode  to  the  spot  where  the  flag  stood, 
and  was  formally  presented  to  Captain  Young,  Twenty-fourth 
Missouri  Infantry,  and  the  associate  claiming  to  know  the 
Confederate  General,  who  quickly  remarked  that  he  had  no 
longer  any  doubt.     At  the  same  time,  too,  the  parapets  of  the 
Fort  were  thronging  with  negro  soldiers,  intently  watching  the 
course  of  events,  and  some  of  whom  were  heard  also  to  say, 
it  was  useless  to  deny  that  General  Forrest  was  before  them, 
for  they  knew  him  "  too  well  for  that."     And  so  close  mean- 
while were  the  Confederate  lines,  that  the  white  men  of  both 
sides  were  bantering  each  other  from  their  respective  posi- 
tions, while  some  of  the  negroes  indulged  in  provoking,  impu- 
dent jeers.    About  the  same  time,  likewise,  the  steamer  Olive 
Branch  reaching  a  point  opposite  the  Fort,  appeared  to  be  turn- 
ing her  bow  toward  the  landing,  a  fact  to  which  Captain  Good- 


comments  upon  this  movement  as  a  vio-  to  do  precisely  what  General  Forrest 

lation  of  the  flag  of  truce,  their  official  justly  apprehended  would   be  under- 

repoits  exhibits  clearly  the  fisict   that  taken,  and    therefore  took  the  war- 

they  examined  closely  into  the  conduct  ranted  precaution  to  foiL     They  ac- 

of  General  Shepley  in  not  carrying  sue-  cepted  as  his  excuse  only  hb  inability* 

cor,  at  that  very  juncture,  to  the  Fort  net  that  there  was  a  intee  I 
Or,  in  other  words,  for  not  attempting 


Capitulation  Refused. 


435 


man  called  the  attention  of  General  Forrest,  who  quietly 
plied,  **  She  won't  land,"  and  in  a  moment,  in  fact,  she  was 
seen  to  resume  her  course  up  the  river  *  Some  instants  latct 
the  answer  to  the  last  demand  was  brought  out  from  the  Fort 
and  handed  to  Forrest  by  Captain  Goodman.  Almost  illegi- 
bly written  with  a  pencil,  on  a  soiled  scrap  of  paper,  transmit- 
ted without  envelope,  it  ran  as  follows,  "  Your  demand  does 
not  produce  the  desired  effect/'f  Reading  it  hastily,  the  Con- 
federate General  exclaimed, "  This  will  not  do.  Send  it  back; 
and  say  to  Major  Booth" — whose  name  was  attached — "  that 
I  must  have  an  answer  in  plain  English — Yes  or  No  !"J 

This  answer,  having  been  dispatched,  by  the  advice  of 
some  of  his  officers,  in  view  of  the  now  menacing  deportment 
of  many  of  the  negroes  behind  the  parapets,  Forrest  returned 
to  the  position  in  the  valley,  some  three  hundred  yards  south* 
ward,  though  satisfied  in  his  own  mind  that  the  Fort  would  be 
surrendered.  It  was  not  long,  however,  before  Captain  Good* 
man  came  to  him  with  the  Federal  answer — a  brief  but  po^ 
tive  refusal  to  capitulate.  As  soon  as  he  had  read  this  com- 
munication, turning  to  his  staff  and  some  officers  around  him, 
Forrest  ordered  that  his  whole  force  should  be  put  in  readir 
ness  for  an  immediate  and  simultaneous  assault  With  a  few 
energetic  words,  he  also  stimulated  the  State  pride  of  the 
Missourians  and  Mississippians,  Tennesseeans  and  Texans 
of  McCulloch's  and  Bell's  Brigades  to  an  emulous  struggle  for 


*  MS.  Notes  of  Captain  Goodman. 
The  time  of  the  passage  of  this  steam- 
er Is  setUed  in  the  evidence  of  General 
Shepley  and  Captain  Thornton,  cited 
anU^  note  p.  433,  by  these  facts :  There 
was  no  firing  as  they  approached  and 
passed  the  Fort ;  the  Federal  flag  was 
still  flying ;  a  flag  of  truce  was  observed 
outside,  immediately  on  passing  the 


Fort ;  and  a  few  moments  later  the  M^ 
deral  flag,  it  was  noticed,  had  fallen. 

t  This  flippant,  discourteous  phrase- 
ology was  doubtless  the  fruit  of  coi^ 
tinned  incredulity  in  regard  to  Fo^ 
rest's  actual  presence,  and  of  a  stupid 
misapprehension  of  a  stratagem. 

I  MS.  Notes  of  General  Forrest  and 
Captain  Goodman. 


♦36 


Campaigns  of  General  Forres L 


precedency  in  planting  their  battle-flags  upon  the  parapets 
before  them.  These  affairs  arranged,  the  Confederate  General, 
with  a  single  bugler,  rode  to  the  commanding  eminence,  on 
Ae  old  Confederate  lines — which  we  have  previously  describ- 
ed as  giving  him  a  complete  view  of  the  field  of  operations — 
from  that  point  to  give  the  signal  for  the  assault. 

At  this  time  the  main  part  of  Bell's  Brigade  present,  with 
the  Second  Tennessee  on  the  right,  were  in  position  with- 
in from  thirty  to  one  hundred  feet  of  the  ditch,  on  the  eastern 
(ace  of  the  work,  and  McCuUoch's  men  occupied  the  cabins, 
as  will  be  remembered,  within  sixty  yards  of  the  southern 
face,  and  the  rifle-pits  on  their  right.  At  the  same  time,  the 
commanding  ridges  eastward  and  north-eastward  of  the  work 
were  studded  with  sharp-shooters,  and  from  one  of  which,  as 
may  be  seen  from  the  diagram  prefixed,  they  completely  enfi- 
laded the  southern  face  of  the  Federal  works ;  that  is,  the  face 
most  strongly  garnished  with  artillery.* 

On  reaching  the  position  we  have  mentioned,  Forrest, 
scanning  the  field,  and  observing  that  all  was  ready,  caused 
the  signal  to  be  given  for  the  resumption  of  hostilities  ;  and 
at  the  first  blare  of  the  bugle,  the  Confederate  sharp- 
shooters, at  all  points,  opened  a  galling  fire  upon  the  hostile 
parapet,  to  which  the  garrison  replied,  for  a  few  moments, 
with    great  spirit.      But    so  deadly  was    the  aim   of  the 


•It  is  injuriously  charged  against 
General  Forrest  that  these  positions 
were  mainly  secured  by  a  perfidious 
breach  of  the  flag  of  truce.  That  this 
ail^ation,  however,  is  utterly  unfound- 
ed, ought  to  be  apparent  even  from  the 
evidence  cited,  note,  antit  p.  430  of 
lieutenant  Leming,  the  witness  chief- 
ly relied  on  to  establish  it  The  fact 
o^  the  position  selected  by  the  Federals 


was  so  unfavorable  that,  while  com- 
manded from  several  surrounding  points 
within  easy  range  of  musketry,  it  coold 
also  be  approached  with  impunity  I7 
an  investing  force,  properly  handled,  to 
within  a  few  ysu'ds  of  its  ditch,  as  was 
done  by  the  Confederates  before  the 
flag  of  truce,  which,  be  it  rememberedi 
did  not  actually  advance  beyond  He* 
Culloch*s  line.    . 


Position  Stormed. 


437 


Confederates,  from  their  enfilading  positions,  that  their 
enemies  could  not  rise  high  enough  from  their  scanty  cover 
to  fire  over  at  their  foes,  nor  use  their  artillery  on  the 
southern  face  without  being  shot  down.  Consequently,  ther€ 
was  practically  little  resistance,  when,  a  few  moments  later, 
the  bugle  still  sounding  the  charge,  the  main  Confederate 
force,  as  with  a  single  impulse,  surged  onward,  like  a  tawny 
wave,  and  crowning  the  parapet,  poured  over,  on  all  sides, 
into  the  work.  Leaping  headlong  into  the  ditch,  these  agile, 
hardy  young  men  found  it  a  feeble  barrier,  and  helping  each 
other,  they  clambered  nimbly,  and  swiftly,  and  simultaneously 
over  the  breastworks  beyond,  opening  from  its  crest  a  fearful, 
converging  fire,  from  all  its  faces,  upon  the  garrison  within. 

In  anticipation  of  this  contingency,  Major  Bradford,  it 
appears,  had  arranged  with  the  captain  of  the  gunboat  that, 
if  beaten  at  the  breastworks,  the  garrison  would  drop  down 
under  the  bank,  and  the  gunboat  would  come  to  their 
succor,  and  shelter  them  with  its  canister.*  The  pre- 
arranged signal  was  now  given,  and  the  garrison,  en  masse^ 
white  and  black,  for  the  most  part  with  arms  in  their  hands, 
broke  for  the  place  of  refuge  and  naval  aid  there  expected^ 
leaving  the  Federal  flag  still  aloft,  on  its  staff,  and  turning  re- 
peatedly, as  they  sped  down  the  precipitous  bank,  to  return 
the  fire  opened  upon  them.f    The  gunboat,  however,  was 


♦  The  evidence  of  Captain  Marshall, 
conclusive  upon  this  point,  is  as  fol- 
lows  :  ''  Major  Bradford  signaled  to 
me  that  we  were  whipped.  We  had 
agreed  on  a  signal  that^  if  they  had  to 
leazt  thi  fort,  they  would  drop  down 
under  the  bank,  and  I  was  to  giite  the 
Rebels  eamsterr-^Reh,  Rec.  VIII.  Doc 

X.P-SS- 
t  Besides  the  positive  averments  of 


gentlemen  of  unquestionable  veradt]^ 
this  connection,  we  have  the  conclusit* 
proof  in  the  fact  that  269  serviceable 
muskets  were  picked  up  and  carried  off 
by  the  Confederates  from  below  the 
bluff,  on  and  near  the  river-bank,  where 
they  had  been  undoubtedly  carried  and 
finally  thrown  by  the  garrison. — MSm 
Notes  of  Captain  C  IK  Anderson. 


438 


Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 


recreant  at  this  critical  moment,  and  failed  to  give  the  least 
assistance.  And  no  timely  shower  of  canister  came  from  its 
ports  to  drive  back  the  Confederates,  who  swiftly  and  hotly 
followed  after  the  escaping  negroes  and  Tennesseeans.  The 
naval  commander,  evidently,  was  more  anxious  for  the  safety 
K&  his  craft  and  its  crew,  than  willing  to  endanger  either  by 
endeavoring  to  do  what  it  had  been  distinctly  preconcerted 
that  he  should,  in  the  emergency  ;  and  so  he  kept  his  vessel 
aloof,  at  a  safe  distance  both  from  the  captured  guns  of  the 
Fort  and  from  any  effort  to  capture  it* 

While  these  events  were  passing,  the  troops  stationed 
to  watch  the  steamers  poured  a  volley  into  the  left  flank 
of  the  retreating  Federals,  killing  and  wounding  a  good  many. 
Finding  that  the  succor  which  they  had  been  promised  from 
the  gunboat  was  not  rendered,  nor  at  hand,  they  were  greatly 


Captain  Marshall  gives,  as  an  ex- 
for  his  course,  that  he  was  fearful 
ihe  Confederates  "might  hail  in  a 
steamboat  from  below,  capture  her, 
put  on  four  or  five  hundred  men,  and 
come  after  (him)  me."  Also,  that  he 
was  apprehensive,  if  he  attempted  to  go 
down  to  the  Fort  from  his  position 
rix>ve,  and  engage  in  the  fight,  as  the 
channel  would  force  him  "  to  go  around 
the  point,"  the  Confederates  in  the 
Fort,  with  its  guns,  would  sink  him. 
*Had  I  been  below  here  at  the  time," 
be  continues,  '*  I  think  I  could  have 
routed  them  out"  If  so,  it  may  be 
asked,  why,  at  such  a  time,  did  he  take 
a  position  above  the  Fort,  rather  than 
the  £ivorable  one  below,  and  thus  put 
It  out  of  his  power  to  render  assistance 
promised,  and  fatally  relied  on  by  the 
Federal  garrison,  when  "  whipped,"  as 
be  terms  it    It  was  surely  in  his  power. 


previous  to  the  onset,  to  have  taken  tiie 
favorable  position.    Further,  he  states 
that,  during  the  tnice,  being  at  the  bar. 
and  observing  movements  on  the  part 
of  the  Confederates,  which  he  regarded 
as  in  violation  of  that  truce,  he  stood 
off  for  the  Fort  again,  intending  to  stop 
it ;  but  he  does  not  choose  to  explain 
why  he  changed  his  mind,  went  aborc 
and  £uled  to-  make  the  least  endeavor 
to  assist  his  people.    No  one  who  reads 
his  testimony  carefully  can  acquit  him 
of  a  criminal  prudence,  at  the  cost  of 
the  lives  of  the  Federal  soldiers,  who, 
on  the  faith  of  his  engagement  to  aid 
them  with  his  guns  and  canister,  in- 
stead of  la^ng  down  their  arms  and 
capitulating  when   the  trenches  weie 
carried,  retreated,  as  they  supposed,  to 
be  succored  by  him.     See  R^  ^' 
VIII.  Doc  I,  p.  55. 


The  MeHe.  439 

bewildered.  Many  threw  themselves  into  the  river  and  were 
drowned  in  their  mad  attempt  to  swim  away  from  the 
direful  danger  they  apprehended ;  a  number  turning  in  the 
direction  of  Coal  creek,  dashed  as  wildly  into  that  stream  and 
perished  ;  others  sought  to  escape  along  the  river-bank  south- 
ward, and,  persisting  in  their  efforts  to  get  away,  were  shot  or 
driven  back. 

It  should  be  remembered  that  the  entrance  of  the  Con- 
federates into  the  work  had  been  achieved  by  an  impetuous 
rush  over  the  parapet  by  each  individual,  and  therefore,  for 
for  some  moments  afterward,  there  was  necessarily  a  general 
confusion  and  tumult,  in  fact,  a  dissolution  of  all  organizations. 
Accordingly,  as  always  happens  in  places  taken  by  storm, 
unquestionably  some  whites,  as  well  as  negroes,  who  had 
thrown  down  their  arms,  and  besought  quarter,  were  shot 
under  that  ijisania  belli  which  invariably  rages  on  such 
occasions.  Nor  must  it  be  forgotten  that  there  was  no 
surrender  of  the  place  at  all.  When  the  Confederates 
swarmed  over  the  trenches  that  had  been  held  defiantly  for 
some  eight  hours  in  the  face  of  numbers  so  manifestly 
superior,  the  garrison  did  not  yield  ;  did  not  lay  down  their 
arms,  nor  draw  down  their  flag ;  but  with  a  lamentable 
fatuity,  the  mass  of  them,  with  arms  still  in  their  hands,  fled 
toward  another  position  in  which  they  were  promised  relief, 
and  while  on  the  way  thither,  returned  the  fire  of  their 
pursuers,  it  is  true,  not  as  a  mass,  but  in  instances  so  nume- 
rous as  to  render  inevitable  a  fire  upon  their  whole  body,  even 
had  it  not  been  the  necessary  consequence  of  their  efforts  to 
escape  capture,  whether  with  arms  in  their  hands  or  not.* 


•  Many  of  the  prisoners  were  intoxi-  stimulated  previous  to  the  final  onset, 

cated,  and  few  were  not,  to  some  de-  as  was  manifest  from  the  fact  that  a 

grcc,   under  the  influence  of  liquor,  number  of  barrels  of  whisky  and  beer 

with  which   they  had   been   lavishly  were   found   disposed   at   convenieBt 


440 


Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 


In  the  mean  time,  or  as  soon  as  he  could  reach  the  scenes 
Forrest,  riding  into  the  work,  assisted  by  Captain  John  Over- 
ton, lowered  the  flag ;   and  immediately  both   he.   General 
Chalmers,  and  other  officers  interfered  so  energetically  to 
stop  the  firing  that  it  ceased  speedily ;  ceased  within  fifteen 
minutes  from  the  time  that  the  signal  for  the  termination  of 
the  truce  was  given,  and  all  allegations  to  the  contrary  are 
mere  malicious  inventions,  started,  nurtured,  and  accredited 
at  a  time,  and  through  a  sentiment  of   strong   sectional 
animosity.     The  first  order,  indeed,  now  issued  by  General 
Forrest,  was  to  collect  and  secure  the  prisoners  from  possible 
injury,  while  details  were  made  from  them  for  the  burial  of 
the  Federal  dead.*     Among  the  prisoners  taken  unhurt,  was 
Major  Bradford,  the  commanding  officer  of  the  post  since 
nine  in  the  morning,  and  at  his   special  request,    General 
Forrest  ordered  the  Federal  dead  to  be  buried  in  the  trenches 
of  the  work,  the  officers  to  be  interred  separately  from  their 
men.     Bradford  was  then  temporarily  paroled,  to  supervise 
the  burial  of  his  brother,  Captain  Bradford,  after  which,  under 
a  pledge  not  to  attempt  to  escape,  he  was  placed  for  the  night 
in  the  custody  of  Colonel  McCulloch,  who  gave  him  a  bed  in 
his  own  quarters,  and   shared  with  him  his   supper.     This 
pledge  Major  Bradford  violated  ;   taking  advantage  of  the 
darkness  and  his  knowledge  of  the  locality,  when  his  host 


points  in  the  works,  with  tin  dippers 
attached,  for  the  use,  evidently,  of  the 
Federal  soldiers.— iWlS*.  Notes  of  Col- 
onel C,  R.  Barteati, 

•  It  is  somewhat  suggestive  that  the 
first  eye-witness  of  the  aflair  at  Fort 
Pillow,  examined  by  the  Congressional 
Committee,  ElictsFalls^  a  negro  soldier, 
testified  expressly  that  Forrest  gave 


orders  to  stop  the  shooting,  and  that, 
"  after  peace  was  made,"  an  officer  toW 
a  "  Seccsh  soldier,"  if  he  did  that  again, 
(shoot,)  he  would  arrest  him.  Subse- 
quent witnesses,  for  some  reason  or 
other,  appear  to  have  been  somewhat 
better  instructed  as  to  the  character  of 
testimony  which  was  wanting,  and  si^* 
pUed  it  "  to  order." 


Confederate  Losses. 


441 


was  asleep,  he  effected  his  escape  through  the  careless  line  of 
sentinels,  and,  in  disguise,  sought  to  reach  Memphis.* 

This  brilliant  success,  howbeit,  was  not  achieved  without 
severe  loss  on  the  part  of  the  Confederates,  the  loss  of  some 
of  their  best  soldiers.  Fourteen  officers  and  men  were  killed, 
and  eighty-six  wounded.  Among  these  casualties  were  Lieu- 
tenant-Colonel Wiley  M.  Reid,  conspicuous  among  his  com- 
rades for  martial  aptitude,  courage,  and  ardor,  who  was  mor- 
tally .wounded  within  eighty  yards  of  the  Federal  trenches, 
while  leading  and  inspiriting  the  Fifth  Mississippi  to  the 
onset ;  the  intrepid  Lieutenant  N.  B.  Burton  of  the  same 
regiment  was  slain  by  his  side.  Captain  W.  R.  Sullivan  was 
mortally  stricken  at  the  head  of  Willis's  Texas  Battalion, 
which  he  gallantly  commanded  at  the  time,  and  Lieutenant 
Ryan  of  that  battalion  was  killed  by  a  shell  at  an  earlier  stage 
of  the  action.  Lieutenant  Hubbard,  of  the  Eighteenth  Mis- 
sissippi Battalion,  a  promising  young  officer,  fell  in  the  final 
onset ;  these  are  some  of  the  losses  among  McCulloch's  vete- 
rans. Lieutenant  George  Love,  of  the  Second  Tennessee,! 
and  Captain  J.  C.  Wilson,  of  Russell's  Regiment  of  Bell's 


•  Wc  have  this  from  the  lips  of  Col. 
McCuIloch.  For  the  subsequent  re- 
capture and  fate  of  this  officer,  see  page 

455- 

t  "  A  singular  instance  of  a  premo- 
nition of  death  occurred  in  the  case  of 
Lieutenant  Love.  As  an  officer,  he 
was  popular  with  his  men,  and  always 
calm  and  fearless  at  the  post  of  duty. 
In  the  morning  he  called  several  of  his 
company  around  him,  and  told  them, 
in  a  quiet  manner,  that  he  should  be 
killed  that  day.  lie  gave  directions 
lor  the  disposal,  among  the  command| 


of  his  horse  and  little  possessions,  ar- 
ranged for  the  payment  of  his  small 
debts,  and  wrote  a  farewell  letter  to  his 
orphan  sister,  living  at  Gallatin,  Tenn. 
He  led  his  company  on,  and  at  eleven 
o^clock  was  laid  low  by  a  canister-shot 
from  one  of  the  enemy's  guns.  We 
buried  him  the  next  morning.  His 
memory  lives  in  the  hearts  of  all  his 
surviving  comrades,  and  the  regiment 
could  boast  f  n  •  I  raver  soldier  or  bet- 
ter man."— ^5".  Noits  of  Colonel  C,  R. 
BarUau^  Secimd  Tentusiee  Cavaliy, 


442  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

Brigade — two  valuable  officers — ^were  slain  while  acting  witk 

signal  bravery. 

Among  the  prisoners  taken  was  Captain  Youngs  the  bearer 
of  the  flag  of  truce,  who,  with  Captain  Anderson,  was  sent 
up  the  river-side  with  a  white  flag,  to  endeavor  to  open  com- 
munication with  the  gunboat  New  Era,  which  was  seen  mak- 
ing off  to  the  northward,  under  the  apprehension,  it  appears^ 
of  its  ever-prudent  master,  that  an  effort  might  be  made  for 
his  capture,*  The  object  was  to  deliver  into  his  hands  as 
soon  as  possible  all  the  Federal  wounded ;  but  every  signal 
was  obdurately  ignored  or  disregarded,  and,  keeping  on  its 
course,  the  New  Era  disappeared  up  the  river.f 

As  fast  as  possible,  meanwhile,  the  wounded  of  both  sides 
were  gleaned  from  the  bloody  field,  and  placed  under  shelter 
and  the  professional  care  of  Confederate  surgeons  of  the 
several  regiments  present,  who  at  once  set  to  work  with  that 
assiduity  and  humanity  which  we  believe  have  characterized, 
with  rare  exceptions,  the  medical  officers  of  both  services 
toward  wounded  prisoners  of  war.  J 

Affairs  thus  provided  for,  Forrest  next  turned  over  the  com- 
mand of  the  troops  on  the  ground  to  General  Chalmers,  with 
instructions  to  complete  the  burial  of  the  dead,  the  collection 
of  the  arms  and  other  portable  property,  and,  if  possible,  to 
transfer  the  Federal  wounded  to  the  first  steamer  that  might 
be  passing ;  and,  finally,  to  follow  with  the  division  and  the 
unwounded  prisoners,  as  soon  as  practicable,  to  Brownsville. 
These  orders  given,  he  set  out  about  sunset  to  return  with  his 


*  Vide  Captain  Marshall's  Evidence,  attendance  is  made  apparent  by  gleams 

ReK  Rec,  VIII.  Doc.  r,  p.  56.  of  the  truth  that  escape  here  and  there 

t  MS.  Notes  of  Captain  C.  W.  An-  in  the  mass  of  suggested  falsehoods, 

derson.  which  appear  as  evidence  taken  before 

X  That  the  Federal  wounded,  black  the   Congressional    Committee.—/^ 

and  white,  received  prompt  surgical  Rcc.  VIII.  Doc.  i,  pp.  i  to  So. 


The  Day  After.  443 

escort  and  staff  to  Jackson,  Tennessee,  encamping  that  night 
at  a  farm-house,  some  six  or  seven  miles  eastward. 

"  Before  nightfall,"  says  Captain  Goodman,  "  the  prisoners 
and  artillery  had-  been  removed,  and  the  troops  were  moved 
back  from  the  river  and  put  into  camp. 

"  On  the  following  morning,  (the  13th,)  a  detail  was  sent  to 
the  Fort  to  collect  and  remove  the  remaining  arms,  and  to  bury 
such  of  the  dead  as  might  have  been  overlooked  on  the  day 
before.  They  had  been  at  work  but  a  short  time  when  a  gun- 
boat (the  Silver  Cloud)  came  up  and  began  to  shell  them.  As 
this  became  annoying,  the  officer  commanding  the  detail  or- 
dered the  tents  which  were  still  standing  in  the  Fort  to  be 
burned,  intending  to  abandon  the  place.  In  doing  this,  the 
bodies  of  some  negroes  who  had  been  killed  in  the  tents,  on 
the  day  before,  were  somewhat  burned  ;  and  this  probably 
gave  rise  to  the  horrible  stories  about  burning  wounded  pri- 
soners which  were  afterward  invented  and  circulated."* 

In  the  mean  time — the  morning  of  the  13th — after  Forrest 
and  his  staff  had  mounted  their  horses,  and  were  about  to 
resume  their  way  toward  Jackson,  the  sound  of  heavy  artillery 
was  heard  at  the  Fort,  and  he  detached  Captain  Anderson  to 
return  thither  with  Captain  Young — the  Federal  Provost-Mar- 
shal— to  make  another  effort  for  the  immediate  delivery  of  the 
Federal  wounded  to  their  friends.  Proceeding  to  execute  this 
order,  Captain  Anderson  reached  the  Fort,  caused  the  details 
at  which  the  firing  had  been  directed  to  be  at  once  withdrawn, 
and  hoisted  a  flag  of  truce  and  parley,  which  being  accepted 
by  the  master  of  tho  Silver  Cloud,  Captain  Ferguson,  an  ar- 
rangement soon  resulted  for  a  truce  until  five  p.m.  It  was 
agreed  that  during  that  time  the  Federals  might  send  parties 


•  We  give  this  part  of  the  narrative  in  the  language  of  that  intelligent,  acca- 
rate  sta£f-officer,  Captain  Goodman. 


444  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

ashore  to  visit  all  parts  of  the  scene,  and  look  after  their  dead 
and  wounded,  bury  any  of  the  former  that  might  have  been 
overlooked  by  the  Confederates,  and  to  assist  in  removing  the 
wounded  on  board  the  transport,  receipts  to  be  taken  for  aO 
thus  delivered.  During  the  day  several  transports  came  to 
the  landing,  and  before  the  hour  when  the  truce  was  to  ezjHit; 
the  prisoners  had  all  been  transferred  to  the  cabin  of  the 
steamer  Platte  Valley,  numbering  at  least  70,  officers  and  mea* 
It  remains  to  be  added  that  7  officers  and  219  enlisted  men, 
(56  negroes,  163  whites,)  un wounded,  were  carried  off^  as  pri- 
soners of  war,  which,  with  the  wounded,  make  an  aggr^;ateof 
those  who  survived,  exclusive  of  all  who  may  have  escaped, 
quite  300  souls,  or  fully  55  per  cent  of  the  garrison,  whik 
those  who  survived  unhurt  constituted  40  per  cent.f 

Several  hours  previously,  having  put  his  main  force  in 
motion  toward  Brownsville,  about  four  p.m..  General  Chalmers 
withdrew  with  his  staff  and  escort  in  the  same  direction,  and 
there  remained  at  Fort  Pillow  none  save  the  dead  who  had 
fallen  in  storming  it,  and  the  dead  of  the  late  garrison,  vic- 
tims, not  of  unlawful  acts  of  war,  as  has  been  so  virulently 
alleged  and  generally  believed  at  the  North,  but  of  an  insen- 
sate endeavor,  as  foolishly  resolved  as  feebly  executed,  to  hold 
a  position  naturally  untenable  and  badly  fortified, — the  vic- 
tims, we  may  add,  in  all  sincerity,  not  of  a  savage  ferocity  on 
the  part  of  their  late  adversaries,  but  of  the  imbecility  and 
grievous  mismanagement  of  those  weak,  incapable  officers, 
whom  the  fortunes  of  war  unhappily  had  placed  over  them. 


•  The  Federal  surgeon  of  the  hos-  t  Some  of  the  Confederate  regunenti 

pital  at  Mound  City,  111.,  testified  that  lost  nearly  as  heavily  at  Chickamiogi* 

he  received  34  whites  and  27  colored  For  a  place  taken  by  storm  the  losswM 

men.    Some  died  on  the  way.  by  no  means  heavy. 


Commentaries.  445 

COMMENTARIES. 

I.  "Valor  as  well  as  other  virtues  has  its  bounds,  which, 
once  transgressed,  the  next  step  is  into  the  territories  of  vice ; 
so  that,  by  having  too  large  a  proportion  of  this  heroic  virtue, 
unless  a  .man  be  very  perfect  in  its  limits,  which  upon  the 
confines  are  very  hard  to  discover,  he  may  very  easily  un- 
awares run  into  temerity,  obstinacy,  and  folly.  From  this 
consideration  it  is,  that  we  have  derived  the  custom  in  time 
of  war  to  punish  even  with  death  those  who  are  obstinate  to 
defend  a  place  that  is  not  tenable  by  the  rules  of  war.  Other- 
wise, if  there  were  not  some  examples  made,  men  would  be 
so  confident  upon  the  hopes  of  impunity  that  not  a  hen-roost 
but  would  resist  and  stop  a  royal  army."  So  wrote  old  Mi- 
chael Montaigne,  who  then  proceeded  to  illustrate  the  prac- 
tice in  civilized  warfare  by  these  historical  examples : 

"  Monsieur,  the  Constable  de  Montmorency,  having,  at  the 
^ege  of  Pavia,  been  ordered  to  pass  the  Tesino  and  to  take 
up  his  quarters  in  the  Faubourg  St.  Antonio,  being  hindered 
from  doing  so  by  a  tower  that  was  at  the  end  of  the  bridge, 
which  was  so  independent  as  to  stand  a  battering,  hanged 
every  man  he  found  within  it  for  their  labor.  And  again,  since, 
accompanying  the  Dauphin  in  his  expedition  beyond  the  Alps, 
and  taking  the  castle  of  Villane  by  assault,  and  all  within  hav- 
ing been  put  to  the  sword,  the  governor  and  his  ensign  only 
excepted,  he  caused  them  to  be  trussed  up  for  the  same  rea- 
son ;  as  also  did  Captain  Martin  du  Bellay,  then  Governor  of 
Turin,  the  Governor  of  St.  Bony,  in  the  same  country,  all 
his  people  being  cut  in  pieces  at  the  taking  of  the  place."* 

Any  one  who  has  read  our  narrative  attentively  must  be 
satisfied  that  Fort  Pillow,  at  least  after  the  Confederates 
secured  possession  of  the  rifle-pits  and  huts  near  the  parapet, 


Works  of  Montaigne,  (EngUsh,)  Chapter  XIV. 


44^  Campaigns  of  General  FarresL 

was  untenable,  and  consequently  its  defense  unjustifiable.   In- 
deed, we  know  of  no  instance  of  such  manifest  indefensibility. 
It  was  not  so,  however,  be  it  noted,  merely  because  of  the  nu- 
merical superiority  of  the  Confederates,  but  for  the  reason  of 
the  situation  of  the  Federal  work  at  the  moment,  even  had 
the  Confederates  not  been  able  to  get  so  close  as  they  did 
to  its  parapets.     Every  foot  of  it  was  completely  enfiladed 
and  swept,  as  may  be  seen  from  the  map,  by  Confederate 
sharp-shooters.    Furthermore,  so  small  was  the  scope  of  the 
place  that,  when  the  whole  garrison  was  driven  back  within 
it,  the  work  was  so  densely  crowded  that  a  sharp-shootei's 
bullet  could  scarcely  miss  an  object,  and  the  jeopardy  of  the 
men  was  the  more  fearfully  augmented.    In  fact,  Forrest 
could  have  established  his  men  under  cover  at  good  rifle-range 
and  made  the  work  untenable  without  attempting  to  storm  it 
2.  Compare  what  actually  happened  at  Fort  Pillow  with 
the  hideous  scenes  of  slaughter,  lust,  and  rapine  that  followed 
the  storming  of  places  in  Spain  and  Portugal  either  by  the 
French  or  English,  as  Oporto,  for  example.     How  trivial  and 
insignificant  in  comparison  were  even  the  worst  alleged  at 
Fort  Pillow  to  what  it  is  not  denied  actually  happened  at 
Oporto,  as  related  by  Napier.     Yet  Marshal  Soult  was  never 
overwhelmed  with  obloquy  in  prose  and  verse,  nor  besmirched 
with  foul  epithets  for  what  occurred  there.    At  the  storming 
of  Palamos,  after  the  third  demand  for  the  capitulation  of  the 
place,  the  Spaniards,  flying  to  the  sea-shore  with  the  purpose 
of  finding  refuge  aboard  some  vessels — just  as  the  gjarrison  at 
Fort  Pillow  expected  to  be  rescued  by  the  gunboat — were  in- 
tercepted by  the  French  troops  and  put  to  the  sword    We 
might  readily  fill  as  large  a  volume  as  this  with  like  instances. 
The  fact  is,  as  was  said  by  a  recent  writer  in  Blackwood s  Ma- 
gazine,  in  connection  with  a  late  affair  in  China :   "  Every 
military  man  knows  that  whenever  a  place  is  taken  by  assault 
under  the  flag  of  any  nation,  many  of  the  defenders  are  put  to 


Commentaries.  447 

death  though  they  throw  down  their  arms  and  cry  for  quar- 
ters."* 

3.  The  Congressional  Committee  have  reported  that  the 
Confederates  took  advantage  of  the  truce  to  advance  to  and 
secure  positions  from  which  they  had  been  beaten  off  by  the 
Federal  garrison  up  to  the  time  that  the  flag  of  truce  was  first 
sent  by  General  Forrest  This  falsehood  is  asserted  in  the 
face  of  abundant  conclusive  evidence  taken  before  them.  For 
example,  Lieutenant  McJ.  Leming,  Bradford's  Adjutant,  as 
we  have  cited  in  note  antey  page  430,  in  the  body  of  his  testi- 
mony expressly  admits  that  the  Confederates,  previous  to  the 
flag  of  truce,  had  "  kept  up  a  steady  fire  by  sharp-shooters  be- 
hind trees,  and  logs,  and  high  knolls  ;  they  began  to  draw 
nearer  and  nearer  up  to  the  time  our  men  were  all  drawn  into 
the  Fort.  Two  companies  of  the  Thirteenth  Tennessee  Ca- 
valry were  ordered  out  as  sharp-shooters,  but  were  finally  or- 
dered in.  We  were  pressed  on  all  sides!*  The  same  witness, 
after  stating  that  Major  Booth  and  his  Adjutant  were  killed 
about  nine  o'clock  a.m.,  adds  that  the  Major  had  previously 
"  ordered  some  buildings  in  front  of  the  Fort  to  be  destroyed, 
as  the  enemy's  sharp-shooters  were  endeavoring  to  get  pos- 
session of  them.  There  were  four  rows  of  buildings,  but  only 
the  row  nearest  the  Fort  was  destroyed ;  the  sharp-shooters 
gained  possession  of  the  others  before  they  could  be  destroyed!* 
(Reb,  Rec,  VIII.  Doc.  i,  pp.  23-4.)  Another  chief  witness. 
Captain  Marshall,  commander  of  the  Federal  gunboat  New 
Era,  deposes  ihzX.  previous  to  truce,  and  when,  at  a  signal  from 
the  Fort,  he  was  firing  up  the  ravine  immediately  to  the  south 
of  it,  the  "rebel  sharp-shooters"  returned  his  fire  " rapidly." 
Further,  that  on  the  north  side  of  the  Fort  the  Confederates 
were  so  near  as  to  be  able  to  fire  at  and  harass  some  non-com- 


•  Number  for  February,  1867,  page  187. 


i 


448  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

batants  who  had  been  removed  in  a  barge  from  the  Fort  to 
the  river-bank  north  of  the  mouth  of  Coal  creek.    {Ibid,  p.  55.) 
One  Elvis  Bevel,  a  refugee,  who  was  present,  likewise  testifies 
that  in  an  hour  after  sunrise  bullets  from  "  rebel  infemtry" 
drove  him  to  take  position  behind  a  large  stump  near  (in 
front  of)  the  Fort,  and  that,  about  nine  a.m.,  he  moved  to 
the  rear,  where  he  "  could  better  see  tfie  rebels  wko  swarmed 
the  bluffl'  while  at  the  same  time  the  Confederates  were  ^ 
near  to  the  gunboat  that  the  crew  "/wrf  to  close  tJteir  ports 
and  use  their  stnall-annsr     {Ibid,  p.  69,)     Moreover,  private 
Daniel  H.  Rankin,  Company  C,-  Thirteenth  Tennessee,  though 
alleging  that  the  worst  thing  he  saw  was  the  rebels  moving 
upon  us  while  the  flag  of  truce  was  up  at  the  Fort,  never- 
theless defines  the  point  attained  by  the  Confederates  by 
saying  that  they  did  not  get  nearer  to  the  Fort  than  "  with- 
in tweftty  or  thirty  steps**     {Ibid,  p.  32.) 

4.  Under  manifest  prompting,  the  witnesses  in  hospital 
all  claim  to  have  been  wounded  after  their  surrender,  and 
that  the  killing  and  wounding  were  chiefly  done  after  the 
position  was  surrendered.  There  was  no  surrender  at  all, 
and  all  statements  to  that  effect  are  untrue.  When  the 
Confederates  surmounted  the  parapets,  the  garrison,  as  we 
have  seen,  by  a  preconcerted  plan,  leaving  their  flag  flying, 
retreated  en  masse  to  the  cover  of  the  river  bank,  expecting 
to  be  sheltered  there  under  the  guns  of  the  New  Enu  It  was, 
therefore,  unquestionably  a  legitimate  act  of  war  to  fire  upon 
them  when  thus  attempting  to  escape,  whether  they  had  arms  in 
their  hands  or  not !  For  those  who  threw  their  arms  away 
and  fan  below  the  bluff",  simply  did  so,  the  more  readily 
to  make  their  escape  from  the  Confederates.  Soldiers  in  a 
place  taken  by  storm,  no  more  than  on  the  field  of  battle,  can 
claim  to  have  surrendered  or  called  for  quarter,  who  fly  as 
fast  as  they  can  in  the  direction  of  expected  or  prearranged 
succor.    The  value  of  the  whole  mass  of  testimony,  reported 


Commentaries.  449 

and  relied  on  as  warranting  these  unfounded  calumnies 
against  General  Forrest  and  his  men,  may  well  be  measured 
in  this  connection.  The  witness  Leming  states  in  the 
body  of  his  testimony :    "  We  kept  them  (the  Confederates) 

back  for  several  minutes.     What  was  called brigade  or 

battalion*  attacked  the  centre  of  the  fort,  where  several 
companies  of  colored  troops  were  stationed.  They  finally 
gave  way,  and  before  we  could  fill  up  the  breach,  the 
enemy  got  inside  the  fort,  and  then  they  came  in  on 
the  other  two  sides,  and  had  complete  possession  of  the 
Fort.  /;/  the  mean  time,  nearly  all  the  officers  had  been  killed^ 
especially  of  the  colored  troops,  and  there  was  no  one  liardly 
to  guide  the  men.  They  fought  bravely,  indeed,  until  that 
time.  I  do  not  think  the  men  wJto  broke  had  a  commissioned 
officer  over  them."  And  yet  this  same  "willing  witness,*' 
under  manifest  manipulation,  in  answer  to  the  question, 
"  Were  those  (officers)  who  were  killed,  killed  before  or  after 
the  Fort  was  captured  T  answered,  "  I  don't  know  of  but  one 
who  was  killed  before  we  were  driven  from  the  Fort.** 
{Reb,  Rcc,  VIII.  Doc.  i,  p.  26.)  In  the  same  connection^ 
also,  is  filed  an  affidavit,  signed  by  Lieutenants  F.  A.  • 
Smith  and  William  Cleary,  the  two  absent  officers  of  the 
Thirteenth  Tennessee  Battalion,  in  which  it  is  stated, 
on  hearsay,  confessedly,  that  Lieutenant  Wilson,  of  their 
regiment,  was  killed,  and  Lieutenant  J.  C.  Akerstrom  was 
severely  wounded  after  the  surrender ;  yet,  in  conclusion, 
they  refer  to  an  accompanying  affidavit  of  one  Hardy 
N.  Revelle  —  an  eye-witness  —  in  which  it  is  especially 
sworn  tfiat  the  said  Lieutenant  Wilson  was  killed  outside  of 


*  A  man  who  draws  no  broader  dis*     lion  than  Lieutenant  Leming  appean 
tinction  between  a  brigade  and  batu      to  do,  is  not  a  very  reliable  witness. 


450 


Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 


the  Fort,  in  the  mornings  before  the  Federal  troops  were  with- 
drawn,* 

5.  It  is  the  gravesb  of  the  charges  against  General  For- 
rest and  his  men,  that  Lieutenant  Akerstrom,  Quartermas- 
ter of  the  Thirteenth  Tennessee  Battalion,  was  nailed,  when 
wounded,  to  the  side  of  a  house,  by  his  clothes,  and  thus 
burned  alive.  The  Committee  accept  as  conclusive  a  mass 
of  sheer  vague  hearsay  testimony  on  this  point,  in  the 
face  of  the  positive  statement  of  private  John  F.  Ray,  Com- 
pany B,  Thirteenth  Tennessee  Battalion,  that  Akerstrom 
wa^  shot  at  his  side,  during  the  action,  and  in  the  fore> 
head,  falling  on  his  face  dead,  as  he  believed.!  One  witness, 
Carlton,  a  negro,  who  professed  to  have  seen  the  Confede- 
rates have  the  Quartermaster,  (Akerstrom,)  after  the  conflict 


*  This  man  had  previously  said 
there  were  ten  officers  belonging,  only 
eight  of  whom,  however,  were  pre- 
sent at  the  time.  Now,  by  reference 
to  the  list  of  the  prisoners  in  the 
Appendix,  it  will  be  seen  that  Cap- 
'tain  J.  L;  Posten  and  Lieutenant  N. 
D.  Logan  were  taken  prisoners,  unin- 
jured, leaving  six  to  be  accounted  for. 
One  of  those,  Captain  Potter — at  the 
time  in  hospital,  wounded  too  badly  to 
testify — Leming  admits  "was  shot  in 
the  early  part  of  the  engagement." 
{Reb,  Ree,  VIIL  Doc  i,  p.  26.)  An- 
other, Lieutenant  Wilson,  says  RevcUe, 
{Ibid,  p.  67)  was  killed  in  the  morning, 
outside  of  the  Fort,  and  yet  another, 
Akerstrom,  as  we  show,  is  ]X)sitively 
stated  by  the  witness  Ray,  (a  white 
man,)  to  have  been  shot  dead  in  the 
forehead  during  the  conflict,  and  there- 
fore only  three  remain  to  be  accounted 
for.    These  sure  Major  Bradford,  Cap- 


tain Bradford,  and  Lieutenant  Leming 
himselfl  Major  Bradford,  as  we  know, 
was  not  shot,  but,  offensive  as  he  was 
to  the  men  who  took  the  work  by 
storm,  was  taken  prisoner.  Leming 
says  he  was  shot  after  the  place  had 
fallen,  but  he  likewise  sa3rs  he  only 
knows  of  one  officer  who  was  not  shot 
in  the  same  way,  which  most  be  Cap* 
tain  Potter,  as  also  just  before  (p.  24) 
that  "  nearly  all  the  officers  had  been 
killed  "  before  the  Confederates  enter- 
ed the  work.  Captain  Bradford  was 
the  signal  officer ;  it  is  plain  he  lived 
long  enough  to  give  the  signal  spoken 
of  by  CapUun  Marshall,  and  was  fooad 
dead  at  the  spot  where  die  signal  was 
made ;  he  was  doubtless  shot  by  some 
one  as  the  parapets  were  surmoonted. 
And  thus  we  dispose  of  Mr.  Leming's 
loosely  constructed  tissue.  Out  of  bis 
lips  must  the  Confederates  be  acquitted, 
t  Reb,  Rec.  VIIL  Doc  i,  p.  31. 


Commentaries.  45  % 

was  over,  describes  him  as  having  three  stripes  on  his 
arm,  which  assuredly  the  Congressional  Committee  must 
have  known  were  the  insignia  of  a  non-commissioned  officer, 
and  not  of  an  officer  of  the  grade  of  quartermaster.*  Another 
witness — one  McCoy — who  was  on  the  gunboat,  swears  that 
he  saw  Akerstrom  in  his  office,  under  the  hill,  after  the  flag  of 
truce  was  in,  making  signals  for  the  boat  to  come  to  him ; 
an  improbable  story  in  sooth,  that  he  could  distinguish  any 
man  at  that  distance  —  fully  half  a  mile.t  The  story  in 
regard  to  this  burning  of  houses,  with  persons  in  theni^ 
white  or  black,  while  alive,  evidently  originated  at  some 
distance  from  the  scene.  Only  one  of  the  witnesses  ex- 
amined testifies  that  he  was  present  and  saw  the  burning. 
Fortunately,  the  published  evidence  affords  a  clue  to  the 
place  where  this  wicked  calumny  was  forged.  Two  witnesses 
—McCoy  and  Shelton — state  positively  they  first  heard 
the  story  after  they  had  reached  the  hospital  at  Mound  City, 
Illinois.^  Yet,  another  alleges  that  he  heard  it  from  the 
hands  on  the  gunboat.  The  witness,  a  negro,  Haskins, 
who  says  that  he  saw  Akerstrom's  house  on  fire,  had  just 
sworn  that  immediately  after  the  place  was  carried  he  was 
shot  in  the  left  arm,  then  ran  down  to  the  river,  jumped  in 
the  water,  and  that  at  night  he  got  into  a  coal-boat,  and  went 
down  the  river,  which  would  make  it  out  of  his  power  to 
see  the  buijdings  burn,§  as  he  was  made  to  say,  falsely, 
by  the  leading  questions  propounded  by  the  Committee. 
The  burning  was  not  done  until  the  morning  of  the  13th. 
Private  Alexander,  of  Company  C,  Thirteenth  Tennessee, 
testifies  that  he  heard  Rebels  say  they  would  not  bum  the 
hospital,  while  "  we  wounded  ones  were  in  there,"  and  that 


•  Reb.  Rec.  VIII.  Doc  I,  p.  1 8.  $  IbitU  VIII.  Uoc.  I,  p.  31, 

t  IbitU  p.  3a  \Ihid,  p.  12,  13. 


452  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

the  hospital  he  was  in  was  standing  when  he  went  down  the 
hill  to  the  boat,  on  the  13th;*  and  the  witness,  Shelton, 
states  that  the  building  he  was  in  was  not  set  on  fircf 

6.  The  nature  and  reliability  of  the  testimony  adduced  by 
the  Congressional  Committee,  in  support  of  their  report,  may 
be  best  measured  by  some  characteristic  extracts.  As.  for 
example :  Thomas  Addison,  (negro,)  having  sworn  that  be 
was  shot  down  after  "  surrender,"  as  were  a  great  many  of  his 
comrades,  in  reply  to  a  question,  goes  on  to  say,  *'  /  heard 
them  shoot  little  children  not  more  than  that  high,"  (holding 
his  hand  oflf  about  four  feet  from  the  floor,)  "  that  the  officers 
had  waiting  on  them." 

Question,  "  Did  you  see  them  shoot  them  ?" 

Answer,  "  /  did  not  hold  up  my  head'' 

Question,  "  How,  then,  did  you  know  that  they  shot  them  T 

Answer,  "  I  heard  them  say,  'Turn  around,  so  I  can  shoot 
you  good/  " 

Question.  "  Did  you  see  them  after  they  were  shot  ?** 

This  was  a  clear  prompt,  but  the  negro,  howevelr  willing, 
was  stupid,  and  only  replied,  "  No,  sir,  they  toted  them,  up  ike 
hill  before  me,  because  they  were  small^  To  prove  that  men 
were  shot  to  a  great  extent,  after  they  had  surrendered,  such 
leading  questions  as  the  following  were  adventured,  "The 
Rebels  must  have  killed  a  great  many  of  the  white  men  after 
they  had  surrendered  ?"  and  such  evidence  as  this  was  relied 
on  as  a  true  reply.  "Yes,  two  thirds  of  them  must  have 
been  killed  after  the  place  was  taken."  Let  any  lawyer 
glance  over  the  examinations  of  the  several  witnesses,  and 
say  whether  questions   so   glaringly  leading  were  ever  at- 


*  R^.  Rec,  VIIL  Doc.  i,  p.  27.  two  or  three  white  soldiers  were  inter- 

t  Ibid,  p.  31.    It  is  a  noticeable  fact  rogated  upon  the  matter,  and  tbcsi 

that  while  the  inquiry  about  the  burn-  said  they  did  not  see  it   The  whole  ia- 

ng  was  general  of  the  negroes,  only  quiry  is  a  marvel  of  im£uniCM. 


Commentaries.  453 

tempted,  much  less  permitted,  in  any  judicial  or  other  in- 
quiry, in  which  the  object  was  to  get  at  the  truth.  Especi- 
ally objectionable  is  it,  we  may  add,  to  use  leading  questions 
with  witnesses  so  ignorant  and  stupid  as  these  negroes^ 
the  inevitable  effect  being  to  prompt  the  answer. 

7.  It  is  charged  that  among  those  shot  below  the  "  bluff" 
were  some  hospital  patients.  We  doubt  not  that  was  the 
case :  but  simply  because  they  left  their  hospital  and  took 
refuge  among  the  soldiers  who  were  there  seeking  succor  by 
the  gunboat.  In  the  turmoil  and  hurly  burly  of  the  moment 
they  could  not  be  discriminated  nor  separated. 

8.  In  the  Appendix  will  be  found  a  list  of  the  prisoners 
taken  on  this  occasion,  and  other  documentary  evidence  con- 
cerning the  transaction,  to  which  we  refer  all  readers  who 
wish  to  know  more  of  its  details. 

9.  In  fine :  We  submit  to  the  candid  and  those  who  are 
capable  of  accepting  the  truth  that,  in  what  occurred  after 
the  Confederates  stormed  the  trenches,  there  was  neither 
cruel  purpose  nor  cruel  negligence  of  duty,  neither  intention 
nor  inadvertence,  on  the  part  of  General  Forrest,  whose 
course,  therefore,  stands  utterly  devoid  of  the  essence  of  ouV 
rage  or  wrong. 


f^'^ 


Headquarters  at  Jackson^  Tenn. 


455 


At  Brownsville,  ,the  citizens  of  all  classes^ — ^men,  women,  and 
children — received  the  Confederate  General  with  tokens  of 
|t  deep-felt  gratitude.  The  ladies  of  the  vicinage,  assembling  at 
the  court-house,  'received  him  publicly,  and  testified  their 
profound  personal  appreciation  of  his  recent  operations,  by 
which  they  had  been  delivered  from  the  apprehension  of  fur- 
ther outrages,  insults,  and  distressing  annoyances,  from  that 
pestilent  band  of  ruffians  and  marauders  which  had  been  so 
thoroughly  uprooted.  And  every  resource  of  a  heartfelt,  teem- 
ing hospitality  was  extended  to  their  cherished  guests — the 
General,  his  staff,  and  escort— during  the  afternoon  and  night 
of  the  13th  and  morning  of  the  14th  of  April. 

On  the  14th,  headquarters  were  reestablished  at  Jackson, 
-where  Forrest  remained  until  the  2d  of  May,  actively  occupied 
mth  measures  looking  to  the  collection  of  all  military  re- 
sources in  men,  draught-animals,  horses,  and  subsistence,  to  be 
gleaned  in  the  region  northward  of  that  point.  And  to  these 
ends  the  proper  instructions  were  framed  and  intrusted  to 
Buford  for  execution  by  detachments  from  his  command  while 
en  route  to  Jackson.* 

Meanwhile,  on  the  morning  of  the  15th,  Chalmers,  turning 
off  at  Brownsville,  passed  through  Sommerville,  where,  early 


♦  Major  Bradford,  the  Federal  com- 
mander of  Pillow,  whose  violation  of  his 
parole  and  escape  is  mentioned  ante^  p. 
441,  was,  several  days  afterward,  re- 
captured in  disguise.  At  first  he  affect- 
ed to  be  a  conscript,  but,  being  recog- 
nized, was  remanded  to  custody  as  a 
prisoner  of  war.  He  was  then  sent  in 
charge  of  a  party — ^a  subaltern  and 
some  five  or  six  men — to  Brownsville. 
On  the  way,  he  again  attempted  to  es- 
cape, soon  after  which  one  of  the  men 
shot  him.  It  was  an  act  in  which  no  offi- 


cer was  concerned ;  mainly  due,  we  are 
satisfied,  after  the  most  rigid  inquiry, 
to  private  vengeance  for  well-authenti- 
cated outrages  committed  by  Bradford 
and  his  band  upon  the  defenseless  fa- 
milies of  the  men  of  Forrest^s  Cavalry. 
He  was  shot,  not  hung ;  and  no  supe- 
rior officer  had  any  hand  in  his  ''  taking 
oft"  Had  there  been  a  wish  to  slay 
the  man  particularly,  there  was  ample 
opportunity  in  the  mflie  at  Fort  Pillow. 
He  was  treated  with  the  utmost  consi- 
deration and  civility. 


i 


456  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest 

on  the  1 6th,  he  divided  his  command ;  Bell,  with  the  prisoners 
and  artillery,  taking  the  road  through  Lagrange,  while  he, 
with  McCuUoch's  and  Neely's  Brigades,  pushed  on  toward 
Holly  Springs.  Here,  on  the  i8th,  information  was  received 
from  General  Polk,  by  telegraph,  that  the  presence  of  Forrest's 
troops  under  his  previous  requisition  was  not  needed,  and  ac- 
cordingly the  movement  of  Chalmers  was  halted,  and  Barteau, 
with  the  Second  Tennessee,  being  detached  to  convoy  the 
prisoners  to  Demopolls,  the  rest  of  Bell's  Brigade,  and  Neely's 
also,  were  ordered  to  return, to  West-Tennessee,  while  McCul- 
loch  resumed  his  old  post  behind  the  Tallahatchie  river,  about 
Panola,  and  General  Chalmers  took  up  his  headquarters  at 
Oxford  until  the  id  of  May.  Then,  pursuant  to  special  in- 
structions from  his  superior,  he  set  out  for  Tupelo,  with  Mc- 
CuUoch's  Brigade,  except  the  Eighteenth  Mississippi  Battalion, 
and,  moving  by  regiments,  swept  the  region,  eastward  to  the 
Mobile  and  Ohio  Railroad,  for  conscripts,  absentees,  and  de- 
serters.* 

In  the  interval.  Bell's  and  Neely's  Brigades  had  reentered 
West-Tennessee,  and  their  several  regiments  were  distributed 
at  points  favorable  for  recruitment,  and  for  granting  furloughs 
to  officers  and  men  to  visit  their  families,  renovate  their  clo- 
thing, and  obtain  remounts,  as  far  as  needful,  by  the  end  of 
the  month. 

By  the  28th,  Buford  had  assembled  his  whole  division,  in- 
cluding Bell's  Brigade,  at  Jackson,  and  on  the  30th  received 
orders  to  move  on  the  2d  of  May  with  it  and  Neely's  Brigade 
to  Tupelo,  convoying  a  large  and  heavy  ox-train,  freighted 
with  subsistence  and  a  large  amount  of  liquor  (for  hospital 


*  The  Eighteenth  Mississippi  Batta-  proaches  of  the  Tallahatchie,  scouting 
lioo — Lieutenant-Colonel  Alexander  H.  9aUx  northward,  on  Memphis  road,  as 
Chalmers— was  left  to  hold   the  ap-     Waterford. 


Affair  near  Bolivar.  457 

purposes)  and  leather,  and  some  three  hundred  prisoners. 
The  Kentucky  Brigade  of  this  division,  which  had  entered  on 
the  campaign  with  an  effective  total  of  1004  men,  now  num- 
bered 171 7  fighting  men  ;  and  Bell's  Tennesseeans,  who  took 
the  field  1254  strong,  now  mustered  over  1700  well-mounted 
horsemen. 

Moving,  as  ordered,  by  way  of  Purdy  and  Corinth,  notwith- 
standing his  impedimenta^  Buford  accomplished  the  distance — 
seventy-eight  miles — to  Rienzi  by  the  4th  of  May,  and  there 
having  transferred  the  supplies  and  prisoners  for  further  trans- 
portation southward,  to  the  Mobile  and  Ohio  Railroad,  was  able 
to  reach  Tupelo  on  the  6th. 

Meanwhile,  on  the  2d  of  May,  General  Forrest,  breaking  up 
his  headquarters  at  Jackson,  set  out  also  for  Tupelo  with  his 
staff  and  escort,  taking  the  road  through  Bolivar,  Tennessee, 
and  Ripley,  Mississippi.  In  the  vicinity  of  Bolivar,  on  that 
afternoon,  he  was  met  by  scouts  with  information  that  a  Fe- 
deral cavalry  force,  quite  two  thousand  strong,  under  General 
Sturgis,  was  then  engaged  in  a  sharp  skirmish  with  McDo- 
nald's Battalion,  under  Lieutenant-Colonel  Crews — not  more 
than  two  hundred  troopers — on  the  Sommerville  road,  about 
two  miles  westward  of  Bolivar.  Pressing  on  at  once  with  his 
accustomed  decision,  Forrest  found  several  hundred  unarmed 
men  collected  in  the  place.  These  he  directed  to  move  out 
with  his  headquarter  baggage-train  and  ambulances,  some  five 
miles  southward,  on  the  road  to  Ripley,  and  encamp,  while  he 
repaired  to  the  point  where  Crews  still  held  the  enemy  at  bay. 
Placing  himself  at  the  head  of  the  Confederates,  reenforced  by 
his  escort,  or  now  with  about  three  hundred  fighting  men, 
boldly  charging  the  foe  in  front,  he  presently  drove  back  their 
skirmish  line  for  three  fourths  of  a  mile  upon  their  main  force, 
inflicting  a  loss  of  some  forty  killed  and  wounded.  Unable, 
however,  to  pursue  this  advantage  further  against  such  odds, 
Forrest  now  withdrew  a  short  distance,  and  took  post,  with 


458  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

Crews's  men  dismounted,  in  the  outer  line  of  fortifications, 
which  had  been  thrown  up  some  time  previously  by  the  Fe- 
derals in  the  western  suburbs  of  the  place.  His  enemy,  see- 
ing in  this  evidences  of  weakness,  taking  heart,  advanced 
vigorously  upon  his  position,  but  were  swiftly  beaten  back  by 
a  hot  fire,  at  short  range,  from  the  steady,  deadly  rifles  of  the 
dismounted  Confederates.  In  this  afiair.  Major  Strange,  For- 
rest's gallant  and  ever  efficient  Adjutant-General,  had  his  right 
arm  broken  by  a  minie  ball  The  Federals,  breaking  in  dis- 
order, immediately  quit  the  field  ar^d  disappeared.  The  Con- 
federate General  then  resumed  his  march,  and  caught  up  with 
his  train,  encamped,  as  before  said,  on  the  Ripley  road,  five 
miles  beyond  Bolivar.* 

Hurrying  on  without  further  incident,  and  crossing  the  line 
of  the  Memphis  and  Charleston  Railroad,  and  thence  through 
Ripley,  the  Confederate  General  arrived  at  Tupelo  early  on 
the  5th,  a  day  in  advance  of  Buford's  Division.  Here  he 
found  Gholson*s  Brigade  of  Mississippi  State  Cavalry,  and 
Chalmers,  with  several  regiments  of  McCuUoch's  Brigade 
The  former,  some  days  later,  having  been  transferred  to  the 
Confederate  States  Service,  was  attached  temporarily  to  Bu- 
ford's  Division,  while  Neely's  Brigade  was  returned  to  Chal- 
mers. 

For  the  remainder  of  the  month,  Forrest  was  closely  occu- 
pied with  means  and  measures  for  increasing  the  efficiency  of 
his  force.  Now  well  mounted,  and  materially  recruited  by 
his  recent  campaign,  he  sought  by  every  means  in  his  power 
to  consolidate  his  organizations  and  perfect  their  equipments.! 


*    Here,  that   night,  occurred  the  12th  May;  certain  Alabama  compa- 
death  of   the  somewhat   conspicuous  nies  being  transferred  to  Roddy^s  corn- 
partisan.  Major  Solomon   Street,  Fif-  mand,  their  places  were  filled  by  inde 
teenth  Tennessee,  by  the  hand  of  a  per-  pendent  companies   from   Tennessee, 
tonal  enemy  in  the  Confederate  ranks,  and  the  regiment  reorganized  as  in  the 

t  Newsom's  Regiment  re-formed  on  roster.    See  Appendix. 


Reorganization. 


459 


His  artillery  was  formed  into  a  battalion  of  four  batteries,  of 
four  guns  each,  under  Captain  J.  W.  Morton,  as  Chief  of  Ar- 
tillery.* The  men  left  dismounted  were  formed  into  a  pio- 
neer detachment ;  and  all  supernumerary  officers  wer©  direct- 
ed to  report  at  department  headquarters.  Special  reports  on 
various  subjects  touching  the  materiel  as  well  as  personnel  of 
his  command  were  required  from  divisional,  brigade,  and  regi- 
mental commanders ;  and  his  order  and  letter-books  of  the 
period  show  that  the  mind  so  alert  and  vigorous  in  the  field 
was  scarcely  less  active  or  effective  in  connection  with  the  in- 
terior administration  of  his  force,  which  as  now  constituted, 
was  as  follows : 

Four  field-batteries— Morton's,  Thrairs,  Rice's,  and  Walton's— x6  guns. 
Chalmers's  Division— McCuIIoch's,  Neely's,  and  Rucker's  Brigades.! 
Buford's  Division — Bell's  and  Lyon's  Brigades.  | 

In  all,  20  regiments,  4  battalions,  5  independent  companies,  and  16  guns. 

This  command,  for  convenience  in  regard  to  forage  and 
subsistence,  and,  in  part,  for  observation,  was  distributed  at 
several  points.  Chalmers's  Division  for  a  time  was  quartered 
around  Verona,  except  a  demi-brigade — Seventh  Tennessee 
and  Nineteenth  Mississippi— detached  under  Colonel  Duck- 
worth, for  temporary  service  at  Grenada,  under  the  special 
instructions  of  Major-General  Lee ;  and  the  Eighteenth  Mis- 
sissippi (battalio'n)  still  posted  near  Panola.  The  brigade  of 
Mississippi  State  troops  was  at  Tupelo  until  about  the  26th, 
when  it  was  detached  and  placed  under  command  of  General 
Wirt  Adams,  at  Canton,  Miss.,§  pursuant  to  orders  from  Ma- 


♦  These  were  the  companies  of  Mor- 
ton, Rice,  Thrall,  and  Walton. 

t  Rucker's  Brigade  was  organized 
oa  the  24th  of  May,  1864,  of  the  Sev- 
enth Tennessee  and  Eighteenth  and 
Nineteenth  Mississippi. 

I  Lyon's  Brigade  was  formerly  com- 


manded by  Colonel  Thompson,  (killed 
at  Paducah,)  and  latterly  by  Colonel 
Crossland,  of  the  Seventh  Kentucky. 
Colonel  Lyon  was  assigned  to  the  com- 
mand about  the  24th  of  May. 

§    With  Brigadier-General   Samuel 
J.  Gholson  immediately  in  command. 


{ 


46o 


Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 


jor-General  Lee.  Buford*s  Division,  for  the  most  of  the  time 
at  Tupelo,  was  engaged  from  the  i6th  to  the  24th  in  a  recon- 
noissance  as  far  as  Corinth.*  And  later,  about  the  26th, 
Chalmers  was  detached  with  McCulloch's  and  Neely's  Bri- 
gades and  Walton's  Battery,  on  an  expedition  into  the  inte- 
rior of  Alabama,  penetrating  that  State  as  far  as  Monte  Vallo, 
about  fifty  miles  north  of  Selma,  and  forty  eastward  of  Tus- 
caloosa, for  the  purpose  of  meeting  a  hostile  raid  against  the 
iron-works  of  that  region,  anticipated  from  the  direction  of 
Decatur  and  Huntsville,t  Alabama. 

Among  the  several  West-Tennessee  regiments,  both  of 
Chalmers's  and  Buford's  Divisions,  was  a  considerable  element 
which  Forrest  had  been  able  to  attract  to  his  standard,  and 
utilize  in  a  substantial  degree,  namely,  numerous  runaways 
from  the  infantry  regiments  of  Johnston's  army  from  that 
district.  At  the  time  of  his  expedition  into  West-Tennessee^ 
in  December,  1863,  that  region  was  full  of  them.     His  repute 


♦  Ncwsom's  Regiment,  Nineteenth 
Tennessee,  (BelFs  Brigade,)  and  Kei- 
zer^s  scouts  having  been  left  to  occupy 
Corinth  and  the  line  of  the  Memphis 
and  Charleston  Railroad. 

t  This  division  reached  Monte  Vallo 
on  the  31st  May,  and  on  the  follow* 
ing  day  Neely's  Brigade  was  detached 
to  Blue  Mountain,  to  report  to  Briga- 
dier-General Pillow,  for  the  defense  of 
the  coal  and  iron-works  in  that  quar- 
ter. McCulloch*s  Brigade  remained  at 
Monte  Vallo  until  the  loth  of  June, 
when  it  was  ordered  by  Major-General 
Lee  to  return  by  forced  marches  to  Co- 
lumbus, Miss.  A  glance  at  the  map  will 
show  the  great  extent  of  country  over 
which  Chalmerses  Division  operated 
during  this  period.     Its  right  wing— 


Neely's  Brigade — ^was  at  Blue  Moun- 
tain, in  the  north-eastern  part  of  Ala- 
bama, near  the  Georgia  line  ;  McCul- 
loch's  Brigade  —  the  centre — was  at 
Monte  Vallo ;  and  Rucker's  Brigade— 
the  left  wing — ^\vas  quartered  at  Oxford, 
Miss. :  and  from  these  widely  distant 
points  were  these  troops  subsequently 
concentrated  for  the  combats  at  Tisho- 
mingo creek  and  Harrisburg.  Neely's 
Brigade,  while  detached  under  General 
Pillow's  command,  participated  in  an 
unsuccessful  assault  on  the  town  of 
Oxford,  Ga.,  garrisoned  by  the  enemy, 
and  did  not  return  under  Forrest's 
command  until  just  before  the  battle 
of  Harrisburg.— il/lS:  Ncta  of  Captmrn 
Walter  A,  Goodman, 


Preparations  for  the  Field. 


461 


as  a  successful  cavalry  leader,  however,  drew  them  forth  from 
their  fastnesses  to  the  number  of  more  than  seven  hundred, 
who  attached  themselves  to  the  different  regiments  brought 
into  effective  existence  by  that  expedition.  Measures,  how- 
ever, were  now  instituted  by  the  War  Department  for  their 
restoration  to  their  old  commands,  which,  carried  out  by  For- 
rest with  his  habitual  earnestness,  resulted  in  the  untoward 
depletion  of  his  own  force,  with  little  advantage  to  the  gene- 
ral service  ;  for  the  greater  part  of  these  men,  while  willing 
to  serve  as  cavalry  under  Forrest,  though  excellent  fighting 
material,  did  not  hesitate  to  desert  their  colors  at  the  prospect 
of  being  remanded  to  the  infantry.* 

Information  having  been  received  that  the  Federals  were 
pressing  General  Roddy  in  the  vicinity  of  Decatur,  North- 
Alabama,  Buford's  Division,  on  the  29th,  was  placed  in  readi- 
ness to  go  to  that  officer's  succor.  At  the  same  time.  Colonel 
Rucker's  Brigade  was  likewise  directed  to  be  concentrated, 
and  held  in  hand  at  Oxford  for  any  emergency.  Giving 
Roddy  due  notice  of  his  purpose  to  push  to  his  assistance, 
Forrest,  in  a  dispatch,  written  on  that  day,  advised  that  officer 
to  keep  scouts  well  in  front  of  the  enemy,  to  watch  and  ascer- 
tain his  movements,  force,  etc.,  and  to  collect  together  and 
concentrate  his  force  on  the  enemy's  right  flank. 


♦  These  men  unquestionably  were 
guilty  of  the  gravest  military  crime,  es- 
pecially in  the  soldiers  of  a  war  for  in- 
dependence; nevertheless,  there  were 
individuals  among  them  of  the  greatest 
gallantry  and  devotion  to  the  Confed- 
erate cause — men  whose  conduct  was 
the  result  of  misconception  rather  than 
purpose.  Of  such,  private  W.  M. 
Strickland  is  the  type.  He  had  be- 
longed to  the  Twenty-seventh  Tennes- 
see infantry;  and  when  on  furlough 


attached  himself  to  Forrest's  escort 
Subsequently  claimed  by  his  command- 
er, when  he  had  shown  himself  an  in- 
valuable soldier,  Forrest  sent  him  to 
his  regiment  with  seven  conscripts,  to 
give  in  exchange  for  himself,  so  that  he 
might  be  regularly  and  permanently  at- 
tached to  the  cavalry.  This  man,  after 
many  acts  of  consummate  courage,  gave 
up  his  life  on  Christmas  day,  1864,  on 
the  retreat  of  Hood  out  pf  Middle  Ten- 
nessee. 


462 


Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 


Forage  meanwhile  had  been  collected  or  thrown  forward  to 
proper  points  on  the  line'  of  march,  and  the  shoeing  of  the 
cavalry  horses  was  going  on  vigorously,  night  and  day.     On 
the  30th,  however,  before  he  had  put  Buford's  Division  in 
motion,  a  dispatch  was  received  from  Brigadier-General  Rod- 
dy, to  the  effect,  that  the  Federal  force  had  fallen  back  to 
Decatur,  and  apparently  was  projecting  an  expedition  in  the 
direction  of  Kingston,  Georgia.     Forrest,  therefore,  decided 
to  await  further  developments  of  the  enemy's  purposes  befcMV 
moving,  and  notified  General  Roddy  of  his  conclusions.     He 
also  gave  specific  instructions  to  that  commander,  for  the 
present  under  his  orders,  to  draw  in  all  detached  forces,  and 
hold  his  whole  command  well  together,  to  get  boats  ready  for 
the  passage  of  the  Tennessee,  and  to  keep  him  thoroughly 
acquainted  with  the  situation.* 

On  the  31st,  Forrest,  having  determined  that  the  time  had 


*  The  letter-book  about  this  date 
furnishes  a  communication  which,  cha* 
racteristic  of  General  Forrest,  at  the 
same  time  illustrates  a  fatal  vice  of 
Confederate  staff  organization.  We 
refer  to  the  Subsistence  Department, 
the  chief  officers  of  which  —  those 
charged  with  the  supply  of  subsistence 
— were  made  independent  of  the  con- 
trol of  military  commanders,  even  of 
the  armies  of  the  Confederate  States. 
This  anomaly  in  military  administra- 
tion saddled  upon  the  Confederate  army 
at  an  early  day,  with  an  impracticable, 
pragmatical  recluse  as  chief  of  the  Bu- 
reau, was  persistently  adhered  to  until 
the  cause  was  in  its  death-throes,  with 
consequences  which  can  not  be  over- 
estimated in  their  mischievous  effect 


upon  all  Confederate  operations.  Nc 
army,  no  campaign,  no  operation  was 
free  from  the  malific  blight  of  this  sys- 
tem. Accordingly,  we  find  one  of 
these  petty  sovereignties  erected  is 
General  Forrest*s  department ;  and,  af 
a  matter  of  course,  in  s|3eedy  collisiof 
with  him,  drawing  forth  a  letter,  firoo 
which  we  extract  the  following  : 

"  I  am  directed  by  the  General  Com- 
manding to  say,  that  he  understands 
you  are  at  Okolona,  and  several  of 
your  men  loitering  around  here,  instead 
of  being  up  at  the  front  attending  to  get- 
ting out  cattle.  He  further  directs  me 
to  say  that,  if  the  matter  is  not  given 
your  attention,  he  will  withdraw  his 
cavalry,  who  are  to  aid  you,  and  report 
the  (act  to  the  proper  department    If 


Went  to  the  Support  of  Roddy.  463 

come  to  effect  a  junction  with  Roddy,  transmitted  a  notifica- 
tion of  his  purpose  in  these  terms  : 

"  Your  dispatch  of  the  29th  just  received.  I  will  start 
from  this  place  to-morrow  morning,  with  2400  men  and  six 
pieces  of  artillery,  to  join  you.  I  wish  you  to  ascertain  which 
direction  the  enemy  has  taken,  and  keep  me  posted.  I  will 
move  by  Fulton,  and  on  the  road  to  Russellville,  unless  you 
should  advise  differently.  If  the  enemy  goes  in  the  direction 
of  Rome,  I  think  they  will  join  the  main  army.  If  they  turn 
South,  you  will  let  me  know  at  once  ;  if  they  go  to  Rome,  I 
will  move  in  another  direction,  and  will  meet  you.  Be 
certain  to  have  with  you  locx)  of  your  best  men  and  horses. 
I  have  sent  my  aid-de-camp — Captain  Charles  W.  Anderson 
— to  see  and  confer  with  you  as  regards  our  future  move- 
ments. You  will  send  couriers  and  scouts  on  the  enemy's 
right  flank,  and  keep  General  Chalmers  posted.  You  will 
find  him  at  Monte  Vallo,  Alabama,  whence  he  was  sent  to 
find  which  road  the  enemy  took  from  Sommerville.  Send 
courier,  also,  to  General  Johnston,  at  Marietta,  Georgia,  giv- 
ing him  the  facts." 

Buford's  Division — except  Newsom*s  and  Russell's  Regi- 
ments, left,  one  at  Tupelo,  and  the  other  at  Corinth — was  in 
motion,  accordingly,  for  North-Alabama,  with  ten  days' 
rations,  by  way  of  Fulton  and  Russellville,  on  the  morning 
of  the  1st  of  June.  Morton's  and  Rice's  Batteries  accompanied 
the  expedition,  and  Forrest  followed,  somewhat  later  in  the 
day,  with  his  escort.  The  whole  force  numbered  some  2600 
rank  and  file,  and  on  the  night  of  the  second  of  June  it  en- 


tnere  is  any  thing  hindering  you  from  portunity.    No  enemy  in  the  country, 

giving  this  matter  your  immediate  at-  and  force  sufficient  to  protect  you. 
tention  he  desires  to  know  it  at  once,  (Signed) 

and  expects  that  you  and  all  your  men  Chas.  W.  Anderson,  A.  D.  C." 

will  be  at  work  while  you  have  the  op- 


464  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

camped,  eight  miles  westward  of  Russellville,  to  which  place 
Forrest  rode,  with  his  staff  and  escort,  ahead  of  his  command, 
on  the  following  morning.     Several  days  previously.  Captain 
John  G.  Mann,  Chief  Engineer,  had  been  sent  ahead  with  his 
engineer  company,  to  the  Tennessee  river,  about  the  mouth 
of  Town  creek,  to  build  or  repair  a  sufficient  number  of  boats 
for  the  prompt  ferriage  of  that  stream.    At  Russellville,  For- 
rest was  met  by  a  dispatch  from  his  aid-de-camp.  Captain 
Anderson,  acquainting  him  that  Roddy's  command  had  been 
concentrated    about    Moulton,  twenty-five  or    thirty  miles 
distant,  and  the  requisite  number  of  boats  would  be  ready  to 
begin  the  passage  of  the  Tennessee  river  at  four  o'clock  that 
afternoon. 

Thus  affairs  stood  about  mid-day,  when  a  dispatch  was 
received  from  Major-General  Lee,  recalling  the  force  to 
Tupelo,  to  meet  a  heavy  column  of  mixed  arms,  penetrating 
the  country  in  that  direction  from  Memphis.  Moving  with 
his  accustomed  celerity,  Forrest  reestablished  his  headquar- 
ters at  Tupelo  early  on  the  5th  June,  and  Buford  came  up  with 
his  division  late  in  the  afternoon. 

On  leaving  Russellville,  Forrest  had  ordered  Roddy  to 
send  Johnson's  Brigade  from  Cherokee,  on  the  Memphis  and 
Charleston,  across  to  Rienzi,  on  the  Mobile  and  Ohio  Rail- 
road.* And  Rucker,  who,  under  orders  from  General  Lee, 
was  moving  with  his  brigade  from  Oxford,  in  the  direction  of 
New-Albany,  was  instructed,  on  the  5th,  by  a  reliable  courier, 
and  through  the  telegraph,  to  throw  a  portion  of  his  brigade 
between  the  enemy  and  Memphis,  and  capture  his  couriers 
and  train,  while  hanging  with  his  main  force  upon  the  Federal 
right  flank. 


*  Was  about  lOOO  strong.     Roddy     (Patterson's)  so  soon  as  it  could  be  coo- 
was  to  follow  with  his  other  brigade     centnUed  from  its  several  stations. 


Arrival  of  Major-General  Lee.  465 

Dispatches  from  trusty  scouts  were  now  received,  reporting 
the  main  body  of  the  enemy,  some  i3,ocx)  strong,  infantry 
and  cavalry,  at  or  near  Salem,  at  mid-day  on  the  4th.*    A  re- 
disposition  was  now  made  of  the  scouts,  with  the  view  to  the 
thorough  investigation  of  the  numbers,  arms,  and  objective  of 
the  enemy  in  their  present  movement.      And  for  the  next 
twenty-four  hours,  Forrest  was  engrossed  with  all  possible 
preparations  for  an  effective  rencounter  with  the  Federals. 
General  Lee,  coming  up  in  the  afternoon  of  the  6th,  the  two 
Generals  had  an  immediate  conference  touching  the  situation, 
and  their  means  for  meeting  the  emergency.     Meanwhile, 
the  enemy  were  reported  by^outs  to  be  at  Ruckerville — ten 
miles  north-east  of  Ripley,  oh  the  road  to  Pocahontas,  while  a 
body  of  Federal  cavalry,  after  striking  the  Mobile  and  Ohio 
Railroad  northward  of  Boonville,  was  already  moving  toward 
Corinth.     It  was  supposed,  from  this  state  of  affairs,  that  the 
ultimate  purpose  of  the  enemy  was  a  junction  with  Sherman, 
then  pressing  Johnston  back  toward  Atlanta.     It  was,  there- 
fore, determined  to  concentrate  all  disposable  forces  to  follow 
and  harass  the  movement  to  the  utmost,  and  to  that  end, 
comprehensive  orders    to  the  several  officers  affected  were 
promptly  distributed.      Johnson's  Brigade  was  directed  to 
repair  to  Baldwin  from   the  north ;   Buford's  Division,  with 
Rice's  and  Morton's  Batteries,  was  ordered  to  the  same  point ; 
and  Ruckcr  was  instructed  to  hasten  to  New- Albany,  observe 
the  roads  in  that  quarter,  and  later,  pressing  on  to  Baldwin, 
thence  effect  a  junction  with  the  main  Confederate  force, 
should  it  not  be  found  at  that  place.'  The  enemy,  meanwhile, 
was  reported  as  still  moving  eastward,  in  the  general  direction 
of  thq  Memphis  and  Charleston  road  ;  and  on  the  7th,  Gene- 
rals L^e  and  -Forrest,  with  the  escort  of  the  latter,  setting  out 
for  Baldwin  also,  established  their  headquarters  there  on  the 


*  Sooo  iii£uitry,  5000  caYalry,  and  six  batteries. 


466  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

morning  of  the  8th.  Rucker,  meanwhile,  soon  after  crossing 
the  Tallahatchie  at  New- Albany,  late  in  the  afternoon  of  the 
7th,  had  struck  a  brigade  of  Federal  cavalry,  under  Colonel 
Winslow.*  Attacking  vigorously  with  the  Seventh  Tennessee 
and  a  squadron  of  the  Eighteenth  Mississippi,  with  cbarac* 
teristic  vigor  and  judgment,  he  drove  the  enemy  for  two 
miles,  when  darkness  put  an  end  to  the  conflict. 

At  Baldwin,  the  Confederate  Generals  learned  that  the 
main  Federal  force  was  still  at  Ruckerville,  arranging,  appar* 
ently,  to  cross  to  the  south  side  of  the  Hatchie  river,  much 
swollen  at  the  time  from  recent  heavy  rains.  Fresh  in- 
structions were,  therefore,  transmitted  to  Rucker  to  press 
rapidly  through  Ripley  and  gain  the  Federal  right  flank, 
maintaining  constant  communication  with  the  Confederate 
headquarters,  which,  with  Buford's  Division,  were  thrown 
forward  to  Boonville  early  on  the  morning  of  the  9th,  and 
here  Rucker  effected  ^  junction  with  Buford  early  the  same 
(Jay.  It  had  been  raining  four  or  five  days  incessantly,  and 
consequently  the  streams,  brim  full,  were  unfordable,  the 
bridges  generally  swept  away,  and  the  roads  scarcely  practi- 
cable. 

The  information  was  now  brought  to  the  Confederate  Gen- 
erals, that  the  Federals,  having  broken  up  their  encampment 
at  Ruckerville,  were  moving  toward  Ripley,  and  later,  that 
having  passed  that  place,  they  were  marching  toward  Gun- 
town.  Meanwhile,  the  roads  from  the  west,  from  the  direction 
of  the  enemy,  were  thronged  with  citizens,  seeking  refuge, 
with  their  portable  property,  from  spoliation  and  those  merciless 
outrages  which  seem  to  have  marked  the  path  of  the  Federal 
column,  with  every  species  of  calamity  for  the  helpless  non- 
combatants  of  the  region  traversed.      General    Lee    now 


*  The  passage  of  this  stream  was     The  ammunition  was  carried  across  by 
cflbcted  with  difficulty,  from  high  water,     the  men  on  their  horses,  to  keep  it  diy. 


Tfie  Federals  in  Forrest's  Path.  '  467 

determined  to  fall  back  with  the  whole  force  toward  Okolona, 
so  as  to  effect  a  junction  with  Chalmers,  and  such  other  forces 
as  he  hoped  to  be  able  to  glean  from  Mobile,  before  grappling 
with  the  enemy.  All  supplies  and  public  property  were 
accordingly  dispatched  southward  by  rail,  and  General  Lee 
proceeded  in  the  like  direction  and  manner  the  night  of  the 
9th,  while  Forrest  was  ordered  to  move  with  Buford's  Division 
and  Rucker,  and  get  between  the  Federal  column  and  Tupelo. 
In  motion  before  dawn  on  the  loth,  with  Lyon's  Brigade  in 
advance,  Forrest  was  at  Old  CarroUville,  four  miles  north- 
eastward of  Brice's  Cross-Roads*  Here  scouts  reported  that 
the  main  force  of  the  enemy  having  encamped  the  past  night 
on  Stubbs's  farm — twelve  miles  east  of  Ripley,  and  eight  from 
the  cross-roads  just  mentioned — their  cavalry,  or  advance, 
had  already  been  met  within  a  mile  of  the  latter  position,  and 
hence  were  about  to  intercept  the  line  of  his  march.  Seeing 
no  way  of  avoiding  this  contingency,  and  Johnson's  Brigade 
having  come  up  meanwhile,  Forrest  promptly  resolved  upon 
the  offensive,  and  an  immediate  encounter.  Lyon  was 
therefore  ordered  to  move  rapidly  forward  with  his  brigade 
and  feel  the  enemy,  while  Rucker's  and  Johnson's  men  were 
replenishing  their  exhausted  cartridge-boxes.  The  night  had 
been  rainy,  but  the  sun  rose  brightly,  and  dispelling  the 
morning  mists,  became  warm  and  somewhat  oppressive  to 
the  men  and  jaded  horses  ;  and  the  roads,  saturated  with 
water,  from  recent  continuous  heavy  rains,  were  so  much 
cut  up  as  to  retard  the  progress  of  the  artillery.  Strict 
orders  were  given,  however,  to  keep  the  men  well  closed 
up,  prevent  straggling,  and  lagging,  and  to  urge  forward  the 
artillery  and  ordnance  trains  as  fast  as  possible. 


*  Lyon's  Brigade  had  bivouacked  the  had  remained  at  Boonville  to  await  ili 

preceding    night    at    Boonville,   and  arrival  there,  ?o  as  to  bring  «p  the  rear 

Bell's  Brigade  at  Rienzi,  some  eight  of  the  command. 

nortiivard,  and  General  Buford  .^  .i 


CHAPTER    XVIII. 

BATTLE     OF   TISHOMINGO     CREEK. 

Shttch  of  Theatre  of  War— -Confederate! first  engaged^Forreit  takts  tlu 
Offensive— Thretv  small  Force  to  harms  Federal  Rear — Desperate 
Fighting — Transient  Checks — Federals  defeated  and  driven  frviK  tkt 
Field^Pursuit  and  Incidents — Commentaries. 


June  loih  to  tyh,  1S64. 

BrICE'S  cross-roads,  four  miles  due  west  from  the 
Mobile  and  Ohio  Railroad  at  Baldwin,  is  at  the  intersection 
c^the  road  from  Ripley  through  Guntown  to  Fulton  with  that 
leading  from  Carrollville  through  Ellistown  to  Pontotoc 

Forrest's  force  immediately  in  hand  at  the  moment  consist- 
edof— 

.    Soo  rank  and  file: 


Lyon's  Brigade,* 
Rucker's  Brigade,f 
Johnson's  Brigade.^ 


700 
500 


•  Composed  of  Third  Kenluckr, 
lieutenaot-Colonel  G.  A.  C.  Holt  com- 
manding ;  Seventh  Kentuckj,  Major 
U.  S.  Hale  commanding  ;  Eighth  Ken- 
tucky, Captain  R.  H.  Fiistoe  command- 
■^ ;  and  Faulknu'i  Kentucky  Re^- 
Bwnt,  Major  Thomas  S.  Tale  e 


t  Composed  of  Eighteenth  Hmi*- 
■ippi,  lieutenant-Colonel  Alexandff 
H.  Chalmers  ;  Nineteenth  Mis^suj^ 
Colonel  W.  L.  Duff;  and  Setenth 
Tennessee,  Colonel  W.  L.  Duclnronb. 

\  Composed  of  Fonith  Alabama 
Uentenant-Colonel  Windei  "*■"■*■—*• 
iogt    Honhnd't     ButaUm^    Httftf 


The  Battle  tegun  by  Lyon.  469 

Lyon,  as  we  have  related,  had  been  ordered  to  press  forward 
with  his  brigade,  and,  coming  in  contact,  to  feel  the  strength  of 
the  enemy  without  being  drawn  inextricably  into  battle.  There- 
fore, his  advance,  Handle's  Company  of  the  Seventh  Kentucky, 
soon  coming  in  conflict  with  a  greatly  superior  cavalry  force 
on  the  road  leading  toward  Tupelo,  through  Brice's  Cross- 
Roads,  west  of  the  railroad,  was  forced  to  fall  back  on  the  bri- 
gade. Lyon  then  ordered  Captain  Randle  to  dismount  his 
men  and  advance  on  foot,  to  develop  the  Federal  position. 
This  done  with  spirit,  speedily  the  enem/s  cavalry  were  found 
strongly  posted  in  heavy  force  in  front.  The  Third  Ken- 
tucky, Colonel  Holt,  meanwhile  dismounted,  was  thrown  for- 
ward at  a  double-quick,  deployed  in  line  of  battle,  in  support 
of  Randle,  and  brought  at  once  into  action.  The  Federal  po- 
sition was  strong  ;  Lyon,  therefore,  dismounting  the  Seventh 
Kentucky  and  Faulkner's  Regiment — except  two  companies^ 
held  as  cavalry  to  guard  his  flanks — immediately  advanced, 
the  former  on  the  right  and  the  latter  on  the  left,  in  line  with 
the  Third  Kentucky,  while  the  Eighth  Kentucky  was  held  as 
a  reserve,  in  rear  of  the  centre,  within  supporting  distance. 
Thus  disposed,  Lyon  pressed  steadily  up  through  a  skirt  of 
timber,  brushing  the  enemy  back  as  he  advanced.  But  dis- 
covering that  the  Federals  were  being  heavily  massed  in  his 
front,  as  if  for  an  attack,  Lyon  halted  his  line,  reconnoitered 
the  position,  and  directed  his  men  to  throw  up  such  cover  as 
could  be  quickly  made  of  rails  and  fallen  timber  at  hand.  The 
enemy,  already  having  several  pieces  of  artillery  in  position, 


George  commanding ;  Williams's  Bat-  forced  march  from  North- Alabama, 
talion,  Captain  Doane  commanding  ;  Not  only  was  this  march  made  through 
Warren's  Battalion,  Captain  W.  H.  an  incessant  torrential  rain,  but  the 
Warren  commanding  ;  and  Ferrel's  streams,  bridgeless  and  swollen,  we«e 
Battery,  four  guns,  under  Captain  Fer-  only  to  be  passed  at  a  good  deal  of  ha- 
re!. This  brigade  had  then  been  con-  zard,  and  the  march  effected  by  much 
•tantly  in  the  saddle  for  a  week,  on  a  energy. 


470  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest 

opened  a  hot  fire  with  shell  and  canister,  while  a  large  force 
menaced  an  onset  upon  Lyon's  left. 

Meanwhile,  a  courier  had  been  dispatched  with  instructioiu 
to  Buford  to  detach  a  regiment  (Barteau's  Second  Tennessee) 
at  Old  Carrollville,  to  gain  the  Federal  rear,  and,  if  possiUe, 
destroy  their  train ;  and  to  hurry  forward  the  artillery  at  a 
gallop,  as  well  as  the  other  regiments  of  Bell's  Brigade. 

Informed  of  the  state  of  affairs  on  the  field,  Forrest  ordered 
Colonel  Lyon  to  take  the  offensive  with  the  Third  Kentucky 
and  Faulkner's  Regiment.  This  gallantly  performed,  the  ene- 
my was  presently  driven  back  for  three  hundred  yards  to  the 
.^dge  of  an  old  field.  Forrest  had  moved  up  meanwhile  the 
Seventh  and  Eighth  Kentucky  to  a  position  somewhat  in  ad- 
vance and  rightward  of  the  road.  Lyon  then  brought  up  the 
Third  Kentucky  and  Faulkner's  Regiment  to  the  same  line. 
The  ground  was  favorable  and  he  awaited  the  onset.  Rucker, 
at  the  same  time,  was  dismounted  and  ordered  also  to  form  in 
line  of  battle  on  the  left,  which  being  done  with  alacrity  and 
characteristic  dash^  he  soon  became  warmly  engaged  with  the 
enemy,  who  opened  upon  him  with  a  sharp  musketry-fire  from 
the  shelter  of  a  fence  and  dense  thicket  of  dwarf-oaks.  Hear- 
ing  the  sounds  of  this  brisk  engagement,  the  Confederate 
General  next  dispatched  Johnson's  Brigade,  mounted,  at  a 
rapid  pace,  to  gain  and  guard  Ljon's  right.  Meanwhile, 
Rice's  and  Morton's  Batteries  of  the  artillery  having  been 
brought  up  at  a  gallop  for  some  eight  miles,  they  were  imme- 
diately thrown  forward  into  position,  in  an  open  field  on  a  hill, 
in  rear  of  Lyon,  and  opened  with  spirit  and  execution,  espe- 
cially upon  the  Federal  infantry  confronting  Rucker.  Duff's 
Mississippians  being  detached  leftward  half  a  mile,  to  guard 
tha*:  flank  from  being  turned,  Rucker  now  charged  with  the 
Seventh  Tennessee  and  the  Eighteenth  Mississippi  Battalion 
(Lieutenant-Colonel  Chalmers)  across  an  open  field  in  the 
face  of  a  heavy  hostile  force  of  infantry.     Chalmers's  Batta- 


Severe  Lasses.  471 

Hon,  unsupported  on  his  left  at  the  time,  being  overlapped  by 
the  enemy  on  that  flank,  was  thrown  into  confusion  by  a  ter- 
rific enfilading  fire,  and  receded  to  the  shelter  of  the  woods  in 
its  rear ;  but,  though  warmly  pressed  back  to  that  position,  it 
was  speedily  rallied,  and  handsomely  resumed  the  onset* 
The  loss  was  serious  among  these  brave  Mississippians  and 
Tennesseeans.  Led,  however,  with  noteworthy  courage  and 
vigor  by  Colonel  Rucker,  and  Lieutenant-Colonels  William  F. 
Taylor  (Seventh  Tennessee)  and  Chalmers,  (Eighteenth  Mis- 
sissippi,) they  intrepidly  breasted  the  fire  of  rifles  and  ar- 
tillery that  swept  the  ground  over  which  they  advanced,  and 
carried  the  position.! 

At  the  same  time  Lyon,  advancing  with  his  brigade  in  the 
face  of  an  actively  plied  artillery  and  warm  fusilade  of  small- 
arms,  drove  back  the  force  opposed  in  his  front,  after  some  ob- 
stinate fighting  and  several  eflforts  to  charge  him  with  a  supe- 
rior force.  And  Buford  having  come  up  at  half-past  eleven 
A.M.,  with  Bell's  Brigade,  or  rather  Russell's  and  Wilson's  Re- 
giments, Forrest  had  placed  them,  dismounted,  immediately 
in  line  and  on  the  left  of  Rucker,  about  the  time  that  brigade 
had  faltered,  as  we  have  mentioned. 

The  enemy  now  occupied  the  arc  of  a  circle  three  fourths 
of  a  mile,  at  least,  in  extent,  and  about  half  a  mile  from  Brice's 
house,  the  right  of  which  lay  across  the  Ripley-Guntown  road. 
They  were  also  in  heavy  force  of  infantry,  as  well  as  cavalry ; 
but  a  large  portion  of  the  infantry  had  been  brought  up  at  a 
double-quick  for  some  six  or  eight  miles,  and,  of  course,  were 
nluch  blown  and  flurried,  and  not  in  good  fighting  condition. 
Lyon's  Brigade,  confronting  them  on  both  sides  of  the  Bald- 


*  Its  efiective  strength  in  this  batUe  Seventh   Tennessee,  was   killed,  and 

only  225.  nearly  a  third  of  his  regiment  werQ 

t  Here  Lieutenant  William  S.  Pope,  placed  h(^s  de  combat.    See  Appendix. 
the  accomplished  young  Adjutant  of  the  ' 


472 


Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 


win  road,  was  formed  in  line  in  the  edge  of  a  thick  wood ; 
Rucker,  as  we  have  stated,  was  next  on  the  left ;  and  Russell's 
and  Wilson's  Regiments  (Bell's  Brigade)  had  taken  positicm 
on  his  left,  with  Duff's  Mississippians  on  his  and  the  extreme 
Confederate  left.     Meanwhile,  Buford  had  been  assigned  to 
the  command  of  the  right  and  centre,  embracing  Lyon's  and 
Johnson's  Brigades,  and  the  artillery,  (eight  guns,)  with  in- 
structions to  attack  strenuously  as  soon  as  Bell  was  beard  in 
action  ;  and  this  was  the  posture  of  the  combat  about  midday. 
The  ground  held  by  the  enemy,  somewhat  more  elevated 
than  that  occupied  by  the  Confederates,  was  undulating,  and 
thickly  clad  with  stunted   trees  and  tangled  undergrowth, 
which,  vailing  their  presence,  furnished  excellent  cover,  in  ad- 
dition to  the  breastwork  of  rails  and  logs  that  they  had  erected. 
Nevertheless,  Bell  advanced  to  the  onset  about  half-past  one 
P.M.,  and  speedily  a  prolonged  musketry  fire  blazed  and  gushed 
in  the  face  of  his  line,  and  many  of  his  bravest  officers  and  men 
went  down  before  it.*  Right  gallantly  and  staunchly  did  these 
regiments  endeavor  to  stem  the  adverse  tide,  but  finally  they 
wavered.      Wilson's  Regiment,  flanked  and  enfiladed,  gave 
back,  and  the  issue  seemed  inevitably  unfavorable  for  a  tima 
But  animated  by  their  officers,  the  men  regained  a  footing, 
and,  happily,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Wisdom  reached  the  ground 
at  the  same  juncture,  with  about  two  hundred  and  fifty  men 
of  Newsom's  Regiment.      These  were  quickly  dismounted, 
and  advanced  to  a  position  on  Wilson's  left.    The  offensive 
was  now  vehemently  resumed  by  the  Confederates  in  all  parts 


•  Here,  Captain  J.  L.  Bell,  Assistant 
Inspector-General,  was  mortally,  and 
Lieutenant  Isaac  Bell,  aid-de-camp  of 
Bell's  staff,  severely  wounded,  as  also 

Major Webb,  of  Russell's  Regi- 

ment        Many  others  were  slain   or 
wounded,  whose  names  will  be  found 


in  the  long  list  of  casualties  of  this  bat« 
tie  given  in  the  Appendix.  We  may  say 
here,  the  loss  in  officers  was  peculiarly 
heavy,  for  sixteen  were  killed  and  sixty- 
one  wounded.  The  Sixteenth  (Wil* 
son's)  Tennessee  had  eleven  of  its  offi- 
cers wounded. 


The  Result  Menacing.  473 

of  their  line.    The  Federals  fought  well,  and  made  several 
persistent  charges,  in  heavy  force,  upon  Johnson's,  Lyon's,  and 
Rucker's,  as  well  as  Bell's  and  Duff's  positions,  and  more  than 
once  defeat  seemed  unavoidable.   Two  strong  lines  of  Federal 
infantry  pressing  upon  Rucker  and  Bell  and  Duff,  through  an 
open  field,  their  front  line  came  within  thirty  paces  of  the 
Confederates,  who  then  drew  their  revolvers  and  drove  the 
enemy  back  with  great  slaughter.    At  the  same  time,  Lyon 
and  Johnson  repulsed  those  who  had  assailed  them  ;*  while 
the  escort,  under  Captain  Jackson,  with  characteristic  daring, 
had  dashed  down  upon  some  neg^o  infantry,  on  the  Federal 
right,  and  thrown  them  into  great  confusion. f  Urged  forward 
by  their  officers,  the  Confederates  pressed  the  enemy  back  by 
the  sheer  valor  and  tenacity  with  which  they  were  handled. 
Nevertheless,  the  Federals,  constantly  reenforced  by  fresh  re- 
giments, brought  up  one  after  another,  were  so  greatly  supe- 
rior in  numbers,  that  the  result  was  still  extremely  doubtful. 
Forrest  thereupon  repaired,  in  person,  to  where  his  artillery 
was  in  position  in  front  of  Lyon.      Ordering  the  pieces  to  be 
double-shotted  with  canister — a  favorite  practice — ^and   lim- 
bered up,  he  moved  with  them  down  a  gentle  wooded  slope, 
to  within  sixty  yards  of  the  Federal  lines,  to  the  edge  of  a 
field  about  a  quarter  of  a  mile  north-east  of  Brice's  house, 
just  at  the   moment  a  strong  Federal  line,  resuming  the 
offensive,  was  emerging  from  the  woods  into  the  open  ground. 
In  this  position,  the  Confederate  artillery  (eight  pieces)  were 
opened  with  signal  execution ;  and,  after  two  or  three  dis- 


♦  Previously,  Johnson's  Brigade,  on  the  interval  which  had  been  left  between 

the   extreme   Confederate  right,  had  its  left  and  Lyon's  rig&t 

Ibrced  the  enemy  back  until  within  sight  t  So  sharp  was  the  combat  in  this 

of  their  wagon-train,  when  it  was  order-  part  of  the  field,  that  the  Seventh  Ken- 

ed  to  oblique  to  the  left  and  rear,  and  tucky  lost  thirty  officers  and  men  killed 

connect  with  Lyon,  to  defeat  an  attempt  and  wounded, 
on  the  part  of  the  enemy  to  penetrate 


474  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

charges,  Lyon  and  Johnson  charged  upon  the  Federal  left 
,  Hotly  engaged  at  all  points — about  two  p.m. — the  conflict  had 
now  become  general  and  desperate.  There  was  no  faltering 
at  the  juncture  anywhere  in  the  Confederate  ranks.  Buford 
was  steadily  pressing  the  Federals  back  upon  Brice's  house, 
with  Lyon's  and  Johnson's  Brigades  ;  Bell's  and  Rucker's 
Brigades,  moving  across  the  fields  and  over  the  fences,  in  their 
fi-ont,  using  their  revolvers  freely,  bore  backward  all  before  them 
in  the  same  direction.  The  Confederate  fire  of  small-arms  and 
artillery  was  rapid,  incessant,  desolating.*  Forrest's  line  was 
now  shortened,  and  hence  strengthened,  as  it  converged  upon 
the  cross-roads,  and  the  Federals  were  driven  back  at  all 
points,  into  a  broad  ravine,  westward  of  Brice's  house,  leading 
to  Tishomingo  Creek,  infantry,  cavalry,  artillery,  their  wagon- 
train  and  ambulances  huddled  together  in  an  almost  inextrica- 
ble coil,  and  upon  this  mass  Morton's  and  Rice's  Batteries 
were  brought  to  bear  with  fearful  carnage. 

By  this  time,  six  guns  had  been  captured  at  Brice's  house, 
and  several  of  these,  manned  by  the  Confederate  artillerists, 
were  turned  upon  the  Federals,  disabling  the  horses  of  another 
Federal  battery  some  three  hundred  yards  westward  of  the 
Ripley  road.f  Seeing  thisyi  Captains  Morton  and  Rice  moved 
their  batteries  forward  at  a  gallop  up  to  the  obstructed  mass 
of  the  enemy,  and  poured  upon  it  a  deadly  tide  of  canister. 
The  havoc  was  ghastly,  and  the  second  battery  was  abandoned, 
as  the  enemy  crowded  back  along  the  Ripley  road,  toward 
Tishomingo  Creek,  the  bridge  over  which,  still  standing,  was 
blocked  up  with  wagons,  some  of  whose  teams  had  been  killed, 


*  Full  eight  hundred  Federal  officers  Kentucky,  having  been  disabled  in  the 

and  men  lay  dead  around  Brice's  house,  charge  upon  this  battery,  Sergeant  — — 

mnd  on  the  field  to  the  east  and  south  Brown,  Company  A,  of  the  regiment, 

of  it  seising  the    flag,  rushed  forward  and 

t    The  color-bearer  of  the  Eighth  planted  it  upon  a  caisson. 


The  Pursuit.  475 

and  more  than  one  hundred  of  the  Federals  were  killed  or 
wounded  in  attempting  to  press  across  the  bridge  thus  ob- 
structed. Finding  their  way  thus  barred,  the  enemy  rushed 
into  the  creek  on  both  side^  of  the  bridge ;  but  as  they  emerged 
from  the  water  on  the  west  bank,  in  an  open  field,  the  Con- 
federates' artillery  played  upon  them,  for  half  a  mile,  killing 
or  disabling  large  numbers. 

In  the  interim,  the  wagons  left  on  the  bridge  had  to  be 
thrown  into  the  stream  before  the  Confederates,  in  any  effect- 
ive numbers,  could  pass  over ;  otherwise,  the  captures  must 
have  been  much  more  numerous.  A  section  of  Rice's  Battery, 
however,  was  worked  across,  and,  supported  by  the  escort, 
overtook,  and  was  opened  upon  the  negro  brigade,  with  double- 
shotted  canister,  with  appalling  effect. 

Meanwhile,  the  obstructions  having  been  removed  from  the 
bridge,  by  throwing  the  wagons  into  the  water,  the  rest 
of  the  artillery  followed  swiftly  the  advance  section,  ahead,  for 
the  moment,  of  any  support,  and  securing  favorable  positions, 
joined  in  the  havoc. 

The  order  was  now  given  for  the  cavalry  to  halt,  reorgan- 
ize, remount  as  fast  as  possible,  and  pursue.  The  road  was 
narrow,  with  dense  woods  on  either  side,  so  that  it  was  im- 
possible to  use  more  than  four  pieces  at  a  time ;  but  that 
number  were  kept  close  upon  the  heels  of  the  retreating 
enemy,  and  in  murderous  play,  preventing  them  from  making 
a  stand.  Nothing  could  exceed  the  daring  spirit,  energy,  and 
execution  with  which  the  Confederate  artillery  was  handled  by 
its  officers.* 


♦  Captain  J.  W.  Morton  was  in  chief  tery  was  commanded  by  Captain  T.  W, 

command,  with  R.  M.  Blakemore  as  Rice,  with  Lieutenants  B.  F.  Haller, 

AdJQtant    His  battery  was  command-  H.  H.  Briggs,  and  D.  C.  Jones  as  sub- 

ed  by  the   gallant  Lieutenant  T.  S.  altems.    Lieutenants  J.  C.  Barlow  and 

Sale^  assbtcd   by  Lieutenants  J.  M.  W.  J.  D.  Winton,  of  Thrall's  Battery, 

Mayson  and  G.  T.  Brown  ;  Rice's  Bat-  casually  present,  and  acting  as  volun- 


476 


Campaigns  of  General  Forrest 


About  two  miles  from  the  cross-roads,  the  enemy  rallied  at 
length  in  strong  force,  and  again  made  stout  battle  for  about 
half  an  hour,  in  the  course  of  which,  concentrating,  they  made 
a  spirited  charge  upon  their  eager  pursuers,  and  drove  them 
back  upon  Rice's  Battery  ;  but  that,  opening  with  douUe 
charges  of  canister,  and  Lyon's  Brigade  springing  forward  with 
loud  cheers,  hurled  them  back  with  so  stormful  an  onset,  that 
the  Federal  array  dissolved  before  it  into  a  molten  mass  of 
fragments  and  stragglers,  and  their  defeat  was  consumiQate: 
The  largest  portion  of  their  wagon-train  was  left  on  the 
ground,  with  many  caissons,  and  the  road  was  so  thickly 
strewn  as  to  be  encumbered  with  the  dead,  the  dying,  and 
the  wounded,  with  cast-away  arms,  accoutrements,  baggage, 
dead  animals,  and  other  wreck  and  residuum  of  a  routed  army. 
It  was  now  sunset,  but  the  pursuit  was  maintained,  weary  and 
over-spent  as  the  Confederates  were,  for  some  five  or  six  miles 
beyond,  and  until  it  became  quite  too  dark  to  go  farther. 

In  the  mean  time,  Barteau's  Regiment,  (Second  Tennessee^ 
not  more  than  250  strong,)  which,  as  will  be  remembered,  had 
been  detached  from  Carrollville  to  get  rearward  of  the  enemy 
on  the  Ripley  road,  effecting  the  movement,  attacked  the 
Federal  rear  with  skill  and  resolution.  This  drew  to  that 
quarter  a  large  part  of  their  cavalry,  while  the  battle  was  rag- 
ing with  greatest  fury  at  the  cross-roads.  Deploying  his  men 
as  skirmishers,  on  a  line  of  nearly  three  quarters  of  a  mile, 
and  with  other  admirable  and  daring  dispositions  of  his  force, 


teers  with  the  batteries  of  Rice  and 
Morton  respectively,  were  conspicuous 
for  their  conduct.  The  spirit  that  ani- 
mated the  men  may  be  illustrated  by 
the  behavior  of  one — Jimmie  Moran, 
of  Morton's  Battery  —  who,  when  shot 
through  the  arm,  on  being  told  by  his 
officers  to  go  to  the  rear,  invariably  re- 


plied, "No,\«ir,  I'll  stay  with  you  as 
long  as  I  can  stand  up,"  and  continued 
to  drive  his  gun-team  with  his  arm  in  a 
sling  through  the  entire,  fight.  Mor* 
ton's  Battecy  consisted  of  four  three* 
inch  rifle  guns,  and  Rice's  of  two  twelve- 
pounder  howitzers,  and  two  six-pound* 
er  smooth-bore  guns. 


Rucker  Leading  the  Pursuit  477 

well  calculated  to  conceal  his  weakness,  Barteau  contributed 
materially  to  disturb  and  disorder  the  enemy,  and  prevent 
the  escape  of  their  train. 

As  the  negro  soldiery  broke,  after  their  last  stand,  they 
were  seen  generally  to  tear  something  from  their  uniform  and 
throw  it  away,  which  subsequently  proved  to  have  been  a 
badge  on  which  was  printed  "  Remember  Fort  Pillow," 
while  at  the  same  time  their  officers  (whites)  threw  off  their 
shoulder-straps  or  insignia  of  rank. 

II. 

As  soon  as  the  several  commands  were  reassembled,  and 
the  darkness  had  somewhat  diminished,  about  one  o'clock  on 
the  morning  of  the  i  ith,  Forrest  gave  orders  for  the  immedi- 
ate resumption  of  the  pursuit.  Rucker's  Brigade — with  the 
Seventh  Tennessee  leading — took  the  advance,  and  within 
three  miles  struck  the  Federal  rear  about  daylight,  at  Stubbs's 
£uin.  A  slight  skirmish  ensued,  when  the  enemy  broke, 
abandoning  the  remainder  of  their  wagon-train,  nine  pieces  of 
artillery,  and  some  twenty-five  ambulances,  with  a  number  of 
wounded,  at  the  crossing  of  a  small  fork  of  the  Hatchie.* 

The  enemy,  as  was  apparent,  were  now  greatly  scattered 
through  the  surrounding  country.  Forrest,  therefore,  threw 
out  a  regiment  on  either  side  of  the  highway,  to  sweep  for 
some  distance  to  the  right  and  left,  and  all  the  morning  the 
din  of  firearms  was  to  be  heard  at  the  harsh,  stern  work  of 
war. 

Bell's  Brigade  was  now  in  advance,  having,  soon  after  sun- 


*  Daring  the  night,  Lieutenant  Frank  surpassed,  made  a  series  of  attacks^ 

Rodgers,  of  Rucker's  staff,  with  a  de-  and  greatly  harassed  and  annoyed  the 

tichment  of  ten  men,  hanging  constant-  enemy,  numbers  of  whom  were  tfaw 

Y§  jttid  dosely  upon  the  Federal  rear,  killed  or  wounded. 
with  an  ardent  daring  that  never  was 


i 


478  Campaigns  of  General  FarresL 

rise,  relieved  Rucker,  whose  horses  were  exhaustedl  And 
about  four  miles  eastward  of  Ripley,  the  Federals  were  found 
rallied  and  in  position  for  another  stand  at  the  crossing  of 
Hatchie  creek,  where  the  "  bottom  "  was  almost  impracticable, 
except  by  the  road  over  a  causeway  for  some  300  yardi 
They  had  already  effected  the  passage  of  the  stream,  and 
were  drawn  up  on  a  ridge,  some  seven  hundred  yards  from  its 
west  bank,  with  a  strong  line  of  skirmishers  lining  a  fringe  of 
woods  near  the  water's  edge,  to  dispute  the  Confederate  ad- 
vance. No  artillery  being  visible,  Forrest  quickly  dismounted 
two  regiments  of  BelVs  Brigade,  moved  with  them,  and  his 
escort  mounted,  up  the  creek,  leftward,  and  crossed  without 
any  resistance,  taking  the  Federals  on  their  right  flank.  At 
this  moment  they  again  broke,  after  a  very  slight  skirmish, 
and  the  whole  Confederate  force,  crossing  the  stream,  resumed 
the  pursuit. 

As  the  advance  of  Bell's  Brigade — ^Wilson's  Regiment- 
approached  Ripley,  about  eight  p.m.,  the  enemy  were  found 
drawn  up  in  two  strong  battle-lines,  just  in  the  outskirts, 
north-west  of  the  place,  stretching  across  the  roads  leading  to 
Lagrange  and  Salem.*  Forrest  coming  up  with  his  escort, 
immediately  dismounted  them  and  Wilson's  men,  and  without 
waiting  for  any  additional  force,  advanced  with  his  habitual 
audacity  to  the  attack  ;  but  sending  orders,  however,  to  Gen- 
eral Buford  to  throw  Rucker  around  to  gain  their  rear  on  the 
Lagrange  road,  and  to  hurry  up  with  the  other  regiments. 

Wilson's  Regiment  and  the  escort  deployed  as  a  thin  line  of 
skirmishers  half  a  mile  long,  advancing  under  cover  of  the 
houses  and  fences  of  Ripley,  opened  with  an  effective  fire 
upon  the  Federal  lines,  inflicting  so  sharp  a  loss  that,  after  a 
few  moments,  they  broke,  leaving  upon  the  field  thirty  of  their 


*  Ripley  is  twenty-five  miles  from  Brice's  Cross-Roada. 


Buford  in  Pursuit.  479 

dead  and  sixty  wounded,  including  a  colonel  of  infantry.*  At 
the  same  time,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Jesse  Forrest  charged 
with  one  company,  mounted,  of  Wilson's  Ilegiment,  with  such 
hardihood  and  tenacity  that,  it  is  understood,  the  commander 
of  the  Federal  cavalry  and  rear-guard  narrowly  escaped  cap- 
ture. 

Buford,  having  now  brought  up  the  other  troops,  was  di- 
rected to  pursue  With  Lyon's  and  Rucker's  Brigades,  and  hang 
closely  upon  the  Federal  rear,  on  the  road  toward  Salem^ 
through   Davenport,  while,   taking    Bell's   Brigade,   Forrest 
would  endeavor  to  reach  Salem  sooner  by  a  left-hand  way, 
somewhat  more  direct,  with  the  hope  of  thus  intercepting  the 
main  body  of  the  retreating  enemy  at  this  point.     Buford, 
however,  took  up  the  pursuit  with  such  vigor  that  this  ex- 
pectation was   disappointed.     Directed  to  lead,  and   charge 
without  dismounting,  Rucker  made  several  spirited  onsets 
upon  the  Federal  rear-guard.f     Sweeping  it  rapidly  ahead  of 
him,  capturing  several  hundred  prisoners,  Rucker's  horses  be- 
came finally  so  jaded  that  Buford  relieved  that  brigade  with 
Lyon's.     Under  this  rearrangement  a  charge  of  signal  gallan- 
try was  made  by  Faulkner's   Regiment,  under  Major  Tate 
driving  the  Fourth  Missouri  (Federal)  cavalry  back  through 
the   ranks  of  their  infantry,  which  had  been  halted  for  a 
stand,  and  here  several  hundred  prisoners  were  captured.    By 
the  time,  however,  Salem  was  reached,  it  was  apparent  that 
no  body  of  the  Federal  force  was  retreating  on  that  road,  but 
only  widely  dispersed  stragglers.     Rucker  and  Johnson  were 
here  turned  back  to  scour  the  country  for  Federal  stragglers 
and  property — harness,  small-arms,  accoutrements,  and  ammu- 
nition with  which  the  road  was  profusely  strewn — while  Buford, 
turning  northward,  with  Lyon's  Brigade  and  Russell's  Regi- 


*  Colonel  George  M.  McCaig,  One  Hundred  and  Twentieth  Illinois  Infantij. 
t  Captain  W.  J  Tate  was  killed  here.    See  Appendix  for  sketch. 


480  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

ment,  resumed  the  chase.  One  detachment,  under  Lieuten- 
ant-Colonel Holt,  followed  the  road  toward  Lamar,  and  the 
other  toward  Lagrange.  These,  however,  were  reduced  to 
small  numbers  ;  for  so  exhausted  had  the  horses  now  become 
generally,  that  few  were  able  to  keep  up,  and  reach  the 
extreme  points  of  pursuit  on  the  nth,  which,  on  the  way  to 
Lagrange,  was  Davis's  Mill,  where  Buford  halted  after  dark, 
and  gave  his  men  and  animals  several  hours*  rest. 

Meanwhile,  Forrest  having  led  BelFs  Brigade,  as  we  have 
related,  by  the  shorter  route,  nevertheless,  on  reaching  Salem 
found  that  Buford  was  in  his  advance.  Thereupon,  permitting 
Colonel  Bell  to  return  to  the  battle-field,  to  look  after  the  dead 
and  wounded,  he  directed  Colonel  Wilson  to  proceed  with  the 
brigade  on  the  route  taken  by  Buford,  and  sweep  the  country 
for  prisoners  and  arms  ;  but  not  long  after,  dispatched  orders 
to  Buford  recalling  the  pursuit.* 

The  enemy  began  their  retreat  about  four  p.m.  on  the  lodi, 
and  by  five  p.m.  on  the  i  ith  they  had  been  driven,  with  heavy 
loss,  in  frequent  collisions  with  the  Confederates,  quite  fifty- 
eight  miles,  with  the  loss  also  of  nineteen  pieces  of  artillery,! 
twenty-one  caissons,  over  two  hundred  wagons,  and  thirty 
ambulances,  with  parts  of  their  teams  and  large  quantities  of 
subsistence,  ammunition,  and  other  materiel  of  war.  More 
than  2000  officers  and  men,  including  the  wounded,  were 
taken  prisoners  ;  and  1900  of  their  dead  were  left  upon  the 
field  or  by  the  wayside,  between  the  battle-field  and  Ripley. 
Seldom,  almost  never,  was  an  army  more  completely  beaten 
and  dispersed  than  that  of  Sturgis  on  this  occasion  ;  beaten, 


•  Several  miles  before  reaching  Sa-         t  Seventeen  pieces  of  artillery  were 
lem,  the  Confederate  General  fell  from     actually  captured ;  two  were  buried  by 
his  horse  from  sheer  exhaustion,  and     the  Federals, 
for  more  than  an  hour  lay  in  a  state  of 
•tupor  by  the  road-side. 


Pursuit  Recalled.  481 

too,  as  has  been  seen,  by  a  force  of  fighting  men  at  no  time 
exceeding  3200  men,  that  is  to  say,  little  over  one  third  of 
the  Federal  army.*  The  Confederate  losses  were  severe,  at 
least  140  officers  and  men  killed,  and  nearly  500  were 
wounded. 

III. 

Having  directed  the  return  of  his  command  to  the  battle* 
field.  General  Forrest,  still  greatly  fatigued  and  exhausted  by 
the  extreme  mental  exertion  he  had  undergone,  now  set  out 
in  the  same  direction  and  slept  Saturday  night,  (nth,)  with 
his  staff  and  escort,  at  the  house  of  a  paternal  uncle — Orrin 
Beck — three  or  four  miles  from  Salem,  and  almost  within 
sight  of  the  little  farm  upon  which  had  been  passed  the  years 
of  his  youth,  for  the  most  part  in  a  hard,  resolute  struggle  for 
the  means  of  support  for  a  widowed  mother  and  her  family  of 
eleven  children. 

Returning  slowly  on  the  next  day  toward  Ripley,  the  Con- 
federate General  tarried  at  that  place  on  the  night  of  the  12th, 
smd  did  not  reach  Brice's  Cross-Roads  until  the  morning  of 
the  13th.  His  first  act  was  to  issue  an  order  for  the  collec- 
tion of  the  wounded  of  both  sides,  and  their  early  removal 
to  hospitals  on  the  line  of  the  Mobile  and  Ohio  Railroad. 
And  from  the  same  place  a  general  order  was  issued  requir- 
ing his  division  and  brigade  commanders  to  make  detailed 
reports  to  his  headquarters  of  all  captured  property  of  every 
description  which  had  been  collected  by  their  several  com- 
mands. These  details  attended  to,  he  repaired  that  afternoon 
to  Guntown  Station,  on  the  Mobile  and  Ohio  Railroad,  five 


*  And  of  this  number  one  fourth,  or  fore  took  no  combatant  part  in  the  bat- 
Toe  man  out  of  every  four,  was  de-  tie,  and  reducing  the  fighting  men  acto- 
mched  to  hold  the  horses  of  their  com-  ally  to  about  2300  men. 
•ades,  fighting  as  infantry,  and  there* 


I 


482 


Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 


miles  southward,  where,  establishing  his  headquartons,  lie 
immediately  addressed  himself  to  the  reorganization  of  his 
command,  and  its  redisposition  for  future  service. 

COMMENTARIES. 

1.  This  battle  has  been  described  by  Federal  writers  as 
having  been  fought  at  Guntown  ;  it  occurred,  however^  at 
Price's  Cross-Roads,  in  close  proximity  to  Tishomingo  creek, 
on  which  account  the  victors  have  always  called  it  the  battle 
of  Tishomingo.  The  Federal  force  engaged,  says  their  Ofll- 
cial  Report,  consisted  of  Warren's  and  Winslow's  Brigades, 
3300  cavalry,  and  Wilkins's  and  Hoge's  (white)  and  Benton's 
(negro)  Brigades  of  infantry,  5400  strong. 

2.  The  action  was  far  bloodier  than  it  would  have  been  had 
not  the  negroes  entered  upon  the  campaign  inspired  by  their 
officers  with  the  conviction  that  no  quarter  would  be  given 
them — inspired,  too,  with  the  resolution  to  give  no  quarter.* 
Impressed  with  this  notion,  animated  by  the  apprehension 
engendered,  they  perversely  refused  to  halt  and  siurrender. 
Wildly  persisting  in  seeking  safety  in  flight,  they  were  ne- 
cessarily shot  down  for  a  time  to  such  a  degree  that  the  affiur 
became  very  like  a  grand  battue  for  wild  game. 

3.  For  a  week  previously  the  Confederates,  be  it  remem- 
bered, had  been  marching,  with  scant  periods  of  rest,  night 


•  We  have  seen  circumstantial,  dra- 
matic accounts  in  Federal  newspapers 
of  the  day,  detailing  the  administration 
of  the  oath  to  the  negroes  to  give  no 
quarter.  General  Washbume,  in  his 
letter  to  General  Forrest,  printed  here- 
inafter p.  487,  confesses  such  an  oath 
was  taken,  and  that  these  very  negroes 
were  permitted  by  him  to  take  the  field 


with  such  purposes ;  and  yet  had  wri^ 
ten  a  letter,  (also  printed  fprward,  p. 
439,)  complaining  that  they  had  been 
unmercifully  dealt  with  in  battle.  The 
famous  Oxenstiem  said,  "  Z/  jmv  ^ 
tambour  dissife  hs  penseesy  AssartSj 
the  drums  around  the  Federal  General 
must  have  driven  thought  from  Ui 
head.    - 


r  Commentaries.  48^ 

and  day — through  drenching  Tains,  over  muddy  roads  am) 
tank-full  streams,  so  that  they  were  greatly  fatigued.  Never, 
theless,  officers  and  men  were  made  invincible  by  a  determV 
nation  to  conquer.  The  courage  manifested  throughout, 
rarely  equaled  in  the  aggregate  on  any  field,  has  never  been 
surpassed.  General  Buford  rendered  signal  aid  to  his  superior 
in  the  general  conduct  of  the  battle ;  the  brigade  commanders. 
Colonels  Bell,  Lyon,  and  Rucker,  were  men  not  only  of  shin- 
ing courage,  but  of  strong  force  of  character,  and  the  several 
regiments  engaged  were  admirably  handled  by  their  immedi- 
ate commanders. 

4.  In  this  battle  the  genuine  military  capacity  of  General 
Forrest  would  seem  to  have  been  demonstrated.  It  has  been 
thought  and  asserted  by  many  that  his  successes  were  largely 
due  to  uncommon  good  fortune,  coupled  with  audacity  ;  but  it 
must  be  apparent  that  this  brilliant  victory  was  won  by  his 
prompt  comprehension  of  the  situation  on  the  morning  ojF  the 
lOth  June,  and  his  recognition  of  the  possibility  of  taking  his 
adversary  at  the  sore  disadvantage  of  being  attacked  while  hi^ 
column  was  extended  in  a  long  line,  moving  over  the  narrow 
roads  of  that  densely  wooded  region.  Seeing  his  advantage 
at  its  right  value,  he  planned  and  executed  with  equal  celerity ; 
and  never  did  soldiers  fight,  we  repeat,  with  greater  tenacity 
or  intrepidity  than  those  he  led  that  day. 

5.  In  this  affair,  furthermore,  was  illustrated  the  sovereign 
efficacy  in  war  of  the  defensive-active^  with  the  concentration 
and  speedy  employment  of  one's  whole  force  when  the  battle 
moment  has  come.  Forrest  brought  his  entire  strength  into 
action,  and  kept  no  reserves  unemployed.  Iti  this  he  was 
right ;  for  a  reserve  is  an  unnecessary  subtractive  from — and 
emasculative  of — ^a  force  so  small  as  that  which  he  commanH- 
pd  ;  and  victory  is  surest  won  on  such  occasions  when  every 
man  is  launched,  and  every  gun  available  is  employed,  as  stre- 
nuously and  swiftly  as  possible.  -  * 


CHAPTER  XIX. 

BATTLE      OP      HARRISBURG. 

Kapid  March  of  Cltalmrri  from  Monte  Vallo — Mabrys  Brigade  addtiU 
Forreifs  Cavalry — Corrtspondfttct  between  Generals  Forrest  ami 
Washburae — Forrest,  anticipating  a  strong  Hostile  Movement,  Tt- 
Ported  the  Facts  to  his  Superior — Approach  of  Enemy  nxder  Maf0- 
General  A.  J.  Smith— The  Country  devastated  by  the  Federtl 
Army — Major-General  S.  D.  Lee  in  Command  of  Confederates—. 
Affair  at  Pinson's  Hill,  also  at  Barrow's  Shop — Forrest  Recemnm- 
Ured  the  Federal  Position— Battle  of  Harrisburg,  fuly  14/ii— Cw- 
federates  worsted,  but  Federals  refuse  to  advance  from  their  /m/rtMJ 
ments — Retreat  of  General  Smith  on  the  l^th  of  yttfy~FttM> 
Ambuscade  at  Town  Creek — Commentaries, 

June  J4th  to  July  i6th,  1S64. 

As  will  be  remembered,  Chalmers,  under  orders  from 
Major-General  Lee,  had  left  Monte  Vallo  with  McCuUoch's 
Brigade  on  the  loth  of  June,  to  return  by  forced  marches 
to  Mississippi.  Notwithstanding  the  heavy  rains,  consequent 
muddy  roads  and  swollen  streams  encountered,  he  was  at  Co- 
lumbus,  Miss. — one  hundred  and  twenty  miles  from  Monte 
Vallo — by  one  p.m.  on  the  13th  June,  and  there  found  orden 
to  halt  for  further  instructions. 

Mabry's  Brigade  likewise  had  come  within  the  limits  d    j 
Forrest's  command,  and  was  posted  at  Okolona.*     It  had 


*  Composed  of  the   Fourth  Miuii-      Misiiitippi,  Colonel  lahwn  Hintoa; 
ifp^  Colonel  C.  C.  WUburne;  SUth     Tbirtr-eighlli  Uisuaupi^  Ifajor  S*- 


Z,etter  to  General  JVashbume.  485 

been  previously  on  service  in  the  quarter  of  the  Yazoo  river, 
tintil  ordered  by  General  Lee  to  push  forward  to  assist  in  rts^ 
pelling  the  expedition,  the  fate  of  which  we  have  just  related 
Reaching  the  vicinity  too  late  to  take  part  in  the  combat  or 
pursuit,  it  became,  however,  thenceforward  an  effective  part 
of  Fo|iREST*s  Cavalry. 

During  the  latter  part  of  the  month  of  May,  a  controversy 
had  grown  up  between  the  Federal  commander  at  Helena, 
Ark.,  and  the  Confederate  commander  on  the  opposite  side  of 
the  Mississippi  river,  who  had  initiated  the  correspondence  in 
regard  to  courses  alleged  to  be  in  breach  of  the  laws  of  war. 
This  coming  to  the  notice  of  General  Forrest,  he  at  once,  dis- 
approving what  had  been  done  by  his  subordinate,  forbade 
such  communications  thereafter  between  his  lieutenants  and 
Federal  commanders.  And  almost  his  first  official  act  on 
reaching  Guntown  was  to  make  the  Federal  commander  at 
Helena  acquainted  with  his  own  views  in  the  premises.  The 
communication  to  that  end  and  copies  of  the  correspondence 
in  question  were  forwarded,  by  flag  of  truce,  to  the  Federal 
commander — Major-General  Washburne — at  Memphis,  on  the 
14th,  for  perusal,  and  the  transmission  of  his  own  letter  to  its 
address.  At  the  same  time  the  Confederate  General  took 
occasion  to  address  General  Washburne  the  following  : 

"Headquarters  Forrest*s  Cavalry,) 
In  the  Field,  June  14,  1864.        ) 

"General:*       .        •        .        . 

"It  has  been  reported  to  me  that  all  your  colored  troops  stationed  in 

Memphis  took,  on  their  knees,  in  the  presence  of  Major-General  Hurlbut 

jind  other  officers  of  your  army,  an  oath  to  avenge  Fort  Pillow,  and  that 

they  would  show  my  troops  no  quarter.    Again,  I  have  it  from  indisputar 


bert    McKay  commanding;    and   the         •   The    omitted   paragraph   relattt 
Fourteenth  Confederate,    Colonel    F.     simply  to  the  indosurcs. 
Dumontiel. 


48.6  Campaigns  of  General  ForresL 

ble  authority,  that  the  troops  under  Brigadier-General  Sturgis,  on  dicir 
recent  march  from  Memphis,  publicly  and  in  many  places  proclaimed  that 
no  quarter  would  be  shown  my  men.  As  they  were  moved  into  action  on 
the  loth,  they  were  exhorted  by  their  officers  to  remember  Fort  Pillow. 
The  prisoners  we  have  captured  from  that  command,  or  a  large  majoritj 
of  them,  have  voluntarily  stated  that  they  expected  us  to  murder  thenv 
otherwise  they  would  have  surrendered  in  a  body  rather  than  taken  to  the 
bushes  after  being  run  down  and  exhausted.  The  recent  battle  of  Tisho> 
mingo  creek  was  far  more  bloody  than  it  would  otherwise  have  been  bat 
for  the  fact  that  your  men  evidently  expected  to  be  slaughtered  when  cap- 
tured, and  both  sides  acted  as  though  neither  felt  safe  in  surrendering; 
even  when  further  resistance  was  useless.  The  prisoners  captured  by  us 
say  they  felt  condemned  by  the  announcements,  etc.,  of  their  own  com- 
manders, and  expected  no  quarter. 

"  In  all  my  operations  since  it  began,  I  have  conducted  the  war  on  civil- 
ized principles,  and  desire  still  to  do  so ;  but  it  is  due  to  my  command  that 
they  should  know  the  position  they  occupy  and  the  policy  you  intend  to 
pursue.  I  therefore  respectfully  ask  whether  my  men  now  in  your  hands 
are  treated  as  other  Confederate  prisoners  of  war,  also  the  course  in- 
tended to  be  pursued  in  regard  to  those  who  may  hereafter  faXi  into  yoar 
hands. 

*'  I  have  in  my  possession  quite  a  number  of  wounded  officers  and  men 
of  General  Sturgis's  command,  all  of  whom  have  been  treated  as  well  as 
we  were  able  to  treat  them,  and  are  mostly  in  charge  of  a  surgeon  left  at 
Ripley  by  General  Sturgis  to  look  af\er  the  wounded.  Some  of  them  are 
too  severely  wounded  to  be  removed  at  present.  *  I  am  willing  to  exchange 
them  for  any  men  of  my  command  you  have,  and,  as  soon  as  able  to  be 
removed,  will  give  them  safe  escort  through  our  lines  in  charge  of  the 
surgeon  left  with  them.  I  made  such  an  arrangement  once  with  Majo^ 
General  Hurlbut,  and  am  willing  to  renew  it,  provided  it  is  desired,  as  it 
would  be  better  than  to  subject  them  to  the  long  ind  ^tiguing  trip  neces- 
sary to  a  regular  exchange  at  City  Point,  Va. 

"  I  am.  General,  etc., 

N.  B.  Forrest, 

Major-GcneraL" 

This  communication,  dispatched  with  a  flag  of  truce  borne 
by  Lieutenant-Colonel  R.  W.  Pitman,  an  officer  of  Forrest's 
staff,  drew  an  answer  as  follows  : 


Reply  of  General  Washbume.  487 

"Headquarters  District  of  West-Tennpsseb, > 
Memphis,  Tennessee,  June  19,  1864.  | 

"  Majar-General  N.  B,  Forrest^  Commanding  Confederate  Forces  : 

"  General  :  Your  communication  of  the  14th  instant  is  received.  The 
letter  to  Brigadier-General  Buford  will  be  forwarded  to  him. 

"  In  regard  to  that  part  of  your  letter  which  relates  to  colored  troops,  1 
beg  to  say  that  I  have  already  sent  a  communication  on  the  same  subject 
to  the  officers  in  command  of  the  Confederate  forces  at  Tupelo.  Having 
understood  that  Major-General  S.  D.  Lee  was  in  command  there,  I  din 
rected  my  letter  to  him.    A  copy  of  it  I  inclose. 

"You  say  in  your  letter  that  it  has  been  reported  to  you  'that  all  the 
negro  troops  stationed  in  Memphis  took  an  oath,  on  their  knees,  in  the 
presence  of  Major-General  Hurlbut  and  other  officers  of  our  army,  to 
avenge  Fort  Pillow,  and  that  they  would  show  your  troops  no  quarter.'  I 
believe  it  is  true  that  the  colored  troops  did  take  such  an  oath,  but  not  in 
the  presence  of  General  Hurlbut.  From  what  I  can  learn,  this  act  of 
theirs  was  not  influenced  by  any  white  officer,  but  was  the  result  of  their, 
own  sense  of  what  was  due  to  themselves  and  their  fellows  who  had  been 
mercilessly  slaughtered.*  I  have  no  doubt  that  they  went  into  the  field, 
as  you  allege,  in  the  full  belief  that  they  would  be  murdered  in  case  they 
fell  into  your  hands.  The  affair  of  Fort  Pillow  fully  justified  that  beliefl 
I  am  not  aware  as  to  what  they  proclaimed  on  their  late  march,  and  it 
may  be,  as  you  say,  that  they  declared  that  no  quarter  would  be  given  to 
any  of  your  men  that  might  fall  into  their  hands. 

"  Your  declaration  that  you  have  conducted  the  war  on  all  occasions  on. 
civilized  principles  can  not  be  accepted ;  but  I  receive  with  satisfaction 
the  intimation  in  your  letter  that  the  recent  slaughter  of  colored  troops  at 
the  battle  of  Tishomingo  creek  resulted  rather  from  the  desperation  with 
which  they  fought  than  a  predetermined  intention  to  give  them  no  quar- 
ter. You  must  have  learned  by  this  time  that  the  attempt  to  intimidate 
the  colored  troops  by  indiscriminate  slaughter  has  signally  failed,  and  that, 
instead  of  a  feeling  of  terror,  you  have  aroused  a  spirit  of  courage  and  des- 
peration that  will  not  down  at  your  bidding. 

"  I  am  left  in  doubt  by  your  letter,  as  to  the  course  you  and  the  Con- 
federate Government  intend  to  pursue  hereafter  in  regard  to  colored  troops. 


.  •  Here  is  a  distinct  admission  that     into  the  field  with  the  declared  iiite»- 
tfie  negro  troops  with  Sturgis  had  gone     tion  to  give  no  quarter. 


483  Campaigns  of  General  FarresL 

and  I  beg  you  to  advise  me,  widi  as  little  delay  as  possible,  as  to  your  in- 
tention. If  you  intend  to  treat  such  of  them  as  lE&ll  into  your  hands  as 
prisoners  of  war,  please  so  state.  If  you  do  not  so  intend,  but  contem- 
plate either  their  slaughter  or  their  return  to  slavery,  please  state  that^  so 
that  we  may  have  no  misunderstanding  hereafter.  If  the  former  is  your 
intention,  I  shall  receive  the  announcement  with  pleasure,  and  shall  ex- 
plain*the  fact  to  the  colored  troops  at  once,  and  desire  that  they  recall  the 
oath  that  they  have  taken.  If  the  latter  is  the  case,  then  let  the  oath 
stand,  and  upon  those  who  have  aroused  this  spirit  by  their  atrocities,  and 
upon  the  Government  and  people  who  sanction  it,  be  the  consequences. 

**  In  regard  to  your  inquiry  relating  to  prisoners  of  your  command  in 
our  hands,  I  state  that  they  have  always  received  the  treatment  which  a 
great  and  humane  government  extends  to  its  prisoners.  What  course  will 
be  pursued  hereafter  toward  them  must,  of  course,  depend  on  circumstan- 
ces that  may  arise.  If  your  command,  hereafter,  do  nothing  which  should 
properly  exclude  them  from  being  treated  as  prisoners  of  war,  they  will  be 
so  treated. 

"  I  thank  you  for  your  offer  to  exchange  wounded  officers  and  men  in 
your  hands.  If  you  will  send  them  in,  I  will  exchange  man  for  man,  so 
&r  as  I  have  the  ability  to  do  so. 

**  Before  closing  this  letter,  I  wish  to  call  your  attention  to  one  case  of 
unparalleled  outrage  and  murder,  that  has  been  brought  to  my  notice,  and 
in  regard  to  which  the  evidence  is  overwhelming. 

"  Among  the  prisoners  captured  at  Fort  Pillow,  was  Major  Bradford, 
who  had  charge  of  the  Fort  after  the  fall  of  Major  Booth.  After  being 
taken  a  prisoner,  he  was  started  with  other  prisoners,  in  charge  of  Colonel 
Duckworth,  for  Jackson.  At  Brownsville  they  rested  over  niglit.  The 
following  morning,  two  companies  were  detailed  by  Colonel  Duckworth  to 
proceed  to  Jackson  with  the  prisoners.  After  they  had  started,  and  pro- 
ceeded a  very  short  distance,  five  soldiers  were  recalled  by  Colonel  Duck- 
worth, and  were  conferred  with  by  him.  They  then  rejoined  the  column, 
and  after  proceeding  about  five  miles  from  Brownsville,  the  column  was 
halted,  and  Major  Bradford  taken  abou*^  fifty  yards  from  the  roadside  and 
deliberately  shot  by  the  five  men  who  had  been  recalled  by  Colonel  Duck- 
worth, and  his  body  left  unburied  upon  the  ground  where  he  felL  He  now 
lies  buried  near  the  spot,  and,  if  you  desire,  you  can  easily  satisfy  yourself 
of  the  truth  of  what  I  assert. 

"  I  beg  leave  to  say  to  you,  that  this  transaction  hardly  justifies  your  re- 
mark, that  your  operations  have  been  conducted  on  ciWlized  principles ; 


Another  Letter  from  Washbume.  489 

imd  until  you  take  some  steps  to  bring  the  peroetrators  of  this  outrage  to 
justice,  the  wodd  will  not  fail  to  believe  that  it  has  your  sanction. 
"  I  am,  General,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

C.  C.  Washburne, 

Major-  General" 

• 

Besides  this  communication,  so  stuffed  with  harsh  epithetSi 
and  the  unsoldierly  discourtesy  of  the  gownsman  in  contro- 
versy, it  seems  that,  while  Forrest's  letter  of  the  14th  of  June 
was  on  its  way  to  the  Federal  headquarters,  one  touching  the 
same  subject  had  been  written  by  General  Washburne,  and 
dispatched  on  the  17th  to  Major-General  Lee,  which  we  also 
print  as  a  part  of  the  history  of  the  day  : 

<*  Headquarters  District  of  West-Tennessee,  ) 
Memphis,  Tennessee,  June  17,  1864.         ) 
^*'  Major-General  S.  D,  Lee^  Commanding  Confederate  Forces^  near  Tupelo^ 

Mississippi, 

"  General  :  When  I  heard  that  the  forces  of  Brigadier-General  Stur- 
gia  had  been  driven  back,  and  a  portion  of  them  probably  captured,  I  felt 
considerable  solicitude  for  the  fate  of  the  two  colored  regiments  that  formed 
a  part  of  the  command,  until  I  was  informed  that  the  Confederate  forces  were 
commanded  by  you.  When  I  heard  that,  I  became  satisfied  that  no  atroci- 
ties would  be  committed  upon  those  troops,  but  that  they  would  receive 
the  treatment  which  humanity,  as  well  as  their  gallant  conduct,  demanded. 
I  regret  to  say,  that  the  hope  that  I  entertained  has  been  dispelled  by  facts 
which  have  recently  come  to  my  knowledge. 

**  From  statements  that  have  been  made  to  me  by  colored  soldiers,  who 
were  eye-witnesses,  it  would  seem  that  die  massacre  of  Fort  Pillow  had 
been  reproduced  at  the  late  af!air  at  Brice's  Cross- Roads.  The  details  of 
the  atrocities  there  committed  I  will  not  trouble  you  with.  If  true,  and 
not  disavowed,  they  must  lead  to  consequences,  hereafter,  fearful  to  con- 
template. It  is  best  that  we  should  now  have  a  fair  understanding  upon 
the  question  of  treatment  of  this  class  of  soldiers. 

"  If  it  is  contemplated  by  the  Confederate  Government  to  murder  all 
colored  troops  that  may  by  the  chances  of  war  fall  into  their  hands,  as  was 
the  case  at  Fort  Pillow,  it  is  but  fair  that  it  should  be  truly  and  openly 
avowed.  Within  the  last  six  weeks,  I  have,  oh  two  occasions,  sent  colored 
troops  into  the  field  from  this  point     In  the  expectation  tliat  the  Confe- 


490  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest 

derate  Government  would  disavow  the  action  of  their  commanding  general 
at  the  Fort  Pillow  massacre,  I  have  forborne  to  issue  any  instructions  to 
the  colored  troops  as  to  the  course  they  should  pursue  toward  Confederate 
soldiers  that  might  &11  into  their  hands  ;*  but  seeing  no  disavowal  on  the  part 
of  the  Confederate  Government,  but,  on  the  contrary,  laudations  from  the 
entire  Southren  press  of  the  perpetrators  of  the  massacre,  I  may  safely 
presume  that  indiscriminate  slaughter  is  to  be  the  fate  of  colored  troops 
that  fall  into  your  hands.  But  I  am  not  willing  to  leave  a  matter  of  such 
grave  import,  and  involving  consequences  so  fearful,  to  inference,  and  I 
have,  therefore,  thought  it  proper  to  address  you  this,  believing  that  you 
would  be  able  to  indicate  the  policy  that  the  Confederate  Government  in- 
tended to  pursue  hereafter  in  this  question.  It  it  is  intended  to  raise  the 
black  flag  against  that  imfortunate  race,  they  will  cheerfully  accept  the  is- 
sue. Up  to  this  time,  no  troops  have  fought  more  gallantly,  and  none 
have  conducted  themselves  with  greater  propriety.  They  have  fully  vindi- 
dicated  their  right  (so  long  denied)  to  be  treated  as  men.  I  hope  that  I 
have  been  misinformed  in  regard  to  the  treatment  they  have  received  at 
the  battle  of  Brice's  Cross-Roads,  and  that  the  accounts  received  result 
rather  from  the  excited  imaginations  of  the  fugitives,  than  fix)m  actual  facts. 
"  For  the  government  of  the  colored  troops  under  my  command,  I  would 
thank  you  to  inform  me,  with  as  little  delay  as  possible,  if  it  is  your  inten 
tion,  or  the  intention  of  the  Confederate  Government,  to  murder  colored 
soldiers  that  may  fall  into  your  hands,  or  treat  them  as  prisoners  of  war> 
and  subject  to  be  exchanged  as  other  prisoners. 

"  I  am,  General,  respectfully,  etc., 

C.  C.  Washburne, 

Maior-General.** 

As  this  communication  passed  through  Forrest's  hands,  he 
made  an  immediate  reply,  which  we  reproduce : 

"  Headquarters  Forrest's  Cavalry,  Tupelo,  > 

June  23,  1864.         ) 
^^Major-General  C,  C,  Waskburne^  Commanding  U,  S,  Forces,  Afemphis: 
"  General  :    I  have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  (per  flag  of 


*  But  admits  in  the  letter,  antty  p.  487,  vengeance,  and  sworn  to  give  no  qur- 
that  he  knew  at  the  same  time  those  ter  to  Confederates  that  might  &U  into 
troops  had  gone  into  the  field  breathing     their  hands.    See  Commentaneab 


Another  Letter  from  Forrest.  491 

truce)  of  your  letter  of  the  17th  instant,  addressed  to  Major-General  S.  D, 
Lee,  or  officer  commanding  Confederate  forces  near  Tupelo.  I  have  for- 
warded it  to  General  Lee,  with  a  copy  of  this  letter. 

'*  I  regard  your  letter  as  discourteous  to  the  commanding  officer  of  this 
department,  and  grossly  insulting  to  myself.  You  seek,  by  implied  threats, 
to  intimidate  him,  and  assume  the  privilege  of  denouncing  me  as  a  mur- 
derer, and  as  guilty  of  the  wholesale  slaughter  of  the  garrison  at  Fort  Pil- 
low, and  found  your  assertions  upon  the  ex  parte  testimony  of  (your  friends) 
the  enemies  of  myself  and  country. 

*'  I  shall  not  enter  into  the  discussion,  therefore,  of  any  of  the  questions 
involved,  nor  undertake  any  refutation  of  the  charges  made  by  you  against 
myself  Nevertheless,  as  a  matter  of  personal  privilege  alone,  I  unhesita- 
tingly say,  that  they  are  unfounded,  and  unwarranted  by  the  £icts.  But 
whether  these  charges  are  true  or  false,  they,  with  the  question  you  ask, 
as  to  whether  negro  troops,  when  captured,  will  be  recognized  and  treated 
as  prisoners  of  war,  subject  to  exchange,  etc.,  are  matters  which  the  Go- 
vernments of  the  United  States  and  the  Confederate  States  are  to  decide 
and  adjust,  not  their  subordinate  officers.  I  regard  captured  negroes  as  I 
do  other  captured  property,  and  not  as  captured  soldiers  ;  but  as  to  how 
regarded  by  my  Government,  and  the  disposition  which  has  been,  and  will 
hereafter  be  made  of  them,  I  respectfully  refer  you,  through  the  proper 
channel,  to  the  authorities  at  Richmond. 

"  It  is  not  the  policy  or  the  interest  of  the  South  to  destroy  the  negro ; 
on  the  contrary,  to  preserve  and  protect  him  ;  and  all  who  have  surren- 
dered to  us  have  received  kind  and  humane  treatment 

"  Since  the  war  began,  I  have  captured  many  thousand  Federal  pri- 
soners, and  they,  including  the  survivors  of  the  *  Fort  Pillow  Massacre,* 
black  and  white,  are  living  witnesses  of  the  fact,  that,  with  my  knowledge 
or  consent,  or  by  my  orders,  not  one  of  them  has  ever  been  insulted  or 
maltreated  in  any  way. 

"  You  speak  of  your  forbearance,  in  *  not  giving  to  your  negro  troops 
instructions  and  orders,  as  to  the  course  they  should  pursue  in  regard  to 
Confederate  soldiers  that  might  fall  into  (your)  their  hands,'  which  clearly 
conveys  to  my  mind  two  very  distinct  impressions.  The  first  is,  that,  in 
not  giving  them  instructions  and  orders,  you  have  left  the  matter  entirely 
to  the  discretion  of  the  negroes  as  to  how  they  should  dispose  of  prison- 
ers ;  second,  an  implied  threat,  to  give  such  orders  as  will  lead  to  *  con- 
sequences too  fearful  *  for  contemplation.  In  confirmation  of  the  correct- 
ness of  the  first  impression,  (which  your  language  now  fiiUy  develops,)  I 
refoyou  most  respectfuDy  to  my  letter  from  the  battie-field  of  Tishomingo 


i 


49^  Campaigns  of  General  FarresL 

creek,  and  forwarded  to  you,  by  flag  of  truce,  on  the  14th  instant  As  to 
the  second  impression,  you  seem  disposed  to  take  into  your  own  hands 
the  settlement  which  belongs  to,  and  can  only  be  settled  by,  your  Govern- 
ment But  if  you  are  prepared  to  take  upon  yoiu^elf  the  responsibility  of 
inaugurating  a  system  of  warfare  contrary  to  civilized  usages,  the  onus,  as 
well  as  the  consequences,  will  be  chargeable  to  yourself. 

*'  Deprecating,  as  I  should  do,  such  a  state  of  af&irs  ;  determined,  as 
I  am,  not  to  be  instrumental  in  bringing  it  about ;  feeling  and  knowing,  as 
I  do,  that  I  have  the  approval  of  my  Government,  my  people,  and  my  own 
conscience,  as  to  the  past ;  and  with  the  firm  belief  that  I  will  be  sustained 
by  them  in  my  future  policy,  it  is  left  with  you  to  determine  what  that  po- 
licy shall  be — whether  in  accordance  with  the  laws  of  civilized  nations,  or 
in  violation  of  them.  Very  respectfully,  etc, 

N.  B.  Forrest, 

Major-Generad." 

On  the  15th  of  June,  General  Forrest,  repairing  to  Tupelo 
with  his  staff  and  escort,  established  his  headquarters  at  that 
central  position.  Meanwhile,  his  troops,  after  burying  the 
dead,  collecting  and  removing  the  wounded,  and  gleaning  the 
field  of  all  spoils  and  trophies,  had  been  distributed  at  points 
deemed  most  advantageous  for  the  easy  subsistence  of  men 
and  animals,  as  well  as  their  rapid  concentration  in  an 
emergency.*  About  this  time  General  Roddy,  with  his  en- 
tire force,  was  placed  under  Forrest,  and  that  officer  accordingly 
was  ordered  to  establish  his  headquarters  at -Corinth,  taking 
thither  his  other — Patterson's — brigade,  except  three  hundred 
men  to  be  left  in  North-Alabama. 

For  the  next  fortnight,  General  Forrest,  ever  diligent,  ever 
looking  into  all  matters  of  administration  with  his  own  eyes, 
with  unremitting  enjcrgy,  pressed  forward  his  preparations  to 


*  Chalmers  was  at  Columbus  with  tcrs  were  at  Guntown,  and  his  diviaon 

McCulloch's    Brigade    and    Walton's  — Bell's  and  Lyon's  Brigades — wis 

Battery,  and  after  a  few  days,  Ruckcr's  quartered      in     that      neighborhood. 

Brigade  was  directed  to  take  post  at  Mabry's  Brigade  was  at  Okolona.    And 

the  same  place.     Buford's  headquar-  Johnson  was  ordered  to  Corinth. 


I 

Measures  of  Preparation,  493 

meet  any  endeavor  of  the  enemy.  Numerous  parties  from 
the  regular  scouting  companies  of  his  command  were  kept  far 
in  advance  upon  all  the  approaches  from  any  hostile  quarter. 
Forage  and  subsistence  were  collected  at  central  points  upon 
all  routes  of  possible  operations.  And  among  his  measures 
at  this  period  was  the  organization  into  an  infantry  battalion 
of  all  the  men  of  Roddy's,  Buford's,  and  Chalmers's  Divisions, 
who  were  without  serviceable-  horses.  All  their  horses,  and 
other  unserviceable  animals  of  the  command,  were  then  col- 
lected and  sent  to  favorable  points  for  recuperation.  Special 
eflforts  were  directed  likewise  to  the  restoration  of  the  battery 
teams  to  the  most  efficient  condition.  And  nothing,  indeed, 
seems  to  have  been  omitted  that  was  practicable  for  placing 
his  whole  force  in  the  most  effective  fighting  condition. 

On  the  22d,  orders  were  given  to  Roddy  to  observe  closely 
on  the  road  westward  toward  Lagrange,  and  in  the  direction 
of  the  Tennessee  river  at  Clifton  ;  also  to  be  in  readiness  to 
move  at  a  moment's  notice  in  the  best  practicable  condition 
for  active  service.  A  letter  written  about  this  time  to  his 
trusty  captain  of  scouts,  will  show  what  he  exacted  of  that 
branch  of  his  command,  and  the  steps  taken  to  secure  accu- 
rate information : 


u 


"  Captain,"  writes  one  of  his  Adjutant-Generals,  (Captain  Anderson,} 
I  am  directed  by  the  Major-General  Commanding  to  say  that  he  is  not 
satisfied  with  the  meagre  and  unreliaWe  information  received  from  your 
men.  He  wishes  you  to  order  them  to  scout  well  and  close  up  to  Mem- 
phis and  the  railroad,  and  give  him  reliable  information  as  to  enemy's  po- 
sition and  movements  ;  also  their  numbers.  Endeavor,  also,  to  send  a 
scout  up  toward  Randolph,  above  Memphis,  to  ascertain  whether  any 
troops  are  moving  up  the  river  from  Memphis.  He  also  wishes  you  to 
have  him  advised  promptly,  by  telegraph,  from  Holly  Springs,  Oxford,  or 
Senatobia,  and  by  courier  line  from  Holly  Springs,  via  Kipley,  to  this 
I^ace. 

^  A  movement  of  the  enemy  in  force  is  anticipated,  and  he  desires  tfiaC 


494  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. . 

you  order  your  men  not  only  to  learn  all  they  can,  but  see  for  linear 
selves."* 

Sharp  and  stringent  orders  were  likewise  issued  to  his 
medical  officers,  commanding  more  rapid  movement  of  the 
wounded  from  the  vicinity  of  the  late  battle-field.  Detach- 
ments were  thrown  out  to  glean  absentees  and  deserters,  and 
a  field-officer  was  dispatched  to  West-Tennessee  to  declare 
an  amnesty  to  all  deserters  who  would  return  to  their  colors. 

By  this  time,  information  was  received  from  sources  so  re- 
liable as  to  satisfy  the  Confederate  General  that  a  Federal 
force  was  preparing  to  march  from  Memphis  against  him, 
larger  than  either  of  the  columns  which  he  had  discomfited 
Informing  his  superior  of  the  fact,  he  made  new  and  additional 
dispositions  to  keep  the  impending  Federal  movement  under 
the  closest  observation.  Among  the  steps  to  this  end  was 
the  detachment  of  a  picked  battalion  of  200  men,  drawn  from 
Buford's  Division,  on  the  23d,  advanced  to  Ripley  to  hold  in 
observation  the  many  roads  converging  upon  that  important 
strategic  position. 

On  the  25th,  he  communicated  for  .the  information  of  his 
superior — Major-General  Lee — his  views,  in  writing,  of  the 
actual  objective  of  the  impending  hostile  movement,  its 
strength  and  progress.  That  communication  is  so  character- 
istic of  the  Confederate  General  that  we  spread  it  upon  these 
pages : 

"  From  the  information  I  have,  am  clearly  of  the  opinion  that  the  force 
now  moving  from  Memphis  meditate  the  destruction  of  the  Mobile  and 
Ohio  Railroad,  as  far  down  as  possible ;   and  then  turn  across  to  the 


*  General     Forrest,     however,    ac-  ance,  courage,  and  intelligence  iHiidi 

knowledges  himself  greatly  indebted  to  enal>led  them  to  render  incalculable  9er* 

Captain  Thomas  Henderson,  his  offi-  vice.    In  £ict,  their  operationswere  iS" 

cers  and  men,  for  their  habitual  vigil-  valuable. 


General  Forrest's  Letter  to  General  Lee.      495 

Central  Railroad,  destroy  it,  and  return  to  Memphis.  I  therefore  advise 
the  removal  of  our  surplus  stores  from  Grenada  and  other  points  across 
in  the  direction  of  Meridian.  I  do  not  believe  they  design  joining  Sher- 
man. Most  of  their  force  consists  of '  one  hundred  day  men  ;'  at  any  rate, 
a  large  number  of  that  character  have  arrived,  and  are  arriving,  at  Mem- 
phis. My  scouts  report  that  184  wagons  and  twenty  ambulances  passed 
Forrest  Hill,  eighteen  miles  east  of  Memphis,  and  that  1200  troops  have 
passed  up ;  but  I  think  that  an  over-estimate  of  the  number  which  has 
thus  far  left  Memphis  for  up  the  road.  I  have  no  doubt  but  that  they  have 
and  will  move  with  18,000  to  20,000  men,  a  portion  of  which  will  be  used  to 
^^arrison  the  points  already  fortified  on  the  Memphis  and  Charleston  road. 
With  a  base  secured  as  far  east  as  practicable,  they  will  then  attempt  the 
programme  previously  referred  to.  I  respectfully  suggest,  therefore,  that 
the  Major-General  Commanding  order  up  (as  far  this  way  as  forage  will 
permit)  all  the  available  troops  of  his  department  Besides  three  com- 
panies of  scouts,  I  have  200  men  at  Ripley,  and  intend  sending  200  more 
under  Colonel  Forrest,  to  go  as  near  Lagrange  as  possible,  and  ascertain 
what  is  going  on,  and  keep  me  fully  posted.  Would  move  a  greater  force 
there  but  for  the  difficulty  in  supplying  it  with  forage,  not  having  a  suffi- 
ciency of  mules. 

"  Have  ordered  all  General  Roddy's  force  to  Corinth,  except  300  men, 
to  be  left  in  the  valley  to  meet  any  raids  from  Decatur.  Also,  ordered 
him  to  send  his  wagon-train  and  all  his  unserviceable  and  broken-down 
stock  to  this  place,  to  be  provided  for  and  pastured.'' 

• 

About  the  same  period — June  27th — another  letter,  ad- 
dressed to  General  Roddy,  may  be  cited  as  showing  the  scope 
of  his  preparations,  and  the  method  and  attention  to  details 
that  characterized  his  instructions  to  his  subordinates  : 

"  I  am  directed  by  the  Major-General  Commanding  to  say  that  he  de- 
sires you  to  move  all  yoiir  wagons,  unserviceable  horses,  dismounted  and 
unarmed  men  to  this  place,  reserving  and  keeping  with  you  only  wagons 
sufficient  for  your  ordnance,  and  the  smallest  quantity  of  cooking  utensils 
that  will  do  your  command.  Take  your  best  teams  for  your  ordnance  and 
cooking  utensils. 

''  Have  one  hundred  rounds  of  ammunition  to  the  man,  forty  in  cart- 
ridge-boxes, and  balance  in  wagons,  together  with  as  much  artillery  am^ 
monition  as  you  may  think  sufficient    Keep  five  days'  rations  for  your 


496  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

command,  and  be  prepared  for  a  move  at  a  moment's  notice.  You  will 
send  your  dismounted  and  unarmed  men,  wagons,  and  unserviceable  horses 
down,  in  charge  of  a  competent  officer  or  officers,  and  have  all  your  men, 
with  horses,  able  for  duty,  armed  from  those  whose  horses  are  unservice- 
able. Two  days'  rations  of  hard  bread  for  all  the  troops  you  may  keep  at 
Corinth,  will  be  sent  you  as  soon  as  the  number  is  ascertained  and  re- 
ported. The  east  side  of  the  railroad  from  Baldwin  is  the  best  road  to 
this  place.     Direct  your  wagons  to  come  that  route. 

"  Respectfully,  etc., 

Charles  W.  Anderson, 

A.  A.  A.  GeneraL" 

Two  General  Orders — Nos.  56-7 — and  a  circular  of  this 
date  (27th)  are  likewise  of  noteworthy  characteristic  import 
The  first  is  as  follows  : 

"The  several  commands  of  the  army  are  now  well  supplied  with 
wagons,  all  complete,  to  wit :  Wagon-bows  and  sheets,  feed-boxes,  extra 
tongues,  and  tongue-props,  in  good  order,  being  so  turned  over  to  them 
from  the  recent  captures  of  the  enemy. 

"  Unless  quartermasters  are  vigilant  and  attentive  in  the  preservation 
of  these  things,  they  will  soon  be  lost  or  destroyed  by  the  carelessness  of 
teamsters  and  wagon-masters.  It  is  therefore  the  intention  of  the  Major- 
General  Commanding,  whenever  he  finds  a  wagon,  in  camp  or  on  the 
march,  deficient  in  any  of  these  needed  articles,  with  all  of  which  it  has 
been  supplied,  or  finds  them  damaged,  or  neglected,  or  missing,  to  hold 
the  proper  party  to  a  most  rigid  responsibility,  and  without  mercy,  inflict 
the  severest  punishment  known  to  the  regulations,  upon  the  head  of  that 
officer  in  whose  department  such  neglect  shall  be  found." 

The  other  order  is  in  regard  to  detailed  men,  a  numerous 
class  in  Confederate  armies,  and  directed  that : 

"  Hereafter,  every  detailed  man  in  all  the  departments  will  be  armed 
with  his  gun  and  necessary  accoutrements  to  go  into  the  fight,  and  it  is  ex- 
pected and  will  be  required  of  them  so  to  do.  One  clerk  in  each  depart- 
ment will  be  excepted  from  this  order.  Division,  brigade  conimanderSi 
and  heads  of  departments  will  be  held  accountable  for  the  full  execution 
of  this  order.  There  wUl  also  be  exempted  one  wagon-master  with 
trains." 


Preparations.  497 

The  circular  concerned  a  vice  very  coiqmon  during  the 
war,  and  was  as  follows : 

"On  account  of  the  many  incorrect,  improper,  and  contradictory  dis- 
patches and  articles  written  by  officers  and  others  of  this  command  for 
publication,  in  many  of  which  have  been  developed  and  made  public  its 
positions,  movements,  numbers,  and  operations,  the  Major-General  Com- 
manding forbids  that  dispatches  or  letters  trenching  upon  any  of  these 
points  be  written  and  sent  from  this  command  unless  first  submitted  to 
and  approved  at  these  headquarters,  or  by  the  Major-General  Command- 
ing the  Department  And  that  there  may  be  no  misunderstanding  upon 
this  point,  he  directs  that  the  order  be  read  at  dress-parade,  the  ensuing 
week,  at  least  three  times." 

Forrest  now  began  to  concentrate  and  redispose  his  troops. 
Chalmers's  Division  was  brought  up  from  Columbus  to  Vero- 
na ;  the  outpost  at  Ripley  was  increased  to  400  men,  placed 
under  Lieutenant-Colonel  Jesse  Forrest,  who  was  instructed 
to  open  dispatches  from  scouts  and  only  to  express  the  im- 
portant to  headquarters,  so  as  to  avoid  unnecessary  work  for 
his  couriers  and  their  horses  ;  and  orders  were  issued  for  all 
to  be  held  in  readiness  for  movement  at  a  moment's  notice. 
The  absentees,  however,  from  the  various  regiments  were  very 
numerous,  despite  his  constant  efforts  to  reduce  the  number.* 

II. 

For  the  first  week  in  July  the  work  of  preparation  for  the 
menaced  conflict  was  pressed  with  unabated  activity  and  at- 
tention to  detail.  The  outpost  at  Ripley  was  strengthened  to 
€00  men,  the  command  of  whom  was  devolved  upon  Lieu- 


«  At  the  end  of  June,  Forrest's  Ca-  Bell  and  Lyon  — at  Tupelo,  Mabry't 

>alry  vere  disposed  as  follows :  Chal-  Brigade  at  Saltillo,  and  Roddy's  Divi- 

^Mrs's  Division— Rucker's  and  McCul-  sion— Johnson*!  and  Patterson's  Bri- 

lodi's  Brigades— at  Verona,  Buford's—  gades^at  Corinth,  or  in  Nordi  Alabama^ 


498  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

tenant-Colonel   §.   M.   Hyams,  First   Mississippi   Partisans. 
And  on  the  8th,  Bell's  Brigade  was  thrown  forward,  from  Tu- 
pelo, some  fifteen  miles  to  the  north-westward,  to  £llistown, 
with  one  of  his  regiments  detached  as  an  outpost  in  advance 
of  that  position.     General  S.  D.  Lee  came  up  on  the  same 
day,  with  some  eight  or  nine  hundred  infantry,  from  Mobile. 
Mabrey  was  also  directed  to  move  on  the  next  day  from  Sal- 
tillo  toward  Ellis  town.    At  the  same  time  the  whole  com- 
mand was  directed  to  draw  and  cook  their  meat-ration  for 
several  days,  while  all  tents  and  superfluous  baggage  were 
ordered  to  be  sent  by  rail  to  the  southward.* 

Meanwhile,  on  the  7th,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Hyams  had  had 
a  skirmish  with  a  strong  Federal  column  a  few  miles  in  ad- 
vance of  Ripley,  and  had  been  forced,  by  the  weight  of  greatly 
superior  numbers,  to  fall  back,  first  to  Ripley  and  then  to  El- 
listown,  on  the  8th.  Generals  Lee  and  Forrest  visited  Vero- 
na on  the  9th,  and  examined  the  ground  carefully  in  that 
neighborhood,  with  a  view  to  the  selection  of  a  position  for 
a  stand  against  the  approaching  Federal  force.  That  force 
was  rapidly  drawing  near,  ravaging  and  wasting  the  country 
far  and  wide  through  which  they  passed,  and  marking  their 
route  by  a  broad  belt  of  smoke  and  flame  at  the  moment,  and 
later  of  ashes,  charred  ruins,  and  blackened,  crumbling  chim- 
ney-stacks.f  At  three  p.m.  on  the  9th,  the  head  of  the  main 
Federal  column  had  reached  a  point  six  miles  south  of  New- 
Albany,  on  the  road  to  Pontotoc  and  Chesterville.  McCul- 
loch*s  Brigade,  therefore,  was  thrown  out  to  Pontotoc,  and 
Rucker  to  a  point  four  miles  west  of  Tupelo,  at  the  intersec- 
tion of  the  road  from  Pontotoc  with  the  one  from  Chester- 


*  The  Federal  column  concentrated  t  The  Federal  column  croMed  and 

at  Lagrange  took  the   field  srt  least  encamped  on  the  south  bank  of  the 

13,000  strong,  under  Major-General  A.  Tallahatchie  on  the  9th. 
J.  Smith,  on  the  5th  of  July. 


The  Enemy  at  Hand.  499 

ville  to  Okolona.  Roddy,  likewise,  was  ordered  to  hasten,  by 
forced  marches  night  and  day,  to  Okolona ;  and  Buford  to 
mass  his  division  at  EUistown,  at  which  point  Mabry's  Bri- 
gade was  also  quartered. 

The  movements  of  the  enemy  now  developed,  apparently,  a 
line  of  march  toward  Okolona.  Accordingly,  Buford  was  or- 
dered to  move  with  the  force  at  EUistown  across  to  Pontotoc, 
whither,  as  will  be  remembered,  Chalmers  had  also  been  di- 
rected to  move  with  his  division  at  daylight  on  the  loth,  and, 
effecting  a  junction  with  Buford,  was  instructed  to  assume 
command  of  all  the  Confederate  forces  in  that  quarter,  with 
orders  to  skirmish  vigorously,  but  to  avoid  being  drawn  into 
a  general  engagement.  By  a  forced  march  during  the  night 
of  the  9th,  Buford  reached  the  vicinity  of  Pontotoc  early  on 
the  morning  of  the  loth.  His  orders  also  were  to  throw  his 
division  across  the  path  and  on  the  flank  of  the  enemy,  skir- 
mishing heavily,  and  to  retire  slowly  in  the  direction  of  Oko- 
lona if  overmatched.  The  enemy  now  was  moving  in  the  di- 
rection of  Pontotoc  in  three  columns,  each  preceded  by  a  force 
of  cavalry. 

Generals  Lee  and  Forrest  established  their  headquarters  at 
Okolona,  and  the  former,  as  senior,  took  the  general  direction 
of  affairs.  Chalmers's  Division  had  been  pushed  forward  ra- 
pidly, on  the  morning  of  the  loth  July,  to  the  vicinity  of  Pon- 
totoc, and  the  Confederate  force  was  further  reenforced,  the 
same  day  at  Okolona,  by  Neely's  and  Gholson's  Brigades, 
which  had  been  brought  up  dismounted,  the  former  from  Ala- 
bama and  the  latter  from  South-Mississippi. 

In  the  mean  time,  Buford  and  Chalmers  kept  detachments 
well  in  advance  of  their  respective  positions,  and  a  constant 
skirmish  was  maintained  with  the  advancing  enemy,  and  Bu- 
ford threw  out  a  detachment  of  100  picked  men,  under  Cap- 
tain Tyler,  of  Faulkner's  Regiment,  to  gain  the  Federal  rear 
and  cut  off  his  communications.    And  on  the  nth,  the  dis- 


\ 


500  Campaigns  of  General  ForresL 

mounted  force  at  Okolona,  including  Neel/s  and  GhoIson*s 
Brigades,  were  thrown  forward  to  Prairie  Mound,  to  construct 
a  line  of  intrenchments  at  that  point. 

On  the  morning  of  the  i  ith,  the  enemy,  quitting  their  camp 
some  four  miles  northward  of  Pontotoc,  at  sunrise,  pushed  Mc- 
Culloch  and  Barteau  slowly  before  them,  until  McCuUoch  was 
relieved  by  Lyon  with  his  brigade  at  Pinson's  Hill,  a  strong 
position  two  miles  south  of  Pontotoc,  which  General  Lyon 
strengthened  by  infantry  cover  of  rails  and  logs.     The  Fede- 
rals, however,  moving  cautiously  and  slowly,  after   feeling 
Lyon's  pickets,  disappeared  from  his  front  about  sunset     At 
this  time,  or  nightfall,  the  position  of  the  Confederate  forces 
appears  to  have  been  as  follows  :  Barteau's  Regiment  occu- 
pied the  extreme  right,  on  the  Tupelo  road,  supported  by 
Rucker's  Brigade  on  the  left  and  somewhat  in  the  rear,  on  a 
way  known  as  the  Cotton-gin  road.     Mabry  supported  Lyon 
on  the  Okolona  road,  and  McCuUoch  held  the  Pontotoc-Hous- 
ton road,  to  the  leftward  of  Lyon,  with  a  small  force  thrown 
but  on  the  extreme  left  and  south-west  of  Pontotoc,  to  watch 
the  road  from  that  place  to  Oxford,  while  numerous  scouts 
were  to  encircle  the  Federal  army.     During  the  night,  how- 
ever, Barteau  was  withdrawn  to  his  brigade.     With  his  forces 
thus  disposed,  Chalmers  was   now  ordered  to  skirmish   ob- 
stinately with  the  enemy,  and,  if  practicable,  to  detain  them 
from  reaching  Okolona  for  two  days  longer,  so  that  the  pre- 
parations might  be  completed  for  their  reception.* 

On  the  morning  of  the  I2th,  the  enemy,  after  some  preli- 
minary skirmishing,  attacked  Lyon's  position  vigorously,  but 
were  foiled  without  difficulty.     Seeing,  however,  that  a  force 


*  The  country  was  traversed  with  of  extreme  difficulty  to  ascertain  the 

many  roads   leading    toward  various  ultimate  line  of  mardi  of  the  enemjf^ 

points  along  or  near  the  Mobile  and  first  from  New- Albany  and  subsequent* 

Ohio  Railroad,  so  that  it  was  a  matter  ly  from  Pontotoc   ' 


A  Battle  Decided  upon. 


501 


was  moving  so  as  to  gain  his  rear,  Lyon  withdrew  several 
hundred  yards  to  another  strong  position.  Simultaneously, 
Federal  columns  had  moved  out  respectively  on  the  Tupelo 
and  Houston  roads,  encountering  and  being  checked  by  Duff's 
Regiment  on  the  former,  and  by  Willis's  Texas  Battalion  on 
the  latter.    And  thus  stood  affairs  at  sunset  on  the  12th.* 

During  this  time,  however.  General  Lee  was  receiving  dis- 
patches from  the  Confederate  commander  at  Mobile,  report- 
ing that  he  was  assuredly  threatened  with  a  grave  attack  by 
land  and  water,  and  urging  the  return  at  least  of  the  troops 
withdrawn  from  his  command.  At  the  same  time,  he  was 
advised  by  General  Joe  Johnston  that  no  reenforcements  need 
be  expected  from  his  army.  Unwilling  to  leave  Mobile  thus 
weakened  and  exposed,  after  a  free  consultation  with  Forrest 
and  other  superior  officers  of  his  command,  General  Lee  de- 
termined to  draw  the  enemy  into  an  immediate  engagement. 
And  with  that  object  the  Confederate  General  put  all  his 
forces  of  every  sort  in  motion,  on  the  night  of  the  12th,  for 
the  position  occupied  by  General  Chalmers,  four  miles  south- 
east of  Pontotoc,  on  the  Okolona  road,  whither  he  repaired  in  • 
person  during  ^the  night,  accompanied  by  General  Forrest. f 


•  Several  of  Forrest's  dispatches  of 
this  day  to  his  subordinates  are  note- 
worthy.  To  General  Chalmers  he 
writes  from  Okolona  that,  "  If  the 
enemy  moves  on  you  this  morning,  let 
bim  come,  keeping  his  flank  and  rear 
well  watched  and  guarded,  so  that  you 
may  know  promptly  of  any  change  of 
direction.  Skirmish  slightly  with  hinu 
A  section  of  artillery  has  been  sent  up 
whicb  you  will  use  occasionally,  as 
though  feebly  resisting  his  advance. 
.  •  .  Should  the  enemy  turn  back, 
jou  will  attack  and  hold  him  until  the 


General  can  move  up  with  the  balance 
of  the  troops."  Somewhat  later,  writ- 
ing to  the  same  officer,  he  says,  "  You 
must  £nd  where  the  enemy  is  and  what 
he  is  doing.  You  have  force  enough 
to  do  this,  and  it  must  be  done." 

t  The  forces  thus  put  in  motion 
were  Bell's  Brigade,  General  Roddy's 
command  ;  Gholson's  State  Troops, 
under  Colonel  Ham ;  and  the  infantry 
and  dismounted  men,  under  Lieutenant- 
Colonel  Beltzhoover,  with  six  pieces  of 
artillery. 


502  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

On  the  morning  of  the  13th,  pending  the  coming  up  of  the 
infantry  and  Neely's  and  Gholson's  dismounted  brigades,  the 
Federals  having  shown  no  disposition  to  advance,  General 
Forrest  went  forward  to  reconnoitre  the  enemy's  position,  with 
Mabry's  Brigade,  Walton's  Battery,  and  his  escort.     Within 
two  miles  of  Pontotoc,  (on  the  Okolona  road,)  a  Federal  out- 
post was  encountered,  which  retired,  skirmishing   pertina- 
ciously, however,  at  all  favorable  positions,  until  finally  driven 
by  Mabry  through  Pontotoc,  and  to  the  Tupelo  road.     It  was 
now  Forrest  learned  that  the  main  Federal  force  had  been  in 
movement  toward  Tupelo  for  several  hours.   Informing  Gene- 
ral Lee  of  this  fact,  and  taking  the  same  direction,  he  followed 
with  his  escort  and  Mabry's  Brigade  for  four  miles  at  a  gal- 
lop, when,  coming  up  with,  he  drove  their  rear-guard  rapidly 
back  to  the  main  column,  and  this  brought  about  some  sharp 
fighting.    The  enemy,  however,  continued  .their  movement 
without  halting  to  make  any  serious  combat,  as  far  as  a  creek 
about  ten  miles  eastward  of  Pontotoc,  though  closely  pressed 
by  Forrest  with  his  small  force,  with  the  hope  that  he  might 
provoke  the  Federal  Commander  to  turn  and  grapple  with  his 
daring  pursuer,  and  thus  give  time  for  General  Lee  to  come 
upon  their  flank  with  the  main  Confederate  force  across  from 
thfi  Okolona  road.     But  in  this  expectation  he  was  balked. 
The  roads  upon  which  Chalmers's  and  Buford's  Divisions  had 
to  advance  were  narrow  ways  through  dense  woods,  in  large 
part  very   unfavorable  for  the  rapid  movement  of  cavalry; 
General  Lee,  moreover,  was  unable  to  throw  his  forces  upon 
the  Federal  flank  while  in  movement,  as  soon  as  or  in  the 
manner  that  had  been  anticipated.    At  the  creek  in  question, 
however,  the  enemy  drew  up,  and  stood  at  bay  ;  but,  after  a 
short  skirmish,  crossed  to  the  east  bank,  and  resumed  their 
march  toward  Tupelo.     In  this  affair  a  section  of  Walton's 
Battery  was  used  with  some  efTect. 

Meanwhile,  Chalmers,  moving  across  toward  the  Tupelo 


Ruckers  Repulse.  503 

road,  with  Rucker's  Brigade,  struck  it  about  three  p.m.,  at  Bar- 
row's shop,  twelve  miles  from  Pontotoc.     At  the  time  the 
enemy  were  moving  along  in  excellent  order,  their  wagons 
and  artillery  on  the  road,  guarded  on  either  flank  with  infan- 
try, having  flankers  thrown  out  likewise.     Selecting  a  favora- 
ble position  in  the  edge  of  a  wood,  skirting  an  open  field 
through  which  the  road  passed  about  one  hundred  yards  dis- 
tant, Rucfker's  men,  dismounted,  were  quietly  formed,  and 
opened  a  heavy  fire  of  musketry  upon  the  moving  column. 
But,  unfortunately,  a  small  detachment,  which  had  been  sent 
to  reach  the  road  somewhat  to  the  eastward,  came  in  collision 
with  the  Federals  before  Rucker  had  succeeded  in  forming  his 
line,  and  the  enemy  were  found  also  in  line  fronting  and  over- 
lapping him,  and  returned  his  fire  almost  simultaneously,  with 
one  of  the  most  destructive  character.     For  an  instant,  how- 
ever, some  of  Rucker  s  men  had  driven  the  Federals  from  a 
portion  of  their  artillery  and  wagons  ;  but  this  was  a  transient 
success,  for  the  devastating  fire,  instantaneously  poured  into 
Rucker's  small  brigade  from  flank  and  front,  could  not  be 
withstood  ;  and  the  Confederates  were  forced  to  withdraw, 
with  severe  loss,  to  their  horses,  where  they  re-formed,  and 
stood  in  admirable  spirit,  under  the  circumstances,  awaiting 
the  onset  of  the  enemy.*    To  which,  howbeit,  they  were  not 
subjected,  for  the  Federal  column  was  c(5ntent  to  resume  its 
march,  burning  some  of  their  wagons  whose  teams  had  been 
lost     We  have  said  the  Confederate  loss  was  severe  ;  it  in- 
cluded the  mortal  wounding  of  the  brave  Captain  W.  G.  Mid- 
dleton.  Eighteenth  Mississippi  ;t  the  gallant  Colonel  Duff, 


♦  The  Federals  lost  here  eight  wa- .  have  been  the  Seventh  Minnesota  and 

gons,  two  ambulances,  and  one  caisson,  Twelfth  Iowa  regiments,  which  sufier- 

the  teams  of  which,  having  been  killed  ed  somewhat. 

in  Rucker's  attack,  they  were  burned  t  This  officer  had  also  been  severely 

and  abandoned.    The  Federal  troops  wounded  at  Fort  Pillow,  while  acting 

chiefly  engaged  at  this  point  appear  to  most  gallantly. 


S04 


Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 


disabled  by  a  severe  wound  ;*  and  Major  C  C.  Clay,  Seventh 
Tennessee,  who  was  again  dangerously  wounded.! 

A.  little  later,  Buford  had  struck  the  head  of  the  Federal 
column  with  Bell's  Brigade  and  Morton's  Battery,  about  seven 
miles  west  of  Tupelo.  The  Federals,  however,  were  not  to 
be  taken  unaware,  but  moving  thoroughly  prepared  for  an 
attack,  their  column  well  closed  up,  well  shielded  by  flankers, 
and  their  wagon-train  fully  protected.  Buford  being  ordered 
by  General  Lee  to  attack.  Bell's  Tennesseeans  went  into 
action  with  their  accustomed  alacrity  and  courage.  But  the 
odds  opposed  were  too  heavy,  and  after  considerable  loss 
Buford  was  compelled  to  withdraw  from  the  combat ;  doing  so 
just  as  the  Kentucky  Brigade,  now  under  Colonel  Crossland, 
reached  the  scene.J  The  two  brigades  were  then  formed  in  a 
favorable  position  to  repel  any  attack. 

Forrest,  meanwhile,  now  reenforced  by  Rucker's  Brigade,  had 
been  hanging  closely  upon  the  Federal  rear,  and  a  succession 
of  sharp  skirmishes  ensued  until  dark,  and  up  to  within  about 
three  miles  of  Tupelo.  A  thin  line  of  troops  was  then  left, 
and  the  rest  of  the  Confederate  forces  were  withdrawn  some- 
what, and  bivouacked  ;  Chalmers's  Division  at  the  intersection 
of  the  Pontotoc  with  the  Chest erville-Okolona  road  ;  Buford 
lay  in  his  front,  about  one  mile  west  of  Harrisburg  ;  and  Roddy 
and  Mabry  to  his  right.     The  day  had  been  so  excessively 


•  Dufi's  Regiment  lost  forty-seven 
killed  and  <wounded,  including  their 
Colonel,  severely  wounded,  as  we  have 
said  above.  Captain  £.  B.  Cochran 
and  Lieutenants  J.  T.  Clayton,  E.  W. 
Jennings,  and  William  H.  Barr,  (car- 
rying the  colors,)  were  killed;  while 
Captain  Johnson,  acting  is  major  of 
the  regiment,  and  Lieutenant  L.  G. 
Knowles,  were  wounded. 


t  Major  Clay  had  been  wotmded 
previously,  in  February,  1864,  while  ia 
the  pursuit  of  Grierson  and  Smithy 
horth  of  Okolona,  Miss. 

%  Lyon's  Brigade  was  now  under 
the  command  of  Colonel  Edward 
Crossland,  (Seventh  Kentucky,)  Gene- 
ral Lyon  having  been  assigned  to  the 
command  of  a  division  formed  of  in£ui- 
try  and  dismounted  troops. 


The  Federals  Intrench.  505 

warm  and  oppressive,  that  the  dismounted  command,  moving 
slowly  and  with  much  straggling,  were  not  upon  the  field  by 
the  night  of  the  13  th.  By  daylight,  however,  a  portion  had 
come  up,  but  greatly  exhausted  by  their  long  march  under  the 
hot  sun  of  the  season.* 

The  position  held  by  the  enemy  was  a  cross-roaod  hamlet — 
called  Harrisburg — of  a  few  houses,  scattered  at  wide  inter- 
vals, over  a  somewhat  commanding  ridge.  It  was  well  chosen 
for  defense;  and  those  strong,  natural  advantages,  Major- 
General  A.  J.  Smith  immediately  set  his  troops  to  improving, 
as  far  as  practicable,  during  the  night,  by  breastworks  made 
of  rails  and  logs,  and  the  materials  of  cabins  and  outhouses, 
torn  down  for  that  purpose,  and  covered  with  earth.  This  was 
discovered  by  General  Forrest  in  a  reconnoissance,  which, 
accompanied  by  Lieutenant  Sam  Donelson,  of  his  staff,  he 
made  about  midnight,  to  within  fifty  yards  of  the  Federal  po- 
sition, riding  along  and  reconnoitering  the  lines  for  nearly  a 
mile. 

Directing  Colonel  Mabry  to  throw  forward  skirmishers  to 
within  close  proximity  of  the  enemy,  Forrest  repaired  to 
General  Lee's  headquarters,  and  reported  what  he  had  ascer- 
tained. Hoping  to  be  able  to  draw  his  adversary  into  an 
offensive  movement  in  the  morning,  General  Lee  directed  the 
immediate  disposition  of  his  force  for  that  contingency,  and 
the  erection  of  temporary  infantry  cover — of  rails  and  fallen 
timber — on  the  line  selected  as  best  for  receiving  an  attack. 
Buford's  Division  was  therefore  advanced  somewhat,  and 
formed  by  daylight  in  line  across  the  Tupelo-Pontotoc  road, 
one  mile  and  a  half  westward  of  Harrisburg  ;  Mabry's  Brigade 
being  on  the  left,  and  Crossland's  (Kentucky)  Brigade  on  the 


*    Cavalrymen,  whose  horses  were     from  Mobile.    They  had  been  marched 
imfit  for  service,  and  heavy  artillery     in  haste  a  distance  of  forty-six  milei. 


So6 


Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 


right  of  that  highway,  with  BelFs  Brigade  as  a  support  or  re- 
serve immediately  in  rear  of  Mabry.  Roddy's  Division,  at  the 
same  time,  had  taken  post  to  the  right  of  Buford's  front  line, 
and  Chalmers's  division  of  cavalry,  and  Lyon's  of  infantry, 
(not  yet  up,)  were  held  as  reserves. 


III. 


BATTLE  OF  HARRISBURG. 

The  Confederate  force  confronting  their  adversary  on  the 
morning  of  the  14th  of  July  scarcely  exceeded  eight  thousand 
officers  and  men.*  The  Federal  army  consisted  of  the  Six- 
teenth Army  Corps,  and  fell  little  short  of  thirteeen  thousand 
infantry,  three  thousand  cavalry,  and  twenty-four  pieces  of 
artillery.!  Their  position — an  eminence  of  crescent  outline, 
convex  toward  the  west,  naturally  strong,  as  we  have  observed 


•  Chalmers's  Division : 

McCulIo€h*s  Brigade,    . 

1400 

Rucker's             "      .    . 

900—2300 

Buford's  Division  : 

Beirs  Brigade,      .    .    . 

1300 

Lyon*s       "           ... 

900—2200 

Mabr/s    "           ... 

1000 

Roddy's  Division  : 

Patterson's  Brigade, 

700 

Johnston's         " 

800—1500 

Lyon's  Infantry  Division  : 

Bcltzhoovers's  Battalion, 

900 

Gholson's  (dismounted) 

Brigade, 

600 

Nccly's       (dismounted) 

Brigade, 

600—2100 

QIOO 

Artillery:    Morton't  Battery,    4 guns. 

Rice's           «• 

4    " 

Artillery:    Walton's  Battery,    4 guns. 
Thrall's         "  4    •« 

Terrell's         "  4 


u 


20 


The  cavalry  being  fought  as  infantry, 
one  fourth  were  detached  as  horse* 
holders,  and  took  no  part 

t  Subdivided  as  follows  :  First  Divi- 
sion of  Infantry,  under  Brigadier-Ge- 
neral  Mower  ;  Third  Division,  under 
Colonel  Moore  ;  and  a  Brigade  of  Ne- 
gro Infantry,  under  Colonel  Benton  : 
with  Grierson's  Division  (four  brigades) 
of  Cavalry.  (Correspondents  of  New- 
York  Times^  and  Missouri  Democrat^ 
Memphis,  July  22d,  1864.)  These  wri- 
ters, however,  place  the  strength  of  the 
whole  force  at  only  13,00a 


The  Battle-field. 


507 


— ^had  been  strengthened  by  breastworks,  thrown  up  during  the 
night  and  that  morning,  and  commanded  all  the  approaches, 
especially  toward  the  west  and  south.*  The  ground  toward 
the  Confederate  lines  was  undulating  or  broken ;  and  on  the 
Tupelo  road  there  were  woods  to  within  two  hundred  yards  of 
the  Federal  intrenchments,  when  an  open  field  intervened,  on 
the  right  and  left  of  which  extended  around,  between  the 
Federal  and  Confederate  lines,  broad,  open  fallow  fields.  That 
is  to  say,  while  in  the  centre,  any  attack  on  the  Federal  posi- 
tion must  necessarily  be  made  for  two  hundred  yards  over 
open  ground,  up  a  gentle  slope,  swept  by  artillery  and  mus- 
ketry ;  at  all  other  points  the  ground  of  approach  was  open 
for  almost  a  mile.  And  thus,  as  may  be  seen,  the  advantages 
of  position  were  clearly  and  formidably  with  the  Federals,  who, 
besides,  had  a  decided  numerical  superiority. 

By  seven  o'clock  a.m.,  having  seen  that  the  Federal  Com- 
mander gave  no  evidence  of  a  purpose  to  come  forth  from  his 
stronghold  and  give  battle,  Major-General  Lee  felt  obliged  to 
take  the  offensive  immediately,  even  though  he  were  forced  to 
attack  him  upon  ground  of  his  own  choosing.  The  precarious 
posture  of  affairs  at  Mobile,  and  the  urgency  of  the  demand 
for  reenforcements  to  that  important  seaport,  it  is  believed 
were  the  considerations  which  swayed  him  at  the  moment. 
Accordingly,  acquainting  General  Forrest  with  his  purpose. 
General  Lee  ordered  him  to  prepare  the  command  for  battle. 
Presently,  too,  skirmishers  were  thrown  forward  from  Buford's 


*  The  Federal  lines  on  the  morning 
of  the  14th  were  somewhat  less  than 
two  miles  from  right  to  left,  and  rested, 
the  left  on  the  railroad  south  of  Tupelo, 
and  the  right  extended  about  half  a  mile 
northward  of  Harrisburg.  The  strength 
of  the  Federal  position  is  forcibly  al- 
luded to  bj  the  correspondents  of  the 


New- York  Times  and  Missouri  Demo- 
crat^ who  say  expressly,  that  the  ground 
gave  the  Federals  "a  decided  advan* 
tage."  "  //  W€U  a  magnificent  position 
in  which  to  receive  an  enemy,^^  is  the 
language  used  by  one  of  these  writers. 
"  The  Federals  were  sheltered  by  tki 
woods  ;  the  Confederates  were  exposed^ 


5o8  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

Division,  and  Morton's  Battery  began  an  active  fire  from  a  hill 
half  a  mile  from  the  Federal  lines,  and  for  some  moments  a 
fruitless  effort  was  made  in  this  way  to  provoke  the  Federal 
Commander  to  take  the  offensive. 

Meanwhile,  the  Confederate  order  of  battle  was  so  modified 
that  it  stood  as  follows :  The  extreme  right  was  held  by 
Roddy's  Division,  leftward  of  which  Crossland's  Brigade  was 
next  in  line,  with  Rice's  Battery.  Bell's  Brigade  was  formed 
on  the  immediate  left,  or  north  of  the  Tupelo  road,  with  Ma- 
bry  first,  and  Rucker  next,  on  his  left,  and  Morton's  Battery, 
under  Lieutenant  Sale,  was  attached  to  this  flank.  McCul- 
loch's  Brigade,  and  Neely's  and  Gholson's  dismounted  men, 
with  Thrall's  and  Ferrell's  Batteries,  constituted  a  second 
line,  or  reserve,  posted  behind  slight  intrenchments  of  rails 
and  timber  across  and  perpendicular  to  the  Tupelo  road. 

Finding  it  impossible  to  entice  the  enemy  from  his  cover, 
or  to  assume  the  offensive,  the  Confederate  Commander,  about 
eight  o'clock,  gave  orders  for  the  simultaneous  advance  of  his 
first  line  upon  the  Federal  position.  At  the  moment,  how- 
ever, the  Confederate  order  of  battle  had  not  been  made 
to  conform  in  outline  to  that  of  the  enemy,  and  Buford, 
moving  on  the  Federal  centre,  struck  it  before  Roddy  had 
come  in  collision  with  the  enemy  in  his  quarter  of  the  field* 
Consequently,  not  only  was  a  heavy  force  of  infantry  massed 
to  meet  Buford's  attack  with  a  furious  peal — a  scorching  fire 
of  small-arms,  but  almost  their  whole  artillery  was  concentra- 
ted upon  Bell's  Tennesseans,  Mabry's  Mississippians,  and 
Crossland's  Kentuckians.  Crossland's  Brigade  was  first  en- 
gaged, driving  the  Federal  skirmishers  rapidly  in,  and  dashing 


•  General  Lee's  orders  really  were  the  enemy  as  that  held  by  Buford,  but 

that  his  centre  shpuld  stand  still,  while  from  a  misunderstanding,  the  Kentucky 

the  right  (Roddy)  should  have  time  to  Brigade  prematurely  began  the  attack, 

■wing  around  into  a  position  as  near  to  as  we  have  described. 


A  Furious  Fire.  509 

forward,  with  loud  and  hearty  cheers,  across  the  open  field  di- 
rectly upon  the  strongest  point  in  the  Federal  position.  The 
Federals  withholding  their  fire  until  their  daring  assailants 
'were  half  across  the  field,  then  opened,  as  we  have  observed, 
with  a  furious,  scathing  fusilade,  and  fast,  incessant  dis- 
charges of  canister  from  many  guns.  Bell  and  Mabry  quickly 
following  to  the  onset,  nothing  could  exceed  the  heat  of  the 
fire  which  they  encountered. 

As  stoutly  as  ever  brave  men  affronted  death,  did  these 
brigades  face  the  terrific  torrent  of  fire  thus  let  loose  i%)on 
their  thin,  exposed  ranks,  and  no  battle-field  was  ever  illustra- 
ted by  more  general  and  shining  courage,  than  was  displayed 
in  this  onset.  Urged  and  led  by  their  officers  with  conspicu- 
ous gallantry,  the  men  were  pressed  up  close  to  the  coveted 
position,  Cfossland's  Brigade,  being  uncovered  on  its  right, 
was  exposed  to  an  oblique  or  enfilading  fire,  under  which  it 
staggered,  and  finally  gave  way,  but  not  until  some  of  the  in- 
trepid Kentuckians  had  penetrated  the  Federal  intrenchments, 
wiiere  they  were  either  killed  or  captured.  Colonel  Faulkner's 
horse  was  shot  under  him,  and  he  twice  wounded  within  sixty 
paces  of  the  same  point,  and  one  third  of  their  numbers, 
including  Lieutenant-Colonel  Sherrill,  Seventh  Kentucky, 
(killed,)  were  stricken  down,  either  killed  or  wounded.*  Rice's 
Battery  moved  forward  with  the  Kentuckians,  and,  kept  well 
in  advance  with  them,  was  handled  with  signal  daring  and 
skill  And  when  the  stress  of  the  Federal  fire  was  greatest, 
Thrairs  Battery  was  thrown  forward  to  close  quarters  in  sup- 
port of  Rice,  Served  with  equal  spirit  and  efficiency,  it  ren- 
dered invaluable  aid  in  covering  the  withdrawal  of  the  Con- 
federates from  under  fircf 


♦  Brigadier-General  A.  Buford's  MS.     Hale,  Seventh  Kentucky,  were  among 
Official    Report    Colonel   Crossland,     the  wounded. 
CCTmmanding  the  brigade,  and  Major        t  Captain  Korton^s  MS.  Notes, 


5IO 


Campaigns  of  General  Forrest 


Bell  and  Mabry's  Brigades,  having  been  moved  forward  with 
somewhat  more  deliberation,  were  halted  at  short  musket* 
range,  and  delivered  several  well-sustained  volleys  before 
emerging  from  the  woods  into  the  corn-field  which  was  be- 
tween them  and  the  enemy.  But,  advancing,  they  had  not 
gone  more  than  fifty  paces  into  the  field  before  all  were  spce- 
dily  driven  back  to  the  cover  of  the  woods,  by  so  deadly  a  fire 
that  it  was  not  possible  to  breast  it,  and  from  which  Mabry's 
Brigade  lost  four  of  its  field-officers*  killed,  and  all  the  colo- 
nels of  Bell's  regiments  were  wounded  in  the  foremost  ranks.t 
Morton's  Battery,  commanded  by  the  gallant  Sale,  had  accom- 
panied this  movement,  and  shared  in  its  vicissitudes.  Its  first 
position  was  within  five  hundred  yards  of  the  enemy,  but, 
advancing,  it  was  carried  at  least  one  hundred  yards  nearer 
under  the  fire  we  have  mentioned  ;  and  when  five  out  of  the 
seven  gunners,  and  six  of  the  eight  horses  of  one  piece  were 
disabled,  and  its  commander.  Sergeant  Brown,  three  times 
wounded.  Nevertheless,  he  remained  with  his  gun  until  it 
was  carried  safely  to  the  rear  by  hand,  by  Captain  Titus's 
company  of  sharp-shooters.  J  Another  piece  was  brought  off 
by  Sergeant  C.  T.  Brady,  after  a  wheel  had  been  shot  from  it 


♦  Colonel  Isham  Harrison,  Sixth 
Mississippi ;  Lieutenant-Colonels  John 
B.  Cage,  Fourteenth  Confederate ;  Tho- 
mas M.  Nelson,  Sixth  Mississippi  Regi- 
ment ;  and  Major  Robert  C.  McKay, 
Thirty-eighth  Mississippi  Regiment, 
were  killed. 

t  Colonels  R.  M.  Russell,  C.  R. 
Bartcau,  A.  N.  Wilson,  and  J.  F.  Ncw- 
som,  were  wounded ;  also  Lieutenant- 
Colonel  Wisdom  and  Major  Parham, 
(Sixteenth  Tennessee.) 

X  A  temporary  experimental  organi- 
zation, made  np  a  day  or  two  before 


the  combat,  from  Confederates  in  on* 
finement  for  capital  and  other  grave 
military  offenses.  In  organizing  the 
company,  General  Forrest  told  these 
men  that  he  would  not  return  them  to 
fight  with  their  companies  as  y«t,  but 
would  place  them  on  probation  daring 
the  impending  battle.  They  were  some 
fifty  in  number,  and  acted  with  conspi- 
cuous gallantry  throughout  the  engage- 
ment, losing  one  third  of  their  nomben 
in  killed  and  wounded.  Subsequently, 
for  their  good  conduct,  they  were  re* 
turned  to  their  respective  companies 


The  Confederate  Left.  511 

The  remaining  pieces,  as  the  troops  were  forced  back,  were 
retired  slowly,  halting  and  firing  with  the  utmost  resolution 
and  effect.  Walton's  Battery  delivered  from  its  position  an 
effective,  long-range  fire  upon  the  enemy's  artillery,  for  which 
its  Parrott  guns  were  peculiarly  suited ;  and  Ferrell's  Battery, 
the  one  that  was  so  gallantly  and  efficiently  handled  during 
the  pursuit  of  Colonel  Streight,  in  1863,  was  held  in  reserve. 
Chalmers,  in  the  mean  time,  had  been  ordered  to  throw 
Rucker's  Brigade  as  a  support  to  Mabry,  leaving  McCuUoch 
to  support  the  centre,  and  cover  the  retreat  in  event  of  disas- 
ter. General  Chalmers  leading  the  left  and  Colonel  Rucker 
the  right  wing,  the  brigade  advanced,  at  a  double-quick,  with 
a  loud  shout,  and  with  splendid  order  entered  the  open  ground 
between  them  and  the  enemy.  The  heat,  that  of  a  sultry  July 
day  of  the  dimate,  was  intense ;  without  a  breath  of  air,  a 
feverish  thirst  harassed  the  men.  Nevertheless,  and  despite 
an  appalling  fi-re  of  musketry  and  artillery  that  swept  the 
ground  over  which  they  advanced,  Rucker's  small  brigade 
struggled  onward  with  resplendent  courage  for  some  moments. 
Twice  wounded,  Rucker  had  to  leave  the  field  after  leading 
his  men  to  within  sixty  yards  of  the  Federal  trenches ;  and 
many  of  his  bravest  officers  and  men  were  added  to  the  num- 
ber of  dead  and  wounded  that  lay  on  the  field  already,  belong- 
ing to  the  brigades  which  had  preceded  in  the  onset.  At 
least  a  third  of  Rucker's  officers  and  men  were  stricken  down, 
either  by  the  enemy  or  by  the  heat,  and  the  attack  was  re- 
pulsed. So  great  indeed  was  the  distress  from  thirst  that,  for 
some  moments,  all  organization  was  at  an  end,  and  no  author- 
ity or  orders  of  officers  was  heeded  until  water  was  found ; 
and  many  of  the  men  were  so  affected  by  the  heat  that, 
scarcely  able  to  walk,  with  great  difficulty  they  were  induced 
to  make  the  effort  to  reach  a  place  of  safety.  However,  in  a 
little  while,  organization  being  recovered,  the  brigade  was 
withdrawn  in  good  order,  rearward,  as  far  as  the  position  held 


512  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

• 

by  McCulloch.   Bell's  and  Mabry's  Brigades,  having  meanwhile 
exhausted  their  ammunition,  were  also  withdrawn. 

During  this  time  General  Forrest  had  been  on  the  right  flank 
with  Roddy's  Division,  which,  when  Crossland's  Brigade  was 
repulsed,  was  moved  rapidly  by  the  left  flank  to  the  jK>sition 
occupied  by  that  brigade  at  the  commencement  of  the  action, 
and  where  the  division  was  held  to  meet  any  counter  or  ofien- 
sive  movement  of  the  enemy.  Any  further  attack  on  the 
Confederate  part  upon  the  enemy's  position  was  clearly  im- 
prudent, and  it  was  not  attempted.  Forrest's  stafi'-officers, 
however,  were  actively  employed,  rallying  the  brigades  on 
the  left ;  and  his  aid  and  son,  Lieutenant  Willie  Forrest, 
thrown  from  his  horse  by  the  concussion  of  a  shell,  exploded 
just  above  him,  was  carried  from  the  field. 

The  Confederate  attack  had  now  failed  at  all  points,  and  it 
was  manifest  the  Federal  position  and  force  were  impregna- 
ble to  any  offensive  operations  of  the  Confederates  arrayed 
against  them.  General  Lee,  therefore,  ordered  his  whole  force 
to  retire  from  the  field,  and  occupy  the  position  held  at  day- 
light, in  rear  of  McCulloch,  and  there  await  the  movements 
of  his  adversary.  But  General  Smith  appears  to  have  been 
satisfied  with  being  able  to  foil  the  attack  of  his  daring  assail- 
ants, and  adventured  no  offensive  movement  at  all.  There- 
fore, McCuUoch's  Brigade  remained  unmolested  in  its  ad- 
vanced position  until  about  half-past  six  o'clock  p.m.,  when  it 
was  noticed  that  the  enemy  were  burning  Harrisburg.  Gene- 
ral Chalmers  was  then  directed  to  reconnoitre  as  closely  as 
possible  with  that  brigade,  the  first  Mississippi  infantry,  and 
a  piece  of  artillery.  Some  Federal  skirmishers,  soon  encoun- 
tered, were  driven  back  by  McCulloch  far  enough  for  him  to 
ascertain  that  the  main  Federal  force  still  remained  in  posi- 
tion at  Harrisburg,  and  the  reconnoissance  was  concluded. 
Chalmers  meanwhile  having  moved  forward  with  the  First 
Mississippi  and  artillery  to  a  favorable  position,  on  the  left  of 


After  the  Battle.  513 

McCulIoch,  before  retiring  threw  some  shell  among  groups  of 
the  enemy  gathered  round  the  burning  houses  of  the  place* 
and  the  figures  of  which,  brought  into  strong  relief  by  the 
flames  at  that  late  hour,  afforded  fine  targets. 

About  this  time,  or  at  sunset,  taking  Rucker's  Brigade, 
under  Colonel  Duckworth,  General  Forrest  led  it  around  the 
Federal  left  flank,  on  the  road  to  Verona,  some  two  miles 
southward  of  Tupelo,  where  he  soon  found  himself  in  the 
presence  of  the, Federal  pickets,  who  opened  a  scattering  fire. 
Dismounting  the  brigade,  and  taking  post  across  the  road, 
Duckworth  threw  one  tenth  of  the  brigade  promptly  forward, 
under  Captain  John  T.  Chandler,  A.  A.  A.  General,  and  the 
Federal  skirmishers  were  brushed  back  upon  their  main  force. 
This  was  presently  followed  by  the  advance  of  the  whole  bri- 
gade, and  a  sharp  skirmish  with  the  ^nemy,  who  receded 
slowly  for  three  fourths  of  a  mile,  until  about  nine  p.m.,  when 
the  Confederates  encountered  a  stormy  fire  from  a  heavy  force 
drawn  up  to  receive  them.  This  checked  the  movement,  and 
in  turn  the  Federals  essayed  the  offensive  ;  but  their  onset  was 
speedily  brought  to  a  halt  by  a  well-directed  fire  from  Duff''s 
Regiment.  Directing  a  small  force  to  be  left  well  in  advance, 
to  watch  that  road,  Forrest  withdrew  the  brigade  for  the 
night  to  a  position  three  miles  south  of  Tupelo,  where  it 
bivouacked. 

IV. 

Apprehensive  that  the  Federal  commander,  emboldened  by 
the  results  of  yesterday's  success,  would  now  attempt  to  press 
forward  into  the  prairie  country  to  the  southward,  to  lay  waste 
the  growing  crops  of  that  fertile  region,  Major-General  Lee 
resolved  to  interpose  every  possible  obstacle,  and  accordingly, 
before  sunrise,  the  whole  Confederate  force  was  concentrated 
across  the  anticipated  route  of  march,  and  drawn  up  in  line  of 
battle,  fronting  the  north,  directly  across  the  Tupelo- Verona 


514  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

road,  about  three  miles  from  the  former  place.    At  the  same 
time  working  parties  were  dispatched  to  repair  the  roads  and 
bridges  rearward,  for  the  easy  movement  of  the  ordnance 
trains  and  artillery,  in  the  event  the  Confederates  were  forced 
back.     There  being,  however,  no  indications  of  any  offensive 
movement  on  the  part  of  the  enemy,  Buford  was  thrown  for- 
ward (dismounted)  on  the  Confederate  right,  with  Crossland's 
and  Bell's  Brigades,  to  feel  the  Federals  in  that  direction,  and 
coming  in  contact  with  their  pickets,  bore  them  back  for 
quite  a  mile  upon  the  left  flank  of  their  main  force,  in  some 
•timber,  where  he  halted,  and,  throwing  out  skirmishers  to 
cover  his  own  position,  stood  on  the  defensive.     Meanwhile, 
so  intense  was  the  heat,  that  as  many  as  eighty  officers  and 
men  were  carried  from  the  field  exhausted,  some  of  them  in- 
sensible, from  the  effects  of  the  sun. 

This  was  the  posture  of  affairs  at  eleven  A.M.,  when  the 
authentic  and  pleasing  intelligence  was  received  that  the 
enemy  were  in  full  retreat.  Chalmers  was  immediately  order- 
ed to  move  forward  rapidly  with  McCuUoch's  Brigade  (mount- 
ed) to  ascertain  their  line  of  retreat  and  apparent  purposes. 
Overtaking  their  rear-guard,  some  skirmishing  ensued  for  an 
hour,  during  which  a  moving  cloud  of  dust  was  visible  along 
the  Tupelo-EUistown  road,  marking  manifestly  the  line  of 
march  of  a  large  force. 

Meanwhile,  General  Lee  had  moved  up  with  his  whole 
command  as  far  as  Harrisburg,  and  Forrest,  with  his  staff  and 
escort,  had  gone  immediately  to  Tupelo,  some  of  the  few 
houses  of  which  were  found  in  ashes,  the  others  filled  with 
wounded,  including  250  Federals,  too  severely  hurt  to  be  re- 
moved, and  few  of  whose  wounds  had  been  dressed.* 


•  In  conseqaence  of  this  neglect,  and  were  fly-blown  and  already  in  a  potridi 

the  extreme  heat  of  the  weather,  many  maggoted  condition,  from  which  tbe 

of  the  wounds,  both  of  the  Confedc-  men  suffered  fearfully.— iVrtSpr  tf  Cm- 

rates  and  Federals  found  in  Tupelo,  erai  FomsL 


Federals  in  Retreat.  515 

While  Chalmers  was  directed  to  press  on  with  McCulloch*8 
Brigade,  and  attempt  to  get  on  their  flank  westward  of  the 
Ellistown  road,  Buford,  about  two  p.m.,  was  ordered  to  goad 
rheir  rear  with  his  division,  now  dwindled  down,  howbeit,  to 
lot  more   than  1000  effectives.     Following  vigorously,  and 
noving  at  the  head  of  his  column  with  a  section  of  Rice's 
runs,  just  as   Buford  approached  Town  creek,  four  miles 
>eyond  Tupelo,  a  warm  volley  was  suddenly  poured  into  the 
lead  of  his  column  from  a  heavy  ambuscade  in  a  corn-field, 
vhile  his  own  force  was  moving  along  a  narrow  road  through 
I  dense  "  black  jack  "  thicket.    The  character  of  the  ground 
nade  it  extremely  difficult  to  deploy  forward  any  effective 
K>dy  of  troops,  and  Bell's  Brigade  receiving  the  first  outburst 
)i  the  ambush,  was  driven  back  in  confusion.    The  road  was 
ilocked  up  at  the  same  time  with  led  horses  and  artillery,  and 
:>r  a  short  while,  had  the  enemy  pressed  their  advantage  with 
igor,  the  situation  was  critically  perilous.    Buford,  however, 
ssisted  by  his  officers,  promptly  rallied  his  men ;  Bell's  and 
*rossland's  Brigades  also  became  engaged  with  their  wonted 
pirit,  and  Rice's  Battery  was  effectively  brought  to  bear  upon 
lie  somewhat  rising  ground,  though  it  suffered  both  in  horses 
nd  men.  General  Forrest  now  came  up,  moreover,  and  assisted 
laterially,  by  his  presence  and  words,  to  sustain  the  men  in 
leir  unequal  combat ;  and  McCulloch's  Brigade  pressing  up  at 
gallop,  he  ordered  it  dismounted  and  thrown  into  action  on 
le  left  of  Buford's  Division.    That  veteran  force  making  a 
laracteristic  charge,  pushed   the  enemy  back  in  its  front. 
his  was  not  done,  however,  without  considerable  loss,  and 
brrest,  who  rode  with  it  in  the  onset,  was  painfully  wounded 
\   the  right  foot,  and  its  intrepid  commander.  Colonel  Bob 
[cCuUoch,  was  struck  in  the  shoulder.    Meanwhile,  General 
halmers  had  conducted  Kelly's  Regiment,  (mounted,)  of  tht 
une  brigade,  still  further  to  the  left,  to  turn,  if  possible,  the 
ederal  flank.    Advancing  well  into  a  corn-field  in  his  front; 


5i6  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

and  pressing  back  his  immediate  enemy,  he  discovered,  hap- 
pily in  time,  that  his  left  flank  was  overlapped  at  the  moment 
by  a  superior  force,  in  the  same  field,  hidden  by  the  high 
corn,  and  he  was  forced  to  fall  back  to  the  edge  of  the  field  to 
avert  disaster.  In  this  he  succeeded  without  being  followed, 
while  McCulloch's  movement  saved  Buford's  horses,  and 
artillery.  Forrest's  wound  was  now  so  painful  that  he  was 
obliged  to  quit  the  ground ;  the  command  therefore  devolved 
upon  General  Chalmers.  Riding  to  Tupelo,  to  have  his  wound 
dressed,  he  reported  the  situation  to  General  Lee,  who 
immediately  repaired  to  the  front.  In  the  mean  while,  the 
enemy  finding  himself  borne  back  by  McCulloch,  threw 
forward  fresh  infantry,  far  too  strong  to  be  withstood  by  the 
small  force  of  Confederates  present  or  available,  and  who 
were  forced  to  recede  in  the  face  of  overpowering  odds  ;  fcut 
Chalmers,  though  hard  pressed,  retired  safely,  just  about  night- 
fell,  beyond  the  reach  of  the  enemy,  who,  fortunately,  was  not 
disposed  to  follow  up  his  advantage  with  any  energy.  Gen- 
eral Lee  having  come  upon  the  ground,  ordered  McCulloch's 
Brigade  to  bivouac  in  observation  for  the  night  within  half  a 
mile  of  the  crossing  of  Town  creek.  Buford's  Division  was 
assembled  not  far  distant,  and  the  rest  of  the  Confederate 
force  slept  for  the  night  in  the  vicinity  of  Tupelo — all  ex- 
hausted by  the  work  of  the  last  three  days,  and  g^reatly  dis- 
tressed by  the  weather. 

Nor  was  the  condition  of  the  command  found  to  be  ma- 
terially better  on  the  morning  of  the  i6th.  The  heavy  marches 
of  the  last  sixty  or  seventy  hours,  and  scanty  forage,  had 
Droken  down  very  much  all  the  horses,  while  battle  casualties 
and  the  fierce  tropical  rays  of  the  sun  had  depleted  the  ranks 
to  such  a  degree  that  further  pursuit  in  force,  had  it  been  of 
any  material  military  advantage,  was  impracticable.  Seeing 
this.  General  Lee  made  his  arrangements  and  dispositions 
accordingly. 


Chalmers  in  Pursuit.  517 

Chalmers  was  directed  to  pursue  with  Rucker's  and  Roddy's 
Brigades,  and  a  section  of  artillery.  The  rest  of  the  cavalry 
were  ordered  to  retire  on  the  road  to  points  between  Tupelo 
and  Okolona,  where  they  could  be  most  readily  supplied  with 
forage  and  subsistence  ;  the  infantry  were  dispatched  by  rail 
to  Mobile.  Gholson's  Brigade  (State  Troops)  was  likewise  re- 
turned to  their  horses  at  Jackson's,  and  the  wounded,  includ- 
ing the  Federal,  having  been  collected  as  rapidly  as  possible, 
were  sent  by  railway  to  Forrest's  hospital  at  Lauderdale 
Springs,  near  Meridian,  Mississippi.*  These  orders  being 
given,  General  Lee,  satisfied  from  reports  of  scouts  that  the 
Federal  army  was  assuredly  in  retreat  upon  Memphis,  left 
on  the  17th,  to  repair  elsewhere  within  the  limits  of  his  conv> 
mand,  where  his  presence  was  required. 

Chalmers,  taking  up  the  pursuit  as  swiftly  as  practicable  in 
the  jaded  condition  of  his  animals  after  the  march  of  fourteeB 
miles,  seized  a  hill  in  full  sight  of  the  smoke  of  the  camp- 
fires  of  the  Federal  army,  after  having  driven  an  outpost  from 
a  creek  in  front  of  their  encampment ;  leaving  a  regiment  to 
hold  this  position,  during  the  night  he  moved  some  two  miles 
to  the  eastward,  to  Knight's  Mill,  with  a  view  of  attacking 
their  flank  on  the  next  day,  at  some  favorable  opportunity. 
On  the  morning  of  the  17th,  Roddy  was  dispatched  across 
the  country  to  seek  an  opportunity  to  strike  their  flank  at 
Kelly's  Mill,  on  the  Ripley  road,  while  Chalmers  would  follow, 
with  Rucker's  Brigade  and  the  artillery,  to  hang  upon  and 
harass  their  rear ;  but  this  position  proved  untoward,  as  it  was 
found  the  enemy,  turning  leftward  at  EUistown,  had  moved  in 
the  direction  of  New-Albany,  and  not  toward  Ripley.    The 


»  This  hospital,  admirably  arranged     federate  service,  as  well  as  to  the  me^ 
and  managed  by  Surgeon  Thompson,     cal  officers  connected  with  it. 
of  Kentucky,  was  a  credit  to  the  Con- 


5x8  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest 

horses,  moreover,  for  the  most  part,  were  now  so  manifestly 
unfit  for  further  pursuit,  that  the  Confederate  commander 
rightly  determined  to  abandon  it.  Detaching  some  250  men 
to  follow  in  observation,  Chalmers  returned  to  Tupelo  with  the 
rest  of  his  command,  while  the  Federal  army  was  making  its 
way  rapidly  in  the  direction  of  Memphis,  by  way  of  Holly 
Springs. 

COMMENTARIES. 

I.  The  Federal  Commander  assuredly  displayed  much 
watchfulness  in  his  movements,  but  the  least  possible  vigor  or 
enterprise.  He  appears  to  have  restricted  his  movements 
after  crossing  the  Tallahatchie,  to  the  defensive  against  an 
antagonist  very  much  his  inferior  in  numbers.  Had  he 
pressed  the  advantage  gained  on  the  afternoon  of  the  14th 
July  with  resolution,  and  with  his  whole  force,  as  the  Confe- 
derates fell  back  repulsed  and  badly  cut  up,  as  he  could  plainly 
see,  the  consequences  for  the  Confederates  must  have  been 
ruinous.  Although  he  remained  in  possession  of  his  strong, 
intrenched  position  (including  that  night)  for  fifteen  hours 
after  the  close  of  the  battle,  and  removed  his  wounded  and 
some  of  the  Confederates  to  hospitals  in  Tupelo,  yet  such  was 
the  demoralized  condition  of  his  force  that  the  wounds,  nei- 
ther of  the  Federals  nor  Confederates  in  hospital  appear  to 
have  been  dressed.  And  when  he  began  the  retrograde,  as  is 
alleged,  for  want  of  subsistence  and  ammunition,  it  was  made 
with  all  the  celerity  and  other  appearances  of  a  retreat  ;  for, 
leaving  one  division  under  Brigadier-General  Mower  to  cover 
his  rear  by  making  a  stand  at  the  extremely  favorable  position 
of  Town  creek,  he  pushed  his  train  on  toward  Memphis,  with 
all  haste,  escorted  by  the  remainder  of  his  force.  Indeed,  in 
TOW  of  General  Smith's  mere  military  movements,  it  is  diflB- 
cult  to  comprehend  with  what  objective  the  campaign  was 
undertaken. 


Commentaries. '  519 

2.  It  must  be  regarded  as  an  error  on  the  part  of  the  Con- 
federate General  to  deliver  battle  at  Harrisburg  upon  a  field 
chosen  by  his  adversary,  and,  as  we  have  seen,  peculiarly 
favorable  for  that  adversary.  Furthermore,  victory,  under  all 
the  circumstances,  never  within  the  scope  of  reasonable  proba- 
bilities for  the  Confederates,  was  made  even  less  possible  by 
the  adoption  of  the  parallel  order  of  battle  rather  than  the 
oblique^  and  the  massing  of  the  Confederates  upon  either 
wing, — and  subsequently  also  by  throwing  the  troops  into  bat- 
tle by  fragments,  so  that  brigades  were  worsted,  sadly  cut  to 
pieces  in  detail. 

3.  The  courage  and  tenacity  with  which  the  Confederates 
fought  on  the  14th,  in  front  of  Harrisburg,  and  on  the  15th 
at  Town  creek,  is  apparent  from  the  formidable  lists  of  killed 
and  wounded  that  resulted.  Buford's  Division,  including 
Mabry's  Brigade,  lost  22  officers  killed  and  104  wounded,  and 
825  enlisted  men  were  killed  and  wounded.  In  Chalmers's 
Division,  both  brigade  commanders  were  severely  wounded. 

4.  It  was  a  somewhat  singular  procedure  for  General  Wash- 
bume  to  complain,  as  he  did  in  his  letter  to  General  S.  D. 
Lee,  that  his  negro  troops  had  not  received  quarter,  when  he 
admits,  in  the  subsequent  letter  to  Forrest,  that  he  was  aware,- 
when  he  sent  them  forth,  they  had  taken  an  oath  not  to  give 
Forrest  and  his  men  quarter  in  that  very  expedition.  Since 
this  chapter  was  in  type,  we  have  found  in  the  New- York 
Times,  of  July  3d,  1864,  i^  a  letter  written  by  one  Doctor 
Hunt,  from  Memphis,  to  his  newspaper,  the  Buffalo  Express^ 
a  reference  to  the  correspondence,  which  shows  he  had  been 
in  immediate  conference  with  General  Washburne  on  the  sub- 
ject. This  writer  says :  "  The  negro  regiments  of  Sturgis*^ 
expedition  took  a  soletnu  oath  before  starting  that  they  would 
neither  give  nor  take  quarter  if  they  met  Forrest,  They  kept 
their  oath — took  no  prisoners."  This  was  not  written  in 
irony,  but  in  exaltation  of  African  courage. 


CHAPTER     XX. 


Cotrtspendence  luilh  Department  Commander;  also  Governor  of  Musis- 
sippi — Command  dhtributed  for  Defensive  Purposes— -Theatre  of 
operations  Iransferred  to  Oxford,  Miss. — Operations  of  General 
Chalmers  in  that  Quarter — Confederates  pressed  fy  largely  Superior 
Force  —  Federal  Devastations  —  Forrest  made  Counter-Movemekl 
upon  Memphis  —  ExtemporiEid  Bridge — Confederates  penetrated 
Memphis  to  the  Gayoso  House — Success  of  the  Operation — Federal 
Forces  withdrawn  from  quarter  of  Oxford  to  succor  Memphis — Gene- 
ral Forrest  established  his  Headquarters  at  Grenada,  Miss. 

July  lyth  to  August  3ith,  1864. 

OUFFERING  acutely  from  his  wound,  nevertheless  General 
Forrest  remained  at  Tupelo  for  twenty-four  hours,  looking  to 
the  care  and  removal  of  the  wounded,  the  burial  of  the  dead, 
the  collection  of  small-arms  from  the  late  battle-iields,  and  the 
location  of  the  troops.  He  then  went  by  rail  to  Okolona, 
where  he  remained  until  the  22d,  though  he  had  turned  over 
the  direct  command  to  Brigadier-General  Chalmers. 

For  the  remainder  of  the  month  the  important  movements 
of  the  command  were  the  following :  The  State  Troops,  re- 
lieved on  the  20th  from  further  service  with  .Forrest,  were 
ordered  to  report  back,  at  Jackson,  to  the  Governor  of  Mis- 
sissippi. Roddy,  detached  with  his  division,  on  the  28th  pro- 
ceeded by  rail  to  Montgomery,  to  meet  a  hostile  expedition 
menacing  the  interior  of  Alabama,  while  his  horses  and  wa- 
gon-train were  sent  across  the  country  to  the  same  point  a 
¥(eek  previously  ;  and  Mabry'3  Brigade,  likewise  detached  on   . 


Forrest  at  Okolona.  521 

the  same  day,  repaired  (mounted)  to  Canton,  Miss.,  to  assist 
in  repelling  a  Federal  movement  from  the  southward.  Mean- 
while, the  other  portions  of  the  command  had  been  distributed 
with  a  view  to  recuperation.  Buford's  Division,  first  at  Egypt 
Station  and  subsequently  at  Shannon  Depot,  on  the  Mobile 
and  Ohio  Railroad ;  and  Neely's  and  McCuUoch's  Brigades,* 
(Chalmers's  Division,)  in  the  vicinity  of  Oakland  Church, 
eight  miles  west  of  Egypt  Depot,  positions  at  once  healthy 
and  convenient  to  forage  and  subsistence.  Staff-depots,  more- 
over, were  established  at  suitable  points  for  the  accumulation 
of  supplies  ;  while  comprehensive  measures,  including  the 
offer  of  amnesty,  were  taken  to  bring  back  absentees  to  the 
ranks,  and  to  re-horse  the  command.  The  scouting  service, 
likewise  reorganized,  was  stimulated  to  even  greater  activity 
in  the  procurement  of  prompt  and  accurate  information  in 
regard  to  all  movements  of  the  enemy  of  a  hostile  character. 
And  fortifications  were  put  under  construction  at  Prairie 
Mound,  as  the  most  favorable  position  for  protecting  the  ap- 
proaches to  the  prairie  country,  a  measure  of  vital  interest  to 
the  planters  of  that  section,  who  were  called  upon  to  supply 
the  labor  and  tools. 

On  the  first  of  August,  though  still  suffering  from  his 
wound,  General  Forrest  returned  to  headquarters  at  Okolona, 
but  did  not  reassume  command  for  several  days.  In  the 
mean  time  scouts  had  continued  to  bring  in  intelligence  of 
the  concentration  of  Federal  troops  and  other  indications  of 
early  hostile  movements  from  the  direction  of  Memphis  ;  and 
•active  preparations  were  therefore  made  in  all  the  departments 
of  Forrest's  command  to  meet  it  as  effectively  as  practicable. 
A  letter,  written  by  General  Chalmers,  on  the  ist  of  August, 


^  Chalmerses  Battalion  (Eighteenth  with  scouts  thrown  forward  as  ^u-  in 
Mississippi)  was  detached  at  Abbe-  advance  *  as  Senatobia  and  Holly 
ville,  on  the  Mississippi  Central  Road,     Springs. 


522  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

to  the  department  commander,  will  best  show  not  only  what 
was  the  actual  military  situation  at  the  moment,  but  also  the 
measures  and  dispositions  which  General  Forrest  regarded  as 
best  calculated,  with  his  resources,  to  baffle  the  hostile  pur- 
poses of  the  enemy.     It  is  as  follows  : 

"Headquarters  Forrest's  Cavalry,     > 
Okolona,  Mississippi,  August  i,  1864.) 

"  Colonel  :  Our  scouts  report  that  the  enemy  is  making  preparations 
to  move  from  Memphis,  Vicksburg,  and  North- Alabama,  at  the  same  time, 
and,  if  successful,  to  concentrate  at  Selma. 

^  There  are  now  fourteen  thousand  infantry  and  cavalry  assembled  at 
Lagrange,  and  they  are  reported  repairing  the  Mississippi  Central  Railroad. 
Three  regiments  of  infentry  and  two  of  cavalry  are  reported  moving  from 
Decatur  to  Moulton,  Alabama.  The  communication  with  Little  Rock  by 
White  River  is  open,  and  the  troops  from  Smith,  reported  as  going  up  that 
river,  have  returned  to  Memphis.  Some  troops,  number  unknown,  have 
been  sent  down  the  river  toward  Vicksburg.  If  the  enemy  moves  in  three 
columns,  as  expected,  it  will  be  impossible  for  us  to  meet  him  ;  and,  after 
consultation,  Major-General  Forrest  and  I  have  concluded  to  recommend 
a  consolidation  of  the  troops  in  this  department  to  meet  one  column. 

"  The  northern  column  will  be  the  largest ;  if  we  can  defeat  it,  the 
others  may  be  easily  overtaken,  and  crushed.  We  have  accumulated  sup- 
plies at  Grenada  and  Oxford,  so  that  the  cavalry  from  Jackson  can  be  well 
subsisted,  should  you  think  it  advisable  to  move  them  there.  We  can  sub- 
sist our  force  better  upon  this  line  than  any  other,  and  it  is  valuable  to  the 
Confederacy,  therefore,  more  important  to  be  defended.  The  column  from 
Vicksburg  could  do  but  little  damage  before  reaching  Demopolis  ;  and  if 
we  should  defeat  the  enemy  here,  could,  by  means  of  the  railroad,  inter- 
cept him  at  Meridian,  on  that  line. 

"  The  force  moving  from  Decatur  is,  as  yet,  reported  small,  and  ought 
to  be  checked  by  the  reserves  and  other  troops  in  Alabama.  We  beg  leave, 
therefore,  to  suggest,  for  the  consideration  of  the  Major-General  command- 
ing the  department,  that  the  forces  from  below  be  concentrated  with  this 
command  on  this  northern  line.  But  should  he  disapprove,  we  still  re- 
commend a  concentration  of  our  whole  force  to  meet  one  of  the  columns. 
We  are  preparing  fortifications  here,  which,  if  manned  by  the  whole  force 
we  had  here  before,  may  en^le  us  to  defeat  the  enemy. 

"  Our  effective  force  is  5357,  but  we  are  very  much  crippled  in  officers. 


Orders  and  Letters.  523 

Both  of  my  brigade  commanders  are  wounded,  also  a  brigade  commander 
of  General  Buford's  Division,  and  most  of  the  field-officers  of  the  command 
were  either  killed  or  wounded  in  the  late  engagement 

"  I  am,  Colonel,  very  respectfully,  etc., 

James  R.  Chalmers, 
Brigadier-General  Commanding. 
**  Colonel  George  Deas,  Chief  of  Staff,  Department  of  Alabama,  Missis^ 
sippiy  and  Louisiana?^ 

Meanwhile,  orders  had  been  issued  to  the  proper  staff-offi- 
cers and  commanders,  to  collect  and  issue,  by  the  3d  of  Au- 
gust, ten  days'  rations  to  the  whole  force  ;  one  hundred  rounds 
of  ammunition  for  small-arms,  and  two  hundred  of  artillery 
were  also  prescribed ;  all  further  furloughs  were  forbidden, 
and  leaves  of  absence,  and  officers  on  special  detached  service 
were  recalled.  And  on  the  2d,  McCulloch's  Brigade  (Chal- 
mers's Division)  was  ordered  to  move  at  daylight  on  the  next 
morning  through  Pontotoc  to  Oxford. 

On  the  3a,  General  Forrest  resumed  command,  and  General 
Chalmers  set  out  with  his  staff,  escort,  and  ThralUs  Battery, 
to  repair  with  McCuUoch's  Brigade  to  Oxford.  One  of  For- 
rest's first  acts  was  a  characteristic  letter,  addressed  through 
a  staff-officer,  to  Colonel  Woodward,  then  on  special  service 
in  West-Tennessee  or  ^forth-West  Kentucky.  We  give  it,  as 
illustrating  the  close  attention  to  details  which  characterized 
the  Confederate  General. 


LRY,      \ 

:,  1864.) 


"  Headquarters  Forrest's  Cavalry, 
Okolona,  Mississippi,  August  2, 

"  Colonel  :  I  am  directed  by  the  Major-General  Commanding  to  say 
that  it  is  entirely  out  of  his  power  to  send  the  ammunition  you  want  It 
is  not  safe  to  do  so  in  the  first  place,  and  we  are  without  transportation  to 
spare.  The  movements  of  the  enemy  require  all  we  have  for  a  move  at  a 
moment's  notice 

"  The  General  also  directs  that  you  will  come  out  with  all  the  men  you 
can  get  by  the  loth  September.  Absentees,  who  come  out  with  you  from 
the  command  or  army,  will  not  be  molested.  .    .    .  We  have  many  com- 


i 


524  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

panics  without  officers,  and  parties  who  can  bring  out  from  twenty  to  forty 
men  can  be  placed  in  the  West-Tennessee  regiments  of  this  command, 
and  those  raising  the  men  can  get  position.  There  are  also  three  Ken- 
tucky regiments  here  that  need  filling  up,  and  your  own  also,  which  will 
give  Kentuckians  a  chance  to  be  with  Kentucky  troops. 

''  Say  to  all,  that  they  must  come  out ;  every  man  is  needed  at  this  time. 
Those  who  fail,  or  refuse  to  come,  you  will  arrest,  dismount,  disarm,  and 
if  necessary,  bring  in  irons.  It  is  hoped,  however,  that  all  will  respond ; 
otherwise,  when  caught,  they  will  be  punished  to  the  full  extent  of  the  law. 

'*  You  will  also  call  the  attention  of  all  parties  attempting  to  raise  com* 
mands  to  the  fact,  that  no  new  organization  can  be  made  for  service  in  the 
Confederate  States  army.  The  following  paragraph  from  General  Order 
No.  42,  A.  and  I.  General's  Office,  April  14th,  1862,  prohibits  it,  and  re- 
vokes any  authority  given. 

"  *  X.  All  authorities  heretofore  given  to  raise  troops,  or  to  recruit  for 
any  particular  command,  are  hereby  revoked.* 

'*  They  must  attach  themselves  to  some  regular  command,  organized 
prior  to  April,  1863. 

"  By  authority  direct  from  the  President,  which  authorizes  Major-General 
Forrest  alone,  can  they  be  received  into  his  command  a^  troops  from' 
West-Tennessee,  unless  they  select  an  organization  organized  prior  to  the 
date  above.    By  bringing  out  their  men,  they  can  join  the  command,  and 
where  competent,  and  with  a  fair  proportion  of  men,  can  get  position. 

"  Respectfully, 

Charles  W.  Anderson, 
A.  A.  A.  General 
"  Colonel  T,  G,  Woodward^  West-Tennessee,^^ 

On  the  4th,  Neely's  Brigade  (Chalmers's  Division)  was  also 
put  in  motion  for  Oxford,  and  General  Chalmers  was  directed 
to  impress  negroes,  northward  of  the  Tallahatchie  river,  to  the 
number  of  five  hundred,  with  axes,  spades,  and  other  imple- 
ments, and  employ  them  in  the  construction  of  fortifications 
at  Grenada,  Graysport,  Abbeville,  and  such  places  as  he  might 
deem  necessary,  on  the  Tallahatchie  river ;  and  also  to  ob- 
struct all  the  fords  and  roads  on  that  river,  except  such  as  he 
might  fortify ;  while,  in  a  letter  of  the  same  date,  Chalmers 
was  further  directed  to  impress  negroes  around  Grenada,  to 


Letter  to  General  Maury.  525 

repair  the  works  there ;  and  to  take  every  negro  that  he  could 
lay  his  hands  on  to  do  the  work  indicated.  He  was  also  au- 
thorized to  direct  Mabry's  Brigade  to  repair  to  Grenada,  and 
was  specially  charged  to  use  the  utmost  energy  in  the  con- 
struction of  defensive  works,  and  the  obstruction  of  the  roads 
and  fords  in  that  region.  At  the  same  time,  the  Governor  of 
Mississippi  was  addressed,  with  a  full  account  of  the  hostile 
movements  apparently  impending  over  his  State  from  various 
quarters ;  and  it  was  suggested  that  the  Legislature  should 
adjourn  at  once,  and  the  members  return  to  their  respective 
districts  to  rally  the  people.  "  It  is  plain,"  Forrest  wrote, 
"  we  are  to  be  invaded  from  various  points,  and  my  reliance 
for  help  in  the  defense  of  North-Mississippi  is  alone  with  the 
people.  They  must  act,  and  act  promptly,  if  they  would  save 
the  country  from  devastation.  Their  organization  is  left  with 
the  officers  commanding  the  reserves.  All  in  my  power  will 
be  done  to  assist  in  rendering  them  effective,  and  placing 
them  where  they  can  be  of  most  service." 

During  the  5th,  General  Chalmers  arrived  at  Oxford  with 
McCuUoch's  Brigade  and  Thrall's  Battery,  and  established  his 
headquarters  at  that  place.  And  on  the  same  day.  General 
Forrest  addressed  to  his  superior,  Major-General  Maury,  the 
Department  Commander,  a  letter  which  discloses  the  exact 
condition  of  his  command  at  the  moment,  as  may  be  seen  : 

"Headquarters  Forrest's  Cavalry,      ) 
Okolona,  Mississippi,  August  5,  1864.  > 

*'  General  :  I  have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  letiei 
of  the  2d  inst.,  and  in  reply,  allow  me  to  say  that  I  can  well  understand  and 
realize  the  responsibility  of  your  position,  and  the  difficulties  under  which 
you  labor,  in  the  command  of  a  large  department,  with  forces  inadequate  for 
its  defense,  when  assailed,  as  it  now  appears  to  be,  from  all  quarters.  I 
regret  very  much  that  recent  engagements  in  North-Mississippi  (Tisho- 
mingo and  Harrisburg)  have  reduced  my  command  so  much  in  numbers. 
But  especially  am  I  deficient  in  field-officers  and  brigade  commanders. 
General  Lyon  having  left  the  department.  Colonels  McCulloch  and  Rucker 


i 


526  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest 

wounded,  leaves  me,  aside  from  Colonel  Bell,  without  experienced  brigade 
commanders,  and  in  Bell's  Brigade  the  greater  number  of  field-officers  are 
killed  or  wounded. 

« Nevertheless,  all  that  can  shall  be  done  in  North-Mississippi  to 
drive  the  enemy  back.  At  the  same  time,  I  have  not  the  force  to  risk  a 
general  engagement,  and  will  resort  to  all  other  means  in  my  power  to 
harass,  annoy,  and  force  the  enemy  back.  I  have  ordered  the  impress- 
ment of  negroes  for  the  purpose  of  fortifying  positions,  blockading  roads 
and  fords,  and  shall  strike  him  in  flank  and  rear,  and  oppose  him  in  finont 
to  the  best  of  my  ability,  and  fight  him  at  all  favorable  positions  along  his 
line  of  march.  I  am  of  opinion  that  his  move  will  be  in  this  direction  ; 
that  the  feints  against  the  Mississippi  Central  Railroad  are  made  to  draw 
my  forces  west,  and  give  him  the  start  toward  the  prairies.  I  have  order- 
ed Mabry  to  Grenada,  a  brigade  to  Pontotoc,  and  General  Chalmers,  with 
one  of  the  best  brigades  I  have,  has  gone  to  Abbeville,  with  instructions 
to  blockade  fords,  fortify  positions,  and  repair  the  works  on  Tallahatchie 
and  Yallabusha  rivers. 

'^  With  Buford's  Division  I  shall  await  further  developments.  I  have 
sent  a  battery  of  four  guns  with  General  Chalmers,  another  with  the  bri- 
gade to  Pontotoc,  and  have  two  batteries  here  yet  My  artillery,  in  aD, 
numbers  sixteen  pieces,  and  my  effective  force  as  formerly  reported,  with 
Mabry  added.  You  may  rest  assured,  General,  of  my  hearty  cooperation 
in  all  things  and  at  all  times.  I  can  take  the  saddle  with  one  foot  in  the 
stirup,  and  if  I  succeed  in  forcing  this  column  back,  will  be  ready  to  move 
to  your  assistance  at  short  notice,  mounted  or  by  rail 

"  Will  arrange  with  Governor  Clark  for  a  proper  disposition  of  the 
State  forces,  and  all  reserves  he  may  be  able  to  bring  to  my  assistance. 

"  Will  write  you  or  telegraph  as  often  as  deemed  necessary. 

N.  B.  Forrest, 

Major-GeneraL 
'  Major-General  Maury ^  Commanding  Departments^ 


At  this  time,  the  Federals,  having  repaired  the  Mississippi 
Central  Railroad  as  far  as  Waterford — eight  miles  south  of 
Holly  Sprifigs — were  running  trains  to  that  point,  and  had 
advanced  from  Lagrange  with  their  main  force  to  Lumpkin's 
Mill,  one  mile  north  of  Waterford,  with  outposts  and  heavy 
picket  force  thrown  forward  to  the  north  bank  of  the  Talla- 


Dispositions  to  meet  Enemy.  527 

hatchie.*  The  route  or  direction  of  the  march  of  the  Federal 
column  being  now  somewhat  developed,  General  Forrest 
began  to  move  his  forces  westward ;  and  by  the  8th  had 
thrown  Neely's  Brigade  (Chalmers's  Division)  and  Buford's 
Division,  and  the  artillery  to  Pontotoc,  with  their  trains,  with 
orders  to  be  ready  to  take  the  field  on  the  9th. 

Chalmers  was  instructed  to  make  as  stout  and  prolonged  a 
defense  of  the  line  of  the  Tallahatchie,  and  his  position  south 
of  it,  as  was  practicable  with  his  resources ;  but  if  over- 
matched and  forced  back,  to  bum  all  the  railroad  bridges  and 
trestles  as  he  retired.  At  the  same  time,  orders  were  given 
for  the  removal  southward  of  Okolona  of  all  rolling  stock  of 
the  Mobile  and  Ohio  Railroad,  and  working  parties  of  negroes. 
Buford  was  directed  to  keep  his  scouting  parties  well  forward 
to  the  Tallahatchie  river,  and  westward  along  that  stream,  to 
g^in  and  report  early  information  of  any  hostile  movement 
from  the  direction  of  Holly  Springs  toward  Pontotoc  ;  and, 
further,  to  keep  his  command  concentrated,  so  that  in  an 
emergency  they  might  operate  in  their  full  strength. 

Giving  information  of  the  military  situation  in  a  letter  of 
the  8th  of  August,  to  Governor  Clark,  the  Confederate 
General  expressed  the  opinion  that  the  enemy  intended 
following  the  line  of  the  Central  Railroad,  and  that,  while 
he  should  make  every  effort  with  his  means  to  impede  his 
antagonist,  and  strike  him  on  flank  or  rear,  yet  so  inadequate 
were  his  forces  that  he  could  not  hope  to  interpose  any  very 
eflfective  or  successful  obstacle  ;  and  hence,  "  unless  Missis- 
sippians  rallied  to  the  defense  of  their  homes,  the  State  must 
be  devastated."     On  the  9th,  having  made  his  arrangements 


*  General  A.  J.  Smith  was  still  in  force  of  three  divisions,  including  3700 

command  with  a  force  estimated  by  cavalry,  and  thirty-eight  pieces  of  ar- 

scouts  and  the  people  of  the  country  at  tillery.     He  doubtless  abo  had  fully 

from  fifteen  to  twenty  thousand,  with  a  10,000  infantry. 


k 


528  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest 

for  the  supply  of  his  command,  General  Forrest  established 
his  headquarters  at  Pontotoc,  still  suffering  a  good  deal  from 
his  wounded  foot,  which  he  was  obliged  to  wear  in  a  sling. 

Meanwhile,  the  Eighteenth  Mississippi  Battalion — not  over 
three  hundred  strong — had  been  holding  the  Tallahatchie 
river  in  advance  of  Abbeville,  with  scouting  parties  northward 
of  the  river,  in  the  immediate  presence,  and  constantly  skir- 
mishing with  the  Federal  pickets.*  The  southern  bank  of 
the  Tallahatchie,  occupied  by  the  Eighteenth  Mississippi  Bat- 
talion, however,  was  highly  unfavorable  for  defense,  being 
commanded  from  the  opposite  side.  It  was  stripped  of  tim- 
ber for  fully  half  a  mile,  while  the  north  bank  was  well 
wooded  up  to  the  water's  edge,  giving  complete  shelter 
for  skirmishers.  Taking  advantage  of  this,  the  enemy  drove 
the  Confederate  pickets  from  their  posts  on  the  river  bank  on 
the  morning  of  the  8th,  and  immediately  threw  several  sraall 
bodies  of  troops  across  to  the  southern  side.  In  the  mean 
time,  the  Eighteenth  Mississippi  having  been  withdrawn  to  a 
slight  ridge  in  the  edge  of  the  woods,  h^lf  a  mile  from  the 
river,  had  strengthened  that  position  by  breastworks  of  rails 
and  timber  ;  but  as  it  could  be  easily  turned  on  either  flank, 
it  was  only  occupied  as  a  post  of  observation.  During  the 
day,  Chalmers  had  moved  up  his  main  force  to  Abbeville  ;  at 
night-fall,  however,  leaving  a  regiment  to  hold  the  position, 
his  whole  force  was  withdrawn  to  Hurricane  creek  for  forage, 
but  resuming  his  position  in  advance  early  the  next  morning. 
As  will  be  remembered,  he  had  only  one  small  brigade  and  a 
section  of  artillery  to  guard  and  hold  a  line  of  some  six 
or  eight  miles,  from  Wyatt's,  on  the  west,  across  in  front 
of  Abbeville,  to  a  point  some  two  or  three  miles  east  of  that 


*  At  the  same  time  the  Second  Mis-  ville.  The  remainder  of  McCulloch*fl 
soiiri  Cavalry  were  at  Wyatt,  and  the  Brigade  was  at  Hurricane  creek,  six 
First  Mississippi  Partisans  at  Abbe-     miles  north  of  Oxford. 


operations  about  Oxford.  529 

place,  which  made  it  impracticable  for  him  to  hold  his 
position,  as  the  Federal  column  now  began  to  press  forward 
seriously,  and  the  Confederates  were  obliged  to  retire.  But 
this  was  done  with  deliberation,  in  admirable  order,  with 
their  front  constantly  toward  the  enemy,  who  followed  closely, 
but  would  make  no  attack  unless  it  could  be  done  with  every  •• 
advantage  of  numbers  and  position.  "Like  fierce  wolves, 
they  circled  around  the  Confederates,  gradually  drawing 
nearer  and  nearer,  but  not  daring  to  close  in,  when  their 
desired  victim  stood  at  bay."* 

Destroying  all  bridges  (small  structures)  and  trestle-work 
along  the  line  of  the  railroad,  Chalmers  fell  back  at  four  p.m., 
on  the  9th,  to  Oxford,  and  formed  Kne  of  battle  in  the  north- 
ern outskirts  of  that  place.  The  Federals  came  up  immedi- 
ately, and  opening  with  a  fierce  cannonade — the  shells  for  the 
most  part  flying  over  and  harinlessly  beyond  the  town — they 
resorted  to  a  flank  movement,  instead  of  a  direct  attack,  upon 
Chalmers's  position.  Seeing  this,  the  Confederate  General 
withdrawing  his  force  through  the  town,  formed  it  in  a  line  of 
battle,  on  some  hills  immediately  southward  of  Oxford,  as  the 
enemy  entered,  simultaneously,  on  the  Wyatt,  Abbeville,  and 
Pontotoc  roads,  so  close  upon  the  heels  of  the  Confederates 
that,  had  they  pressed  vigorously  and  rapidly  onward,  Chal- 
mers's small  command  must  have  been  reduced  to  great  peril, 
and  its  extrication  almost  impossible.  But,  apparently  content 
with  the  achievements  of  the  day,  the  Federal  Commander  .. 
(General  Hatch)  did  not  improve  his  advantage,  nor  attempt 
to  pursue,  that  day,  beyond  Oxford.f  Boldly  holding  his  posi- 
tion in  line  until  six  o'clock,  Chalmers  then  retired  southward, 
and,  leaving  the  veteran  Second  Missouri  two  miles  below 


•   MS.  Notes   of  Captain  W.  A.         t  His  force  consisted,  it  is  believed, 
Goodman.  of  ten  or  eleven  regiments  of  cavalry 

and  some  artillery. 


530  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest 

Oxford,  to  watch  the  movements  of  the  enemy,  led  the  rest  of 
his  command  to  Taylor's  Station,  nine  miles  south  of  Oxford. 
Meanwhile,  Neely's  Brigade  and  a  battery  were  en  route  since 
that  morning  from  Pontotoc,  to  join  him. 

On  the  morning  of  the  loth,  finding  that  the  Yocona  was 
much  swollen,  and  there  being  little  or  no  forage  northward 
of  it,  Chalmers  crossed  to  the  south  bank  of  that  stream,  and 
took  a  position  to  defend  the  crossing  over  it ;  and  a  part  of 
Mabry's  Brigade  having  come  up,  it  was  placed  in  position  on 
the  right  of  McCuUoch's  Brigade.* 

The  Second  Missourians  having  been  still  left  in  position 
within  two  miles  of  Oxford,  they  were  feebly  attacked,  about  ten 
A.M.,  by  a  Federal  force,  which  retired,  however,  after  a  little 
while,  and  there  was  no  more  fighting  during  the  day.     That 
morning  early.  General  Forrest  had  left  Pontotoc  with  Bell's 
Brigade  and  Morton's  Battery,  and  by  a  forced  march,  effect- 
ing a  junction  with  Neeley  on  the  way,  succeeded  in  reaching 
Oxford  by  eleven  o'clock  that  night.t    The  place,  however, 
had  been  evacuated  after  dusk  by  the  Federal  cavalry,  whose 
commander,  evidently  having  no  stomach  for  a   rencounter 
with  the  redoubtable  Confederate  cavalry  leader,  rapidly  re- 
tired upon  the  main  cavalry  force  at  Abbeville,  upon  hearing 
of  Forrest's  approach,  and  the  Confederate  cavalry  horses 
were  fed  on  the  forage  that  had  been  distributed  to  those  of 
their  adversary.     When  many  of  the  citizens  of  Oxford  went 
to  sleep  that  night,  the  town  was  full  of  Federal  soldiers  ;  but 
to  their  joy  and  astonishment,  the  next  morning  they  foimd 


*  McCulloch's  Brigaae  was  com-  to  guard  against  any  flank  movement  in 
manded  by  Colonel  William  B.  Wade,  that  direction ;  and  the  Seventh  Ten- 
Eighth  Confederate  Cavalry.  nessee  and  Forrest's  old  regiment  of 

t  Buford  was  left  at  Pontotoc  with  Neely's  Brigade,  were  absent  also  os 

tne  Kentucky  Brigade  and  a  battery,  detached  service  at  the  time. 


spoliations.  531 

the  pavements  and  public  square  covered  with  their  gray-clad 
countrymen,  still  holding  their  jaded  horses  by  the  reins,  as 
they  slept  soundly  after  their  long  ride.* 

It  is  said  the  conduct  of  the  Federal  soldiery  on  this  occa- 
sion in  Oxford  was  not  so  generally  in  flagrant  disregard  of 
the  laws  of  war  with  respect  to  non-combatants,  private  pro- 
perty, and  the  privacy  of  families  of  women  and  children  as 
had  characterized  their  recent  operations  in  Mississippi ;  but 
we  have  to  record  one  conspicuous  exception  in  the  brutality 
and  rapacity  of  the   Federal  commander,  General  Edward 
Hatch.     Having  established  his  headquarters  at  the  house  of 
Mrs.  Jacob  Thompson,  his  soldiers  were  sufiered  to  prowl 
about  the  premises,  and  plunder  many  articles  of  considerable 
value,  such  as  were  to  be  found  in  the  mansion  of  a  lady  of 
her  affluence  and  social  station.  Appealing  to  General  Hatch 
for  a  "  safeguard"  from  this  unsoldierly  spoliation,  he,  want- 
ing in  the  manners  of  a  gentleman,  as  of  the  instincts  of  a 
soldier,  leaning  back  in  a  comfortable  arm-chair,  superciliously 
answered  that  his  men  could  take  any  thing  they  might  wish, 
except  the  chair  in  which  he  was  then  seated.    And  later, 
when  about  to  retire,  he  caused  his  ambulance  to  be  filled 
with  pictures,  china,  and  glassware,  and  such  other  articles 
from  the  house  as  had  attracted  his  fancy.f 

Immediately  after  Forrest  had  reoccupied  Oxford,  he  dis- 
patched orders  to  General  Chalmers  to  return  with  his  com- 
mand ;  and  this  was  done  early  on  the  i  ith.  Chalmers's  Divi- 
sion was  then  reconstituted,  embracing  McCulloch's,  Neely's, 


♦  MS.  Notes  CoL  T.  H.  Logwood.  Thompson  is  the  wife  of  the  Hon. 

t  The   testimony  on  this  point,  as  Jacob  Thompson,  once  Secretary  of 

"Well  as  concerning  other  acts  of  kin-  the  Interior  of  the  United  States,  who 

dred  character  on  the  part  of  Gene*  was  absent  abroad  at  the  time  in  the 

ral  Hatch,  is  incontrovertible.    Mrs.  service  of  the  Confederate  States. 


532  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest 


and  Mabr/s*  Brigades ;  and,  with  Bell's  Brigade,  were  order- 
ed to  take  post  that  afternoon  at  Hurricane  creek,  five  or  six 
miles  southward  of  Abbeville. 

The  pickets  of  the  hostile  cavalry  were  soon  in  collision, 
and  a  numbo:  of  fruitless  rencounters  took  place  for  the  next 
two  days  ;  until  three  p.m.,  on  the  13th,  when  a  spirited  attack 
was  made  upon  Mabr/s  Brigade  and  Chalmers's  (Eighteenth 
Mississippi)  Battalion,  holding  the  road  from  Wyatt,  and 
forming  the  Confederate  left  flank.  But  for  the  promptness 
with  which  Lieutenant-Colonel  Chalmers  brought  his  batta- 
lion into  action,  and  the  tenacity  with  which  these  brave  Mis- 
sissippians  held  their  position  against  great  odds,  until  the 
remainder  of  the  command  could  be  formed  and  take  part  in 
the  action,  the  whole  command  would  probably  have  been 
borne  back  in  disorder.  Soon,  however,  the  engagement 
became  general  along  the  whole  line  of  Hurricane  creek  ;  and, 
finally,  the  Confederates,  by  the  sheer  weight  of  numbers, 
were  pressed  back,  after  having  inflicted  some  loss  upon  the 
enemy. 

Without  being  pressed,  the  Confederates  took  up  a  position 
about  half-way  between  Hurricane  creek  and  Oxford,  where 
they  remained  for  several  days,  frequently  engaged  in  warm 
skirmishes  along  the  line  of  this  creek,  behind  which  the 
Federal  force  had  been  cautiously  withdrawn.  And  on  Mon- 
day, the  isth  of  August,  General  Chalmers,  taking  a  detach- 
ment of  some  two  hundred  men  from  Neely's  Brigade,  moving 
out  to  reconnoitre  on  the  Abbeville  road,  drove  the  enemy's 
pickets  with  such  ease  before  him  that  he  dashed  into  Abbe- 
ville. The  place  was  occupied,  at  the  moment,  by  two  bri- 
gades of  infantry,  which,  taken  unawares,  were  thrown  into 


*  This  brigade  was  now  reduced  by     of  horses  to  not  more  than  600  mo«nt« 
Uittle  casualties  and  the  breaking  down     ed  men,  present,  fit  iat  duty. 


Federal  Excesses.  533 

confusion,  and  retreated  in  disorder,  pursued  by  the  Confede- 
rates, until  it  became  prudent  to  halt  But  this  was  not  done 
until  General  Chalmers  could  distinctly  see  a  large  force  of 
infantry  drawn  up  in  line  of  battle,  doubtless  expecting  an 
onset  from  the  whole  of  Forrest's  force.  Chalmers  then 
quietly  withdrew,  and  carried  his  little  command  safely  back 
without  loss. 

Meanwhile,  the  Federal  forces  about  and  northward  of 
Abbeville  had  been  guilty  of  the  harshest  excesses  toward  the 
defenseless  inhabitants  of  that  region  ;  spreading  destitution 
on  all  sides,  they  inflicted  manifold  outrages,  and  every  species 
of  humiliation.  Geneial  Smith,  an  educated  soldier,  claims  to 
have  given  special  orders  for  the  protection  of  the  people  on 
the  routes  traversed  by  his  army ;  but  with  that  he  appears  to 
have  been  satisfied,  and  surely  must  have  given  no  thought 
whether  his  orders  were  obeyed  or  not  He  can  scarcely 
have  been  ignorant  that  they  were  grossly  disobeyed,  and 
that  the  path  of  his  army  was  marked  by  conduct  utterly 
unbecoming  the  age. and  any  civilized  soldiers.* 

Buford  was  now  ordered  to  repair  with  the  rest  of  his  divi- 
sion (Kentucky  Brigade)  to  Oxford.  And,  by  the  morning  of 
the  1 8th,  from  the  reports  of  scouts,  it  became  evident  that, 
havmg  rebuilt  the  railroad  to  Abbeville,  collected  supplies  of 
subsistence  and  forage,  and  laid  a  pontoon-bridge  across  the  Tal- 
lahatchie, the  Federal  commander  designed  to  concentrate  his 
whole  force  at  Abbeville,  with  the  view  to  serious  offensive 
movements  beyond.  Knowing  his  inability  to  contend  success- 
fully with  the  force  of  his  opponent,  Forrest  rapidly  reviewed 
the  situation,  and  happily  resolved  upon  a  counter-movement. 
That  is  to  say,  he  determined  to  lead  a  picked  detachment  of 


*  In  proof  of  this  there  is  abundant     the  correspondence  to  Northern  joor- 
tettimony,  which  might  be  cited  from     nals,  from  that  force  at  the  time. 


534  Campaigns  of  General  Forresi. 

his  command,  and  by  a  sudden  coup  de  main  threaten  if  not 
capture  the  city  of  Memphis,  with  the  effect,  as  he  hoped,  of 
forcing  General  Smith  to  return  to  the  relief  of  that  place. 

After  a  free  consultation  with  his  second  in  command- 
General  Chalmers — the  necessary  orders  for  the  expedition 
were  immediately  issued,  and  detachments  of  Bell's  and 
Neely's  Brigades,  and  a  section  of  Morton's  Artillery,  under 
Lieutenant  Sale,  were  directed  to  be  got  ready  to  move  tbat 
afternoon. 

II. 

Short  as  was  the  notice,  by  five  p.m.  on  the  i8th  of  August, 
the  Confederates  detailed  for  the  expedition  had  made  their 
preparations,  and  were  ready  to  spring  into  their  saddles ;  for 
by  this  time  Forrest  had  impressed  his  characteristic  qualities 
upon  his  whole  command.  After  their  ranks  had  been  ca^^ 
fully  culled  of  those  whose  horses,  on  inspection,  did  not  pro- 
mise ability  for  the  forced  marches  before  them,  the  detach- 
ments selected  for  the  expedition  constituted  a  force  of  about 
1 500  officers  and  men,  and  four  guns.  And  this  command,  a 
little  after  five  p.m.,  went  forth  in  the  midst  of  a  heavy,  pelting 
rain,  which  had  been  falling,  without  intermission,  all  day,  as 
indeed,  for  much  of  the  time  during  several  previous  dap. 
The  streams,  as  a  matter  of  course,  were  all  greatly  swollen, 
and  Forrest  had  to  take  a  circuitous  route,  of  some  forty  miles, 
to  Panola,  in  the  first  stage  of  the  expedition,  over  roads  as 
deep  with  mud  as  torrential  rains  could  make  them.  But  the 
men  who  followed  met  the  difficulties  of  the  way  with  hearty 
good-will  ;  and  there  were  no  laggards,  no  croakers,  no 
gloomy,  but  a  long  array  of  eager,  hopeful  faces.  All  night 
of  the  19th  the  march  was  continued,  through  rain  and  mud, 
and  dense  darkness,  swimming  many  streams,  and  hauling 
the  artillery  by  hand  across  and  up  frequent  slippery  hilk. 


Expedition  to  Memphis.  535 

When  the  command  reached  Panola,  it  was  seven  o'clock  A.M., 
by  which  time  the  artillery  horses  were  found  to  be  so  fagged 
as  to  make  it  imprudent  to  take  more  than  a  section  beyond 
that  point.  Accordingly,  a  selection  being  made  of  the  most 
serviceable  horses,  all  unfit  were  sent  rearward  to  Grenada. 
One  hundred  men  were  also  left  with  their  horses,  which  were 
found  unable  to  endure  the  fatigues  of  the  expedition.  Re- 
suming the  march,  about  ten  o'clock  a.m.,  over  roads  knee- 
deep  with  mud  and  water,  by  the  time  the  command  reached 
Senatobia,  twenty-three  miles  northward  of  Panola,  Forrest 
saw  tbat  his  animals  were  so  distressed,  it  was  prudent  to  go 
no  further  that  day. 

Before  leaving  Senatobia,  on  the  morning  of  the  20th,  learn- 
ing it  would  be  necessary  to  bridge  Hickahala  Creek,  a  deep 
stream,  running  sixty  feet  broad,  with  full  banks,  the  Confede- 
rate General  spread  detachments  over  the  intermediate  coun- 
try to  collect  the  lumber  of  cotton-gin-house  floors,  and  carry 
it  on  their  shoulders  to  the  crossing,  about  four  miles  beyond. 
In  this  manner,  with  little  delay,  the  necessary  quantity  was 
transported  to  the  proper  point.  There  was  also  a  small,  nar- 
row flat-boat,  about  twenty  feet  long,  but  no  other  means  of 
ferriage  whatsoever  ;  and  the  construction  of  a  bridge  neces- 
sarily began. 

Out  of  the  abundant,  luxuriant  grape-vines  of  the  country 
a  strong,  twisted  cable  was  made ;  this,  quickly  stretched 
across  the  stream,  was  firmly  fastened  to  a  tree  on  either 
bank.  At  the  same  time,  some  dry  cedar  telegraph-poles 
were  cut  down,  and  tied  together,  with  grape-vines  also,  into 
large,  but  comparatively  light,  fascines,  and  rolled  into  the 
river  to  serve  as  pontoons.  Floated  into  position,  two  of  these 
were  attached  to  the  cable,  likewise  with  grape-vines,  and  the 
flat-boat  was  placed  and  fastened,  intermediately,  in  the  same 
manner  as  the  central  pontoon.  Telegraph-poles  were  then 
laid  across  as  balks ;  over  these  the  flooring  (from  the  gin- 


536  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest 

houses)  was  spread,  and  a  practicable  bridge  was  thus  impro- 
vised in  little  more  than  sixty  minutes.  The  command  began 
the  crossing  at  once,  in  columns  of  two,  the  men  leading  their 
horses>  and  the  artillery,  unlimbered,  was  safely  carried  over 
by  hand. 

Cold  Water  river,  six  or  seven  miles  beyond,  was  also  found 
beyond  fording,  with  only  a  small  ferry-boat  capable  of  trans- 
porting four  horses  at  a  time ;  and  here,  again,  a  bridge  was 
absolutely  requisite,  and  one,  too,  double  the  length  of  that 
at  Hickahala.  Another  grape-vine  cable  was  quickly  pirepared, 
and,  happily,  some  dried  cypress  logs  were  found  at  hand,  with 
which  pontoon  rafts  were  made  and  disposed,  as  at  the  Hicka- 
hala ;  while  the  ferry-boat  constituted  the  midway  pontoon. 
Telegraph-poles  furnished  the  necessary  material,  and  neigh- 
boring gin-houses  the  requisite  flooring.  In  less  than  three 
hours,  the  second  bridge  being  ready  for  service,  the  com- 
mand began  the  passage,  which,  as  before,  was  effected  with- 
out casualty.  And  the  Confederates  were  as  far  as  Her- 
nando, only  twenty-five  miles  from  Memphis,  before  night- 
fall. 

Forrest  was  here  met  by  some  of  his  scouts,  who  had  left 
Memphis  that  day,  with  accurate  information  touching  the 
position  and  strength  of  the  enemy's  troops  in  and  around  the 
city,  where  all  was  quiet,  and  without  the  least  expectation  of 
the  foray  impending.  Halting  at  Hernando  but  a  few  mo- 
ments, the  command  now  took  the  direct  road  to  Memphis ; 
but  so  deep  was  the  mud,  and  so  great  the  fatigue  of  the  ani- 
mals, that  it  was  quite  three  o'clock  Sunday  morning  of  the 
2 1  St  before  the  Confederate  advance  had  arrived  in  the  vi- 
cinity of  the  city.  Meanwhile,  however,  when  about  ten  miles 
distant,  Forrest  was  met  by  several  citizens  of  the  place,  from 
whom  he  gleaned  further  information  in  regard  to  the  num- 
bers and  positions  of  the  Federal  troops,  and  the  location  of 


Near  MempMs.  537 

their  prominent  officers  *  And  on  arriving  at  Cane  creek, 
only  four  miles  from  Memphis,  several  of  Henderson's  trusty 
scouts  came  up,  with  exact  intelligence  of  the  position  of  the 
pickets  on  that  particular  road.  From  these,  moreover,  the 
Confederate  Commander  learned  that  there  were  fully  five 
thousand  troops,  of  all  arms,  in  and  around  the  city,  for  the 
most  part  negroes  and  one  hundred  days'  men. 

Directing  his  force  to  be  closed  up,  and  summoning  the 
commanders  of  his  brigades  and  detachments  to  'the  front, 
Forrest  gave  to  each  definite  and  comprehensive  instructions, 
as  to  the  part  assigned  their  respective  commands  in  the  ap- 
proaching drama ;  and,  at  the  same  time,  the  necessary  guides 
were  distributed. 

To  a  company  commanded  by  Captain  William  H.  Forrest 
was  given  the  advance,  with  the  duty  of  surprising,  if  possi- 
ble, the  pickets  ;  after  which,  without  being  diverted  by  any 
other  purpose,  it  was  to  dash  forward  into  the  city,  by  the 
most  direct  route,  to  the  Gayoso  House,  to  capture  such 
Federal  officers  as  might  be  quartered  thercf  Colonel  Neely 
was  directed  to  attack,  by  an  impetuous  charge,  the  encamp- 
ment of  the  one  hundred  days*  men,  across  the  road  in  the 
outskirts  of  Memphis,  with  a  command  composed  of  the  Se- 
cond Missouri,  (Lieutenant-Colonel  McCuUoch,)  Fourteenth 
Tennessee,  (Lieutenant-Colonel  White,)  and  the  Eighteenth 
Mississippi,  (Lieutenant-Colonel  Chalmers.)  Lieutenant-Co- 
lonel Logwood  was  to  press  rapidly  after  Captain  Forrest  to 
the  Gayoso  House,  with  the  Twelfth  and  Fifteenth  Tennessee 


*  This  information  was  communica-  ward  to  execute  his  subsequent  orders 

ted  in  the  hearing  of  the  .field-officers  of  with  intelligence, 

the  command,  who  were  called  up  by  t  Major-General  Hurlbut  was  known 

General   Forrest  for  that  purpose,  so  to  lodge  at  that  hotel,  with  a  number  ol 

that  it  might  be  impressed  upon  their  Federal  staff-officers, 
minds,  and  they  be  the  better  able  after- 


538  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest 

regiments,  placing,  however,  detachments  to  hold  the  junction 
respectively  of  Main  and  Beal,  and  Shelby  and  Beal  streets, 
and  to  establish  another  detachment  at  the  steamboat  landing 
at  the  foot  of  Union  street  Lieutenant-Colonel  Jesse  For- 
rest was  ordered  to  move  rapidly  down  Desoto  to  Union,  and 
thence  leftward,  along  that  street,  to  the  headquarters  of 
General  Washburne,  the  Federal  Commander,  whose  capture 
it  was  his  special  duty  to  make. 

At  the  same  time.  Colonel  Bell  held  in  reserve,  with  New- 
som's  and  Russell's  Regiments  and  the  Second  Tennessee, 
under  Lieutenant-Colonel  Morton,  with  Sale's  section  of 
artillery,  was  to  cover  the  movement  And  upon  all  com- 
mands the  most  rigid  silence  was  enjoined,  until  the  heart  of 
the  town  was  reached,  and  the  surprise  had  been  secured. 
These  dispositions  and  orders  having  been  made,  the  several 
detachment  commanders  rejoined  their  troops,  formed  them 
immediately  into  column  of  fours,  and  at  about  a  quarter  past 
three  a.m..  Captain  Forrest  began  the  movement 

It  was  still  very  dark ;  the  night  having  been  sultry  and 
damp,  a  dense  fog  had  been  generated,  which  enshrouded  the 
whole  country  to  such  a  degree  that  neither  man  nor  horse 
could  be  distinguished  at  the  distance  of  thirty  paces,  as 
Captain  Forrest  moved  slowly  and  noiselessly  across  the 
bridge  at  Cane  creek.  But  anxious  that  no  misconception  of 
orders  should  mar  the  success  of  the  operation,  the  Con- 
federate General  halted  his  column,  after  it  had  moved  about 
half  a  mile,  and  dispatched  his  aid-de-camp.  Captain  Ander- 
son, to  see  that  each  officer  understood  precisely  and  clearly 
the  duty  that  had  been  specially  intrusted  to  his  execution, 
and  to  ascertain,  moreover,  whether  each  command  was  well 
closed  up.  That  efficient  staff-officer,  not  long  absent,  mak- 
ing a  satisfactory  report,  General  Forrest  gave  orders  for  the 
movement  to  be  resumed  at  a  slow  walk. 

Captain  Forrest  preceded  his  command  some  sixty  paces, 


Picket-Post  Captured.  539 

with  ten  picked  men  of  his  company,  until  about  two  miles 
from  Court  Square.  The  sharp  challenge  of  the  picket, 
"  Who  comes  there  ?'*  was  suddenly  heard  to  break  the  still- 
ness of  the  morning  hour,  as  also  the  Confederate  Captain's 
cool  and  prompt  reply  : 

"  A  detachment  of  the  Twelfth  Missouri  Cavalry  with  rebel 
prisoners."* 

The  customary  rejoinder  quickly  followed  : 

"  Advance  one." 

Captain  Forrest  rode  forward  in  person,  having  previously, 
in  a  low  tone,  directed  his  men  to  move  slowly  but  closely  be- 
hind him. 

Meanwhile,  General  Forrest,  with  his  escort,  moving 
with  the  head  of  the  main  column,  was  but  one  hundred 
paces  r^rward,  with  not  a  little  anxiety,  heard  the  challenge, 
as  also,  some  moments  later,  the  sound  of  a  heavy  blow, 
followed  soon  by  the  discharge  of  a  single  gun.  Captain  For- 
rest, it  seems,  as  he  rode  forward,  met  the  Federal  picket, 
mounted,  in  the  middle  of  the  highway.  As  soon  as  he  was 
within  reach  of  the  unsuspecting  trooper,  the  Confederate 
officer  felled  his  adversary  to  the  ground  by  one  blow  with  his 
heavy  revolver,  while,  at  the  same  instant,  his  men  sprang 
forward  and  captured  the  picket-post  of  some  ten  or  twelve 
men— dismounted  at  the  moment — a  few  paces  rearward,  to 
the  left  of  the  highway,  without  any  noise  or  tumult,  except  the 
discharge  of  the  single  gun,  heard,  as  we  have  said,  by 
General  Forrest.  Sending  the  prisoners  immediately  to  the 
rear  Captain  Forrest  pressed  on  for  a  quarter  of  a  mile,  when 
he  encountered  another  outpost,  which  greeted  him  with  a 
volley.    The  daring  Confederates  dashed  forward,  however. 


•  This  particular  regiment  was  desig-     absent  from  Memphis,  in  the  field,  with 
nated,  because  it  was  known  to  the     General  Smith. 
Confederates  to  be  one  of  those  then 


540  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest 

and  scattered  the  enemy  in  every  direction.  But,  unhappily, 
forgetting  the  strict  orders  to  be  as  silent  as  swift  in  their 
operations,  shouting  lustily,  and  the  contagion  spreading,  the 
cheer  was  taken  up  and  resounded  rearward  through  the 
whole  column,  now  roused  to  a  state  of  irrepressible  eagerness 
for  the  fray. 

By  this  time  the  head  of  the  column  was  in  a  few  paces 
of  the  Federal  camp,  on  the  outskirts  of  the  dty ;  day  was 
breaking,  and  a  long  line  of  tents  were  visible,  stretching 
across  the  country  to  the  eastward  and  westward  of  the 
highway  for  nearly  a  mile.  The  alarm  having  been  given,  and 
the  orders  prescribing  silence  generally  forgotten  by  his  men, 
General  Forrest  directed  the  ever-present  Gaus  to  sound  the 
charge,  and  all  the  bugles  of  the  several  regiments  took 
up  and  repeated  the  inspiriting  notes.  Another  cheer  burst 
forth  spontaneously  from  the  whole  line,  and  all  broke  ardent- 
ly forward  in  a  swift,  impetuous  charge. 

Two  only  of  Neely's  regiments  charging  into  the  encamp- 
ment rightward,  or  eastward,  of  the  road,  the  way,  for  some 
moments,  was  obstructed  by  another  of  his  command,  so  that 
Logwood  was  unable  to  push  on  and  enter  the  city  as  soon  as 
had  been  expected.  Moreover,  in  making  the  attempt  to 
break  through,  his  men  became  intermingled  with  those  of 
Neely's  Regiment,  so  much  confusion  resulted,  for  the  great- 
est exultation  now  prevailed  among  the  men.  Meanwhile, 
Captain  Forrest  charging  rapidly  down  the  road  toward  the 
city,  with  his  little  band,  (some  forty  strong,)  encountered  an 
artillery  encampment  eight  or  nine  hundred  yards  beyond  the 
infantry  cantonment.  Sweeping  down  with  a  shout,  and 
a  volley  from  their  pistols,  the  Confederates  drove  the  Federals 
from  their  guns,  (six  pieces,)  after  killing  or  wounding  some 
twenty  of  the  gunners.  This  eflfected,  they  pressed  forward 
into  the  city,  and  did  not  halt  until  they  drew  rein  before  the 
Gaj'oso  Hotel,  into  the  office  of  which  Captain  Forrest  and 


In  Memphis.  541 

several  of  his  companions  entered,  without  dismounting  ;  and 
in  a  moment,  his  men  spreading  through  the  corridors  of  that 
spacious  establishment,  were  busily  searching  for  General 
Hurlbut,  and  other  Federal  officers,  to  the  great  consternation 
of  the  startled  guests  of  the  house.  Some  of  the  Federal 
officers,  loused  by  the  tumult,  rushing  forth  from  their 
rooms,  misapprehending  the  gravity  of  the  occasion,  offered 
resistance,  and  one  of  their  number  was  killed,  and  some 
others  captured ;  but  Major-General  Hurlbut  was  not  to  be 
found.  Happily  for  that  officer,  his  convivial  or  social  habits 
having  led  him  out  of  his  quarters  the  evening  before,  they 
had  also  held  him  in  thrall  and  absent  from  his  lodging  . 
throughout  the  night. 

Meanwhile,  also.  Colonel  Logwood  having  broken  through 
the  obstructions  in  his  path,  with  a  large  portion  of  his  demi- 
brigade,  found  a  fprmidable  line  of  Federal  infantry  drawn  up 
facing  the  road  on  his  right,  or  eastward,  which  opened 
a  warm  musketry  fire  upon  the  head  of  the  Confederate 
column.  Ordered  to  push  on  into  the  heart  of  the  city  with- 
out halting  to  give  battle  on  the  wayside,  Logwood,  placing 
himself  at  the  head  of  his  men,  pressed  onward  for  some  dis- 
tance^ running  a  gauntlet  of  small-arm  volleys,  until  a  turn  of 
the  road  brought  him  in  the  presence  of  a  line  of  infantry 
directly  across  the  way,  and  sweeping  it  with  their  fire. 
There  was  a  fence  on  the  one  hand,  a  broad,  deep  ditch  on 
the  other.  Unswerved,  on  rushed  the  Confederates  with 
their  well-known  yell — ^the  men  with  their  rifles  poised  as  so 
many  battle-maces,  and  their  officers,  sabre  in  hand — burst 
through  the  opposing  ranks.  Hastening  onward,  a  battery 
was  seen  to  the  leftward,  but  commanding  a  straight  reach  of 
the  road  ahead,  and  the  gunners  of  which  were  busily  charg- 
ing the  pieces.  In  view  of  the  danger  his  command  incurred 
from  this  battery,  Logwood  was  obliged  to  charge  and  dis- 
perse those  who  manned  it ;  and  giving  the  command  to 


i 


542  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

charge,  again  his  men  clubbed  their  rifles,  and  with  a  shout, 
swooped  down  upon  their  luckless  enemy,  a  number  of  whom 
were  knocked  down  at  the  pieces,  while  the  rest  were  driven 
off  before  they  were  able  to  fire  a  gun.*    Resuming  his 
charge  toward  the  city,  Logwood,  in  a  few  minutes,  entered 
and  galloped  down  Hernando  street  to  the  market-house,  and 
up  Beal,  across  Maine,  to  the  Gayoso  Hotel.     The  men,  wild 
with  excitement,  now  dashed  forward  at  a  run,  shouting  like 
so  many  demons,  regardless  of  the  fire  opened  upon  them  by 
the  Federal  militia  from  windows  and  fences.    The  women 
and  children,  and  some  men,  were  screaming  or  crying  with 
affright,  or  shouting  and  clapping  their  hands,  and  waving 
their  handkerchiefs  with  joy,  as  they  recognized  the  mud-be- 
spattered, gray  uniforms  of  the  Confederate  soldiery  in  their 
streets  once  more.     Soon,  indeed,  the  scene  was   one  of 
memorable  excitement.      Memphis  was  the  home  of  many 
of  those  gray-coated  young  riders  who  thus  suddenly  burst 
into  the  heart  of  their  city  that  August  morning  ;  and  the 
women — ^young  and  old — forgetting  the  costume  of  the  hour, 
throwing  open  their  window-blinds  and  doors,  welcomed  their 
dear  countrymen  by  voice  and   smiles,  and  every  possible 
manifestation   of   the  delight  inspired  by  such  an   advent. 
Reaching  the  Gayoso  finally,  however.  Colonel  Logwood  com- 
pleted the  search  of  that  hotel  for  Federal  oflScers,  after 
which,  collecting  his  men  in  hand  as  soon  as  possible,  he 
began  to  retire  by  Beal  street,  about  nine  o'clock,  as  it  was 
learned,  through  scouts,  that  a  strong  Federal  force  was  being 
rapidly  concentrated  upon  that  point. 

During  this  time,  it  will  be  remembered,  Lieutenant-Colo- 
nel Forrest,  also,  had  been  ordered  to  penetrate   the  city. 


*  This,  doubtless,  was  the  same  bat-     by  Captain  Forrest,  and  re-manned  after 
tery  encountered  and  taken  previously     he  had  passed. 


Fighting.  543 

Speeding  with  his  regiment  toward  the  headquarters  of 
Major-General  Washbume,  on  Union  street,  he  reached  that 
point  without  serious  resistance,  to  find,  however,  the  Fe- 
deral commander  had  already  flown ;  but  several  of  his 
staff  were  captured  before  they  could  dress  and  follow  their 
fleet-footed  leader. 

Meanwhile,  Neely  had  met  serious  resistance  in  the  execu- 
tion of  his  orders.  The  infantry — at  least  a  thousand  strong 
— which  it  was  his  part  to  attack,  as  we  have  seen,  had  been 
formed  in  line  in  time  to  receive  his  force  with  a  warm  fire  of 
small-arms.  Seeing  this  check,  General  Forrest,  who  had 
remained  with  the  reserves  under  Colonel  Bell,  led  them 
rapidly  by  the  right  flank  to  reenforce  Neely  ;  but  on  the  way 
developed  a  cavalry  encampment  just  eastward  of  the  in- 
fantry, from  which  the  Confederates  were  received  by  a  heavy 
fire.  Being  in  advance,  as  usual,  Forrest  charged  promptly 
with  his  escort  (mounted)  over  intervening  fences  and  through 
some  gardens,  dispersing  the  dismounted  occupants  of  the 
encampment,  and  capturing  nearly  all  their  horses,  with  a 
number  of  prisoners.  Neely,  at  the  same  time  making  a 
vigorous  onset  upon  the  infantry,  succeeded  in  driving  them, 
with  some  loss,  from  their  position.  Whereupon  they  and 
the  dispersed,  dismounted  cavalry  took  refuge  in  the  ex- 
tensive brick  buildings  of  the  "  State  Female  College,"  seve- 
ral hundred  yards  distant,  a  strong  defensive  position.  Fol- 
lowed by  the  Confederates,  the  enemy  poured  a  noisy  and 
annoying  fire  from  behind  the  cover  afforded  by  the  college^ 
At  this  Forrest  ordered  up  Lieutenant  Sale  with  the  artillery, 
and  dismounting  some  of  the  troops,  made  an  effort  to  dis- 
lodge the  Federals,  and  an  animated  skirmish  ensued.  A 
number  of  shells  were  thrown  and  exploded  in  the  main 
building  ;  but  it  soon  became  apparent  the  position  was  only 
to  be  gained  at  a  loss  far  greater  than  was  required  for  the 
success  of  the  expedition,  and  the  attempt  was  not  made. 


544  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

Finding  that  the  enemy  were  rapidly  rallying  and  assem* 
bling,  Forrest  had  previously  ordered  the  troops  to  evacuate 
the  city,  and  concentrate  at  the  Federal  infantry  camp  which 
we  have  mentioned.  This  order  found  the  Confederates 
greatly  dispersed  and  widely  spread  over  the  city,  many  with 
the  hope  and  object  of  meeting  and  greeting  friends  and 
kindred ;  but  for  the  most  part,  intent  upon  the  discovery 
and  appropriation  of  horses.  Few,  indeed,  retained  their 
regimental,  or  in  fact,  company  organizations.  As  soon, 
however,  as  they  could  be  collected,  and  Lieutenant-Colonels 
Logwood  and  Forrest  having  effected  a  junction  on  Desoto 
street,  they  moved  out  together,  but  encountered  a  strong 
body  of  infantry,  formed  across  the  road,  near  Provine's 
house,  as  a  support  for  the  battery  there — the  gunners  of 
which  were  twice  dispersed  previously — ^was  found  re-manned 
once  more,  and  commanding  the  road.  A  warm  collision 
occurred,  in  the  course  of  which  Captain  Peter  Williams, 
Fifteenth  Tennessee,  charging  the  battery  with  his  company, 
(I,)  was  in  turn  charged  and  driven  back ;  but  reenforced  by 
Company  H  (Lieutenant  Witherspoon)  of  the  same  regi- 
ment, the  battery  was  again  charged  and  taken.*  Colonels 
Logwood  and  Forrest  then  hastened  to  rejoin  their  com- 
mander, as  directed ;  and  as  all  the  Confederates  were  now 
withdrawn  from  the  city,  except  some  stragglers  and  those 
who  had  been  captured  or  killed.  General  Forrest  gave  orders 
for  the  whole  force  to  withdraw.  The  object  of  the  expedition 
having  been  in  the  main  attained  by  the  confusion  and  con- 
sternation into  which  the  garrison  had  been  thrown  by  his 
operations  of  that  morning,  it  only  remained,  to  secure  the 
entire  success  of  Forrest's  plans,  that  General  Smith  should 
receive  as  early  intelligence  of  the  occurrence  as  practicable, 


*  Captain  Williams  had  his  arm  broken  in  this  affair. 


Combat  at  the  College.  545 

and,  therefore,  he  retired  to  give  General  Washburne  leisure 
and  opportunity  to  telegraph  the  menacing  situation  at  Mem- 
phis, and  to  ask  for  succor,  which  it  was  felt  assured  he 
would  do. 

Meanwhile,  some  of  the  Confederates  who  had  lingered  in 
the  city,  or  had  lost  their  way  in  the  general  dispersion  which 
occurred,  were  chased  out  by  a  body  of  several  hundred 
Federal  cavalry,  a  strong  detachment  of  which  made  a  dash 
at  some  of  Forrest's  men  still  in  the  infantry  camp,  and  just 
in  the  act  of  mounting.  Seeing  their  jeopardy,  Forrest  sprang 
forward  with  a  small  detachment  ol  the  ever  reliable  Second 
Missouri,  that  happened  to  be  most  convenient,  and  a  close, 
sanguinary  collision  took  place  Among  the  slain,  on  this 
occasion,  was  a  Federal  field-officer,*  who,  while  urging  his 
men  to  the  attack,  was  mortally  wounded  by  the  hands  of  the 
Confederate  leader  himself.  With  this  affair  the  contest 
terminated,  and  the  Confederates  moved  back  southward  on 
the  Hernando  road  for  about  a  mile,  when  they  were  halted, 
and  directed  to  exchange  their  jaded  horses  for  those  captur- 
ed in  the  city,  some  four  hundred  in  number. 

It  was  now  found  that  some  600  prisoners  had  been 
brought  away,  including  some  citizens,  and  many  convales- 
cent soldiers,  who,  when  the  alarm  was  given,  having  fled 
from  their  hospitals  into  the  streets,  had  been  captured. 
Nearly  all  were  bareheaded,  and  numbers  were  without 
shoes  or  clothing,  except  that  in  which  they  slept.  After 
some  delay  at  this  point,  the  march  was  resumed  about  mid- 
day, but  on  reaching  Cane  creek,  it  was  apparent  few  of  the 
prisoners  were  able  to  walk  in  their  shoeless  condition, 
while  the  convalescents  were  utterly  unable  to  make  such  a 
march  as  was  impending.    The  Confederate  General,  there- 


•  Colonel  Starr. 


546  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

fore,  dispatched  a  flag  of  truce  by  Captain  Anderson,  ac- 
companied by  a  captured  staff-officer,  to  propose,  as  an  act  of 
humanity,  that  the  prisoners  in  his  possession  be  exchanged 
for  those  of  his  own  command,  taken  that  morning,  and  that 
the  rest  would  be  turned  loose  on  parole,  provided  General 
Washburne  would  accept  the  arrangement  as  binding.     But 
in  the  event  that  this  proposition  were  rejected,  he  would 
wait  at  Nonconnah  creek  for  the  necessary  clothing  to  be 
sent  out.     About  a  little  after  two  p.m..  Captain  Anderson 
returned  with  General  Washburne's  reply,  to  the  effect  that 
having  no  authority  to  recognize  the  proposed  parole  of  the 
prisoners,  he  could  not  do  so ;  but  thanking  the  Confederate 
General  for  the  proffered  privilege  of  supplying  them  with 
clothing,  that  should  be  done  as  speedily  as  possible.*     After 
some  delay,  Colonel  W.  P.  Hepburne  and  Captain  H.  S.  Lee, 
two  officers  of  the  Federal  army,  appeared  with  a  flag  of 
truce,  and  clothing  for  both  officers  and  men,  which  were 
promptly  and  properly  distributed.     This  done,  the  prisoners 
were  drawn  up,  and  after  examination  by  surgeons,  the  able- 
bodied  were  selected,  some  400  in  number,  and  mounted  upon 
the  led  or  supernumerary  horses,  to  accompany  the  command. 
The  others,  that  is,  the  sick  or  disabled,  and  all  citizens,  then 
marched  back  across  the  Nonconnah,  were  turned  adrift,  to 
return  to  Memphis,  but  with  the  promise  exacted  not  to  bear 
arms,  or  otherwise  injure  the  Confederate  cause,  until  they 
should  be  regularly  exchanged. 

Another  difficulty  now  presented  itself,  in  connection  with 
the  remaining  prisoners.  Exposed  since  leaving  Oxford  to 
the  continuous  heavy  rains,  and  in  the  swimming  of  streams, 


•  We  can  not  understand  General  themselves  to  give  their  parole,  b  which 

Washburne^s  assertion  that  he  had  no  case  General  Washburne  was  bovnd  to 

authority  to  recognize  the  parole  ;  for  recognize  them, 
it  was  in  the  power  of  the  prisoners 


•  % 


Fed  by  Enemy.  547 

the  rations  of  the  command,  it  was  found,  had  been  almost  all 
destroyed,  and  there  were  consequently  none  for  issue  to  the 
prisoners.  In  this  dilemma,  with  that  readiness  which  ever 
served  him.  General  Forrest,  before  leaving  Nonconnah, 
wrote  to  General  Washbume,  and  setting  forth  in  emphatic 
terms  this  inabiUty  to  feed  his  prisoners,  suggested,  as  he 
would  not  receive  them  on  parole,  that  he  shoxild,  at  least, 
send  something  that  night  for  them  to  eat  on  the  road  to 
Hernando,  where  he  would  be  found.  This  communication 
having  been  dispatched,  Forrest  resumed  his  movement  to- 
ward  Hernando,  at  which  place — seventeen  miles  distant^-* 
he  arrived  in  four  hours,  and  then  halted  for  the  night 

About  daylight.  Colonel  Hepbume,  Captain  Lee,  and 
several  Federal  officers,  overtook  the  Confederate  command, 
with  two  wagon-loads  of  supplies,  of  the  contents  of  which, 
after  issuing  two  days'  rations  to  the  prisoners,  enough  was 
left  for  the  whole  command  for  a  day. 

Remaining  at  Hernando,  as  if  intending  to  retire  no  further, 
Forrest  gave  his  men  rest  until  the  Federal  officers,  with  the 
subsistence  wagons,  had  left  to  return  to  Memphis,  when — 
about  eight  A.M. — he  rapidly  resumed  his  mar^h  to  Panola, 
which  place  he  reached  by  ten  o'clock  that  night  Here  he 
remained  until  the  next  day,  when,  with  his  staff,  escort,  and 
the  section  of  Morton's  Battery  that  had  been  with  him  on 
the  expedition,  he  went  by  rail  to,  and  fixed  his  headquarters 
at,  Grenada,  while  the  several  commands  that  had  accom- 
panied him  to  Memphis,  were  distributed  to  their  respective 
divisions. 

HI. 

Reverting  to  affairs  at  Oxford,  we  find  that  General  Chal- 
mers skillfully  disposed  and  handled  his  small  command  (about 
two  thousand  effectives)  to  conceal  the  absence  of  his  superior 
with  so  important  a  part  of  the  Confederate  force.    With  this 


548  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

view,  during  the  19th  of  August,  he  made  several  sharp  attacks 
upon  the  outposts  on  all  the  roads  occupied  by  the  Federals. 
Nevertheless,  the  enemy  pressed  forward  heavily,  to  within 
four  miles  of  Oxford,  and  Chalmers  had  to  recede  to  a  posi- 
tion about  one  mile  northward  of  that  place,  with  a  strong 
line  of  pickets  maintained,  however,  in  the  immediate  presence 
of  the  enemy.  Meanwhile,  the  long-continued  rains  had  ma- 
terially injured  the  Confederate  ammunition,  as  had  been 
shown  during  the  skirmishes  of  the  day,  and  there  was  a  good 
deal  of  uneasiness  and  discouragement,  as  a  consequence, 
asQong  the  troops.*  Buford,  however,  came  up  with  the  Ken- 
tucky Brigade,  and  took  position  in  the  line  in  front  of  Oxford. 

The  theatre  of  these  operations — ^between  the  Tallahatchie 
and  the  Yocona — ^is  a  rolling,  broken  country,  but  without  any 
very  high  hUls  or  ridges.  Much  of  it  had  been  cleared,  and 
was  extensively  cultivated  before  the  war ;  the  uncleared  tim- 
ber was  not  lofty,  but  very  dense,  with  undergrowth.  All  the 
positions  were  easily  turned ;  and  on  both  sides  of  Oxford 
were  highways  from  Abbeville,  by  which  an  army  passing  the 
place  might  reach  one  of  the  bridges  of  the  Yocona.  That 
stream,  whet}  swollen  by  rains,  as  at  this  time,  could  only  be 
parsed  by  bridges,  of  which  two  remained  standing,  (Oliver's 
and  Carr's  ; )  but  the  roads  leading  to  these  through  the  bot- 
toms, on  the  northward,  traversed  quicksands,  which  made 
them  almost  impracticable.  All  the  streams  and  gullies  were 
now  overflowing  their  banks,  and  every  road  in  the  vicinity  of 
Oxford  was  greatly  cut  up  by  the  constant  movement  of  troops, 
artillery,  and  train. 

Reenforced  by  Buford,  Chalmers  made  a  spirited  attack  on 
the  enemy  during  the  morning  of  the  20th,  about  four  miles 


^  So  bad  was  the  ammumtion  in  the     the  19th,  only  thirtj-seTen  guns  out  of 
handi  of  the  men  that,  in  the  affidr  of     five  or  six  hondred  would  dachaife^ 


Federals  at  Oxford.  549 

in  advance  of  Oxford,  on  the  Abbeville  road,  but,  greatly  over- 
matched, in  the  end  was  obliged  to  retire.  At  the  same  time, 
in  view  of  the  condition  of  the  roads  in  his  rear,  and  of  the 
growing  difficxilties  of  the  passage  of  thq  Yocona,  he  ordered 
his  train  behind  that  stream  in  advance  of  his  own  retreat — 
presently  inevitable. 

But  on  the  morning  of  the  21st,  still  making  a  show  of 
offensive  purposes,  Chalmers  was  skirmishing  with  the  enemy 
in  his  front  at  eleven  a.m.  At  that  hour,  however,  he  received 
intelligence  that  a  strong  body  of  Federal  cavalry  was  making 
a  detour,  by  way  of  College  Hill,  with  the  evident  object  of 
getting  rearward,  and  cutting  off  his  retreat  across  the  Yoconst 
It  was  therefore  an  act  of  transparent  necessity  to  retreat  as 
rapidly  as  practicable  behind  that  stream,  which,  under  the 
circumstances  we  have  described,  was  already  a  matter  of 
difficulty.  Able  to  pass  the  Yocona  only  by  the  two  bridges 
we  have  mentioned,  had  the  enemy  pressed  vigorously  with 
their  heavy  cavalry  force,  there  must  have  been  grave  difficul- 
ties  in  the  movement ;  but  happily,  it  was  accomplished  with- 
out disaster  or  molestation  ;  and  Chalmers,  fixing  his  head- 
quarters at  Springdale,  disposed  his  small  command  to  make 
an  obstinate  contest  in  the  event  the  enemy  advanced.  His 
men,  however,  having  been  on  duty  continuously  for  more  than 
twenty  days,  they  and  their  horses  were  greatly  jaded,  while 
little  of  the  ammunition  was  fit  for  service. 

During  this  time  scouts  were  held  closely  around  Oxford, 
and  General  Chalmers  left  one  of  his  staff — Captain  L.  T. 
Lindsey — ^with  a  telegraph  station  within  three  miles  of  the 
place,  to  secure  constant  telegraphic  communication  touching 
hostile  movements  in  that  direction.  The  Federal  advance, 
however,  did  not  enter  Oxford  until  about  eight  o'clock  on  the 
morning  of  the  22d,  but  a  column  of  infantry  soon  followed. 
The  cavalry  were  speedily  and  widely  scattered  through  the 
town,  but  the  infantry  were  kept  in  ranks.    Up  to  noon. 


550  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest 

although  there  were  a  number  of  petty  acts  of  spoliation  on 
the  part  of  individual  soldiers,  yet  no  general  disposition  was 
shown  either  to  license  or  commit  arson  and  rapine.  The 
railroad  depot  was  burned  in  the  morning,  but,  as  yet,  no 
private  buildings  were  set  on  fire.  Suddenly,  about  midday, 
however,  this  forbearance  ceased.  Orders  were  then  given 
by  the  Federal  commander  for  the  burning  of  the  public 
buildings  and  unoccupied  houses ;  and  in  a  little  while,  to 
quote  the  language  of  a  Federal  chronicler,  "  the  public  square 
was  surrounded  by  a  canopy  of  flame  ;  the  splendid  court- 
house was  among  the  buildings  destroyed,  with  other  edifices 
of  a  public  character.  In  fact,  where  once  stood  a  handsome 
little  country  town,  now  only  remained  the  blackened  skele- 
tons of  the  houses,  and  the  smouldering  ruins  that  marked 
the  track  of  war."*  In  this  conflagration  were  consumed  all 
the  principal  business  houses,  with  one  accidental  exception, 
the  two  brick  hotels  of  the  place;  and,  of  course,  the  flames 
speedily  spread  to  several  dwellings  occupied  by  women  and 
children,  and  sick  persons,  happily  rescued,  however,  from 
destruction  by  the  exertions  of  the  inhabitants  of  Oxford, 

One  occupied  mansion,  howbeit,  was  burned  to  the  ground 
under  circujnstances  which  make  the  act  noteworthy  in  these 
pages.  It  will  be  recollected,  Mrs.  Thompson's  house,  seve- 
ral days  previously,  had  been  despoiled  by  the  Federal  cavalry 
commander  and  his  men.  Major-General  Smith  now  sent  an 
officer  of  his  staff*  with  a  detachment  to  bum  it  Mrs. 
Thompson  made  a  dignified,  earnest,  but  vain  appeal  that  her 
house  might  be  spared    her.     Only  fifteen  minutes   were 


*  That  is,  war,  as  was  now  made  by  made  wtr,  as  tbey  and  their  Govem- 

Federal  commanders,  roirived  A-om  the  ment  maintained,  to  restore  the  autho- 

dajTS  of  Tilly.    This  destruction  of  pub-  rity  of  the  United  States  over  the  in- 

lie  buildings  by  Federal  commanders  vaded  region.    These  buildings  could 

is  altogether  inexplicable,  since  they  be  of  no  possible  military  use. 


The  Devastation  of  Oxford. 


551 


granted  for  the  removal  of  any  articles  which  she  might  spe- 
cially wish  X.0  save ;  but  these,  as  fast  as  they  were  brought 
from  the  house,  in  the  presence  of  Federal  officers,  were  ruth- 
lessly stolen  from  her  by  the  soldiery  who  clustered  around, 
so  that  scarcely  an  article,  other  than  the  clothing  on  her  per- 
son, escaped  fire  or  pillage.* 

Up  to  midday,  guards  had  been  set  as  if  to  repress  pillage ; 
these  were  withdrawn  about  that  time,  and  for  several  hours 
thereafter  Oxford  was  delivered  up  to  riot  and  rapacity. 
Houses  on  all  sides  were  broken  into  and  despoiled  of  cloth- 
ing, bedding,  and  provisions,  which,  if  not  carried  off,  were 
maliciously  destroyed.  Carpets  were  torn  up,  curtains  cut 
down,  and  furniture  broken  in  downright  wantonness  ;  and  in 
a  number  of  instances  the  torch  was  set  to  houses  thus  rifled, 
and  only  the  exertions  of  their  terrified  occupants  saved  them 
from  destruction.  Some  subaltern  officers  were  greatly  cha- 
grined, and  displayed  a  disposition  to  restrain  their  men  from 
acts  so  disgraceful  to  their  vaunted  flag ;  but  no  officer  -of 
rank  was  heard  to  interpose  his  authority  for  the  suppression 
of  disorder  in  a  place  which  there  had  been  no  eflfort  to  de- 
fend, nor  any  conflict  in  its  immediate  vicinity.  The  men, 
thus  assured  of  the  countenance  of  their  commander,  set  all 
opposition  to  their  licentiousness  at  defiance,  until  five  p.m., 
when  they  were  suddenly  withdrawn,  and  the  enemy  began 
their  retreat  northward  so  rapidly  as  to  reach  Holly  Springs 
by  ten  a.m.,  on  the  next  day.  So  completely,  however,  had 
they  done  their  work  in  Oxford,  that  its  non-combatant  inha- 


*  "  In  the  suburbs  of  the  place  was 
sitoated  the  splendid  residence  of  the 
Hon.  Jake  Thompson.  To  this,  Gene- 
ral Smith  also  ordered  the  torch  to  be 
applied  ;  and  it  also,  with  its  fine 
furniture,  which  could  not  have  cost 
less  than  one  hundred  thousand  doUars, 


was  entirely  consumed.  The  Federal 
soldiers  stood  by  and  gazed  upon  the 
scene  of  destruction  with  feelings  bet- 
ter imagined  than  described.  They  will 
not  soon  forget  that  visit  to  Oxford.*' 
— See  Correspondent  Chicago  Ttmes, 
dated  Cairoy  Septemher  12M,  1864. 


i 


552  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest 

bitants,  mostly  women  and  children,  were  left  absolutely  desti- 
tute of  food  until  the  soldiers'  rough  rations  coxild  J^e  brought 
up  from  the  Confederate  depots  south  of  the  Yocona,  and  dis- 
tributed among  them. 

The  news  of  the  Federal  retreat  was  rapidly  communicated 
by  telegraph  to  General  Chalmers,  who  promptly  made  his 
dispositions  to  advance  upon  their  trace  at  daylight  on  the 
23d.    This  he  did  in  two  columns.     Buford,  with  M cCuUoch 
and  the  Kentucky  Brigade,  took 'the  road  across   Oliver's 
Bridge,  and  General  Chalmers  moved  with  Mabry  over  Carr's 
Bridge,  near  the  line  of  the  railroad.     Notwithstanding  re- 
pairs, the  ways  across  the  Yocona  "  bottom "  were  still  well- 
nigh  impracticable,  and  caused  delay ;  nevertheless,  McCul- 
loch's  Brigade,  (Colonel  Wade,)  being  in  advance  and  press- 
ing on  through  Oxford,  overtook  the  enemy's  rear-guard  near 
Abbeville.    The  advance  of  the  brigade,  (Fifth   Mississippi 
and  the   Forrest   Regiment,)  attacking  with  vigor,  became 
entangled  and  almost  surrounded  by  the  superior  force  assail- 
ed, and  suffered  severely,  but  were  finally  withdrawn  behind 
Hurricane  creek,  where  the  whole  command  was  formed  in 
line  of  battle  in  anticipation  of  an  attack,  though  none  was 
made.     During  the  23d,  Walton's  Battery  did  handsome  exe- 
cution upon  the  Federal  ranks  on  several  occasions. 

On  the  morning  of  the  24th,  it  was  apparent  the  Federal 
army  was  retiring,  but  not  rapidly,  in  consequence  of  difficulty 
in  crossing  the  Tallahatchie,  their  bridge  over  which  had  been 
broken.  In  the  jaded  condition  of  the  troops  and  ineffective 
state  of  the  ammunition,  it  was  not  practicable  for  the  Confe- 
derate commander  to  harass  his  adversary  materially.  More- 
over, supplies  were  now  extremely  difficult  of  transportation 
•  over  the  roads  of  the  country,  consequently  General  Forrest 
ordered  Chalmers  to  fall  back  southward  of  the  Yocona  again, 
leaving  detachments  of  scouts  to  keep  in  close  observation  of 


The  Federals  in  Retreat.  553 

the  movements  of  the  enemy,  with  three  regiments  on  an  out- 
post several  miles  south  of  Oxford,  at  the  point  to  which  the 
Mississippi  Central  Railroad  was  in  running  condition  from 
the  south. 


CHAPTER    XXI. 

Forresfi  Cavalry  reorganized— AfcCulloch's  Brigadt  dttached— Repair 
of  Mobile  and  Ohio  Railroad  to  Corinth — Expedition  info  Middie 
Tennessee — Hiipp)i  Ruse  and  Capture  of  Strong  Works  at  Athens, 
Ahhanta  —  Successful  Attack  upon  Works  at  Sulphur  Trestle— 
Dtitruction  of  Trestle  and  Large  Railroad  Bridges — Federals  in 
Superior  Force  take  the  Defensive  at  Pulaski^Demonstration  in 
Quarter  of  Tullakoma — Country  alive  with  Federal  Corps  called 
forth  by  Forrest  —  Forrest  divided  Forces— His  Operations  from 
spring  Hill  to  Columbia — Failure  to  Capture  Huntsville — Danger- 
ous Rising  of  the  Tennessee  River — Difficulties  of  Ferriage  sur- 
•  tnMtnled—Ifaadiome  Affair  of  Colonel  Kelly  at  Eastport—General 
Forrest  planned  Expedition  for  the  Destruction  of  Federal  Depots  at 
jfohnsonville — Chalmers's  Demomstratum  against  Memphis — Cent' 
mentaries. 

August  iylto  October  i^th,  1864. 
\JiJ  establishing  his  headquarters  at  Grenada,  General  For- 
rest found  assembled  there,  as  we  have  mentioned,  several 
battalions  of  "  State  Reserves,"  under  Colonel  Pettus  and 
Lieutenant-Colonel  Davis*     His  other  troops,  for  the  rest 


■  Composed  or  men  exempt  Irom  fitted  for  the  most  active  military  tcr- 

conscription,  but  called  forth,  under  the  ticc,  and  this  fact  excited  among  the 

laws  of  ttke  State  of  Mississippi,  in  the  veterans  feelings  of  antagonism,  which 

exigency.   Among  them,  however,  were  found  expression  in  the  rude  but  ei- 

many  of  the  "  exempt  classes,"  who  pressive  hnmor  of  the  camp'Grc,  soch 

were  able-bodied  men  in  all  respects,  as  "Tax  in  kind,"  the  epithet  by  which 


Reorganization. 


555 


of  the  month,  were  mainly  distributed  with  reference  to  con- 
venience to  supplies  of  forage  and  subsistence.* 

About  the  end  of  the  month,  however,  under  a  requisition 
from  Major-General  Maury,  Chalmers's  Division  was  detached 
to  proceed  to  West-Point,  on  the  Mobile  and  Ohio  Railroad, 
en  route  to  assist  in  the  defense  of  Mobile.  Mabry's  Brigade 
had  likewise  been  ordered  away  to  cooperate  with  General 
Wirt  Adams  in  the  direction  of  the  Yazoo.  Moreover,  a  re- 
organization was  directed  of  the  brigades  and  divisions,  and 
every  other  possible  preparation  was  made  for  early  active 
service.!    Meanwhile,  also,  Brigadier-General  Lyon  had  re- 


this  dass  were  so  habitually  designated 
that  General  Forrest  found  it  necessary 
to  issue  a  circular  calling  upon  the  of* 
ficers  of  his  command  to  repress  the 
practice  with  the  utmost  vigor. 

*  Chalmerses  Division  was  quartered 
for  a  time  ten  miles  west  of  Water 
VaUey,  a  station  on  the  Mississippi 
Central  Railroad,  eighteen  miles  south 
of  Oxford ;  and  subsequently  at  Oak- 
land, a  station  half-way  between  Panola 
and  Grenada,  on  the  Mississippi  and 
Tennessee  Railroad.  Buford's  Divbion 
chiefly  at  Oxford. 

t  Forrest's  Cavalry,  as  constituted 
imder  this  order,  was  as  follows: 
CHALMERS'S  DIVISION,  McCuL- 
loch's  Brigade,  Cciotul  Robert  Mc- 
Culloch  commanding.  Second  Missouri 
Cavalry,  Lieutenant-Colonel  R.  A.  Mc- 
Culloch  commanding ;  Willis's  Texas 
Battalion,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Leo  Wil- 
lis commanding ;  Seventh  Mississippi 
Cavalry,  (formerly  First  Mississippi 
Partisans,)  Lieutenant-Colonel  Samuel 
M.  Hjrams  conmianding  ;  Fifth  Mis- 
sissippi Cavalry,  Major  William  Gaston 


Henderson  commanding  ;  Eighth  Mis- 
sissippi Cavalry,  Colonel  William  Li 
Duff  commanding ;  Eighteenth  Missis- 
sippi  Cavalry,  Colonel  Alexander  H. 
Chalmers    commanding.       Rucker's 
Brigade,  (formerly  Neeiyf^)  Colond 
Edward  tV.  Rucker  commanding,    For- 
rest's (old)  Regiment,  Lieutenant-C&lo- 
nel  D.  C.  Kelly  commanding ;  Seventh 
Tennessee,  Colonel  W.  L.  Duckworth ; 
Fourteenth  Tennessee,   Colonel  J.  J. 
Neely;   Fifteenth  Tennessee,  Colonel 
F.  M.  Stewart;    Twelfth  Tennessee, 
Lieutenant-Colonel  J.  U.  Green,  com- 
manding.    BU  FORD'S  DIVISION  : 
Lyon's  Brigade,  Brigadier-General H, 
B^  Lyon  commanding.   Third  Kentucky 
Cavalry,  Colonel  G.A.C.Holt ;  Seventh 
Kentucky,    Colonel    Ed.    Crossland ; 
Eighth  Kentucky,  Lieutenant-Colonel 
A.  R.  Shacklett  commanding ;  Twelfth 
Kentucky,  (Faulkner's,)  Colonel  W.  W. 
Faulkner.      Bell's  Brigade,   Colonel 
7.  H,  Bell  commanding.    Second  Ten- 
nessee, Colonel  C.  R.  Barteau  ;  Nine- 
teenth Tennessee,  Colonel  J.  F.  New- 
som  ;  Twentieth  Tennessee,  Colonel 


556  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest 

joined  Buford's  Division,  and  Colonels  McCulloch  and  Ruckcr 
returned  sufficiently  recovered  from  their  wounds  to  be  put 
at  the  head  of  their  respective  brigades.  And  on  the  4th  of 
September,  Forrest,  directing  Buford  to  hold  his  division  in 
readiness  to  follow  at  a  moment's  notice,  left  Grenada  with 
his  staff  and  escort  to  proceed,  by  way.  of  Jackson  and  Meri- 
dian, to  take  part  in  the  defense  of  Mobile. 

McCulloch's  Brigade — except  the  Fifth  Mississippi* — the 
advance  of  Chalmers's  Division,  having  reached  West-Point 
on  the  3d,  was  at  once  dispatched  by  rail  to  Mobile,  and  re- 
mained there,  detached  from  Forrest's  Cavalry,  for  six  months; 
but  just  as  Rucker's  Brigade  was  about  to  set  out,  on  the  4th, 
for  the  same  point,  a  telegpram  was  received  from  General 
Maury,  dispensing  with  further  aid  from  Forrest's  command. 
And  that  telegram  made  it  unnecessary  for  General  Forrest 
himself  to  go  beyond  Meridian,  where  he  arrived  on  the  Sth. 
The  situation,  however,  determined  him  to  establish  his  head- 
quarters for  the  present  at  Verona,  whither  General^  Bufoni 
was  ordered  with  his  division.     Orders  were  g^ven  at  the 
same  time  to  impress  negroes  and  employ  them,  guarded  by 
details  of  dismounted  men,  to  repair  the  Mobile  and  Ohio 
Railroad  as  speedily  as  possible  to  Corinth,  as  General  For- 
rest had  now  conceived  the  plan  of  throwing  his  force,  with 
that  of  Roddy,  across  the  Tennessee  river  upon  the  line  of 
Sherman's  communications  in  Middle  Tennessee,  and  cutting 
him  off  from  his  base  of  supplies.     For  the  next  fortnight  all 
the  preparations  for  this  important  operation  were  pursued 
under  the  sanction  of  the  Department  Commander  with  cha- 
racteristic extent  and  vigor.     General  Chalmers  was  directed 
to  take  post  at  Grenada,  in  command  of  all  the  troops  not  to 


R.  M.  Russell ;  Twenty-first  Tennes-         *  This  regiment  was  absent  at  the 
see,  (formerly  Sixteenth,)  Colonel  A.     time  on  detached  service. 
N.  Wilson. 


Middle  Tennessee  Expedition.  557 

be  carried  upon  the  expedition  impending*  And  General 
Roddy  was  instructed  to  repair,  with  his  command  in  North- 
Alabama,  the  bridges  and  breaches  in  the  Memphis  and 
Charleston  Railroad  to  the  eastward  of  Corinth,  as  well  as  to 
prepare  boats  for  the  ferriage  of  the  Tennessee  river  in  the 
vicinity  of  Cherokee  Station.  Moreover,  by  the  15th,  Bell's, 
Lyon's,  and  Rucker's  Brigades,  with  the  artillery,  were  con- 
centrated at  Verona,  previous  to  which,  on  the  13  th  September, 
a  general  order — No.  75 — had  been  issued  in  these  terms  : 

^  I.  This  entire  command  will  be  in  readiness  to  move  on  the  morning 
of  the  i6th  instant,  with  four  days'  cooked  rations.  They  will  leave  all 
baggage  except  one  blanket  and  one  change  of  clothing.  All  ordnance 
stores  will  be  shipped  by  railroad,  and  the  ordnance-trains  of  the  com- 
mand will  assist  in  transporting  forage,  forage  and  ordnance-trains  moving 
together.  Three  days'  rations  of  com  for  the  command  will  be  carried  in 
the  ordnance  and  forage-trains. 

'^  II.  The  command  will  be  supplied  with  one  hundred  rounds  of  am- 
munition to  the  man,  forty  of  which  will  be  taken  in  the  cartridge-boxes, 
the  balance  to  be  shipped  by  railroad. 

''  III.'  Adjutants  will  not  be  allowed  to  take  any  more  papers  than  will 
be  necessary  for  active  field-service.  No  desks  will  be  taken,  or  other 
boxes  or  baggage  allowed  to  be  carried 

''  IV.  All  extra  wagons,  disabled  horses,  and  baggage  will  be  sent  back 
to  Suquatoncha  creek,  near  West-Point  One  officer  from  each  brigade 
and  one  man  to  every  ten  horses  will  be  sent  back  with  the  extra  wagons, 
baggage,  and  unserviceable  horses. 

"  V.  All  dismounted  men  will  be  ordered  to  report  to  Lieutenant-Colo- 
nel Bamett,  for  the  purpose  of  being  organized  into  a  battalion. 

"  VI.-  Lieutenant-Colonel  Bamett  will  organize  all  dismounted  men  into 
a  battalion,  and  be  in  readiness  to  move  on  the  morning  of  the  i6th  in- 
stant with  rations  and  ammunition  as  above. 

"VII.  A  fiill  and  complete  field  report  of  arms,  ammunition,  horses 
and  their  condition  will  be  sent  to  these  headquarters  by  the  morning  of 
the  15th  instant" 


♦  Mabry'8  Brigade,  brought  up  from     McCulloch's  Brigade-^md  the  •*  State 
Lexington— the  Fifth  Mississippi   of    Reserves"  or  militia. 


558  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest 

Other  judicious  and  comprehensive  orders  were  issued,  re- 
gulating the  movement  and  the  general  conduct  of  the  troops, 
especially  one,  stringently  forbidding  and  guarding'  against 
depredations  upon  the  property  and  premises  of  their  coun- 
trymen. 

On  the  morning  of  the  i6th,  as  directed,  Buford's  Division 
and  Rucker's  Brigade,  (under  Colonel  Kelly,)  with  the  horses 
of  Morton's  and  Walton's  Batteries,  marched,  with  the  view 
of  striking  the  Memphis  and  Charleston  Railroad  at  Chero- 
kee Station,  eastward  of  luka,  near  which  it  was  expected  to 
pass  across  the  Tennessee  river,  and  this  march  was  accom- 
plished by  sunset  on  the  19th.*    General  Forrest,  accompa- 
nied by  his  Adjutant-General,  Major  Strange,  also  left  Verona 
on  the  morning  of  the  i6th,  with  a  battalion,  450  strong,  of 
dismounted  men,  under  Lieutenant-Colonel  Bamett,  and  the 
guns  and  caissons  of  his  batteries,  to  proceed  by  the  Mobile 
and  Ohio  Railroad  for  the  same  destination  by  way  of  Corinth. 
Four  trains  followed  freighted  with  subsistence,  ordnance, 
and  quartermasters'  stores  for  his  command.     Obliged  to  re- 
pair a  number  of  the  bridges  and  trestles  on  the  r&ilroad,  he 
did  not  reach  Corinth  until  the  evening  of  the  17th.     Trans- 
ferring his  trains  to  the  Memphis  and  Charleston  Railroad, 
the   Confederate  General,  early  on  the  i8th,  resumed  the 
movement  with  his  wonted  determination  and  disregard  of 
obstacles.    All  the  wood  used  by  the  locomotives  had  to  be 
cut  by  the  wayside  by  his  troops,  who  likewise,  in  the  absence 
of  tanks,  kept  the  boilers  filled  with  water  brought  in  buckets 
from  the  streams  that  bordered  or  intersected  the  road      Many 
parts  of  the  roadway  had  to  be  patched,  and  long  "  cuttings" 
cleared  of  earth  and  rubbish,  frequently  several  feet  deep. 


*  General  Forrest's  staff  and  the  principal  part  of  his  escort  accompanied  this 
column. 


Colderi's  Skoals,  559 

which  had  accumulated  upon  the  track.  Nevertheless,  by 
the  evening  of  the  19th  every  hinderance  had  been  overcome, 
and  Forrest  reaching  Cherokee  Station  with  his  trains,  his 
whole  forces  and  resources  were  thus  auspiciously  collected 
at  that  point 

Roddy's  Division  was  reported  to  be  in  readiness  for  the 
field,  but  during  the  20th,  the  whole  command  remained  at 
Cherokee  Station,  actively  occupied  in  cooking  their  rations, 
or  other  preparations,  especially  the  shoeing  of  their  horses. 
Exclusive  of  Roddy's  men,  Forrest's  force  now  numbered 
three  thousand,  rank  and  file,  including  the  battalion  of  dis- 
mounted men,  and  with  this  command  the  movement  was 
inaugurated  on  the  morning  of  the  21st — scouts  previously 
dispatched  by  General  Roddy  having  communicated  the  satis- 
&ctory  intelligence  that  there  was  no  hostile  force  at  hand 
to  dispute  the  passage  of  the  Tennessee  river.  General 
Roddy  had  collected  the  requisite  means  of  ferriage  for  the 


artillery  at  Colbert's  Ferry,  just  above  the  head  of  Colbert** 
shoals,  about  seven  miles  from  Cherokee  Station,  and  to  thfit 


560  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

point  Barnett's  Battalion  and  the  batteries  repaired,  while 
the  cavalry  moved  to  the  ford  at  the  lower  extremity  of  the 
shoals. 

The  river,  at  this  point,  was  about  2000  yards  broad,  in  a 
straight  line ;  but  the  ford,  extremely  tortuous,  and  winding 
along  the  shallows  on  the  ledges  of  the  shoals,  was  quite  two 
miles  in  length.    The  whole  stream  was  filled  with  ledges  of 
rock,  some  of  which  jutted  high  above  the  water,  while  over 
others  the  swift  surging  current  broke  heavily  and  boiled  in 
frothy  tumult ;  and  profound  crevices,  or  holes,  marked  the 
spaces  between,  by  the  comparative  smoothness  of  the  deep 
water  that  flowed  over  them.     Placing  a  guide  at  the  head  d 
the  column,  Forrest  directed  it  to  make  the  crossing  in  a 
column  formed  by  twos,  and  kept  well  closed  up,  so  as  not  to 
lose  the  devious  and  obscure  pathway  through  the  breakers. 
Thus  disposed,  the  Confederate  cavalry  venturiiig  into  the 
river,  boldly  dared  the  perils  of  a  ford,  to  stray  from  which  a 
few  feet,  either  to  the  right  or  left,  were  almost  certain  des- 
truction ;  for  falling  into  some  pit,  the  luckless  trooper  would 
have  been  drawn  irretrievably  down-stream  by  the  current, 
and   dashed  against  the  jagged  rocks  which  crowded  the 
rapids  on  all  sides,  with  almost  certain  hazard  of  being  dis- 
abled and  drowned.     At  one  time  the  whole  ford,  from  side 
to  side,  was  filled  with  horsemen,  presenting  the  appearance 
of  a  huge,  sinuous,  tawny  serpent,  stretched  across  the  river 
among  the  breakers. 

This  serious  operation  having  been  happily  accomplished, 
the  Confederate  forces  were  pressed  on  with  Forrest's  ha- 
bitual diligence  and  celerity,  to  within  two  miles  of  Florence, 
and  bivouacked  for  the  night.  In  motion  seasonably  on  the 
22d,  Roddy's  command,  which  had  been  crossed  the  day  be- 
fore at  Bainbridge,  and  in  that  vicinity,  effected  a  junction  at 
Shoal  creek  with  the  troops  from  Mississippi,  and  Forrest's 
whole  force  was  now  assembled,  about  4500  strong,  of  all 


Affair  at  Athens^  Alabama.  561 

arms  *  The  line  of  march  taken  led  by  Athens,  Alabama,  an 
important  point  on  the  Nashville  and  Decatur  Railroad,  known 
to  be  occupied  in  force  by  the  enemy,  and  in  that  immediate 
vicinity  the  Confederate  column  arrived  about  sunset  on  the 
23d  of  September.  I 

A  considerable  Federal  encampment  was  visible  in  the  j 
north-eastern  suburbs  of  the  place.  The  Confederate  leader 
pressing  forward  his  command,  mounted,  at  once  upon  the 
cantonment  So  sudden,  so  unexpected  was  his  appearance 
and  the  onset  which  followed,  that  its  occupants  were  forced 
to  take  refuge  in  a  fort  about  three  quarters  of  a  mile  distant, 
southward  of  Athens,  leaving  the  horses  and  equipments  of 
their  cavalry  in  the  hands  of  their  ever  enterprising  enemy. 
Losing  no  time  in  preliminaries,  or  in  the  weighing  of  plans, 
Forrest  deployed  his  force  so  as  to  encompass  the  town,  (with 
possession  of  the  Federal  encampments,)  and  three  sides  of 
the  fort,  and  thus  awaited  daylight,  before  undertaking  further 
operations.  A  heavy  rain  fell  during  the  whole  night  in 
which  the  men,  for  the  most  part,  were  forced  to  bivouac 
without  shelter,  and  much  of  their  ammunition  was  injured. 

Fully  three  hours  of  the  morning  of  the  24th  were  neces- 
sarily occupied  in  this  position  in  preparation  for  the  attack. 
The  dismounted  men  were  established  meanwhile  as  sup- 
ports to  the  artillery,  which  occupied  four  commanding  po^ 
sitions  around  the  redoubt,  and  about  eight  hundred  yard% 
distant  from  it.  Bell's  Brigade  was  placed  in  line  about  tb« 
same  distance  east  and  south-east  of  the  work  ;  Lyon  about 
six  hundred  yards  immediately  southward ;  and  Kelly„  with 
Rucker's   Brigade,  as  far  from  the  Federal  position,  to-  the 


*  Roddy's  forces,  about  1500  strong,  to  accompany  his  commaiid^.aiid  thus 

were  under  the  command  of  Colonel  General  Forrest  was  deprived  of  the^ 

William  A.  Johnson,  Roddy  having  re-  services  of  this  valuablt:<^^er. 
mained  at  Tuscumbia,  being  too  sick 


562  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest 

westward  of  it,  while  Johnson  occupied  the  town  with  Roddy's 
men,  so  extended  in  three  lines  through  the  streets  as  to 
make  it  impossible  for  the  enemy  to  estimate  their  actual 
strength.  Detachments  from  each  brigade  were  held,  mount- 
ed, and  thrown  out  to  cover  all  the  approaches,  and  the  rest, 
or  greater  part  of  the  command,  were  dismounted,  with 
the  usual  horse-holders,  who  were  concentrated  in  one  body. 
Thus,  by  half-past  ten  a.m.,  the  Federal  position  was  tho- 
roughly invested  with  a  double  line  of  riflemen,  the  foremost 
circle  (skirmishers)  being  within  one  hundred  and  fifty  yards 
of  the  Federal  trenches.  Being  now  ready  for  the  attack,  the 
Confederate  Commander  determined  to  test  the  efficacy  of  a 
flag  of  truce,  and  accordingly  ordered  the  signal  for  a  parley 
to  be  sounded. 

A  few  moments  later,  a  Confederate  stafl'-officer — Major 
Strange,  accompanied  by  Captain  Pointer — bearing  the  usual 
flag  of  truce,  presented  a  formal  demand  for  the  unconditional 
surrender  of  his  position.  The  answer,  an  absolute  refusal  to 
capitulate,  was  not  long  delayed.  Not  at  all  disconcerted, 
however.  General  Forrest  immediately  sent  forward  another 
communication  requesting  a  personal  interview  with  his  ad- 
versary, which  soon  took  place. 

The  Confederate  General,  at  once  approaching  the  business 
of  the  interview,  earnestly  expressed  his  desire  to  avoid  the 
unnecessary  shedding  of  blood  ;  declared  that  his  means, 
including  artillery,  were  so  ample  that  he  could  carry  the 
position  by  storm,  without  any  hazard  of  failure ;  and  ^(i 
assured  did  he  feel — he  observed — of  this  fact,  that  he  was 
quite  willing  to  exhibit  his  forces  to  the  Federal  Commander, 
who  would  find  it  to  be  fully  8000  strong,  of  all  arms.  In 
jeply^  Colonel  Campbell,  the  Federal  Commander,  remarked 
<that,  of  course,  if  he  could  be  satisfied  such  a  force  actually 
surrounded  him,  he  would  not  feel  authorized  to  maintain 
so  (Useless  a  defense.     Forrest's  dispositions  being  favorable 


Forces  Adroitly  Displayed.  563 

,    for  his  purpose,  with  characteristic  adroitness  and  audacity, 
^     he  proposed  that  his  adversary  should  at  once  review  his 
lines,  and  they  rode  together  for  that  purpose. 

The  first  troops  displayed  were  the  dismounted  cavalry, 
who,  armed  with  Enfield  rifles,  were  deployed  as  infantry, 
which  they  were  represented  to  be.  Some  six  hundred  yards 
rearward  the  horse-holders  were  drawn  up,  mounted,  the 
horses  in  their  charge  so  disposed  as  to  be  mistaken  for  a 
body  of  at  least  4000  cavalry,  the  number  indicated  by  the 
wily  Confederate.  The  batteries  were  exhibited  in  turn,  and 
adroitly  shifted  from  position  to  position,  so  as  to  do  double 
duty  in  the  display.  By  the  time  the  inspection  was  con- 
.  eluded.  Colonel  Campbell  declared  that  what  he  saw  far  ex- 
ceeded his  conception  of  the  force  that  confronted  him,  a 
force  which,  he  added,  appeared  indeed  fo  be  fully  10,000 
strong,  and  made  defense  on  his  part  fruitless  and  unwar- 
ranted. He  therefore  proposed  to  capitulate,  asking  only 
that  his  officers  might  be  allowed  to  retain  their  private  pro- 
perty and  side-arms.  Of  course,  this  proposition  was  accept- 
ed without  discussion  ;  and  Major  Strange  and  Captain  An- 
derson, of  the  Confederate  staff,  returned  with  him,  in  order 
that  the  surrender  should  take  place  as  speedily  as  practica- 
ble. Accordingly,  the  garrison  was  soon  marched  forth  with- 
out arms,  some  1400,  rank  and  file — in  great  part  new  troops 
— ^and  the  capitulation  was  effected  by  one  p.m.* 

Previously,  howbeit,  just  as  Rucker's  Brigade  (Kelly)  had 
taken  its  position  in  the  line  of  investment,  a  train  came  up 
from  the  direction  of  Decatur,  filled  with  Federal  infantry, 
who  disembarked,  over  400  strong,  near  a  block-house,  about 


•  The  work  thus  surrendered  was  a  ten  feet  deep  and  fifteen  feet  broad,  also 

strong,  square  redoubt,  built  upon  a  with  aline  of  aAa/^;  and  the  ditch 

high  hill,  with  pa)rapets  from  eight  to  lined  with  sharpened  palisades, 
ten  feet  high,  encompassed  by  a  ditch 


564  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

one  mile  from  the  work,  and  were  moved  forward  with  the  evi- 
dent purpose  of  forcing  their  way  to  a  junction  with  the  invest- 
ed garrison.    The  Seventh  Tennessee,  having  been  already 
posted  in  observation  in  that  quarter,  became  immediately 
engaged  in  a  lively  skirmish  with  these  troops,  as,  soon  after, 
did  a  detachment  of  Wilson  and  Russell's  Regiments,  under 
Lieutenant-Colonel  Jesse  Forrest,  detached  for  that  purpose 
by  Colonel  Bell  from  his  brigade.    About  150  of  the  Fifteenth 
Tennessee,  under  Lieutenant-Colonel  Logwood,  also  fell  upon 
their  left  flank.    The  enemy  fought,  and  were  handled  with 
decided  courage  and  resolution  ;  many  of  their  number  were 
killed  and  wounded.     Pressed,  however,  on  all  sides,  finally, 
after  a  struggle  of  nearly  an  hour,  and  under  the  stress  of  a 
fire  in  front  and  flank,  throwing  down  their  arms,  they  sur- 
rendered to  the  number  of  4CX),  after  having  inflicted  upon 
die  Confederates  the  loss  of  some  of  their  best  officers  and 
men.* 

Two  block-houses  still  remained  in  the  vicinage  to  be  re- 
duced ;  one  half  a  mile  and  the  other  one  mile  and  a  half  dis- 
tant from  Athens,  on  the  line  of  the  railroad  to  Decatur. 
Both  were  immediately  and  simultaneously  summoned  to 
capitulate.  The  one  most  remote  succumbed  at  once,  and 
the  garrison  laid  down  their  arms  on  the  like  terms  to  those 
granted  Colonel  Campbell.!  But  a  stouter  soldier,  apparently, 
held  the  other  fortalice  ;  for,  when  called  upon  to  surrender, 
he  haughtily  answered,  that,  having  been  placed  in  command 
by  his  government,  he  would  forfeit  his  life  rather  than  yield. 

During  the  parley,  Captain  Morton,  Chief  of  Artillery,  hav- 
ing casually  but  closely  observed  the  block-house,  formed  and 
expressed  to  General  Forrest  the  opinion  that,  notwithstand- 


*  Lieutenant-Colonel  Jesse  Forrest        t  This  garrison  consisted  of  eightj* 
was   severely  wounded    through    the     five,  officers  and  men. 
thigh. 


Block-House  taken  by  Morton.  565 

mg  the  great  thickness  of  its  walls,  of  hewn  oak  timber,  by 
firing  at  the  joints — somewhat  wide  from  shrinkage — he  might 
penetrate  within  the  work  with  his  projectiles.  Thereupon 
Morton  was  ordered  to  turn  four  of  his  three-inch  rifled  pieces 
upon  it.  This  done  at  a  range  of  not  exceeding  three  hun- 
dred yards,  the  first  shot — from  one  of  Mayson's  section — 
striking  the  roof,  scattered  earth  and  plank  in  every  direction, 
while  two  other  shells,  penetrating,  exploded,  and  killed  six 
and  wounded  three  of  the  garrison.  The  effect  was  instan- 
taneous ;  the  wicket  was  thrown  hurriedly  open,  and  an  of- 
ficer, rushing  forth  with  a  white  flag,  exclaimed  in  accents  of 
great  excitement,  as  General  Forrest  rode  forward  in  person 
to  meet  him  :  "  You  have  killed  and  wounded  nearly  all  my 
men  ;  your  shells,  sir,  bore  through  my  block-house  like  an 
auger !"  This  garrison  numbered  thirty-five,  officers  and  men, 
making  the  aggregate  of  prisoners  now  taken  around  Athens 
1900. 

General  Buford  and  Colonel  Johnson  were  now  actively 
occupied  supplying  their  respective  commands  from  the  Fede- 
ral cantonments  and  depots  with  such  articles  and  equipments 
as  their  men  most  needed.  The  former  was  able  to  improve 
materially  the  armament  of  his  division,  and  to  provide  about 
200  of  his  dismounted  men  with  excellent  mounts.  Some 
twenty  wagons  and  teams  were  among  the  spoils,  and  these 
were  promptly  loaded  with  such  supplies,  medical  stores  and 
instruments,  and  ammunition,  as  were  selected  by  the  proper 
staff-officers.  Colonel  Wheeler,  of  the  First  Tennessee  Cav- 
alry, having  come  up  about  this  time  with  some  two  hundred 
men  belonging  to  General  Wheeler's  Cavalry,  left  in  the  coun- 
try during  that  officer's  recent  expedition,  his  men  too  were 
furnished  with  arms  and  equipments.  The  rest  of  the  stores, 
to  a  considerable  amount,  were  then  set  on  fire  and  consumed, 
together  with  the  two  block-houses,  the  adjacent  trestle-work 
of  the  railroad,  which  they  commanded,  and  all  the  buildings 


566  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

in  and  around  the  redoubt  that  had  been  used  by  the  enemy. 
Meanwhile  the  dead  were  buried,  and  the  wounded  of  both 
sides  collected  and  properly  disposed  of  in  Athens  for  treat- 
ment The  other  results  of  the  day  not  already  enumerated 
were  the  capture  of  four  pieces  of  artillery  and  five  or  six 
ambulances,  while  some  forty  of  the  enemy  were  killed  and 
about  one  hundred  wounded  The  Confederate  loss  was  not 
over  twenty  killed  and  sixty  wounded,  casualties  which  pre- 
ceded the  capitulation  of  the  redoubt,  and  mainly  in  the  skir- 
mish with  the  infantry  exterior  to  it 

The  block-house  buildings,  bridges,  and  trestle-work  having 
been  burned  to  the  ground,  the  prisoners,  captured  artillery, 
and  wagon-train,  properly  guarded,  about  five  p.m.,  were  dis- 
patched rearward  in  the  direction  of  Florence.  And  at  the 
same  hour  Forrest  put  his  main  command  in  motion  again, 
along  .the  line  of  the  Tennessee  and  Alabama  Railroad,  to  the 
northward,  for  what  is  known  as  the  "  Sulphur  Trestle,"  in 
which  direction  he  moved  that  evening,  eight  miles,  before 
bivouacking.  On  the  way,  two  other  block-houses  were  en- 
countered and  captured  with  their  garrisons,  after  short  nego- 
tiations, in  which  the  Federal  officer  whose  block-house  Mor- 
ton's projectiles  had  so  readily  perforated  related  that  incident 
with  quite  enough  of  warmth  of  color  in  his  description  to 
produce  the  effect  for  which  he  had  been  carried  along.  Both 
these  block-houses  and  the  bridges  which  they  guarded  were 
destroyed,  and,  with  seventy  officers  and  men,  captured  with- 
out firing  a  gun,  were  the  closing  results  of  the  day.* 

III. 

'   Early  in  the  morning  of  the  25th,  Forrest  was  in  front  of 
Sulphur  Trestle,  after  a  march  of  only  three  miles  from  his 


*  This  was  effected  by  a  detachment  from  Roddy's  Division,  under  Lienteoaat- 
Colonel  F.  M.  Windes. 


Sulphur  Trestle.  567 

bivouac.  The  position  was  known  to  be  defended  by  a  strong 
redoubt,  garnished  with  artillery  and  heavily  garrisoned,  as 
well  as  by  several  block-houses.  The  trestle  was  a  costly 
structure  which  spanned  a  deep  ravine,  with  precipitous  sides, 
some  four  hundred  feet  broad.  It  was  sixty  feet  high,  and,  as 
ma.y  be  seen,  formed  a  most  vulnerable  link  in  the  chain  of 
communication  and  supply  between  the  Federal  forces  in 
North- Alabama  and  their  base  at  Nashville.-  Hence,  its  pro- 
tection was  a  matter  of  vital  military  importance  to  the  for- 
mer, and  accordingly  the  position  had  been  fortified*  A 
square  redoubt,  with  faces  of  about  three  hundred  feet  in 
length,  had  been  thrown  up  on  an  eminence  to  the  southward, 
so  as  to  command  the  trestle  and  all  approaches.  This  was 
furnished  with  two  twelve-pounder  howitzers,  skillfully  ar- 
ranged, to  be  fired  through  embrasures,  sweeping  all  possible 
avenues  to  the  trestle  ;  while,  some  two  hundred  yards  in 
advance,  on  three  sides,  it  was  surrounded  by  a  line  of  rifle- 
pits.  And  two  formidable  block-houses  were  built  in  the 
ravine,  at  each  extremity,  so  as  to  command  the  ravine  and 
prevent  hostile  approach  to  the  trestle  by  that  way.  These 
block-houses  and  the  redoubt  were  garrisoned  by  about  one 
thousand  men.* 

His  brigade  being  in  advance,  Colonel  Kelly,  supported  by 
Roddy's  command,  was  ordered  to  drive  the  Federal  pickets 
and  skirmishers  within  the  redoubt.  Leading  this  gallant 
brigade,  with  their  characteristic  promptness,  across  an  open 
field,  Kelly  charged  the  rifle-pits,  and  made  the  enemy  seek 
shelter,  after  a  short  skirmish,  in  the  fort,  but  not  without  the 
loss  of  several  valuable  men,  while  his  own  horse  was  wounded 
under  him,  and  those  of  several  of  his  field-officers  were  killed. 
Making  a  close  reconnoissance,  Forrest  saw  that  the  works 


Third  Tennessee  (Federal)  cavalry,  400  strong,  and  aboat  600  negro  infantrf. 


568  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

made  the  position  almost  inexpugnable  to  his  resources,  espe- 
cially since  the  block-houses  were  sheltered  from  his  artillery. 
Nothing  daunted,  however,  relying  on  himself,  and  ever  fertile 
in  resources,  he  spent  several  hours  in  unimportant  light  skir- 
mishes, in  the  course  of  which  he  succeeded,  with  slight  loss, 
in  establishing  a  considerable  portion  of  his  force  within*  one 
hundred  yards  of  the  breastworks  of  the  redoubt,  under  cover 
of  the  acclivity  of  the  ridge  upon  which  it  was  built,  and  some 
ravines  which  seamed  it.     In  the  mean  time,  also.  Captain 
Morton  had  found,  and  reported  four  positions  for  his  artillery 
severally  within  eight  hundred  yards  of,  and  commanding 
the  works,  from  which  he  might  easily  explode  his  shells  in  it 
At  this  stage  of  operations  Forrest  determined  to  resort  again 
to  the  artifice  of  demanding  a  surrender,  and,  accordingly, 
Major  Strange  was  sent  forward,  under  a  flag  of  truce,  with 
the  summons.  Fully  an  hour  elapsed  before  he  returned  with 
the  answer — a  positive  refusal. 

Captain  Morton  was  now  ordered  to  establish  his  batteries 
in  the  positions  we  have  mentioned,  and  to  open  with  them 
without  delay ;  meanwhile,  a  lively  skirmish  was  commenced, 
and  kept  up  by  the  Confederate  riflemen — a  fire,  however, 
more  noisy  and  ostentatious  than  effective,  for  they  were  di- 
rected to  be  kept  under  cover,  and  to  avoid  loss.  Walton's 
guns  were  soon  in  position  at  two  points,  from  which  he  en- 
filaded a  large  portion  of  the  southern  and  western  faces  of 
the  work,  while  Morton's  own  battery,  to  an  equal  extent, 
raked  its  other  two  faces,  and  FerrelFs  guns  were  brought  to 
bear  from  a  somewhat  more  exposed  position  in  a  corn-field, 
within  short  range  of  the  fort.  From  these  hurtful  positions 
the  Confederate  artillery  was  speedily  plying  with  perceptible 
effect.  For  a  time,  the  enemy  responded  vigorously  with  two 
twelve-pounder  howitzers ;  but  a  shell  from  Lieutenant  Sale's 
section  of  Morton's  Battery,  striking  the  lower  lip  of  one  of 
them,  glanced,  and  striking  the  axle,  exploded,  killing,  it  is 


Sulphur  Trestle.  569 

said,  five  men,  while  overturning  the  piece ;  and  soon  the  other 
was  dismounted  by  a  shot  planted  squarely  in  its  mouth  by 
Lieutenant  Brown  of  the  same  battery.  The  Confederate 
practice  was  excellent ;  every  shell  fell  and  exploded  within 
the  Federal  work,  whose  faces,  swept  in  great  part  by  an  en- 
filading fire,  gave  little  or  no  shelter  to  the  garrison,  who  were 
to  be  seen  fleeing  alternately  from  side  to  side,  vainly  seeking 
cover.  Many  found  it,  as  they  hoped,  within  some  wooden 
buildings  in  the  redoubt,  but  shot  and  shell  crushing  and  tear- 
ing through  these  feeble  barriers,  either  set  them  on  fire  or 
leveled  them  to  the  ground,  killing  and  wounding  their  in- 
mates, and  adding  to  the  wild  helplessness  and  confusion  of 
the  enemy,  who,  though  making,  meanwhile,  no  proffer  to  sur- 
render, had,  nevertheless,  become  utterly  impotent  for  defense.  * 
Seeing  their  situation,  and  desiring  to  put  a  stop  to  the 
slaughter,  Forrest,  ordering  a  cessation  of  hostilities,  again 
demanded  a  capitulation.  This  time,  the  demand  was  prompt- 
ly acceded  to,  and  the  capitulation  of  the  block-houses,  as  well 
as  the  redoubt,  was  speedily  accomplished  through,  the  proper 
staff-officers. 

The  interior  of  the  work  presented  a  sanguinary,  sickening 
spectacle,  another  shocking  illustration  of  the  little  capacity 
for  command,  scant  soldierly  aptitudes,  and  deficiency  of  mili- 
tary knowledge  of  those  appointed  by  the  Federal  Govern- 
ment over  their  negro  troops,  rather  than  an  example  of  a 
stout,  loyal  maintenance  of  a  soldier  s  post  on  the  part  of  the 
garrison.  As  we  have  said,  all  the  buildings  within  the  para- 
pets had  either  been  razed  or  burned  to  the  ground.  Eight 
hundred  rounds  of  ammunition  had  been  expended 'by  the 
Confederate  artillery  in  this  affair,  and  at  least  two  hundred 
Federal  officers  and  men  lay  slain  within  the  narrow  area  of 
that  redoubt,  giving  it  the  aspect  of  a  slaughter-pen.  Among 
the  dead  were  Colonel  Lathrop,  the  commander,  and  a 
number  of  officers ;  comparatively  few  of  the  garrison  had 


i 


570  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

been  wounded  The  bursting  shells  had  done  their  w<Hi 
effectively  upon  this  poor,  mis-officered  force,  whose  defense, 
manifestly,  from  its  feebleness,  had  been  thus  prolonged,  \xr 
cause  the  officers,  paralyzed  under  the  tempest  of  iron  show- 
ered upon  them,  knew  not  what  to  do  in  the  exigency.*  Eight 
hundred  and  twenty  officers  and  men  capitulated  ;  the  other 
results  were  two  pieces  of  artillery,  twenty  wagons  and  teams, 
about  three  hundred  and  fifty  cavalry  horses,  with  their  equip- 
ments, complete,  and  a  large  quantity  of  ordnance  and  com- 
missary stores.f 

During  this  operation,  intelligence  was  received  that  the 
enemy,  hearing  of  the  movement,  were  evacuating  their  block- 
houses and  fort  at  the  bridge  over  Elk  river,  some  six  or  seven 
*miles  to  the  northward.      Buford,  therefore,  was  detached, 
with  Lyon's  Brigade,  to  push  forward  and  destroy  the  bridge 
and  its  defenses.   Having  already  expended  so  large  a  portion 
of  his  artillery  ammunition,  Forrest  now  determined  to  send 
back  to  Florence,  and  across  the  Tennessee,  four  pieces  of 
his  own  artillery,  the  captured   guns   and  wagon-train,  and 
prisoners,  with  a  suitable  escort,  commanded  by  Lieutenant- 
Colonel  Logwood.     The  other  troops  were  set  to  burying  the 
dead,  collecting  and  providing  for  the  wounded  of  both  sides, 
and  employed  in  the  destruction  of  the  trestle  and  block- 
houses.    The  trestle  had  first  to  be  cut  down — not  a  light 
work — ^and  was  then  set  on  fire.    Through  the  night  the  Con- 
federates were  thus  occupied,  so  that  by  six  a.m.  on  the  26th, 
there  remained  of  that  huge  work  naught  except  a  heap  of 
ashes,  and  coals,  and  charred  beams. 


•  The  Federal  wounded  scarcely  ex-  Colonel  Johnson's  escort j  was  among 

cceded  thirty.  the  killed.      Major  John  H.  Doan  ajid 

t  This  was  not  achieved,  however,  Captain  Carter,  of  the  same  command, 

without  some  loss  on  the  Confederate  (Roddy's,)   were  severely  wounded.— 

side.      Captain  James  J.  Kirkman,  (of  MS,  Notes  of  Captcnn  y,  J.  ScanUm, 
Florence,  Alabama,}  in   command  of 


Richland  Creek.  571 

Bell's  Brigade  was  now  dispatched  to  catch  up  with  and 
rejoin  Buford  at  Elk  river,  as  General  Forrest  set  out  with 
Kelly  and  Johnson,  .by  other  roads,  toward  Pulaski,  the  latter 
marching  through  Upper  Elkton,  while  Forrest,  with  Kelly, 
moved  by  a  way  nearer  the  line  of  the  railroad,  so  as  to 
be  within  supporting  distance  of  Buford,  who  was  ordered 
to  advance  along  that  line  as  far  as  Richland  creek,  seven 
miles  south  of  Pulaski ;  and  there  Johnson,  also,  was  instruct- 
ed to  join  him. 

Buford,  moving  along  the  railroad,  after  he  had  destroyed 
the  large  railroad  bridge  and  block-houses  at  Elk  river,  des- 
troyed  another  deserted  block-house,  and  about  io,cxx)  cords 
of  wood,  collected  for  the  operations  of  the  road,  in  the 
burning  of  which  he  likewise  effectually  impaired  at  least 
a  mile  of  the  track.  The  command  was  then  concentrated, 
and  moved  on  to  Richland  creek,  over  which  there  was  a 
truss  railroad  bridge,  2CX)  feet  long,  defended  by  a  heavy 
block-house,  the  garrison  of  which  capitulated  after  a  few 
shells  had  been  burst  against  it*  The  bridge  and  block- 
house were  then  consigned  to  the  torcl),  and  the  command 
bivouacked  for  the  night. 

Early  on  the  27th,  Forrest  was  again  in  motion  toward 
Pulaski,  Buford  moving  still  by  the  railroad,  Johnson  to  the 
right  of  it,  deployed  across  the  turnpike,  followed  by  Kelly. 
In  this  order  the  Federal  pickets  were  encountered  a  mile  be- 
'  yond  Richland  creek,  and  were  borne  back  for  another  mile, 
when  a  heavy  Federal  force  was  developed  in  line  of  battle, 
stretched  across  the  turnpike  and  railroad — here  about  400 
yards  apart — and  on  a  range  of  hills  affording  an  excellent 
position.  It  was  a  mixed  force  of  cavalry,  artillery,  and 
infantry,  apparently  not  less   than  6000  strong ;  while  the 


♦  Forty-five  officers  and  men  were  taken  here. 


i 


572  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

Confederates  present  did  not  number  over  33CX>  men  and  four 
guns.  Nevertheless,  their  leader,  resolved  on  the  offensive, 
dismounting  them,  deployed  Buford's  and  Johnson's  small 
divisions  across  the  roads,  as  Kelly,  still  mounted,  was  boldly 
launched  to  make  a  detour  to  the  eastward  and  gain  the 
Federal  rear. 

Deploying  his  escort,  some  sixty  rifles,  on  foot,  as  skirmish- 
ers, in  front  of  Johnson  and  to  the  rightward  of  the  turnpike, 
Forrest  threw  forward  that  indomitable  band  of  combatants. 
Charging,  with  characteristic  intrepidity,  up  a  hill  held  by 
the  enemy  in  that  part  of  the  field,  they  brought  on  the 
engagement  and  gained  the  position,  with  a  loss  of  seven  or 
eight  of  their  number  killed  or  wounded.  Meanwhile,  Bu- 
ford  and  Johnson  pressed  up  with  vigor,  and  an  animated 
musketry  and  artillery  afiair  ensued.*  The  enemy,  however, 
did  not  stand  their  ground,  and  soon  were  observed  retiring 
toward  Pulaski.  At  this,  directing  his  escort  to  remount, 
Forrest  made  a  dash  with  them  and  his*  staff  at  the  Federal 
rear,  and  a  running  skirmish  was  kept  up  for  five  or  six  miles 
in  the  course  of  which,  the  enemy  halting  frequently,  turned 
and  made  battle  at  every  favorable  position,  until  Forrest,, 
concentrating  his  forces,  deployed,  and  threw  his  men  forward 
with  his  wonted  aggressive  tactics.f  Then,  in  each  instance, 
the  enemy  withdrew,  till  finally,  about  three  p.m.,  they  filed 
into  position  behind  their  works  at  Pulaski.  These  consisted 
of  a  chain  of  detached  redoubts  of  commanding  positions, 
interlinked  by  rifle-pits,  the  whole  furnished  with  artillery, 
and  bristling  with  abatis. 


♦  Here  Colonel  Johnson  was  dan-  Fourth  Alabama,  was  slain. — MS,  NoUs 

gcrously  wounded  by  a  rifle-ball  in  the  of  Captain  J,  J,  Scanlan. 

leg,  below  the  knee,  and  the  command  t  Gaus,   Forrest's  favorite    orderly 

of  Roddy's  force  devolved,  for  the  rest  bugler,  ever  by  the  side  of  his  leader, 

of  the  expedition,  upon  Colonel  J.  R.  had  his  bugle  disabled  by  three  balls  io 

B.  Burtwell.    Lieutenant  John  Moore,  this  ride. 


In  Front  of  Pulaski. 


573 


Manifestly,  nothing  was  to  be  achieved  by  the  s  word-in - 
hand  process  here,  and  it  had  been  a  folly  to  have  attempted 
the  offensive  even,  had  not  the  force  in  occupancy  been 
greatly  superior  to  that  under  Forrest.  However,  he  made  a 
menace  of  an  attack  upon  the  southern  and  eastern  faces ; 
pushing  forward  a  strong  skirmish  line,  he  pressed  it  slowly 
but  steadily  up  to  within  400  yards  of  the  Federal  intrench- 
ments  by  nightfall  in  that  quarter.*  And  after  dark,  a  broad, 
long  belt  of  camp-fires,  by  his  orders,  blazed  on  a  ridge  about 
^  mile  and  a  half  from  the  threatened  part  of  the  Federal 
works.  Maintaining  his  pickets  close  up  to  the  enemy,  and 
renewing  the  camp-fires  about  nine  o'clock,  the  Confederates 
were  quietly  formed,  and  at  ten  o'clock,  drew  off  by  the  road 
to  the  eastward,  in  the  direction  of  Fayetteville,  with  the  pur- 
pose of  striking  the  Nashville  and  Chattanooga  Railroad  at, 
and  in  the  vicinity  of,  Tullahoma.t  That  railroad  was  the 
main  channel  of  supply  and  recruitment  for  Sherman's  army, 
then  at  Atlanta,  Georgia,  and  Forrest's  object  was  to  destroy 
as  much  of  the  track  and  as  many  of  the  bridges  upon  it  as 
possible.  The  rain,  however,  began  to  pour  down,  and  the 
night  became  soon  so  dark  that  the  ordnance  train  could  not 
be  forced  along  over  the  miry,  rugged  roads  of  the  country, 
and  the  command  was  halted  for  the  night,  after  a  short 
inarch  of  six  or  seven  miles. 

But  at  daybreak,  on  the  28th,  the  movement  was  resumed, 


*  In  this  affair  Forrest's  Cavalry  had 
the  misfortune  to  lose  Captain  Edmund 
Daley,  who  fell  at  the  head  of  the 
Twelfth  Tennessee  Cavalry,  the  com- 
mand of  which  had  devolved  upon  him. 
During  the  first  twelve  months  of  the 
war  he  had  served  in  an  infantry  regi- 
ment, after  which,  raising  a  company  of 
cavalry,  he  became  attached  to  the 


Twelfth  Tennessee.  He  was  an  officer 
of  zeal,  courage,  and  intelligence,  and 
his  death  made  a  chasm  in  his  regi- 
ment 

t  Forres*  also  sent  back  to  Florence 
from  in  iron  o^  Pulaski  all  supernum- 
erary wagons  and  teams,  some  200 
^prisoners,  and  40  wounded  men,  under 
a  suitable  eicort 


i 


574  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest 

and  though  the  route  was  by  narrow  cross-ways,  through  a 
broken,  extremely  rough  country,  made  boggy  by  recent  hard 
rains,  nevertheless  the  command,  much  of  the  time  at  a  sharp 
trot,  marched  forty  miles,  and  bivouacked  at  dark,  five  miles 
beyond  and  northward  of  Fayetteville  *  Still  pressing  on, 
the  next  day,  toward  Tullahoma,  till  within  fifteen  miles  of 
that  place,  Forrest  there  was  met  by  scouts,  with  the  tidings 
that  a  heavy  column  of  Federal  infantry  was  advancing  from 
Chattanooga  to  meet  him ;  and  that  the  forces  which  he  had 
left  in  the  lurch,  intrenched  at  Pulaski,  were  now  on  the  way, 
by  rail,  through  Nashville,  to  confront  him  at  Tullahoma. 
Thus  anticipated,  the  Confederate  Commander  found  it  expe- 
dient to  make  a  radical  change  in  his  plan  of  operations. 

His  horses,  now  in  great  part  unshod,  were  foot-sore,  as 
well  as  greatly  fatigued  by  excessive,  prolonged  hard  service. 
It  was  still  raining,  moreover,  and  the  Tennessee  river  was 
rising  rapidly,  while  there  were  no  means  of  ferriage  available, 
except  a  few  old  flats  at  or  near  Florence.  And  besides,  the 
enemy  in  the  country  were  greatly  his  superior  in  numbers,  - 
even  in  cavalry.  The  situation  was  extremely  precarious,  and 
one  indeed  that  required  a  large  measure  of  coolness  and 
judgment  for  extrication.  Forrest,  therefore,  resolved  to  sub- 
divide his  command.  One  detachment,  of  15CX)  men  and  the 
artillery  and  wagon-train,  he  placed  under  General  Buford, 
with  orders  to  move  swiftly  upon  Huntsville,  seize  that  place 
if  practicable,  and  afterward,  destroying  as  much  of  the  rail- 
road thence  to  Decatur  as  he  could,  throw  his  command  south 
of  the  Tennessee  at  that  point,  if  the  means  were  found  there. 
Putting  himself  at  the  head  of  the  other  detachment,  likewise 
about  15CX)  strong,  he  proposed  to  move  rapidly  across  the 
country  to  Spring  Hill,  strike  the  railroad  there,  and  break  it 


MS.  Notes  Lieutenant  Jlobert  J.  Black,  Seventh  Tennessee  Cavalry. 


spring  Hill.  575 

up  between  that  point  and  Columbia,  and  at  the  same  time 
drawing  after  him  hostile  forces  that  otherwise  would  be  sure 
to  follow  Buford,  and  prevent,  most  probably,  the  escape  of 
the  Confederate  wagon-train  and  artillery  across  the  Tennes- 
see river.  He  had  also  received  information,  through  citizens, 
that  a  vast  amount  of  army-stores  had  been  collected  at  John- 
sonville,  on  the  Tennessee  river,  the  terminus  of  the  Nash- 
ville and  North- Western  Railroad,  destined  and  essential  for 
the  Federal  forces  at  Chattanooga  and  Atlanta.  .  This  depot, 
and  the  bridges  on  the  railroad  leading  to  it,  it  was  likewise 
his  purpose  to  destroy,  if  the  condition  of  his  horses,  on  reach- 
ing Spring  Hill,  would  warrant  him  in  undertaking  it* 

Both  subdivisions  were  in  motion  on  the  evening  of  the 
29th.  Forrest,  taking  the  road  through  Lewisburg,  in  Mar- 
shall county,  encamped  at  a  hamlet  called  Petersburg,  where 
he  learned,  through  scouts,  that  a  strong  Federal  cavalry  force, 
on  the  march  from  Pulaski  to  Tullahoma,  was  only  eight  miles 
distant,  to  the  north,  at  the  time.  Nevertheless,  as  his  weary 
animals  required  rest,  he  remained  encamped  until  daylight  on 
the  30th.  Then  resuming  his  march  across  the  country,  pass- 
ing through  Lewisburg,  and  crossing  Duck  river  at  Hardi- 
son's  ford,  to  the  eastward  of  Columbia,  Forrest  reached 
Spring  Hill  about  meridian  on  the  ist  of  October. 

Here,  seizing  the  telegraph-ofBce  by  surprise,  he  found  the 
line  in  operation  from  Pulaski  to  Nashville,  and  most  oppor- 
tunely intercepted  several  official  dispatches,  which  gave  pre- 
cise information  with  regard  to  the  location  at  the  time  of  the 
principal  bodies  of  troops  which  were  afield  in  pursuit  of  him. 
From  one  of  these  he  was  particularly  annoyed  to  learn  that 
General  Steedman  was  marching  with  a  heavy  column  toward 
Huntsville,  with  the  evident  object  of  cutting  off  his  retreat  to 


*  Forrest's  immediate  command  now     Lyon's,  Bell's,  and  Rucker's  Brigades, 
consisted  of  parts  of  seven  regiments,  of     choice  fighting  material 


i 


576  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

the  south  bank  of  the  Tennessee  river.  Having  thus  acquired 
as  much  information  as  possible  touching  the  movements  of 
the  enemy,  he  now  sent  several  misleading,  spurious  dis- 
patches to  General  Rousseau,  in  regard  to  Confederate  move- 
ments, especially  one,  reporting  that  "  Forrest "  was  still  de- 
stroying the  Nashville  and  Decatur  Railroad,  and  the  block- 
houses in  that  direction.  These  messages  being  dispatched, 
he  broke  up  the  telegraph-line  around  Spring  HiU,  and  at  two 
P.M.,  turned  the  head  of  his  column  toward  Columbia,  having 
previously  detached  a  force  to  destroy  the  small  trestles  on 
the  railroad  as  far  northward  as  Franklin. 

The  roadside  was  found  strewn  with  large  piles  of  wood, 
collected  for  the  locomotives.  These  were  burned,  as  also  an 
extensive  Government  saw-mill  and  a  large  quantity  of  public 
lumber,  about  three  miles  southward  of  Spring  Hill ;  and  here 
were  captured  thirty  fat  oxen,  six  wagons,  and  some  forty 
mules.*  Near  by  were  several  strong  block-houses,  but  being 
now  without  artillery,  Forrest  was  perplexed  as  to  the  speedi- 
est method  for  their  reduction.  Howbeit,  promptly  displaying 
his  force  so  as  to  make  a  formidable  show,  the  oft-tried  device 
of  a  peremptory  demand  for  a  surrender  was  again  adventufed. 
Meeting  with  an  equally  prompt  refusal,  he  next  requested  a 
personal  interview  with  the  Federal  Commander,  which  being 
assented  to,  they  met.  The  Confederate  General  expressing 
his  earnest  desire  to  avoid  unnecessary  bloodshed,  urged  that 
the  defense  of  an  untenable  place  should  not  be  attempted, 
for  he  could  not  be  responsible  for  the  consequences  if  forced 
to  carry  the  position  by  storm.    Then  proposing  to  show  to 


*  This  wood  was  piled  and  burned  gitudinal  expansion,  under  the  heat  of 

upon  the  railroad,  by  Colonel  Bell,  who  fire,  being  prevented,  the    rails  were 

had  previously  and  ingeniously  caused  warped  into  short  curves,  which  render- 

the  rails  to  be  firmly  fastened  at  each  ed  them  useless  for  three  miles  of  the 

extremity  by  spikes.    In  this  way,  Ion-  road. 


Successful  Ruse.  577 

his  adversary"  the  forces  at  his  disposition,  so  that  it  might 
be  seerr  there  was  no  deception  on  the  Confederate  side,  and 
furnishing  a  horse  to  the  Federal  commander,  they  actually 
made  together  a  rapid  survey  of  the  investing  force,  in  the 
course  of  which  some  of  the  Confederate  officers,  taking  the 
hint,  were  heard  to  speak  impatiently  to  each  other  of  the 
delayed  approach  of  several  rifled  batteries.  Moreover,  For- 
rest assuring  his  antagonist,  as  he  was  approaching  his  ambu- 
lance, that  he  had  the  means  to  destroy  the  block-houses 
without  artillery,  called  upon  the  driver  of  that  vehicle  to 
bring  him  a  vial  of  "  Greek  fire."  This  being  done,  it  was 
thrown  and  broken  against  a  fresh  oak  stump,  and  the  fluid 
spreading,  the  blaze  immediately  covered  the  still  green  bark. 
The  men  cheering  lustily  at  this,  for  the  "  Greek  fire,"  Forrest, 
taking  advantage  of  the  tumult,  remarked  that  as  his  men 
were  growing  excited,  it  were  best  for  them  to  retire  toward 
the  block-hotise,  whither  they  galloped  immediately,  before 
the  officer  was  able  to  scan  the  positive  effects  of  the  Greek 
fire.  The  Federal  officer  now  expressing  himself  satisfied  as 
to  the  hopelessness  of  any  defense,  under  the  circumstances, 
capitulated  both  block-houses  at  five  p.m.,  with  sixty-five  offi- 
cers and  men.  Both  structures  and  the  truss  bridge — 150 
feet  long — which  they  guarded,  were  now  thoroughly  fired  and 
destroyed.  Major  Strange  was  next  dispatched,  with  a  flag 
of  truce,  to  demand  the  surrender  of  another  block-house^ 
half  a  mile  distant.  The  commander  was  a  German,  who> 
greatly  excited  by  the  demand,  refused  not  only  to  yield  but 
to  hold  any  conference,  swearing  roundly  that  he  had  heard 
of  Forrest  before ;  that  he  was  a  d— d  rebel,  with  whom  he 
would  have  nothing  to  do.  The  mail  even  went  so  far  as  to 
threaten  to  fire  on  the  flag.  Hearing  this,  Forrest  set  men  to 
collecting  and  filling  sacks  with  dry  chips  and  other  light  com- 
bustibles, which  were  then  saturated  with  turpentine  and  oil, 
carried  for  the  contingency. 


i 


578  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

It  was  now  nine  o'clock,  and  very  dark.     Dismounted  men 
were  at  once  pressed  close  up  to  the  work,  under  cover  of  the 
railroad  embankment,  and  opened  a  noisy  fire  upon  the  block- 
house, during  which  others — picked  men,  provided  with  bags 
of   combustibles  —  crept  to  the  bridge,  and  placing  these 
under  its  braces,  at  the  signal  ignited  them  with  the  Greek 
fire,  a  small  vial  of  which  each  man  carried  also.     In  a  mo- 
ment the  bridge  was  effectually  in  flames,  and  the  men  who 
had  applied  the  fire  rejoined  their  companies  without  hurt* 
The  Confederates,  now  cheering  heartily,  bantered  their  ad- 
versary, while  the  Dutchman  swore  profusely  as,  remount- 
ing, th^  Confederates  rode  away. 

While  this  was  going  on,  -Colonel  Wheeler,  whose  com- 
mand was  now  increased  to  five  hundred  men,  had  been  de- 
tached, and  directed  to  menace  Columbia.!  Meeting  the 
stage  with  several  Federal  officers,  these  were  captured  and 
the  horses  appropriated.  Coming  presently,  however,  across 
a  force  of  three  hundred  Federal  cavalry,  moving  after  the 
stage,  a  sharp  collision  occurred,  in  which  the  Confederates 
were  worsted  to  the  verge  of  disaster.  But,  happily,  a  de- 
tachment of  the  old  Forrest  Regiment,  under  Captain  For- 
rest, came  up  opportunely,  and  Wheeler,  thus  reenforced, 
charged  in  turn,  and  drove  the  enemy  rapidly  back  into  Co- 
lumbia, capturing  some  twenty-five  prisoners  and  fifty  horses. 
Moving  then  down  to  the  north  bank  of  Duck  river,  he  re- 
mained for  several  hours  menacing  the  passage  of  the  stream 
and  an  attack  upon  Columbia ;  but  after  eight  o'clock,  quietly 
withdrawing,  rejoined  his  command,  two  hours  later,  on  the 
road  leading  down  Duck  river,  toward  WilliamsporL 


*  This  bridge  was  burned  by  Colo-  belonged  to  the  different  regiments  of 

nel  Russell  and  his  regiment  of  Ten-  General  Wheeler's  command,  and  had 

nesseeans.  been  left  in  Middle  Tennessee  on  the 

t  As  will  be  remembered,  these  men  occasion  of  his  recent  ezpeditkm. 


Columbia.  579 

Four  block-houses  and  as  many  large  truss  railroad  bridges 
had  been  burned,  and  so  eflTectually  was  the  railroad  impaired 
that  it  would  be  useless  to  the  enemy  for  weeks.  At  the 
same  time  scouts  reported  the  rapid  rising  of  the  Tennessee 
river ;  that  Buford,  unable  to  capture  Huntsville,  had  likewise 
£dled  to  destroy  the  Memphis  and  Charleston  Railroad ;  that 
General  Steedman  was  moving  with  a  column  of  infantry, 
reported  to  be  8000  strong,  with  the  evident  object  of  inter- 
cepting the  Confederates,  in  their  retreat  at  Decatur;  thatja 
heavy  cavalry  force  was  pressing  across  from  TuUahoma  to- 
ward Florence,  and  a  column  of  infantry  and  cavjdry  under 
Rousseau,  from  the  direction  of  Nashville.  Thus  fully  15,000 
Federal  troops  had  been  drawn  into  the  field,  and  Forrest 
determined  to  effect  a  junction  with  Buford  without  delay,  for 
in  that  event  he  would  be  able,  he  hoped,  to  beat  off  any  cav- 
alry force  that  he  might  meet,  and  by  manoeuvre  he  would 
elude  any  infantry  column,  if  unable  to  effect  the  passage  to 
the  south  bank  of  the  river. 

By  sunrise  on  the  2d  of  October,  scouts  reported  that  Rous- 
seau was  in  motion.*  Hearing  from  Buford  that  he  was  mov- 
ing toward  Florence,  Forrest  immediately  threw  his  command 
to  the  south  bank  of  Duck  river.  Spreading  details  over  the 
country  to  collect  beef  cattle  and  bread-rations,  he  meanwhile 
halted  his  main  force  about  six  miles  from  Columbia,  which 
he  next  proceeded  to  threaten  with  an  attack,  by  a  detach- 
ment of  cavalry  under  his  own  immediate  command.  The 
pickets  were  soon  driven  in,  but  the  position  was  found  to  be 
well  fortified  ;  nevertheless,  remaining  on  the  outskirts  of  the 
town  until  late  that  evening,  he  harassed  the  garrison  and 
burned  some  short  trestles  in  the  direction  of  PulaskL  Mean- 
whQe,  his  main  force,  after  his  commissary  details  had  dis- 


*  RouMean's  iofiyitry  mainly  mcnred  in  wagons,  to  secure  rapid  traatpoitetioiL 


i 


580  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

charged  their  duties,  had  moved  across  to  Mount  Pleasant 
and  bivouacked,  and  there  he  joined  them  that  night* 

On  the  3d,  the  movement  began  definitely  for  there  passage 
of  the  river  and  the  evacuation  of  Middle  Tennessee.  Mov- 
ing across  the  country  toward  Florence,  through  Lawrence- 
burg,  Forrest  encamped  on  the  night  of  the  Sth  within  seven 
miles  of  the  former  place,*  whither  Buford  had  preceded  him, 
and  was  already  ferrying  the  train  and  artillery  at  the  mouth 
of  Cypress  creek  and  Newport. 

Detaching  Company  B  of  the  Seventh  Tennessee  to  push 
on  with  the  beef  cattle  by  the  direct  road  to  Colbert's  Ferry, 
at  the  head  of  Colbert  Shoals,  General  Forrest  led  the  rest  of 
his  command,  before  daylight,  to  Florence.  The  rapid  ap- 
proach both  of  Steedman  and  Rousseau  made  the  situation 
urgent ;  and  the  Confederate  General  now  gave  his  special 
attention  to  every  possible  means  for  increasing  the  facilities 
^or  ferriage,  by  distributing  his  command  at  all  practicable 
points  of  crossing,  from  the  mouth  of  Cypress  creek  to  Col- 
bert Shoals.  The  river,  already  very  high,  was  still  rising, 
and  so  full  of  driftwood  as  to  be  extremely  dangerous  to  the 
swimming  horses  ;  while  three  small  flat-boats  and  not  more 
than  half  a  score  of  skiffs  were  the  means  of  ferriage  at  the 
disposition  of  the  Confederates.  Nevertheless,  by  midday  on 
the  7th,  all  the  artillery,  the  wagon-train,  and  a  portion  of  the 
troops,  had  been  safely  landed  on  the  south  bank  of  the  Ten- 
nessee, as  well  as  a  large  number  of  horses. 

But  the  river,  nearly  a  mile  wide,  had  now  become  much 
agitated  by  high  winds,  so  that  the  waves  breaking  constantly 
over  the  skiffs,  they  could  only  be  kept  fi-om  swamping  by 
being  bailed  incessantly  by  the  men  with  their  hats  ;  and  the 
flats,  blown  by  the  wind  and  drifted  by  the  current,  lost  fiilly 


*  Among  the  supplies  now  collected  were  over  150  head  of  beef  cattle. 


At  the  Ferry.  581 

half  a  mile  down-stream  at  each  crossing.  During  this  time, 
also,  both  Steedman  and  Rousseau  were  drawing  so  danger- 
ously near  that  a  counter-movement  became  necessary  for 
their  delay.  Accordingly,  the  Second,  Sixteenth,  and  a  part 
of  the  Seventh  Tennessee  were  detached  to  move  back  on 
the  State  line  and  Athens  roads,  toward  Shoal  creek,  to  meet 
and  skirmish  with  the  approaching  foe,  while  Lieutenant-Colo- 
nel Windes  was  directed  to  make  a  detour  with  his  regiment 
to  the  north  and  rear  of  the  hostile  column,  on  the  Lawrence- 
burg  road,  which  he  was  to  strike  from  that  quarter  *  This 
service  Colonel  Windes  performed  with  notable  judgment  and 
daring ;  in  fact,  so  effectively  that  he  checked  and  retarded 
the  Federals  from  reaching  Florence  until  late  on  the  morn- 
ing of  the  8th.  And,  a  little  later,  the  Second,  Seventh  and 
Sixteenth  Tennessee  regiments  handsomely  disputed  the 
crossing  of  Cypress  creek,  west  of  Florence,  repulsing  seve- 
ral efforts  of  the  enemy  to  pass  that  stream,  until  General 
Steedman,  finding  himself  unable  to  force  the  position,  had 
sent  a  brigade  of  his  cavalry  around,  by  a  crossing  three 
miles  above.  About  to  be  taken  in  reverse,  the  Confederates 
were  now  obliged  to  retire  by  the  Newport  Ferry  road,  doing 
so  doggedly,  however,  and  standing  at  bay  to  gain  time  at 
several  favorable  positions. 

Quite  as  many  as  12,000  of  the  enemy  were  now  within  a 
few  miles  of  one  of  the  Confederate  ferries ;  and  at  least  1000 
of  Forrest's  men,  with  their  horses,  were  still  on  the  north 
bank  of  the  river,  besides  those  confronting  and  engaged  with 
Steedman  and  Rousseau,  whose  advance-guard  was  at  length 
in  such  menacing  neighborhood  that,  in  the  skirmish  which 
ensued,  their  rifle-balls  plashed  in  the  water  among  the  Confe- 
derate men  and  horses.     Abandoning  that  ferry,  Forrest 


*  Fourth  Alabama  Regiment,  300  strong. 


582  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest 

directed  Windes  to  fall  back  on  the  Waterloo  road,  with  the 
hope  of  attracting  the  enemy  in  that  direction.  The  Fede- 
rals pursuing,  Windes,  cooperating  with  Wilson  (Sixteenth 
Tennessee)  and  a  squadron  of  the  Seventh  Tennessee,  falling 
back  slowly,  kept  them  actively  engaged  and  engrossed  in  a 
series  of  skirmishes  all  day  during  the  9th,  giving  the  Confe- 
derate General  the  opportunity  to  complete  the  ferriage  of  his 
cattle  from  an  island  at  the  head  of  Colbert  Shoals,  and  to 
throw  the  rest  of  his  horses  and  men  to  the  south  bank,  ex- 
cept those  under  Windes  and  Wilson,  whom  he  directed  to 
scatter  to  the  rear  of  the  enemy  that  night,  and  recross  the 
river  at  such  times  and  places  as  they  might  find  practicable. 
The  highest  credit  is  due  to  Colonel  Windes,  and  the  officers 
and  men  of  his  own  and  of  the  Second,  Seventh,  and  Six- 
teenth Tennessee  regiments,  for  their  heroic  conduct  during 
this  day.* 

Under  the  difficulties  and  obstacles  we  have  enumerated, 
Forrest,  by  sunset  on  the  9th,  had  transported  to  the  south 
bank  of  the  Tennessee  25cx>  men  and  their  horses,  as  many  as 
100  cattle,  about  fifty  wagons  and  teams,  and  eight  pieces  of 
artillery ;  a  military  feat  which  illustrates  the  energy,  the 
decision,  and  the  fertility  in  resources  which  characterized  his 
operations,  and  were  habitually  at  his  command.  His  loss  on 
this  occasion  was  that  of  two  men  and  about  twenty  horses 
drowned.  Windes  and  Wilson  subsequently,  about  the  13th, 
effected  the  re-passage  of  the  river  at  Newport  ferry,  bringing 
off  fifty  prisoners. 

Roddy's  troops  were  at  once  detached,  to  report  again  to 
their  commander  at  Tuscumbia,  and  on  the  evening  of  the 


*  Lieutenant-Colonel  G.  H.  Morton*     venth ;  and  Colonel  A.  K.  Wilson,  the 
commanding  the  Second;  Lieutenant-     Sixteenth  Tennessee  Regiments* 
Colonel  William  F.  Taylor,  the  Se- 


Headquarters  at  Corinth.  583 

loth  the  rest  of  the  command  was  again  concentrated  at 
Cherokee  Station,  and  to  the  west  of  it*  The  Federal 
General,  having  found  no  opponent  in  his  presence  or  within 
reach  that  morning,  after  several  hours  of  fruitless  search,  had 
countermarched  to  Florence. 

During  the  ferriage  of  the  Tennessee,  General  Forrest,  with 
his  usual  close  attention  to  all  the  details  effecting  his  opera- 
tions, crossed  and  recrossed  repeatedly  from  one  side  of  the 
river  to  the  other  ;  and  believing  that  the  enemy  might  send 
gunboats  and  a  strong  force  up  the  river  to  intercept  his 
re-passage  of  it,  he  detached,  as  early  as  the  8th,  a  squadron 
of  the  Seventh  Tennessee,  which  had  crossed  the  day  before, 
to  make  a  reconnoissance  along  the  bank  of  the  river  in  the 
vicinity  of  Chickasaw,  dnd  keep  him  advised  of  any  hostile 
movement  in  that  quarter,  f 

On  the  morning  of  the  nth,  Buford's  Division  was  put  in 
motion  for  Corinth,  and  breaking  up  his  depot  at  Cherokee 
Station,  General  Forrest  repaired  by  rail,  with  his  staff  and 
escort,  to  the  same  point,  where  Buford  arrived  on  the  morn- 
ing of  the  12th,  Meanwhile,  scouts  had  reported  the  presence 
of  detachments  of  the  enemy  at  several  points  on  the  north 
bank  of  the  Tennessee,  between  Waterloo  and  Clifton,  ap- 
parently with  the  object  of  crossing  the  stream.  Buford, 
therefore,  was  immediately  directed  to  repair,  with  his 
division,  to  Pittsburg  Landing,  where  it  was  anticipated 
General  Washbume  would  attempt  to  recross  from  Middle 
Tennessee  with  a  brigade  of  infantry  and  his  cavalry,  with 
which  he  had  gone  from  Memphis  to  cooperate  with  the 
Federal  movements  against  Forrest.  And  Rucker's  (Kelly's) 
Brigade  was    likewise  ordered   in    the    same  direction,   to 


•  Rocker's  Brigade,  imder  KeUy,  was        t  Companies  B  and  C,  under  the 
at  Corinth.  command  of  Captain  James  P.  Russell. 


584  Campaign^  of  General  Forrest. 

cooperate  with  Buford.  Henderson's  scouts  were  established 
between  Bear  creek  and  Pittsburg  Landing,  others  were 
spread  along  the  river  to  the  northward,  to  keep  watch  upon 
gunboats  and  transports,  and  every  practicable  measure  was 
taken  to  secure  early  intelligence  of  hostile  movements. 

IV. 

In  the  dispositions  made  to  meet  any  attempt  to  throw  a 
force  against  Forrest  by  the  river.  Colonel  Kelly  was  dis- 
patched to  Eastport,  where  he  arrived  with  less  than  300  men, 
and  Walton,  with  a  section  of  his  battery,*  just  as  a  fleet  of 
three  Federal  transports,  heavily  laden  with  infantry  and  ar- 
tillery, and  convoyed  by  two  gunboats,  came  in  sightf 
Fortunately,  his  presence  was  unobserved,  and  dismounting 
his  troopers,  he  threw  all,  except  the  necessary  horse-holders, 
to  within  six  hundred  yards  of  the  river,  behind  the  crest  of  a 
ridge  near  the  landing,  while  Walton's  guns  were  established, 
without  being  seen,  in  some  old  fortifications  on  a  hill  about 
800  yards  from,  and  commanding  the  point  of  debarkation,  at 
which  the  transports  were  already  making  fast.  Before  these 
dispositions  were  completed,  however,  the  enemy,  throwing 
out  their  staging-planks,  began  to  disembark  rapidly,  while 
the  gunboats  came  to  anchor  opposite,  in  the  stream,  about 
150  yards  from  the  shore.  Fully  1200  officers  and  men,  three 
six-pounder  rifle-guns,  and  about  sixty  horses  were  ashore, 
and  the  infantry  formed  in  line  toward  the  northward,  along 
the  river  bank,  before  Kelly  suffered  his  riflemen  and  artillery 
to  open  upon  them,  at  a  moment  when  the  staging  was  still 
filled  with  troops. 


•  This  command   consisted   of  de-  t  The  approach  of  this  fleet  and  ex- 

tachments  of  the  Twelfth  Tennessee,  pedition  had  been  ascertained  and  duly 

Captain  Bell,  and  of  Forrest's  old  regi-  reported  by  Keizer*8  scoots, 
ment,  Captain  Barbour  commanding. 


Colonel  Keliys  Success  at  EastporL  585 

The  •  Confederate  artillery  was  admirably  handled  by  Wal- 
on,  who  opened  the  action  by  one  shell  thrown  and  raking 
he  troops,  while  another,  aimed  at  a  transport,  tearing  through 
t,  was  seen  to  explode  in  one  of  the  gunboats.  At  the  same 
noment,  the  riflemen  poured  a  warm,  well-sustained  fire  into 
he  infantry  ashore,  creating  the  wildest  disorder.  Breaking 
anks  beyond  the  control  of  their  officers,  they  rushed  en 
^asse  toward  the  transport.  Shell  after  shell  was  sent  plow- 
ig  through  the  flying  throngs  others  crashed  and  splintered 
firough  the  sides  of  the  transports,  and  at  least  one  was 
gain  exploded  in  a  gunboat.  At  this  juncture,  the  cables  of 
le  transports  being  cut  loose,  drifting  off  from  the  bank, 
leir  stagings  were  dropped  into  the  water  when  crowded 
dth  men,  who  were  plunged  headlong  into  the  stream,  as 
^ell  as  another  gun  and  caisson. 

The  Confederate  artillery  continued  to  play  rapidly  on  the 
'ansports  and  gunboats,  while  Kelly's  riflemen  kept  up  a 
zathing  fire  upon  the  infantry  left  upon  the  bank.  Many  of 
lese,  in  their  panic,  springing  into  the  river,  attempted 
5  swim  to  and  clamber  upon  the  steamers.  Meanwhile, 
le  commotion  in  the  water  caused  by  the  wheels  of  the 
teamers,  washing  over,  submerged  and  strangled  many  of 
le  swimmers,  who,  in  their  death-throes,  grappled  with 
ach  other,  and  it  is  probable  that  at  least  200  were  drowned. 
Tie  cooler-headed  of  those  ashore,  recognizing  the  situation, 
m  down  the  river-bank,  except  some  fifty,  who,  throwing 
own  their  arms,  surrendered.  The  transports,  making  no 
flTort  to  save  those  of  their  people  who  were  in  the  water, 
'ere  soon  under  headway  down-stream,  intent  upon  getting 
om  under  fire  of  the  CoAfederate  artillery,  whose  shells 
icochetting  along  the  water,  repeatedly  struck  them,  until 
ley  escaped  out  of  range.  Meanwhile,  the  Federals  ashore, 
bandoning  their  guns,  knapsacks,  blankets,  and  haversacks, 
ad  reached  a  part  of.  the  river-bank  so  rough  and  precipitous 


A 


586  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest 

that  it  was  difficult  to  pursue  them  with  the  cavalry,  and 
some  four  or  five  hundred  of  the  fugitives  effected  their 
embarkation  about  half  a  mile  below,  upon  one  of  the  steam- 
ers which  ventured  to  touch  the  bank  for  that  purpose, 
but  some  stragglers  were  picked  up  in  the  woods.  The 
results  of  this  brilliant  little  affair  were  the  capture  of  seventy- 
five  officers  and  men,  three  pieces  of  rifled  field  artillery,  and 
sixty  horses,  one  gun  and  two  caissons  sunk  in  the  river, 
and  the  drowning  and  killing  of  at  least  250  Federal  officers 
and  men,  including  those  hurt  on  the  transports  and  gun- 
boats. Meeting  with  such  a  summary  hostile  reception,  the 
Federal  fleet  left  that  portion  of  the  river  as  rapidly  as 
possible,  reporting,  it  is  said,  that  they  had  been  attacked 
and  beaten  off  by  all  of  Forrest's  Cavalry. 

About  this  time,  the  cavalry  belonging  to  General  Wheeler's 
command,  which  had  been  brought  out  under  Colonel  Wheeler, 
of  the  First  Tennessee  Cavalry,  were  detached,  with  orders  to 
repair  to  Gadsden,  Alabama,  and  rejoin  their  division.  And  on 
the  14th,  Buford  was  instructed,  after  leaving  several  regi- 
ments in  observation  upon  the  banks  of  the  Tennessee  river, 
to  return  to  Corinth  with  the  rest  of  his  command,  including 
Rucker's  (Kelly's)  Brigade,  for  the  purpose  Of  reshoeing  and 
refitting  for  the  field. 

Ever  on  the  outlook  for  new  theatres  of  operation,  as  soon 
as  he  had  safely  effected  the  re-passage  of  his  forces  from  Mid- 

* 

die  Tennessee,  Forrest  reporting  to  Lieutenant-General  Tay- 
lor, his  superior,  from  Cherokee  Station,  the  results  of  his  ex- 
pedition, asked  that  General  Chalmers,  who  had  been  detached 
from  his  command  during  his  absence,  should  be  restored  to 
it,  to  enable  him  to  make  another  expedition  into  the  northern 
part  of  West-Tennessee,  with  a  special  view  toward  the  de- 
struction of  the  Federal  depot  at  Johnsonville.  This  depot, 
as  he  explained,  had  been  established  in  consequence  of  the 
dangers  incurred  from  guerrillas,  and  other  difficulties  in  the 


Chalmers's  Operations.  587 

navigation  of  the  Cumberland,  and  the  greater  part  of  the  sup- 
plies for  Sherman's  forces  and  those  serving  in  Middle  and 
East-Tennessee  were  accumulated  here  in  large  quantities  for 
transportation  thence,  by  rail,  by  way  of  Nashville.  General 
Taylor  promptly  approving  the  projected  operation,  Chalmers 
was  directed  to  report  at  Jackson,  Tennessee,  with  such  forces 
a3  he  might  be  able  to  assemble  there ;  and  orders  were  given 
to  the  rest  of  Forrest's  Cavalry  to  secure  their  efficiency  and 

early  readiness  for  the  expedition. 

While  Forrest,  as  we  have  related,  was  operating  so  suc- 
cessfully in  Middle  Tennessee,  the  troops,  which  had  been 
left  meanwhile  in  Mississippi,  under  Chalmers,  had  not  been 
inactive.  But  nothing  fruitful  was  the  result,  however,  of  aU 
their  continuous  exposure,  hard  riding,  and  several  daring 
scouts,  except  that,  having  been  ordered  by  General  Taylor 
to  make  a  demonstration  in  the  immediate  neighborhood  of 
Memphis,  to  create  a  diversion  in  favor  of  Forrest,  at  the  time 
he  was  repassing  to  the  south  bank  of  the  Tennessee,  Chal- 
mers presented  himself,  with  about  1000  of  his  veterans  and 
a  few  State  troops,  in  the  vicinity  of  that  place  on  the  morning 
of  the  8th  of  October.  At  the  moment,  a  force  of  nearly  7000 
infantry  and  cavalry  were  concentrated  in  the  place,  apparently 
on  the  eve  of  an  expedition ;  and  the  approach  of  Chalmers 
producing  the  liveliest  apprehension,  stimulated  the  Federal 
commander  to  the  most  active  preparations  for  the  defense 
of  his  position.  Taking  the  defensive,  the  enemy  placed  strong 
^ards  upon  all  the  approaches  to  Memphis ;  these  threw  up 
bfeastworks  across  all  the  roads,  while  barricades  of  cotton 
were  erected  at  various  points  in  the  city  itself,  especially 
at  the  several  crossings  of  Gayoso  bayou,  the  bridge-floor- 
ings over  which  were  torn  up.  The  militia  were  called  out ; 
outlying  regiments  and  depots  were  withdrawn ;  the  forts 
were  strongly  manned,  and  the  streets  were  heavily  patroled. 
Manifestly,  so  grave  and  serious  did  the  Federal  General  re- 


588  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

• 

gard  the  situation,  that  he  must  have  felt  unwarranted  in  de- 
taching any  force  of  sufficient  strength,  at  that  juncture^  to 
attempt  to  obstruct  or  harass  Forrest's  movements,  if  he  had 
previously  entertained  such  a  design.  It  was  on  returning 
from  this  expedition  that  Chalmers  received  the  order  which 
we  have  mentioned,  to  meet  Forrest  at  Jackson,  Tennessee. 
The  horses,  however,  of  Mabr/s  Brigade,  to  a  large  extent, 
had  become  unserviceable,  so  that  Chalmers  was  unable  to 
march  with  more  than  750  men. 

COMMENTARIES. 

Jn  the  course  of  the  expedition  into  Middle  Tennessee^ 
General  Forrest  placed  hors  de  combat  fully  3590  Federal  offi- 
cers and  men,  including  those  taken  prisoners.  He  also  cap- 
tured 8  pieces  of  artillery,  with  their  caissons  and  ammuni- 
tion, 900  head  of  horses  and  mules,  more  than  100  head  of  beef 
cattle,  about  100  wagons,  the  most  of  which  were  destroyed, 
3000  stand  of  arms  and  accoutrements,  with  large  stores  of 
commissary,  ordnance,  and  medical  supplies.  He  destroyed  6 
large  truss  railroad  bridges,  nearly  icx>  miles  of  railroad,  2 
locomotives,  and  some  50  freight  cars,  several  thousand  feet 
of  heavy  railroad  trestling,  a  Government  saw-mill,  with  a 
large  amount  of  lumber,  at  least  5000  cords  of  wood,  and, 
finally,  captured  and  destroyed  10  of  their  best  block-houses, 
which,  with  one  exception,  be  it  noted,  were  actually  impreg- 
nable to  ordinary  light  field-artillery.  He  also  brought  out  of 
Middle  Tennessee  a  thousand  men  added  to  his  own  immedi- 
ate command,  as  well  as  600  or  800  who  had  straggled  from 
Major-General  Wheeler  in  the  course  of  his  recent  expedition 
in  that  region.  All  this  was  achieved  at  the  expenditure  of 
about  300  officers  and  men  killed  and  wounded,  but,  unfortu- 
nately, among  the  killed  and  disabled  were  several  of  his  best 
officers.  It  was  accomplished,  moreover,  in  twenty-three  days, 
in  the  course  of  which,  from  Corinth  back  to  Cherokee  Station^ 
the  Confederate  troops  marched  over  five  hundred  miles. 


CHAPTER  XXII. 


Campaign  to  Kentucky  Bordtr—Buford'i  Successful  Operation  against 
Federal  Gunboats  and  Transport!— Capture  of  United  States  Steam 
Gunboat  Undine  and  Transports  Venus,  Maseppa,  and  Cheeseman — 
Operations  of  Forres fs  Cavalry  Afloat  —  Successful  Operatioiu 
against  Federal  Depot  at  JokusonviUe—Destruetion  of  Warehouses, 
Gunboats,  and  Transports— Description  of  Scene—Summary  of  Xo- 
mtlts— Forrest  ordered  to  join  General  Hood  in  Middle  Tennessee—: 
Abortive  Effort  to  pass  the  Tennessee  at  Perryville—  Wretched  Con- 
£tian  of  the  Roads — Forresfs  Cavalry  assembled  at  Florence,  Ala- 
bama— Hood's  Army  concentrated  there. 

Oc/ober  17th  to  November  lytk,  1864. 

1-»ARLY  on  the  17th,  Buford's  Division  was  set  in  motion 
with  two  batteries,  (Morton  and  Walton,)  for  the  vicinity  of 
Jack's  creek,  and  on  the  next  day  General  Forrest  followed 
with  his  escort  and  Rucker's  Brigade,  still  under  Kelly,  en 
route  for  Jackson,  by  way  of  Purdy  and  Henderson  Station, 
effecting  a  junction  at  the  latter  place  with  Chalmers  on  the 
morning  of  the  20th.  Meanwhile,  scouts  and  detachments  of 
cavalry,  under  intelligent  and  trusty  officers,  were  thrown  out 
to  watch  all  the  crossings  of  the  Tennessee  river  from  Ham- 
buig  to  Clifton,  where  the  enemy  appeared  to  be  concentrat- 
ing, as  if  designing  to  cross.  On  the  morning  of  the  20th, 
Buford  was  directed  to  take  position  at  Lexington,  about  twen- 
ty-five miles  eastward  of  Jackson,  and  a  central  position  for 


590 


Campaigfts  of  Generai  Forrest. 


observation.  The  next  day  Forrest  established  his  headquar- 
ters at  Jackson,  where  Colonel  Rucker,  having  reported  for 
duty,  was  reassigned  to  the  command  of  his  brigade,  which 
thereupon  was  reported  again  to  General  Chalmers,  as  Dhri- 
sional  Commander.* 

Remaining  at  Jackson  until  the  28th|  seeing,  meanwhile, 
that  the  enemy  was  indisposed  to  venture  into  West-Tennes- 
see, on  the  24th  Forrest  ordered  Buford  to  move  northward, 
and  establish  his  division  at  Huntingdon.  Chalmers  was  di- 
rected to  occupy  the  vicinity  of  McLemorcsville,  and  active 
staff-officers  were  sent  forward  to  ascertain  the  forage  and  sub- 
sistence resources  of  that  region,  while  reliable  scouts  were 
dispatched  to  Union  City  and  Faducah  to  glean  information 
from  that  quarter.  At  the  same  time  the  commanders  of  all 
outlying  detachments  were  specifically  instructed  to  interpose 
no  obstacle  whatsoever,  if  the  enemy  attempted  to  pass  to  the 
west  bank  of  the  Tennessee ;  and  all  were  further  directed  to 
give  special  attention  to  the  collection  of  absentees  in  their 
respective  neighborhoods.  Bell's  Brigade,  being  in  the  vicinity 
in  which  it  was  raised,  the  men,  in  succession,  were  permitted 
to  visit  their  homes  to  refit,  both  their  clothing  and  mounts, 
until  the  26th.  General  Roddy  was  also  requested  to  move 
to  the  neighborhood  of  Corinth  as  many  of  his  division  as 
could  be  prudently  spared  from  North- Alabama,  and  thus  be 
in  position  to  oppose  any  effort  of  the  enemy  to  strike  in  that 
direction,  and  Lieutenant-General  Taylor  was  also  urged  to 
send  a  force  temporarily  to  the  same  important  position.f 


*At  reconstituted,  this  division  in- 
cluded Rucker*s  and  Mabry's  Brigades, 
and  a  battery  and  section  of  artillery. 

t  Letter  to  Lieutenant-General  Tay- 
lor, October  24th,  1864.  Wc  cite  from 
that  letter  the  following  passages,  as 
•bedding  light  upon  the  views  of  Gen- 


eral Forrest  at  the  time:  "  I  shall  do 
the  best  that  can  be  done,  and  in  every 
way  do  all  in  my  power  to  create  a  <£• 
version  in  fiivor  of  General  Hood.  I 
left  a  regiment  at  Corinth,  and  feel  some 
solicitude  for  its  protection,  as  the  pre- 
servation of  the  Mobile  and  Ohio  road 


Bu/ord's  Operations. 


591 


Buford's  Division  having  been  reassembled,  he  was  then  or- 
dered to  repair  with  it,  by  way*  of  Paris,  to  the  mouth  of  the 
**  Big  Sandy"  river,  or  in  that  vicinity,  and  "  blockade  the  riv- 
er'* at  the  most  effective  point  for  that  purpose,  throwing  out 
scouts  as  far  northward  as  old  Fort  Henry,  and  a  section  of 
twenty-pounder  "  Parrott"  guns,  brought  up  from  Mobile,  were 
sent  to  him  for  that  purpose.  Chalmers,  a  day  later,  was  also 
directed  to  take  position  with  his  division  at  Paris,  in  support- 
ing distance  of  Buford,  in  the  event  that  officer  should  require 
aid.  Buford,  moving  on  the  afternoon  of  the  26th,  with  Bell's 
and  the  Kentucky  Brigade,  two  twenty-pounder  "  Parrotts,"  and 
Morton's  Battery  of  three-inch  rifles,  arrived  at  Paris  the  next 
day,  though  his  horses  were  in  wretched  condition,  especially 
those  of  the  artillery.  Reaching  the  river  at  the  "  mouth  of 
Sandy"  on  the  28th,  Buford,  after  a  careful  reconnoissance,  se- 
lected the  old  Confederate  "  Fort  Heiman"  and  "  Paris  Land- 


may  prove  to  be  of  great  importance, 
especially  so  should  it,  in  any  event,  be 
necessary  in  transporting  supplies  to 
the  '  Army  of  Tennessee.'  I  respect- 
fully suggest,  therefore,  that,  if  pos- 
sible, you  send  a  force  up  to  Corinth, 
as  the  enemy  at  Clifton  may  cross  above 
and  move  on  the  line  of  the  Memphis 
and  Charleston  road,  looking  to  a  junc- 
tion with  the  forces  now  at  Memphis. 
Should  they  do  so,  there  is  nothing  to 
prevent  them  from  occupying  Corinth 
and  destroying  the  road  southward. 
There  are  about  seven  hundred  of  Ma- 
hrf%  Brigade,  with  disabled  and  unser- 
Ticeable  horses,  at  or  near  Grenada, 
and  a  section  of  artillery  also  at  that 
place ;  and  I  submit  for  your  consider- 
sdoa  and  action  the  propriety  of  send- 


ing these  men  across  to  West-Point  or 
Tibbee  Station,  on  the  Mobile  and  Ohio 
Railroad,  where  they  can  be  placed 
upon  cars,  and  sent  up  to  Corinth,  as 
also  the  section  of  artillery ;  while  their 
horses  could  be  left  meanwhile  in  the 
prairies,  to  be  recruited.     ..... 

These  suggestions  are  simply  for  your 
consideration,  believing,  as  I  do,  that 
all  the  forces  not  necessary  for  the  pro* 
tection  of  points  exposed  or  threatened 
should  be  placed  at  once  in  position  to 
protect  the  Mobile  and  Ohio  Railroad, 
as  its  occupation  and  preservation  may 
be  of  vital  importance  to  General  Hood, 
as  well  as  protection  to  myself  it  being 
the  base  of  supplies  for  my  own  and 
General  Roddy's  commands." 


i 


592  Cathpaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

ing,"  some  five  miles  apart,  as  most*  favorable  for  the  location 
of  his  batteries.     From  those'  points  he  could  command  the 
river,  both  up  and  down  from  two  to  three  miles,  and  accord- 
ingly established  Bell's  Brigade,  with  a  section  of  Morton's 
Battery,  at  the  latter.*    Lyon  was  put  in  position  with  his  bri- 
gade at  Fort  Heiman,  the  twenty-pounder  Parrotts  at  the  old 
works,  and  Brown's  section  of  artillery  four  or  five  hundred 
yards  below  in  position,  with  orders  not  to  disturb  any  trans- 
ports or  gunboats  until  the  batteries  were  thoroughly  prepared 
for  action,  nor  then  to  fire  until  such  steamer  or  steamers 
should  have  passed  into  the  reach  of  the  river  between  the 
batteries.      In  the  mean  time.  Colonel    Wilson,  (Sixteenth 
Tennessee,)  and   Lieutenant -Colonels  Wisdom  (Newsom's) 
and  White,  (Fourteenth  Tennessee,)  were  actively  engaged  in 
watching  the  movements  of  the  enemy  at  various  points  on 
the  Tennessee  river,  southward  of  Clifton,  while  Keizer's  scouts 
were  in  close  observation  upon  Memphis ;  and  on  the  28th,  For- 
rest, with  his  staff  and  escort,  setting  out  for  Paris,  reached 
that  place  on  the  evening  of  the  29th. 

By  daylight  on  the  29th,  Buford's  Batteries,  well  masked, 
were  in  effective  condition,  as  well  as  judiciously  disposed, 
and  at  nine  a.m.,  the  transport  steamer  Mazeppa,  hea\dly 
laden — with  a  barge  in  tow — unaware  of  the  lurking  danger, 
passed  the  lower  battery  at  Fort  Heiman.  A  section  of 
Morton's  guns,  600  yards  north  of  the  old  works,  was  im- 
mediately opened  upon  her,  followed  promptly  by  the  heavy 
Parrotts,  and  with  such  effect  that,  her  machinery  being 
speedily  disabled,  she  became  unmanageable,  and  drifting  to 
the  opposite  shore,  was  deserted  by  her  crew.f     An  officer 


*  Commanded  by  Sergeant  Lemuel  section  of  twenty-pounder  Parrotts  by 

Zarring.  Lieutenant  W.  O.  Hunter. — NMa  tf 

t  Morton's  section  was  commanded  Captains  Morton  and  tVa/tan, 
by  lieutenant  J.  W.  Brown,  and  the 


Escape  of  a  Transport.  593 

of  the  Third  Kentucky,  Captain  Gracy,  voluntarily  swam  to 
her  with  the  aid  of  a  log,  and  brought  back  a  yawl,  in  which 
General  Buford,  with  a  party  of  men,  at  once  repaired  to  the 
Mazeppa,  and  taking  possession,  she  was  quickly  warped  by  a 
hawser  across  to  the  west  bank  of  the  river.  She  proved  to 
be  heavily  freighted  with  hard  bread,  blankets,  shoes,  cloth- 
ing, axes,  aild  other  military  stores,  and  by  five  p.m.,  the 
greater  part  of  these  were  safely  discharged  upon  the  bank  of  . 
the  river. 

At  this  juncture,  however,  three  Federal  gunboats  came 
upon  the  scene,  and  taking  position  out  of  range  of  the 
Confederate  guns,  shelled  the  landing  and  the  Mazeppa 
with  such  vigor  and  precision  that  Buford  found  it  expedient 
to  burn  the  steamer,  and  address  himself  at  once  to  the 
security  and  removal  of  the  stores  already  landed.  Setting 
the  Mazeppa  on  fire,  she  was  soon  consumed,  and  shortly 
after  sundown  the  gunboats  withdrew  down  the  Tennessee. 
Thus  left  in  possession  of  the  field,  the  Confederates  worked 
all  that  night,  and  during  the  30th,  in  hauling  the  captured 
supplies  to  a  place  of  security,  with  wagons  and  teams 
mainly  impressed  for  the  service  from  the  neighborhood.  On 
the  morning  of  the  30th,  another  transport,  the  Anna,  from 
above-stream,  passing  Colonel  Bell  unaware  of  the  snare 
in  her  path,  drew  the  fire  of«  the  section  of  three-inch  rifles 
there  ;  the  heavy  Parrotts  next  opened ;  but  Buford,  anxious  to 
capture  the  boat  uninjured,  if  possible,  galloping  to  the  bank, 
ordered  her  to  come  to.  Promptly  replying  that  he  would  do 
so,  the  pilot  ringing  his  signal-bell  to  that  effect,  Buford 
directed  the  firing  to  cease.  The  pilot  then  cried  out  that  he 
would  round  to  at  the  lower  landing,  but  really  kept  on 
his  course.  Speedily  apprehending  perfidy,  the  Confederate 
General  ordered  the  batteries  to  reopen ;  nevertheless,  the 
Anna  made  good  her  escape  from  under  fire,  though  well 
riddled,  and  badly  damaged. 


594  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

Several  hours  later,  the  gunboat  Undine  came  in  sight, 
also  from  above,  convoying  the  transport  Venus,  with  two 
barges  attached.     Permitted  to  pass  by  a  short  distance,  the 
upper  battery  was  turned  upon  the  gunboat,  which  then  en- 
gaged the  Confederates  with  spirit  for  nearly  an  hour,  during 
which  Beirs  sharp-shooters  were  so  actively  employed  that, 
under  the  effect  of  the  three-inch  artillery  and  the  Confede- 
rate riflemen,  it  presently  dropped  down  the  river  in  contact 
with  the  battery  at  Fort  Heiraan,  which  was  speedily  found  too 
formidable  to  attempt  to  pass,  however.    The  Undine  withdrew 
with  the  Venus,  above  and  behind  the  bend  of  the  river,  from 
which  position  it  began  a  noisy  shelling  of  the  battery,  at  the 
same  time  repairing  damages   in  the  hull  and   steampipe. 
During  this  time,  or  about  midday,  another  transport,  the 
J.  W.  Cheeseman,  coming  down-stream,  was  speedily  brought 
to,  disabled  in  her  machinery  by  the  artillery  at  the  Paris 
Landing. 

Meanwhile,  on  the  afternoon  of  the  29th,  General  Chalmers 
had  reached  Paris  with  his  division ;  and  soon  after.  General 
Forrest  arrived  with  his  staff  and  escort  at  the  same  place, 
where  he  received,  that  night,  Buford's  dispatch  announcing 
the  capture  of  the  Mazeppa,  with  her  cargo,  as  well  as  her 
subsequent  destruction.  Chalmers  was  then  ordered  to  repair 
to  Paris  Landing,  with  Rucker's  Brigade  and  four  pieces  of 
artillery,  early  on  the  morrow.*  Leaving  Mabry's  Brigade 
and  Thrall's  Battery  at  Paris,  and  moving  at  daylight,  he 
reached  Paris  Landing,  after  a  march  of  twenty  miles,  about 
midday. 

Just  before  the  arrival  of  General  Chalmers,  Captain  Morton 
had  come  up  with  orders  from  General  Buford  to  transfer  the 


*  This  artillery  consisted  of  a  section     commanding,  and  a  section  of  Walton*^ 
of  Rice's   Battery,  lieutenant  Briggs     Battery,  Sergeant  Crozier  commandiog 


Qapture  of  the  Undine  and  Venus.  595 

section  of  his  battery  there  to  the  immediate  vicinity  of  the 
gunboat,  and  recommence  the  attack.  Informed  of  this  fact, 
and  the  situation  of  affairs,  Chalmers,  after  consultation  with 
Colonel  Bell,  directed  that  officer  to  move  his  artillery  as  near 
as  possible  to  the  Undine  and  Venus,  and  drive  them  from 
their  shelter.  Some  serious  difficulties,  however,  being  re- 
ported to  be  in  the  way  of  transporting  the  artillery  to  the 
proper  point,  Colonel  Rucker  made  a  personal  reconnoissance, 
and  finding  the  movement  to  be  practicable,  was  then  ordered 
to  take  the  section  of  Walton's  Battery,  (two  ten-pounder 
Parrott  guns,)  supported  by  the  old  Forrest  Regiment  (Kelly) 
and  the  Fifteenth  Tennessee  Cavalry,  (Logwood)  and  at- 
tack as  quickly  as  possible.  Dismounting,  and  taking  a 
position  under  cover  of  the  bushes,  below  the  gunboat,  Colo- 
nel Kelly,  opening  a  rapid  fire  both  upon  the  Venus  and  at 
the  port-holes  of  the  Undine  with  his  rifles,  attracted  the 
attention  of  the  enemy,  while  the  artillery,  imder  Sergeant 
Crozier,  was  moved  up  by  hand  into  a  favorable  position, 
from  which  a  vigorous  fire  was  promptly  opened,  and  main- 
tained with  such  precision  that  the  enemy,  unable  to  make 
head  with  their  armament — eight  twenty-four  pounder  howit- 
zers— after  a  vain  but  spirited  endeavor  to  do  so,  was  driven 
to  the  opposite  shore.  One  shot  striking  the  bow,  passed 
through  from  stem  to  stern,  and  she  had  been  forced  to  close 
her  port-holes  from  the  effects  of  sharp-shooters.  Her  officers 
and  men  not  killed  or  woimded  then  escaped  ashore.  Mean- 
while, the  Venus  had  been  surrendered  to  Colonel  Kelly,  who, 
going  on  board  with  two  companies,  took  possession  of  the 
Undine,  raised  steam,  and  carried  both  gunboat  and  transport 
to  Paris  Landing. 

During  this  time  another  gunboat,  descending  the  stream 
at  the  sound  of  the  conflict,  came  to  anchor  about  a  mile  and 
a  half  above  the  section  of  Rice's  Battery,  (Lieutenant 
Briggs,)  which  Chalmers  had  established  several  hundred 


/ 


596  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

yards  southward  of  the  position  that  Morton's  guns  had  held, 
and  began  a  vigorous  shelling  of  the  Confederate  position. 
Briggs's  pieces  being  too  far  from  the  gunboat  for  execution, 
Chalmers  directed  them  to  be  moved  up  to  shorter  range, 
supported  by  his  escort  and  a  company  of  Alabama  Cadets* 
as  sharp-shooters.  Securing  a  good  position,  the  Confederate 
artillery,  after  a  brief,  spirited  engagement,  forced  their  adver- 
sary to  weigh  anchor,  and  withdraw  up  the  river. 

Both  the  Undine  and  Venus  proved  a  good  deal  shattered, 
but  not  injured  materially,  either  in  hull  or  machinery  ;  where- 
upon mechanics,  gleaned  from  the  command,  as  well  as  those 
on  the  Venus,  were  set  to  work  to  place  them  in  serviceable 
condition,  which  was  effected  by  the  afternoon  of  the  31st 
A  detachment  of  infantry  had  been  on  the  Venus,  ten  of 
whom  were  killed  or  wounded,  and  an  officer  and  ten  men 
were  captured.  The  barg6s,  being  empty,  were  destroyed  The 
Cheeseman,  on  inspection,  was  found  to  be  irreparably  injured, 
with  .the  resources  and  time  at  the  disposition  of  the  Confede- 
rates ;  she  had,  however,  a  small  freight  of  commissary  stores, 
including  coffee,  candies,  and  nuts,  and  a  quantity  of  furni- 
ture. The  former  articles,  appropriated  by  the  troops,  were 
greatly  enjoyed,  long  unaccustomed  as  they  were  to  any  but 
the  roughest  army  rations.  The  boat  was  burned  by  order  of 
the  Confederate  GeneraLf 

The  Undine,  one  of  the  largest  of  the  class  of  gunboats 
designated  as  "  tin-clads,"  from  the  lightness  of  their  sheet- 
iron  plating,  carried,  as  we  have  said,  an  armament  of  eight 
twenty-four  pounder  brass  howitzers,  which,  with  her  equip- 


*  Belonging  to  the  Seventh  Alabama  supplies  as  could  not  be  carried  swaj 

Cavalry,  detached  as  escort  to  Colonel  was  distributed  among  the  f^Haynf  of 

Rncker.  the  vicinage. 

t  The  furniture,  together  with  such 


Forrest's  Cavalry  Afloat.  597 

ments,  were  speedily  made  serviceable  though  an  attempt  had 
been  made  to  spike  two  of  the  guns,  and  disable  another  by 
a  shell  jammed  in  its  muzzle. 

General  Forrest,  coming  upon  the  ground  on  the  morning 
of  the  31st,  with  his  habitual  energy  urged  forward  the  pre- 
parations for  moving  upon  Johnsonville.  Crews  and  officers 
were  detailed  from  the  command  for  the  Undine  and  Venus, 
upon  both  of  which  the  Confederate  flag  was  now  floating,  to 
the  great  delight  of  the  men,  none  of  whom  had  seen  that 
flag  upon  an  armed  vessel  since  the  Confederate  gunboats 
went  down  at  Memphis  in  1862.  Captain  Gracy,  of  the  Third 
Kentucky,  commanded  the  Undine ;  and  Lieutenant-Colonel 
W.  A.  Dawson  the  Venus,  while  upon  the  latter  the  two 
twenty-pounder  Parrotts  were  placed  as  armament ;  and  that 
afternoon  the  Confederate  General  made  a  "  trial-trip "  with 
his  fleet  as  far  as  Fort  Heiman,  to  see  that  all  was  in  efficient 
service.  As  they  rounded  out  into  the  stream,  the  troops, 
drawn  up  in  line,  made  the  air  ring  with  cheer  upon  cheer  for 
Forrest  and  his  cavalry  upon  their  novel  element  At  Fort 
Heiman,  stopping  long  enough  to  take  on  board  the  Venus  a 
quantity  of  shoes,  blankets,  and  hard  bread,  which  had  been 
secured  from  the  Mazeppa,  he  moved  back  to  the  Paris  Land- 
ing, satisfied  that  both  boats  were  in  serviceable  condition, 
and  orders  were  given  for  a  general  movement  on  the  follow- 
ing morning.  Lieutenant-Colonel  Dawson,  placed  in  com- 
mand of  the  fleet,  was  instructed  to  move  slowly  up  the  river, 
as  soon  as  the  cavalry  and  artillery  had  taken  up  their  line  of 
march  along  the  bank,  so  that  he  might  keep  his  steamers 
under  cover  of  the  batteries.  Chalmers's  Division,  being  in 
advance,  was  to  be  kept  as  close  to  the  river  as  possible,  to 
shield  the  steamers  from  any  attack  from  the  southward,  while 
Buford,  following  Chalmers,  was  to  cover  them  from  any  gun- 
boats which  might  come  from  the  direction  of  Paducah. 

At  noon  on  the  ist  November,  all  were  in  motion,  as  direct- 


598  Campaigns  of  General  FarresL 

m 

ed,  but  a  steady  rain  began  to  fall,  and  the  roads,  naturally 
rough  and  through  a  rugged  country,  became  slippery  and 
difficult.    That  night  the  Confederate  column  encamped  just 
south  of  the  ruins  of  the  railroad  bridge  over  the  Tennessee 
river,  and  the  steamers  were  anchored  under  the  shelter  of 
the  field-batteries  ashore.    A  hard  rain  through  the  night, 
making  the  roads  worse  even  than  before,  the  troops  moved 
slowly;  and  the  fleet,  unfortunately,  steamed  ahead  of  the 
supporting  land-batteries,  until  at  a  sudden  bend  in  the  river, 
above  Davidson's  Ferry,  they  were  brought  into  the  immediate 
presence  of  three  Federal  gunboats,  when  an  immediate  ani- 
mated collision  ensued.    The  Venus,  soon  receiving  a  shot 
among  her  machinery  and  her  tiller-rope  being  cut,  became 
unmanageable,  so  that  Colonel  Dawson  was  obliged  to  run 
her  ashore ;  and  as  the  Undine,  overmatched,  fell  back,  he, 
with  his  crew,  abandoned  the  Venus  under  a  hot  fire.    She  was 
then  recaptured  by  the  enemy  with  her  armament  and  the 
stores  that  had  been  taken  from  the  Mazeppa.*     In  the  mean 
time  Chalmers  put  his  artillery  in  battery  at  Davidson's  Ferry 
in  time  to  make  an  effective  diversion  in  favor  of  the  Undine, 
and  the  enemy,  forced  to  forego  their  prey,  bore  off)  taking 
the  Venus  in  tow.     After  this  untoward  affair,  resuming  the 
march,  the  head  of  the  Confederate  column  encamped  that 
evening  a  mile  below  Reynoldsburg,  General  Forrest  sleeping 
some  four  miles  to  the  southward. 

Meanwhile,  Mabry  had  been  directed,  several  days  previous- 
ly, to  establish  himself,  with  Thrall's  Battery  and  his  brigade, 
on  the  river  above  Johnsonville,  and  accordingly  he  had  taken 
a  position — as  he  reported  at  Chalmers's  headquarters,  three 


♦   The    tiller-rope   of  the   Venus,     who  had  been  retained  on  duty  with 
doubtless,  was  cut  by  her  old  engineer,     her  engines. 


Loss  of  the  Undine.  599 

miles  south  of  the  destined  point  of  attack^  where  he  had  been 
joined  by  the  Seventh  Tennessee,  (Lieutenant-Colonel  Tay- 
lor,) from  the  southward. 

Mabry  was  now  directed  to  establish  his  command  as  nearly 
opposite  to  Johnsonville  as  possiWe  the  next  morning,  keeping 
carefully  out  of  sight  of  the  enemy ;  and  during  the  day  the 
rest  of  the  Confederate  forces  were  concentrated  in  the  same 
direction  from  below.  But  meanwhile,  some  light  skirmishing 
occurred  with  several  gunboats  that  were  now  hemmed  in  be- 
tween Mabry,  on  the  south,  and  Buford,  on  the  north,  though 
without  substantial  results,  and  thus  stood  affairs  on  the  morn- 
ing of  the  third,  when  five  heavily-armed  gunboats  appear- 
ing from  below,  engaged  in  a  sharp  skirmish  "with  the  Con- 
federate batteries,  in  the  course  of  which  shells  were  thrown 
quite  three  miles,  from  thirty-two-pounders,  among  the  Con- 
federates and  their  horses,  with  great  din  and  uproar,  as  they 
crashed  through  the  dense,  lofty,  forest  trees  of  the  country, 
but  happily  without  harm.  For  a  time  the  Undine  took  part 
in  the  conflict,  and  also  two  of  the  gunboats  from  Johnsonville  ; 
but  the  former  having  been  struck  as  many  as  three  times,  and 
being  within  close  range  of  the  gunboats,  both  from  above  and 
below,  her  crew,  far  better  accustomed  to  the  headlong  charge 
and  unhampered  warfare  of  the  trooper  or  dismounted  rifle- 
man, than  to  be  cooped  up  in  the  narrow  gun-room  of  a  ship- 
of-war,  became  demoralized,  and  turning  the  bow  of  their  ves- 
sel hurriedly  to  the  bank,  set  her  on  fire,  and  made  off  for 
their  horses  as  fast  as  they  could  scamper,  fonder  of  the  troop- 
er's saddle  than  ever  before.  And  thus  terminated  the  short- 
lived operations  of  Forrest's  Cavalry  afloat. 

During  this  time,  though  a  cold  rain  had  been  falling  inces- 
santly, never  postponing  any  thing  for  to-morrow  which  he 
might  possibly  do  at  the  moment,  the  Confederate  General  had 
made  a  close  reconnoissance  of  Johnsonville. 

The  river  here  was  about  eight  hundred  yards  broad.    John- 


i 


6oo  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

sonville  itself,  independent  of  the  depot  buildings,  was  a  smaO 
hamlet  at  the  mouth  of,  and  just  southward  of,  a  creek,  and 
was  built  upon  the  slope  of  the  river-bank,  which,  rising  gen- 
tly from  the  water's  edge,  in  the  distance  of  three  hundred 
yards  attained  an  elevation  of  only  about  forty  feet,  and  ter- 
minated in  a  bench  or  plateau,  the  upper  or  northward  verge 
of  which,  nearest  the  creek,  was  surmounted  by  a  hill  about 
one  hundred  feet  above  the  level  of  the  water.  Upon  this  emi- 
nence an  extensive  redoubt  had  been  built,  that  overlooking 
commanded  the  western  bank  with  the  heavy  ordnance 
with  which  it  was  armed  ;  and  a  long  line  of  rifle-pits  envel- 
oped the  depot  near  the  water's  edge  and  to  the  south.  The 
western  bank,  from  which  the  Confederate  leader  expected  to 
operate,  is  abrupt  near  the  river,  about  twenty  feet  above  the 
level  of  the  water,  and  descends,  as  it  recedes,  toward  the  west 
It  was  thickly  covered  with  heavy  timber,  except  immediately 
in  front  of  the  depot,  where  the  trees  had  been  felled  for  some 
distance  rearward  to  give  range  for  their  guns,  and  prevent 
any  hostile  approach  under  their  cover.  But,  notwithstanding 
the  defensive  advantages  of  the  position,  and  the  preparations 
made  for  the  event  of  an  attack,  Forrest  saw,  or  was  satisfied, 
after  his  reconnoissance,  that  if  he  could  get  his  guns  in  cer- 
tain positions  which  he  selected,  he  might  readily  destroy,  not 
only  the  depot  and  vast  accumulation  of  supplies  there  collect- 
ed, but  the  gunboats  and  transports  then  at  the  landing. 

In  the  mean  time,  Brigadier-General  Lyon,  who  had  been 
detached  from  Middle  Tennessee,  on  an  expedition  into  Ken- 
tucky, had  reported,  with  some  400  men.  Lyon  had  been  an 
artillery  officer  of  the  regular  service  before  the  war,  and  stood 
high  with  Forrest,  for  his  professional  skill  as  well  as  energy ; 
he  was,  therefore,  ordered  to  take  Thrall's  Battery,  (twelve- 
pounder  howitzers,)  then  near  at  hand,  and  establish  it  as 
close  to  the  river-bank  as  practicable,  immediately  opposite 
the  upper  or  southern  part  of  the  landing.     Losing  no  time, 


Chalmers's  Operations.  587 

navigation  of  the  Cumberland,  and  the  greater  part  of  the  sup- 
plies for  Sherman's  forces  and  those  serving  in  Middle  and 
£ast-Tennessee  were  accumulated  here  in  large  quantities  for 
transportation  thence,  by  rail,  by  way  of  Nashville.  General 
Taylor  promptly  approving  the  projected  operation,  Chalmers 
was  directed  to  report  at  Jackson,  Tennessee,  with  such  forces 
as  he  might  be  able  to  assemble  there ;  and  orders  were  given 
to  the  rest  of  Forrest's  Cavalry  to  secure  their  efficiency  and 
early  readiness  for  the  expedition. 

While  Forrest,  as  we  have  related,  was  operating  so  suc- 
cessfully in  Middle  Tennessee,  the  troops,  which  had  been 
left  meanwhile  in  Mississippi,  under  Chalmers,  had  not  been 
inactive.  But  nothing  fruitful  was  the  result,  however,  of  aH 
their  continuous  exposure,  hard  riding,  and  several  daring 
scouts,  except  that,  having  been  ordered  by  Genial  Taylor 
to  make  a  demonstration  in  the  immediate  neighborhood  of 
Memphis,  to  create  a  diversion  in  favor  of  Forrest,  at  the  time 
he  was  repassing  to  the  south  bank  of  the  Tennessee,  Chal- 
mers presented  himself,  with  about  looo  of  his  veterans  and 
a  few  State  troops,  in  the  vicinity  of  that  place  on  the  morning 
of  the  8th  of  October.  At  the  moment,  a  force  of  nearly  7000 
infantry  and  cavalry  were  concentrated  in  the  place,  apparently 
on  the  eve  of  an  expedition ;  and  the  approach  of  Chalmers 
producing  the  liveliest  apprehension,  stimulated  the  Federal 
commander  to  the  most  active  preparations  for  the  defense 
of  his  position.  Taking  the  defensive,  the  enemy  placed  strong 
^ards  upon  all  the  approaches  to  Memphis  ;  these  threw  up 
breastworks  across  all  the  roads,  while  barricades  of  cotton 
were  erected  at  various  points  in  the  city  itself,  especially 
at  the  several  crossings  of  Gayoso  bayou,  the  bridge-floor- 
ings over  which  were  torn  up.  The  militia  were  called  out ; 
outlying  regiments  and  depots  were  withdrawn ;  the  forts 
were  strongly  manned,  and  the  streets  were  heavily  patroled. 
Manifestly,  so  grave  and  serious  did  the  Federal  General  re- 


6o2  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

rest  then,  having  the  watches  of  his  several  subordinate  com- 
manders compared  and  set  uniformly,  ordered  that  his  batte- 
ries should  open  fire  simultaneously  and  precisely  at  two  p.ic. 
In  the  interval,  the  gunboats  from  below  had  withdrawn  out 
of  sight ;  the  three  at  Johnsonville  were  quietly  moored  at  the 
landing,  but  with  steam  up,  and  their  upper  decks  covered 
with  their  officers  and  crew,  the  latter  either  busy  scrubbing, 
or  washing  their  clothes.  Straggling  troops  were  sauntering 
about  over  the  hill-side  or  pacing  the  parapet  of  the  redoubt ; 
laborers  were  at  work  landing  stores  from  transports  and 
barges ;  passengers  lounged  upon  the  decks  of  the  transports 
and  steamers,  smoking  or  chatting ;  and  some  ladies  were  to 
be  seen  coniing  down  the  bank,  evidently  in  anticipation  of 
an  early  departure  on  some  one  of  the  steamers,  several  of 
which  were  getting  up  steam.  It  was  apparent  there  was  not 
the  least  suspicion  of  the  impending  tempest,  and  that  the 
Federals  must  imagine  the  Confederates  had  withdrawn  from 
their  neighborhood  without  the  ability  of  doing  them  any  harm. 
Meantime,  General  Forrest  anxiously  surveyed  the  scene  with 
his  glasses  until  the  moment  for  action  had  come.  Then  aim- 
ing with  his  own  eye  and  hand  a  piece  in  Morton's  Battery,  at 
the  appointed  instant,  ten  pieces,  carefully  trained  upon  the 
gunboats  at  the  landing,  were  discharged  with  such  harmony, 
that  it  could  not  be  discerned  there  was  more  than  one  report 
—one  heavy  gun.  At  the  moment,  several  gunboats  were 
just  beginning  to  swing  out  into  the  stream,  as  if  for  a  cruise. 
Immediately,  steam  and  smoke  poured  forth  from  the  boats 
and  at  every  aperture  from  one  of  them,  while  her  crew  were 
seen  jumping  into  the  river  nearest  the  shore  and  swimming 
for  the  landing,  showing  that  her  steam  apparatus  was  mor- 
tally hurt.  Another  of  the  gunboats  turned  toward  the  land- 
ing ;  and  the  ladies  just  approaching  the  transports  rushed 
wildly  up  the  hillside  toward  the  fort.  Only  one  of  the  gun- 
boats returned  the  fire,  but  the  redoubt  burst  forth  with  a 


CHAPTER  XXII. 


Campaign  lo  Kentucky  Border— BuforiTt  Suceasful  Operations  against 
FiiUral  Gunboats  end  Transports— Capturt  of  United  States  Steam 
Gunboat  Undine  and  Transports  Venus,  Maxeppa,  and  Cheeseman— 
Operations  of  Forrest s  Cavalry  Afloat  —  Sueeessful  Optrafiems 
against  Federal  Depot  at  JoknsoitvilU^Destructienof  Warekausa, 
Gunboats,  and  Transports — Description  of  Scene— Summary  of  Re- 
mtlts^Forrest  ordered  to  join  General  Hood  in  Middle  Tennessee- 
Abortive  Effort  to  pass  the  Tennessee  at  Perryville^U^rctched  Con- 
dition of  the  Roads — Forrest's  Cavalry  assembled  at  Florence,  Ala- 
bama— Hood's  Army  concentrated  there. 

October  17th  to  November  y'jth,  1864. 

lifARLY  on  the  17th,  Buford's  Division  was  set  in  motion 
with  two  batteries,  (Morton  and  Walton,)  for  the  vicinity  of 
Jack's  creek,  and  on  the  next  day  General  Forrest  followed 
with  his  escort  and  Rucker's  Brigade,  still  under  Kelly,  en 
route  for  Jackson,  by  way  of  Purdy  and  Henderson  Station, 
effecting  a  junction  at  the  latter  place  with  Chalmers  on  the 
morning  of  the  20th.  Meanwhile,  scouts  and  detachments  of 
cavalry,  under  intelligent  and  trusty  officers,  were  thrown  out 
to  watch  all  the  crossings  of  the  Tennessee  river  from  Ham- 
burg to  Clifton,  where  the  enemy  appeared  to  be  concentrat- 
ing, as  if  designing  to  cross.  On  the  morning  of  the  20th, 
Buford  was  directed  to  take  position  at  Lexington,  about  twen- 
ty-five miles  eastward  of  Jackson,  and  a  central  position  for 


6o4  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

his  batteries  to  the  main  work  in  hand,  the  destruction  of  the 
warehouses  and  supplies  ashore.     Discovering  a  large  pile  of 
hay,  a  few  deftly-exploded  shells  kindled  it  into  a  consuming 
fire  that  soon  spread  to  vast  heaps  of  com  and  bacon  adjoin- 
ing.    And  descrying  higher  up  the  slope  a  large  pile  of  bar- 
rels under  tarpaulins,  suspecting  that  they  contained  spirits, 
Briggs's  section,  armed  with  James's  rifles,  was  directed  to  be 
brought  to  bear  upon  them,  using  percussion  primers.*    A 
few  well-aimed  shell  were  thrown  with  the  happiest  effect, 
for  a  blue  blaze,  unmistakably  alcoholic,  was  quickly  seen  to 
dart  from  under  the  tarpaulins.     At  this,  a  loud  shout  burst 
from  the  Confederates,  though  many,  doubtless,  were  athirst 
for  that  which  they  saw  swallowed  up  by  the   ravening  fire. 
Soon  the  barrels  began  to  burst  with  loud  explosion,  and  the 
burning  liquor  ran  in  torrents  of  livid  flame  down  the  hillside ; 
spreading  a  flame  in  its  course  toward  the  river,  and  filling 
the  air  with  the  blended  yet  distinct  fumes  of  burning  spirits, 
sugar,  coffee,  and  meat.t     Meanwhile,  all  the  warehouses  and 
buildings  were  ignited,  and  the  work  of  destruction  effectually 
accomplished  ;  therefore,  stopping  the  fire  of  his  artillery,  For- 
rest directed  the  main  part  of  the  cavalry  to  move  rearward 
several  miles,  to  where  his  train  was  established,  and  feed 
their  horses.     And  after  dark,  all  the  artillery  except  Briggs  s 
section  were  likewise  withdrawn  to  the  same  point — Ruckers 
Brigade  being  left  as  a  support  to  the  artillery  section  and  to 
picket  the  river.     As  the  Confederates  retired,  the  air  was  still 
redolent  with  the  savory  odors  of  that  enormous  roast  of  sub- 
sistence in  which  they  had  been  engaged,  and  Ihe  night  was 
made  almost  as  luminous  by  the  conflagration  as  the  day. 


*  Captured  from    the   Federals    at  dared  at  night  that  the  effect  of  the 

Tishomingo  creek.  fumes  we  have  mentioned  was  to  make 

t  The  Confederates  had  been  on  short  them  feel  as  if  they  had  been  eitin{ 

rations  all  day,  yet  some  of  them  de-  heartily. 


Results.  605 

* 

Riding  back  to  the  river  early  on  the  morning  of  the  5  th, 
the  Confederate  General  had  the  satisfaction  to  see  that 
naught  remained  opposite  of  the  opulent  depot  of  yester- 
day but  the  isolated  redoubt,  gloomily  surmounting  and 
guarding  with  its  wide-mouthed  guns  broad  heaps  of  ashes 
and  charred,  smoking  dibris.  Nothing  was  left  unconsumed  ; 
neither  gunboats,  transport,  or  barge  had  escaped ;  the  rail- 
road depot,  filled  with  supplies,  and  the  warehouses  and  other 
buildings  of  the  depot  had  ceased  to  be,  as  well  as  the  large 
piles  of  stores  that,  on  noon  of  the  day  before,  had  covered 
several  acres  of  the  surrounding  slope. 

Briggs's  guns  were  now  ordered  to  be  withdrawn ;  but  as 
this  was  being  done,  a  regiment  of  negroes,  emerging  from 
their  covert,  displayed  themselves  upon  the  opposite  bank  in 
amusing,  irate  antics.  Throwing  off  their  coats,  and  shaking 
their  clenched  fists  at  the  hated  Confederates  who  had 
wrought  the  desolation  around  them,  they  hurled  across  the 
stream  upon  the  morning  air  their  whole  arsenal  of  explosive, 
offensive  epithets,  oaths,  and  maledictions.  Thereupon  the 
section  was  halted  and  turned  upon  the  absurdly  frantic 
negroes,  while  Rucker's  veterans,  bringing  their  far-reaching 
rifles  down  upon  them,  one  volley  and  a  salvo  speedily  dis- 
persed the  howling,  capering  crowd,  who  scampered  away  in 
the  wildest  confusion ;  but  a  number  were  left  dead  or 
wounded  upon  the  river-bank.  This  drew  a  few  shell  from 
the  redoubt,  but  the  Confederates  moving  off  unharmed,  re- 
joined their  comrades. 

As  results  of  this  happily-conceived  and  well-executed 
operation,  it  remains  to  recount  the  destruction  at  Johnson- 
ville  of  three  gunboats,  eleven  transports,  and  some  eighteen 
barges ;  and  of  buildings,  quartermasters'  and  commissary's 
supplies,  according  to  the  Federal  estimate,  to  the  value  of 
over  eight  millions  of  dollars.  Previously,  the  gunboat  Undine 
had  been  captured,  and  also  destroyed,  as  well  as  the  trans- 


i 


6o6  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

• 

ports  Cheeseman  and  Mazeppa,  and  three  barges,  from  which 
last  a  large  amount  of  subsistence,  blankets,  and  shoes,  as  al> 
ready  statedi  had  been  secured.  This  had  been  accomplished 
with  the  loss  of  the  two  twenty-poundei-  Parrotts,  which  feD 
into  the  hands  of  the  enemy  with  the  transport  Venus,  upon 
her  recapture,  and  two  men  were  killed  and  four  wounded. 

The  Confederates,  as  may  be  supposed,  were  highly  elated 
and  gratified  by  the  results  we  have  just  enumerated,  a  bril' 
liant  close  indeed  to  their  operations  in  West-Tennessee ;  so 
that  though  put  in  motion,  under  a  hard,  chilly  rain,  toward  the 
south,  yet  all  marched  off  cheerfully.  Their  commander  had 
just  received  orders  from  General  Beauregard,  directing  him 
to  repair,  with  his  entire  command,  to  Middle  Tennessee,  and 
form  a  junction  with  General  Hood,  between  Florence  and 
Columbia  ;  and  with  that  object  he  now  took  the  field — ^march- 
ing twenty  miles  that  afternoon,  in  the  direction  of  Perryvillc, 
where  he  hoped  to  effect  the  passage  of  the  Tennessee  river. 

The  roads  were  extremely  deep  with  mud,  as  in  fact  they 
had  been  ever  since  leaving  Jackson,  on  the  way  to  Fort 
Heiman,  and  up  to  Johnsonville,  The  horses,  moreover,  had 
been  much  of  the  time  on  scanty  rations,  and  began,  especially 
those  of  the  artillery,  to  show  fatigue  perceptibly.  Never- 
theless, the  Confederate  force  reached  Perryville  by  the  after- 
noon of  the  6th. 

Forrest  had  preceded  his  command  with  his  staff  and  es- 
cort, and  went  to  work  at  once  to  build  a  raft  with  planks  and 
timber  taken  from  an  adjacent  building ;  and  Chalmers  and 
his  staff  coming  up,  went  to  work  to  build  another  ;  but  upon 
trial,  neither  would  answer  any  useful  purpose.  Meanwhile, 
two  yawls  were  brought  up  on  wagons  from  the  Undine,  and 
with  these  the  crossing  began  that  night.  By  daylight,  the 
Fifteenth  Tennessee  had  been  thrown  across,  with  its  horses, 
which  had  been  made  to  swim.  The  rain  fell  without  inter- 
mission, and  the  stream  rising  at  the  rate  of  two  feet  in 


Difficulties  of  the  Roads.  607 

twenty-four  hours,  was  filled  with  driftwood.  Howbeit  the 
crossing  continued  during  the  7th,  until  the  Seventh  Tennes- 
see and  Forrest's  old  regiment  (Kelly's) — or  about  400  of 
Rucker's  Brigade — ^had  been  crossed  with  the  yawls.  Mean- 
while, some  pontoons  came  up,  and  an  effort  was  made  to 
construct  a  raft  with  them  that  would  carry  the  wagons ;  a 
small,  frail  flat  also  had  been  built ;  but  this  and  the  raft 
proved  to  be  unable  to  stand  the  driftwood  with  which  the 
rapid  ciurent  of  the  stream  was  flooded.  Therefore,  direct- 
ing Rucker  to  move  forward  to  Mount  Pleasant,  to  effect  a 
junction  with  General  Hood,  Forrest,  on  the  morning  of  the 
8th,  determined  to  abandon  the  effort  to  cross  the  river 
at  Perryville,  and  push  forward  to  Florence.  Chalmers  was 
directed  to  move  directly  upon  luka  by  the  river  roads  in 
that  direction,  which  were  found  as  bad  as  possible.  Buford 
marched  with  his  division  by  way  of  Corinth.  Artillery 
moved  with  both  divisions,  and  both  commanders  were  in- 
structed to  send  out  detachments  through  the  country  to 
exchange  their  fagged  animals  with  the  people  for  others  fit 
for  service,  and  thus  effectively  rehorse  their  artillery  at  least. 
But  failing  peradventure  in  this,  oxen  were  to  be  resorted  to. 
The  rain  still  poured  down  in  torrents  as  the  Confederates 
pressed  on  over  the  red  clay  hills  of  the  country,  and  through 
the  deep  mud  .and  mire,  all  weary  and  constantly  wet  to  the 
skin ;  and  one  day  so  nearly  impassable  were  the  roads  that, 
working  from  sunrise  until  after  night,  Morton's  Battery  was 
only  transported  two  miles  and  a  half.  Unable  to  get  fresh 
horses,  the  artillery  teams  were  increased  from  twelve  to  six- 
teen horses  to  a  gun,  and  oxen  being  impressed,  eight  of  fhem 
were  attached  to  a  piece,  after  which,  there  was  less  difficulty. 
Chalmers  finally  reached  luka,  with  a  part  of  Rucker's  Brigade 
and  the  Fifth  Mississippi,  on  the  1 3th ;  Mabry's  Brigade  having 
been  detached,  under  order  from  General  Forrest,  the  day  be- 
fore, to  garrison  the  depot  at  Corinth.    Meanwhile,  Buford, 


i 


6o8  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

moving  by  roads  further  westward,  reached  luka,  with  his  di- 
vision, on  the  1 6th,  and  passed  on  to  Cherokee  Station,  the 
terminus  of  railway  transportation  *  Chalmers,  in  the  interim, 
was  engaged  in  having  his  horses  shod  and  with  other  neces- 
sary preparations  for  the  field.  All  extra  bagg^age  and  artiiler)', 
except  eight  pieces  and  the  disabled  horses  of  both  divisions, 
were  ordered  to  Vernon,  Mississippi ;  and  on  the  i6th,  both 
divisions  were  ordered  to  move  up  to  Florence,  where  Chal- 
mers arrived  on  the  afternoon  of  the  7th,  having  crossed  the 
Tennessee    on  a  pontoon-bridge,  constructed    for    General 
Hood's  army ;  and  his  command,  moving  out,  encamped  two 
miles  to  the  northward  of  the  town.    Buford  did  not  cross 
until  the  morning  of  the  iSth.f 

The  army  of  the  Tennessee  was  found  encamped  on  both 
sides  of  the  river,  and  had  thrown  up  a  strong  tite-de-pont, 
with  other  fortifications,  to  protect  the  pontoon-bridge  by 
which  Chalmers  and  Buford  crossed.      Florence  was  filled  at 
the  time  with  general  officers  and  their  staff,  soldiers,  baggage- 
wagons,  ambulances,  and  ordnance-trains,  and  all  betokened 
an  early  march.  The  troops  appeared  to  be  in  fine  spirits,  but 
the  ranks  of  every  regiment  were  attenuated  to  an  unpromising 
degree.  Besides,  the  wretched  roads  and  gloom  of  the  weather 
were  inauspicious.  All  the  supplies  were  drawn  by  railway  to 
Cherokee  Station,  and  thence  sixteen  miles  by  wagons,  over 
roads  by  constant  use  almost  impassable,  and  now  thick- 
strewn  with  wagons  broken  down  or  ruined,  and  mules  which 
had  literally  "  died  in  harness,"  "  and  in  the  last  ditch."  Alto- 


*  General  Forrest  having  reached  use  the  led  horses  of  his  officers  and 

Corinth  on  the  12th,  repaired  by  rail  to  dismount  their  neg^o  servants,  and  if 

Cherokee  Station,  and  thence  to  Tus-  that  did  not  supply  the  requisite  num- 

cumbia  on  the  13th,  and  had  an  iqter-  ber,  to  make  up  the  deficiency  by  dis- 

view  with  General  Beauregard.  mounting  some  of  the  men  from  each 

t  Such  was  the  condition  of  Buford*s  regiment 
artillery  horses,  that  he  was  ordered  to 


GEH    A   BUFOFL' 


At  Florence. 


609 


gether,  indeed,  the  movement  "  looked  like  the  desperate  ven- 
ture of  a  desperate  man/'  says  a  staff-officer.  ''  But  among  ^ 
the  troops  whom  we  saw — officers  and  men — there  was  no 
faint-heartedness,  but,  on  the  contrary,  an  evident  desire  to 
go  forward  and  fight  it  out" 


1.  _    p 


.. .  -^^  ,'».  . 


CHAPTER    XXIII. 

THE    HOOD    CAMPAIGN, 

Sketch  of  Gcniral  Hood's  Plans  and  MovimiHls — General  Forrest  ordtrta 
to  him— 'Confederate  Forces — The  Campaign  Opened — Operali^u 
antecedent  to  Franklin — Battle  of  Franklin — Advance  upon  A'ash- 
ville — Detached  Operations  of  Forrest  around  Murfreesboro — Battle 
of  Nashville— Retreat  of  Confederate  Forces — Forrest  in  Command 
of  Rear-Guard— Brilliant  Character  of  his  Operations — Safe  Re- 
passage  of  the  Tennessee  River — Commentaries. 

November  tith  to  December  31st,  1864. 

It  is  sufficient  for  the  scope  of  this  work  to  say  that  Lieu- 
tenant-General  Hood,  with  the  sanction  of  his  Government, 
having  left  his  adversary,  General  Sherman,  in  possession 
of  Atlanta — about  the  ist  of  October— had  moved  rapidly 
northward  with  the  whole  Confederate  force  at  his  dispositioa 
First,  striking  Sherman's  communications  at  Big  Shanty,  just 
north  of  Marietta,  the  Confederate  General  had  destroyed 
the  railroad  at  intervals  thence  to  Dalton ;  and  then,  after 
some  manoeuvres  and  demonstrations  in  that  quarter,  moving  by 
way  of  Gadsden,  had  pressed  on  with  the  purpose  of  throwing 
himself  into  Middle  Tennessee,  near  Gunter's  Ferry,  the  south- 
ernmost point  on  the  Tennessee  river.  His  object  was  to  fall 
on  Sherman's  communications,  and  thus  oblige  him  to  with- 
draw and  give  up  Atlanta  and  North-Georgia ;  not  only  to  re- 
establish those  communications,  but  as  a  necessity  to  avoid 


I, 


Confederate  Forces.  6ii 

the  starvation  of  his  army.  This  was  the  original  plan  of 
operations  ;  and  finding  it  well  on  foot  when  assigned  to  the 
chief  command  of  all  Confederate  forces  in  the  State  of  Ten- 
nessee, Georgia,  Alabama,  and  Mississippi,  General  Beaure- 
gard, in  order  to  give  it  all  possible  aid  within  his  power, 
ordered  General  Forrest  to  cooperate  with  his  cavalry,  by  an 
early  junction  with  General  Hood  in  Middle  Tennessee. 

From  some  causes,  as  yet  unexplained,  instead  of  moving 
directly  to  Guntersville,  only  forty  miles  distant  from  Gads- 
den, where  General  Hood  had  concentrated  his  army  as  early 
as  the  2 1  St  day  of  October,  that  General  turned  the  head  of 
his  command  to  Decatur.  There,  howbeit,  he  found  so  strong 
a  hostile  force  ready  to  dispute  his  passage  of  the  Tennessee, 
that  he  felt  constrained  not  to  attempt  the  operation  at  that 
point,  and  after  a  delay  of  three  weeks^  he  began  to  throw  his 
army  across  the  river  at  Florence,  Alabama. 

The  forces  under  General  Hood  were  divided  into  three 
corps,  consisting  of 

An  effective  total  of  in£iintry,  .••«.•        25,000 

An  effective  total  of  artillery, 2,000 

And  Jackson's  Division  of  cavalry, ....         2,000* 

Total, 29,000 

To  this  force  was  now  added  Forrest's  Cavalry,  about  3000 
effectives,!  swelling  the  Confederate  army  about  to  take  the 
field  in  Middle  Tennessee  to  32,000  men,  of  .which  5000  were 
cavalry ;  and  over  these  General  Forrest  was  placed  in  chief 


*  Armstrong's   Brigade   numbered  procure  remounts  at  the  moment  the 

nbout  1300  men.    Ross's  Brigade,  686.  order  to  join  Hood  was  receiyed,  and 

Total,  1986.  had  not  had  time  to  reassemble ;  and  all 

t  Buford's  Division  was  reduced  to  but  450  of  the  Kentucky  Brigade 

about  1200  men,  all  but  about  750  of  absent  on  detached  senrice. 
Bell's  Brigade  being  on  furlough  to 


6i2  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

command,  on  reporting  to  the  commander  of  the  forces,  as 
early  as  the  17th. 

On  that  day,  in  a  "circular"  assuming  command,  he  ex- 
pressed, in  a  few  hearty  words,  his  sense  of  the  responsibi- 
lity of  his  position,  his  reliance  upon  the  cordial  cooperation 
of  all  subordinates  as  well  as  upon  the  "  patient  endurance 
and  unflinching  bravery"  of  the  troops  placed  under  him. 
Other  orders  directed  immediate  preparations  for  the  field, 
and  forward  movement  on  the  21st.  Meanwhile,  Jackson's 
Division  was  in  advance  on  the  Lawrenceburg  road,  ten  or 
fifteen  miles  from  Florence,  and  both  Chalmers  and  Buforti 
had  been  also  thrown  out  as  early  as  the  19th  in  the  same 
direction,  as  far  as  Prewett's  Mill,  to  secure  forage  for  their 
horses,  with  special  instruction,  likewise,  to  give  daily  notifica- 
tion at  Forrest's  headquarters  of  the  precise  location  of  each 
division.  They  were  also  to  glean  the  country  of  cattle,  and 
set  the  mills  of  the  neighborhood  to  grinding  all  the  meal 
possible ;  and,  further,  were  to  keep  scouts  well  out  in  ad- 
vance toward  Pulaski,  and  on  the  right  flank,  to  gain  definite 
information  touching  movements,  positions,  and  numbers  of 
the  enemy.  And  at  the  same  time  Captain  Keizer  had  been 
thrown  forward  with  scouts  to  Waynesboro,  and  to  spread 
them  over  the  country  from  Johnsonville  to  Columbia.  A 
demi-brigade  under  Colonel  Biflie  was  also  pushed  forward  to 
Waynesboro  about  the  21st* 

On  reaching  Butler's  creek,  on  the  1 9th,  Buford  found  that 
a  brigade  of  Federal  foragers  was  also  in  that  vicinity. 
Throwing  out  the  Kentucky  Brigade  with  Hue/s  Battalion,! 
be  soon  came  in  collision  with  the  enemy,  who  made  a  spirited 


*  Some  500  strong,  detached  from        f  About  150  men,  recently  itadted 
Dibrell't  Brigade,  and  during  the  cam-     in  Kentucky, 
paign  were  transferred  from  Jackson's 
Division  to  serve  with  Chalmers's. 


Skirmishes^  613 

contest ;  but  it  so  happened  that  General  Armstrong,  of 
Jackson's  Division,  being  in  the  immediate  neighborhood — in 
the  same  field,  in  fact — in  quest  of  forage  likewise,  heard  the 
firing,  and  making  for  the  scene,  suddenly  fell  upon  the  Fede- 
ral right  flank.  Thus  brought  between  two  fires,  the  enemy 
fled  precipitately  across  Shoal  creek,  but  the  gallant  Colonei 
Crossland  was  once  more  severely  wounded 

The  general  advance  having  commenced,  Buford  and  Jack- 
son, moving  by  the  highway  through  Lawrenceburg,  were 
in  that  vicinity  on  the  morning  of  the  22d.  Driving  in  the 
enemy's  skirmishers  and  opening  communications,  both  Jack- 
son and  Buford  arranged  for  an  immediate  attack  upon  the 
places  though  it  was  understood  from  the  scouts  (Henderson's) 
that  it  was  occupied  by  quite  as  large  a  force  as  4000  Federal 
cavalry. 

II. 

Disposing  Wilson's  and  Newsom's  Regiments  on  the  north- 
ward, and  Nixon's  (all  of  Bell's  Brigade)  on  the  south-west 
of  Lawrenceburg,  with  the  Kentuckians  under  Faulkner  to 
the  west  of  the  town,  while  Jackson  encompassed  the  south- 
ward, an  animated  skirmishing  began  with  the  enemy,  found 
in  line  of  battle  on  the  road  to  Pulaski.  Jackson,  bringing 
his  artillery  into  active  play  from  a  favorable  position,  and 
pushing  forward  Armstrong's  Brigade  upon  the  position,  the 
Federals  rapidly  withdrew  toward  Pulaski,  leaving  their  forage 
in  the  hands  of  the  Confederates.*  Meanwhile,  Chalmers, 
moving  that  morning  with  Rucker's  Brigade  on  what  is  known 
as  the  Middle  or  Henryville  road,  encamped  near  the  hamlet 
of  West-Point  on  the  night  of  the  21st,  and  during  the  22d 


*  In  tius  little  afiair  lieutenant  Wil-     was   particularly  distinguished   while 
liam  Hunt,  Twenty-eighth  Mississippi,     commanding  the  leading  squadron. 


i 


6 14  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

was  engaged  in  having  his  horses  shod  And  here,  during 
that  day,  the  advance  of  the  infantry,  pursuing  that  road,  came 
up.  Moving  on  the  23d  toward  Henr)rville,  up  the  valleys  of 
several  meandering  streams,  Rucker  struck  a  Federal  cavalry 
force,  about  three  p.m.,  soon  after  his  road  intersected  the 
turnpike  from  Waynesboro  to  Mount  Pleasant.  It  was  the 
Fourteenth  Tennessee  (Lieutenant-Colonel  White)  that  first 
became  engaged,  having  been  fired  upon  by  an  outpost,  which, 
being  put  to  flight,  retreated  upon  a  Federal  brigade  of  cav- 
alry, encamped  to  their  rear  about  six  'miles  beyond  Pcrry- 
ville,  and  where  they  were  drawn  up  in  line  of  battle  quite 
1500  strong. 

Rucker's  Brigade  did  not  now  exceed  800  troopers ;  as  will 
be  recollected,  Biffle  was  at  Waynesboro,  and  the  rest  of  the 
Confederate  cavalry  en  route  toward  Pulaski,  while  the  infen- 
try  were  some  ten  miles  southward  ;  but  General  Forrest, 
coming  upon  the  scene,  ordered  Chalmers  to  advance  and 
engage  the  enemy,  sending  Kelly  with  the  old  Forrest  Regi- 
ment around  by  the  left,  to  gain  the  Federal  rear,  if  possible 
At  the  same  time,  the  Confederate  General,  leading  his  escort, 
some  eighty  strong,  rapidly  around  the  Federal  right  flank, 
attempted  to  form  a  junction  with  Kelly.  Having,  however, 
an  unobstructed  road,  he  struck  the  enemy's  rear  three  miles 
from  where  Chalmers  was  fighting,  and  a  running  fight  en- 
sued for  two  miles  in  the  direction  of  Mount  Pleasant.  The 
escort  being  well  mounted,  some  of  the  enemy  were  overtaken 
and  captured,  including  an  officer,  from  whom  General  For- 
rest learned  that  only  one  regiment  was  engaged  skirmishing 
with  Chalmers,  and  that  the  rest  of  the  brigade  had  gone  into 
camp,  a  mile  still  nearer  Mount  Pleasant.  Continuing  the 
pursuit,  however,  the  General  and  his  escort  were  soon  in  the 
very  midst  of  that  encampment,  whose  occupants  at  the  in- 
stant were  dismounted  feeding  their  horses.  The  escort 
all  wore  rubber  overcoats  and  leggings,  captured  at  different 


Capture  of  Federal  Encampment.  615 

times  from  the  enemy,  and  this  caused  them,  as  they  dashed 
into  the  camp,  to  be  mistaken  by  the  Federals  for  their  own 
troops ;  but  as  the  Confederates  fired  their  pistols  in  rapid 
play  into  the  thronging  encampment,  recognizing  at  last  their 
mistake,  the  enemy  broke  and  scattered  in  great  confusion, 
only  one  regiment  having  been  rallied.  This  forming,  pre- 
sently poured  a  volley  into  the  escort,  killing  three  and 
wounding  five  of  their  number,  but  after  that,  retreated  like- 
wise, leaving  General  Forrest  and  his  escort  in  possession  of 
the  encampment,  after  having  killed  and  wounded  in  the  chase 
and  onset  about  thirty  men,  and  capturing  sixty  prisoners, 
with  as  many  horses.  Hearing  the  firing,  the  Federal  pickets 
fell  back  into  camp,  and  were  also  captured,  some  eight  or 
ten  in  number.  It  was  now  dark,  and  knowing  that  a  portion 
of  the  hostile  brigade  was  still  between  his  force  and  Chal- 
mers, Forrest,  as  a  matter  of  prudence,  turned  in  that  direc- 
tion ;  but  leaving  the  highway  finally,  for  a  distance  of  two 
hundred  yards,  he  concealed  his  prisoners  under  charge  of 
some  forty  of  his  men,  and  returned  with  the  other  portion  of 
his  escort  to  the  road  to  await  the  approach  of  the  enemy, 
whom  he  heard  engaged  with  Chalmers  about  a  mile  distant. 
They  were  evidently  yielding  slowly  to  the  Confederates,  giv- 
ing back  toward  Mount  Pleasant,  and  soon  a  detachment  was 
to  be  heard  approaching  at  a  walk.  Forrest  at  once  dis 
mounting  his  escort,  posted  them  in  the  edge  of  an  opportune 
thicket,  where  they  rigidly  awaited  the  approach  of  the  foe  to 
within  ten  feet.  Then  pouring  forth  a  volley,  many  men  and 
horses  went  to  the  ground,  and  the  rest  of  the  surprised  de- 
tachment scattered  in  wild  confusion.  But  meanwhile  an- 
other, following  the  same  road,  coming  up  at  a  trot,  speedily 
met  the  same  warm  reception.  The  rest  of  the  Federal  com- 
mand, finding  they  were  ambuscaded,  while  the  woods  were 
too  dense  for  them  as  a  body  to  find  a  way  through  in  the 
dark,  now  made  a  right  gallant  charge  down  the  road.    The 


j 


6i6  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest, 

« 

• 

escort  stood  their  ground,  however,  with  characteristic  fear- 
lessness, and  another  volley  from  their  deadly  Spencer  rifles* 
again  emptied  many  saddles,  and  more  than  one  horse  was 
added  to  the  number  which  already  blocked  up  the  narrow 
road.  Meanwhile,  Rucker's  men,  hearing  the  uproar,  charged 
likewise  at  full  speed,  and  with  loud  shouts,  in  the  same  direc- 
tion. Mistaking  this  for  a  hostile  approach  of  a  fresh  and 
still  larger  force,  the  escort  at  length  fell  back  to  remount ; 
but,  fortimately  believing  that  he  recognized  the  cheers  of  his 
own  men,  Forrest,  springing  forward,  cried  out,. "  Rucker  f 
That  officer,  after  his  wonted  fashion,  was  at  the  head  of  his 
column,  and  answered  the  hail  of  his  commander.  The  escort 
was  at  once  remounted,  and  the  whole  force  moved  back  about 
half  a  mile  to  the  Federal  encampment  previously  mentioned. 
There  was  found  an  abundance  of  forage  and  subsistence 
abandoned  by  the  enemy,  and  the  Confederates  found  it  like- 
wise an  opportune  bivouac.  In  the  engagements  of  this  day, 
Rucker's  losses  and  those  of  the  escort  counted  up  as  many  as 
five  killed  and  thirty  wounded  ;  that  of  their  enemy  quite 
foiw  times  that  number,  exclusive  of  some  sixty  prisoners. 

During  this  time  Buford  and  Jackson  had  been  moving 
swiftly  across  the  country  in  the  direction  of  Linnville,  on  the 
Tennessee  and  Alabama  Central  Railroad;  northward  of  Pu- 
laski, so  as  to  cut  the  Federal  communications  with  Columbia, 
as  it  was  understood  the  enemy  were  assembling  for  a  stand 
at  Pulaski.  They  did  not  reach  Linnville,  however,  that  day, 
and  had  no  hostile  encounters. 

About  two  o'clock  a.m.  on  the  24th,  Rucker  was  again  in 
the  saddle  with  his  brigade,  and,  moving  rapidly  by  way  of 
Mount  Pleasant,  about  daylight  he  overtook  the  Federal  rear 
near  the  house  of  General  Lucius  Polk,  in  the  neighborhood 


*  Repeaters,  which  had  been  captured  from  the  Federala. 


Cavalry  at  .Columbia. 


617 


of  Columbia.  Without  making  a  stout  stand,  they  were  pre- 
sently borne  back  upon  their  fortifications  and  a  large  in- 
fantry force.  This  pursuit  closed,  however,  with  a  gallant 
charge  upon  the  infantry  pickets  that  cost  the  life  of  the  gal- 
lant Lieutenant-Colonel  W.  A.  Dawson.  Leading  the  men 
across  a  small  bridge  near  the  town,  he  fell  mortally  hurt  as 
he  was  wrenching  a  Federal  standard  from  the  tenacious 
hands  of  its  bearer.*  Meantime,  Forrest  and  Chalmers  came 
up,  and  Rucker,  boldly  deploying  his  men  dismounted  as 
riflemen,  maintained  a  lively  skirmish  with  the  pickets  all  the 
afternoon. 

In  the  mean  time,  Jackson  and  Buford  continuing  the  pur- 
suit toward  Pulaski  by  separate  roads,  the  former,  at  night  on 
the  23d,  on  coming  within  eight  miles  of  that  place,  ascer- 
tained that  the  enemy  were  rapidly  evacuating  the  country. 
He  therefore,  next  day,  as  well  as  Buford,  moved  by  roads 
more  directly  northward  until,  on  reaching  Campbellville, 
about  noon,  he  found  in  his  front  more  than  a  Federal  divi- 
sion,! under  Hatch.  Promptly  making  his  dispositions  for 
an  attack,  a  part  of  Ross's  Brigade  was  thrown  forward,  while- 
Armstrong's  Brigade,  making  a  detour,  fell  upon  the  Federal 
right  flank  and  rear,  and  Young's  Battery  was  opened  with 
great  fury  and  effect  from  a  favorable  position. 

At  the  same  moment,  Buford's  guns  were  also  heard  iri 
action  about  a  mile  distant.  Coming  up  with  the  enemy  on 
his  line  of  pursuit,  Buford  had  previously  attacked  them  with 
Bell's  Brigade  and  Huey's  Kentuckians,  or  less  than  iocx> 


*  This  is  the  same  officer  who,  as  re- 
lated in  Chapter  XX II.,  was  placed  in 
command  of  the  gunboat  Undine  when 
the  attempt  was  made  to  use  her  in  the 
operations  against  Johnsonville.  Evi- 
dently Colonel  Dawson  was  one  of 
those     ever-ready,    valuable    officers 


whom  General  Forrest  so  liked  to  have 
around  him,  and  was  apt  to  work  hard 
and  in  manifold  ways. 

t  The  Federal  forces  fought  were  at 
least  4000  strong.  (Reports  of  Generals 
Jackson  and  Buford.)  We  infer  from 
Swinton  that  Croxton  was  also  there. 


6i8  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

men,  and  maintained  a  vigorous  combat  until  Jackson  came 
up,  when  both  divisions,  with  a  common  aim  though  a  sepa- 
rate impulsion,  were  thrown  upon  their  enemy.  The  ef- 
fect was  the  complete  rout  of  their  adversary.  In  Buford's 
quarter  of  the  field  Newsom,  charging  with  the  Nineteenth 
Tennessee,  dispersed  several  regiments  and  captured  more 
than  100  prisoners  ;  and  Jackson's  troops,  pressing  the  ad- 
vantage vehemently,  captured  as  many  more,  with  their 
horses  and  equipments,  four  stands  of  colors,  and  sixty-five 
head  of  beef  cattle. 

It  was  now  late,  and  Buford  and  Jackson  bivouacked,  Arm- 
strong at  Linnville  and  the  other  brigade  somewhat  short  of 
that  place.  Moving  early  the  next  day,  they  also  took  posi- 
tion in  the  vicinity  of  Columbia,  Buford's  right  resting  upon 
Duck  river,  his  left  upon  the  Pulaski  turnpike,  and  Jackson 
upon  the  Chapel  Hill  turnpike. 

At  the  moment,  Columbia  was  occupied  with  the  Fourth  and 
Twenty-third  Federal  Army  Corps  and  Wilson's  Cavalry*  with 
heavy  bodies  of  skirmishers  in  position  behind  a  line  of  rifle- 
pits  stretching  around  the  town,  about  one  mile  and  a  half  from 
it.  From  an  elevated  position,  in  rear  of  Chalmers,  the  main 
body  of  the  enemy  were  to  be  plainly  seen,  drawn  up  in  three 
lines  of  battle.  Nevertheless,  though  Buford  and  Jackson 
pressed  their  skirmishers  back  at  several  points  on  numerous 
occasions,  and  had  seized  and  held  portions  of  their  advanced 
line,  firom  which  they  had  been  expelled,  yet  was  no  disposi- 
tion manifested  by  the  enemy  to  come  to  any  serious  engage- 


•  The  Federal  force  appears  to  have  error  in  his  assertion  (p.  442)  that  evcm 

been  {vtcU  Swinton's  Decisive  Battles  of  at  that  stage  of  the  campaign  Hood 

the  War,  p.  441)  Fourth  Corps,  12,000  "  far  outnumbered,  above  all,  cutnum* 

men,  Twenty-third  Corps,  10,000,  and  bered  in  cavalry,"  his  adversary.    In  ca- 

7700  cavalry— that  is,  Hatch's  Division,  valry  it  was  Hood  who  was  "outnumber- 

4000,  Croxton*s  Brigade,  (?)  2500,  and  ed." 
Capron's,  1200.     Hence,  Swinton  is  in 


Confederates  Concentrated  at  Columbia.       619 

ment.  And  Chalmers's  artillery,  from  an  enfilading  position, 
by  a  few  well-aimed  shells  drove  a  considerable  infantry  force 
from  the  shelter  of  their  rail  breastworks  in  rapid  flight. 

That  evening,  Lee's  (S.  D.)  Corps  of  infantry  came  upon 
the  ground,  and  bivouacked  in  the  vicinity  of  Chalmers,  to 
whom  Biffle  also  reported  with  his  demi-brigade. 

During  the  26th  and  27th,  a  good  deal  of  unprofitable  skirmish- 
ing was  kept  up  between  the  enemy  and  Forrest's  command — 
dismounted  and  acting  as  riflemen — while  the  Confederate  ar- 
tillery was  employed  on  the  26th  with  execution  so  decided 
that  the  Federals  were  forced  to  quit  their  outer  line  of 
cover.     Meanwhile,  all  of  General  Hood's  infantry  having 
come  up,  they  replaced  Forrest's  Division,  which  then  was  re- 
disposed,  Chalmers  at  Webster's  Mills,  about  ten  miles  south- 
west of  Columbia,  Buford  in  the  neighborhood  of  Berlin,  on 
the  Lewisburg  turnpike  ;  and  Jackson  at  Fountain's  creek,  on 
the  Shelbyville  turnpike. 

On  the  night  of  the  27th,  General  Forrest  was  called  to 
General  Hood's  headquarters.  A  full  conversation  was  then 
had  concerning  the  roads,  nature  and  condition  of  the  coun- 
try, and  he  was  ordered  to  attempt  to  throw  the  cavalry  to 
the  north  side  of  Duck  river  early  the  next  morning,  to  cover 
the  construction  of  the  pontoon-bridge  for  the  passage  of  the 
infantry.  Accordingly,  Buford  was  instructed  to  pass  the 
stream  on  the  Lewisburg  turnpike,  Chalmers  about  Holland's 
Ford,  some  seven  miles  eastward  of  Columbia,  and  Jackson 
two  miles  still  farther  eastward,  at  Hall's  Mill,  while  For- 
rest, with  his  escort  and  Biffle's  force,  was  to  attempt  a  ford 
two  miles  westward  of  Chalmers. 

The  enemy,  however,  had  evacuated  Columbia  during  the 
night,  and  taken  up  a  strong  fortified  position  on  the  north 
bank  of  Duck  river,  from  which,  during  the  28th,  they  threw 
an  occasional  shell  at  the  Confederate  infantry,  as  they  were 
exposed  in  their  movements  in  the  vicinity  of  the  place  ;  but 


k 


620  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

at  the  same  time  they  had  commenced  to  retire  toward  Nash- 
ville. 

The  weather  was  cold  and  disagreeably  wet.  The  fords  of 
Duck  river  all  greatly  swollen  and  swift,  their  passage  was 
not  only  tedious  but  hazardous,  for  only  the  tallest  horses 
could  effect  it  without  swimming.  Jackson — Armstrong's 
Brigade  in  advance — had  also  to  force  his  way  across,  under  a 
sharp  fire  ;  but  both  he  and  Chalmers,  late  that  afternoon, 
stood  upon  the  north  bank  of  the  stream  with  their  divisions. 
Buford,  however,  was  resisted  by  a  strong  force,  in  face  of 
which  it  was  impracticable  to  pass.  Late  as  it  was,  the  Con- 
federates northward  of  Duck  river  were  pressed  ahead.  While 
Armstrong  pressed  after  the  enemy  northward,  Jackson  had 
led  Ross's  Brigade,  about  sunset,  over  upon  the  Lewisburg- 
Franklin  turnpike,  where  Buford's  passage  of  the  stream  was 
being  disputed,  and  making  a  vigorous  attack,  after  a  severe 
conflict,  he  drove  off  the  enemy  from  the  contested  ground, 
and  captured  their  field-train,  including  ordnance-wagons,  a 
stand  of  regimental  colors,  several  gfuidons,  and  about  eighty 
men  with  their  horses. 

Meanwhile,  Chalmers,  having  moved  toward  the  north-east 
for  some  hours,  after  dark,  over  roads  extremely  rugged  and 
difficult,  was  directed  by  General  Forrest  to  halt  and  bivouac 
about  four  miles  from  the  river. 

Buford,  having  been  prevented  from  crossing,  as  we  have 
recounted,  threw  his  force  across,  however,  by  daylight  on  the 
29th.  In  the  mean  while,  Forrest,  not  able  during  the  night 
to  ascertain  Buford's  movements,  had  sent  orders  to  Chal- 
mers and  Jackson  to  resume  the  pressure  upon  the  Fede- 
ral cavalry  toward  Hurt's  Cross-Roads,  before  dawn  on  the 
29th,  the  first  by  a  narrow  country  road,  through  the  cedar 
thickets  of  that  region,  and  the  latter  by  the  turnpike  from  the 
Lewisburg-Franklin  road.  Jackson,  coming  up  with  their 
rear  near  Rally  Hill,  engaged  with  animation,  and  drove  the 


Obstinate  Cavalry  Fighting.  621 

enemy  steadily  back  in  a  series  of  well-contested  combats. 
At  the  same  time  Chalmers  had  been  engaged  in  some  sharp 
brushes  with  the  Federals  in  his  path.  Fighting  for  the  most 
part  dismounted,  he  had  several  times  during  the  day  charged 
in  the  saddle,  and  his  escort  bugler  was  shot  by  his  side. 
Meanwhile,  Buford  had  also  came  up,  and  the  whole  Confede- 
rate cavalry  were  now  assembled  near  Hurt's  Cross-Roads,  in 
the  immediate  presence  of  a  superior  hostile  force. 

An  immediate  attack  was  then  ordered,  and  a  sharp  en- 
counter resulted,  in  which  the  enemy  were  borne  steadily 
but  doggedly  rearward,  as  far  as  Mount  Carmel,  on  the  Lew- 
isburg-Franklin  road.  The  country,  rocky  and  rugged,  was 
thickly  clad  with  cedars,  and  difficult,  of  course,  for  cavalry 
movements,  so  that,  for  the  most  part,  the  fighting  was  on 
foot,  which,  however,  was  now  Forrest's  habitual  tactics. 
Armstrong's  Brigade,  all  fighting  admirably,  and  ever  well  led, 
here  "had  an  obstinate  combat,  in  which  the  Twenty-eighth 
Mississippi  was  especially  distinguished,  and  Buford's  men 
were  thrown  into  action  with  their  accustomed  vigor.  Pressed 
back  by  their  eager,  indomitable  enemy,  now  mounted,  the 
Federal  cavalry  turned  and  stood  at  bay  at  several  favoring  po- 
sitions, from  which  they  were  driven  only  after  most  obstinate 
contests  up  to  within  five  or  six  miles  of  Franklin.  Here 
leaving  several  regiments  in  observation,  Forrest  tiumed  off 
abruptly,  and  moved  swiftly  across  the  country  toward  Spring 
Hill  with  the  rest  of  his  force. 

Meeting  a  small  cavalry  force,  it  was  at  once  brushed  back 
upon  a  large  infantry  command  found  in  occupation  of  a  long 
line  6f  breastworks  extending  around  east  and  south  of  the 
place,  while  another  infantry  column  was  known  to  be  ^  rauU 
between  Spring  Hill  and  Columbia  on  the  turnpike.  Every 
disposition  was  now  made  to  attack  and  check  the  infantry  in 
movement,  and  some  sharp  skirmishing  had  taken  place,  when 
General  Forrest  received  a  dispatch  from  General  Hood,  di- 


k 


622  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

recting  him  to  attempt  to  hold  the  enemy  in  check  at  that 
point  until  Cheatham's  and  Stewart's  Corps,  then  en  route, 
should  come  up.  The  skirmishing,  therefore>  was  continued 
with  such  effect,  that  the  enemy  withdrew  all  their  pickets 
and  outposts  behind  their  fortifications,  and  about  four  o'clock, 
Forrest,  dismounting  his  whole  force,  disposed  it  as  if  in  me- 
nace of  a  general  attack.* 

At  length  Cheatham's  Corps  of  infantry  came  up,  and  Qe- 
bume's  Division  being  advanced  and  formed  in  line  on  the 
left  of  Chalmers  and  Buford,  it  was  arranged  that  a  serious, 
joint  attack  should  be  made  upon  the  Federal  position.  Chal- 
mers and  Buford,  however,  were  nearly  out  of  ammunition, 
and  the  plan  of  attack  was,  that  after  the  onset  Cleburne 
should  hold  the  ground  gained  until  the  rest  of  the  troops 
should  come  up.  The  attack  was  handsomely  and  success- 
fully made  ;  for,  after  a  short  though  stubborn  stand,  the  ene- 
my yielded  the  position  and  fell  back  upon  a  second  line, 
which,  however,  was  not  a  strong  one.  It  was  now  dark ; 
Forrest's  men,  engaged  in  action  since  sunrise,  had  exhausted 
their  ammunition  and  were  worn  down  from  hard  work — 
without  intermission  for  the  past  week  ;  therefore  they  were 
withdrawn  to  feed  their  horses  and  bivouac  out  of  immediate 
contact  with  the  enemy's  pickets,  the  infantry  being  left  to 
hold  the  ground  acquired. 

About  nine  that  night,  General  Stewart's  Corps  came  up  to 
the  immediate  vicinity  of  General  Forrest's  headquarters,  and 
these  two  officers  meeting,  after  a  short  conversation,  found 
that  their  orders  appeared  to  conflict.  Accordingly,  they 
rode  together  to  General  Hood's  headquarters,  a  mile  dis- 
tant.!    Oil  the  way  thither,  however,  Forrest  was  surprised 


•  Since  writing  the  foregoing,  we  find  Fourth  Corps,  and  Roger's  Division  of 

from  Swinton*s  Decisive  Battles  of  the  the  Twenty-third. 

War,  p.  444,  that  the  Federal  force  at  t  At  the  mansion  of  Mr.  Thomp- 

this  point  consisted  only  of  Stanley's,  son. 


Forrest  Ordered  to  Obstruct  Federal  Retreat    623 

to  find  that  Cleburne's  Division  had  been  withdrawn  from  the 
position  in  which  he  had  supposed  it  was  to  remain  through 
the  night,  and  had  gone  into  bivouac  somewhat  remote  from 
it,  where  the  men  were  engaged  cooking  their  rations,  leaving 
no  Confederate  soldiers  interposed  across  the  highway  south 
of  Spring  Hill,  and  therefore  throwing  that  road  open  to  the 
rear  divisions  of  the  Federal  army.  At  the  same  time,  also, 
a  dispatch  overtook  him  from  Jackson,  who  had  been  thrown 
round  with  his  division  across  the  turnpike  northward  of 
Spring  Hill,  reporting  that,  being  overmatched,  and  pressed 
back  from  the  road,  he  stood  in  need  of  immediate  aid.  Bu- 
ford  and  Chalmers,  having  already  expended  sixty  rounds  of 
ammunition  during  the  day,  were  without  a  cartridge.*  For- 
rest, therefore,  hurried  on  to  report  the  situation  to  the  CJene- 
ral-in-Chief.  General  Hood  seemed  surprised  that  Cheat- 
ham's Corps  had  not  been  held  in  position  across  the  turn- 
pike, declaring  that  he  had  so  ordered  it  expressly.  Turning, 
then,  to  General  Stewart,  he  inquired  whether  he  could  not 
establish  his  corps  in  that  position.  There  was  some  imme- 
diate obstacle,  and  the  Confederate  General  now  asked  For- 
rest if  he  could  not  throw  his  cavalry  upon  the  turnpike  in 
time  to  check  the  Federal  retreat  ?  The  cavalry  General  re- 
plied :  "  That,  as  Chalmers  and  Buford  were  without  ammuni- 
tion, their  commands  would  be  inefficient,  leaving  him  only 
Jackson's  Division  for  the  service.  That,  luckily,  had  captured 
enough  ammunition  in  its  operations  of  the  day  for  present 
purposes.  But  he  would  do  the  best  he  could  in  the  emer- 
gency." General  Hood  then  remarked  that  he  would  order 
his  corps  commanders  to  furnish  the  requisite  ammunition. 
Forrest,  unaccustomed  to  delay  in  the  execution  of  his  orders, 


•  Their  ordnancc-train  had  been  left  placed  at  the  extreme  rear  of  that 
behind  at  Columbia  with  that  of  the  train,  so  that  it  did  not  come  up  until 
whole   army,  and  by  mischance  was    the  Confedcratca  confronted  NashTille. 


624  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

thereupon  hurried  off  to  make  application  for  ammunition; 
but  neither  Cheatham  nor  Stewart  were  able  to  supply  it, 
their  ammunition-trains,  also,  having  failed  to  come  up.  Re- 
turning to  his  own  headquarters,  he  found  General  Jackson 
awaiting  him.  Explaining  the  situation  of  affairs  as  well  as 
General  Hood's  expectations,  Jackson,  engaging  to  establish 
his  division  upon  the  road  at  Thompson's  Station  and  en- 
deavor to  hold  the  rearward  column  of  the  enemy  in  check  at 
that  point,  left  at  once  with  that  object* 

Having  thus  done  all  in  his  power  to  interpose  a  barrier 
between  the  divided  portions  of  the  Federal  army,  Forrest  re- 
ported, through  a  staff-officer,  to  his  superior,  his  inability  to 
obtain  ammunition,  and  what  he  had  done  in  the  exigency. 
By  midnight,  Jackson's  guns  began  to  be  heard  in  an  ani- 
mated engagement  in  the  north,  and  a  continuous  uproar  of 
musketry  resounded  from  that  direction  throughout  the  night ; 
and  never  did  so  small  a  force  fight  more  tenaciously  or  stout- 
ly than  Jackson's  little  division  on  this  occasion.  The  high- 
est credit  is  the  just  meed  of  officers  and  men  alike.  The 
force  encountered,  a  heavy  col)imn  of  infantry  pressing  on  to- 
ward Franklin,  was  too  powerful,  however,  for  Jackson's  slen- 
der force.  He  was  unable  to  do  more  than  harass  the 
masses  that  forced  their  way  by  him  during  the  night,  and  to 
oblige  them  to  abandon  a  number  of  wagons,  which  he  burned, 
while  a  considerable  number  of  the  enemy  were  killed  and 
captured ;  and  one  of  his  brigades  (Ross's)  came  upon  and 
destroyed  a  train  of  cars  near  Thompson's  Station. 

On  the  morning  of  the  30th,  procuring  ammunition  from 
Walthall's  Division  for  Buford  and  Chalmers,  the  latter  was 
at  once  detached  across  west  of  Spring  Hill  to  the  Carter's 
Creek  turnpike,  to  cover  the  left  flank  of  the  Confederate 


*  Jackson's  Division,  as  will  be  remembered,  took  the  field  only  2000  stroQg. 


Franklin.  625 

army  ;  while  the  Kentucky  brigade  of  Buford's  Division  was 
likewise  detached  to  move  with  a  similar  object,  in  connection 
with  Hood's  right  flank,  on  the  Lewisburg  pike.  At  the 
same  time,  Forrest,  with  his  escort  and  Bell's  Brigade,  moved 
forward  upon  the  Franklin  turnpike  in  advance  of  the  infantry. 
About  six  miles  in  advance  of  Spring  Hill  he  came  up  with 
Jackson,  still  hanging  closely  upon  and  harassing  the  Federal 
rear-guard.  Bell  was  then  thrown  forward  to  take  part,  and  a 
continuous  skirmish  resulted  for  some  four  miles,  until  the 
enemy  had  withdrawn  behind  their  lines  in  front  or  south  of 
Franklin. 

These  lines  and  the  position  Forrest  at  once  proceeded  to 
reconnoitre  with  his  habitual  boldness  and  thoroughness,  after 
which  he  returned  to  meet  General  Hood,  whom  he  found  at 
the  head  of  his  army  three  miles  south  of  Franklin,  about  one 
P.M.  The  whole  army  was  baited,  and  no  movement  occurred 
for  at  least  one  hour. 

HI. 

Franklin  lies  in  a  bend,  and  on  the  south  bank  of  the  Har- 
peth  river,  on  a  gentle  plateau.  A  commanding  eminence, 
known  as  Figuer's  Hill,  which  rises  abruptly  just  across  the 
stream  eastward  of  the  town,  commands  the  place  and  all  the 
approaches  for  miles  to  the  southward.*  Immediately  in  front, 
or  southward,  of  the  town,  a  line  of  breastworks,  with  a  narrow 
ditch,  extended  for  fully  three  fourths  of  a  mile  from  the  river, 
on  the  west,  across  the  throat  of  the  horse-shoe  shaped  bend 
in  which  Franklin  is  built.  This  breastwork,  made  quite 
strong  when  occupied  formerly  by  the  Federal  forces,  had 
been  further  strengthened  for  the  present  emergency,  and 
it  was  heavily  garnished  with  field-batteries. 


•  On  it  was  an  observatory,  erected     was  commaiided  of  the  wholt  scope  ot 
in  a  tree,  from  which  a  complete  view     ooimtry. 


626  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

General  Hood,  however,  was  of  the  belief  that  the  main 
Federal  force  was  already  in  rapid  retreat,  and  that  the  appa- 
rent defensive  preparations  were  merely  counterfeit,  with 
the  view  of  gaining  time  to  secure  that  retreat  This  convic- 
tion he  expressed  to  General  Forrest,  when  that  officer  re- 
ported the  formidable  military  resources  with  which  the  posi- 
tion bristled.  His  determination,  therefore,  was  to  defeat  it, 
by  immediately  storming  the  place,  rather  than  to  turn  it* 
Accordingly,  by  four  p.m.,  the  preparations  for  that  ill-starred 
operation  were  completed.  As  ordered,  Forrest  had  formed 
Jackson's  and  Buford's  Divisions  immediately  on  the  right  of 
Stewart's  Corps  of  infantry  ;  Buford*s  men,  dismounted,  filling 
the  space  between  the  Lewisburg  turnpike  and  the  Harpeth 
river ;  and  Jackson's  having  been  thrown  to  the  south  bank 
of  the  stream,  to  engage  and  occupy  the  cavalry,  and  also  the 
force  which  held  and  was  firing  from  a  redoubt  in  that  quarter. 
At  the  same  time,  Chalmers's  Division — including  Bifile's 
demi-brigade — was  on  the  extreme  Confederate  left 

At  half-past  four  p.m.,  the  onset  began.  The  Federal  fdrccs 
were  commanded  by  Major-General  Schofield,  and  consisted 
of  the  Fourth  and  Twenty-third  Corps,  (22,cxx>  infantry,) 
formed  in  a  semi-circular  line,  curved  toward  the  south,  filling 
their  whole  line  of  intrenchments,  while  the  cavalry,  under 
General  Wilson,  were  mainly  disposed  northward  of  the  Har- 
peth, to  cover  their  rear  and  flanks  from  that  direction.  Mov- 
ing in  line  with  the  infantry,  Buford  soon  came,  however,  in 
collision  with  a  heavy  cavalry  force,  but  advancing  steadily, 
after  an  engagement  of  more  than  half  an  hour,  in  which  his 
men  fought  with  their  wonted  steadiness,  their  immediate 


•  At  this  day  it  is  scarcely  necessary     ter,  than  by  storming  the  pontion,  by  t 
to  point  out  how  General  Hood  could     very  short  detour, 
have  manifestly  gained  his  purpose  bet- 


Battle  of  Franklin.  627 

adversary  withdrew  across  the  Harpeth.  Meantime,  Chalmers 
on  the  other  flank  drove  in  the  skirmishers  in  his  front,  and 
charging,  forced  a  detachment  to  give  up  a  stone  wall  in  ad- 
vance, and  retire  behind  the  breastworks.  Pressing  them 
hotly  to  within  sixty  yards  of  their  lines,  he  was  not  strong 
enough  to  attempt  to  storm  their  present  cover;  he  there- 
fore established  his  own  men  under  convenient  shelter,  from 
which  he  maintained  an  incessant  skirmish  in  that  part  of  the 
field. 

By  this  time,  the  Confederate  infantry — Stewart's  and  Cheat- 
ham's Corps — Lee  in  reserve — had  moved  directly  upon  the 
breastworks,  and  were  fiercely  engaged  at  all  points.  Stew- 
art's and  Cheatham's  men,  charging  with  their  superb  spirit 
upon  an  extensive  line  of  intrenchments  held  by  a  Federal 
division,  carried  it,  capturing  some  six  hundred  prisoners.* 
The  ground  of  approach  to  the  main  position  was  open,  with 
very  slight  shelter  ;  but  on  pressed  the  Confederates,  with  little 
halt,  after  their  first  success,  though  now  fully  aware  of  the 
appalling  gfravity  of  the  work  in  hand  They  were  presently 
met  by  a  broad,  desolating  tide  of  musketry,  while  shot  and 
canister,  both  from  the  intrenchments  ii)  front  and  the  redoubts 
on  Figuer's  Hill,  smote  down  their  gallant  ranks  from  flank  to 
flank.  The  slaughter,  indeed,  was  now  deplorable.  The 
enemy,  ensconced  behind  stout  breastworks,  with  almost  a 
single  salvo  of  their  numerous  artillery  swept  away  entire  Con- 
federate regiments,  and  thinned  all  the  others  to  a  heart- 
rending degree.  But  with  characteristic,  imconquerable  reso- 
lution the  survivors — staggered  for  a  moment — still  moved 
forward,  and  many  reached  the  intrenchments,  and  m  attempt- 
ing to  surmount  them  were  slain.  War  ever  devours  the  best. 


•  We  tee  Swinton  says  this  poution  was  occupied  by  onlj  two  brifiUks  fA 
Wsfner*!  Diviaoo,  Fourth  Corps. 


i 


628  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

and  here  perished,  unhappily  and  without  profit,  some  of  the 
choicest  officers  of  the  Confederate  service.  Notable  of  the 
number  was  Major-General  Cleburne,  without  superior  as  a 
division  commander.  After  having  filled,  with  confessed  dis- 
tinction, every  grade  and  command  to  which  he  had  attained, 
he  was  killed  while  attempting  to  leap  his  horse  over  the 
enemy's  works.  Though  his  precious  life  was  thus  wasted, 
his  superb  conduct,  "  honored  in  death,  shall  glory  gain  out  of 
the  lips  of  foes."  In  a  like  endeavor,  about  the  same  time 
with  Cleburne,  fell  the  accomplished  soldier,  Brigadier-Ge- 
neral John  Adams,  just  as  his  genuine  worth  was  beginning 
to  be  appreciated  in  the  service  to  which  he  gave  his  life. 

In  this  fearful  onset  the  first  line  of  the  Confederates  had 
been  almost  annihilated.  A  second  and  indeed  a  third  line 
were,  nevertheless,  brought  up,  and  thrown  forward  with  kin- 
dred hardihood  to  meet,  as  might  be  expected,  the  same  san- 
guinary reception,  the  same  repulse  with  gaping  ranks  ra- 
vaged of  their  best  officers  and  men.  For  in  vain,  under  the 
circumstances,  were  all  their  efforts  to  carry  the  position  and 
this  general  display  of  as  superb  valor  in  officers  and  men 
alike  as  ever  signalized  a  battle-field.*  By  this  time  it  was 
dark,  and  afiairs  were  past  any  remedy  for  that  night ;  never- 
theless, small  detachments  of  the  Confederates,  that  had  gain* 
ed  lodgments  at  different  points  in  the  ditch,  held  their  ground, 
and  kept  up  across  the  ipaulement  an  animated  skirmish  with 
the  enemy  until  midnight,  when  Schofield  withdrew,  and  re- 
sumed his  retreat  upon  Nashville,  leaving  his  dead  and  the 
greater  part  of  his  wounded  in  the  hands  of  the  Confederates, 
as  well  as  some  subsistence  and  other  supplies. 


*  It  has  not  come  within  the  scope  did  not  reach  25,000^  while,  as  we  hare 
of  this  work  to  enter  into  an  elaborate  seen,  the  force  assailed  in  their  strong 
sketch  of  the  details  of  this  battle.    It  intrenchments  numbered  22,000^  back- 
it  proper  to  say,  however,  that  the  Con-  ed  bjr  at  leastTTOO  ctTaby. 
Mente  infiuitry  assaHini;  the  position 


Federals  Fall  Back  upon  Nashville.  629 

The  loss  of  Forrest's  Cavalry  in  this  mortal  battle  was 
comparatively  light  compared  with  that  of  the  infantry,  which, 
including  some  yoo  prisoners,  was  over  6cxx),  embracing  six 
general  officers  killed  and  six  wounded  *  -The  enemy,  fighting, 
as  we  have  said,  from  behind  excellent  cover,  suffered  lightly 
— according  to  their  reports  having  lost  not  more  than  2336, 
of  which  1 104  were  prisoners. f^ 

It  having  been  discovered  that  the  enemy  had  evacuated 
the  position,  the  cavalry  were  at  once  ordered  to  move  in 
vigorous  pursuit  Accordingly,  Chalmers,  still  holding  the 
left  flank,  was  directed  to  bear  leftward  to  the  Hillsboro-Nash- 
ville  turnpike,  and  follow  it  to  the  latter  place ;  Buford,  thrown 
across  the  Harpeth  rightward  of  Franklin,  in  conjunction 
with  Jackson,  at  the  same  time  hung  close  upon  the  Federal 
cavalry  on  that  flank,  eastward  of  the  Franklin  highway. 
Forrest  himself  had  his  headquarters  with  this  force.  Com- 
ing up  with  their  aflversary  within  four  or  five  miles,  several 
sharp  bits  of  fighting  resulted,  as  the  hostile  cavalry  was 
forced  back  toward  Brentwood  ;  and  in  that  vicinity  Buford 
and  Jackson,  cooperating,  made  several  dashing  charges. 
These  threw  the  Federal  column  into  a  good  deal  of  disorder, 
while  as  many  as  three  stands  of  colors  and  a  hundred  pri- 
soners, with  their  horses,  were  won  on  these  occasions.  On 
Chalmers's  flank  slight  or  no  impediment  was  encountered. 
When  within  six  miles  of  Nashville,  however,  the  cavalry  divi- 
sions were  halted  and  thrown  into  position  for  the  night,  di- 
rectly in  advance  of  the  infentry,  on  a  line  stretching  from 
the  Nolansville  turnpike  on  the  right  across,  a  distance  of  six 
miles,  to  the  Granny  White  turnpike. 


*  We  can  not  give  the  exact  losses  afiairs  in  which  they  had  been  engaged 

of  Forrest's   Divisions    at    Franklin,  in  the  past  week. 

Chalmers's  Division,  however,  had  lost  t  We  take  these  numbers  from  Swin- 

(killed  and  woonded)  ii6  officers  and  ton,  habitually  well  infonned  of  what 

men ;  and  Bofbrd*s  91,  in  the  several  he  writes. 


i 


630  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

On  the  next  morning,  Chalmers,  with  Biffle's  demi-brigade 
on  his  left,  was  moved  up  early  to  the  immediate  vicinity  of 
Nashville,  on  the  Hillsboro  and  Harding  turnpikes,  while  For- 
rest advanced  with  £uford  and  Jackson,  by  the  Nolansville 
road,  to  within  three  miles,  but  in  full  view  of  the  State 
House.  But  presently,  the  infantry  having  followed  and  re- 
lieved the  cavalry  without  loss  of  time,  about  midday,  Forrest 
began  a  series  of  characteristic  operations  for  the  destruction 
of  the  railroads  and  telegraph  lines  communicating  with  Mur- 
freesboro  and  Chattanooga,  and  the  block-houses  which  g^uard- 
ed  them. 

IV. 

Buford's  Division  was  now  reduced  by  the  casualties  of  the 
campaign  to  icxx)  effectives  ;  with  that  force  he  was  directed 
to  destroy  the  stockades  on  the  Nashville-Chattanooga  Rail- 
road, while  maintaining  a  chain  of  pickets  on  the  right  of  the 
Confederate  army  across  to  the  Lebanon  turnpike.  Intrust- 
ing this  service  to  Bell's  Brigade,  Buford  moved .  promptly 
with  his  Kentuckians  to  attack  the  block-houses.  First  in- 
vesting the  one  known  as  No.  i,  it  proved  to  be  capable  of  a 
prolonged,  formidable  defense.  Cruciform  in  figure,  its  walls 
were  built  of  unseasoned  oak  timber,  at  least  three  feet  thick, 
upon  which  field-artillery  made  little  impression  ;  as  upon  the 
roof  of  the  structiure  also,  which,  being  well  covered  with 
earth,  was,  moreover,  not  easily  combustible.  Bell  was  now 
sent  for  likewise.  But  so  dangerous,  if  not  impracticable,  were 
the  operation  manifestly  that  the  men  of  neither  brigade  were 
in  the  humor  to  undertake  to  storm  the  fortalice.  Morton's 
Battery,  however,  was  set  to  work  to  pound  it,  and,  it  seems, 
with  the  effect  of  killing  ten  and  wounding  twenty  of  the  gar- 
rison. Meanwhile,  a  train  came  up  from  the  direction  of  Mur- 
Ireesboro,  with  some  negro  troops,  who  escaped  for  the  most 
part,  though  the  train  was  captured  and  destroyed.  Thus 
^  invested  and  oattered  by  Morton's  guns,  on  the  morning  of 


Reduction  of  Block-Houses.  631 

the  3d  December  the  garrison  capitulated — some  eighty  of- 
ficers and  men. 

This  happily  achieved,  No.  3  was  next  essayed,  as  also  No. 
2 — the  block-house  on  Mill  creek — and  both  succumbed  after 
some  delay  and  parley,  on  the  morning  of  the  4th.  All  three 
were  destroyed.  The  other  results  were  250  officers  and 
men  captured,  including  those  taken  with  the  train  on  the  3d. 
Leaving  a  detachment  of  250  men,  under  Colonel  Nixon,  to 
guard  and  picket  from  the  Murfreesboro  road  to  the  Cum- 
berland river,  Forrest  set  out  on  the  morning  of  the  5  th,  with 
Jackson  and  Buford,  for  Murfreesboro.  At  Lavergne,  Jackson 
was  ordered  to  move  around  to  the  right,  and  reduce  a  redoubt 
in  that  quarter,  while  Forrest  himself,  with  Buford,  beset  the 
block-house  (No.  4)  near  by.  At  the  usual  formal  demand  to 
surrender,  with  which  the  Confederate  leader  habitually  ini- 
tiated his  operations  of  this  character,  the  work  was  )delded, 
with  40  officers  and  men  ;  and  in  the  same  way  the  redoubt 
surrendered  to  Jackson,  with  80  officers  and  men,  two  pieces 
of  artillery,  several  wagons  and  teams,  and  a  considerable 
store  of  military  supplies.* 

The  block-house  and  a  number  of  barrack  buildings  having 
been  burned,  the  expedition  was  resumed  ;  but  the  force  was 
strengthened  by  Bate-s  Division,  ordered  to  cooperate-f 
That  evening  the  cavalry  approached  within  four  miles  of 
Murfreesboro ;  but  the  infantry  was  unable  to  reach  the  scene 
until  the  next  morning.  Meanwhile,  a  cavalry  detachment 
thrown  out  at  Lavergne  had  captured  and  destroyed  another 
block-house,  (at  Smyrna  Station,)  and  added  35  prisoners  to 
those  already  taken  that  day. 


*  This  block-house  guarded  a  tres-  t   Bate*s  Division  had  been  preri- 

tle-bridge  over  the  creek,  and  the  re-  ously  deUched  to  operate  against  Mur- 

doubt  on  a  hill  south-east  of  Lavergne,  freesboro,  but  was  met  bj  a  force  four 

guarded  the  railroad  for  some  distance  miles  in  advance  of  the  place,  and 

in  that  dhection.  forced  to  fall  badL 


i 


632  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

Soon  after  the  infantry  came  up  in  front  of  Murfreesboro, 
it  was  formed  in  line,  and,  promptly  throwing  forward  skir- 
mishers, offered  battle,  which,  after  some  feeble  skirmishing 
for  two  hours,  the  enemy  refused  unless  attacked  in  position, 
and  accordingly  suspended  firing.  Meanwhile,  Forrest,  taking 
about  1 50  of  Pinson*s  Mississippi  Regiment,  made  a  careful 
close  reconnoissance ;  and  driving  back  some  pickets  behind 
their  intrenchments,  captured  a  few  prisoners.  Afterward,  he 
likewise  made  a  complete  circuit  from  the  right  around  to 
the  Murfreesboro  turnpike,  with  the  result  of  ascertaining 
from  close  inspection  that  the  works  were  really  impreg^ble 
to  the  force  at  his  disposition,  occupied  as  they  were  known 
to  be  with  full  8000  men,  under  General  Rousseau.  On  the 
evening  of  the  6th,  Forrest  was  slightly  reenforced  by  two 
small  infantry  brigades,  (Sears*s  and  Palmer's,)  about  idoomen, 
making  his  force  now  about  6scx)  strong,  of  all  arms.  It  was 
late,  however,  and  no  further  operations  were  attempted  that 
afternoon. 

Taking  post  early  on  the  morning  of  the  7th  with  Palmer^s 
Brigade  (infantry)  on  a  hill  southward  of  the  Wilkerson  turn- 
pike, two  miles  from  Murfreesboro,  General  Forrest  presently 
observed  a  heavy  hostile  column  swiftly  emerging  from  Mur- 
freesboro by  the  Salem  road.  At  the  moment  the  Confederates 
were  spread  over  a  crescent  reaching  from  the  Woodbury  turn- 
pike, on  the  eastward,  to  Palmer's  position.  A  new  disposi- 
tion was  -necessary  to  meet  the  menaced  attack.  Retiring 
Palmer  rapidly  to  the  north  side  of  the  Wilkerson  road,  Forrest 
threw  forward  a  line  of  battle  extending  from  Overall's  creek 
in  the  direction  of  Murfreesboro.  It  was  formed  of  Bate's 
Division  and  Sears's  and  Palmer's  Brigades,  with  Jackson's 
Division  of  cavalry,  a  brigade  disposed  on  each  flank  of  the 
infantry. 

Meanwhile,  the  enemy  moving  handsomely  forward,  drove 
in  the  Confederate  pickets  and  pressed  vigorously  forward  to 
grapple  with  the  main  line.   From  some  inexplicable  cause  the 


Federal  Sortie. 


633 


Confederate  infantry,  except  Smith's  Brigade,  fell  into  disor- 
der, and  did  not  stand  to  meet  the  oncoming  charge,  so  that 
two  pieces  of  artillery  were  captured  almost  without  a 
struggle.  Seizing  the  colors  of  one  of  the  broken  regiments, 
Forrest,  throwing  himself  prominently  in  front,  sought  to  rally 
his  demoralized  lines.  Major-Greneral  Bate,  and  other  offi- 
cers, cooperated  strenuously  in  a  like  endeavor;  but  all  in 
vain.  1^0  appeal  or  personal  example  could  restore  the  spirits 
of  these  troops,  veterans  though  they  were  of  every  hard- 
fought  field  in  the  West,  and  the  peers  in  repute  for  shining 
conduct  on  all  previous  occasions  of  any  of  that  army.*  In  this 
exigency,  Forrest  dispatched  Major  Strange  to  General  Jack- 
son, to  acquaint  him  with  the  critical  situation,  and  to  say  that 
all  depended  upon  the  staunchness  and  gallantry  of  his 
division.  With  admirable  spirit  was  the  responsibility  ac- 
cepted. Ross's  Brigade  was  instantly  thrown  forward  in 
front,  while  Armstrong  attacked  vigorously  on  the  right  flank 
and  rear,  and  such  was  the  resolution  and  vehemence  of  these 
charges  that,  first  checking,  they  presently  forced  the  enemy 
to  give  back  and  yield  the  field.  This  happily  accomplished, 
the  infantry  were  withdrawn  to  Stewart's  creek,  eight  miles 
northward  from  Murfreesboro,  but  the  cavalry  bivouacked  in 
their  former  position  before  Murfreesboro. 

While  this  was  going  on,  Buford  on  the  left,  about  midday, 
moving  down  the  Woodbury  road  with  some  500  men  and 
Morton's  Battery,  had  met  and  fought  a  strong  Federal  force 
at  the  college,  in  the  eastern  verge  of  the  town.    With  men 


*  Forrest,  on  this  occasion,  rode  his 
fiivorite  gray  horse  King  Philip,  of 
whose  bellicose  traits  we  have  made 
previous  mention.  Catching  sight  of 
the  offensive  blue  uniform,  King  Phi- 
lip was  only  restrained  with  great  diffi- 
culty from  rushing  down  upon  the 
enemy  for  an  individual  battle.    Gaus, 


his  favorite  bugler,  was  also  by  his  side 
as  usual,  blowing  the  charge  with  ha« 
bitual  intrepidity.  This  drew  the  fire 
of  a  regiment  scarcely  a  hundred  yards 
distant,  without  any  other  harm  than 
the  spoiling  of  another  bugle  for  Gaus, 
the  one  he  was  blowing  being  actually 
riddled,  as  once  before,  with  rifle-balls. 


634  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

dismounted,  and  operating  as  riflemen,  and  using  his  artiUeiy 
with  free  hand,  he  steadily  drove  them  into  the  place,  and 
followed  as  far  as  the  court-house,  which  he  forced  the 
enemy  to  vacate,  under  the  pressure  of  two  of  Morton's  ever 
well-handled  gun^.  But  soon  reenforced  with  infantry,  the 
Federals  rallied,  and  Morton  became  engaged  in  the  heart  of 
the  town  imtil  two  p.m.,  losing  nearly  every  horse  of  one  of  his 
pieces,  which  was  only  saved  by  being  carried  off  by  hand. 
At  that  hour,  Buford  was  ordered  by  General  Forrest  to 
establish  his  command  upon  the  left  flank  of  the  Confederate 
line,  then  engaged  as  we  have  mentioned.  As  he  attempted 
to  execute  this  order,  the  enemy  pressed  after  with  a  heavy 
force,  for  a  time  with  menacing  vigor,  and  he  was  not  able  to 
reach  the  scene  until  after  Jackson's  Division  had  so  hand- 
somely repulsed  Milroy  and  brought  his  daring  sortie  to  a 
baffled  close. 

For  several  days  following,  the  cavalry  remained  in  position 
before  Murfreesboro,  but  without  noteworthy  collision  with  the 
enemy.  In  the  mean  time  Bate's  Division  was  recalled  to  its 
corps  at  Nashville,  and  a  small  brigade  under  Colonel  Ohn- 
stcad  instead  was  substituted.*  But  on  the  loth,  Biiford 
was  detached,  with  his  Kentuckians,  to  take  post  at  the 
Hermitage,  and  establish  pickets  along  the  Cumberland, 
between  Huntsville  and  the  mouth  of  Stone  river,  so  as  to  ob- 
struct the  navigation  of  the  former  stream  above  Nashville. 
Another  purpose  was  to  drain  the  country  of  persons  liable  to 
military  service,  animals  suitable  for  army  purposes,  and  sub- 
sistence supplies.  This  delicate,  arduous,  and  at  the  moment, 
perilous  service.  General  Buford  discharged  with  notable 
efficiency,  though  his  force  at  no  time  exceeded  300  men. 

In  the  interval,  the  infantry  brigades  were  engaged  tearing 
up  and' destroying  the  railway  between  Lavergne  and  Mur- 


*  Leaving  General  Forrest  three  small  brigades  of  infimtry. 


Orders  to  Fall  Back.  635 

freesboro  ;  and  Jackson  having  been  thrown  with  his  division 
to  the  southward,  Ross's  Brigade,  on  the  15  th,  surprised  and 
captured  a  train  of  cars  en  route  from  Stephenson,  freighted 
with  subsistence  for  the  garrison  at  Murfreesboro.  It  was 
gallantly  defended  by  the  Sixty-first  Illinois  Infantry  for  a 
time ;  but  overcome,  150  of  their  number  were  captured,  while 
the  rest  secured  refuge  in  a  strong  block-house  near  by.  Some 
2cx>,ooo  rations  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  Confederates,  who 
had,  however,  to  destroy  the  greater  part,  as  well  as  seventeen 
cars  and  the  locomotive.  The  day  before  moving  out  east- 
ward of  Stone  river,  with  two  of  his  infantry  brigades,  to 
intercept  a. Federal  foraging-train  reported  in  that  quarter. 
General  Forrest,  on  the  evening  of  the  15th,  received  an 
order  from  General  Hood  to  hold  his  force  in  hand  ready  for 
the  emergencies  of  a  general  engagement  which  had  then  com- 
menced at  Nashville.  Thereupon  the  immediate  concentra- 
tion of  his  command  was  directed  to  take  place  at  Wilkerson's 
Cross-Roads,  six  miles  distant,  and  that  was  effected,  with  the 
exception  of  the  Kentuckians  absent  with  Buford,  during  the 
next  day.  And  happily  so,  for  that  night  a  staff-officer 
brought  intelligence  of  the  disastrous  issue  of  the  battle  for 
the  Confederates,  and  orders  for  Forrest  to  fall  back  by  way 
of  Shelbyville  and  Pulaski 

Buford  was  now  ordered  to  retire  through  Lavergne,  and 
cover  Forrest's  rear  until  the  artillery  and  wagon-train  were 
well  in  motion.  But  as  his  sick  and  baggage-train  were  at 
Triune,  Forrest  fortunately  did  take  up  his  line  of  retreat 
through  Shelbyville,  but  by  way  of  Lillard's  Mills,  on  Duck 
river,  while  Armstrong's  Brigade  was  detached  to  push  across 
at  once  to  get  in  the  rear  and  cover  Hood's  beaten  corps. 

The  infantry  with  Forrest  were  barefooted.  The  country 
to  be  traversed,  naturally  rugged  and  obstructed  by  cedar 
thickets,  was  rendered  almost  impracticable  by  the  deep  mire 
wrought  by  recent  heavy  rains.  It  was  late  in  December  ; 
he  was  encumbered  with  prisoners,  several  hundred  head  of 


i 


636  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest 

hogs  and  beef  cattle,  and  few  marches  have  been  more  tofl- 
some  or  involved  more  suffering.  But  Forrest  led  it  in  per- 
son, and  with  his  officers  did  all  that  could  be  done  to  cheer 
and  urge  his  men  forward,  and  to  repress  straggling.  Reach- 
ing Lillard's  Mills,  Duck  river  was  found  to  be  rising  rapidly. 
Pressing  the  passage  at  once  and  vehemently,  after  the  pri- 
soners,* cattle,  and  about  half  the  wagons  had  been  thrown 
over,  the  stream  became  unfordable,  and  Forrest  was  obliged 
to  move  westward  to  Columbia  to  secure  a  crossing  for  his 
other  baggage  and  ordnance-trains  and  artillery. 


V. 

While  these  detached  operations,  which  we  have  recounted, 
were  taking  place  under  the  immediate  direction  of  General 
Forrest,  Chalmers  had  remained,  with  his  division  distributed 
upon  the  right  and  left  flanks  of  the  Confederate  army,  in 
front  of  Nashville,  his  headquarters  on  the  Harding  turnpike, 
about  four  miles  from  the  city.f  As  early  as  the  3d  of  De- 
cember, Lieutenant-Colonel  Kelly  was  detached,  with  some 
300  men  of  Rucker's  Brigade  and  Briggs*s  section  of  artillery, 
to  take  post  and  blockade  the  Cumberland  twelve  miles  below 
Nashville.  On  reaching  the  scene,  he  was  so  fortunate  as  to 
capture  two  transports  laden  with  army  horses  and  mules  en 
route  down-stream.  However,  four  gunboats  quickly  ap- 
peared, and  Kelly's  artillery  ammunition  being,  unhappily, 
exhausted,  the  transports  were  wrested  from  his  hands  despite 
his  efforts  to  burn  them  ;  but  he  secured  56  prisoners  and 
197  horses  and  mules. 


♦  400  prisoners,  100  head  of  cattle,     tending  to  the  river  above,  and  Rucker 
and  400  hogs.  on  the  left,  his  pickets  reaching  to  the 

t  Bifflc  was  upon  the  right  flank,  ex-     river  below  Nashville. 


Nashville.  637 

A  day  or  two  later,  Ector's  Brigade  of  infantry  having  been 
sent  to  relieve  Rucker  on  the  Harding  turnpike,  the  ca- 
valry were  redisposed  *  The  Seventh  Alabama  being  left 
in  position  on  the  right  of  Ector,  leftward  of  the  road,  the  rest 
of  the  brigade,  about  gcx)  men,  were  stretched  on  the  left  of 
Ector,  across  the  Charlotte  turnpike,  to  and  along  the  river 
for  four  miles,  in  support  of  two  of  Briggs's  Parrotts  and  two 
sent  from  an  infantry  division,  which  were  successfully  em- 
ployed in  hindering  the  navigation  even  by  iron-plated  gun- 
boats. Meanwhile,  the  weather  had  become  very  cold  ;  there 
had  been  a  heavy  snow-fall,  upon  which  a  sleet  supervened,  and 
the  ground  was  heavily  coated  with  ice  for  several  days.  But 
this  did  not  deter  the  enemy,  as  could  be  seen,  from  the  great- 
est activity  in  the  trenches,  in  which  there  had  been  em- 
ployed, we  learn,  5cxx)  quartermasters'  laborers,  as  well  as  many 
citizens  of  Nashville,  under  a  general  officer  of  the  Regular 
Engineer  Corps  of  the  United  States  Army,  until  the  place 
stood  girded  with  a  double  belt  of  earthworks  —  detached 
forts  connected  with  strong  curtains  and  infantry  intrench- 
ments.  And  behind  these  had  been  gathered  more  than 
30,000  men,t  besides  the  two  corps  of  Schoiield  that  had 
been  suffered  to  escape  through  the  clutches  of  their  adversa- 
ry, first  at  Columbia  and  next  at  F'ranklin.  Or  in  all,  the 
Federal  force  now  invested  at  Nashville  mustered  50,000 
fighting  men,  behind  intrenchments  of  the  strongest,  most 
scientific  character,  amply  furnished  with  all  the  resources 
and  appliances  of  efficient  war.    The  investing  force,  on  the 


*  Whole  brigade  was  not  more  than  tanooga,  some  negro  troops,  and  twenty 

1200  strong.  new  regiments  of  twelve-months'  men, 

t  That  is,  the  corps  of  A.  J.  Smith,  and    12,000  Wilson's   Cavalry. — Vide 

11,000  strong,  brought  from  St  Louis;  Swinton's  Decisive  BaiiUs  of  the  War^ 

the  forces  under  Steedman,  from  Chat-  pp.  451-2-5. 


i 


638  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

other  hand,  was  absurdly  small :  three  small  corps  of  infantry; 
the  wreck  that  survived  the  shambles  at  Franklin  and  the  ex- 
cessive exposure  to  the  harsh  December  weather  of  the  cli- 
mate, and  not  exceeding  1700  cavalry,*  or,  at  most,  a  force  in 
hand  of  but  22,cxx)  of  all  arms.  We  know  of  no  parallel  to  this 
in  war  annals  ;  no  instance  in  which  an  army  so  superior  as 
that  which  Major-General  Thomas  commanded  permitted  itself 
to  be  so  long  beleaguered  by  one  so  inferior  in  all  but  a  supreme 
courage,  a  blenchless  devotion  to  a  cause,  as  was  arrayed  under 
the  tattered  Confederate  battle-crosses  upon  the  ice-clad  hills 
that  encircled  Nashville.     It  is  said  the  Federal  leader  waited 
to  complete  the  organization  of  his  cavalry,  in  order  that,  after 
having  routed  his  adversary,  he  might  insure  his  destruction 
by  having  some  9000  cavalryf  to  launch  upon  his  broken,  de- 
moralized ranks.    That  being  so,  it  becomes  singular  that 
there  was  not  a  more  vigorous  effort  made  to  that  end,  a  more 
vehement,  damaging  employment  of  that  powerful  element  of 
his  strength. 

However,  as  early  as  the  13th  there  were  portents  in  the 
air  of  the  storm  about  to  burst  upon  the  Confederates.  Indi- 
cations were  manifest  of  an  early  offensive  movement  on  the 
part  of  the  enemy,  especially  in  the  transfer  to  the  south  bank 
of  the  Cumberland  of  a  very  large  cavalry  force.  At  the 
same  time  the  Confederates  had  thrown  up  rifle-pits  and  had 
commenced  to  construct  some  detached  earthworks.  But  ex- 
terior to  the  enemy,  their  line  was  necessarily  of  much  greater 
length,  and  really,  as  has  been  aptly  said  of  it,t  "it  presented 


*  Jackson  and  Bufbrd  being  with  of  whom  were  badly  and  7500  finely 

Forrest  at  Murfreesboro,  as  also  three  mounted.— Z^^runv  BaiUes^  p.  455. 

brigades  of  infantry.  |  MS.  Notes  of  Captain  Walter  A. 

t  We   learn  from  Swinton  that  it  Goodman,  ever  reliable,  very  full,  and 

irambered  full  12,000  men,  about  1500  acute  and  sound  in  their  obeenratxoiis. 


Nashville.  639 

the  appearance  of  the  skirmish-line  of  an  investing  army 
rather  than  of  that  army  itself."  And  we  repeat,  never  in 
military  operations  have  two  belligerent  forces  occupied  to- 
ward each  other  an  attitude  so  anomalous  as  that  maintained 
by  tfie  Federal  and  Confederate  forces  at  Nashville  on  the  eve 
of  the  14th  of  December,  1864. 

It  does  not  come  within  the  purview  of  this  work  to  describe 
in  detail  the  disastrous  results  that  befell  the  Confederate  army 
in  that  quarter  on  the  15  th  and  i6th  December.  We  shall 
therefore  confine  our  recital  mainly  to  the  part  taken  by  the 
cavalry  or  by  the  troops  with  whom  Chalmers  cooperated. 

It  must  be  observed,  however,  the  enemy,  making  a  feint  of 
an  attack  on  the  Confederate  right,  hurled  the  mass  of  his 
forces  upon  Hood's  left  flank.  As  will  be  recollected,  Rucker 
was  in  that  quarter  with  his  brigade  of  about  1200  cavalry. 
The  gunboats  opened,  soon  after  daylight,  upon  his  left  with  a 
boisterous  cannonade,  and  speedily  a  heavy  division  of  cav- 
alry, closely  supported  by  infantry,  advanced  along  the  Char- 
lotte road  simultaneously  with  another  of  like  character  along 
the  Harding  way.  The  country  was  broken  and  wooded,  and 
a  heavy  fog,  hanging  low  over  the  scene,  so  enshrouded  these 
movements,  that  they  passed  without  observation,  until  almost 
ready  to  burst  in  full  force  upon  the  lean  Confederate  lines. 
Extor's  Brigade,  on  the  Harding  turnpike,  was  struck  by  the 
mass,  and  forced  to  swing  eastward  for  support  upon  the  in- 
fantry,* leaving  the  Seventh  Alabama  Cavalry  to  seek  a  junc- 
tion with  the  rest  0/  Rucker's  Brigade  westward  of  the  road. 
And  thus  the  Harding  turnpike  was  now  left  in  possession  of 
the  enemy,  while  a  part  of  Chalmers's  wagon-train,  which  had 
been  left  for  security  in  rear  of  Ector's  Brigade,  was  captured. 
Meanwhile,  Chalmers  with  Rucker  had  maintained  an  obsti- 
nate unequal  combat  on  the  Charlotte  turnpike;  but  Chalmers 
held  his  ground  until  what  had  happened  rightward  was  re- 
ported, and  it  was  manifest  he  was  now  isolated  from  the 


i 


640  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest 

Confederate  army.  He  therefore  retired  by  a  cross-road  to 
a  point  on  the  Harding  turnpike,  being  without  orders  in  the 
exigency,  and  unable  to  communicate  with  General  Hood.  Ad- 
vancing up  the  road  in  the  direction  of  his  enemy,  with  his  es- 
cort and  a  small  detachment,  after  a  spirited  skirmish,  in  which 
the  enemy  encountered  were  repulsed,  Chalmers  ascertained, 
about  dark,  by  a  personal  reconnoissance  and  from  scouts, 
that  the  Confederate  left  wing  was  still  in  position  in  the  main 
lines  eastward  of  the  Harding  turnpike,  on  the  Hillsboro  road. 
Rucker  was  then  directed  to  take  position  for  the  protection 
of  its  left  flank,  which  he  effected  just  before  dawn  at  the 
point  where  the  cross-road  from  Brentwood  strikes  the  Hills- 
boro turnpike.  Here  he  was  speedily  assailed  by  a  strong 
cavalry  column,  apparently  bent  on  turning  the  Confederate 
left  flank.  Made  aware  of  the  emergency,  Chalmers  present- 
ly moved  across  with  his  escort  and  Kelly's  Regiment  (the 
old  Forresters)  to  the  Granny  White  turnpike,  just  in  time  to 
meet  there  a  hostile  cavalry  force.  Securing  a  strong  position, 
he  held  his  enemy  at  bay,  and  Cheatham's  ambulance-train. 
meanwhile,  was  enabled  to  escape  capture.  In  the  mean  time, 
Rucker,  with  a  part  of  his  brigade,* -was  hotly  beset,  by  forces 
equally  strong,  on  his  front  and  left  flank.  Sorely  pressed, 
Chalmers  ordered  the  concentration  of  his  cavalry  imme- 
diately in  front — northward — of  Brentwood,  and  about  half- 
pa^t  four  P.M.,  went  to  seek  orders  from  General  Hood.  Very 
soon,  between  sundown  and  dark,  a  dispatch  from  General 
Hood  to  General  Chalmers  was  received,  and  handed  to  Col- 
onel Rucker,  in  the  absence  of  his  superior.  It  was  the  an- 
nouncement of  defeat  and  his  retreat,  with  orders  that  the 


•  The  Seventh  Tennessee  had  been  sent  off  on  escort  service  thlt  morning  to 
Franklin. 


Wounding  and  Capture  of  Col.  Rucker.      641 

cavalry  should  resist  at  all  hazard  the  pursuit  of  the  Federal 
cavalry  by  the  Granny  White  turnpike. 

Rucker — formed  by  nature,  except  perchance  in  stature,  for 
a  cavalry  leader — swiftly  drew  up  his  dauntless  veterans  in 
line  across  the  designated  road,  and  placing  Colonel  Kelly  in 
command,  went  rearward  with  his  escort  a  half-mile,  there  to 
build  some  breastworks  of  rails  at  the  intersection  of  the  road 
from  Brentwood  with  the  Granny  White  turnpike,  and  across 
the  latter.     But  before  this  could  be  done,  a  largely  over- 
whelming force  was  upon  Kelly,  who  maintained  desperate  but 
unavailing  battle  as  long  as  possible  against  the  odds  accumu- 
lating upon  him.     Rucker,  meanwhile,  working  at  his  breast- 
works— as  Rucker   can — ^was  then  joined  by  the   Seventh 
Alabama,  which  as  yet  had  been  rearward ;  but  while  throw- 
ing it  into  position  well  to  th6  leftward,  the  Twelfth  Ten- 
nessee fell  back  with  the  ill-tidings  that  Kelly  had   been 
driven  from  his  ground.    Colonel  White,  its  commander,  was 
directed  to  form  behind  the  breastworks,  just  leftward  of 
the  turnpike,  and   Rucker  then  repaired  in  person  farther 
to  the  left,  to  dispose  the  Seventh  Alabama  precisely  as  he 
wished     Returning    presently    to  the   point  he   had  indi- 
cated for  the  Twelfth  Tennessee,  he  found  himself  in  the 
midst  of  a  mounted  regiment ;  inquiring  for  the  commanding 
officer,  he  was  immediately  approached  by  an  officer  so  closely 
that  both  saw,  from  their  uniforms,  they  were  enemies.    Both 
drawing  their  sabres,  sprang  to  the  conflict  with  the  like  spirit. 
The  weather  was,  however,  so  cold  that  the  combatants  could 
not  manage  their  horses,  and  Rucker's  sabre,  as  he  struck 
with  all  his  power,  missing  its  aim,  fell  from  his  hand     In 
immediate  contact  with  his  foe  at  the  moment,  he  grappled 
and  wrenched  his  sword  from  the  Federal  officer.     Seeing  that 
he  was  in  the  midst  of  at  least  a  Federal  regiment,  the  Con- 
federate officer  rapidly  glanced  around  for  an  avenue  of  escape- 
In  his  front  were  breastworks  of  rails,  in  his  rear  a  hostile 


642  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

regiment.     Turning  his  horse,  he  boldly  dashed  toward  the 
right,  with  the  purpose  of  threading,  in  the  darkness,  his  way 
between  the  line  of  breastworks  and  the  enemy ;  but  the  latter 
shouting,  "  Shoot  the  man  on  the  white  horse !"  in  an  in- 
stant hundreds  of  weapons  were  leveled  and  fired  at  him.    One 
ball,  taking  effect,  shattered  his  left  arm  above  the  elbow,*  just 
as  the  dauntless  Rucker  struck  an  adversary  who  was  trying 
to  cut  off  his  escape.     But  his  own  horse  falling  at  the  in- 
stant, he  was  thrown  violently  to  the  ground  against  some 
rails,  and  rendered  speechless  from  the  concussion/  though 
conscious  of  what  was  happening  around.     For  a  moment, 
there  was  a  rush  upon  the  prone  Confederate,  as  of  so  many 
hounds  upon  the  deatd  quarry  of  their  long  pursuit.     After 
some  moments  of  wild,  fierce  clamor  and  rough  handling, 
Rucker,  replaced  on  his  horse,  was  carried  to  General  Hatch, 
a  short  distance  off,  and   questioned,  with  the  result  that 
the  Federal  Commander  was  probably  satisfied  that  Forrest 
(previously  supposed  to  be  at  Murfreesboro)  had  come  up  and 
was  covering  Hood's  retreat. 

As  Rucker  was  being  carried,  however,  to  General  Hatch, 
some  one  shouting  for  the  Federal  Commander,  the  Seventh 
Alabama  was  made  aware  of  the  proximity  of  the  enemy.  Ma- 
jor Randolph  immediately  moved  on  in  the  indicated  direc- 
tion, and  so  intently  were  all  interested  in  the  examination  of 
the  Confederate,  that  a  sudden  volley  from  the  Seventh  Ala- 
bama, killing  and  wounding  a  good  many  of  Hatch's  escort, 
was  their  first  admonition  of  the  danger.  The  Federals  scat- 
tered, but  carried  their  prisoner  away,  though  vigorously 
pressed  by  Randolph  for  a  mile. 

Kelly  had  previously  fought  manfully  for  the  position  assigned, 
but  such  were  the  odds  assailing  him  that  he  was  forced  from  it, 
as  we  have  said,  and  a  general  miUe  occurred  in  the  dark. 


*  Ampatation  was  subsequenUy  performed  in  the  hospital  at  Nashville. 


The  Retreat.  643 

• 

The  Seventh  Alabama,  were  able,  however  to  check  the  fur- 
ther progress  of  the  Federal  cavalry  down  the  turnpike  ;  and 
notable  in  their  ranks  for  splendid  courage  on  the  occasion,  as 
through  the  day,  were  a  company  of  cadets  from  the  Alabama 
University — mere  youths — commanded  by  one  of  their  num- 
ber. The  unconquerable  tenacity,  the  brilliant  valor  of  these 
boys,  who  faced  and  fought  all  odds,  until  their  ranks  were 
cut  to  pieces,  excited  general  notice  and  praise. 

In  the  main,  the  darkness  which  shrouded  the  field  was 
decidedly  propitious  for  the  vanquished,  for  it  concealed  their 
fearful  weakness — their  shattered,  disorganized  condition. 
Some  regiments,  however,  preserved  a  nucleus  embodied, 
and  bivouacked  within  near  sight  of  the  Federal  camp-fires. 
Meantime,  until  eleven,  the  roads  toward  Franklin  had  been 
swarming  with  infantry,  preserving  little  or  no  organization. 
Then,  worn  down  and  overcome  by  fatigue,  they  fell  by  the 
wayside,  and  rested  for  the  night  as  they  could. 

Fortunately,  the  Federal  cavalry  were  not  handled  with 
resolution,  and  bivouacked  after  the  rencounter  with  the 
Seventh  Alabama.  Had  they  been  pressed  forward,  with  all 
their  redoubtable  numbers,  (nine  thousand,)  they  must  have 
inflicted  irremediable  damage  that  night  upon  General  Hood's 
army.  Doubtless  the  impression  adroitly  given  by  Rucker 
of  Forrest's  presence  had  a  material  effect  in  staying  the 
movement ;  for  Forrest  was  not  a  soldier  whom  they  were 
willing  to  meet  in  the  dark  or  with  unlaced  harness. 

It  was  not  a  juncture  for  sluggards.  The  infantry  were  early 
afoot  again,  some  by  the  Franklin  and  others  the  Lewis- 
burg  turnpikes  ;  and  by  three  o'clock  a.m.)  Chalmers's  Cavalry 
were  in  their  saddles,  following  and  covering  the  rear  on  both 
roads,  but  crossing  the  Harpeth  near  Franklin  immediately 
after  Lee's  Corps.  That  corps,  though  greatly  reduced,  had 
preserved  its  organization,  and  was  placed  as  the  rear-guard 
of  the  army.  Here,  too,  Buford  joined  with  the  Kentuckians 
and  a  part  of  Bell's  Brigade,  and  Chalmers,  assuming  general 


i 


644  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest 

• 

command  of  the  cavalry,  was  directed  to  receive  his  orders 
from  General  Lee,  who  was  pres^tly  wounded,  however,  in  a 
reconnoissance,  so  that  the  command  was  devolved  upon  Ma- 
jor-General  Carter  L.  Stevenson. 

Meanwhile,  the  enemy,  though  not  following  with  that  vigor 
which  their  superiority  and  long  preparations  portended,  yet 
were  getting  troublesojme.  But  a  favorable  position  inter- 
vening, about  six  miles  southward  of  Franklin,  the  Confederate 
cavalry  were  halted,  formed  astride  the  highway,  and  awaited 
the  onset.  Right  speedily  this  ensued,  and  a  succession  of 
weighty  charges  were  beaten  back.  But  the  Federals  per- 
sisted, and  gathering  volume,  poured  down  with  such  a  tide 
that  the  Confederates  were  swept  back  about  dark  to  a  second 
position,  where  they  happily  gained  another  foothold— one, 
moreover,  of  great  strength,  which  was  held  In  this  affiiir 
there  were  numerous  hand-to-hand  conflicts  between  officers 
and  men.  General  Chalmers  himself  shot  one  Federal  and 
Captured  another ;  and  General  Buford  and  Chalmers's  ac- 
complished Adjutant-General,  Captain  Goodman,  becoming 
entangled  in  the  mJ^Ue  with  the  enemy,  narrowly  escaped 
The  weather,  still  wet,  was  very  cold,  the  roads  desperately 
muddy,  horses  and  men  so  hungry  and  jaded  that  despondency 
was  now  stamped  upon  the  sombre  features  of  the  hardiest 

That  night,  (17th,)  the  infantry  rear-guard  bivouacked  about 
Thompson's  Station,  while  the  cavalry  rested  southward,  at 
Spring  Hill,  and  were  there  reenforced  by  Armstrong's  Bri- 
gade. The  infantry  passing  southward,  the  cavalry  were  again 
disposed  to  cover  their  retreat;  and  Cheatham's  Corps  re- 
lieved Lee's  as  the  infantry  rear-guard.  Thereupon,  Cheat- 
ham, to  secure  the  passage  of  the  trains  across  Rutherford's 
creek,  then  greatly  swollen  by  the  rain-fall,  halted  his  corps 
two  miles  southward  of  Spring  Hill,  and  intrenched.  He  was 
thus  able  to  hold  the  enemy  at  bay,  while  the  train  was  saiely 
thrown  southward  of  the  dangerous  stream.  Then,  late  that 
aftemooni  he  withdrew  slowly  across  i^  his  rear  and  flanks 


Torrest  Placed  in  Command  of  Rear-Guard.    645 

covered  by  cavalry ;  but  as  the  Federal  cavalry  continued  to 
be  handled  with  singular  languor,  there  was  no  collision.  By 
this  time,  the  main  Confederate  forces  were  passing  Duck 
river,  six  miles  rearward,  and  Cheatham  and  the  cavalry  held 
the  line  of  Rutherford's  creek  the  night  of  the  iSth,  It  was 
then,  during  the  night,  the  redoubtable  battle-flag  of  Major- 
General  Forrest  reappeared  among  his  men,  with  the  rear- 
guard. As  Cheatham's  available  force  of  infantry  did  not  now 
exceed  1500  men,  Forrest  offered  to  relieve  him  with  his  men, 
and  this  was  sanctioned. 

VI. 

On  the  morning  of  the  19th,  the  'enemy's  cavalry  were 
early  afield  and,  in  fomiidable  numbers,  displayed  a  resolute 
purpose  to  force  the  passage  of  Rutherford's  creek,  while  a 
considerable  column  was  observed  in  movement,  as  if  aiming 
to  cross  Duck  river,  below  the  junction  of  the  creek  with  it. 
But  up  to  three  p.m.,  they  were  unable  to  break  the  barrier 
of  the  creek.  And  meanwhile,  the  Confederate  train  and 
main  force  were  safely  behind  Duck  river.  Then  the  rear- 
guard likewise  was  withdrawn  southward  of  that  stream  with- 
out hinderance,  and  bivouacked  the  night  of  the  19th  at 
Columbia. 

There,  on  the  morning  of  the  20th,  Walthall's  Division, 
Stewart's  Corps,  reenforced  by  five  other  fragments  of  brigades 
— ^in  all  only  1900  bayonets — ^was  placed  under  the  orders  of 
General  Forrest  as  commander  of  the  rear-guard  ;  and  he  was 
directed  to  hold  the  position  to  the  last  possible  moment,  re- 
tiring, when  forced  to  do  so,  upon  Florence,  by  way  of  Pulaski, 
doing  what  were  possible  meanwhile  to  gain  time  for  the  safety 
of  the  remains  of  the  Confederate  army.* 


*  These  orders  and  dispositions  re-     the  19th,  between  Generals  Hood  and 
suited  from  an  interview  the  night  of      Forrest,  in  which  the  former  expressed 


646 


Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 


m 

Of  Walthall's  force,  at  least  300  were  shoeless,  and  so  foot- 
sore as  to  be  unable  to  m^h  and  bear  arms,  and  were  there- 
fore detached  on  the  wagon-tram.  For  some  reason  the 
enemy  did  not  appear  in  force  until  late  that  afternoon,  when, 
although  Columbia  was  manifestly  unoccupied  by  any  part  of 
the  Confederate  army,  they  opened  upon  it  a  furious  cannon- 
ade of  shot  and  shell.  •  Hoisting  a  flag  of  truce,  Forrest  had 
an  interview — the  stream  between  them — ^with  General  Hatch, 
whom  he  formally  assured  that  Columbia  was  only  occupied 
by  non-combatants  and  the  wounded  of  both  armies.  He 
also  proposed  the  exchange  of  some  2000  prisoners,  the  fruits 
of  the  campaign,  who  were,  as  he  acquainted  him,  without 
blankets  or  proper  clothing  for  the  inclement  season,  and 
must  therefore  perish,  in  many  cases,  from  cold,  if  not  ex- 
changed.* After  a  delay  of  two  hours,  the  answer — ^in  the 
name  of  General  Thomas — ^was  a  refusal  either  to  exchange 
prisoners  or  to  receive  those  Forrest  had  on  parole,  with  the 
understanding  that  a  like  number  should  subsequently  be  re- 
turned.   The  shelling,  however,  was  discontinued. 

Forrest,  after  a  careful  examination  into  his  resources,  found 
that  he  had  only  3000  officers  and  effectively  mounted  men,  . 
with  1600  infantry  and  eight  pieces  of  artillery.     With  this 
force  he  was  expected  to  confront  and  keep  off  a  hostile  army 


the  belief  that  he  could  not  escape  in 
such  weather,  with  unfavorable  roads 
and  broken-down  teams.  Forrest  re- 
plied,  that  to  remain  there  would  cer- 
tainly result  in  the  capture  of  the  whole 
force,  but  that,  if  reenforced  with  4000 
infantry,  he  would  undertake  to  secure 
time  and  opportunity  for  the  escape  of 
all  across  the  Tennessee.  General  Hood 
rejoined  that  he  should  have  the  in- 
£iintry. 
♦  The  cold  of  the  night  of  the  19th 


and  morning  of  the  20th  was  of  unusual 
severity — ^indeed,  beyond  the  ezperieaoe 
of  any  one  with  Hood's  army.  We 
learn,  besides,  from  General  F.,  that  as 
many  as  a  fourth  of  these  prisoners 
must  have  perished  from  exposure,  and 
many  more  were  disabled  on  the  re- 
treat He  did  what  he  could  to  allevi- 
ate their  wretched  condition,  as  well  be- 
fore as  after  the  strange,  unjustifiable 
refusal  to  receive  them,  even  on  parole, 
for  subsequent  exchange. 


The  Retreat.  647 

of  10,000  cavalry,  and  possibly  30,000  infantry.  Seldom  or 
never  has  a  soldier  been  placed  in  a  graver  situation,  or  one 
from  which  extrication  seemed  so  little  probable.  We  are 
assured,  however,  "  that  at  no  time  in  his  whole  career  was 
the  fortitude  of  General  Forrest  in  adversity,  and  his  power 
of  infusing  his  own  cheerfulness  into  those  under  his  com- 
mand, more  strikingly  exhibited  than  at  this  crisis.  De- 
feated and  broken  as  we  were,  there  were  not  wanting  many 
others  as  determined  as  he  to  do  their  duty  to  the  last,  and 
who  stood  out  faithfully  to  the  end ;  but  their  conversation 
was  that  of  men  who,  though  determined,  were  without  hope, 
and  who  felt  that  they  must  gather  strength  even  from  des- 
pair ;  but  he  alone,  whatever  he  may  have  felt,  (and  he  was 
not  blind  to  the  dangers  of  our  position,)  spoke  in  his  usual 
cheerful  and  defiant  tone,  and  talked  of  meeting  the  enemy 
with  as  much  assurance  of  success  as  he  did  when  driving 
them  before  him  a  month  before.  Such  a  spirit  is  sympa- 
thetic, and  not  a  man  was  brought  in  contact  with  him  who 
did  not  feel  strengthened  and  invigorated,  as  if  he  had  heard 
of  a  reenforcement  coming  to  our  relief."* 

During  the  night  of  the  21st,  the  enemy  effected  the  pas- 
sage of  Duck  river,  above  the  town,  with  their  cavalry,  and  by 
morning  their  infantry  began  to  cross  ;  whereupon  Forrest 
put  his  forces  in  retreat,  the  infantry  moving  by  the  Pulaski 
road.  Jackson's  and  Buford's  Divisions  covered  the  rear, 
and  Chalmers's  the  right  flank,  moving  by  the  road  through 
Bigbyville,t  while  the  left  was  carefully  guarded  by  detach- 
ments of  scouts.  Pressing  closely  after,  the  enemy  came  up 
with  and  opened  warmly  with  artillery  upon  Forrest's  rear- 


*  Notes  of  Captain  Walter  A.  Good-     sion  he  had  organized  at  Columlna  as 
man.  a  brigade — about  500  men — ^which  he 

t  The  remains  of  Chalmers's  Divi-     commanded  in  person. 


648  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

guard,  about  three  miles  southward  of  Columbia,  and  under 
this  stress  the  Confederates  continued  their  retreat  until 
a  strong  defensive  position  was  found  in  a  gorge  between  two 
high  ridges,  three  miles  further  on.  Here  a  stout  stand 
was  made  until  the  23d,  and  the  Federals  were  held  in  check 
by  the  cavalry.  Resuming  the  retreat  then,  to  gain  time  for 
the  movement  of  the  stock  and  wagon-train,  another  stand 
was  made  on  the  24th  south  of  Lynnville,  and  Walthall's 
infantry  being  brought  into  action,  a  severe  engagement 
ensued  for  several  hours,  after  which  the  Confederates  fell 
back  in  good  order  two  miles,  to  a  favorable  position  just  in 
advance  of  Richland  creek,  where  dispositions  were  made  for 
another  combat.  Armstrong's  Brigade  was  here  placed  in 
support  of  six  pieces  of  artillery,  established  upon  and  sweep- 
ing the  turnpike  ;  the  infantry  held  the  crossing  of  the 
creek  ;  Chalmers  and  Buford  were  drawn  up  in  line  with  and 
to  the  left  of  the  artillery,  while  Ross's  Brigade  was  on  the 
right.  A  vigorous  artillery  conflict  then  resulted,  in  the 
course  of  which  two  Federal  guns  were  dismounted.  Mean- 
while the  enemy  pressing  Chalmers  and  Buford  heavily  with 
superior  masses  of  cavalry,  forced  the  creek  to  the  Confede- 
rate right.  But  Jackson's  Division  was  sent  to  meet  them, 
and  for  several  hours  a  warm  conflict  was  maintained — in 
which  the  enemy  lost  heavily  and  the  Confederates  lightly, 
but  among  the  wounded  was  General  Buford,  whose  di- 
vision was  then  temporarily  consolidated  with  Chalmers's 
forces.  The  Federals,  however,  being  now  reenforced,  For- 
rest withdrew  toward  Pulaski  without  further  molestation 
fliat  day.  During  the  past  thirty-six  hours,  however,  the 
fighting  had  been  with  little  intermission.  The  Federal 
cavalry  had  been  constantly  making  strenuous  efforts  to  flank 
Forrest's  force,  while  their  infantry  had  pressed  vigorously  on- 
ward by  the  highway  ;  but  each  Confederate  officer  and  man 
appeared  to  act  and  fight  as  if  the  fate  of  the  army  depended 
on  his  individual  conduct     And  never  were  there  manifested 


Anthonys  Hill.  649 

higher  soldierly  virtues  than  by  Forrest's  heroic  band — 
including  the  infantry — the  virtues  of  fortitude,  unblench- 
ing  valor,  and  an  unconquerable  cheerfulness  and  alacrity 
under  orders. 

The  roads  now,  grown  even  worse  than  before,  were  nearly 
impracticable  for  wheels,  hence  it  became  necessary  to  destroy, 
at  Pulaski,  a  quantity  of  the  ammunition  of  the  army,  which 
could  not  be  carried  off,  also  several  locomotives  and  two 
trains  of  cars.  Jackson  was  then  left  there  with  orders  to 
make  an  obstinate  stand,  while  the  other  divisions  of  the  rear- 
guard retired  ;  and  well  did  that  division — Armstrong's  and 
Ross's  veterans — discharge  that  service,  retiring  only  when 
about  to  be  overwhelmed. 

No  further  stand  was  now  attempted  until  the  Confederates 
reached  and  took  post  upon  Anthony's  Hill,  seven  miles  be- 
yond Pulaski.  It  was  now  only  forty-two  miles  to  Bainbridge, 
the  point  on  the  Tennessee  river  where  Hood's  army  was  to 
cross,  but  as  yet  many  of  his  infantry  had  not  reached  the 
river-bank ;  the  main  part  of  the  ordnance-train  had  been 
abandoned,  and  the  horses  necessarily  taken  to  transport  the 
pontoons,  many  of  which  also  were  known  to  be  still  some 
distance  from  the  river.  At  the  same  time  the  enemy  were 
reported  to  be  in  portentous  numbers  and  proximity.  Gene- 
ral Wilson  had  already  passed  Pulaski  with  10,000  cavalry, 
and  Thomas  had  reached  that  point  with  a  large  force  of  infan- 
try, and  both  were  pressing  onward  in  hot  pursuit.  To  pre- 
vent the  annihilation  of  Hood's  army,  it  was  necessary  to 
make  a  yet  more  obstinate  effort  to  delay  the  approaching 
enemy  as  long  as  possible,  and  fortunately  the  ground  was 
highly  favorable  to  that  end.  The  approach  to  Anthony's 
Hill,  for  two  miles,  was  through  a  defile  formed  by  two  steep, 
high  ridges,  which,  uniting  at  their  southern  extremity,  form- 
ed the  hill,  the  ascent  of  which  was  sudden,  and  both  the 
ridges  and  hill  were  thickly  wooded. 

Morton's  Battery  was  established  upon  the  immediate  sum- 


650  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

mit  of  the  hill,  so  as  to  sweep  the  hollow  below  and  the  road 
through  it.  Along  the  crest  of  the  hill  and  around  on  the 
ridges,  were  grouped  Featherston's  and  Palmer's  Brigades  of 
Walthall's  Division,  reenforced  by  4CX>  of  Ross's  Texans  and 
as  many  of  Armstrong's  Mississippians,  dismounted.  The 
rest  of  Jackson's  Division  were  disposed  as  cavalry  on  either 
flank,  with  Reynolds's  and  Field's  Brigades  of  infantry  formed 
in  a  second  line  as  a  reserve.  The  infantry  had  further 
strengthened  their  position  by  breastworks  of  rails  and  tim- 
ber, and  a  line  of  skirmishers  were  posted  under  cover  on  the 
hill-side.  At  the  same  time  Chalmers  was  halted  about  a  mile 
and  a  half  to  the  rightward,  on  the  road  by  which  he  was  mov- 
ing, to  guard  that  flank  from  being  turned.  So  broken  and 
densely  timbered  was  the  ground  that  the  concealment  of  the 
Confederate  forces  was  complete. 

Scarcely,  however,  were  these  dispositions  made  when, 
about  one  p.m.,  the  Federal  cavalry,  driving  the  Confederate 
rear-guard  into  the  mouth  of  the  glen,  followed  hotly.  But 
the  place  at  length  began  to  look  so  dangerous,  that  their 
commander  apparently  thought  it  requisite  to  dismount  seve- 
ral of  his  regiments  before  undertaking  the  ascent  of  the  hilL 
These  he  pushed  forward  on  foot  with  a  piece  of  artillery. 
The  Confederates,  meanwhile,  had  ridden  rapidly  through 
the  hollow,  and  up  and  over  the  hill,  as  if  left  unsupported, 
as  the  enemy  was  suffered  to  ascend  within  fifty  paces  of 
the  skirmishers  without  hinderance.  Then  Morton  break- 
ing the  grim  silence  with  canister,  the  skirmishers  enve- 
loped them  with  a  hot,  galling  fire  of  musketry  from  front 
and  flank,  followed  quickly  by  a  heavier  fire  from  the  main 
line  of  infantry.  The  enemy,  thoroughly  surprised,  returning 
but  a  scattering,  feeble  fire,  gave  way  in  disorder,  as  the  Con- 
federates sprang  forward  with  a  shout,  and  charged  down  the 
hill  after  them,  through  the  horses  of  the  dismounted  men, 
only  halting  once  to  deliver  another  fire.  Thus  the  enemy  were 
driven  back  in  great  confusion  out  of  the  defile,  when  Forrest 


The  Retreat.  ^651 

recalled  his  men  from  their  eager  pursuit,  to  avoid  becoming 
entangled  with  the  Federal  infantry,  the  advance  of  which, 
he  apprehended,  was  near  at  hand.  The  enemy  left  behind  one 
hundred  and  fifty,  killed  and  wounded,  some  fifty  prisoners, 
about  three  hundred  cavalry  horses,  as  many  overcoats,  and  a 
twelve-pounder  Napoleon  gun,  with  its  team  of  eight  horses 
intact  The  Confederate  losses  did  not  exceed  fifteen  killed 
and  forty  wounded.* 

It  was  now  nearly  four  p.m.,  and  heavy  Federal  cavalry 
columns  having  made  the  detour  both  to  the  right  and  left 
of  the  road  through  the  ravine,  were  beginning  to  press  both 
Ross's  and  Armstrong's  mounted  men,  and  Chalmers  reported 
the  near  approach,  in  his  quarter,  of  a  heavy  force.  All  the 
advantages  of  the  situation  had  been  exhausted,  its  further 
defense  was  therefore  inexpedient,  and  Forrest  at  once  gave 
orders  to  retire,  which  was  done  in  good  order,  carrying  off 
his  prisoners  and  captured  gun.  The  roads  were  now  as  bad 
as  ever  an  army  encountered,  and  the  horses  had  to  be  pushed 
through  mud  and  slush  every  step  of  the  way,  often  belly- 
deep>  and  never  less  than  up  to  their  knees.  The  men 
marched,  barefooted  in  many  cases,  often  waist-deep  in  ice- 
cold  water,  while  sleet  beat  upon  their  heads  and  shoulders ; 
nevertheless,  by  one  o'clock  that  night,  they  had  reached 
Sugar  creek,  fourteen  miles  from  Anthony's  HilL  There 
the  stream  was  clear,  with  the  pebbly  bottom  ;  and  the  men 
were  brought  to  a  halt,  in  order  to  wash  the  mire  from  their 
ragged  clothing,  and,  building  fires.  Were  sufiered  to  remain 
at  rest  until  daylight. 

But  at  dawn  the  Federal  cavalry  was  up  again,  and,  in  heavy 
mass,  attacked  Ross's  Brigade,  now  manifestly  bent  on  a  vigo. 


*  It  was  here  Forage-Master  William  M.  Strickland  was  killed,  of  whom  we 
have  made  note  amte  page  461. 


6$2  '  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

rous  attempt  to  press  forward  over  all  obstacles,  so  as  to  strike 
Hood's  force  before  it  might  escape  across  the  Tennessee. 
The  road  to  the  river  was  now  filled  with  the  debris  of  Hood's 
army.  His  ordnance-train  was  still  at  Sugar  creek,  while  the 
mules  had  been  used  to  assist  in  drawing  the  pontoon-train 
to  the  river ;  but  having  been  returned,  the  ordnance-train 
was  just  on  the  point  of  moving.  It  was,  therefore,  necessary 
to  make  another » resolute  stand  to  secure  that  movement 
Accordingly,  about  sunrise,  Reynolds's  and  Field's  Brigades, 
of  Walthall's  Division,  were  put  in  position  some  two  hundred 
yards  southward  of  the  fcwd,  across  a  narrow  ravine,  and 
upon  a  high  ridge  to  the  north  of  the  creek  and  ravine,  where 
they'threw  up  cover  with  rails  and  other  material  at  hand, 
while  two  other  brigades  (Featherston's  and  Palmer's)  were 
established  in  a  strong  position,  half  a  mile  further  to  the 
rear,  which  was  also  strengthened  by  logs,  rails,  and  some  old 
out-houses.  Jackson's  brigades  were  grouped,  Ross  on  the 
right  and  Armstrong  on  the  left  of  the  first  line  of  infantry, 
and  Chalmers  was  halted  in  a  strong  position,  where  the 
parallel  road  which  he  pursued  crossed  Sugar  creek.  Fortu- 
nately, a  dense  fog  enveloped  the  position,  and  enabled  the 
Confederates  to  remain  concealed. 

About  half-past  eight  a.m.,  the  enemy's  cavalry  were  to  be 
heard  fording  the  creek,  scarcely  one  hundred  yards  in  front 
of  the  Confederate  infantry,  until  several  regiments  had  been 
crossed  over  and  formed  in  line.  The  fog  vailed  their  move- 
ments, but  it  was  apparent  that,  apprehensive  of  a  lurking 
danger,  the  enemy  had  dismounted  and  were  advancing,  with 
a  part  of  their  force,  on  foot,  in  front  of  the  cavalry.  Thus 
disposed,  the  Federals  came  within  thirty  paces  of  the  breast- 
works across  their  path,  when,  from  behind  it,  a  broad  stream 
of  rifle-balls,  cleaving  through  the  thick  fog,  spread  confu- 
sion instantly  through  the  Federal  ranks,  and,  springing  for- 
ward, the  infantry  pressed  their  advantage  with  such  vigor 
that  the  enemy,  unable  to  recover  and  rally,  were  driven  back 


Sugar  Creek.  653 

through  their  horse-holders  and  among  their  cavalry,  thus 
increasing  the  disorder.  The  creek  was  about  saddle-skirt 
deep,  and  through  it  the  Federal  cavalry  dashed  rearward, 
without  regard  to  any  ford,  and  after  them  followed  Walthall's 
dauntless  men,  charging  waist-deep  through  the  icy  water. 
Ross,  charging  at  the  same  time  up  the  east  bank  of  the 
stream  with  about  eighty  men,  rode  over  at  least  a  regiment 
of  the  disordered  enemy,  capturing  a  number  of  men  and 
horses.  At  the  same  time.  Colonel  Dillon,  making  a  circuit 
with  the  Second  Mississippi,  of  Armstrong's  Brigade,  cross- 
ed the  creek  above,  struck  the  enemy  on  the  other  flank, 
driving  them  pell-mell  up  the  defile  for  a  mile,  and  killing 
and  wounding  many.  Pursuit  was  now  recalled,  as  at  An- 
thony's Hill,  for  fear  of  collision  with  the  Federal  infantry, 
but  the  position  was  held  by  the  Confederate  infantry  until 
twelve  o'clock,  up  to  which,  the  enemy  having  made  no 
demonstration  upon  the  position,  they  were  again  put  in 
movement  for  the  river.  The  substantial  results  of  this 
handsome  affair  were  the  capture  of  at  least  150  horses  and 
many  overcoats,  of  great  value  to  the  men  in  weather  so 
inclement.  As  many  as  one  hundred  officers  and  men  were 
taken  prisoners,  and  at  least  four  hundred  of  the  enemy  and 
their  horses  were  placed  hors  de  combat.  But  the  most  valua- 
ble effect  was,  that  it  checked  further  close  pressure  upon  the 
rear  of  Hood's  army  by  the  Federal  cavalry,  who  had  now 
been  punished  so  severely  in  men  and  horses,  here  and  at 
Anthony's  Hill,  as  to  be  altogether  unwilling  to  venture  an- 
other collision  with  their  formidable  adversary.  In  the  mean 
time  Chalmers,  having  been  attacked  in  his  position,  repulsed 
his  enemy  handsomely,  and  charging  in  turn,  captured  some 
prisoners,  thus  checking  the  hostile  movements  in  that  direc- 
tion also. 

At  one  P.M.,  Forrest's  Cavalry  was  next  withdrawn  ;  and 
that  night  Walthall's  Division  bivouacked  within  sixteen  miles 
of  the  Tennessee  river,  and  on  the  following  day  returned 


654  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

under  the  command  of  Lieutenant-General  Stewart  And  on 
the  afternoon  of  the  27th,  a  corps  of  infantry  being  left  to 
hold  the  north  bank  of  the  Tennessee,  the  cavalry,  relieved 
from  further  rear-guard  duty,  were  ordered  to  cross  to  the 
south  bank  of  that  stream  on  the  pontoon-bridge.  Chalmers's 
command  brought  up  the  rear  after  night,  and  there  was  not 
a  man  of  all  that  battle  and  weather-tempered  band  who  did 
not  feel  a  sense  of  supreme  relief  at  the  moment. 

COMMENTARIES. 

I.  General  Forrest  completed  his  passage  to  the  north  bank 
of  the  Tennessee,  on  the  i8th  day  of  November,  with  not 
more  than  3000  men,  and  was  then  placed  in  chief  command 
of  the  Confederate  cavalry  with  Hood's  army,  which,  with 
Jackson's  Division,  numbered  5500  effectives,  officers  and 
men.  The  campaign,  with  its  eventful  disasters,  lasted  35 
days,  during  which  Forrest's  Cavalry  were  incessantly  in  sharp 
conflict  with  the  enemy,  at  a  season  of  lingular  inclemency 
With  this  force  he  captured  and  destroyed  16  block-houses, 
20  considerable  railroad  bridges,  more  than  30  miles  of  rail- 
road, of  immediate  vital  importance  to  the  communications  of 
the  enemy,  4  locomotives,  at  least  100  cars,  and  100  wagons. 
He  captured  as  many  as  1800  of  the  enemy,  ioo,cxx>  rounds 
of  ammunition,  200,000  rations,  and  9  pieces  of  artillery  ;  and 
brought  away  3  pieces  of  artillery  and  10  wagons  and  teams 
more  than  he  had  carried  in,  besides  many  horses,  while  the 
aggregate  of  the  killed  and  wounded  of  the  enemy  may  be  set 
down  at  2000..  At  the  same  time,  nothing  in  the  annals  of 
war  exceeds  in  soldierly  excellence  the  conduct  of  the  Confe- 
derate rear-guard  from  Columbia  to  Shoal  creek  ;  and  the 
results  signally  illustrated  how  true  it  is  in  war,  as  the  Latin 
poet  says : 

"  They  can,  because  they  think  they  can."* 


*  Possunt  quia  posse  videntur. 

ViBGiU 


CHAPTER    XXIV. 


Htadquarters  at  Corinth— Riicker's  and  BelFs  Brigades  fiirlougfud, 
oihtrs  sent  to  Okoiona—ffeadguarlers  at  Verona— General  Forrest 
assigned  to  Command  of  Cavalry  of  ike  Departnttnt^Reorganixed 
Divisions  under  Generals  Chalmers,  fackson,  and  Buford—Madt  a 
Lieutenant-General — Formidable  Preparations  for  a  Federal  Raid— 
Major-General  WilsotCs  Movement  against  Monte  Vallo — Conoids  in 
that  Quarter — Forrest  in  Collision  with  the  Enemy — Affairs  at  Bog' 
ler's  Creek  and  Dixie  Station — Stirring  Personal  Combats — Forced 
into  Selma — Dispositions  for  Defense— Selma  stormed  by  Wilson, 
and  Confederates  dispersed^ Adventures  of  General  Forrest  and 
Escort — Headquarters  at  Gainesville — Forest's  Cavalry  lay  dovm 
their  Arms  under  Parole — Concluding  Observations. 

fanuary  1st  to  May,  186;. 

VJENERAL  HOOD  having  established  his  headquarters 
at  Tuscumbia,  General  Forrest,  repairing  thither,  reported  the 
broken-down  condition  of  his  horses  and  his  inability  to  forage 
them  in  that  region.  He  was,  therefore,  permitted  to  put  his 
whole  corps  in  movement,  on  the  29th  of  December,  for  Co- 
rinth, leaving  to  General  Roddy's  small  cavalry  force  the  duty 
of  covering  Hood's  rear.  This  soon  brought  Roddy  in  sharp 
collision  with  a  largely  superior  Federal  force  that  had  been 
thrown  southward  of  the  Tennessee  at  Decatur,  and  which 
pressed  him  actively  back  toward  Tuscumbia.  Armstrong's 
Brigade  was  therefore  recalled  and  directed  to  remain  rear- 


656  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

ward  of  Hood's  infantry  until  they  had  passed  westward  of 
Cherokee  Station.  On  the  30th  of  December,  Forrest,  reach- 
ing Corinth,  furloughed  the  West-Tennesseeans  of  Bell's  Bri- 
gade, to  proceed  to  their  homes  for  fresh  horses  and  clothing. 
And  a  few  days  later,  the  like  privilege  was  granted  to  Ruck- 
er's  Brigade,  and,  indeed,  to  all  the  cavalry  whose  homes  were 
not  either  too  remote — as  Ross's  Texans — or  beyond  the  Con- 
federate lines. 

On  New- Year's  day,  1865,  Hood's  infantry,  beginning  to 
arrive,  were  dispatched,  as  rapidly  as  practicable,  by  rail  to  Tu- 
pelo.  At  the  same  time,  all  the  cavalry  not  on  furlough  were 
ordered  to  Okolona,  to  recuperate  in  that  country,  so  rich  in 
forage. 

One  of  General  Forrest's  first  acts  at  Corinth  was,  on  the 
2d  of  January,  to  indite  a  letter  to  Lieutenant-General  Tay- 
lor— to  whose  command  he  had  been  now  returned — exhibit- 
ing the  situation,  with  a  close  grasp  of  details,  a  broad  reach 
of  military  views.  Remaining  there  until  the  9th  or  loth,  he 
dispatched  picked,  trusty  scouts  into  Middle  Tennessee,  to 
ascertain  the  exact  situation  of  the  main  body  of  the  enemy, 
and  reliable  indicia  of  probable  offensive  movements.  Gene- 
ral Bell  was  likewise  recalled  by  the  25  th,  with  orders,  as  he 
returned,  to  glean  West-Tennessee  for  absentees  from  mUita- 
ry  service.  And  at  the  same  time,  measures  were  taken  to 
secure  timely  information  of  any  offensive  movement  from  the 
quarter  of  Memphis,  or  up  the  Tennessee  river.  Then,  leav- 
ing Ross's  Brigade  to  garrison  Corinth,  about  the  12th  of 
January,  Forrest  established  his  headquarters  at  Verona, 
some  fifty-five  miles  southward  of  Corinth.  Here,  occupied 
assiduously  with  measures  looking  to  the  recruitn^ent  of  his 
gaunt  ranks,  the  re-horsing  of  cavalry  and  artiller)',  and  to 
the  close,  stringent  search  of  the  country  for  absentees  from 
his  regiments,  Forrest  remained  until  about  the  ist  of  March. 
For  some  time  aware  that  he  was  to  be  assigned  to  the  com- 
mand of  the  cavalry  of  the  Department  of  Alabama,  Missis* 
sippiy  and  East-Louisiana,  the  order  to  that  effect  reached  him 


Forrest's  Commafid  Enlarged. 


657 


about  the  24th  of  February,  when  he  assumed  the  command 
assigned  him.  It  embraced  about  10,000  men,  widely  dis- 
persed over  three  States,  and  to  combine  these  as  speedily  as 
possible  for  the  most  part  into  one  coherent,  effective  body 
became  his  immediate  aim. 

One  of  his  early  measures  was  to  group  the  troops  of  the 
several  States  into  State  divisional  organizations,  as  far  as 
practicable.  Brigadier-General  Chalmers  was  placed  over  the 
division  embracing  the  brigades  made  up  of  Mississippians ; 
Brigadier-General  Buford,  one  constituted  of  the  Alabama 
cavalry  and  the  gallant  remains  of  his  old  Kentucky  brigade, 
with  orders  to  proceed  to  Monte  Vallo,  Ala.,  and  there  organize 
his  new  division.  The  Tennessee  troops,  with  Ross's  Texans, 
were  assigned  to  the  command  of  General  Jackson.  And,  as 
under  this  arrangement  Colonel  McCuUoch  necessarily  lost 
the  command  of  a  brigade  after  having  exercised  it  so  long 
with  distinguished  efficiency,*  his  regiment,  the  famous  Se- 
cond Missouri  Cavalry,  was  excluded  from  either  brigade  or 
divisional  association  and  constituted  a  special  scouting  force, 
receiving  orders  direct  from  Forrest's  headquarters.  These 
and  other  orders,  devised  for  the  thorough  organization  of  his 
resources — including  the  Mississippi  Militiaf — upon  the  most 
effective  footing  possible,  were  promptly  matured  and  issued. 
Indeed,  nothing  calculated  to  that  end  appears  to  have  been 
overlooked.  But  meanwhile,  he  had  been  promoted  to  the 
grade  of  Lieutenant-Gcneral.  J 

Before  the  middle  of  March,  Chalmers's  Division  was  organ- 
ized with  an  effective  aggregate  of  4SOO,§  divided  into  three 


*  He  had  been  many  times  recom- 
mended for  promotion  since  early  in 
1862 — that  is,  by  all  his  commanders. 
Colonel  I^ell  was  promoted  alxtut  this 
time,  and  Urigadier-Gcncrals  Starke 
and  Campbell  having  joined,  there 
was  no  longer  a  brigade  command  va- 
cant 


t  Composed  of  classes  of  citizens  not 
subject  to  military  duty  under  the  con- 
scription laws  of  the  Confederate  States. 

X  Commission  dated  2Sth  of  Febru- 
ary, 1865. 

§  Up  to  the  17th  of  March,  Chalmers 
was  at  Columbus,  Miss.,  and  Huford  kc 
Monte  Vallo,  Ala. 


658  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

brigades,  commanded  respectively  by  Brigadier-Generals  F. 
C.  Armstrong,  Wirt  Adams,  and  Peter  B.  Starke.     Jackson 
also  had  his  division  in  shape,  about  3800  strong,  the  Tennes- 
see brigades  of  Generals  T.  H.  Bell  and  Alexander  \V.  Camp- 
bell being  increased  to  3200  rank  and  file.     As  yet,  Buford 
had  not  been  able  to  organize  his  di\ision.     Roddy's  force, 
which  was  to  constitute  an  important  part  of  it,  was  necessa- 
rily detached,  and  actively  on  duty  in  North- Alabama,  watch- 
ing the  movements  of  a  heavy  Federal  cavalry  force,  accumu- 
lated just  across  the  Tennessee  river,  at  Gravelly  Springs. 
The  other  two  brigades,  (Alabamians.)  Clanton's  and  Arm- 
stead's,  constituting  his  command,  were  likewise  detached, 
guarding  one  of  the  then  threatened  flanks  or  approaches  to 
Mobile. 

During  this  period,  thus  mainly  occupied— from  the  first  of 
January  to  the  middle  of  March — with  the  cares  of  reorga- 
nization, numerous  hostile  demonstrations  had  taken  place 
upon  the  outskirts  of  the  territory  intrusted  to  General  For- 
rest, and  as  many  counter  movements  on  his  side  were  made ; 
but  in  each  instance  the  encmv  recoiled  without  a  collision. 
Meanwhile,  also  remaining  at  Verona  until  the  ist  of  March, 
he  had  then  transferred  his  headquarters  to  West-Point, 
forty-two  miles  southward,  on  the  line  of  the  Mobile  and 
Ohio  Railroad. 

In  the  interval  the  Federal  authorities  had  not  been  in- 
active. The  cavalry  in  Middle  Tennessee,  to  the  number  kA 
22,000,  had  been  collected  in  cantonments  about  Gravelly 
Springs  and  Waterloo,  just  northward,  as  we  have  indicatctl. 
of  the  Tennessee  river,  near  favorable  points  for  the  passaije 
of  that  stream,  for  piercing  either  the  heart  of  Alabama  or 
Mississippi.  Formed  into  ^xo^  divisions.  Major-General 
James  Wilson  was  in  command  of  this  formidable  force. 
A  distinguished  graduate  of  the  West-Point  Military 
Academy,  and  standing  very  high  as  a  cavalry  officer  with 
his  suj)eriors,  Wilson  had  devoted  himself  to  the  drill,  orga- 


General  Wilson  Afield.  659 

nization,  and  discipline  of  his  corps.  Instituting  "a  thorough 
system  of  instruction,"  he  used  every  effort  to  bring  this 
splendid  body  of  horse  into  the  highest  possible  state  of 
efficiency  and  mobility.*  His  men  all  in  hand,  the  vast 
resources  of  the  arsenals  and  supply  depots  of  the  United 
States  were  at  his  easy  disposition,  and  so  he  was  left  free  to 
give  his  thoughts  and  care  exclusively  to  the  military  mould- 
ing of  his  force.  His  adversarj',  on  the  other  hand,  had  his 
means,  as  we  have  seen,  scattered  over  at  least  two  great  States, 
Alabama  and  Mississippi.  He  had  to  recruit  his  regiments, 
to  disperse  his  men  to  procure  remounts,  and  secure  cloth- 
ing, to  glean  the  lean  Confederate  arsenals  and  armories  for 
weapons  and  ammunition,  to  watch  a  long  frontier  bristling 
with  foes  ;  in  sooth,  not  only  to  mould  resources  into  effective 
form,  but  in  great  part  to  create  them. 

In  P'ebruary,  however,  one  of  Wilson  s  Divisions  was  de- 
tached for  service  elsewhere,  but  he  was  left  with  17,000  men, 
5000  of  whom,  it  appears,  were  without  horses.f  Those 
mounted,  about  twelve  thousand  strong,  constituted  three 
divisions,  under  Generals  McCook,  Long,  and  Upton.  Mean- 
while, Canby  had  commenced  his  operations  for  the  reduction 
of  Mobile.  And  on  the  i8th  of  March,  General  Wilson  threw 
his  three  mounted  divisions,  w-ith  about  1500  dismounted 
men,  to  the  south  side  of  the  Tennessee  at  Chickasaw 
Station,  on  the  Memphis  and  Charleston  Railroad,  with  the 
immediate  object  of  making  a  diversion  in  behalf  of  the 
operations  against  Mobile,  by  penetrating  deep  into  Ala- 
bama. Four  days  later,  accordingly,  he  set  out  from  Chicka- 
saw upon  his  expedition,  invested  by  General  Grant  with  the 
widest  range  of  discretion  in  his  operations.  His  equipage 
included  a  pontoon-train  of  fifty  wagons  ;  otherwise,  he  moved 


*  Vidi  Andrews's  History  of  the  Campaign  of  Mobile,  p.  243, 
t  Vide  Andrews. 


66o  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest 

with  not  more  than  250  supply  and  baggage-wagons.  But 
each  man  carried  five  days'  "  light  rations  "  in  his  haversack, 
and  on  his  horse  twenty-four  pounds  of  grain,  100  rounds  of 
ammunition,  and  a  pair  of  extra  horse-shoes.  Five  days'  n- 
tions  of  hard  bread  and  ten  severally  of  sugar,  coft'ee,  and  salt 
were  carried,  moreover,  on  pack  animals. 

As  we  have  said,  Roddy  had  been  in  watchful  obser\'ation 
of  this  force  for  some  time,  and  so  wary  a  soldier  as  Forrest 
had  not  failed  to  hold  it  under  constant  sur\'eillance.  He  was 
therefore  promptly  informed  of  Wilson's  movement  upon 
Chickasaw,  and  of  his  departure  for  that  point. 

In  anticipation  of  it,  however,  Chalmers,  as  early  as  the 
1 7th  of  March,  had  been  ordered  to  establish  himself  with  Arm- 
strong s  and  Starke's  Brigades  (3200  strong)  at  Pickers\'illc, 
Alabama,  the  other  brigade  of  the  division  (Wirt  Adams's)  at 
the  moment  being  on  the  march  to  Columbus,  from  Jackson, 
Mississippi.  Bell's  and  Campbell's  Brigades — some  3200  men 
— were  at  West-Point.*  Therefore,  6400  men,  with  such 
force  as  Buford  might  assemble,  were  all  that  Forrest  could 
rely  on  to  confront  his  adversarj',  as  it  was  thought  essential 
to  leave  Adams's  Brigade  to  guard  the  line  of  the  Mobile  and 
Ohio  Railroad.  Having  duly  communicated  to  General  Tay- 
lor tidings  of  the  dangerous  expedition  afield  in  his  dej)art- 
ment,  that  officer,  on  the  24th,  telegraphed  orders  to  Forrest 
to  concentrate  his  available  forces  upon  Selma,  the  supposed 
objective  of  the  enemy. 

Meanwhile,  both  Chalmers  and  Jackson  had  for  some  da}'S 
been  held  in  readiness  to  move  at  " six  /iours*  notice"  and  on 
the  25th  Armstrong's  Brigade  and  a  battery  were  put  in 
motion  for  Selma.  The  next  day  Chalmers's  other  brigade, 
(Starke's,)  and  Bell's  and  CampbelFs  Brigades,  of  Jackson's 
Division,  were  likewise   ordered  to  march   in   the   same  di- 


*  Ross's  Brigade  was  still  at  Corinth. 


Forrest  in  Motion.  66 1 

.•  rection — ^Jackson's  command  moving  first  upon  Monte  Vallo, 
about  fifty  miles  firom  Sclma,  and  forty  eastward  of  Tusca- 
loosa, important  as  the  centre  of  a  number  of  iron  mines  and 
foundries,  worked  for  the  Confederate  Ordnance  Department. 
On  the  27th,  Forrest  also  set  out  for  the  theatre  of  impending 
operations.  At  Columbus  he  learned,  through  scouts,  that  it 
was  manifest  the  Federal  column  was  aiming  for  Monte  Vallo. 
This  he  at  once  reported  to  his  superior,  General  Taylor,  by 
telegraph,  and  urged  the  concentration  of  all  possible  re- 
sources for  the  defense  of  Selma.  Directing  Jackson  now  to 
press  forward  to  Tuscaloosa  with  the  utmost  celerity,  Forrest 
set  out  for  the  same  point  on  the  morning  of  the  28th,  and 
reached  there  in  a  ride  of  thirty  hours.  There  he  learned 
definitely  of  the  movement  toward  Monte  Vallo.  Again  com- 
municating with  General  Taylor,  he  reported  his  movements 
and  dispositions. 

In  the  mean  while,  the  enemy,  with  i3,ocx)  horse,  1500  in- 

;  fantry,  and  three  batteries,  had  taken  two  lines  of  »^arch  ; 
Upton's  Division  the  most  eastern,  through  Russellville  to 
Saunders's  Ferry  on  the  west  fork  of  the  Black  Warrior 
river;  the  other  two — long  in  advance  with  the  pontoon- 
train — following  the  road  toward  Tuscaloosa.  General  Wil- 
son, on  the  27th,  was  at  Jasper,  and  there  hearing  of  Chal- 
mers's movement,  apprehending  that  it  portended  a  concen- 
tration of  Forrest's  Cavalry  to  meet  him,  he  at  once  stripped 
to  his  pack-train  and  artillery,  and  ordered  his  three  divisions 
to  -move  in  light  order,  with  all  haste,  by  way  of  Ely  ton,  to 
Monte  Vallo,  leaving  the  wagon-trains  to  follow.  I  le  was  at  that 
place  on  the  30th,  and  there  detached  Croxton's  Brigade — Mc- 
Cook's  Division — to  hasten  to  Tuscaloosa  to  burn  the  Uni- 
versity,* and  the  military  stores  accumulated  there. 


•  A  military  organization  had  lH?cn  burn  the  buildings,  and  it  was  a  savage 
given  to  this  University,  but  that  as-  act,  unworthy  of  civilised  war.  Sec 
snredly  did  not  warrant  the  order  to     Andrews,  p.  246. 


I 


662  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest 

It  was  Upton's  Division  that,  flooring  the  railroad  bridge 
near  Hillsboro,  crossed  the  stream  then,  and  pushing  on. 
approached  Monte  Vallo.  late  on  the  evening  of  the  30th,  when 
he  encountered  Generals  Dan  Adams  and  Roddy.  Several 
days  previously,  General  Roddy,  having  been  ordered  by 
General  Taylor  to  hasten  southward  with  his  command  to 
meet  a  hostile  force  moving  northward  from  Pensacola  against 
Montgomery,  had  already  been  thrown  across  the  Alabama 
river  at  Selma,  when  the  order  was  countermanded,  and  his 
destination  changed  to  Monte  Vallo,  to  report  to  General 
Adams.  Recrossing  the  river,  and  making  a  forced  march  of 
fifty  miles,  he  reached  the  scene  just  in  time  to  meet  Upton  s 
Division,  with  his  petty  force,  a  little  northward  of  Monte  Vallo. 
Overborne  by  numbers,  after  a  sharp  rencounter,  Adams  and 
Roddy  were  driven  back  through  the  place,  and  the  Federal 
Commander  was  enabled  to  execute  the  purpose  which  had 
led  him  thither — the  destruction  of  four  iron-furnaces,  a  roll- 
ing-mill, and  five  collieries  in  the  neighborhood.  On  the  31st. 
the  other  two  Federal  divisions  arrived,  and  also  General  Wil- 
son, in  person. 

The  Confederates,  meanwhile,  having  rallied,  had  reappeared 
before  the  place  as  the  Federal  Commander  reached  the  scene. 
Upton's  Division  was  at  once  thrown  out  to  engage  them, 
and  a  keen  collision  ensued.  Greatly  inferior  in  numbers,  the 
Confederates  were  soon  worsted,  and  driven  southward,  to- 
ward Randolph,  to  the  "  Six  Mile  Creek."  where  Roddy,  beinc: 
reenforced  by  Crossland's  small  brigade  of  Kenfuckians,  and 
the  ground  being  rather  favorable,  a  stand  was  made.  As 
Crossland  came  up,  he  threw  his  little  force  gallantly  across 
the  road  down  which  the  Federals  were  pressing  strenuously, 
and  presently,  taking  the  offensive,  he  charged,  in  tufn.  half  a 
mile,  thus  gaining  a  good  position  at  a  bridge,  which  he  ^^'^ 
able  to  hold  against  several  vigorous  attempts  to  cjslodge 
him.  and  until  at  length  he  was  about  to  be  turned  o^^^*^^ 
flanks.       Then,  sending  his  horses  rearward,  Cross]ai*d  ^^ 


Ar.  Forrest  upon  the  Federal  Flank.  663 

i   back  slowly  on  foot,  as  the  enemy  pressed  hotly  after,  receiv- 
.,    ing,  however,  at  least  one  galling  fire  from  Crossland's  deadly 
■     rifles.    The  situation  was  one  of  extreme  peril,  but  as  the 
:    ground — a  thick  pine  wood— was  favorable,  he,  with  equal 
.     skill  and  resolution,  kept  a  steady  front  to  the  enemy  of  half 
his  men  at  a  time  for  several  miles,  while  the  other  half  would 
fall  back,  re-form,  and  await  the  enemy  in  its  turn.     The  Fe- 
derals  charged,  by  regiments,  with  much  spirit  and  vigor,  but 
were  met  with  a  courage  and  tenacity  that  has  never  been 
exceeded.     Crossland,  originally  reduced  to  about  600  rank 
and  file,  now  finding  that  he  was  rapidly  dwindling  away  by 
the  casualties  of  the  conflict,  attempted  to  remount ;    this  be- 
ing observed,  the  enemy  charged  upon  the  Kentuckians  while 
thus  engaged,  and  some  captures  resulted,  making  his  losses 
in  killed,  wounded,  and  prisoners,  a  little  over  100  men.    The 
rest  of  his  command  he  was  able  to  lead  safely  away  from  the 
field.     Meanwhile,  General  Roddy  had  rallied  or  massed  the 
greater  part  of  his  brigade  a  short  distance  northward  of  Ran- 
dolph, and  there  Crossland  joined  him. 

During  this  time,  Forrest  was  rapidly  riding  across  the 
country  from  Centreville  toward  Monte  Vallo,  with  his  staff*  and 
escort,  some  seventy-five  in  number,  and  it  so  happened  he 
came  within  sight  of  this  road,  just  where  the  conflict  we  have 
related  had  been  fought,  and  he  observed  that  it  was  filled 
with  Federal  cavalry,  at  a  rapid  trot  moving  southward.  Ever 
swift  and  daring  in  his  measures,  he  determined  to  avail  him- 
self of  a  favorable  conformation  of  the  ground  to  make  a  dash 
at  the  hostile  column,  great  as  was  the  disparity.  Accordingly, 
forming  his  little  following — upon  each  man  of  whom  he  could 
rely — into  a  column  of  fours,  when  within  fifty  yards  of  the 
road  he  charged  boldly  from  his  covert  into  the  moving  mass, 
and  broke  through.  Turning,  he  now  dashed  upon  the  frag- 
ment northward  of  him,  and  drove  it  rearward  for  half  a  mile. 
But  there  his  adversary  stood  drawn  up  in  a  heavy  line  of 
battle  to  receive  him.      Changing  his  direction  at  once  to  the 


664  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

southward  at  a  charging  pace,  he  now  found  the  road  strewn 
with  signs  of  a  recent  battle,  inchiding  some  fifteen  or  twenty 
dead  Federals  and  some  ten  or  twelve  of  Crossland's  Ken- 
tuckians  ;  moreover,  having  also  captured  several  prisoners,  he 
learned  that  there  had  been  a  good  deal  of  fighting  in  that 
quarter,  and  that  General  Wilson  was  already  southward  of 
him,  pressing  Roddy  and  Crossland  back  toward  Selma.  In 
his  own  little  affair  he  had  lost  three  men,  and  being  in  the 
very  midst  of  the  whole  Federal  force  with  now  less  than  75 
men,  it  was  incumbent  upon  him  to  withdraw,  and  find  his 
way  speedily  to  the  main  body  of  his  force  southward.  Mak- 
ing a  slight  detour  from  the  line  of  the  road,  after  a  rapid 
ride  of  six  or  eight  miles,  he  succeeded  in  finding  Roddy  and 
Crossland,  about  ten  o'clock  at  night,  confronting  the  enemy 
near  Randolph. 

Informed  of  the  situation  and  of  the  occurrences  of  the  dav, 
he  dispatched  an  order  to  Jackson — supposed  to  be  at  Scotts- 
ville — to  move  swiftly  across  to  Ccntrcville,  and,  throwing  his 
division  upon  Wilson's  right  flank,  harass  him  as  much  as 
possible,  after  which  to  effect  a  junction  before  they  were 
forced  back  into  Sclma.  Again  reporting  the  situation  to 
General  Taylor  at  Sclma,  Forrest  repeated  his  recommenda- 
tion of  a  general  concentration  for  the  defense  of  Sclma,  and 
inquired  the  present  locality  of  Chalmers's  Division.  The 
answer  being  that  Chalmers  was  then  at  Plantersville,  about 
twenty  miles  southward  of  Randolph,  Forrest  requested — by 
telegraph — that  the  division  should  at  once  be  dispatched  to 
his  aid  in  the  direction  of  Randolph,  so  that  he  might  delay 
the  enemy  as  long  as  possible,  and  secure  time,  both  for  the 
concentration  of  troops  for  the  final  defense  of  Selma,  and  the 
removal  of  stores  from  that  depot. 

During  the  night  of  the  31st,  the  enemy  remained  quietly 
in  front  of  Randolph  ;  but  they  had  intercepted  dispatches 
both  from  Jackson  and  Captain  Anderson,  of  Forrest's  staff", 
which  divulged  to  General  Wilson  the  plans  of  his  adversar)-, 


Confederate  Forces  Divided.  665 

the  scattered  disposition,  at  the  moment,  of  the  Confederate 
forces,  and  the  weakness  of  Forrest's  command,  then  im- 
mediately in  his  front.  Jackson,  as  he  ascertained  from  these 
dispatches,  was  still  westward  of  the  Cahawba,  moving  toward 
Centreville.  Already  he  had  come  in  collision  with  Croxton, 
and  was  expecting  another  conflict.  Wilson,  therefore,  cog- 
nizant of  the  small  available  force  in  his  path,  detached  Mc- 
Cook  with  another  brigade  to  seek  to  form  a  junction  with 
Croxton  and  occupy  Jackson,  while  he  would  press  directly 
for  Selma  with  his  other  divisions,  still  at  least  9000  strong. 

To  meet  this  force,  Forrest  had  now  little  over  1 500  men, 
portions  of  Roddy's  and  Crossland's  Brigades,  and  some  raw 
militia  that  had  been  in  garrison  at  Monte  Vallo  under  Gene- 
ral Dan  Adams. 

At  sunrise,  on  the  ist  of  April,  the  enemy  were  promptly  in 
their  saddles,  Wilson  now,  as  we  have  said,  fully  conscious 
of  the  extreme  weakness  of  any  enemy  he  could  possibly  en- 
counter. The  Confederates,  of  course,  retired,  but  in  the 
course  of  the  next  eight  or  ten  miles  there  was  some  spirited 
skirmishing  with  the  Federal  advance,  \yhich  several  times 
was  checked  by  Forrest  and  his  escort,  and  portions  of  Rod- 
dy's and  Crossland's  commands.  Giving  General  Taylor  tele- 
graphic intelligence  of  his  inability  to  make  substantial  head 
against  Wilson  with  his  present  force,  about  twelve  m.,  Forrest 
learned,  to  his  chagrin,  from  Captain  Goodman,  of  Chalmers's 
staff,  near  Maplesville  Station,  that  that  officer  was  not  south- 
ward, on  the  riantersville  road,  as  had  been  reported,  but  was 
really  northward,  moving  by  another  road  to  the  left  hand. 
Couriers  were  accordingly  dispatched  hurriedly  in  all  probable 
directions,  to  find  Chalmers,  and  guide  him  to  a  junction  in 
front  of  Selma,  at  the  expense,  if  needful,  of  his  train  and  ar- 
tillery. Several  hours  later,  a  dispatch  from  General  Chal- 
mers himself,  announced  his  exertions  to  reach  a  point  south- 
ward (Dixie  Station)  as  soon  as  his  horses  would  enable  him. 
Having  learned,  meanwhile,  from  General  Adams,  that  there 


666  Campaigns  of  General  ForresL 

was  a  strong  defensive  position  some  four  miles  southward, 
that  officer  was  directed  to  fall  back  and  occupy  it  with  the 
artillery  and  the  main  body  of  Roddy's,  Crossland's.  and  his 
own  men.  Forrest  then  threw  himself  across  the  path  of  the 
enemy  with  his  escort  and  lOO  of  the  Kentuckians,  resolved 
to  dispute  every  inch  of  the  ground,  to  gain  time  for  Adams 
to  get  into  position  and  arrange  for  its  defense.  For  several 
miles  did  he  boldly  grapple  with  the  Federal  advance,  con- 
stantly checking  it  by  a  scries  of  charges  of  characteristic 
audacity,  and  only  falling  back  when  the  numbers  brought  up 
were  overpowering.  But  by  four  p.m.,  he  had  been  forced  to 
fall  back  upon  Adams,  where  he  hoped  for  a  junction  also 
with  Chalmers. 

The  position  was,  in  fact,  very  favorable  for  defense.  Kog- 
ler  s  creek,  with  rugged  banks,  intersected  the  railroad  and 
highway,  forming  a  narrow  valley  rightward  of  the  former, 
with  steep,  wooded  hills  commanding  the  several  approaches 
from  Randolph  and  Maples ville.  On  these  ridges  the  Con- 
federates were  drawn  up  —  Roddy's  Brigade  immediately 
astride  the  highway,  supporting  the  artillery,  which  swept 
both  the  road  from  Randolph  and  the  one  from  Maplcsville  : 
on  his  left  lay  Crossland,  and  on  his  right  Adams  with  the 
remains  of  the  State  troops,  and  a  small  infantry  battalion 
from  Selma,  resting  rightward  on  Mulberry  creek.  They  did 
not  exceed  in  all  1350  men,  and  to  these  now  Forrest  added 
about  150  officers  and  men.  making  a  force  of  scarcely  1500 
men,  and  si.x  guns. 

About  four  I^^f.,  the  enemy — Long's  Division — came  up.  and 
promptly  and  resolutely  assailed  the  right  of  Roddy's  position 
with  a  mounted  battalion,  (Seventeenth  Indiana.)  with  drawn 
sabres.  It  was  handsomely  done,  and  the  Confederates  were 
thrown  into  a  good  deal  of  confusion,  giving  way  in  disorder. 
Forrest,  observing  the  disaster,  dashed  upon  the  scene  with 
his  staff,  and,  assisting  Generals  Roddy  and  Adams,  succeed- 
ed in  reestablishing  their  lines,  while  a  number  of  the  enemy 


Federal  Charge.  667 

were  left  on  the  ground  cither  killed  or  wounded.  Having 
thus  restored  the  integrity  of  his  lines  in  that  quarter,  Forrest 
returned  to  where  his  artillery  was  posted. 

During  this  time  the  other  Federal  division — Upton's — 
guided  by  the  sounds  of  battle,  had  been  rapidly  approaching 
by  the  Maplesville  road.  Previously,  Forrest  had  thrown  for- 
ward that  indomitable,  hard  fighter,  Lieutenant  Nathan  Boon, 
of  his  escort,  with  ten  men,  to  reconnoitre,  and  presently  the 
shrill  clangor  of  a  bugle  was  heard  beyond  an  old  field  in  front 
of  the  Confederate  position,  and,  soon  after,  Boon  and  his 
little  band  dashed  into  sight,  closely  pressed  by  the  enemy, 
who  charged  across  the  field  in  right  gallant  fashion  in  line. 
The  Confederates  now  opened  upon  them  with  a  destructive 
fire,  both  of  canister  and  rifles,  emptying  a  number  of  saddles. 
Ill  the  mean  time,  Upton,  having  come  upon  the  scene  right- 
ward,  dismounted  his  division,  and  pressed  up  to  the  attack 
upon  the  Confederate  right.  There  were  the  militia,  and 
they  could  not  be  made  to  stand,  but  fell  back  in  confusion. 
The  left  had  held  their  position  successfully,  but  there  was 
now  imminent  risk  of  being  turned  and  cut  oft"  from  the  ford 
of  Dixie  creek  ;  Forrest  therefore  ordered  his  line  withdrawn 
to  secure  that  crossing.  This  being  observed,  doubtless,  by 
the  enem}*,  a  vigr)rous  charge  by  platoons  was  made,  to  meet 
which  Forrest  had  at  the  moment  available  only  his  famous 
escort  and  staff  and  the  section  of  Adams's  artillery.  From 
the  latter,  one  discharge  was  secured,  but,  seeing  that  the  in- 
fantry support  had  gone,  the  artillerists  abandoned  their  guns 
in  position,  and  retreated  abruptly.  On  came  the  Federal 
cavalry,  with  their  sabres  drawn,  when  Forrest  sprang  to  meet 
them  with  his  escort ;  but  he  was  swept  back  into  the  woods 
about  fifty  yards  by  the  overwhelming  stress  of  numbers  ;  and 
such  was  the  momentum  of  the  Federal  charge,  that  one  of 
their  horses,  striking  squarely  against  the  wheel  of  a  piece, 
broke  every  spoke,  and  split  his  own  breast  open.  A  single 
artillerist  had  remained  staunchly  at  that  piece  ;  gathering  a 


668  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest 

handspike  from  the  trail,  with  one  blow  he  dashed  out  the 
brains  of  the  overthrown  trooper,  and  knocked  another  from 
his  seat,  after  which  feat,  shouldering  his  handspike,  he  deli- 
berately made  his  way  rearward. 

By  this  time,  five  p.m.,  General  Forrest,  his  staff,  and 
escort  were  engaged  in  a  hand-to-hand  mildc  with  the  enemy, 
and  the  General  became  involved  in  one  of  those  personal  ren- 
counters that  have  marked  his  life,  and  his  escapes  from 
which  apj)car  incredible.  He  was  set  upon  by  four  troopers 
in  the  road  at  one  moment.  Shooting  one,  the  others  dashed 
down  upon  him  with  uplifted  sabres,  which  he  attempted  to 
parry  with  his  revolver,  but  received  several  slight  wounds 
and  bruises,  both  on  his  head  and  arm.  Three  others  came 
up,  meanwhile,  and  took  part,  so  that  actually  as  many  as  six 
troopers  were  either  attempting  to  sabre  or  shoot  him.  By 
this  time  the  hammer  of  his  pistol  had  been  hacked  away,  so 
that  the  weapon  was  useless,  while  his  right  arm  was  sorely 
weakened  by  the  many  blows  which  had  fallen  upon  it.  His 
staff  and  escort  could  not  help  him  ;  for  all,  at  the  moment,  were 
strenuously  engaged  in  the  like  personal  combats.  On  either 
hand  the  roadway  was  hedged  by  a  dense,  impenetrable 
thicket,  and  rearward  was  choked  by  a  two-horse  wagon, 
which  barred  his  escape  in  that  direction,  while  his  enemies 
filled  the  road  frontward,  fiercely  cutting  and  shooting  at  him. 
Escape,  indeed,  seemed  hopeless  ;  for,  as  if  to  render  it  utterly 
so,  his  horse  was  now  severely  wounded  by  a  pistol-ball  in  the 
thigh.  But  it  was  not  the  habit  of  the  man  to  look  upon 
aught  as  hopeless.  Wheeling  his  horse  toward  the  wagon, 
giving  him  the  spur  fiercely,  and  lifting  him  with  the  bridle, 
the  brave  animal  rose  into  the  air,  and  surmounted  the  obstacle 
at  the  bound,  going  some  thirty  steps  before  he  was  halted, 
and  Forrest  turned  to  sur\'ey  the  field.  Scarcely  had  he  done 
so,  when  he  was  charged  by  a  Federal  officer,  who  lunged  at 
him  with  his  sabre ;  but  Forrest  parried  the  thrust  with  his 
other  pistol,  which  he  had  been  able  to  draw,  and,  firing, 


Gallant  Fighting  of  Forrest  and  Staff.       669 

killed  his  resolute  adversary.*  By  this  time,  however,  those 
whom  he  had  eluded  by  his  desperate  leap  over  the  wagon 
had  contrived  to  pass  it,  and  were  again  upon  him  ;  but  Colo- 
nel M.  C.  Galloway  (of  Memphis)  and  Dr.  Jones,  of  his  staff, 
by  this  time  had  come  to  the  aid  of  their  imperiled  chief,  and, 
firing,  had  each  put  an  adversary  Jiors  dc  combat,  Forrest 
killed  yet  another,  and  Galloway,  wounding  still  another,  took 
him  prisoner.  Meanwhile,  the  escort,  fighting  with  their 
usual  fearless  prowess,  had  first  checked  and  then  driven  their 
enemy  back,  which  discovered  by  the  few  who  survived,  they 
retreated  precipitately,  leaving  him  and  his  intrepid  party 
masters  of  the  field.  The  enemy  had  used  the  sabre  almost 
exclusively.  Forrest  and  his  staff  were  armed,  each  with  two 
navy  revolvers,  and  the  men  with  Spencer  rifles  as  well  as 
pistols.  It  was  a  contest  of  sabres  with  firearms,  in  a  thick 
wood,  with  the  odds  of  four  to  one  against  the  Confederates. 
Forrest,  Lieutenant  Boon,  and  five  of  his  men  only  were 
wounded,  while  some  thirty  of  the  enemy  were  killed  and  as 
many  as  sixty  were  left  in  hospital,  near  by,  badly  wounded. 

The  caissons  had  been  carried  off,  but  it  was  necessary  to 
abandon  the  section  of  artillery  to  the  enemy,  as  Forrest  fell 
back  across  the  creek.  Previously,  likewise,  some  200  of  the 
State  troops  and  infantry  had  also  fallen  into  their  possession. 

This  stand  and  combat  which  we  have  related,  would  not 
have  been  undertaken  but  for  the  supposition  that  General 
Chalmers,  from  his  reported  short  distance  from  the  ground, 
would  be  able  to  bring  his  division  up  in  time  to  enable  For- 
rest to  profit  by  the  favorable  character  of  the  position  to 
make  a  prolonged,  effective  resistance  there.  But  Chalmers, 
untowardly  diverted  and  retarded  by  conflicting  orders,  and 
bad  roads  and  swamps  across  his  route,  had  really  gone  to- 
ward Marion  with  Starke's  Brigade. 


♦  Captain  Taylor.     Vide  Andrews,  p.  25a 


i 


670  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

Adams\s   men  were  now  utterly  demoralized,   and   many 
too,  of  Roddy's  were  dashing  rearward  toward   Solma,  with 
little  or  no  organization  ;  meanwhile,  the  enemy  were  persist- 
ently pressing  after.     But  Forrest  still  interiDosed  his  staff  and 
escort  across  their  path,  and  again  a  squadron,  apparently,  was 
launched  upon  him  ;  but  standing  at  bay,  they  were  repelled 
and  driven  back  across  a  creek.     Roddy,  meanwhile,  having 
gathered  some  three  or  four  hundred  of  his  best  men,  was  or- 
dered to  cover  the  rear  as  long  as  practicable.     By  this  time, 
Forrest's  wounds  had  become  very  painful,  and  he  rode  with 
his  staft'  and  escort  rapidly  to  Plantersville.     General  Adams 
was  there,  and  had  succeeded  in  again  embodying  the  mass  of 
the  Confederates.     But,  unluckily,  Chalmers  was  not  there. 
Scarcely  had  General  Forrest  had  time  to  telegraph  General 
Taylor  the  present  state  of  affairs,  before  the  eager   enemy 
appeared,  and,  without  halting,  dashed  down  upon  the  Confed- 
erates, who  at  the  instant,  for  the  most  part,  were  occupied 
drawing  forage  and  subsistence  from  the  stores  accimiulated 
there.     Straightway  the  panic  was  general,  there  was  mount- 
ing in  hot  haste,  and  the  larger  portion  made  off,  as  fast  as 
their  horses  could  carry  them,  to  Selma.     But  around  Forrest 
rallied  his  matchless  escort,  each  one  as  doughty  as  any  Pala- 
din of  story,  and  with  them  he  quickly  sallied  forward.      Pre- 
sently, a  short  but  most  spirited  engagement  took  place,  which, 
thanks  to  the  virtue  of  the  Spencer  (repeater)  rifle  in  the  sure, 
steady  hands  of  that  sturdy  band,  resulted  in  forcing  the  Fed- 
erals to  retire  upon  their  main  force  about  sunset. 

Apprehensive  that  Roddy  and  the  rear-guard  had  been  cap- 
cured,  after  a  brief  conference  with  Adams,  Forrest  directed 
that  officer  to  fall  back,  that  night,  to  Selma,  witli  such  forces 
as  could  be  collected,  while  he  would  go  in  quest  of  Chalmers 
with  his  escort,  now  reduced  to  not  more  than  forty  men,  by 
courier  and  other  detached  service,  and  casualties. 

Taking  the  road  toward  Marion,  some  five  miles  from  Plan- 
tersville, Forrest  was  relieved  somewhat  by  coming  upon  Rod- 


Concentration.  671 

dy  and  his  detachment,  seeking  their  way  toward  Sehna,  after 
having  been  pressed  off  the  road  by  the  enemy.  Later,  about 
eleven  p.m..  he  also  met  Armstrong,  with  his  brigade  at  a  halt, 
awaiting  Chalmers,  who,  he  reported,  was  still  six  or  eight 
miles  distant,  impeded  by  a  swamp  and  some  bad  streams 
across  his  road.  Armstrong  was  now  ordered  to  hasten  to 
Sclma,  and  Colonel  Thomas  W.  White  was  dispatched  to  find 
Chalmers,  with  orders  to  press  in  the  same  direction  with 
Starke's  Brigade,  even  though  he  had  to  leave  his  artillery  be- 
hind. These  measures  having  been  taken,  at  two  p.m..  the 
2d  of  April,  the  Confederate  General,  suft'ering  acutely  from 
his  hurts,  and  worn  down  with  fatigue,  halted,  and  gave  his 
escort  opportunity  for  several  hours  of  rest,  and  to  feed  their 
hungry  horses. 

We  must  now  turn  to  the  movements,  meanwhile,  of  the 
divisions  of  Chalmers  and  Jackson,  so  far  at  least  as  may  shed 
light  upon  the  causes  which  hindered  a  timely  concentration 
of  all  Confederate  defensive  resources  across  the  path  of  Wil- 
son. Armstrong's  l^rigade,  as  will  be  recollected,  moved  on 
the  26th  day  of  March,  two  days  ahead  of  the  other  brigade 
(Starke's)  of  Chalmers's  Division  ;  hut  he  was  overtaken  by 
General  Chalmers  and  staff  at  Greensboro  on  the  28th.  hav- 
ing been  detained  in  the  passage  of  the  Black  Warrior.  At 
Marion,  in  consequence  of  an  order  from  Genera!  Forrest  pre- 
scribing concentration,  Armstrong  was  halted,  and  Starke's 
Brigade  was  ordered  thither.  The  country  is  one  of  great  fer- 
tility, abounding,  at  the  time,  in  large,  highly  improved  plan- 
tations, handsome  houses,  with  pretty  villages,  and  had  never 
been  visited  or  seared  by  any  of  the  material  ills  of  the  war. 
Little  accustomed  to  see  soldiers,  the  people  received  Forrest's 
Cavalry  with  a  boundless  hospitality,  and  made  their  reception 
and  stay  very  pleasant ;  an  unwonted  holiday  and  relaxation 
from  the  toils  which  were  their  usual  lot.  Meanwhile,  the 
country  was  full  of  rumors  of  the  movements  of  the  enemy. 
Starke's  Brigade  came  up  on  the  afternoon  of  the  30th,  and 


i 


672  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

that  night  an  order  was  received  from  General  Taylor,  at  eleven 
o'clock,  to  move  upon  Plantersville.  The  Cahawba,  after  some 
unavoidable  delay  in  the  construction  of  the  pontoon-bridge, 
was  crossed  late  in  the  afternoon  of  the  31st.  But  swamps 
and  wretched  roads  made  General  Chalmers  diverge  from  his 
projected  line  of  march  toward  Randolph,  and  seek  practicable 
roads  for  his  artillery  and  trains,  escorted  by  Starke's  Brigade. 
Armstrong's  Brigade  having  become  detached  on  the  ist  of 
April. 

Jackson's  Division,  moving  on  the  route  assigned  it,  had 
encountered  Croxton,  eight  miles  north  of  Scottsville,  and, 
after  a  sharp  fight,  dispersed  that  brigade,  capturing  a  number 
of  prisoners,  several  stands  of  colors,  one  hundred  and  fifty 
horses,  and  Croxton's  papers  ;  but,  as  the  bridge  over  the  Ca- 
hawba, near  Centreville,  was  burned  by  the  enemy  under  Mc- 
Cook,  with  whom  he  also  had  a  skirmish,  he  was  unable  to 
pass  that  stream  in  time  to  throw  the  weight  of  his  splendid 
division  into  the  unequal  scales.  Thus,  with  three  of  his 
choicest,  largest  brigades  absent  or  beyond  his  control,  the 
morning  of  the  2d  of  April  dawned  upon  General  Forrest. 
But,  meanwhile,  he  was  riding  swiftly,  with  his  faithful  escort, 
toward  Selma,  where  he  arrived  at  ten  a.m.  He  found  the 
place  in  wild  confusion,  not  unnatural,  perhaps,  in  view  of  the 
serious  dangers  impending.  Long  trains  of  cars,  freighted 
with  stores  and  prisoners,  were  being  dispatched  toward  De- 
mojiolis.  Steamers  at  the  landing  were  being  loaded  with 
other  stores  and  freight  of  all  descriptions,  to  be  sent  up  the 
river  to  Montgomery  ;  the  streets  were  thronged  with  wagons 
and  drays,  laden  with  boxes,  barrels,  and  parts  of  machinery, 
and  rapidly  driven  in  different  directions.  Troopers,  too,  rode 
hither  and  thither,  seeking  their  commands  and  officers.  Gen- 
eral Taylor,  the  Department  Commander,  was  still  there,  but 
on  the  eve  of  departure,  by  rail,  with  a  train  of  ordnance  and 
subsistence  supplies,  for  Demopolis. 

Selma  is  upon  the  west  bank  of  the  Alabama  river,  and 


L 

f 


j 

Selma.  673 

%  stands  upon  a  bluff  nearly  one  hundred  feet  above  high- 
i  water  level.  There  were  established  one  of  the  chief  arsenals 
f  of  construction  and  depots  of  the  Confederate  States,  embra- 
[i  cing  ordnance  foundries  for  the  army  and  navy.  Therefore, 
It  the  place  was  extensively  fortified  by  a  double  line  of  works^ 
I  the  exterior  of  which  was  upon  a  trace  of  nearly  four  miles, 
i  which  enveloped  the  town  upon  all  sides  save  the  river-front 
^  These  works  were  of  strong  profile,  and  well  arranged  with 
;  bastions,  proper  ditches,  and  strongly  palisaded  at  many 
I  points  ;  but  they  required  for  their  proper  defense  a  very 
l^  large  garrison,  one  far  larger  than  was  now  available,  as  For- 
rest was  satisfied,  after  taking  a  careful  survey,  and  the 
resources  at  hand  for  holding  them.  Nevertheless,  as  the 
chief  command  devolved  upon  him  by  the  departure  of  Gene- 
ral Taylor  at  two  p.m.,  he  made  his  dispositions  for  the  at- 
tempt, hopeless  as  it  seemed.  Armstrong's  Brigade,  about 
- 1400  strong,  was  stationed  to  hold  the  lines  on  the  left  and 
west,  his  men  being  deployed  at  intervals  of  ten  feet,  in  order 
to  cover  the  whole  ground  assigned  the  brigade.  Roddy's 
)  men,  and  such  other  forces  as  were  in  the  place,  in  all  some 
1700,  rank  and  file,  were  disposed  in  the  same  extended  man- 
ner to  the  right  of  Armstrong,  filling  the  centre  and  eastern 
I    portion  of  the  line. 

The  enemy  had  bivouacked  nineteen  miles  distant,  at  Plan- 
tcrsviUe.  Taking  the  field  at  daylight  that  morning,  they 
began  to  skirmish  with  the  Confederates  as  early  as  two  p.m., 
and  kept  it  up  until  four,  when  they  had  completely  invested 
the  position,  making  it  impracticable  for  Jackson  and  Chal- 
mers now  to  enter  the  place.  Meanwhile,  Forrest  had  ascer- 
tained  not  only  the  weakness  of  his  garrison,  but  likewise 
that  the  artillery  had  been  left  with  a  small  supply  of  ammu- 
nition, and  not  one  charge  of  either  grape  or  canister.*    Hav- 


^  For  example,  two  of  the  principal     of  General  Forrest  and  Captain  Good' 
batteries,  with  twenty  rounds  of  am-     man. 
Mnaition  and  mainly  solid  shot — l^foks. 


6/4  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

ing  also  opened  telegraphic  communication  with  General  Bu- 
ford,  he  found  that  that  officer  had  not  been  ordered  thither 
with  his  disposable  forces,  and  therefore  gave  the  order. 

In  the  interval,  under  cover  of  the  light  skirmishing  kept 
up,  as  we  have  mentioned,  since  two  p.m..  General  Wilson  had 
made  his  dispositions  with  decision  and  celerity.  Confident 
of  success,  and  appreciating  the  value  of  the  prize  almost 
within  his  grasp,  his  approaches  were  yet  made  with  special 
care,  to  avoid  the  exposure  of  his  men  to  any  profitless,  need- 
less loss.  An  extensive  wood  in  front  of  Armstrong's  posi- 
tion was  favorable  for  this  end. 

About  five  P.M.,  a  piece  of  artillery  on  the  extreme  (Arm- 
strong's) left  opened  upon  the  Federals,  who  were  forming 
for  an  assault  in  that  quarter.  Soon,  too,  all  of  Armstrong's 
artillery  opened  upon  similar  forces  in  their  front ;  and  pre- 
sently the  enemy,  bringing  up  a  battery  to  a  favorable  ridge, 
replied  with  spirit,  but  their  projectiles,  flying  high,  did  no 
harm.  For  a  while  they  appeared  little  disposed  to  come  to 
close  quarters  ;  but  at  half-past  five,  three  strong  lines  of  bat- 
tle were  pushed  forward  to  the  assault,  not  only  of  Arm- 
strong's position,  but  of  the  Confederates  on  his  right  As 
we  have  mentioned,  the  Confederate  artillery  was  not  pro- 
vided with  proper  ammunition,  and  despite  all  the  fire  that 
was  opened  upon  the  advancing  Federal  lines,  they  moved  up 
steadily  and  handsomely  to  their  work.  They  were  armed 
with  Spencer  rifles,  repeaters,  and  breech-loaders  ;*  and  firom 
their  massive  lines  poured  out  an  unceasing  stream  of  leaden 
hail,  to  which  the  return  fire  of  the  attenuated  Confederate 
line  was  as  that  of  a  skirmish  detachment  to  the  uproar  of  a 
battle  at  its  climax. 

Forrest  had  rapidly  repaired  to  the  scene  where  the  assault 


*  The  Spencer  rifle  discharges  sev-     then  reloaded  in  kM  time  llum  an  or* 
en  loads  in  quick  succession,  and  is     dinary  rifle. 


Selma.  675 

was  most  strenuous.  Meanwhile,  the  militia  began  to  falter 
and  gradually  quit  their  places  behind  the  breastworks,  leav- 
ing broad  gaps,  and  Armstrong's  right  exposed.  Roddy  was 
therefore  directed  to  move  over  and  fill  the  breach ;  but  before 
it  could  be  effected,  the  enemy  had  reached  the  exposed,  de- 
serted section  of  the  lines,  and  surmounted  it,  cutting  Roddy 
and  Armstrong  in  sunder.  Turning  leftward,  they  opened  an 
enfilading  fire  upon  Armstrong,  who  had  repulsed  three  at- 
tacks upon  his  front,  with  severe  loss  to  his  immediate  assailants. 
At  this,  however,  Armstrong  was  forced  to  withdraw  his  bri- 
gade, which  having  to  do  under  a  heavy  fire,  his  loss  was  very 
heavy.  The  last  to  leave  their  position  were  the  First  Mis- 
sissippi (Pinson's)  Cavalry.  Standing  stoutly  their  ground, 
the  enemy  were  in  their  rear  before  they  fell  back,  and  theii 
gallant  Colonel  and  a  large  part  of  his  regiment  were  taken 
prisoners.  In  the  mean  time,  the  militia  had  thrown  away 
their  arms,  and  were  swiftly  seeking  their  horses,  and  divest- 
ing themselves,  as  they  fied,  of  all  that  would  betray  their  late 
connection  with  the  defense  of  Selma.  The  scene  generally 
was  one  of  the  wildest  confusion.  The  Confederates,  beaten 
from  the  breastworks,  were  rushing  toward  their  horses ;  in  the 
town  the  streets  were  choked  with  horses,  with  soldiers  and 
citizens  hurrying  wildly  to  and  fro.  Clouds  of  dust  rose  and 
so  filled  the  air,  that  it  was  difficult  to  distinguish  friend  from 
foe.  From  the  houses  came  the  wails  and  lamentations  of 
terrified  women  and  children,  about  to  be  left  to  the  mercies 
of  a  storming  enemy.  The  Federals  were  still  firing  upon 
their  routed,  fleeing  adversary. 

Farther  resistance  upon  a  field  so  utterly  lost,  indeed  as 
soon  as  the  enemy  appeared  in  such  overpowering  force  before 
it,  was  now  worse  than  useless.  But  what  avenue  of  escape 
was  there  left  open  ?  For  the  broad  Alabama  river  as  effectu- 
ally closed  the  way  in  that  quarter,  as  the  enemy  did  appa- 
rently on  all  other  sides.  While  Armstrong,  who  throughout 
the  fight  had  led  his  men  with  the  most  signal  gallantry,' 


676  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

gathered  some  of  Ashcraft's  Regiment  around  him,  and  con- 
tinued to  skirmish  with  the  enemy  as  he  fell  back  into  the 
town,  Forrest,  assembling  his  staff  and  escort,  sallied  forth 
from  Selma,  by  the  Montgomery  road,  upon  which,  happily  as 
yet,  there  was  no  hostile  force  to  bar  his  egress.  Armstrong 
soon  followed,  with  a  like  sturdy  band  around  him,  but  mis- 
taking the  road,  became  enveloped  in  a  bend  of  the  river, 
where,  having  been  closely  pursued,  he  effected  his  escape  by 
cutting  his  way  out  with  forty  or  fifty  followers. 

Thus  Selma  fell,  and  with  it  the  last  important  arsenal  of 
construction  belonging  to  the  Southern  people  remained  in 
the  possession  of  General  Wilson,  and  the  main  purpose  for 
which  that  General  had  taken  the  field  was  accomplished, — just 
as  the  illustrious,  the  "  incomparable"  army  of  North-Virginia 
was  forced  to  abandon  its  long-held  lines  at  Petersburg,  and 
enter  upon  a  dogged,  hopeless,  fatal  retreat  along  the  valley 
of  the  Appomattox,  to  that  field  whereon,  seven  days  later,  it 
finally  stacked  the  arms  so  long  borne  with  such  affluence  of 
glory,  furled  the  colors  that  it  had  made  all-famous,  and,  quench- 
ing its  camp-fires  forever,  practically  brought  to  a  close  the 
manful,  heroic  struggle  of  the  Southern  people  for  a  separate 
national  existence  and  political  institutions  of  their  own  choice. 

Forrest,  as  we  have  said,  taking  the  road  along  the  west 
bank  of  the  Alabama  river,  some  three  miles  from  Selma, 
across  the  highway  by  which  the  Federal  force  had  approach- 
ed, suddenly  heard  in  the  stillness  of  the  night,  the  cries  of 
women  in  distress.  Guided  by  the  sound,  he  and  some  of 
his  men  dashed  thither  to  find  a  neighboring  house  in  the 
possession  of  four  Federal  "  bummers,"  who,  after  having  rifled 
it  of  all  jewelry  and  other  portable  valuables,  were  eng^ed  in 
the  effort  to  outrage  the  women  who  lived  there.  Summary 
was  the  fate  of  these  wretches.  The  escort  were  now  greatly 
excited  and  provoked  by  the  incident,  and  those  in  the  ad- 
vance-guard, meeting  a  number  of  these  fellows,  loaded  down 
with  plunder,  did  not  hesitate  to  slay  them  on  the  spot 


The  Escort  Surprise  a  Federal  Squadron.      677 

Hearing  the  sounds  of  what  was  happening  ahead,  Forrest,  to 
32  check  it,  took  the  conduct  of  the  advance  himself.     Presently 
3Z  capturing  a  picket-party,  he  learned  that  it  belonged  to    a 
3;J  snudl  squadron  of  the  Fourth  Regulars,  encamped  near  by, 
«:  rearward,  which  he  determined  to  surprise  and  capture  also, 
s-  small  as  was  his  own  force.     Meanwhile,  learning  from  the 
gis  picket,  also,  that  there  was  a  scouting  party  in  the  neighbor- 
s' hood  detached  from  the  same  squadron,  he  dispatched  a  part 
{%  of  the  escort  in  their  quest,  with  speedy  success ;  for  they 
J    were  soon  found,  a  little  distance  from  the  road,  and  taken 
;j:  without  resistance,  burdened  with  articles  of  jewelry,  plate, 
2^  and  the  like,  from  the  neighboring  houses.      Encumbered 
\\  with  prisoners  who  had  to  be  guarded,  he  had  only  about 
A   thirty  men  left  disposable  for  the  surprise  of  the  squadron  we 
^   have  mentioned,  reported  over  fifty  strong.     Nevertheless,  he 
^   was  not  diverted  from  his  purpose ;  but  as  they  approached 
,*    its  immediate  vicinity.  Captain  Jackson,  the  commander  of  his 
ji    escort,  stated  to  him  that  he  was  requested  on  the  part  of  the 
\    men  to  say,  they  would  not  attack  the  enemy  if  their  General 
^.    led  them  ;  for  in  a  night  attack  he  would  be  exposed  to  danger 
J    which  they  were  altogether  unwilling  he  should  incur  at  that 
.-    time ;  that  if  he  would  remain  where  he  was,  they  would  cheer- 
fully execute  his  orders.     To  this  wish  of  men  who  had  served 
him  so  long  with  superb  devotion  and  valor,  Forrest  properly 
acceded,  and,  halting  by  the  wayside,  directed  Captain  Jack- 
'   son  to  do  the  work  in  hand,  their  prey  being  less  than  a  quar- 
ter of  a  mile  distant.     Presently  Jackson  was  close  upon  his 
adversary  without  being  observed,  but  then  a  Federal  soldier, 
springing  up,  fired  his  pistol.    The  escort  rushed  upon  the 
enemy,  as,  startled  by  their  comrade,  they  rose  from  their 
blankets  and  caught  up  their  arms.    An  animated  fight  re*> 
suited,  which  was  brought  to  a  close  in  a  few  minutes,  how- 
ever, by  the  complete  success  of  the  Confederates,  thirty-five 
of  the  enemy  being  either  killed  or  wounded,  and  five  cap- 
tured, with  the  loss  on  the  other  side  of  only  one  man  wounded 


6/8  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

Rapidly  resuming  his  march,  in  the  course  of  the  next  eight 
miles,  they  met  and  captured  some  more  of  the  plundering 
"  bummers,"  so  that  the  fruits  of  the  night's  operations  were 
at  least  sixty,  either  killed,  woimded,  or  captiured. 

Reaching  Plantersville  early  on  the  next  morning,  Forrest 
here  found  in  a  hospital  one  hundred  Federals  who  had  been 
brought  thither  by  the  enemy  after  their  affair  with  him 
at  Dixie  Station,  on  the  ist  of  April  Here,  too,  he  halted 
until  three  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  to  give  his  jaded  men  and 
animals  food  and  rest  Then,  retaking  his  line  of  retreat 
toward  Marion,  scarcely  had  he  gone  a  mile  when  he  came  in 
collision  with  the  advance  of  the  Federal  brigade  which  had 
been  detached  some  days  previously  under  General  McCooL 
After  their  old  fashion,  the  escort  promptly  charged  upon  the 
adversary  in  their  road,  and  killed,  wounded,  and  captiu^  at 
least  twenty ;  but  further  combat  was  altogether  too  unequal 
to  be  adventured,  and  Forrest  swiftly  withdrew  by  the  left 
flank  through  the  woods.  It  was  now  four  p.m.,  and,  pushing 
on  all  night — crossing  the  Cahawba  river — he  reached  Marion 
at  ten  a.m.  on  the  4th.  Forrest  and  his  band  had  now  been 
in  their  saddles,  with  little  intermission,  for  seven  days  and 
nights,  with  the  scantiest  fare  for  men  or  horses ;  and  aU 
were  so  greatly  worn  down  that  rest  and  sleep  were  essential 
Here,  too,  he  found  Jackson's  Division,  Chalmers  with  Starke  s 
Brigade,  and  the  entire  train  and  artillery  intact  that  he  had 
brought  from  Mississippi 

For  the  week  following,  Forrest  remained  with  this  force 
in  that  vicinity,  reassembling  so  many  of  his  command  as  had 
escaped  from  Selma ;  and,  notwithstanding  the  inauspicious 
aspect  of  affairs,  he  set  to  work  with  characteristic  activity  to 
place  his  own  command  in  condition  for  service  by  recruiting, 
and  exchanging  his  horses  and  mules,  while  at  the  same  time 
closely  guarding  the  line  of  the  Cahawba  from  Marion  to 
its  mouth.  Then,  on  the  isth,  establishing  his  headquarters 
at  Gainesville,  he  withdrew  his  force  to  that  quarter.     It  was 


The  End  at  Hand. 


679 


;  that  Northern  newspapers  began  to  give  the  particulars  of 
surrender  of  General  Lee's  army  at  Appomattox  Court- 
ise  ;  and,  presently,  the  fall  of  Mobile,  followed  soon  by 
graphical  intelligence  —  about  the  25th  —  that  General 
nston  had  opened  negotiations  with  General  Sherman  for 
final  cessation  of  hostilities.  All  had  now  to  see  that  the 
was  near  at  hand  ;  the  end  of  toilsome  marches  ;  the  end 
light-watches  ;  the  end  of  fierce  battles  with  an  enemy 
lys  superior  in  numbers ;  the  end  of  years  of  hardship 
peril ;  but  alas!  the  end  also  of  all  the  proud  hopes,  which 
inspired  them  throughout,  of  political  independence.  So 
1  as  this  was  comprehended,  the  deepest  anxiety  seized  upon 
men  to  get  home  once  more,  and  numbers  did  not  await 
last  moment,  but  went  off  of  their  own  accord.  Thus 
d  affairs  on  the  9th  of  May.*  General  Taylor  having  pre- 
isly  completed  negotiations  with  General  Canby  for  the 
lation  of  hostilities  by  the  Confederate  forces  of  his  depart- 
it  on  the  same  terms  as  had  been  stipulated  between 
lerals  Johnston  anJ  Sherman,  on  that  day  Brigadier- 
leral  E.  S.  Dennis  reached  Gainesville  as  the  Federal 
imissioner  to  execute  the  proper  paroles.  General  Jack- 
was  appointed  a  Commissioner  on  the  part  of  the  Con- 
rates  to  authenticate  muster-rolls  and  other  necessar}' 
srs,  and  the  work  of  paroling  began ;  and  in  this  manner  : 
ter-rolls,  in  duplicates,  of  each  general  and  his  staff;  of 
1  regimental  staff;  of  each  quartermaster  and  commis- 


General  Crozton,  after  having 
3yed  the  fisictories  at  Tuscaloosa, 
ig  westward,  sought  to  strike  and 
;  up  the  Mobile  and  Ohio  Rail- 
firom  Columbus  to  Meridian.  But 
ral  Wirt  Adams,  left  at  West- 
by  Forrest  to  guard  that  road, 
'himself  with  about  the  same  force 
I  Crexton's  path,  near  Sipsey  river, 


and,  after  a  warm  combat  of  about  one 
hour,  the  Federals  were  beaten  back, 
with  the  loss  of  about  one  hundred 
killed,  wounded,  and  captured.  Adams 
pursued  for  some  thirty  or  forty  miles, 
but  without  securing  any  other  material 
advantage.  TTiis  was  the  last  engage* 
ment  of  the  war  east  of  the  Jlfississtfi^ 


i 


68o  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest 

sary,  and  their  employes  ;  and  of  each  company,  were  made, 
and  a  copy  furnished  each  Commissioner.  To  each  non-com- 
missioned officer  and  private  was  then  issued  a  certificate  of 
parole,  bearing  the  number  opposite  their  names,  respectively, 
upon  the  muster-rolls,  and  signed  by  the  two  Commissioners. 
The  officers,  however,  were  required  to  sig^  duplicate  obli- 
gations, as  follows : 

"  I,  the  undersigned,  prisoner  of  war,  belonging  to  the  Army  of  the  De- 
partment of  Alabama,  Mississippi,  and  East-Louisiana,  having  been  sur- 
rendered by  Lieutenant-General  R.  Taylor,  Confederate  States  Army, 
commanding  said  department,  to  Major-General  £.  R.  S.  Canby,  United 
States  Army,  commanding  Army  and  Division  of  West-Mississippi,  do 
hereby  give  my  solemn  parole  of  honor  that  I  will  not  hereafter  serve  in 
the  armies  of  the  Confederate  States,  or  in  any  military  capacity  whatever 
against  the  United  States  of  America,  or  render  aid  to  the  enemies  of  the 
latter,  until  properly  exchanged  in  such  manner  as  shall  be  mutually  ap- 
proved by  the  respective  authorities." 

This  was  then  approved  by  both  Commissioners,  and  General 
Dennis  added  his  indorsement,  that  the  officer  in  question 
would  "  not  be  disturbed  by  the  United  States  authorities  as 
long  as  he  observed  his  parole  and  the  laws  in  force  w/tere  he 
resides'* 

On  the  same  day  of  the  arrival  of  General  Dennis  at  his 
headquarters.  General  Forrest  issued  his  address  to  his  troops 
in  the  following  language  : 


"Headquarters  Forrest's  Cavalry  Corps, 
Gainesville,  Alabama,  May  9,  1865 


."■} 


"  Soldiers  :  By  an  agreement  made  between  Lieutenant-General  Taylor, 
commanding  the  Department  of  Alabama,  Mississippi,  and  East- Louisiana, 
and  Major-General  Canby,  commanding  United  States  forces,  the  troops 
of  this  Department  have  been  surrendered. 

"  I  do  not  think  it  proper  or  necessary,  at  this  time,  to  refer  to  the  causes 
which  have  reduced  us  to  thjs  extremity';  nor  is  it  now  a  matter  of  mate- 
rial consequence  to  us  how  such  results  were  brought  about  That  we  are 
beaten,  is  a  self-evident  fact,  and  any  further  resistance  on  our  part 
would  be  justly  regarded  as  the  very  height  of  folly  and  rashness. 


General  Forrest's  Farewell  Address.         68 1 

"  The  armies  of  Generals  Lee  and  Johnston  havhig  surrendered,  you 
are  the  last  of  all  the  troops  of  the  Confederate  States  Army,  east  of  the 
Mississippi  river,  to  lay  down  your  arms. 

"  The  cause  for  which  you  have  so  long  and  so  manfully  struggled,  and 
for  which  you  have  braved  dangers,  endured  privations  and  sufferings,  and 
made  so  many  sacrifices,  is  to-day  hopeless.  The  Government  which  we 
sought  to  establish  and  perpetuate  is  at  an  end.  Reason  dictates  and 
humanity  demands  that  no  more  blood  be  shed.  Fully  realizing  and  feel- 
ing that  such  is  the  case,  it  is  your  duty  and  mine  to  lay  down  our  arms — 
submit  to  the  *  powers  that  be  * — and  to  aid  in  restoring  peace  and  es- 
tablishing law  and  order  throughout  the  land. 

"  The  terms  upon  which  you  were  surrendered  are  favorable,  and  should 
be  satis&ctory  and  acceptable  to  all.  They  manifest  a  spirit  of  magna- 
nimity and  liberality  on  the  part  of  the  Federal  authorities,  which  should 
be  met,  on  our  part,  by  a  faithful  compliance  with  ^ill  the  stipulations  and 
conditions  therein  expressed.  As  your  Commander,  I  sincerely  hope  that 
every  officer  and  soldier  of  my  command  will  cheerfully  obey  the  orders 
given,  and  carry  out  in  good  faith  all  the  terms  of  the  carteL 

**  Those  who  neglect  the  terms,  and  refuse  to  be  paroled,  may  assuredly 
expect,  when  arrested,  to  be  sent  North  and  imprisoned. 

**  Let  those  who  are  absent  from  their  commands,  fi*om  whatever  cause, 
report  at  once  to  this  place,  or  to  Jackson,  Mississippi ;  or,  if  too  remote 
from  either,  to  the  nearest  United  States  post  or  garrison,  for  parole. 

"  Civil  war,  such  as  you  have  just  passed  through,  naturally  engenders 
feelings  of  animosity,  hatred,  and  revenge.  It  is  our  duty  to  divest  our- 
selves of  all  such  feelings  ;  and,  as  far  as  in  our  power  to  do  so,  to  culti- 
vate fiiendly  feelings  toward  those  with  whom  we  have  so  long  contended, 
and  heretofore  so  widely,  but  honestly,  differed.  Neighborhood  feuds, 
personal  animosities,  and  private  differences  should  be  blotted  out ;  and, 
when  you  return  home,  a  manly,  straightforward  course  of  conduct  will 
secure  the  respect  even  of  your  enemies.  Whatever  your  responsibilities 
may  be  to  government,  to  society,  or  to  individuals,  meet  them  like  men. 

*'*'  The  attempt  made  to  establish  a  separate  and  independent  Confede- 
ration has  failed ;  but  the  consciousness  of  having  done  your  duty  faith- 
fully, and  to  the  end,  will,  in  some  measure,  repay  for  the  hardships  you 
have  undergone. 

"In  bidding  you  farewell,  rest  assured  that  you  carry  with  you  my  best 
wishes  for  your  future  welfare  and  happiness.  Without,  in  any  way,  re- 
ferring to  the  merits  of  the  cause  in  which  we  have  been  engaged,  your 
courage  and  determination,  as  exhibited  on  many  hard-fought  fields,  have 
elicited  the  respect  and  admiration  of  friend  and  foe.    And  I  now,  cheer- 


682  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest. 

fully  and  gratefully,  acknowledge  my  indebtedness  to  the  officers  and  men 
of  my  command^,  whose  zeal,  fidelity,  and  unflinching  bravery  have  been 
the  great  source  of  my  past  success  in  arms. 

^  I  have  never,  on  the  field  of  battle,  sent  you  where  I  was  unwilling  to 
go  myself;  nor  would  I  now  advise  you  to  a  course  which  I  felt  myself 
unwilling  to  pursue.  You  havi  been  good  soldiers ;  3rou  can  be  good  citi- 
zens. Obey  the  laws,  preserve  your  honor,  and  the  Government  to  which 
you  have  surrendered  can  afford  to  be,  and  will  be,  magnanimous. 

^<  N.  B.  Forrest,  Lieutenant-GeneraL" 

The  utmost  eagerness  now  pervaded  the  command  to  pro- 
ciwe  their  paroles.  General  Dennis,  found  to  be  a  courteous 
gentleman,  did  all  in  his  power  to  accelerate  the  work  as- 
signed, and  in  a  manner  most  acceptable  to  his  late  adversa- 
ries. And  by  the  i6th  of  May,  about  8000  officers  and  men 
had  been  paroled,  and  allowed  to  return  to  their  homes.*  To 
that  extent  at  least 

"  For  them  the  blooming  life  is  sweet ; 
Return  is  not  for  all." 

Ah  !  no.  Thousands  of  their  comrades,  as  valiant  and  strong 
of  soul  as  ever  died  on  the  battle-field  in  defense  of  their  birth- 
righty  after  having  established  the  proud  records  of  their  corps 
at  Fort  Donelson,  Red  Mound,  Murfreesboro,  Thompson  s 
Station,  Prairie  Mound,  Fort  Pillow,  Tishomingo,  Harrisburg, 
and  in  that  fearful  winter  retreat  from  Nashville,  were  in  their 
graves  on  that  day  when  Forrest's  Cavalry  ceased  to  exist. 

CONCLUDING   COMMENTARIES, 

If  by  this  time  our  readers  have  not  been  able  to  form  a  fair 
and  just  conception  of  the  distinctive  traits  of  General  For- 
rest, both  as  a  man  and  a  cavalry  commander,  we  have  mate- 
rially failed  in  the  work  we  undertook,  and  it  were  needless 
now  to  attempt  to  make  amends  by  a  wordy  summary  of  what 


*  Including  about  600  of  Scott's  Louisiana  Cavalry,  paroled  at  Gainesville. 


Concluding  Commentaries.  683 

we  regard  tliose  traits  to  be.  It  may  not,  however,  be  amiss 
to  say,  that  one  of  the  lessons  of  his  operations  wDl  be  in  the 
demonstration  of  the  great  utility  in  war  of  horses  in  the  rapid 
transportation  of  a  body  of  men  to  the  field  of  battle  or  opera- 
tions, there  to  be  employed  as  riflemen,  fighting  on  foot.  The 
current  of  belief  has  been,  that  any  advantage  thus  secured 
was  more  than  counterbalanced  by  the  necessary  absence, 
during  battle,  of  the  horse-holders — about  one  fourth.  But  as 
Forrest  handled  his  men,  we  believe  it  to  be  apparent  he 
made  his  corps  so  effective,  by  the  celerity  and  uncertainty — 
to  the  enemy — of  his  movements,  as  to  add  immensely  to  the 
value  of  mounted  operations  in  war. 

Examined  closely,  his  operations  will  be  found  based  on  the 
soundest  principles  of  the  art  of  war.  His  tactics,  intuitively, 
and  without  knowledge  of  what  other  men  had  done  before 
him,  were  those  of  the  great  masters  of  that  art — that  is,  to 
rush  down  swiftly,  thunderously  upon  his  enemy  with  his 
whole  collective  strength.  He  had  the  happy  gift  of  knowing 
how  to  confirm  the  courage  of  his  men,  how  to  excite  their 
confidence  and  enthusiasm,  how  to  bend  them,  the  most  reck- 
less, to  his  iron  will.  In  his  composition  there  is  apparent  as 
much  sagacity  as  audacity.  Fortitude,  animal  courage,  and 
vitality  of  body  gave  him  energy  and  celerity  in  action,  while 
all  was  guided  by  a  judgment  and  circumspection  rarely  at 
fault  At  critical  instants  he  was  ever  quick  to  see,  clear  in 
his  previsions,  swift  to  decide,  and  swift  to  strike — the  very 
embodiment  assuredly  of  warlike  vigor.  With  every  expedi- 
tion he  seems  to  have  been  able  to  increase  the  influence  of 
his  resolute  character  upon  his  men,  and  infuse  them  with  the 
like  spirit. 

His  combats  appear  to  have  been  habitually  delivered  or 
accepted  at  the  right  juncture.  Exigencies  were  encountered 
with  a  wise  audacity,  and  without  loss  of  time  in  weighing 
probabilities  after  his  preparations  were  made.    When  left  to 


i 


684  Campaigns  of  General  Forrest 

himself  and  to  his  own  resources,  General  Forrest  always 
prospered. 

It  may  be  justly  said  that  no  other  soldier  of  either  side,  dur- 
ing the  war — Stonewall  Jackson  excepted — carried  the  genuine, 
distinctive  traits  of  the  American  character  into  their  opera- 
tions as  did  General  Forrest.  Ever  attracted  to  take  the  short- 
est line  toward  his  object,  he  always  knew  how  to  grasp  op- 
portunity, and  was  never  at  a  loss  for  resources  in  the  most 
sudden  emergencies.  Endowed  by  nature  with  as  stormful, 
fiery  a  soul  as  ever  blazed  to  heat  and  flame  in  any  soldier, 
yet  surely  he  accomplished  as  much  by  address  as  by  swift, 
hard-smiting  blows.  A  strong  man  of  action,  of  sleepless 
temper,  strenuous,  aggressive,  and  to  whom  war  was  a  killing 
manner  of  thing,  nevertheless  General  Forrest  was  not  the 
less  adroit,  and  wary,  and  watchful  than  swift,  and  resolute, 
and  indomitable  in  his  operations.  Essentially  as  daring  a 
cavalry  leader  as  ever  gained  distinction,  it  may,  in  fine,  be 
said  of  him,  in  the  words  of  Napier,  that  his  daring  was  "  not 
a  wild  cast  of  the  net  forfortwiel'  for  it  was  always  supported 
by  a  penetration  and  activity  that  suffered  no  opportunity  to 
escape. 


s^r.r;:'^;' 


Appendix. 


(A.) 


Staff    and    Regimental    Rosters. 

t 

The  Staff  of  General  N.  B.  Forrest  in  his  several  Grades  and 

Commands, 


Naub. 


*Joha  P.  Strange.. 


*Chaa.  W.  Anderson. . . 


*Wm.  M.  Forrest. 


^Samuel  Donelson 


C.  S.  Severson.* 


•R.M.  MMon... 
«G.  V.  Rambaut. 


Grade. 


Major. 


ist  Lieut . 


ist  Lieut . 
ist  Lieut . 


Major. 


^George  Dashiell. 
•J.  R  Cowan 


•Charles  S.  Hill. 
*John  G.  Mann.. 


Major . . . . 
Major..... 


Captain. . . 
Surgeon.. . 


Captain. . . 
Captain. . . 


Function. 


Date  of 
Aiq;>ointment 


Assist  Adjt-Gen. ...  I  July  ai,  i86x.. 


Aid-de-Camp 


Aid-de-Camp. , 


Aid-de-Camp. , 


Chief  Quartermaster. 


Chief  Quartermaster. 
Chief  Commissary. . . 


Chief  Paymaster. 
Chief  Surgeon. . . 


Chief  Ordnance. 
Chief  Engineer.. 


July  31,  t86x . 


Jan.  lo^  t86a.. 


Not.  aov  x86i 


May  17,  1861. 
July  at,  186a.. 


Remarks. 


Nor.  X,  1863.. 


Remained  as  Adjutant- 
General  throv^  all 
Gen.  Forrest's  pro- 
motions. Was  wound- 
ed at  Fort  Donelson 
in  February.  1863, 
near  Nashville,  De- 
cember, 1863,  and  at 
Bolivar,  Tenn.,  May 
3d,  1864. 

Acting  Assistant  Adju- 
tant and  Inspector- 
General  ^ —  acted  as 
an  effective  inspector 
through  all  General 
Forrest's  commands. 

Was  an  Aid-de-Camp 
through  all  General 
Forrest's  grades. 

Was  atuched  to  staff 
when  General  Forrest 
became  Major-Gene- 
ral. 

Served  on  General  For- 
rest's staff  until  late 
in  1864,  when  he  was 
relieved  by  Major 
Mason. 

Remained  on  Gen.  For- 
rest's staff  through  all 
his  promotions. 

Joined  staff  of  Major- 
General  Forrest 

Remained  as  Chief  Sur- 
geon throi^h  all  Gen- 
eral Forrest's  promo- 
tions. 

Joined  staff  in  North- 
Mississippi  in  1863. 


NoTB.— The  organization  of  the  staff  marked  with  *  was  formed  on  General  Forrest's  promo- 
tion to  nade  of  Lieutenant-General,  and,  remaining  unchanged  up  to  the  time  of  tbe  surrender,  was 
so  paroled. 

General  Forrest  was  commissioned  Brigadier-General  July  sxst,  x86^  Migor-Genend  Drewi 
ber  4th.  1863,  and  Laeutenant-General  Mardi  sd^  1865. 

'Otner  ^kers  whose  names  are  mentioned  m  the  fof^mog  work  lenrcd  from  tioM  to  tiMt 
tnniifintly  but  cffiBi:tiTely  on  the  staff  of  General  Forrest 


686 


Appendix. 


Staff  of  Brigadier-Generai.  James  R.  Chalmers,*  Commanding 
First  Division^  as  organized  at  Como^  Miss.,  yanuary,  1864. 


Namx. 


Gnde. 


Walter  A.  Goodman. 
L.  Taziny  Liodaey... 
Andrew  O.  Milla. . . . 


GeoiseT.  Banks.. 
Samuel  0*Nem... 


William  F.  Avent. 


Captain... 
Captain... 
Captain... 


ist  Ueut. 
Captain... 


Asst  A4it-Gen 

Act  Asst.  Adjt-Gen. 
Act  Asst  Inq».-Gen. 


Joly  3x,  1863. 
Oct  5,  X863. 
May  — 1 1863. . 


John  T.  Back..... 
Brodie  S.  Crump. 
James  R.  Bamett 


Captain... 


ist  Lieut . 

Major 

Suiigeon.. . 


Aid-de-Camp. 

Chief  Quartennaster. 


A.Q.M.  and  Paym*r. 


Chief  Ordnance. ... 
Chief  Commissary . 
Chief  Surgeon 


Date  of 
Appomtmcttt 


Feb.  13,  x86a. 
Maya8,i86x. 


e?3 
isi 


May  — ,  x86x. , 


June  %  1862. 
April  24,  i86a. 
Sept  35,  z86i.. 


Relieved  Febrn'y  rfS^ 
x865»      by      Colaael 
Thomas    W.   White, 
Eighth      MissttBppi 
Cavalry,   and    9&a- 
ward    (March    s6lh, 
X865)  assipied  to  duty 
Captain  of  Cosb- 
y  D,   Eighteenth 
ississipia  (consoli- 
dated) Regiment 

Relieved  Seplembe  . 
1864,  by  Major  Wm. 
BarnewalL  Bane 
wall  was  succeeded 
Febniary  xst  z86c 
by  Major  J.  P.  Hor- 
bach.  Both  asnn- 
ments  made  by  oraer 
of  Secretary  of  War. 

Relieved  Febroary  jd, 
1864,  and  assigned  to 
duty  at  Oadbrd^Miss., 
by  orders  frcm  De- 
partment Headquar- 
ters. Captain  Sarao- 
el  O'Neill  (fonneriv 
Chief  Quartermaster) 
was  assigned  Chidt 
Paymaster  of  Divi-I 
vision  Febniary  xst, 
X865. 


Relieved  by  orders  from 
Department  Head- 
quarters (at  his  own 
request)  November, 
1864,  Sorgeoo  G.  W 
Henderson,  Fifth 
Mississippi  Cavalry, 
appointed  Chief  Sar> 
geon.  His  health' 
niling.  Surgeon  L. 
M.  HaU  succeeded 
February  ayth,  1865. 


*  From  MS.  Notes  of  Captain  Walter  A.  Goodman. 
NoTB.— General  Chahaers's  commission  bears  date  Febniary  zjth,  186a. 


Appendix. 


687 


Staff  of  Brigadier-General  A.  Buford,  Commanding  Second  Divi- 
sion^ as  organized  near  Columbus^  Miss.,  March,  1864. 


Namb. 


Hunter  Nicholson. ... 
^  Bonus  M.  Crowdcr. 

I>.  A.  Given 

I>.  £.  Myers. 


Grade. 


James  L.  Lea.. 


i 


R.  Fiadi. 

bhn  D.  Gardner. 


Tlioiiias  F.  Oardy. 
W.  M.CaisiIL.... 


Major.  . . . 
Captain... 
ist  Lieut . 
ist  LieuL . 


Function. 


Captain... 


Major..... 
ist  Lieut . 

Suigeon.. . 

Major.  ... 


Act  Asst  Adjt-Gen. 

Asst  Adjt-Gen.  .... 

Act  Aid-de-Camp. . . 

Aid-de-Camp       and 

Act    Asst    Insp^ 

Geo 


Date  of 
Appointment 


Oct  31,  1863. 
Dec  4,  1862. 

Aoff.  1, 1863., 


Chief  Qoartermaster. 


Chief  Commissary. 
Chief  Ordnance.... 


Chief  Swseon. , 


Quartermaster     and 
Division  Paym'r. 


Sept  vjt  x86i. 


Remarks. 


May  aov  1862. . 


Lieutenant  Myers  was 
formerly  Captain  of 
Company  £^  Ninth 
Kentucky  Cavalry, 
and  was  severely 
wounded  in  the  bat- 
tle of  Murfreesboro, 
December  31st,  x86a. 
Having  to  oe  retired 
in  conseouence,  he 
received  tne  aproint 
ment  of  Aid-de-Camp 
to  General  Bofmrd  in 
August  X863. 

Captain  Lea  was  trans- 
fened  to  the  staff  of 
General  T.  H.  Bell 
at  the  reorganization 
of  Forrest's  Cavalry 
in  February,  1865. 

Assigned  from  Seventh 

Kentucky. 
Assigned  from  Seventh 

Kentucky. 


Staff  of  Brigadier-General  William  H.  Jackson,  Commanding 
Tennessee  Division,  as  organized  November,  1864. 


Namx. 

Grade. 

Function. 

Date  of 
Appointment 

Remarks. 

K.  T.Sykea. 

Captain. . .  Asst  Adjt-Gea 
ist  Lieut.  Act  Asst  Adjt-Gen. 
Captain. . .  j  Asst  Iiisp.-G«n. 
ist  Lieut .  Aid-de-Camp. 
Major.....  Chief  Quartermaster. 

Major. ....  Chief  CTnmnnisaarv. 

James  d  Jones. 

T.  B.  Sykes. 

J.  Henry  Martin 

W.  P.  Paul 

A.  P.  Slover 

i  Arthur  Bragden 

!G.  a.  Hogg. 

Surgeon .. 
Suigeon.. . 

Chief  Surgeon. 
Asst  Chief  Surgeon. 
Chief  Ordnance. 
Chief  ArtiUery. 
Drill-Master. 

Lewis  Bond. 

Captain. . . 
Captain. . . 
Lieut  .... 

John  Waties 

.William  Ewing, 

i 


688 


Appendix. 


Staff  of  Brigadier-General  Tyree  H.  Bell,  Commanding  Bdl^f 
BrigatUy*  BuforePs  Division^  Forres fs  Cavalry. 


Naub. 
Reuben  D.  Clark.  . 

T.  E.  Richardson... 

J.  L.BeU.; 

Pleasant  A.  Smith.. 
Isaac  T.Bell 

T.P.Allison 

J.ULea 

A.  G.  Harris 

D.  M.  Wormack... 
CCHarrU 


Grade. 


Captain... 

zst   Lieut 
andAdjt 

ist   Lieut 
and  Adjt. 

tst   Lieut 

and  Adjt 

ist  Lieut . 


FnnctiOQ. 


Act  Asst  Adjt*Gen. 
Act  Asst  Adjt>Gen. 

Act  Asst  In8p.-Gen. 

Act  Asst  Insp.-Gen. 
Act  Aid-de*Camp. . . 


Major. . . .  Act  Brigade  Q.  M  . . 
Captain. . .  Brigade  Quartenn'r.. 


tst  Lieut . 


Capt^un. . . 
xst  Lieut . 


Act  Brigade  Com. . . 


Brigade  Commissary. 
Ordnance  Officer. . . . 


Date  of 
Appointment 


Dec  z,  X863... 


May  8, 1864. . . 

May  17,  1862.. 
Feb.  15, 1864.. 


Feb.  15,  1864. 
Sept  37,  z86i. 


Sept  37,  t86t.. 


Sept  x6, 1864. 
Nov.  t,  1863  . . 


Remaxka. 


Mortally  wounded  at 
Murfreesboro  —  De- 
cember, 1864. 

Was  as^gned  to  dutr 
left  vacant  by  death 
of  Captain  Clark, 
Dec  iftt,  1864. 

Mortally  wounded  at 
Tishomingo  Creek, 
June  loth,  1864. 

On  staff  from  Feb.  xsth, 
X865. 

Severely  wounded  at 
Tishomingo  creek, 
June  loth,  X864. 

Became  Brigade  Quar- 
termaster Fcbi  isth, 
1865,  by  transfer  mm 
Gen.  Baford*s  staff 

Subsequently,  from 
Feb.  X5th,  1864,  vert- 
ed  on  same  staff  ia 
Adjt-Genetal's  De- 
partment 

Apparently  Bripde 
Commissary  since 
Febi  xxth,   1865. 


*  This  brigade  was  transferred  to  the  division  of  General  W.  H.  Jackson  upon  reorganiziag 
the  troops  in  February,  1865.  Vidt  **  Roster  of  Bell's  Brigade,  Jackson's  Division.  It  was  first 
organized  March,  1864. 


Staff  of  Colonel  Ed.  Crossland,  Commanding  Kentucky  Brigade,^ 
Buford^s  Division^  Forres fs  Cavalry^  as  organized  May,  1864. 


Namb. 


C.  L.  Randle. 


;T.  P.  Matthewson. 
William  Lindsey. . 


I.  R.  Smith 

Robert  A.  Galbraith... 
F.  G.Terry. 


Grade. 


Captain. , 


zst  Lieut . 
Captain. . . 

Major 

Captain. . . 
Captain... 


Function. 


Date  of 
Appointment 


Act  Asst  Adjt-Gen.  Nov.  x,  x86z.. 


Act  Asst  Insp.-GeiL  July  i,  i86z . 
Brigade  Quarterm'r..'July  z,  z862. 


Brigade  Commissary.  July  as,  Z863. 
Act  Aid-de-Carop. . .  May  30,  t86z. 
Act  Ord.  Officer. . . .  Sept  aa,  t86a. 


Remarks. 


Assigned  from  Seventh 
Kentucky.  ^  Wound- 
ed at  Tishomingo 
Creek, 

Assigned  from  Seventh 
Kentucky  Regiizient 


Asrigned  fivira  Eighth 
Kentucky  Regiznent 


*  This  brigade  was  formerly  commanded  by  the  lamented  Colonel  A.  P.  Thompson,  who  fen 
in  the  attack  on  Paducah,  March  z^th,  Z864 :   subsequently  by  General  H.  B.  Lyon.     General 
Lyon  having  received  orders  assignmg  him  to  anothCT  command  in  East-Teimessee  or  Weatera 
irginia,  Colonel  Crossland  suece^ed  to  the  comznand  of  the  bii^iade. 


Appendix. 


689 


Staff  of  Colonel  Robert  McCulloch,  Commanding  First  Brigade^ 
Chalmers's  Division^  Forres fs  Cavalry^  as  organized  January^  1864. 


Naub. 


John  T.  Chandler. 


Grade. 


W.  T.Vanldrk.... 
J.  11.  Tyler 


hM 


.  Guytoo** 
"  Tomer. 


I* 


.^H., 


Durrett. 


Captain... 


Captain. . . 
ist  Lieut , 


Captain. . . 
ist  Lieut . 


ad  Lieut.. 
Surgeon... 


FuncUon. 


Act  Aast  Adjt'Gen. 


From  what  Com- 
mand Assigned. 


3d  Mo.  Cavalry  . . 


Brigade  Quarterm'r. 
Act  Aast  Insp.-Gen. 


Brigade  Commissary. 
Act  Aklde  Camp... 


Ordnance  OflEioer. . . . 
Senior  Suigeon. 


Missouri  Infimtry.. 


ist  Miss.  Partisans, 
ad  Ma  Cavalry... 


Prov.  Army  C.  S. 
ad  Mo.  Cavalry. 


Remarks. 


Transferred  to  the  staff, 
of  Colonel  £.  W. 
Rucker,  and  Lieute- 
nant L.  L.  Maughsj 
Bledsoe's  Missouri 
Battery,  Army  o(f 
Tennessee,  on  de- 
tached  duty  with  the 
brigade,  succeeded 
him.  Lieutenant 

Maughs  was  wound- 
ed in  the  ei^gement 
near  West  -  Point, 
Mississippi,  Februa- 
ry, 1864. 

Relieved  1864, 

and  Lieutenant  F. 
R.  Wolffe,  First  MU- 
sissippt  Partisans,  as-j 
signed. 

Severely  wounded  at 
Town  Creek,  Miss., 
July  14th,  1864. 


Staff  of  Colonel  E.  W.  Rucker,  Commanding  Rucker's  Brigade, 
Chalmer^s  Division^  Fotresfs  Cavalry ^  organized  September^  1864.* 


Namb. 


Grade. 


John  T.  Chandler.. 


Captain... 


Ferdinand  Stith . . .  i  Captain. . . 
ohn  Overton,  Jr. .  [Captain. . . 


Function. 


V 


LFaass   ^i^T  ws  ft^#Bif     I  a  •  •  I  ^^— a#fc«ss»»  •  • 

rank  B.  Ro(Uwr8.xst  Lieut. 
WUliam  O.  Key . . .  JMajor. .. . . 

R.  M.  Ligon. Captain. . . 

C.  K.  Caruthers...'Sureeon... 
C  N.  Featherston.'ad  Deut.. 


Act  Aast  Adjt-Gen. 


Act  Asst  Adjt-Gen. 
Act  Asst  Insp.-Gen. 
Act  Aid  de  C^mp. . . 
Brigade  Quarterm'r.. 
Brigade  Commissary. 

Semor  Surgeon. 

Ordnance  Officer. . . . 


From  whence 
Assigned. 


ad  Ma  Cavalry... 


McDonald's  Bat*n. 
McDonald's  Bat'n. 
Prov.  Army  C  S. 

TthTenn.  Cavalry. 
Prov.  Army  C.  S. 


Remarks. 


Wounded  at  Athens, 
Alabama,  September, 
X864. 


*  This  onaniiation  existed  until  the  return  of  General  Forrest's  command  6rom  Middle  Ten- 

jee  on  the  *^Hood  Campaign"  and  the  reorganisation  of  the  tnx^  early  in  186^  Colonel  Rucker 

having  been  wounded  ana  captured  at  Nashville,  and  the  troops  reonanized^  mto  brigades  with 
reference  to  States,  the  larger  part,  if  not  the  entire  command  former^  constituting  his  brigade, 
arrai^ged  under  command  of  General  Alexaiuler  W.  Campbell,  and  placed  in  Jackson's  ^eh 
e)  Division,  the  efficers  of  the  /rrwna/  staff  rqxvting  to  General  Campbell  nnder  this  ar 


j 


690 


Appendix. 


Staff  of  Colonel  J.  J.  Neely,  Gnnmanding  Neel/s  Brigade^  CAaU 
titers' s  Division^  Forrest'* s  Cavalry ^  as  organized  May^  1864. 


Name. 


Grade. 


V.  B.  Waddell.... 

Ed.  Renaue 

M.  K.  Mister 

WniiamO.Key... 
S.  J.  Alexander... 
C.  X.  Caruthers. . . 


Function. 


From  whence 
Assigned. 


ist  Lieut. .  Act.  Asst  Adjt-Gen. 

ad  Lieut. .  Act  Asst.  Insp.-Gen. 

2d  Lieut..  Act.  Aid  de  Camp. 

Major.  ...  Brigade  Quarterm'r. 

Major.  ..., 'Brigade Commissary.  Prov.  Army  C  S. 

Surgeon...  j Senior  Surgeon.         bth  Tenn.  Cavalry. 


19th  Tenn.  Cav*ry. 
1 2th  Tenn.  Cav*ry. 
15th  Tenn.  Cav'ry. 
Prov.  Army  C.  S, 


Remarks. 


Staff  of  Brigadier-General  Alexander  W.  Campbell,  Com- 
manding CampbelVs  Brigade^  JacksotCs  (Tennessee)  Divistan^  Forrest s 
Cavalry^  organized  March,  1864.  Commissioned  Brigaditr-General 
March  i,  1865. 


Name. 


Ferdmand  Stith 

John  Overton,  Jr. ... . 
William  R.  Harris. . . , 


A.  Warren 

W.  J.  Svkes 

C  N.  f'eatherston. 


Grade. 


Function. 


Captain. . . 
Captain. . . 
ist  Lieut . 


Sept  II,  1864.. 

Sept  zz,  1864.. 

M'ch  39, 1865.. 

Dec  »3,  1863. 
Major.  . . .  IBrigade  Commissary.  .'Oct^  i,  i86a. 
ad  Lieut. .  Ordnance  Officer. .       *     " 


Act.  Asst  Adjt-Gen. 
Act  Asst  Insp.-Gen. 
Act  Aid  de  Camp. . . 


Major.  . . . '  Brigade  Qiurterm V.. 


Date  of      I 
Appointment  ) 


Transferred  fixxn  Rvdc- 
er*s  staff. 

Transferred  from  Rock- 
er's staff 

Transferred  from  Se- 
venth Tennessee. 


April  a,  1863  . .  jTransferred from  Rac- 
er's staff 


FORREST'S     ARTILLERY    BATTALION, 

AS  ORGANIZBD   MAY   13TH,    1864. 


Namb. 


Morton's  Battery. 
John  W.  Morton . . . . 


Rank. 


T.  Saunders  Sals 

G.  Tullv  Brown 

Joseph  M.  Mayson 

James  P.  Hanner. . . . , 


Rkt's  Battery. 

T.W.Rice 

B.  F.  Haller 


H.H.Briggs 

Daniel  C.  Jones 

Jacob  Huggins,  Jr. 


Captain... 


zst  Lieut, 
zst  Lieut, 
ad  Lieut. 
Surgeon  . 


Date  of 

Election  or 

Appointment. 


Dec.  aj,  1863. 

Dec.  a3,  i86a. 
Aug.  aS,  z86a. 
Nov.  26,  1863. 
July  14,  1863. 


HudsctCt  Battery. 


Edwin  S.  Walton Captain 


Captain... 
ist  Lieut.. 


ad  Lieut . . 
3d  Lieut . . 
Surgeon  . . 


Milton  H.  Trintham..  zst  Lieut.. 

Green  C  Wright lad  Lieut . . 

Willis  O.  Hunter |2d  Lieut. . 

R.  P.  Weaver i  Surgeon  . . 


Aug.  IS,  1861. 
Aug.  Z5,  1861. 


Jan.  1,  1862. 
April  I,  1862. 
March  a6,  1863 


Remarks. 


Acting  Chief  of  Artillery,  with  R.  M.  Bbke- 
more  as  Adjutant,  and  S.  K.  Watkias 
Assistant  Quartermaster. 

Commanding  Battery. 

Relieved  Sept.  13,  Z864. 

Wounded  at  Harrisbuig,  July  z4,  1864. 


Transferred  with  one  sectioo  to  Morton's 
Battery  in  January,  Z865.  Surrendered  in 
that  battery. 


March  7,  1863. 

April  Z2,  1863. 
Oct  3,  1863. 
Oct  3,  1863. 
July  9,  1863. 


ThraJts  Battery. 

tC.  Thrall Captain. . . 
S.  Anderson ist  Lieut.. 


T 


This  battery  is  spoken  of  generally  in  this 

work  as  ''^Walton's  Battery." 
Severely  wounded  during  siege  of  Yidubai:^ 

in  sprmg  of  1863. 


.  C.  Barlow 
^  J.  D.  Winton 
J.  L.  Grace 


L 


ad  Lieut . . 
ad  Lieut. . 
Surgeon  . . 


May  12,  1862. 
May  12,  1862. 
May  14,  1862 
May  12,  i86a. 
July  I,  1863. 


Wounded  at  Yazoo  City,  Miss.,  Mch.  c  Z864. 
Wounded  at  ShUoh,  April  6^  Z863. 


Appendix. 


691 


SECOND  TENNESSEE  CAVALRY. 


FIELD  AND  STAFF-OFFICERS. 


C  R.  Barttau,  Colonel. 
G.  H.  Morton,  Lt-Colonel. 
William  Panish,  Major. 


T.  B.  Underwood  (B) 
M  W.  McKnight  (C) 
WaKam  T.  Ridunan  (D) 


T.  C  AtkinaoB  (A) 
G.  W.  Smithson  (B) 
H.  L.  W.  Tumey  (C) 
George  Love  (D) 

A.  H.  French  (A) 
S.  B.  Wa]l<B) 

LD.  Core  (B) 
noel  Dennis  (C) 
J.  S.  Harrison  (Q 
F.  W.  Youree  (D) 
Id.  Bollock  (D) 


tM.  Hughes,  Surgeon.  P.  A.  Smith,  Lt  ind  A^QmanL 

W.  Harrison,  Asst^urgeoo.  S.  C  Talley,  Chiplafa. 


Elliott,  Acting  Q.  M. 

CAPTAINS. 

W.  A.  De  Bow  (E) 

ohn  A.  Brinkley  (F) 
M.  Eustis  (G) 

FIRST  LIEUTENANTS. 


1 


B.  Edwards  (H) 
S.  W.  Reeves  [l) 
O.  B.  Farriss  (K) 


(G) 


J.  Bedford  (H) 
William  Lattimer  (I) 
J.  H.  Neal  (K) 


SECOND  LIEUTENANTS. 

R.  B  Dobbins  (E)  E.  Las^ter  (H) 

F.  J.  Carman  (E)  T.  L.  StubbWeld  (H) 

John  E.  Deming  (F)  J.  H.  Bettick  (I) 

Newsom  PenneTl  (F)  W.  C.  RoberU  (I) 

A.  W.  Liincomb  (G)  F.  M.  McRae  (K) 

J.  J.  Lawrance  (G)  H.  Pryor  (K) 


FOURTH  TENNESSEE  CAVALRY. 

FIELD  AND  STAFF-OFFICERS. 

Tames  H.  Stamea,  Colonel.        Wm.  H.  Davis,  Lt  and  Adjt     Joseph  B.  Briggi,  A.  Q.  IL 
Perril  C  Hayoes,  Lt-ColoaeL  Edward  Swanson,  Surgeon.        Moses  H.  Gift,  A.  C  S. 
Peter  T.  Rankin,  Major.  Allen  E.  Gooch,  Asst  Suigeon.  Wm.  H.  Whitsatt,  ChiyUia. 


Aaron  Thompson  (A) 

tB.  Britton  (B) 
L.  Lindsey  (C) 
A.  A.  Dysart  (D) 

James  C  Candiff(A) 

C.  C  Rutherford  (B) 
W.  E.  Donnel  (C) 
W.  M.  RobinsoD  (D) 

Beajamtn  F.  Boyd  (A) 
Silas  S.  Short  (A) 
K.L.  Collier  (B) 
S.  T.  Bass  (B) 
C  C.  Hancock  (Q 

D.  W.  GransUff  (Q 
F.  M.Webb(D) 


CAPTAINS. 

G.  W.  Robinson  (E) 
W.  S.  McLemore  (F) 
Andrew  McGrq^or  (G) 

FIRST  LIEUTENANTS. 

W.  F.  White  (E) 
J.  T.  Pierce  (F) 
A.  J.  Dufley  (G) 


1.  E.  Teagne  (H) 
J.  M.  McBride  (I) 
Francisco  Rke  (K) 


J.  W.  Tol 
J.  A.  Smi 
J.  B.  PosI 


bhnson  (H) 
mitherroan  (I) 
Poston  (K) 


SECOND  LIEUTENANTS. 
John  Carpenter  (D)  C.  G.  Pryor  ( 


A.  Hubbard  (E) 


J.  W.Norton  (E) 

S.' 

£.  W.  BurweU 


S.  Hughes  (F) 

~  -ulTossCF) 

rohn  H.  Dice  (GJ 


S.  C  TuiToss  (Fj 


?aj 


J.  M.  Rigen  (H) 
G.  L.  Freeman  (I) 
T.W.Lewis  (I) 
W.  E.  Baker  (K) 
W.  A.YoaQgm 


SEVENTH  TENNESSEE  CAVALRY. 


FIELD  AND  STAFF-OFFICERS. 

WoL  L.  Duckworth,  CoIooeL     Wm.  S.  Pope,  Lt  and  Adit       J.  C 
Wm.  F.  Taylor.  Lt-ColoneL      Kenneth  Garrett,  A.  Q.  M.        W. 
C  C  Clay,  Major. 

CAPTAINS. 


T.  W.  Sneed  (A) 
J.  P.  RnsseU  (B) 
John  T.  Lawler  (C) 
l.W.Tklia&rro(D) 


H.  W.  Watkins  (A) 
H.  T.  Sale  (B) 
W.&Winitoo(C) 

J.  Livii^^toB  <D) 


W.  J.  Tate  (E) 
CH.  Jones  (F)<» 
F.  F.  Aden  (G) 
H.  C  McCutchra  (H) 


I 


FIRST  LIEUTENANTS. 

P.  Stader(E) 
.  J.  Blake  (G) 
.  A.  Jenkins  (H) 


nr  ord,  SnnpsMk 
L.  Rosser,  ChapUfc 


T.  R.  Alexander  (0 
J.  A.  Anderson  (K) 
Alexander  Duckworth  A) 
Benjamin  T.  Dsvis  M 


W.P.  MalooeCI) 
J,  S.  Hille  (K) 
William  MoorarCM) 


Isair 


thstthiy 


692 


Appendix. 


W.  L.  Certain  (A) 
J.D.  MilchdlCA) 
J.  V.  StiiiBoo  (B) 
Robert  J.  Black  (B) 
Samael  B.  HigKii»(Q 
A.  L.  WiastonCQ 
T.J.  MaanCD) 


SECOND  LIEUTENANTS. 

A.  A.  JohnaoD  (D) 
H.  Harris  (£) 
W.  C  Mashburne  (E) 
W.  N.  GrifEn  (G) 
James  T.  Haynes  (G) 
P.  A.  Fisher  (I) 
E.  M.  Downing  (I) 


Jolin  Trout  (K) 
£.R.Scnias(K) 
Frank  PughTL) 
William  WitherspooQ  (L) 
Charles  Rice  (M) 
J.  L.  LiTiosstoo  (BC) 


EIGHTH  TENNESSEE  CAVALRY. 


FIELD  AND  STAFF-OFFICERS. 


Ooorn  G.  DIbrell,  Colonel 
F.  VL  Doiu^erty,  Lt-ColoneL 
Jeffrey  £.  Forres^  Miyor. 


W.  W.  Wmdle  (A) 
Hamilton  McGoinness  (B) 
Isaac  G.  Woolaey  (Q 


llK>raasCWebb(B) 
William  C  Wood\Q 
JamMW.  ReYis(D) 


A.L.Windle(A) 
AUes  G.  Parker  (B) 
LeriW.  MaynardCB) 
T.  W.  Pendeigraw  (Q 
Davis  (Q 


M.  D.  Smallman.  Lt  and  Adjt    Wm.  H.  McCord,  Safseoa. 

J.  Luke  Ridley,  A»t.  Stan 


iman,  \a.  i 
A.  C.  Dale,  aTQ.  M. 
Jasper  N.  Bailey,  A.  C  S. 

CAPTAINS. 

iefferson  Leftwich  (D) 
osiah  Bilbrey  (F) 
f  ounce  L.  Gore  (G) 

FIRST  LIEXTTENANTS. 

Wmiam  P.  ChapinOB) 
Jefferson  Bilbrey  (F) 
William  Z.  Beck  (G) 

SECOND  LIEUTENANTS. 

Waman  U  Dibbrell  (D) 
Uoyd  W.  Chapin  (E) 
Jesse  AUen  fE) 
Thomas  H.  Webb  (F) 

Hemer  (F) 

Newton  C  Byber  (G) 


James  M.  Barnes  (U) 
James  W.  McReyiiolds(I) 
Biyan  IC  SwearoosiB  (K) 


John  Hin  (H) 
Jesse  Beck  (K) 


S.Rhea(H) 
loseph  D.  Bartlett  (H) 
fames  Walker  (I) 
Won  D.  WaUace  (I) 
EHjahW.  Terry  (K) 


NINTH  TENNESSEE  CAVALRY. 

FIELD  AND  STAFF-OFFICERS. 

J.  B.  Biflle,  Colonel  Roderick  Perry,  Lt  &  Adjt       W.  S.  Johnston,  A.  C  & 

A  G.  Cocker,  Lt-Colonel        Wm.  M.  Irwin,  A.  Q.  M.  Henry  Lon|^  Sugeoo. 


r.  J.  Biffle  (A) 
James  Reynolds  (B) 
C  F.  Barnes  (C) 
Lewis  M.  Kirk  (D) 


John  W.  Hill  (A) 

Littleton  (B) 

Thomas  Helmick  (Q 
May  (D) 


Gfp  Wells  (A) 
P.BrownlawCQ 


P^ipN^ob 


CAPTAINS. 

Gideon  J.  Adkisson  (E) 
J.  W.Johnson  (F) 
John  S.  Groves  (G) 
Thomas  H.  Beatty  (H) 

FIRST  LIEUTENANTS. 

James  Leftwich  (E) 
J.  P.  Montague  (F) 
D.  B.  Coofwr  (G) 
Dent  Pennington  (H) 


Frank  Smith  (I) 
R.  L.  Ford  (K) 
Robert  Sharp  (L) 


B.  F.  Burkitt  (I) 
l*homas  Hargroves  (K) 
Ed.  Cannon  (L) 


SECOND  LIEUTENANTS. 


(E) 


B.S.  Haniin(F) 
John  Johnson  (P) 
Robert  Harris  (G) 
Jacob  Armstrong  (G) 


J.  DarisCH) 
Mat  D.  Cooper  (H) 
John  Hicks  (K) 
Robert  Clarke  (L) 


N.  N.  Coac,  Colonel 

E.  R  Tresevant,  Lt-Colonel 

Wm.  E.  De  Mosa,  Migor. 

W.  T.Hall(A) 
W.  H.  Lewb  (B) 
W.  H.  WhitwencC) 
W.J.RMmmCD) 


TENTH  TENNESSEE  CAVALRY. 

FIELD   AND   STAFF-OFFICERS. 

E.  A.  Spottswood,  Lt  and  Adit  J.  N.  Ricknan, 
D.  H.  Whiter  Q.  M.  Julius  Johnston, 

CAPTAINS. 


John  Minor  (E) 
W.  W.  Hobbs  (F) 
T.S.Ea8dy(G) 


B.aRMteum(H) 
Thomas  Fletcher  (I) 
ThoBuiM.  HatduaaoB 


m 


Appendix. 


6^3 


s(A) 
isher  (B) 

ig  (C) 
(U(D) 

imsend  (A) 
idall  (B) 
Vhitwell  (B) 
Tier  (q 
'\  Lewis  (C) 
lipps  (D) 
■ay(D) 


FIRST  LIEUTENANTS. 

Andrew  Nesbitt  (E) 
M.  M.  Box  (F) 
J.  A.  MaoMiIey  (G) 


W.  H.Coode(H) 
Clinton  Aden  (I). 
J.  UUey  (K) 


SECOND  LIEUTENANTS. 

Joseph  B.  WUliamt  (E)  £.  H.  Sheplienl  (H) 

Nesbitt  (E) 

Jessce  T.  Hobbs  (F) 
Charles  S.  Summers  (F) 
~  M.  HaU  (G) 
.J.  Fnuier(G) 


V 


J.D.  Land(H) 
B.  £.  Summers  (I) 

Dodsonm 

W.  O.  Chapman  (K) 
J.  O.  »iuck  (K) 


ELEVENTH  TENNESSEE  CAVALRY. 

FIELD  AND  STAFF-OFFICERS. 
Edmonson.  ColoneL    W.  R.  Garrett,  Lt  and  Ad|t      O.  G.  Goiley,  A.jQ^  IL 


}lnian,  Lt-ColoneL 
Martin,  Major. 


ras  commanded  by 
Charles  McDonald, 
ently  of  McDonald's 
n,  to  which  it  wau 
red  in  May,  1863. 
Miller  (C) 


NevUs  (B) 
raden  (C) 
barney  (D) 

milton  (Q 
ney^) 
ler  (D) 
rable  (D) 
ordon  (E) 


J.  D.  Alkn,  A.  C  S. 


Tesse  D.  Core,  Surgeon, 
wm.  H.  Anderson,  Asst  Sai|^ 

CAPTAINS. 

John  I^e  (D) 

A.  R.  Gordon  (E) 

Ca    F   was    commanded    by 

Captain  PhiL  T.  Altin.  and    John  M.  Rust 

in  May,  1863,  transferred  to 

McDonald's  Battalion. 

FIRST  LIEUTENANTS. 
X*.  M.  Edmondscn  (E)  John  C  Bostick  (I) 


Chatham  Coffee  (H) 
Thomas  F.  Perkms  (I) 
James  Rivers  (K) 


Thomas  Banks  (G) 

SECOND  LIEUTENANTS. 


rm.H.Bau|^m 


George  Rothrock  (E) 
David  S.  Chaney  (G) 
A.  S.  Chapman  (G) 
Robert  Bruce  (H) 
William  Duriey  (H) 


MalachiKJzbyCI) 
Sol.  Rozelle  (I) 
Robert  McNairy(K) 
James  Ward  (L) 


TWELFTH    TENNESSEE    CAVALRY. 


en,  ColoneL 
nnett,  Maior. 
le,  Lt  ana  Adjt 

)aly  (A) 
rmack  (B) 
ne(Q 
::aaiey(D) 

rite  (A) 
ilder(B) 
JelKQ 
»erry(D) 

rickland  (A) 
assey  (A) 
>wn(B) 
»cey(B) 
nonton  (C) 
livan(C) 


FIELD  AND  STAFF-OFFICERS. 

A.  Beaty,  Surgeon.  S.  F.  Cocke,  A.  Q.  M. 

E.  H.  SKoD,  Asst  Swgeoo.        A.  G.  Burrow,  ChaplaiB. 


CAPTAINS. 

CS.  McStuaack(E) 
William  Bell  (F) 
John  Maaeey  (G) 


W.  M.  Craddodc(H) 
J.  B.  Scarboroogh  (n 

R.  J.  McSfNuldanm 


I 


FIRST  LIEUTENANTS. 

S.  Grandberry  (E) 
ohn  Matthews  (F) 
W.  Freeman  (G) 


J.CHamet(H)l 
R.  Johnson  (I)  . 
£.H.Cobte(k) 


SECOND  LIEUTENANTS. 

W.  M.  Parker  (D) 
J.  S.  Stewart  (E) 
James  Brooks  (F) 
Hiram  Prewitt  (F) 
Ambrose  House  (G) 
O.  H.  Wade(G) 


W.  J.  Overall  (H) 
L.  L.  Cherry  (H> 
Wmiam  Stewart  (I) 
WDliamMcKinkin(I) 
J.T.  Briap(K) 
R.A.Will&Brd(K) 


FOURTEENTH  TENNESSEE  CAVALRY. 

FIELD   AND   STAFF-OFFICERS. 

E.  S.  Hammond,  Lt  and  A4it    T.  H.  Turner,  Stfk|Ma. 


dy,  Colonel, 
lute,  Lt -Colonel 
Imnnond,  Major. 

(A) 

berry  (B) 
C) 

(D) 


M.  H.  Pirtle,  A.  Q.  M. 

CAPTAINS. 

E.  M.  Jacobs  (E) 
W.J.  HaU  (F) 
A.C.Reid(G) 


R.  P.  Wataoo,  Asft 


Jamea  Gwyni  (H) 

£.S.Enioct(D 

CCCooMrCX) 


694 


Appendix. 


K.  A.  Senter  (B) 
R.  J.  Strayhorne  (Q 
J.  W.Ridu(D) 


M.  P.  Harbin  (A) 
J.  B.  Harris  (A) 
6.  Hicks  (B) 
John  B.  Holt  {JSi 
W.  H.Swink(Q 


FIRST  UEUTENANTS. 

A.  R.  EnimctsoD  (£) 
J.  M.  Moore  (r 


Di]]anl(G) 


(U 


B.  P.  Tatmn  (H) 
A.W.  Fleinii«(K) 


SECOND  LIEUTENANTS. 


James  Drake  (D) 
W.  G.  Piitle  OS) 
M.  G.  HaU  (F) 
J.  Robertson  (6) 
J.  Reid(G) 


D.  L.  Hfll  (H) 
H.  J.  Brewster  (H) 
James  Laird  (I) 
John  Lancley  (I) 
W.  J.  Campbdl  (K) 


FIFTEENTH  TENNESSEE  CAVALRY, 


FIELD   AND   STAFF-OFFICERS 


F.  M.  Stewart,  Colonel 

T.  H.  Lofwood.  Lt.-CokmeL 

S«L  &  Street^  Major. 

F«  W.  Moore  (A) 
J.  L.  Garrison  (B) 
H.T.  Hanks  (Q 


W.R.  Griffith  (A) 
John  F.  Garrison  (B) 
A.  a  Henry  (Q 

R.  S.  Van  Dyke  (A) 
Richard  T.  Gardner  (A) 
W.  B.  Noney(B) 
W.  D.Brown  (B) 
J.  Ray  (O 


John  Skeffington,  A.  Q.  IC        A.  Bruce,  AasL  Snrfeoo. 

A.  B.  Tapscott,  Surgeon.  J.  L.  Bazkadate,  Lt.  and  kSHu 


CAPTAINS. 

T.  Nutt(D) 

£.  L.  Hussey  (E) 

T.  C  Buchannon  (F) 

FIRST  LIEUTENANTS. 

G.  W.  Yapp(E) 
J.  P.  Thurman  (F) 
J.  M.  McCaleb  (G) 

SECOND  LIEXTTENANTS. 

G.  T.  Baker  (C) 
L.  C  Street  (D) 
F.  G.  Ferguson  (Y) 
E.  S.  Thurman  (F) 
P.  H.  Sutton  (G) 


R.B.  Sanders  (G>] 
P.  M.  Williains  (I) 
J.  A.  Wimamaon  (K) 


J.  M.  WitherspooQ  (H) 
T.  W.  Allen  (1) 


R.  Y.  Anderson  (I) 
J.  L.  Seward  (I) 
R.  Stone  (K) 
V.  H  Swift  (K) 


SIXTEENTH  TENNESSEE  REGIMENT. 


FIELD   AND   STAFF-OFFICERS. 


A.  N.  Wilson,  Colonel. 
Jesse  A.  Forrest,  Lt. -Colonel 
W.  T.  Parham,  Major. 

i.  A.  RusseU  (A) 
L  D.  Polk  (B) 
J.  J.  Rice  (C) 
W.  H.  Bray  (I 


H.  Bray  (D) 

W.  A.  McCandkss(A; 

CShipp(B) 
.  J.  Galbreath  (Q 


f 


John  Cobeme  (A) 
T.  F.  WUson  (A) 
W.  B.  Malone  (B) 
J.  R.  Glover  (B) 
J.  F.  Collins  (( 
J.  D.Walker  (< 


F.  M.  Ben,  Lt  and  A4jt 
B.  M.  Bray,  A.  Q.  M. 


CAPTAINS. 

W.  H.  Simmons  (E) 

ames  Steimett  (F) 

W.  FuaseU  (G) 


i: 


FIRST  LIEUTENANTS. 

R.  Arnold  (D) 
P.  Revelv  (E) 
ames  Torminson  (G) 

SECOND  LIEUTENANTS. 

C  Dodds  (D) 

M.  Bray  (D) 
A.  J.  Baxter  (E) 
S.  J.  Crowder  (F) 
Thomas  R.  Mannum  (G) 
T.  A.  Haynes  (G) 


J 


{ 


S.  H.  Caldwell,  Snrgeoii. 
M.  D.  L.  Jordan,  .^^st. 


I 


W.  Carron(H) 
C.  Goocbe  (I) 
E.  Dudley  (K) 


M.  L.  Cherry  (H/ 
H.  Lassitterfl) 
J.  F.  Loony  (K) 


S.  C  Kennedy  (H) 
M.  H.  Gocdloe  (I) 
J.  B.  Northern  (I) 
W.  E.  Scales  (K) 
A.  F.  Brooks  (K) 


NINETEENTH  (NEWSOM'S)  REGIMENT  TENNESSEE 

CAVALRY. 


FIELD   AND    STAFF-OFFICERS. 


John  F.  Newaooi.  Colonel 
D.  M.  Wisdom,  Lt-Colonel 
W.  y.  Baker,  Major. 

W.  N.  Bamhill  (A) 
R.  M.  May  (B) 
William  Wilson  (C) 
T.  H.  Taykir(D) 


H.  T.  Johnson,  Lt  and  Adjt 
A.  B.  Ctook,  A.  Q.  M. 


I 


CAPTAINS. 


B.  Michin  (E) 
R.  Damron  (F) 
-  Sharp  (G) 
Sharp  (U) 


k 


Lodchart,  Sargeflo. 

John  Randolph,  Chaplaiai 


S.  C.  McOeriOn  (I) 
W.  D.  Strattoo  (K) 
Thomas  R.  Dick  (L) 


Appendix^ 


695 


iT.  SetUe  (A) 
iddleton  Haves  (B) 
'WUliam  Lee  (C) 
If.  B.  Omwby  (D) 


J.  C  O'Nein  (A) 
H.  Klyce  (A) 
N.  T.  Budcley  (B) 
I.  a  Ray  (B) 
John  McBarrett  (Q 
Thomas  Barrett  (C) 
D.  J.  Bowdu  (D) 
W.  P.  Walker  (D) 


FIRST  LIEUTENANTS. 

R.  M.  Wharton  (E) 
A.  P.  Meeks  (F) 

M.  T.  Shelby  (G) 
J.  D.  Springer  (H) 

SECOND  LIEUTENANTS. 


•  wuu 


Betts  (I) 
Miller  (K) 
UUam  HoUis  (L) 


E.  R.  Turner  (E) 
J.  R.  Adams  (E) 
A.  L.  Winningham  (F) 
W.  R.  Ledbetter  (F) 
Absalom  Brashear  (G) 
Robert  T.  Simmons  (G) 
J.  M.  WanUow  (H) 


Nathaniel  Busby  (H) 
S.  M.  Ozier  (I). 
J.  M.  Bumposs  (I) 
J.  J.  Lane  (K) 
E.  W.  D.  Dunn  (K) 
James  Stuart  (L) 
— — •  Lockman  (L) 


TWENTIETH  (RUSSELL'S)  TENNESSEE  REGIMENT. 

FIELD   AND   STAFF-OFFICERS. 


R.  M.  RnsselU  CokmeL 
H.  C  Grier,  Lt-ColoneL 
H.  F.  Bowman,  Major. 

William  Gay  (A) 
William  H.  Hawkins  (B) 
J.  T.  Mathi8(C) 


{.  H.  Blakemoie  (A) 
r.  W.  McNeille  (B) 
J.  P.  Armstrong  (Q 


J.  N.  Gay  (A) 

K.  H.  Goodman  (A) 
WUliam  H.  Courts  (B) 
M.  B.  Dinwiddie(B) 


S.  J.  Ray.  A.  Q.  M. 

T.  C.  McNeille,  Surgeon. 

CAPTAINS. 

J.  A.  Shane  (D) 
W.  D.  Hallam  (E) 
J.  C  Wilson  (F) 


J.  R.  Westbrook,  Asst  Sm«OB. 
A.  G.  Hawkins,  Lt.  and  Ad)t 


I 


R.  Hibbitto(G) 
R.  Gardner  (H) 


I 


FIRST  LIEUTENANTS. 

R.  Dance  (D) 
A.  Caster  (£) 
A.  Crutchfield  (F) 


SECOND  LIEUTENANTS. 

U.  S.  HalUborton  (C) 

W.  Herrin  (D) 

F.  Nelson  (D) 
R.  C  McLesky  (H) 


h 


A.  C  Miller  (H) 
W.  H.  Lawler  (I) 
M.  H.  Freeman  (K) 


George  Cathy  (H) 
A.  J.  KUUbrew  (K) 
T.  J.  Burton  (K) 


SIXTEENTH   BATTALION   TENNESSEE   CAVALRY. 


T.  R.  Neal,  U.>CoIoneI. 
Joaeph  Paine,  Major. 

James  Rodgers  (A) 
L  F.  MasUn  (B) 


Frederick  A.  Lenoir  (A) 
W.  N.  King  (B) 


G.  A.  Montgomery  (A) 
W.  C  Pride  (A) 
".  T.  Vaughn  (B) 
.  M.  King  (B) 


\ 


FIELD    AND    STAFF-OFFICERS. 

W.  B.  L.  Reaisan,  Lt  and  Adjt   H.  W.  McEIwee,  A.  Q.  If. 

CAPTAINS. 

W.  P.  Darwin  (C) 
F.  M.  Murray  (D) 

FIRST  LIEUTENANTS. 

H.C  Collins  (C) 
Thomas  H.  Mastin  (D) 

SECOND  LIEUTENANTS. 

Armour  (C)  William  Wniiams  (E) 

Thommasson  (Q  W.  P.  Reed  (E) 

Campbell  (D)  1^ Monegham  (F) 


Thomas  S.  Rambaugh  (E) 
Mike  Stoley  (F) 


Thomas  Williams  (E) 
E.  Eitson  (F) 


D.  C  Kelly,  Lt -Colonel. 
P.  T.  AlUn,  Major. 

T.  F.  Pattison  (A) 
James  G.  Barbour  (B) 
J.  C  Blanton  (C) 
W.  H.  Forrest  (D) 

W.J.  P.  Doyle  (A) 
C  D.  SteinkuhUB) 
Charles  Bakh  (Q 


James  Baine  (D)  Moses  Anderson  (F) 

FORREST'S  (OLD)   REGIMENT,* 

AS  OKGAlflZBD  MAKCH,   1865. 

FIELD  AND   STAFF-OFFICERS. 

E.  A.  Spottswood,  Lt  and  Adjt.  G.  A.  Cochran,  A.  Q.  M. 


CAPTAINS. 

N.  E^Wood(E) 
J.  F.  Rodgers  (F) 
W.J.  Shaw  (G) 

FIRST  LIEUTENANTS. 
T.  H.  MaKee(D) 
D.  A.  Autrey(G) 
M.  Nelms(H) 


J.  LMorphis(H) 
T.  R.  Bcarfoot  (I) 
WUeyHiggs(K) 


J: 


M.  Duncan  (O 
P.  Johnson  (K) 


*  Mentioned  prominently  in  this  work,  in  different  places,  as  "  McDonald's  Battalion.* 


i 


696 


Appendix. 


.  A.  Powdl  (A) 

ames  Southerland  (A) 

LL.Ivcy(B) 
[.  W.  Alexander  (B) 
Samuel  Powell  (Q 
G.  Glenn  (Q 


i 


SECOND  LIEUTENANTS. 

S.  B.  Soliman  (D)  J.  H.  Tones  (H) 

Joseph  Luxton  (D)  W.  J.  Mocphb  (H) 

W.rRedd(E)  E.Wooten(I) 

B.  A.  Powen (E)  J.  C  &ivage(lQ 

G  A.  Douglass  (F)  J< ' 
J.  S.  Nichob(F) 


[ohn  Ramsay  (K) 


NIXON^S  CONSOLIDATED  REGIMENT* 

COMPOSKD  OP  NIXON's  AND  CARTBR's  FOURTBBNTH  AND   PIFTBBNTH    TBNNBSSBB    RSGIMRim. 


G.  H.  Nixon,  Colonel. 

T.  H.  Logwood,  Lt-Colooel. 

J.  M.  Crews,  Major. 

Peter  W.  Moore  (A) 
Z.  Voss  (B) 

C  A.  S.  Shaw  (Q 
A.  C.  Reid  (D) 

J.  L.  B.  Barksdale  (A) 
W.  H.  Wharton  (B) 
H.  J.  Brewster  (C) 
C  C.  Conner  (D) 


FIELD   AND   STAFF-OFFICERS. 

W.  W.  Bayless  Lt  and  Adjt     A.  L  Hamilton,  Asst  Surgeon 


T.  U.  Turner,  Suzgeon. 

CAPTAINS. 

Cahnn  Gilbert  (E) 
J.  H.  George  (F) 
J.  R.  VosstG) 


H.  R.  Shaddett,  A.  Q.  ML 


J.  B.  Van  Houton  (H) 
N,  J.  Vaughn  (1) 
R.  H.  Dudley  (K) 


J.  L  Herrin  (H) 
L  Burnett  (I) 
E.  J.  Nea  (K) 


W.  R.  Griffith  (A) 
W.  M.  Weatherly  (B) 
H.  D.  Nealson  (C) 
W.  H.  Reid  (D) 
Alonzo  Gilbert  (E) 


FIRST  LIEUTENANTS. 

J.  T.  Scott  (E) 
J.  F.  Byers  (F) 

A.  C.  Harwell  (G) 

SECOND  LIEUTENANTS. 

B.  G.  Pierson  (E)  Eugene  Allen  (H) 
P.  W.  Halbert  (F)  ~ 
J.  M.  Jackson  (G) 
George  W.  Prior  (( 


ugeni  , 

gTw,  Heath  (H) 
T.  R.  HollowcU  (O 
J.  L.  Dismukes  (K) 


eorge  W.  Prior  (G) 

SECOND  MISSOURI   CAVALRY. 

FIELD   AND   STAFF-OFFICERS. 

Robert  McCulloch,  Colonel.        N.  S.  Adams^  Acting  Q.  M.        R.  E.  Howlett,  Asst  Sngeoa 
Robert  A.  McCulloch,  Lt-CoL  Lucius  T.  Gaines,  Lt  and  Adjt  J.  B.  Link,  Chaplain. 


W.  H.  Couzzens,  Major. 


A.  L.  Zollinger  (A) 
1.  Thompsoi 
Savery  (C) 


Jno.  S.  Thompson  (B) 
P.  M.  ~ 


J.  T.  Eubanks(A) 
Felix  Murray  (B) 
Ed.  Aldrich  (C) 


F.  R.  Durrett,  Surgeon. 

CAPTAINS. 

Geo.  W.  Lyndamoor  (D) 
F.  J.  Smith  (E) 
R.  F.  Lanning  (F) 

FIRST  LIEUTENANTS. 
T.  J.  Chandler  (D) 
A.  H.  Chadwell  (E) 
C  M.  Sutherlin  (G) 

SECOND  LIEUTENANTS. 


G.  B.  Harper  (G) 
Josiah  Tippatt  (H) 
CoUins(I) 

W.  G.  Blakey(H) 
Christian  (I) 


G.  M.  Buchanan  (Ai 
W.  O.  Hall  (A) 
Thomas  A.  Bottom  (B) 
J.  R.  Chambers  (B) 
Ch.irles  Hayes  (Q 


J.  J.  Peck  (Q 
R.  H.  Douglass  (D) 
Z.  D.  Jennmgs(E) 
W.  N.  Hinds  (E) 


John  S.  Ford  (G) 
W.  A.  Thornton  (G) 
Asa  Ptttman  (H) 
Quarles(I) 


THIRD   MISSISSIPPI   CAVALRY, 

AS  ORCANIZBD  UPON  TRANSFSR  FROM  STATS  TO  CONFKDBRATB  SBRVICZ  IN  MAT,  1K4. 

FIELD  AND  STAFF-OFFICERS. 

fohn  McGuirk,  Colonel. 

H.  H.  Barksdale,  Lt-ColoneL 

rhomas  W.  Webb,  Major. 


W.  Joe  Walker,  Lt  and  Adjt     A.  F.  Clayton,  Asst  SorgMD. 
T.  M.  Griffin,  Act  Q.  M.  W.  F.  Baker,  A,  C  S. 

J.  F.  Butler,  Surgeon. 


T. 
F. 


T.  Krle  (A) 
M.  Griffin  (B) 
hn  W.  Logan  (C) 
m.  Gwartney  (D) 


CAPTAINS. 

£.  L.  RichmondJE) 
J.  G.  Kennedi 


T.  Daniel 


w 


E.  M.  Fewell  (A) 
J.  F.  Peeler  (B) 
S.  H.  White  (C) 
Samtiel  Downing  {H) 

*  These  rcpmeats,  Vhus  «oiQaoViAa\«&«tDNataK&«s& 


FIRST  LIEUTENANTS. 
W.  O.  Cochran  (E) 
W.  H.  Thornton  (F) 
J.  L.  Hamer  (G) 


J.  L  Brannon  (H) 
C.  W.  Orr(I) 
R.H.  Tomer  (K) 

E.  J.  Haiden  (H) 
C  M.  Richards  (I) 
James  T.Dubanl(IC) 


^<W. 


Appendix. 


697 


Um.  Fox  (A) 
L  p.  Pipkin  (A) 
r.  J.  Grafton  (B) 
A.  Price  (B) 
Tno.  Miller  (Q 
J.  S.  Ford  (C) 
S.  H.  Bogard  (D) 


SECOND  LIEUTENANIS. 

R.  A.  Butler  (D)  W.  L.  Brannon  (H) 

C.  G.  Yarborough  (E)  H.  P.  Bridgen  (H) 

£.  Q.  Withers  (£)  R.  F.  Dickens  (I) 

B.  F.  Bibb  (F)  R.  B.  Sheegog(I) 
G.  W.  Sadler  (F)  J.  H.  Carr  (K) 

J.  G.  Hamer  (GJ  J.  W.  Griffis  (K) 

C.  C  Wilkins(G) 


FOURTH   MISSISSIPPI   CAVALRY, 


AS  ORGANIZBD  WHILE  KBPORTING  TO  GBNBRAL  PORRBST  IN  s86 


FIELD  AND  STAFF-OFFICERS. 

C.  C  Wnboume,  Colonel 

T.  R.  Stockdale,  Lt -Colonel     W.  C  McCaieb,  Surgeon. 

J.  M.  Nonnan,  Major. 


B.  H.  Morehead,  Lt  and  Adit  V.  T.  Chew,  Asst.  Smvei 
~  W.  W.  Vaught,  A.  Q.  M 


D.  McCnIIam(A) 
V.  L.  TerreU  (B) 
Wm.  Mirtin  (C) 
a  p.  McLean  (D) 


S.  R.  Allen  (A) 
John  Pope  (B) 
C.  E.  Buck  (C) 
B.  B.  Thomas  (D) 


R.  Q.  Allen  (A) 

R.  J.  Magee  (B) 

C  Lott  (B) 

D.  B.  Humphreys  (Q 

J.  P.  Parker  (Q 

B.  F.  Atkins  (D) 

JohnaHaning(D) 


CAPTAINS. 

S.  D.  Ramsey  (E) 

Luther  Blue  (F) 

A.  C  McKisMck(G) 

FIRST  LIEUTENANTS. 

A.  J.  Short  (E) 
S.  B.  McCown  (F) 
T  U.AmoldCG) 


feii< 


r.Whitnev(H) 
Hoover  (I) 
John  B.  McEwen  (K) 


W.  S.  Crawford  (H) 
D.Williams  (I) 
W.J.  Webb  (K) 


SECOND  LIEUTENANTS, 
ohn  T^  Hardie  (E)^  H.  C  Snodgrass  f  H) 


H.  Bondurant  (£) 
L.  B.  McLaurinXF) 
Tom  Robinson  (F) 
John  Armistead  (G) 
W.  C  Dunn  (G) 


David  Kinnison  (H) 
D.  N.  Walker  (I) 
B.  C  Quinn  (I) 
W.  J.  Driver  (K) 
£.  G.  Buraey  (K) 


FIFTH  MISSISSIPPI   CAVALRY. 


i 


FIELD  AND  STAFF-OFFICERS. 

Z.  George,  Colonel.  J.  Moore,  A.  Q.  M.  1^^°  Gerdine,  Asst  Snrgeon. 

A.  Barksdide,  Lt-Colonel      G.  W.  Henderson,  Suigeoo.       R.  ~    ~" 
.  G.  Henderson,  Major. 

CAPTAINS. 


L.  Watson,  Lt  and  Adjt 


W.  B.  PeeTy(A) 
J.  P.  Trotter  (B) 
W.  H.  Curtis  (C) 
W.N.  Scales  (D) 

R.  B.  Burton  (A) 
C  Lindsay  (Bl 
Ed.  Crippin  (Q 
W.  H.  GoffCD) 

CE.Magdre(A) 
R- J.Fr3ric(B) 
H.  D.  Stone  (B) 
Tames  Flowers  f  C) 
J.  C  Ferguson  (C) 
R.  M.  Coyle  (D) 


D.  Love  (E) 
J.  P.  PovaU  (F) 
J.  R.Allen(G) 


FIRST  LIEUTENANTS. 

W.  Kelly  (E) 
R.M.Bridgeforth(F) 
H.  H.  Hi^tower(G) 


R.  HtH  (H) 

G.  P.  M.  Turner  (I) 

A.G.  Ward(K) 


tC  Conner  (H) 
M.  Nash  (I) 
T.  M.  Blassingame  (K) 


SECOND  LIEUTENANTS. 

W.  H.  Nichols  (D)  J.  R.  Hope  (H) 

R.  D.  McCree  (E)  M.  Park  (H) 

H.  F.  Moore  (£)  J.  M.  Brown  (I) 

R.  C  Harrington  (F)  J.  F.  Rook  (Ij 

~       T)  £.  A.  Lampldn  (K) 

(G)  T.  £.Nedy(K) 


W.  C  Cole  (P) 
J.  H.  Parker   ~ 


SIXTH  MISSISSIPPI   CAVALRY. 


Ishara  Harrison,  CdoneL 
T.  C  Lipscomb,  Lt-Colonel 
R.  Y.  Brown,  Major. 


S.  Harper  (A) 
H.  B.  Brown  (B) 
W.  P.  Paidue  (Q 


FIELD*  AND  STAFF-OFFICERS. 


bhn  Oliver,  Lt  and  AdQt 
Russell,  Suigcon. 


^. 


M.  K.  Harrison.  Ajit. 
M.  Clay,  A.  C  S. 


CAPTAINS. 

CH.  Carter  (D) 

J.  E.  Hunt  (E) 

W.  S.HaRiQgton(r) 


E.  J.  Rannds(G) 
J.  H.  Richards  (H] 

C.A.Johmlflaa) 


Appendix. 


699 


MfflsW.  BrittmimCA) 
K.  D.  Porter  (B) 
Wm.  H.  CarroU  (C) 


Hugh  A.  Reynolds  (A) 
".  P.  Morton  (By 


fei 


T.  Smith  (C) 
J.  Z.  King  (D) 

Fred  Chick  (A) 
Geofve  WaU  (A) 
H.  H.  Hopson  (B) 
J.  Johnson  (B) 
Clayton  R.  Jones  (C) 
W.  J.  Hughes  (Q 


CAPTAINS. 

W.  G.  Middleton  (£) 
J.  H.  McCain  (F) 
J.  R.  Perry  (G) 

FIRST  LIEUTENANTS. 

John  L.  Knox  (E) 
r>.  M.  Slocumb  (F) 
O.  F.  West  (G) 


W.  J.  Floyd  (H) 
A.  T.  Wiroberly  (I) 
W.  A.  Raines  (K) 


Hubbard  (H) 

A.  T.  Farriss  (I) 
Elbert  OUver(K) 


SECOND  LIEUTENANTS, 

Ed.  Smith  (D)  B.  F.  Thompson  (G) 

tT.  Davis  (E)  David  Wright  (H) 

L.  Harris  (E)  Robert  Brown  (H) 

L.  Dooley  (F)  Americus  H.  Payne  (K) 

Dickens  (F)  Joseph  P.  Goodman  (K) 

Wallace  (G) 


THIRTY-EIGHTH   MISSISSIPPI  (MOUNTED)  INFANTRY. 


p.  Brent  ColooeL 

W.  L.  Ware.  Lt  and  Adjt 


FIELD   AND   STAFF-OFFICERS. 

E.  Hoskinsi  A.  Q.  M.  J.  J.  Wade,  Smgeoa. 


S.  Hoskins  (A) 
.  L  Faulk  (B) 
LHart(C) 
H.  Jones  (D) 


CAPTAINS. 

J.  A.  Bass  (E) 
J.  J.  Green  (F) 
B.  M.  Black  (G) 


W.  M.  Estelle  (H) 
A.  E.  Foxworth  (I) 
J.  C.  WUliams  (K) 


P.  E.  Dyson  (A) 
£.  T.  Harrington  (B) 


S.  D.  Gwin  (A) 
£.  S.  Leonard  (A) 
8.  F.  Smith  (B) 
J.  W.  WUloughby  (C) 


FIRST  LIEUTENANTS. 

L  L  Charles  (C)  M.  H.  Cnny  (H) 

W,  B.  Graves  (F)  John  Applewhite  (I) 

SECOND  LIEUTENANTS. 


W.  L  Jenkins  (D) 
W.  D.  CarmichacI  (F) 
John  E.  T^pley  (H) 


Tom  Ball  (H) 
W.  Ball  (I) 
N.  L  Ball  (I) 


CHALMERS'S   CONSOLIDATED  (MISSISSIPPI)   REGIMENT, 

rORMBD    BY    CONSOLIDATION    OF    KICHTBXNTK  AND  A   PORTION    OP    PIPTH    MISSISSIPPI    RBGI- 

MENTS,   MARCH    16,    1865. 

FIELD   AND   STAFF-OFFICERS. 

A.  H.  Chalmers,  Colonel.  W.  J.  Floyd,  Major.  J.  T.  Chandler,  SofgeoB. 

J.  Waverly  Smith,  Lt-Cdonel.  R.  F.  Cook,  A.  Q.  M. 


A.  T.  Wimberly  (A) 

B.  F.  Saunders  (B) 

C.  T.  Smith  (C) 
A.  G.  Milb  (D) 

Hugh  Reynolds  (A) 
J.  P.  Morton  (B) 
James  Dlnkins  (C) 
R.  E.  Smith  (D) 

Fred  Chick  (A) 
H.  H.  Hopson  (B) 
Thomas  Nf .  Jones  VC) 
John  G.  Burton  (C) 


CAPTAINS. 

J.  L.  Knox  (E) 
Wm.  A.  Raines  (F) 

0.  F.  West  (G) 

FIRST  LIEUTENANTS. 
George  E.  Harris  (E) 
D.  M.  Slocumb  (F) 
Moore  (G) 

SECOND  LIEUTENANT. 

1.  Z.  King  (D) 
J.  Wright  (E) 
S.  F.  Green  (F> 
R.  M.  Banks  (F) 


David  Wright  (H) 
R.  L  Watson  (I) 
R.  HiU  (K) 


Robert  Bnywn  (H) 
R.  F.  Moore  (I) 
J.  C.  Conner  (K) 


R.  T.  Bowen  (G) 
S.  H.  Hyatt  (H) 
R.  J,  Hoke  (K) 
M.Park(K) 


CONSOLIDATION  OF  ASHCRAFTS,  HAM»S,  AND  LOWRVS 

MISSISSIPPI  REGIMENTS, 

AT  THB  RBORCANIZATtON  OP  PORRSST*S  CAVALRY,   MARCH,   1^5. 


T.  C  Ashcraft,  Colonel. 


FIELD   AND   STAFF-OFFICERS. 

W.  P.  Curlee,  Lt-Colonel.         L.  L  Marshall,  If  i^. 


i 


700 


Appendix. 


T.  Brownrin  (A) 
Georve  W.  Bynum  (B) 
J.  R.  Wallace  (C) 

W.  H.  Hill  (A) 
W.  A.  Parish  (B) 
T.  R.  Strickland  (Q 
G.  W.  Frazier  (D) 


Georee  Owen  (A) 
K.  M.  Harrison  (B) 
L.  B.  Brown  (C) 
T.  G.  Stocks  (D) 
John  Cofieewood  (D) 


CAPTAINSw 

J.  E.  Lowry  (p) 
A.  B.  Cole  (E) 
J.  C  Fcaii  (F) 

FIRST   LIEUTENANTS. 

J.  K  Daris  (E) 
C.  L.  Martin  (F) 
W.  D.  Graves  (G) 


S.H.Wood(G) 
•M.  H.  HowaM(H) 
T.  J.  Rye  (I) 


L.  M.  Cobom  (H) 
F.  T.  Thomas  (1) 
J.  K.  Gilleylin  (K) 


SECOND  LIEUTENANTS 

La&yette  Weatherell  (E)  A.  C  Tatoin  (H) 

Lucius  Hemdon  (E)  Wm.  Hinds  (H) 

W.  H.  Kcycs  (F)  W.  E.  Thoows  (I) 

L.  P.  McCord  JG)  L.  T.  Taylor  (I) 

Scott  Turner  (G)  J.  L.  Laughzidge  (K) 


THIRD  KENTUCKY  REGIMENT. 


A.  P.  Thompson,  Colonel. 
G.  A.  C.  Holt,  Lt.-Colonel. 


H.  Blackwen  (A> 
C  H.  Mishew  (B) 
A.  C.  McGoodwin  (C) 
M.  Kincade  (D) 


J.  L.  Noe  (A) 
G.  W.  Timberlake  (B) 
G.  W.  Rucker  (C) 
J.  A.  Turk  (D) 


FIELD  AND  STAFF-OFFICERS. 

T.  T.  Bamett,  Major.  J.  C  Small,  Lt  and  Adit 

C  A.  Duncan,  A.  Q.  M.  J.  B.  Saunders,  Smipeoo. 


J.  H.  Jamutt  (D) 
^  t  H.Kilon(D) 


P.  Brian  (A) 
.  C.  Qements  (A) 
A.  Fuller  (B) 
.  G.  Ashbrook  (6) 
S.  Wheeler  (C) 
H.  Carter  (C) 


CAPTAINS. 

S.P.  Ridgeway(E) 
W.  L.  Stevenson  (F) 
T.  C.  Edwards  (G) 
T.  A.MUler(H) 


William  Shepptud  (I) 
T.  J.  Bamett  (K) 
J.  E,  Morris  (L^ 


Qay  Home  (M) 


FIRST  LIEUTENANTS. 

G.  W.  Thomas  (E)  « 

no.  Ashbrook  (F) 
E.  Morgan  (G) 
P.  Witherspoon  (H) 


I 


E.  B.  Rote  (K) 
W.  H.  Burruss  (L) 
William  Cheeres  (If) 


SECOND  LIEUTENANTS. 

S.  B.  Edwards  (E) 
"  F.  Cacey  (E) 

M.  Minhar  (F) 

F.  O.  Donnelly  (F) 

.  R.  Owens  (G) 
T.  H.  Hall  (G) 
A.  H.  Duncan  (H) 
J.  M.  J.  Manning  (H) 


S. 

I 


A.  E  Davis  (I) 


W.  J.  Charies  (K) 
R.  0. 

S.  W!  McMurry  (L) 
T.  J.  Haile  (M) 
T.  W.  Dumas  (M) 


Barnes  (K) 


W.  J.  Bushaitl 


SEVENTH  KENTUCKY  CAVALRY. 


Ed.  Crossland,  Colonel. 
L.  G.  Sherrill,  Lt.-ColoneL 
H.  S.  Hale,  Major. 


James  Lynch  (A) 
H.  C.  Watson  (B) 

iesse  Hinkle  (C) 
>.  P.  Walston  (D) 


FIELD  AND  STAFF-OFFICERS. 

T.  F.  Qardy,  Surgeon.  C  H.  Ronlhae,  Lt  and  Adjt 

W.  Undsey,  A.  Q.  M.  J.  B.  McCntchen,  Chaplain. 


.  A.  McFall  (A) 
M.  Seay  (B) 
T.  Davis  (C) 
D.  Gardner  (D) 


W.  G.  Pirtle  (A) 
B.  P.  Willinirham  (A) 
W.  H.  Seay  (B) 
S.  M.  Renwick  (B) 
Baker  Boyd 
Jna  Heady 


\% 


CAPTAINS. 

J.  T.  Cochrane  (E) 
X  W.  Logan  (F) 
D.  L.  Nowlan  (G) 


C  W.  Jetton  (H) 
D.  S.  Campbdl  (I) 
D.  H.  Grttbbs(K) 


FIRST  LIEUTENANTS. 

E.  W.  AnderKNi  (E) 
T.  J.  Garrett  (F) 
J.  K.  P.  Wills  (G) 

SECOND  LIEUTENANTS. 

R.  D.  Crest  (D) 
W.Cochrane  (E) 


J.  D.  A.  Hall  (H) 
Allen  Campbell  m 
Charles  UPk«(K) 


J.  B.  Adair  (E) 
T.  F.  Roberts  (F) 
D.  S.  Frazer  (F) 


W.  W.  Easelv  (G) 

F.  E.  Dodd  (H> 

C  WUson(I) 

C  Penn  (K) 

ames  Eraser  (K> 


I 


Appendix. 


701 


EIGHTH   KENTUCKY  REGIMENT. 

FIELD  AND  STAFF-OFFICERS. 

Jabez  Bingham,  Major.  J.  H.  Beniss,  Lt  and  A^t 


H.  B.  Ljron,  Colmiel.  labez  Jtfingtum,  Mau 

A.  R.  Shacklett,  Lt-Colonel.     J.  W.  Smith,  Asst  Surgeon. 


T.  W.  Brown  (B) 
K.  IL  Fristoe  (C) 


T.  B.  Jones  (A) 
J.  K  Burchard  (Q 
John  T.  Dennis  (D) 


J.  W.  HamHUm  (A) 
William  L.  Dunning  (B) 
T.  R.  Gil&y  (B) 
R.  T.  Albntton  (C) 


CAPTAINS. 


J.  H.  Goodloe  (D) 
James  Powell  (F) 


F.  G.  Terry  (G) 
W.  D.  McKay  (K) 


FIRST  LIEUTENANTS. 

J.  M.  Couch  (F)  J.  T. 

Logan  Field  (H)  J.  G. 


Redford  (I) 
Duncan  (K) 


SECOND  LIEUTENANTS. 


T.  B.  Dane  (D) 
B.  D.  Morton  (F) 
Lee  Turner  (G) 


A.  D.  Leadrum  (H) 
H.  T.  Rowland  (H) 
J.  A.  Duncan  (K) 


FAULKNER»S  KENTUCKY  REGIMJENT. 


FIELD  AND  STAFF-OFFICERS. 


W.  W.  Faulkner,  Colonel. 
W.  D.  Lannum,  l4.*ColoaeL 


H.  A.  Tyler  (A) 
E.  R.  Dent  (B) 
G.  W.  Qanton  (Q 
J.  J.  Wilson  (D) 


G.  W.  Maraman  (A) 
E.  P.  Nailing  (B) 
W.  R.Boa«7Q 
R.  Thomas  (D) 


a  H.  Welch  (A) 
P.  B.  Stoner  (A) 
G.  G.  Tyson  (Bj 
~ohn  C  Dent  (B) 
A.  Berryman(C) 
B.  Morris  (C) 
H.  C  Lawhome  (D) 


T.  M.  Malone,  Major. 

W.  A.  Thompson,  Asst  Suig. 


E.  A.  Manning,  Lt  and  AdQt 


CAPTAINS. 


J.  Z.  Linn  (E 
R.  P.  Cole 


J.  F.  MUton 


•  (6) 


k 


J.  Kelleher(H) 
F.  Davis  (I) 
W.D.  MerTiwetfaer(K) 


FIRST  LIEUTENANTS. 

B.  W.  McOure  (E) 
L.C  Baker  (F) 
W.  J.  Matthews  (G) 

SECOND  LIEUTENANTS. 


J.  L.  Card  (H) 
G.  J.  Freeman  (I) 
L.  I>onelsoD(K) 


J.  J.  Birdsong  (D) 
6.  P.  O'Brien  (E) 


D.  McMorgan  (E) 
J.  W.  Goodloe  (F) 
H.  L.  Raines  (F) 

D.  Wilson  (G) 

E.  Beckham  (G) 


k. 


tM.  Essell  (H) 
.  B.  Beardon  (H) 
H.  D.  WUson  (I) 
A.  J.  Bennett  (I) 
W.  H.  AnderKm  (K) 
Thomas  Stone  (K) 


FOURTEENTH  CONFEDERATE  CAVALRY. 


FIELD  AND  STAFF-OFFICERS. 


F.  Dumontiel,  Colonel. 
P.  C  Harrington,  Major. 
Em.  Forstall,  Lieut  and  Adjt 

W.  O.WeatheTs1>y(B) 
M.  T.  Deuson  (C) 
J.  GoQiales  (D) 


Robert  BacoC  (A) 
Georee  P.  Harrison  (B) 
Zeb  Williams  (Q 


tM.  Hart(A) 
O.  CaUahan  (A) 
J.  M.  Qoy  (B) 
S.  T.  Kennedy(B) 
Z.  B.  Gatlin  (C) 
SamManhaU(C) 


James  Miltenbener,  A.  Q.  BL    C.  P.  Henderson,  Surgeon. 
Ernest  Bourges,  A.  C  S.  S.  G.  Luckett*  Asst  Snigeoo. 


CAPTAINS. 

N.  G.  Rhodes  (F) 
G.  C  Mills  (G) 
L.  S.  Greenlee  (H) 

FIRST  LIEUTENANTS. 

R.  T.  Fridge  (D) 
W.  S.  Wrea(F) 
Edward  Young  (G) 

SECOND  LIEUTENANTS. 

J.  A.  GoQxales  (D) 
V.  A.  Ganthram  (D) 
R.B.  Easely(F) 
W.  B.  Lenoir  (F) 
G.  W.CStfe(O) 
Thomas  J7  Fnqna  (G) 


W.M.  Porter  m 
S.F.  Williams  (K) 


P.  Boyac  (H) 
T.  P.KeU(I) 
£.  An>iewhite  (K) 


P.  M.  WataoB(H) 
James  Boaby(H) 

Lm.  Baldwin  0) 
B.T.  Temple  (1) 
W.  L.  WilfiamstK) 
T.W.  Fiiriow(K) 


702 


Appendix. 


FIRST  TEXAS  LEGION .♦ 

AS  OSGANIZBD  MAY  lOTR,  1864. 

FIELD  AND  STAFF-OFFICERS. 


E.  R.  Hawkb&  Cclonel. 

J.  H.  Brooks,  Lieut -Colonel 

J.  T.  Whitfield,  Major. 


\ 


N.ZacharyfA) 
M.  Ingrain  (C) 
avid  Snodgrass  (D^ 


B.  H.  Nonwortby  (] 

B.  M.  Irwin  (A) 

tF.  Pleasant  (Q 
L.  Elkin  (D) 
R.  J.  Bradford  (E) 


W.  T.  Rogers  (A) 
J.  W.  Urquahart  (A) 
S.  H.  Horton  (C) 


J.  W.  Gale  (Q 
J.  L.  Nance  (D) 
Adam  Adams  ( £) 
J.  £.  Sharp  (E) 


B.  T.  Soindle,  Lieut  and  A^jt. 
R.  J.  Lee,  A.  Q.  M. 

CAPTAINS. 

Benjamin  Griffin  (F) 
Edward  O.  Williams  (G) 
F.  M.  Smith  (H) 
Jesse  M.  Cook  (I) 

FIRST  LIEUTENANTS. 

L.  R.  WUiiams  (G) 
W.  G.  WeUboume(H) 
Thompson  Monris  (I) 

SECOND  LIEUTENANTS. 

W.  J.  Swain  (F) 
T.  M.  Bagley(F) 
J.  S.  Moore  (G) 
W.  L.  Snell  (G) 
H.  McAllister  (H) 
J.  A.  Welch  (l) 
W.  Bridges  (I) 


T.  J.  Scorlock,  Saraeoo. 
J.  Y.  Bradfield,  Asst  ~ 


J,  J.  Welboome  (K) 
R.  W.  Billups  (L) 
O.  P.  Preston  (M) 


T.W. 
J.  H. 
J.  R] 


Middlebrooks  (K) 
Barcley(L) 
McKemum  (M) 


Murray  (M) 
D.  Griffin  (N) 
Joel  Parka  (N) 


NINTH  TEXAS  CAVALRY, 

AS  ORGANIZED  MAY  lOTH,  1864. 


FIELD  AND  STAFF-OFFICERS. 

D.  W.Jones,  Colonel.  ^ 

T.  G.  Berry,  Lieut. -Colonel.       R.  C  Simma,  A.  Q.  M. 
J.  C  Bates,  Major.  J.  E.  Robertson,  Surgeon. 


G.  \*.  Griscom,  Lieut,  and  AdjtJ.  F^  March,  Aasii^C  Saiceoo. 


C.  ArmstroQ^  Chaplain. 


Thomas  Purcell  (A) 
E.M.  Wright  (B) 
J.  W.  Beckett  (C) 

F.  O.  Qare  (A) 
J.  T.  R.  Jewett  (B) 
R.  W.  Gallagher  (C) 
J.  H.  Smith  (,D) 


J.  E.  Moore  (A) 
F.  M.  Dyer  (AV 
W.  A.  Wingo  (B) 

C.  Duncan  (C) 

D.  C.  Robinson  (C) 


CAPTAINS. 

M.  A.  McLemore  (D) 
David  Whtteman  (E) 
W.  E.  Alderson  (F) 

FIRST  LIEUTENANTS. 

M.  N.  Scoggins  (E) 
D.  W.  Odell  (F) 
T.  C.  Henaley  (G) 

SECOND  LIEUTENANTS. 

J.  S.  Wright  (D) 
Thomas  Cox  (E) 
W.  E.  Orr  (F) 
A.  B.  Claringer  (F) 
M.  RuaseU  (G) 


A.  R.  Wells  (m 
Perry  Evans  (I) 
H.  C  Dial  (K) 


S.  A.  Griffith  (H) 
H.  G.  Haynes  (I) 
J.  C  Garrett  (K) 


J.  W.  Smith  (H) 
J.  W.  Moore  (I) 


W.  T.  McClatchy  (K) 


yf,  J.  Chambers 
H.  F.  Young  (K) 


SIXTH  TEXAS  CAVALRY, 

AS  OKCANIZED  MAY  tOTH,  1864. 


FIELD  AND  STAFF-OFFICERS. 
Jack  Wharton,  Cblonel.  ^      ,     Edward  Myers,  Lieut,  and  AdjjtJ^.  H.  Hill,  Surgepo. 


*eter  F.  Ross,  Lieut-Colonel.    J  J.  Baker,  A.  Q.  M. 
S.  B.  Wilson,  Major. 

CAPTAINS. 

Reuben  Simpson  (£) 
R.  A.  Rawhnes  (F) 
J.  McWUson  (G) 


J.  S.  Porter  (A) 
H-  W.  Wade  (B) 
Geoii^e  B.  Brown  (Q 
G.  S.  Rosamond  (D) 

H.  T.  Moore  (A) 
A.  Richardson  (B) 
John  R.  West  (Q 
a  S.  Milan  (D) 


R.  B.  Sadler, 


W.  B.  Wbitttagtan  (H) 
H.  M.  MorrisoQ  (I) 
A.  G.  Graves  (K) 


FIRST  LIEUTENANT& 

Tosiah  Bradley(E) 
James  Green  (F) 
W^.  X. 


McCaon  (G) 
*  There  was  no  Company  B  to  this  command. 


R.  H.  Baker  (1 
M.  M.  Guerin  (11 
L.H.GravesO 


Appendix. 


703 


C  H.  Wahvortb  (A) 
J.  C.  Caruthers  (A) 
A.  P.  Thomas  (B) 
W.  H.  Thomas  (Q 
W.  P.  Wright  (E) 


SECOND  LIEUTENANTS. 

T.S.  Woods  (E)  E.R 

A.  J.  Gray  (F) 
P.  S.  Taylor  (F) 
U.  Chick  (G) 
W.  H.  Riggs  (H) 


CoIUrd 
W.  C.  Scott 


R.H.  Royal(f) 
R.  C.  White  (K) 


H) 


WILLISES  TEXAS  BATTALION. 

FIELD  AND  STAFF-OFFICERS. 

John  Wyatt,  Smgeoa. 


Leo  Wmit,  Lieutenant-ColoneL  A.  a  Evans,  A.  Q.  Bf. 
H.  &  Parker,  LieuL  and  AdjL 


LT.  Leon(C) 
W.  D.  M.  Peck  (D) 


A.  Persons  (A) 
W.  F.  MiUer  (Q 


W.  H.  Rtdgeway  (A) 
J.  a  Thomas  (A) 
E.  F.  Manhews  (B) 
W.  M.  Reddmg  1b) 
R.  J.  JohiMon(C) 


CAPTAINS. 

W.  R.  Sullivan  (E) 
F.  M.  Harwood  (F) 

FIRST  LIEUTENANTS. 

F. 
T 


W.  R.  Roff  (G) 


\  T.  Nally  (D) 


Qevehmd  (F) 

SECOND  LIEUTENANT& 

T.  W.  Hodges  (Q 
A.  S.  Gregory  (D) 
H.  McKay  (D) 


Sterritt  (G) 

aM.  BlackshMr(H) 


W.  H.  Logsden  (E) 
T.  T.  U^kins  (E) 


S.  T.  Walters  (F) 
L.  E.  KeUey  ij) 
G.  W.  Mciansie(G) 
H.  S.  Palmer  (G) 


THIRD  TEXAS  CAVALRY, 

AS  OSGANIZBD  MAY  lOTH,  1864. 

FIELD  AND  STAFF-OFFICERS. 

H.  P.  Mabry,  Colonel  W.  R  Gee,  Lieut  and  Adjt       E.  B.  Blocker,  Asst  Sorgooo. 

J.  Sb  Boggess.  Lieut-ColoneL     E.  P.  Hill,  A.  Q.  M.  N.  A.  Duckett,  Chaplain. 

A.  B.  Stone,  Major.  Daniel  Shaw,  Surgeon. 


B.  Gaose  (A) 
Wynne  (B) 


R. 

obn  Germany  (C) 
L  S.  Dabney  (D> 


J.  P.  Alexander  (A) 
A.  C.  Rorison  (B) 
W.  H.  Carr  (Q 
John  E.  Yeager  (D) 


W.  J.  Carin  (A) 
M.  B.  Harwell  (A) 
Taylor  Brown  (B) 
Tliomas  S.  Stephens  (B) 
R.  L.  Hood  (Q 
S.  B.  Barren  (Q 
B.  P.  Nance  (D) 


CAPTAINS. 

P.  B.  Word(E) 
R.  F.  Dunn  (F) 
S.E.  Noble  (G) 

FIRST  LIEUTENANTS. 


J.  W.  Lee  (H) 
G.  A.  Connally  (I) 
&  S.  Johnson  (K) 


T.  M.  Soap  (E) 
S.  O.  Ternll  (F) 
D.  N.  AUey  (G) 

SECOND  LIEUTENANTS. 

A.  J.  Chambers  (D) 
W.  S.  Holman  (E) 
D.  T.  Roberts  (E) 
H.  P.  Teague  (F) 
W.  C  Cresswell  (F) 
T.  J.  Towles  (G) 
H.  L  Taylor  (G) 


A.  R  Hargrove  (H) 
A.  G.  W.  Hunt  (I) 
A.  C  Erwin  (K) 


F.  M.  Henderson  (H) 
M.  W.  Moon  (H) 
W.H.  Rutland  (f) 
J.  D.  Jackson  (I) 
F.  M.  Noble  (K) 
John  Jefiies  (K) 


Joint  resolution  of  thanks  of  the  Confederate  States  to  Major-General  N.  B.  Forrest,  and  the  oA» 
cers  and  men  of  his  command,  for  their  campaign  in  Mississippi,  West-Tennessee,  and  Ken- 
tucky: 

Res^hfedy  by  tht  Congrtu  •/  tkt  C0i{ftd*rmU  Siaits  0/  A  wurkm^  That  the  thanks  of  Con* 
gress  are  eminently,  and  are  hereby  cordially  tendered  to  Major-General  N.  B.  Forrest,  and  tha 
officers  and  men  of  his  command,  for  their  late  brilliant  and  swccessfiil  campaign  in  Mississippi, 
West-Tennessee,  and  Kentocky— a  campaign  which  has  conferred  upon  its  authors  feme  as  aa« 
during  as  the  records  of  the  struggle  wh^4i  they  have  so  brilUantly  illwtrated. 
Approved  May  a3d,  186^ 


704 


Appetutix. 


(B.) 

LIST  OF  PRISONERS   CAPTURED  AT  FORT  PILLOW. 

Thirtkbnth  Tbnnbssbb  Battalion.— C^.  ^4— Setgeant  R.  C  Guntcr;   Privates  J.  Chil- 
dresa,  A.  J.  Knight,  J.  £.  Lemon,  J.  L.  Howell,  G.  W.  Kirk,  T.  F.  BurtoD,  J.  &  Phipps,  J. 
Clarke,  J.  Long,  C.  Swinny,  D.  Burton,  J.  Minyard,  J.  Berry,   T.  Halford,  W.  T.  Lovett.  M. 
Mitchell,  £.  Haynes,  E.  Anthony,  V.  V.  Matthemr,  J.  Moore.    Co.  ^—Privates  A.  J.  Pankey. 
B.  R.  McKie,  J.  H.  Scoby.  J.  Green,  A.  McKie,  W.  G.  Bowles,  E.  Jones,  A.  J.  Crawford.  S. 
Hubhs,  G.  W.  Bowles,  T.  L  Perry,  J.  W.  Stewart,  D.  Floyd,  W.  P.  Flowers,  J.  A.  Baker, J.  C 
Steward,  W.  C  Asprey,  J.  H.  Cover,  J.  Eason,  J.  Ellington,  Z.  Ellington,  W.  Etheridn,  T.  M. 
Paulk,  C  F.  Bowles,  W.  T.  Hooser,  J.  Jones,  W.  Morrow,  C.  R.  Allen,  H.  Bailey.  J.  A.  Beatnr. 
D.  B.  Burress,  W.  J.  Mifflin,  J.  Burruss,  W.  Woodward,  A.  H.  Barom.   Co.  C— First  Lieutenant 
N.  D.  Lmoui  ;   Privates  H.  Coming,  W.  L.  Tate,  N.  G.  Henderson,  T.  Wheeiess,  £.  Scarbo- 
rough, J.  Bvnum,  S.  Read,  J.  Cbrke,  D.  Myers,  W.  Stafford,  A.  McGhee,  F.  £.  Neeham,  J.  A 
Smith,  J.  Ham,  J.  Pressley,  M.  Day,  D.  F.  Hood,  F.  M.  Gammon,  J.  Jones,  L.  Hohoer,  G.  L. 
Ellis,  J.  H.  Webl).  H.  C  Moore,  W.  H.  Bolls.  A.  J.  Rice,  Wm.  Ryder,  J.  Norman.  J.  Souther 
land,  A.  Middleton,  H.  S.  Morris,  J.  M.  Tidwell,  J.  M.  Knuckles,  C.  Oxfisrd.    Cp.  i^Privatet 
D.  Z.  Alexander,  S.  £.  Kirk,  B.  J.  Kirk,  F.  D.  Tidwell,  Wm.  Hancock,  John  Taylor,  J.  W. 
Brown,  T.  Woods,  B.  Johnson,  J.  Wilson,  W.  R.  Johnson,  J.  Moer,  M.  Harper,  £.  D.  Stewart, 
B.  F.  Ellison,  tTP.  Pascal,  J.  M.  Wilson,  J.  W.  Gibson,  P.  S.  Alexander.  B.  W.  King,  J.  Rum- 
age,  J.  C  Green.    Co.  if— Captain  J.  L.  Poston :  Privates  J.  T.  Cochran,  A.  J.  Hall,  E.  Chil- 
diress,  J.  A.  Brown,  W.  G.  Poston,  J.  Smith,  O.  B.  Goodman,  S.  N.  Scarberry,  N.  C  Kleek,  J. 
Coxort,  W.  Hines.  J.  W.  Antwine,  C.  Ellis,  A.  J.  Madlin,  A.  Carr,  J.  F.  Sumps,  R.  Richardsoo, 
J.  A.  Haynes,  T.  M.  Smith,  T.  J.  McMurrv,  J.  F.  Rolf,  J.  Shoemate,  Henry  Clay,  J.  Arnold,  R. 
Williams,  A.  J.  Sutton,  A.  Lewis,  J.  H.  Scarboro,  T.  A.  Lunsibrd,  W.  J.  Scarberry^.  Hodse, 
H.  Jones,  W.  M.  Henley.  H.  L.  Brogden,  M.  E.  Beard :  F.  Dowling,  Quartermaster's  Clerk.    Co. 
(JknowM  as  yofuuom*a  Escort  Ctf.V- First  Lieutenant  P.  H.  McBnde ;  Private  M.  H.  Blantoo.* 
Second  United  States  Light  Artillery. — Co.  Z>— First  Lieutenant  A.  M.  Hunter ;  Private 
T.  D.  Fox.    Twenty- Fourth  Mlssouri  Infantry. — Co.A — Captain  J.  F.  Young.    Sticall's 
Home-Guards.— Privates  W.  H.  Gibson,  S.  T.  Gibson,  J.  W.  Autrey,  Wm.  Borer,  R.  C  Price, 
S.  M.  Price.    Second  Iowa  Cavalry. — Co.  Zr— Private  R.  B.  Springer.    First  Unitiid  States 
Regular  Artillery.— O.  ^—Private  C  K  Pratt    Second  Illinois  Cavalry.— C».  ^— 
Private  H.  W.  Holloway.    Fifty-second  Indiana  Infantry.— C*.  C— Private  A.  Baker.    Se- 
venth Tennessee  Cavalry.— C*.  ^—Private  R.  MuUins.    Co.  C— Private  R.  H.  StewarL    C*. 
Z>— Private  W.  M.  Crews.   Co.  ilf— Private  W.  H.  Snow.  Sixth  Tennessee  Cavalry.— C*.  E— 
Private  T.  K.  Taylor.    Seventh  Kansas  Cavalry.— Private  T.  C  George,  (Hospital  Steward.) 
Sixth  united  States  (colored)  Artillery,  (heavy.)— C«.  A — Captain  C  J.  Eppeneiter ; 
First  Lieutenant  P.  Bbhop ;  Sergeant  J.  Hennissey ;  Privates  A.  J.  Hatfielc^  T.  Thompson,  Frank 
Hopper,  Tom  Norris,  Anthony  Flowers,  Bill  Smith,  Oliver  Jones,  Henry  Smithy  Jenkins  Rice,  Bill 
Ward,  Monk  Moores,  Cog  Horton,  Edmund  Trice,  Peter  Williams,  Charlie  Williams,  Dave  Man- 
ley,  Ray  McGhee,  Broxton  Kirkman,  Wilson  Johnson,  Bill  Oates,  Solomon  Patrick,  Henderson 
Tobnson,  John  Gentry.  Sandy  Worsham.  Wilson  Crenshaw,  Jim  McCauley,  Albert  Ingram,  Jef- 
ferson Dobbs,  Spott  Clayton,  Harry  Hill,  Wm.  Gray,  Jim  Danbridge,  Dan  Newbern,  Dave  O^s. 
Frank  Browder,  Tom  Palmer,  Aaron  Bradley,  David  Oats,  Henry  Smith,  Wilson  Peyton.  David 
Johnson,  Jacob  Lumpkin,  Moses  Wiseman,  Lewis  Van  Eagle,  John  McHaioey,   Tun  MurrrlU 
Jim  Flowers,  Sam  Baugh,  Dick  Sallee,  Hiram  Lumpkin,  Jim  Pnde,  John  Henry  Harper,  Davt 
Flowers. 


RECAPITULATION. 


Sixth  United  States  Heavy  Artillery,  (Colored). 

Second  Iowa  Cavalry. 

Thirteenth  Tennessee  Battalion 

Second  United  States  Lieht  Artillery 

First  United  States  Re^ar  Artillery 

Twenty-fourth  Missouri  Infintry 

Stigall's  Home-Guards. 

Seomd  Illinois  Cavalry. 

Fifty-second  Indiana  Infantry 

Seventh  Tennessee  Cavalry 

Sixth  Tennessee  Cavalry. 

Seventh  Kansas  Cavalry. 

Total 


Officers. 

Enlisted 
Men. 

Total. 

a 

54 

56 

•  • 

I 

3 

148 

«S» 

t 

I 

•  • 

1 

I 

•  • 

•  • 

6 

•  • 

s 

«  • 

I 

•  • 

4 

•  • 

s 

•  • 

1 

1 

ai9 

aa6 

*  In  Um  recapitulation.  Lieutenant  McBride  v  enomcrated  with  tte  ThSvtcflBtli  Tc 


J 


iliiu 


THE  BORROWER  WILL  BE  CHARGED 
AN  OVERDUE  FEE  IF  THIS  BOOK  IS 
NOT  RETURNED  TO  THE  LIBRARY  ON 
OR  BEFORE  THE  LAST  DATE  STAMPED 
BELOW.  NON-RECEIPT  OF  OVERDUE 
NOTICES  DOES  NOT  EXEMPT  THE 
BORROWER  FROM  OVERDUE  FEES. 

Harvard  College  Widener  Library 
Cambridge,  MA 021 38    (61 7)  495-241 3 


f    A  ^ 

i 


■\-W?  p 


■  iOAtiiiiEU 


-^      i'     V 


I 


