# Official Records XXXIV part 1: Richard Taylor reports, dispatches and orders, March-May 1864, v1

## transcription-note

Digital OCR of a University of Illinois scan; not verified against print. Whitespace collapsed; all other characters retained, including OCR errors, split words, running headers, misprinted page numbers and footnote markers. Local headings are editorial. Bounded report passages only; inclosures and orders printed with a report are part of that report. No maps or compiled returns selected.

## title

THE WAR OF THE REBELLION: A COMPILATION OF THE OFFICIAL RECORDS OF THE UNION AND CONFEDERATE ARMIES. PREPARED BY The late Lieut. Col. ROBERT N. SCOTT, Third U. S. Artillery. PUBLISHED UNDER THE DIRECTION OF The Hon. REDFIELD PROCTOR, Secretary of War, BY Maj. GEORGE B. DAVIS, U. S. A., Mr. LESLIE J. PERRY, Mr. JOSEPH W. KIRKLEY, Board of Publication. SERIES I— VOLUME XXXIV — IN FOUR PARTS. PART I— REPORTS. WASHINGTON: GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE. 1891.

## taylor-1864-07-31-transmittal

No. 95. Reports of Maj. Gen. Richard Taylor, C. S. Army, commanding District of West Louisiana A Alexandria, July 31, 1864. Brig. Gen. W. R. Boggs, Chief of Staff: General : The accompanying report was written long since, but the impossibility of obtaining returns of the casualties in the cavalry prevented me from forwarding it. Respectfully, your obedient servant, R. TAYLOR, Lieutenant- General.

## taylor-1864-04-18

Headquarters District of West Louisiana, Shreveport, April 18, 1864. Colonel : I have the honor to submit the following report and request that the accompanying documents be made a part of it. Document A (March 5) shows my anticipation of the enemy’s cam- paign. Hearing that Sherman had visited New Orleans, I feared his co-operation with Banks from Vicksburg, but I had no means of estimating either the extent or time of such co-operation. Docu- ment B (March 7) orders Polignac to move his brigade to Alexandria at once. Document C (March 8) proposes an expedition against Plaquemine, as the enemy was not ready to move from the Teche, and an offensive movement, so unexpected, might well delay his attack and afford time for my re-enforcements from Texas to come up. Document D, with inclosed papers from March 13 to 15 inclusive, relative to the landing of the enemy at Simsport and subsequent *See also General Taylor’s correspondence, March 6-June 5, with General Smith, pp. 488-546. CflAP. XL VI.] THE RED RIVER CAMPAIGN. 561 movements until I joined the forces on the Boeuf, 25 miles south of Alexandria. The report of Major-General Walker (Document E) is respectfully submitted.* It is proper to observe that this officer had only three small companies of cavalry under his command, which were operating east of the Atchafalaya on the Mississippi. The movement of the enemy on the 12th separated these companies from General Walker, and they only reached him on the 15th, after I assumed command on the Boeuf. Consequently he was without means of gaining information from the 12th to the 15th, but sub- sequent events prove his estimate of the force in his front to have been more correct than mine. From enemy’s accounts it appears that Fort De Russy surrendered after two hours’ resistance, with a loss to him of 4 killed and 30 wounded, and to us 5 killed and 4 wounded. The place was taken by a land attack, the gun-boats not making their appearance until after the surrender. The enemy claims 200 prisoners. Document F shows the number of guns, &c. , lost. Shortly after reaching the troops on the Boeuf I received the in- telligence of the enemy’s fleet reaching Alexandria about 4.30 p. m. on March 15. Before leaving Alexandria on the morning of that day I had taken steps to secure the removal of all public property by loading the steamers and sending them above the falls. From the point on the Boeuf where I assumed command of the troops the Burr’s Ferry road strikes off to the Sabine. This is the shortest road from the lower Red River Valley to the Sabine. Twenty miles west of the Boeuf it crosses the old military road from Opelousas to Fort Jesup and Natchitoches. After the fall of Vicksburg and Port Hudson, estimating the ability of the enemy at any time to throw an overwhelming force upon me by the Red River, I caused depots of forage to be placed on these roads at suitable points. The entire country from the Boeuf to the Sabine, or to Natchitoches, is a pine desert, furnishing no supplies whatever. On the 16th, the army was moved toward Carroll Jones’, on the Natchitoches road, where it arrived on the evening of the 17th. Vincent’s regiment of Second Louisiana Cavalry (the only mounted force at my disposal south of Red River) was ordered to move from the Teche, where it was watching the enemy’s large force, and join me on the military road, leaving flying scouts on the enemy’s flank. The position at Carroll J ones’ was very favorable. It was a depot of forage. The roads to Burr’s Ferry and to Natchitoches separated there. Only 12 miles from the Bayou Rapides and Cane River, it enabled me to draw supplies from both places and observe the movement of the fleet on the main Red River, Accordingly I determined to remain at Carroll Jones’ until the last moment, hoping every hour to hear of re-enforcements, which a reference to Document G (of March 7) shows I had reason to expect. On the 19th, the Second Louisiana Cavalry joined me, and on the 20th, was sent forward to the valley of the Bayou Rapides to push on toward Alexandria. During the 20th and the morning of the 21st, this regiment skir- mished briskly with the enemy. Being apprehensive that the enemy would send largely superior forces and attempt to dislodge them, I sent Edgar’s battery of light artillery to Colonel Vincent on the morning of the 21st, and posted it at a strong position near James’ Store, where it commanded the valley of the Rapides. Late in the * See of March 19, 1864, p. 598, 36 R R— VOL XXXIV, PT I 562 LOUISIANA AND THE TRANS-MISSISSIPPI. [Chap. XLYI. day, hearing the sounds of Edgar’s pieces, I dispatched Major Brent, chief of artillery and ordnance on my staff, to examine the condition of affairs and ascertain if re-enforcements were needed by Colonel Vincent. This officer returned in the evening, informing me that re-enforcements would be needed, as Colonel Vincent expected to be attacked there in the morning. Some time elapsing without my hearing from Colonel Vincent, after Major Brent left him, I was fear- ful that the enemy had cut off my couriers, and therefore sent Capt. C. LeD. Elgee, of my staff , with an escort to communicate with Col- onel Vincent and direct him to fall back at once to the infantry support. Captain Elgee did not reach the command, but was taken prisoner by the enemy and is now in their hands. The weather dur- ing the day and night of the 21st was wretched, raining and hailing heavily. At about 9 o’clock at night a large cavalry force of the enemy, guided by deserters and jay hawkers, took a road unknown to my best guides, crossing below James’ Store at Grubb’s Lake, got in rear of the position and surprised the camp, capturing the 4 pieces and men of Edgar’s battery and 100 men of the Second Louisiana Cavalry. The aggregate loss of prisoners was about 200. On the morning of the 22d, deeming it possible that the enemy might at- tempt an advance of cavalry by the way of Carroll Jones’, sent my trains to Beasley’s and formed Mouton’s division in line of battle at that place (Carroll Jones’) ; but as no demonstration was made I withdrew to Beasley’s, which position covered the road to Many and Natchitoches, and from which there was a good road striking Cane River about 26 miles below Natchitoches, whence I could draw abundant supplies of forage and subsistence. At the same time I dispatched couriers to intercept the -cavalry re-enforcements and di- rect them to cross the Sabine at points above Burr’s Ferry and join me at Beasley’s. From the 22d, to the 29th, I remained at Beasley’s, hoping each day that some of my cavalry re-enforcements would ar- rive, the enemy in the mean time massing his forces at Monett’s Ferry, and when he crossed Cane River, it being impossible to pro- cure subsistence and forage from that direction, I ordered the cav- alry-to fall back slowly toward Natchitoches, contesting the enemy’s advance, and moved the infantry by way of Fort Jesup to Pleasant Hill. Depots of supplies having been established at both places, I proceeded myself on the 30th to Natchitoches, where I remained until within a few hours of the arrival of the enemy. On the night of the 30th, Colonel McNeill’s Fifth Texas Cavalry reached Natchitoches, numbering 250 men, of whom 50 were unarmed, and on the morning of the 31st, Colonel Herbert’s Seventh Texas Cavalry reached the same place, numbering 350 men, of whom 125 were unarmed. These were the first re-enforcements which reached me since the opening of the campaign. Taking a steam-boat I pro- ceeded to Blair’s Landing, and thence across the Bayou Pierre to Pleasant Hill, examining the road with a view to its use in hauling supplies from the river in the- event of our occupying Pleasant Hill for any considerable length of time. I reached Pleasant Hill on April 1, the divisions of Major-General Walker and Brigadier- General Mouton arriving on the same day. On the evening of April 1, Major-General Green joined me in person. On the night of April 1, 1 was informed by General Green that Colonel Debray was marching from Many to Pleasant Hill with his regiment and Moseley’s and McMahan’s batteries and his trains. As the enemy was moving up on the Natchitoches road to Pleasant Chap. XLVI.] THE RED RIVER CAMPAIGN. 563 Hill in force I ordered Colonel Debray to pnsli forward his batteries and trains with dispatch, which was done. Colonel Debray, with his regiment, unexpectedly encountered the enemy before he reached Pleasant Hill and had a brisk skirmish with them, which re- sulted in a loss to him of 4 or 5 wounded. At the same time Gen- eral Bagby, with his cavalry command, was skirmishing with the enemy who were advancing on the Natchitoches road. On the morning of the 3d, I offered battle to the enemy at Pleasant Hill, which was not accepted by him, and leaving the cavalry in the front I withdrew the infantry to Mansfield, which place they reached on the 5th. On the 6th, Brigadier-General Major’s brigade of cavalry, Hardeman’s and Waller’s regiments, of Bagby ’s brigade of cavalry, and Buchel’s regiment of cavalry reached Mansfield, having taken the road via Logansport, as directed by me on the night of the 2d. On the morning of the 7th, I received information from Brigadier- General Major, commanding the cavalry advance and outposts at Pleasant Hill, that the enemy was advancing with a large force of all arms and was driving in our pickets. On receipt of this news I moved to the front in company with Major-General Green, and after verifying the fact that the advance was rather serious, leaving Gen- eral Green in command in front I returned to Mansfield to make my arrangements for the following day, announcing my intention to department headquarters to fight a general engagement the next day if the enemy advanced in force, unless ordered positively not to do so. Churchill’s and Parsons’ divisions of Arkansas and Missouri troops, numbering about 4,000 bayonets, were ordered to march at early dawn on the morning of the 8th from their camp, 20 miles dis- tant, to Mansfield. These troops reached Shreveport on the evening of March 24, and were retained at that place until late in the evening of April 4, when they were ordered to march to Keachie, report to me, and await my orders at that point. The infantry divisions of Major-General Walker and Brigadier- General Mouton were ordered on the night of the 7th to move at early dawn on the 8th, to a position about 3 miles below Mansfield, which had been selected by me on the previous day. The chief surgeon of the army (Surgeon McKelvey) was directed to make all necessary arrangements in the village of Mansfield for the care of the wounded. The chief quartermaster and commissary (Major Sanders and Major Mason) were instructed to pursue their ordinary avocations and get up forage and supplies. I beg leave to submit copies of the correspondence between my- self and department headquarters between my arrival at Carroll Jones’ and the morning of April 8. Arrangements were perfected to secure quiet and order among the wagon trains camped around Mansfield. In the morning of the 8th, I moved down to the position selected for the troops. Walker’s division occupied the right of the road, facing Pleasant Hill, Buchel’s and Terrell’s regiments of cavalry, under Brigadier-General Bee, on its right ; Mouton’s division on the left of the road, with Major’s division of cavalry, consisting of his own and Bagby’s brigades (dismounted), on Mouton’s left. Debray’s regiment of cavalry was held in the road a little to the rear. Halde- man’s and Daniel’s batteries were on the right in position with Walk- er’s division, Cornay’s and Nettles’ with Mouton’s division. Mc- Mahan’s battery, which had been in the front with the cavalry 564 LOUISIANA AND THE TRANS-MISSISSIPPI. [Chap. XLYI. advance, relieving the Yal verde, was withdrawn to the rear and held with the reserve artillery, the wooded condition of the country offering no field for the employment of many guns. My line of battle was in the edge of a wood, with cleared fields in front on both sides of the Pleasant Hill road, the clearing about 1,000 yards in extent. Soon after the troops were in position our cavalry was rapidly driven in and assumed the positions above described. On the left a body of the enemy's cavalry, following hard upon ours, ran into the line of the Eighteenth Louisiana and was destroyed. The enemy formed his line in the woods on the opposite side of the cleared fields,- and some light skirmishing took place. I soon found that the enemy was weakening his left and massing on his right to turn me. I at once brought Terrell’s regiment of cavalry to the left to re-enforce Major, and Randal’s brigade, of Walker’s division, from the right to the left of the road to strengthen Mouton’s, causing the whole line to gain ground to the left to meet the attack. These movements were masked by throwing forward skirmishers toward the enemy and de- ploying Debray’s regiment of cavalry in the open fields on both sides of the road. It was not until 4 p. m. that these changes were com- pleted, when, becoming impatient at the delay of the enemy in developing his attack, and suspecting that his arrangements were not complete, I ordered Mouton to open the attack from the left. The charge made by Mouton across the open was magnificent. With his little division, consisting of his own and Polignac’s brigades, the field was crossed under a murderous fire of artillery and musketry, the wood was reached, and our little line sprang with a yell on the foe. In this charge General Mouton, commanding division, fell. Colonel Armant, of the Eighteenth Louisiana; Colonel Beard, of the Cres- cent Regiment; Lieutenant-Colonel Walker, commanding Twenty- eighth Louisiana ; Lieutenant-Colonel Noble, Seventeenth Texas ; Major Canfield, of the Crescent Regiment, were killed, and Lieuten- ant-Colonel Clack, Crescent Regiment, dangerously wounded. Seven standard-bearers fell one after another with the flag of the Crescent Regiment. Despite these and other heavy losses of officers and men, the division never halted for a moment nor ever fell into confusion, but under the gallant Polignac pressed stubbornly on. Major, with his division, consisting of his brigade, under Colonel Lane, Bagby’s brigade, Vin- cent’s brigade of Louisiana cavalry, re-enforced by Terrell’s regiment drawn from the right, dismounted his men on Mouton’s left and kept pace with his advance, forcing back and turning the enemy’s right. Randal supported Mouton’s attack by advancing his regi- ments en echelon from the left. In vigor, energy, and daring Randal surpassed my expectations, high as they were of him and his fine brigade. These movements on the left of the road to Pleasant Hill were under the immediate direction of Maj. Gen. Thomas Green, who displayed the high qualities which have distinguished him on so many fields. As soon as the left attack was well developed I ordered Major-General Walker to move Waul’s and Scurry’s brigades into action, directing General Bee, on his right, to press on with De- bray’s and Buchel’s cavalry to gain the enemy’s rear. Believing my right outflanked by the enemy, General Walker was instructed to throw forward Scurry to turn his left and gain a position on the high road beyond his main line of battle. The dense wood through which Bee advanced prevented him from gaining much ground, but the gallantry and vigor with which that accomplished soldier Chap. XLVI.] THE RED RIVER CAMPAIGN. 565 (Walker) led his fine brigades into action and pressed on the foe has never been surpassed. Until he was disabled by a painful wound on the following day, every hour but illustrated his capacity for command. The enemy in vain formed new lines of battle on the wooded ridges, which are a feature of the country. Every line was swept away as soon as formed, and every gun taken as soon as put in position. For 5 miles the enemy was driven rapidly and steadily. Here the Thirteenth Corps gave way entirely and was re- placed by the Nineteenth, hurriedly brought up to support the fight. The Nineteenth Corps, though fresh, shared the fate of the Thir- teenth. Nothing could arrest the astonishing ardor and courage of our troops. Green, Polignac, Major, Bagby, and Randal on tfce left, Walker, Bee, Scurry, and Waul on the right swept all before them. Just as night was closing in the enemy massed heavily on a ridge overlooking a small creek. As the water was important to both parties, I ordered the enemy driven from it. The fighting was severe for a time, but Walker, Green, and other gallant leaders led .on our tired men, and we camped on the creek as night fell, the enemy forced back some 400 yards beyond. The conduct of our troops was beyond all praise. There was no straggling, no plunder- ing. The vast captured property was quietly taken to Mansfield and turned over untouched to the proper officers. Daylight on the 9th found every man at his post, and the pursuit was taken up with full ranks. This testimony is due the army under my command. The village of Mansfield, only 3 miles from this fierce battle, was during the day and night the scene of order and quiet. The excellent arrangements made by Surgeon McKelvey, medical director; Major Sanders, chief quartermaster, and Major Mason, chief commissary of subsistence, secured the efficient work- ings of their several departments. Not a straggler was seen in the village on the 8th or 9th, and citizens assured me but for the sound of the guns they might have supposed peace to reign in the land. After all was quiet at the creek, and the necessary orders for the morning had been given to Major-Generals Walker and Green, I returned to Mansfield to hurry forward ChurchilTs and Parsons’ divisions, arrived that evening from Keachie, 22 miles distant. Churchill and Parsons were put in motion for the front at 2 a. m. After sending dispatches to department headquarters and giving necessary instructions to the heads of the several departments I re- turned to the front at 3.30 a. m. Finding the enemy had retreated during the night, as I supposed he must after the severe losses of the preceding day, I sent forward all the cavalry under Green, the infantry following in column along the Pleasant Hill road, Churchill leading, then Parsons, Walker, and Polignac, now commanding Mouton’s division. * I accompanied the cavalry. For 12 miles not a shot was fired by the enemy. Many prisoners, burning wagons, scattered arms, gave evidence of the rout. A mile in advance of Pleasant Hill, Green found the enemy drawn up in a strong position. As we had left the infantry far in our rear by the rapid advance, I ordered feints to be made to the right and left to develop the posi- tion and strength of the enemy. The importance of pushing Banks beyond Pleasant Hill could not be overestimated. As shown by his orders dated at Natchitoches and captured on the 8th, Banks ex- pected to reach Shreveport on the 11th with the Thirteenth [andj Nineteenth Corps and the cavalry via Pleasant Hill and Mansfield, and had on the 8th made two-thirds of the distance between the two 566 LOUISIANA AND THE TRANS-MISSISSIPPI. [Chap. XLVI. points. Simultaneous with his march from Natchitoches a fleet of some thirty gun-boats and transports, many of the latter loaded with troops, ascended the river above Grand Ecore, the port of Natchitoches, on the main Red River. This fleet was watched by Brigadier-General Liddell with a small brigade of cavalry and a four- gun battery. This officer had been in command on the Ouachita. He was directed to throw his command from the Ouachita to the east bank of Red River and annoy the enemy’s boats in the river. As he was in constant communication with me, his mo vements were directed from this side and made to conform with mine. Such w§s the confidence of the enemy in his superior numbers and vast preparations that his fleet ascended the river 100 miles above Grand Ecore, notwithstanding the difficulty of navigation, the result of low and falling water, and the punishment inflicted by Liddell. The troops of the Sixteenth and Seventeenth Corps, which came from Vicksburg and landed at Simsport, as they came in transports and had not appeared on the battle-field of the 8th, were certainly on the transports, being without land transportation. From Pleasant Hill * a good road leads to Blair’s Landing, on Red River, 16 miles distant, and crossing Bayou Pierre 4 miles from the river, Blair’s Landing being 45 miles above Grand Ecore by water. From Pleasant Hill to Natchitoches the stage road leads around Spanish Lake, distance 36 miles, through a pine woods desert. The possession of Pleasant Hill thus prevented Banks from re-enforcing by the short line from his transports by the Blair’s Landing road and threw him back to Natchitoches before he could unite his troops. On the night of the 8th, shortly after the action closed, I ordered a force of cavalry to push on the road from Blair’s Landing to Pleas- ant Hill, taking a cross-road from Mansfield which fell into that road near the ferry over the Bayou Pierre, mentioning in the order that a small force posted on the bluff overlooking Bayou Pierre could de- lay indefinitely the crossing of that stream from the east. Unfortu- nately this order was construed to mean that its execution was to follow on possession of Pleasant Hill, so that I could not decide what force we were confronted by on the 9th. It was late after midday before the infantry got up, and a glance at Churchill’s troops showed they were too much exhausted to attack. The infantry was ordered to lie down and rest for two hours. Mean time cavalry was pushed right and left to gain information, and a party was sent on the Blair’s Landing road by a detour to the left, to procure the intelli- gence of which I was deprived by the , mistake above mentioned. This party did not return until after the attack. At 3 p. m., the infantry being somewhat restored by rest, the plan of attack was formed and the troops put in motion. The Arkansas and Missouri divisions, under Churchill and Parsons, with Etter’s and Daniel’s batteries, were sent to the right to outflank the enemy, reach the Jesup road, and attack from the south and west. Churchill, the seniorofficer, was to push Hardeman’s, McNeill’s, and Terrell’s cav- alry to his right, and communicate with Walker on his left. When the enemy was driven, the cavalry above mentioned was to push down the Jesup road for 12 miles, take a cross-road leading into the Natchitoches road, and thus fall on the enemy’s line of retreat. Walker filed to the right through the woods to form line between the Pleasant Hill and Jesup roads and communicate with Churchill’s left. As soon as he heard Churchill’s and Parsons’ guns he was to attack by echelon of brigades from his right, the men to throw for- Chap. XLVI.] THE RED RIVER CAMPAIGN. 567 ward their right shoulders as they came into action. Orders were given to all to rely on the bayonet, as we had neither ammunition nor time to waste. These orders were well carried out, as many ghastly wounds among the Federals testify. On the left of Walker, Bee held Debray’s and Buchel’s cavalry in the main road from Mans- field, with orders to charge through Pleasant Hill whenever the right attack disordered the enemy. To the left of the road Major, with his own and most of Bagby’s cavalry (dismounted), was to move forward, outflank the enemy’s right, and gain and hold the Blair’s Landing road. These latter movements were under the immediate charge of General Green. Polignac, whose division had suffered more than any in the previous battle, was held in reserve in the Mansfield road behind Bee’s cavalry. At 4.30 p. m. (about the time I expected Churchill to be in position) I directed General Green to open artillery on a battery posted on an eminence fronting the Mans- field road where it debouched from the woods to a low cleared field. This was for the purpose of diverting the enemy’s attention from Churchill’s attack. Nettles’, Moseley’s, and J. A. A. West’s batteries were posted by Major Semmes, chief of artillery to General Green, and soon overpowered the enemy’s fire on the hill before mentioned. The Yal verde Battery, under Nettles, was first in action, and was • roughly used by the opposing fire, but the other batteries mentioned soon opened and drove the enemy from his formidable position. To conclude with the artillery, Major Brent, chief of artillery on my staff ; Major French, of General Walker’s staff, who later brought Haldeman’s battery into position, and Major Semmes illustrated the high capacity of their arm of the service. Our batteries were at one time advanced in the open field within 200 yards of the wooded hill held by the enemy’s infantry, and opened without support from that position. The hill before alluded to, on which was posted the enemy’s battery, was the key to his position in this quarter. To his left ex- tended a range of broken hills, densely clothed with young pines, and his troops were well posted along these wooded hills and protected by piles of logs, rails, and some abatis. At about 5 p. m. Churchill and Parsons opened on the right and Walker commenced his ad- vance in support. Just then our fire overpowered the enemy’s battery, in front of the Mansfield road, and disabled his guns, which were removed to the rear. The confusion and movement incident to this, coupled with the sound of Churchill’s and Par- sons’ attack, led General Green naturally to suppose the time for Bee’s charge had arrived. Bee led forward Debray’s and Buchel’s fine regiments in most gallant style across the fields and up the opposite slope, where he was stopped by a close and deadly fire of musketry from the dense woods on either side of the road. Bee was struck, Buchel mortally wounded, and Debray and Major Me- nard, of the same regiment, struck. Many a gallant horseman went down. Bee drew back, himself retiring last. The charge failed for the time, but the gallantry displayed by Bee, Debray, Buclief, Me- nard, and others produced its effect on the enemy. During this time Walker had led his splendid division across the field and was fully engaged in the opposite wood, and Major had swept around to the left with his dismounted cavalry of Bagby’s and his own brigade, under Colonel Terrell (severely wounded in the fight), cleared the wood to the left, and seized and held the position occupied by the enemy’s battery in the commencement of the engagement. The stubborn resistance offered by the enemy along the whole line soon 568 LOUISIANA AND THE TRANS-MISSISSIPPI. [Chap. XLVI. convinced me that lie had received re-enforcements of fresh troops, and I ordered forward Polignac. Jnst then information reached me that Major-General Walker was wounded. Galloping to the spot I found that he had received a severe contusion in the groin, and ordered him to quit the field, which he did most reluctantly. His wound was a great misfortune. The con- tinuity of our line was lost, as I could not for some time find either of his brigade commanders, all of whom were hotly engaged within the pine thicket in the front. Churchill in his attack did not gain ground enough to his right nor use his cavalry efficiently. The consequence was that, although his first attack was vigorous, sweeping all before it, the enemy out- flanked his right and threw him into much confusion. He did all in his power to restore order, and was ably seconded by Generals Parsons, Tappan, and Clark, whose brigade of Missourians suffered heavily. Brigadier-General Scurry, also commanding the right brigade of Walker’s division, behaved most nobly, and speaks highly of Colonel Waterhouse, commanding one of his regiments. General Scurry was slightly wounded in the engagement. The efforts of these leaders prevented the confusion on the right from becoming disas- trous. Mean time the fighting on the left and center was close and fierce. The fresh troops of the Sixteenth and Seventeenth Corps held their ground manfully. The dense woods prevented a view of the field, and the continuity of our line was lost. An idea prevailed that we were firing on each other. Green, Polignac, Major, Randal, and Gray, with their respective staffs, rallied the troops and led them again and again into action, and the men by their conduct showed them- selves worthy of such leaders. At nightfall I withdrew the troops to prevent the additional confusion incident to darkness and formed line in the open field. The men fell in at once, and, animated by their noble leaders, brought order and confidence to the ranks. Brig- adier-General Waul withdrew from the wood, where he had been hotly engaged, in fine style and showed the coolness of a veteran. General Churchill reported to me in person from the right and enabled me to judge the result. With 12,000 men we had attacked twenty-odd thou- sand, many of them fresh troops, posted strongly on ground unknown to us. W e had driven them at every point, and but for the mistake and consequent confusion on the right we would have captured most of his army. This was accomplished by hard, stern, stubborn fight- ing. I respectfully refer to my order to the army for a statement of the tangible fruits of our victories. After order was restored I directed the infantry to fall back some 6 miles to water, as there was none to be had nearer and all were parched with thirst. As many of the cavalry as could be foraged were sent to the same point, where forage and rations had been accumulated. The remainder, except Debray’s regiment, was ordered to Mansfield to feed and rest. This was absolutely necessary. The cavalry had been fighting and march- ing for four consecutive days, and man and horse had been without food for forty hours. I remained with General Bee some 300 yards from the battle-field, two companies of Debray’s regiment picketing on the field. The noise of wagons moving in the rear of the enemy’s position confirmed my opinion that he would retreat in the night. The cavalry which was sent to the first water to forage was ordered to come to the front at daylight to take up the pursuit, and or- ders were issued to make details to bury the dead and care for the wounded. Chap. XLVL] THE RED RIVER CAMPAIGN. 569 The morning of the 10th found us in possession of Pleasant Hill, the enemy retreating secretly in the night, leaving his dead unburied and some 400 wounded in our hands. Bee took up the pursuit and held it for 20 miles without receiving a shot, capturing prisoners and finding at every step the same evidence of rout as had marked the pursuit of the previous day. Thus was defeated this great expedition for the conquest of the Trans-Mississippi Department. The third army of the enemy in point of numbers on the theater of the war was routed and driven from the field with a loss of at least 10,000 men. These great results, due alone to the valor of the army under my command, were ac- complished at great sacrifice of life. Both in numbers and in quality has the loss been heavy to the country. A consolidated report* of the casualties of the two battles accompanies this report. The report of the cavalry corps is omitted, the active nature of their service preventing prompt returns. The casualties of the cavalry will swell the whole loss to 2,500. I cannot speak too highly of the services rendered during the two days’ operations by my staff. Major Surget, assistant adjutant-gen- eral, who was with me in all the hard-fought actions of the Valley campaign, distinguished himself highly. So did Lieutenant Hunter, aide-de-camp, and G. L. Kusilier and T. J. Williams, volunteer aides. The latter gentleman, formerly sheriff of De Soto Parish, was very useful from his intimate acquaintance with the country. Captain Stevens, assistant quartermaster at Alexandria previous to the advance of the enemy, accompanied me on both days and was active and zealous in the transmission of orders. The same can be said of Lieutenants Chambers and Williams, of Benjamin’s company, forming my escort. These officers, with a few men of their company, performed excellent service, as did their men, and are entitled to honorable mention. Of Maj. J. L. Brent, chief of artillery and ord- nance, an officer always in the right place at the right time, I have previously spoken, as well as of the meritorious conduct and efficiency of Chief Surgeon McKelvey, Major Sanders, and Major Mason. Captain May, acting assistant adjutant-general, remained at Mans- field and contributed much by his energy and good judgment to the preservation of order and the general efficiency of all branches of the service. Surgeon Egan, inspector of hospitals for this district, was in charge of the Mansfield hospitals, and did much to mitigate the sufferings of our wounded. Surgeon Yandell, medical director of the department, placed his energy and high professional skill at my disposition and was of incalculable use to us. Taking charge of the hospitals at Pleasant Hill, he speedily perfected arrangements for the proper care of the wounded at that point. Surgeon Hooper, president of the medical board, with Surgeon Lawrence and Sur- geon Scott, followed Surgeon Yandell to Pleasant Hill and assisted in the good work. I was deprived of the very valuable services of Maj. William M. Levy, assistant adjutant and inspector general, never before absent from the field since I assumed command in this State. Confined to his tent by severe illness, Major Levy was only able to contribute to our success by the assistance he gave Captain May at Mansfield. I desire especially to call attention to the high character and serv- ice of Majors Surget and Levy. Distinguished time and again for * Not found. 570 LOUISIANA AND THE TRANS-MISSISSIPPI. [Chap. XLVI. gallantry oil the field as well as for patient labor in office work, these officers are almost deprived of the hope of promotion, as they have already attained the grade allowed by the custom of the service to officers of the adjutant and inspector general’s departments, serving on the staff of a major-general. It would be very gratifying to me could these gallant officers receive the preferment they have so justly earned. To understand the movements of the three days preceding the battle of Pleasant Hill a short description of the country is neces- sary. Leaving the Red River on the west bank a few miles below Shreveport, the Bayou Pierre, after a long course, in which it fre- quently expands into wide lakes, returns to the Red River 3 miles above Grand Ecore, divides the hills of Caddo, De Soto, and Natchi- toches from the alluvion of Red River. Three main roads lead from the interior to landings oil Red River and cross Bayou Pierre by ferries, the stream being 300 feet wide at the narrowest ferry and never fordable. These main roads, commencing at the south, are the road from Pleasant Hill to Blair's Landing, crossing Bayou Pierre at J ordan’s Ferry, 4 miles from the latter place ; the road from Mansfield to Grand Bayou Landing, 18 miles, crossing Bayou Pierre at a wide ferry, and the road to Red Bluff Landing, which leaves the Mansfield and Shreveport road about midway between the two places. I had stationed on the west bank of the Red River a most energetic and reliable officer, Capt. James McCloskey, assist- ant quartermaster and chief of forage on my staff, with instruc- tions to keep me advised of the progress of the enemy’s fleet, the condition of the river, and facilitate my communications with Brig- adier-General Liddell, operating, as previously stated, on the op- posite side of the river with his cavalry brigade and a battery of four guns. Dispatches from General Liddell and Captain Mc- Closkey informed me that the fleet of about thirty vessels, of which only five were loaded with troops — the others being gun- boats and transports loaded with stores — passed Grand Bayou Landing on the morning of the 9th, pushing slowly and steadily up the river, as at the low stage of the water every mile which they gained in ascending served to insure their destruction. I felt anxious to cut off their communication with Banks, being certain that the intelligence of his defeat on the 8th and 9th would send the fleet down to Grand Ecore. Accordingly, at daylight on the morning of the 11th, Bagby, with his brigade of cavalry, which had returned to Mansfield from the battle-field of Pleasant Hill to for- age, was ordered to proceed with his brigade and Barnes’ battery to Grand Bayou. Before reaching the ferry over Bayou Pierre he ascertained that the enemy had succeeded, on the afternoon of the 10th, in passing 40 cavalry up the river to communicate with the fleet, which had immediately turned back from Boggy Bayou, the highest point reached by it. Bagby immediately proceeded to throw his command across the ferry to the bank of the river. The time lost in crossing Bayou Pierre without a pontoon brought him too late on the river, the fleet having passed Grand Bayou Landing on their way down at 10 a. m. on the lltli. He pushed on down the river road toward Blair’s Landing, which he reached on the evening of the 12th, after the close of Green’s operations of that day. The want of a pontoon alone prevented him from inflicting heavy dam- age upon the enemy. During this time (the 10th and 11th) the infantry had been drawn back to the neighborhood of Mansfield, for reasons which will Chap. XLVI.] THE RED RIVER CAMPAIGN. 571 appear by reference to my correspondence with department head- quarters." Bee, with part of Major’s and Bucliel’s and Debray’s regiments, of his own command, was pursuing the enemy toward Natchitoches. Green was at Pleasant Hill directing generally the operations of the cavalry in front. Woods’ and Gould’s regiments and portions of Parsons’ brigade, which had reached Mansfield from Texas on the evening of the 9th and morning of the 10th, with Terrell’s regiment, which had returned to Mansfield from Pleasant Hill to forage, all being cavalry, were pushed down to Green on the 10th and early on the 11th. Nettles’, J. A. A. West’s, Mc- Mahan’s, and Moseley’s batteries were also sent down, and Gen- eral Green was informed of the position and movements of the fleet. The importance of reaching Blair’s Landing in advance of the fleet was impressed upon him. Green with his usual energy marched from Pleasant Hill for Blair’s Landing at G p. m. of the 11th. The same difficulty which met Bagby in the passage of the Bayou Pierre, namely, the want of a pontoon — which reference to my correspond- ence with department headquarters will show I had long before asked for — seriously delayed Green’s movement. He, however, reached the river at and below Blair’s Landing on the 12th, with Woods’, Gould’s, and Parsons’ commands, ana engaged the fleet. The loss inflicted upon the crowded transports of the enemy was terrible. Several times the transports raised the white flag, but the gun-boats, protected by their plating, kept up their fire and com- pelled our troops to renew the punishment on the transports. Many times our sharpshooters forced the gun-boats to close their port-holes, and it is believed that the result would have been the capture of the 'whole fleet but for the unfortunate fall of the noble Green, killed by a discharge of grape from one of the gun-boats. Notwithstanding that this action took place within sound of Banks’ army, now con- centrated at Grand Ecore, such was the demoralization resulting from the defeats of the 8th and 9th that not even a demonstration was made to assist the fleet. Liddell, on the east bank, was, during the 11th, 12th, and 13th, actively engaged with the fleet, but no detailed report of his opera- tions has yet been received. I beg leave to refer to copies of my orders to General Liddell, accompanying my report. On the night of the 12th, the fleet passed below the mouth of Bayou Pierre, cut- ting off further operations from the west bank of the river. Accordingly, the cavalry near Blair’s Landing, under the command of General Major, marched back to Pleasant Hill and joined Gen- eral Bee, in front of Grand Ecore and Natchitoches, which latter place was occupied by us on the 15th, the enemy having all his forces concentrated at Grand Ecore behind hastily constructed works, with a pontoon across the river, with his gun-boats and transports aground above and below. To return for a moment to the morning of the 11th : Vincent’s regiment of Second Louisiana Cavalry, much weakened by the dis- aster at James’ Store, with Bush’s regiment of Louisiana cavalry and a mountain howitzer, captured on the 8th from the enemy, were ordered down to Opelousas and the Attakapas country to capture and destroy any small bands of the enemy found roving in that region. As the enemy had stripped all that country of troops in his forward movement, Vincent is expected to clear the country, arouse the population, and prevent any captured or stolen property from reaching that outlet of escape. Early on the morning of the 13th, the general commanding the 572 LOUISIANA AND THE TRANS-MISSISSIPPI. tCHAP. XLVI. department visited my headquarters at Mansfield and expressed great anxiety for the destruction of Steele’s column. It was certain, in my opinion, that Steele would receive intelligence of Banks’ defeat and immediately beat a hasty retreat ; but the general’s views differing from mine, I expressed my willingness to march to General Price with the main body of my infantry and serve under his com- mand until Steele’s column was destroyed or driven back. I under- stood, however, in view of the great importance of promptly follow- ing and destroying Banks’ army and capturing the immense supplies which accompanied them, a thing which I then believed, and which subsequent events have shown to be entirely feasible, which was, in fact, the legitimate fruit of the victories of the 8th and 9th and subsequent operations on the river, that as soon as Steele was known to have taken the alarm and commenced his retreat my movement northward would stop, and I would be permitted to return to com- plete the work so auspiciously begun. The general commanding the department, after remaining with me a few hours, returned to Shreveport. At daylight on the 14th, W alker’s, Churchill’s, and Parsons’ divisions of infantry took up their line of march for Shreveport, with every- thing prepared for an active and vigorous campaign. The same day Polignac’s division of infantry, numbering scarcely 2,000 bayonets, was pushed toward Natchitoches to give confidence to and support the cavalry, operating against the enemy at Grand Ecore and below. Being two days’ march from Mansfield to Shreveport, I did not leave the former place until the forenoon of the 15th, and reached Shreve- port on the evening of that day, when I learned at an interview with the general commanding the department that Steele had already commenced his retreat from a point 110 miles distant, but he still hoped to overtake him, and proposed to assume command of the .movement in person. My offer to accompany the troops was declined, and I was left in nominal command at Shreveport, with permission to join the troops near Natchitoches if I thought proper. I have remained at Shreveport until this evening (the 18th instant), engaged in writing this report of an extended campaign, and pur- pose proceeding toward Natchitoches to-morrow morning to take command of the cavalry and Polignac’s division of infantry. As I am writing these last lines a telegram from the chief of staff of the general commanding, dated Magnolia, the 18th, informs me that the pontoon train which I had in vain asked for, and which accom- panied the general commanding the department on his march from this point northward on the morning of the 16th, has been ordered back and placed at my disposition. Very respectfully, your obedient servant, R. TAYLOR, Major- Gene ml, Commanding . Col. S. S. Anderson, Asst. Adjt. Gen., Trans-Mississippi Department.

## taylor-1864-03-13-to-douglas-10pm

[Sub-inclosure No. 2.] Headquarters District of West Louisiana, Alexandria , March 13, 1864 — 10 p. m. Maj. H. T. Douglas, Chief Engineer Trans-Mississippi Department : Major : Dispatches just received from General Walker announce a largely superior force of the enemy in his front at Moreauville. He fears much that the fort is not tenable. I have written that the delay of the enemy, even for a few days, will be of incalculable ad- vantage to the country, and the place must be held if able to resist a coup. The Frolic takes down some provisions, which*should not be placed in the fort if the supply on hand is sufficient to feed the gar- rison the time it can possibly hold out, or until I can relieve it if invested. Heavy re-enforcements are on their way to join me, and if the fort can sustain itself for a few days and keep back the gun- boats, all will be well. The Frolic, with the two boats there, can bring off everything not needed at the fort. Tell Colonel Byrd, for me, to arrange with the couriers to preserve communication with this point as long as possible. Your obedient servant, R. TAYLOR, Major- General.

## taylor-1864-03-13-to-walker-10pm

[Sub-inclosure No. 8.] Headquarters District of West Louisiana, Alexandria, March 13, 1864 — 10 p. m. Major-General Walker, Commanding Division : General : Your dispatch of to-day just received. I supposed you on the other side of the De Glaize. The enemy may follow the * For sub-inclosure No. 5, see Taylor to Walker, March 13, p. 493; and for sub- inclosure No. 6, see May to Walker, 6 a. in., March 13, p. 492. 37 It R — YOU XXXIV2 PT I 578 LOUISIANA AND THE TRANS-MISSISSIPPI. [Chap. XLVI. De Glaize road and beat you to Evergreen. Mouton’s brigade is en route for Evergreen to unite with you. Polignac’s brigade will reach here to-morrow and be pushed to Lecompte. Try and obtain as correct an estimate as possible of the enemy’s strength, and whether he comes from down the river or not. The line of couriers from here to the Teche passes on the Boeuf, thus you can communicate from Evergreen or vicinity by Huffpower. If the fort is not tenable I at all for the garrison it should not be sacrificed, but as re-enforce- ments are coming forward the delay of a few days would be of in- calculable advantage to the cause. This will be carried down by the i Frolic, which I have detained for the purpose. I suppose you have the light artillery which was on the river below the fort with you ; if not, remove it either with you or to this point. The Countess, Frolic, and Dixie can doubtless bring off everything not required for the fort. A dispatch from Vincent of the 11th reports no move- ment at that date. Thus we have only the force in your front for the present. Try and obtain as correct estimate as possible of this, for if not too large we may defeat it before Banks gets up from below. In this view the holding of De Russy for a few days becomes of vast importance. Unless I hear from you something to prevent, I shall join you by the Huffpower as soon as I clear this place of all Government stores and make the necessary arrangements regarding my whole command. Respectfully, your obedient servant, R. TAYLOR, Major- General.

## taylor-inclosure-d-1864-03-14

[Inclosure D.] Headquarters District of West Louisiana, Alexandria, March 14, 18G4. Brigadier-General Boggs, Chief of Staff : General : The inclosed copies will furnish the latest information of enemy’s movements. Colonel Vincent’s last dispatch of the 11th reports no movement from Franklin, but every indication of an im- mediate advance. By reference to a former communication it will appear that I anticipated co-operation by Sherman if Banks advanced with his principal force from Berwick Bay, but I suppose Banks, on the long line, would have moved first, and his movement would indicate the other. I also hoped, rather than expected, that Sher- man’s movement would be north of Red River, as the move by Sims- port was the one most apprehended. Polignac’s command will not reach here until this evening. Every effort has been made to hurry him on, but distances are fixed facts and require time to overcome. I hope to have everything here — sick, stores, &c. — mobilized by to- night. Three boats are at DeRussy to bring off negroes, tools, &c., at the last moment. Directions have been given to labor on the works to the last possible moment. An ample supply of provisions is in the fort, and all the ammunition we have suited to the guns. The loss of the material and garrison, should the fort not be able to hold out, will be severe; but having committed ourselves to the defense of that point we mu^ take the risk. The river has commenced falling here slightly, and should the fall continue Alexandria will probably be the limit of the enemy’s advance. Certainly it is extremely improb- able that Sherman can delay here any considerable time. Before leaving here I will probably receive something more definite from General Walker and Major Douglas, who is at the fort. We will fight the enemy, of course, if there be only remote chance of success. Very full instructions have been sent to General Liddell and Colonel Vincent, and I hope to get away from this to-morrow morning for the De Glaize. If we can fight the Simsport column at all, the sooner the better, before the movement from the Teche becomes embarrassing. Respectfully, your obedient servant, R. TAYLOR, Major- General.

## taylor-inclosure-f-1864-04-14

[Inclosure F.] List of ordnance and ordnance stores lost at Fort De Russy by its capture on March 14, 1864. 9-inch Dahlgren guns 2 Banded and rifled 32-pounder 1 Smooth-bore 32-pounder 1 32-pounder carronades 2 24-pounder guns * 2 Iron 6-pounders % 2 Chap. XLVI.] THE RED RIVER CAMPAIGN. 579 These guns were all mounted and fully equipped for service, and provided on an average with over 100 rounds per gun, the exact and detailed report of which is not given for want of access to the data of my office. Enfield rifle cartridges 60, 000 Extra caps 10,000 J. L. BRENT, Chief of Art. and Ord., Dist. of West Louisiana. Mansfield, April 14, 1864.

## taylor-1864-04-24-near-natchitoches

Headquarters District of West Louisiana, In the Field , near Natchitoches, April 24, 1864. Colonel : Yesterday General Wharton pursued the enemy to Clou- tierville, where he attempted to make a stand. Wharton finally drove him 1-J miles from his hastily constructed works. General Emory, of the Federals, is believed to have fallen in the fight. The Sixteenth and Seventeenth Corps were the troops engaged. We had some killed and many wounded. This morning Polignac’s division is up, and will re-enforce Wharton. Bee, with four brigades and three batteries, holds Monett’s Ferry, in Banks’ front, and up to mid- day yesterday repulsed the enemy’s efforts to force a passage. Banks’ whole force is on this side of Red River, that portion on the east bank having recrossed at Grand Ecore on the 21st. I have the road to Beasley’s strongly guarded, and Liddell has been directed to occupy the river bank opposite the mouth of Cane River. If my orders are well carried out the enemy must suffer before he gets away. Banks has some 15,000 with him ; the others have gone down in boats. The enemy burned immense stores in Grand Ecore, and threw much in the river which we will recover. He was burning property all last night, the fires lighting the horizon. I think he will try and escape by crossing at Calhoun’s, but Liddell should im- pede him much, while Wharton and Polignac worry his rear. Send me hospital surgeons, &c., as I expect to fight the enemy every day as long as I can get at him. We must either capture or force him to destroy the immense fleet he has above the falls. The enemy had very heavy works at Grand Ecore ; 3 miles of sand-bags. I am sav- ing these to fill with shelled corn. Let the boats bringing corn to me take negroes to commence shelling. When the boats reach Grand Ecore the bags can be filled while the boat goes down to Cotile. I must have shelled corn to enable me to operate below. Let the 580 LOUISIANA AND THE TRANS-MISSISSIPPI. [Chap. XLVI. negroes be procured at once. Energy in sending down subsistence and forage by boats is demanded by the exigencies of the service. Inform me,why the order I gave to impress horses in Shreveport was countermanded, and by whom. An important part of Faries’ bat- tery is thereby prevented from joining me. ISTo one but the general commanding the department had a right to issue an order to prevent the execution of impressment positively directed by me. Your obedient servant, R. TAYLOR, Major- General. Col. S. S. Anderson, Assistant Adjutant- General.

## taylor-1864-04-24-monetts-ferry

Headquarters District of West Louisiana, Monett’s Ferry, April 24, 1864. Colonel : This morning Wharton commenced on the enemy at 3 a. m. by firing on his camp with artillery. His rear guard was 4 miles below Cloutierville. The fighting was brisk until 2 p. m., when the enemy crossed Monett’s and escaped toward Alexandria. Banks’ entire force has been before me for the last three days, and has been driven with heavy loss by Parsons’ brigade with Barnes’ battery. Polignac got to Monett’s just as the enemy crossed his last troops. The force used against us was very large and of all arms, and it is difficult to estimate the importance of the service rendered by Wharton, Steele, and Parsons. The gallantry and pluck they exhibited in fighting such odds for three days is beyond praise. Par- sons displayed great courage and has the entire confidence of his brigade. He should be promoted at once, as Steele commands a division. The service would be benefited. On the 21st (the day be- fore the enemy left Natchitoches and Grand Ecore), Bee was in posi- tion at Monett’s Ferry with Major’s, Bagby’s, Debray’s, and Terrell’s brigades of cavalry and McMahan’s, Moseley’s, J. A. A. West’s, and Nettles’ batteries. The importance of holding the position to the last extremity had been impressed upon General Bee both by Major-Gen- eral Wharton and myself. The movement of the enemy on the night and morning of the 21st and 22d (the date of my arrival at Natchitoches) rendered communication with General Bee difficult, it being necessary to pass around the enemy via Beasley’s and Carroll Jones’, a distance of 56 miles. The head of the enemy’s column reached Bee’s front about 2 p. m. on the 22d. He held his position until about 2 p. m. of the 23d, when he allowed the enemy to outma- neuver him and force him back. During the 22d and 23d, the sound of our guns at Monett’s Ferry and in the rear of the enemy was mutually heard by Wharton and Bee. The enemy experienced very heavy loss in forcing Monett’s Ferry, and destroyed a large number of his wagons on the night of the 22d. Bee’s errors were, first, in sending back Terrell’s entire brigade to Beasley’s to look after a sub- sistence train, for the safety of which I had amply provided ; second, in taking no steps to increase artificially the strength of his position; third, in massing his troops in the center, naturally the strongest part of his position and where the enemy were certain not to make any decided effort, instead of toward the lakes on which his two flanks rested ; fourth, in this, that when he was forced back he re- tired his whole force 30 miles to Beasley’s, instead of attacking vig- Chap. XLVL] THE RED RIVER CAMPAIGN. 581 orously the enemy’s column while marching 13 miles to Cotile through a dense pine woods, encumbered with trains and artillery and utterly demoralized by the vigorous attacks of Wharton in the rear. He displayed great personal gallantry, but no generalship. My unfor- tunate trip to Shreveport and the loss of Walker’s division have as- suredly saved Banks’ army from utter destruction. * Bee has been got back to-night to Carroll Jones’, and I press on to Alexandria to-mor- row. The destruction of this country by the enemy exceeds any- thing in history. For many miles every dwelling-house, every negro cabin, every cotton-gin, every corn-crib, and even chicken-houses have been burned to the ground ; every fence torn down and the fields torn up by the hoofs of horses and wheels of wagons. Many hun- dreds of persons are utterly without shelter. But for our prompt attacks Natchitoches would have been burned to the ground, and also the little village of Cloutierville, both of them having been fired in several places. I trust every effort will be made to push forward supplies by boat, both of subsistence and forage, with the least possible delay, and that no change may be made in the last orders sent to General W alker to join me as promptly as possible. Very respectfully, your obedient servant, R. TAYLOR, Major-General. Col. S. S. Anderson, Assistant Adjutant-General.

## taylor-1864-05-10

Headquarters District of West Louisiana, Lecompte, May 10, 1864. Colonel : On yesterday some skirmishing took place on the Rap- ides road some 5 miles from Alexandria. Our position on the river yras much strengthened at Wilson’s and Fort De Russy. At the 590 LOUISIANA AND THE TRANS-MISSISSIFPI. [Chap. XLVI. former position is Major with his division ; at the latter Bagby with his, lately Bee’s, who has been relieved from duty with this army. The enemy were driven to within 3 miles of Alexandria along the river, Hardeman’s advance squadron charging 600 Yankee cavalry, driving them in and taking prisoners. Roads are being cut to con- nect Major and Bagby by short lines so as to concentrate rapidly on either position. Four of the guns from the Signal are ready for action with a good supply of captured ammunition. The blockade of the river has continued for ten days complete, every boat, whether gun-boat or transport, having been taken or destroyed that attempted the passage. For four days no attempt has been made. This morn- ing at dawn I attacked the enemy at the lower Chambers place, on the Bayou Robert, with Steele’s division of cavalry, supported by Polignac’s infantry. Steele drove the enemy rapidly to Governor Moore’s upper place, capturing cooking utensils, tents, and horses, and followed hard until he found their infantry displayed in line. To-night, about an hour before dark, I will renew the attack, using Steele, Polignac, and artillery, and try and drive him beyond John Williams’. This will connect Steele’s pickets on the Bayou Robert with Major’s on the river road and prevent the enemy from camp- ing on the high ground of Bayou Robert. In case we find too much strength we can easily draw off at so late an hour without risk of being followed. On the Rapides road I have but one regiment of cavalry and a section [of artillery]. Pickets connect through the swamp with Bayou Robert. All cattle, &c., have been removed from the Rapides country for 18 miles, so the enemy has no object in pushing in that direction even if he dared to do so ; the whole coun- try to the Gulf and Sabine being open to me, I have no line of sup- plies or base of operations, and can move where I please. On the north side of Red River everything is watched from above Pineville to opposite Major’s batteries, where communication is established. All the roads from Pineville to the Ouachita and Black Rivers have been ordered to be blocked by felling trees across them and destroy- ing the bridges on the Flaxon and other streams. Thus we have^a continuous line of pickets inclosing Banks’ army and Porter’s fleet, and they are as closely besieged as was ever Vicksburg. Every day the enemy is attacked and driven on some road and kept continually harassed by feints, driving in pickets, &c. Thus he is expecting an assault every moment, and is uncertain of the direction whence it may come. To keep this up, with my little force of scarce 6,000 men, I am compelled to “eke out the lion’s skin with the fox’s hide.” On several occasions we have forced the enemy from strong positions by sending drummers to beat calls, lighting camp-fires, blowing bugles, and rolling empty wagons over fence rails. If we force the enemy from Bayou Robert to-night I will move Polignac at once to Marks- ville. From Marks ville lie can support Major or Bagby, throw him- self with them upon any force attempting to reach Alexandria from Simsport, and will be 20 miles nearer Trinity than Banks at Alexan- dria. Should Banks retreat by Trinity on Natchez, the cavalry will cross from their present position and strike in on his line through the pine woods. Polignac, with all the artillery, will move rapidly to the mouth of Red River and salute whatever portion of the invad- ing army may seek to reach New Orleans by the Mississippi River. Arrangements for crossing both the Red and Atcliafalaya Rivers have been made. Chap. XLVI.] THE RED RIVER CxVMPAIGN. 591 From present appearances the end is drawing near. Banks’ cav- alry is almost destroyed. His troops are disheartened, sullen, and disinclined to fight. He is short of provisions and almost entirely without forage. All captured horses are like scarecrows and show want of forage. Sickness prevails to an unprecedented extent, and as he has no means of removing the sick or wounded much depres- sion is caused among the well. The lower river is still falling slowly. I scarcely need repeat that it will be held to the last extremity against an attempt to open it. Your obedient servant, R. TAYLOR, Majo r - General. Col. S. S. Anderson, Asst. Adjt. Gen Trans-Mississippi Department.

## taylor-1864-05-14-evening

Headquarters District of West Louisiana, In the Field , May 14, 1864. Colonel : On yesterday the enemy moved heavy masses down the river road from Alexandria, the head of his column reaching a point 20 miles below last night. Three hundred and thirteen wagons ac- companied the column. Heavy explosions were heard at Alexandria during the day and dense clouds of smoke enveloped [it] . Twenty- three transports and two gun-boats had up steam ana the river was full of floating masses of cotton. Hardeman skirmished briskly with their advance, while Steele from the Bayous Rapides and Robert was driving their rear and attacking their flank. Reports are so con- tradictory of the condition of the dam at the falls that I do not know what to believe. It appears certain, however, that a portion at least of the fleet has passed over, and perhaps all. This morning heavy firing lasted for two hours along the river, the heavy guns of gun-boats taking part. My troops are so disposed as to harass the enemy in rear and flank and attack the boats from both banks of the river. Having no frontier which offers advantage to a small force, I have not the pretension to attempt to fight a general battle with my little force against four times their number, with one flank resting on Red River supported by gun-boats ; but I hope to force the enemy to destroy large amounts of property, and harass and worry him until he reaches the Mississippi. The troops from above cannot reach me in time to be of use in this campaign. I shall direct General Walker to halt at Campti and rest and reorganize his command. His pres- ence here at the right time would have insured the most brilliant re- sults ; but such opportunities never occur twice in the same cam- paign. As soon as Banks reaches the Mississippi River he will lose the troops of the Sixteenth and Seventeenth Corps loaned him by Sherman. Even if he withdraws every man from Texas, which he will do, he cannot do more than maintain himself in New Orleans. Polignac, if strengthened by Thomas’ brigade and a good brigade of cavalry, can occupy and hold the La Fourche, and with any co-oper- ation from the other side entirely prevent the navigation of the Mis- sissippi River. Everything else should be directed to Missouri. There can be no doubt that this is the last campaign of the war. Nothing but the fall of Richmond can prolong the struggle after the summer campaign. The fate of Missouri will have to be decided by diplomacy or the sword. If settled by the latter, it fixes the ques- tion of Tennessee and simplifies that of Kentucky. Ten thousand horses and an equal force of infantry can reach the Missouri River before the summer passes. I respectfully offer these suggestions, esteeming it a duty to do so. Your obedient servant, R. TAYLOR, Major- General. Col. S. S. Anderson, Asst. Adjt. Gen., Trans- Mississippi Department.

## taylor-1864-05-16

Headquarters District of West Louisiana, In the Field, May 16, 1864. Colonel : On yesterday the fighting was well sustained. Steele’s division pressed the enemy’s rear and flank on the river road below Alexandria, while Bagby’s division, afterward re-enforced by Major, Chap. XLVI.] TIIE RED RIVER CAMPAIGN. 593 beat back several times the head of his column as it attempted to debouche on the high ground of the Marksville Prairie, from the Choctaw Swamp. Heavy loss was inflicted on the enemy, Bagby skillfully masking his artillery and using it at short range. Late in the evening the enemy turned the position by bringing up his masses, and we fell back to Mansura, Marksville being occupied by him during the night, At early dawn this morning skirmishing began along our line, of which Mansura was the center, Bagby and Major, with nineteen pieces of artillery, holding the right, and Po- lignac, re-enforced by two regiments of cavalry under Debray, the left, with thirteen pieces of artillery, including two 30-pounder Parrotts. The broad, open prairie, smooth as a billiard table, af- forded an admirable field for artillery practice, and most of our guns were 3-inch rifle and 10-pounder Parrotts captured from the enemy. About 6 a. m. the action became general, the enemy bringing up masses of infantry with several batteries. Several attempts to turn our right were signally repulsed, as were the efforts to advance on our center. At 10 a. m. long lines of infantry commenced demon- strations on our left, the pivot of the position, our trains being behind that flank near Evergreen. This rendered the position dan- gerous, as the enemy had probably 16,000 men on the field, and per- haps more. Our men withdrew with the steadiness of veterans on parade, and the road to Simsport was left open to the foe. Our artil- lery was most admirably served, and told heavily on the long lines aud heavy columns of the enemy, while our short, thin line offered a small mark. As soon as the enemy resumed his retreat a division of cavalry was sent to attack him at the Moreauville Cut-off, while the remainder of my little force harassed his rear and flank. I have some men in a good position on the east bank of the Atchafalaya to impede the passage of that stream and inflict loss on the fleeing foe. .No report from Colonel Harrison for two days, but as he has had excellent opportunities of worrying the fleet I hope to have a good account of him. The campaign here will close to-morrow, when I will await for a day or two the decision of department headquar- ters on my suggestion of a Missouri movement. Not hearing, I will order down Walker’s division, throw myself into the La Pourche, confine the enemy to New Orleans, and close the navigation of the Mississippi. Your obedient servant, R. TAYLOR, Major-General . Col. S. S. Anderson, Asst. Adjt. Gen., Trans-Mississippi Department.

## taylor-1864-05-18

Headquarters District of West Louisiana, In the Field , May 18, 1864. Colonel : Yesterday was a hard day for the enemy. Early in the morning his rear was vigorously attacked and driven by General Wharton below Mansura. Between Mansura and Moreauville De- bray was ambushed in a wood some 600 yards from the road with two regiments and a battery. As the enemy formed heavy line to resist Wharton, Debray opened, enfilading their line. Many were killed and wounded, and Wharton’s charge captured a good many prisoners. At the same time, Colonel Yager, with his own and the 38 R R— -VQL XXXIV, FT I 594 LOUISIANA AND THE TRANS-MISSISSIPPI. [Chap. XLVI. Second Louisiana Regiment, cut in on the wagon train near Yellow Bayou, dispersed the negro guard, killed many of the white officers, and destroyed much property. The wagons could not be brought off, as there was no exit except by the De Glaize road, on which was the Sixteenth Corps, forming the rear guard of Banks’ army. At dark the whole force had been driven pell-mell across Yellow Bayou, 4 miles from Simsport. Many were left on this side scat- tered through the De Glaize swamps. These will be hunted out to- day. We began operations this morning at dawn, and will continue them as long as the enemy is within reach. A report of Colonel Harrison’s operations on the north bank has been received. He kept up a continued fire on the crowded transports from Pineville to Black River, inflicting heavy loss of life on the enemy. He was in position to have destroyed the transports if his artillery had not been ordered to Arkansas. The campaign will probably close to-day at Simsport, its point of departure, after nearly seventy days of un- interrupted fighting. Nothing but the withdrawal of Walker’s division from me has prevented the capture of Banks’ army and the destruction of Porter’s fleet. I feel bitterly about this, because my army has been robbed of the just measure of its glory and the country of the most brilliant and complete success of the war. No gun-boats remain in the Red River. The iron-clads which escaped from Alex- andria were dismantled and stripped of their armor. Much iron can be saved for the department. Many heavy guns were destroyed, also, and numbers of wagons burned. Stone coal, cotton, and other valuable property was abandoned. If the Atchafalaya Swamp is pass- able I will cross that stream, establish myself on the Grossetete and Maringouin, where forage abounds for the cavalry, and blockade the Mississippi with my batteries. As soon as the water falls I will move down and occupy and hold the La Fourche Valley, where the army can be subsisted. Your obedient servant, R. TAYLOR, Major- General. Col. S. S. Anderson, Assistant Adjutant-General.

## taylor-1864-05-19

Headquarters District of West Louisiana, In the Field, Moreauville, May 19, 1864. Colonel : Yesterday a very severe action occurred near Yellow Bayou between my forces and the fresh troops of the enemy recently arrived from Texas. We drove the enemy handsomely on our right, killing all the horses and most of the gunners of a battery, and forcing the enemy to abandon it. On the left, near the De Glaize, we were severely repulsed and were forced to arrest the progress of our right. General Polignac restored order in his left brigade after a^time, McMahan’s battery preventing the enemy from following up his success in this part of the field. We held the field, on which the enemy, who fell back at once, left 30 dead. Our loss will reach 500, of which 30 were killed, 50 severely wounded, and some hundred prisoners taken from the left brigade. The remaining wounds are of a trifling character. Among the killed I regret to include Colonel Stone, of Polignac’s old brigade, a gallant and promising officer. This morning the enemy was close under the guns of his fleet at Chap. XLVI.] THE RED RIVER CAMPAIGN. 595 Simsport and will in all probability get away to-night. A regiment has been sent to the left bank of the De Glaize to annoy him be- tween Simsport and Old River. I have had no report of their opera- tions. The campaign may be considered as closed here, where it opened on the 12th of last March. It has been a most arduous one to me and to this army. The limits of human and equine endurance have been reached. If the water permits I will cross the Atchafa- laya, bring up Walker’s division and push for the La Fourche, and blockade the Mississippi River. Your obedient servant, R. TAYLOR, Major- General. Col. S. S. Anderson, Assistant Adjutant- General.

## taylor-general-orders-1864-04-11

General Orders, ) Hdqrs. Dist. of West Louisiana, No. — . ) Mansfield , La., April 11, 1864. Soldiers of the Army of West Louisiana : At last have your patience and your devotion been rewarded. Condemned for many days to retreat before an overwhelming force, as soon as your re-enforcements reached you you turned upon the foe. No language but that of simple narrative should recount your deeds. On April 8, you fought the battle of Mansfield. Never in war was a more complete victory won. Attacking the enemy with the utmost alacrity when the order was given, the result was not for a moment doubtful. The enemy was driven from every position, his artillery captured, his men routed. In vain were fresh troops brought up. Your magnificent line, like a resistless wave, swept everything before it. Night alone stopped your advance. Twenty- one pieces of artillery, 2,500 prisoners, many stand of colors, 250 wagons attest your success over the Thirteenth and Nineteenth Army Corps. On the 9th, you took up the pursuit and pressed it with vigor. For 12 miles prisoners, scattered arms, burning wagons proved how well the previous day’s work had been done by the soldiers of Texas and Louisiana. The gallant divisions from Mis- souri and Arkansas (unfortunately absent on the 8th) marched 45 miles in two days to share the glories of Pleasant Hill. This was emphatically the soldier’s victory. In spite of the strength of the enemy’s position, held by fresh troops of the Sixteenth Corps, your valor and devotion triumphed over all. Darkness closed one of the hottest fights of the war. The morning of the 10th dawned upon a fleeing foe, with our cavalry in pursuit, capturing prisoners at every step. These glorious victories were most dearly won. A list of the heroic dead would sadden the sternest heart. A visit to the hospi- tals would move the sympathy of the most unfeeling. The memory of our dead will live as long as noble deeds are cherished on earth. The consciousness of duty well performed will alleviate the suffer- ings of the wounded. Soldiers ! from a thousand homes thanks will ascend to the God of battles for your victories. Tender wives and fond mothers will repose in safety behind the breast- works of your valor. No fears will be felt that the hated foe will desecrate their homes by his presence. This is your reward ; but much remains to be done. Strict discipline, prompt obedience to orders, cheerful endurance of privations, will alone insure our independ- ence. R. TAYLOR, Major-General, Commanding.
