$  fl^g.  &  .  cj 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 

in  2011  with  funding  from 

The  Institute  of  Museum  and  Library  Services  through  an  Indiana  State  Library  LSTA  Grant 


http://www.archive.org/details/shenandoahvalleyOOpond 


THE 


SHENANDOAH   VALLEY 


2 


J 


CAMPAIGNS  OF   THE   CIVIL    WAR.— XL 


THE 


SHENAIDOAH  VALLEY 


In  1864 


BY 

GEOKGE  E.   POND, 

ASSOCIATE   EDITOR   OF   THE    ARMY   AND  NAVY  JOURNAL 


NEW  YORK 

CHARLES    SCRIBNER'S    SONS 

1883 


Copyright,  1883,  by 
CHARLES  SCRIBNBR'S  SONS 


Trow's 

Printing   and  Bookbinding  Company 

201-213  East  i2t/i  Street 

NEW   YORK 


PKEFACE. 


The  Author  desires  to  acknowledge  his  indebtedness  to 
Colonel  E.  N.  Scott,  U.  S.  A.,  for  the  facilities  furnished 
him  at  the  War  Records  Office,  in  studying  the  official 
documents  relating  to  the  events  described  in  the  present 
volume. 

In  making  free  use  of  field  despatches,  many  of  which 
have  never  hitherto  been  published,  it  has  not  been  deemed 
desirable  to  strike  out  occasional  errors  of  statement, 
arising  from  imperfect  information;  since,  in  order  to 
profitably  study  and  rightly  understand  the  military  opera- 
tions herein  described,  it  is  necessary  to  know  the  views 
on  which  they  were  based,  and  to  recall,  in  1883,  the  facts 
as  they  appeared  in  1864. 

New  York,  January,  1883. 


CONTENTS. 


PAGE 

List  of  Maps,       .  .        .- xi 


CHAPTER  I. 
The  Valley  of  Virginia, 1 

CHAPTER   II. 
Clotd's  Mountain  and  New  Market,      ....      9 

CHAPTER  III. 
General  Hunter's  Lynchburg  Campaign,       .        .        .23 

CHAPTER  IV. 
Early  Menaces  Washington, 46 

CHAPTER  V. 
In  the  Valley  again,         .......    71 

CHAPTER  VI. 

Kernstown,  Chambersburg,  and  Moorefield,   .   .  94 


viii  CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER  VII. 

TAGE 

General  Sheridan's  March  to  Strasburg,    .        .        .  Ill 


CHAPTER  VIII. 
The  Shenandoah  Lines  in  September,  ....  137 

CHAPTER  IX. 
The  Battle  op  the  Opequon, 153 

CHAPTER  X. 
The  Battle  op  Fisher's  Hill, 173 

CHAPTER  XI. 
Pursuing  Early  and  Laying  Waste  the  Valley,  .        .  186 

CHAPTER  XII. 
The  Battle  of  Tom's  Brook, 201 

CHAPTER  XIII. 
The  Battle  of  Cedar  Creek, 220 


CHAPTER  XIV. 
Waynesboro, 243 


CONTENTS. 


APPENDIX  A. 

PAGJ 

Opposing  Forces  in  the  Shenandoah  Valley,        .        .251 


APPENDIX  B. 
Tables  Indicating  Numerical  Strength,     .        .        .  263 

APPENDIX  C. 
List  op  Casualties  and  Captures,         ....  269 

APPENDIX  D. 
Confederate  Accounts  op  Events, 271 

Index, 275 


LIST   OF  MAPS. 


PAGE 

The  Shenandoah  Valley,         ....      Frontispiece 

The  Kegion  around  Newbern,         .        .        .        .        .11 

The  Battle  of  New  Market,   ......     18 

The  Battle-Field  of  Piedmont,       .....     26 

Early's  Maryland  Campaign, 52 

The  Northern  Defences  of  Washington,  .  .  .63 
The  Battle  of  the  Opequon,  ....  to  face  155 
The  Battles  of  Fisher's    Hill  and  Cedar  Creek, 

to  face  222 


The  Shenandoah  Valley. 


THE     SHENANDOAH 
VALLEY. 


CHAPTER  I. 

THE  VALLEY  OF  VIRGINIA. 

The  mountain  region  of  Virginia,  from  the  beginning  of 
the  war,  held  a  close  military  relation  to  the  broad  plain 
that  stretches  from  the  foot  of  the  Blue  Ridge  to  the  sea, 
and  it  eventually  became  the  theatre  of  a  series  of  cam- 
paigns at  once  picturesque  and  decisive.  The  State  was  like 
a  vast  fortress  or  intrenched  camp,  thrown  out  above  the 
line  of  the  other  ten  Confederate  commonwealths  to  guard 
their  capital.  Its  parallel  rivers,  flowing  to  the  Atlantic, 
were  water-barriers  against  attack  from  the  north,  while 
upreared  to  shield  its  western  front  were  the  rampart  ridges 
of  its  highland  domain.  The  valleys  between  these  ridges 
furnished  well-sheltered  avenues  for  invading  Northern  ter- 
ritory. 

Of  these  avenues  the  most  commanding  was  the  Valley 
of  Virginia,  called  also,  from  the  chief  river  that  drains  it, 
the  Valley  of  the  Shenandoah.  Its  eastern  wall  is  the 
lofty  Blue  Ridge ;  its  western,  the  North  Mountains,  a  part 
of  the  main  chain  of  the  Alleghanies.  Since  its  course 
is  southwesterly,  a  Confederate  army  moving  northward 
XI.— 1 


2  THE   SHENANDOAH   VALLEY. 

through  it  would  at  the  same  time  draw  nearer  Washington, 
whereas  a  Union  advance  southward  would  diverge  from  the 
straight  course  to  Richmond.  The  Potomac  running  at  right 
angles  to  the  line  of  the  Ridge,  a  Confederate  force  crossing 
this  border  stream  at  the  mouth  of  the  Valley,  as  at  Williams- 
port,  would  already  be  sixty  miles  north  or  in  rear  of  Wash- 
ington. State  lines  there  are  not  determined  by  the  high- 
land configuration — what  is  known  in  Virginia  as  the  Valley 
of  the  Shenandoah  continues  unbroken  north  of  the  Poto- 
mac, taking  there  the  name  of  Cumberland  Valley,  while 
its  protecting  wall  is  also  prolonged  with  a  simple  change 
of  appellation  from  Blue  Ridge  to  South  Mountain ;  and 
one  day's  march  through  the  Cumberland  Valley  would 
carry  a  body  of  Confederate  horsemen  among  the  peaceful 
farm  lands  of  Pennsylvania. 

Beautiful  to  look  upon,  and  so  fertile  that  it  was  styled 
the  granary  of  Virginia,  rich  in  its  well-filled  barns,  its  cattle, 
its  busy  mills,  the  Valley  furnished  from  its  abundant  crops 
much  of  the  subsistence  of  Lee's  army.  When  Confederate 
forces  occupied  it,  their  horses  fattened  on  its  forage,  and 
in  quitting  it  to  invade  the  North,  the  commissaries  filled 
their  wagons  from  its  storehouses  and  farms.  While  a  few 
of  the  people  of  the  lower  Valley  shared  the  sentiments  of 
loyalty  which  animated  West  Virginia,  the  inhabitants  as  a 
whole  became  bitterly  hostile  to  the  Union.  There  was, 
however,  a  large  population  of  Dunkards,  with  whom  non- 
resistance  was  an  article  of  religious  faith,  and  who  were 
accordingly  exempt  from  conscription  on  payment  of  a  spe- 
cified sum,  even  when  the  Confederate  need  of  troops  was 
sore.  These  became,  in  time,  of  hardly  less  military  value 
than  an  equal  number  of  combatants,  for  they  raised  the 
crops  on  which  the  Confederate  armies  depended  for  sus- 
tenance, and  often,  also,  cared  for  the  families  of  absent 


THE  VALLEY  OF  VIRGINIA.  3 

soldiers.  At  last  their  whirring  mills  and  golden  wheat- 
fields  ceased  to  be  at  the  service  of  the  South  ;  for  the  Val- 
ley felt  the  fury  of  war,  and  its  fatal  wealth  of  resources  was 
laid  waste. 

Looking  at  the  Shenandoah  Valley  in  history,  we  observe 
that  it  was  the  scene  of  constant  Confederate  manoeuvring, 
whether  on  a  large  scale,  under  Jackson,  Ewell,  and  Early, 
or  on  a  smaller  one,  under  Ashby,  Mosby,  Imboden,  and 
Gilmor.  From  the  first  it  was  a  tempting  field  for  the 
strategists  of  both  armies.  The  initial  campaign  of  the  war 
turned  on  the  use  made  of  the  Valley  by  the  forces  which 
General  J.  E.  Johnston  posted  at  its  outlet  under  the  name 
of  "The  Army  of  the  Shenandoah."  There,  too,  Jackson 
began  the  campaign  of  1862  by  sustaining  a  check  from 
Shields,  for  which  he  fully  indemnified  himself  when,  a 
few  months  later,  he  fell  upon  Shields  at  Fort  Republic, 
defeated  Fremont  at  Cross  Keys,  captured  the  garrison  of 
Front  Eoyal,  drove  Banks  across  the  Potomac,  and,  by 
alarming  Washington,  broke  up  the  intending  junction  of 
McDowell  and  McClellan,  and  the  threatened  capture  of 
Richmond.  It  was  from  the  Valley  that  Jackson,  repeating 
on  a  bolder  circuit  the  Manassas  device  of  1861,  hurried  to 
turn  the  Union  right  on  the  Peninsula.  Lee  found  in  the 
Valley  a  line  of  communications  for  his  Maryland  campaign, 
and  captured  at  Harper's  Ferry  11,000  men,  seventy-three 
guns,  and  thirteen  thousand  small  arms ;  there,  too,  he 
sought  rest  and  refreshment  on  retreating  from  the  Antie- 
tam.  The  Valley  was  Lee's  route  of  invasion  after  defeating 
Hooker  at  Chancellorsville ;  Ewell,  entering  it  at  Chester 
Gap,  took  several  thousand  men  and  a  score  or  more  of 
guns  from  Milroy ;  and  thither  again  Lee  fell  back  after 
Gettysburg,  pitching  his  camps  along  the  Opequon. 

These  events,  described  in  preceding  volumes  of  the  pres- 


4  THE  SHENANDOAH  VALLEY. 

ent  series,  show  that,  though  subordinate  to  the  main  scene 
of  operations  east  of  the  Blue  Ridge,  the  Valley  of  Virginia 
had  always  played  an  important  part  in  the  drama  of  the 
war.  It  had  yielded  so  many  captures  of  Union  garrisons 
and  so  many  disasters  in  the  field,  as  to  be  called  the  Valley 
of  Humiliation ;  and  not  until  it  was  wrested  from  Confed- 
erate control  did  the  problem  of  the  Richmond  campaign 
find  a  successful  solution. 

To  set  forth  the  manner  in  which  Confederate  power  in 
the  Shenandoah  Valley  was  overthrown  during  1864  is  the 
purpose  of  the  present  volume.  But  before  entering  upon 
this  narrative  it  is  well  to  describe  the  terrain  in  detail. 

The  Shenandoah  River  rises  a  little  south  of  the  38th  par- 
allel; but  military  operations  extended  nearly  to  the  bor- 
der of  North  Carolina.  From  this  boundary  northward  to 
where,  in  latitude  37°  30',  the  James  crosses  the  Blue  Ridge, 
the  surface  is  broken  by  tumultuous  upheavals,  spurs  push- 
ing out  from  the  main  ranges  in  all  directions ;  still,  every- 
where can  be  traced  the  familiar  double  chain  of  mountains, 
which  becomes,  indeed,  a  triple  chain  south  of  Floyd  County, 
where  the  Blue  Ridge  forks.  The  landscape  is  now  of 
surpassing  beauty  and  again  of  savage  grandeur ;  but  though 
there  are  practicable  passages  in  the  mountains  for  all 
three  arms,  deep  chasms  being  threaded  by  narrow  roads 
that  climb  the  sides  of  the  precipitous  bluffs,  yet  the  region 
is  hostile  to  campaigning.  The  chief  strategic  importance 
of  the  rugged  southwestern  angle  of  Virginia  was  an  artifi- 
cial one,  contributed  by  the  East  Tennessee  Railroad,  which 
connected  Lynchburg  with  Knoxville,  and  hence  Richmond 
with  the  South  and  West.  Southern  Virginia,  through 
which  this  road  ran,  was  rich  in  minerals  and  grains,  and 
full  of  supplies  and  manufactured  products  of  many  sorts, 


THE  VALLEY   OF   VIRGINIA.  5 

important  to  Lee's  army.  The  principal  stations  in  Virginia, 
starting  westward  from  Lynchburg,  were  Liberty,  Salem, 
Christiansburg,  Newbern,  Wytheville,  and  Abingdon.  All 
these  became  intimately  connected  with  one  of  the  Shen- 
andoah campaigns  of  1864 ;  and  though  the  latter  three 
properly  came  within  the  scope  of  operations  that  have  the 
Kanawha  as  a  base,  they  held  direct  relations  with  the  Rich- 
mond campaign,  since  at  Newbern  the  railroad  crossed  New 
River,  an  affluent  of  the  Kanawha,  offering  an  important 
bridge  for  destruction,  while  the  lead  works  of  Wytheville 
and  the  salt  works  at  Saltville,  near  Abingdon,  furnished 
to  the  Confederacy  valuable  military  stores. 

In  the  mountainous  country  above  and  beyond  the  Shen- 
andoah Valley  proper,  the  rivers  run  to  all  points  of  the 
compass.  The  Roanoke  and  the  New  diverge  from  opposite 
slopes  of  the  same  range ;  the  Kanawha  and  the  James,  from 
neighboring  headwaters,  take  their  several  ways,  after  many 
turnings,  the  one  to  the  Mississippi  and  the  other  to  the 
Atlantic.  A  little  south  of  where  the  James  rushes  through 
the  Blue  Ridge  at  Balcony  Falls,  the  range  also  breaks  apart 
at  the  Peaks  of  Otter.  On  a  branch  of  the  James,  called 
North  River,  is  Lexington,  the  seat  of  Rockbridge  County. 
We  are  now  in  the  Valley  itself;  for  below  Lexington  the 
Shenandoah  takes  its  rise  in  a  multitude  of  streams  that  com- 
bine in  three,  called  North,  Middle,  and  South,  these  unit- 
ing in  turn  lower  down,  near  Port  Republic.  From  Lex- 
ington to  Harper's  Ferry,  at  the  foot  of  the  Valley,  the 
distance  is  one  hundred  and  fifty-five  miles ;  and  at  Staun- 
ton, thirty-five  miles  below  Lexington,  we  strike  upon  the 
Valley  turnpike  that  runs  northward  through  Harrisonburg, 
New  Market,  Woodstock,  Strasburg,  and  Winchester  to 
Martinsburg  —  a  fine,  macadamized  road,  well  worn  by 
Northern  and  Southern  troops   and  trains.     West  of  the 


6  THE  SHENANDOAH  VALLEY. 

pike  is  the  Back  Eoad,  with  a  Middle  Eoad  in  some  places 
between  the  two.  Here  at  Staunton  the  Virginia  Central 
Railroad  crosses  the  Valley  on  its  way  to  Charlottesville, 
Gordonsville,  and  Bichmond,  traversing  the  Blue  Ridge  at 
Eockfish  Gap,  near  the  village  of  Waynesboro. 

Five-and-twenty  miles  north  of  Staunton,  near  Harrison- 
burg, an  isolated  chain,  called  Massanutten,  rising  abruptly 
to  a  height  equal  to  that  of  the  Blue  Eidge,  divides  the 
Valley  for  a  distance  of  more  than  forty  miles,  until,  at 
Strasburg,  this  beautiful  range  suddenly  falls  again  into  the 
plain.  The  Massanutten  Mountains  are  presently  seen  to 
follow  the  prevailing  type  of  the  Appalachian  system,  by 
breaking  into  two  parallel  ridges,  Massanutten  proper  and 
Keifs  Mountain,  leaving  between  them  Powell's  Fort  Val- 
ley, or  the  "  The  Fort,"  a  narrow,  picturesque  vale,  through 
which  winds  Passage  Creek  to  the  Shenandoah  below; 
while  west  of  Kell's  is  another  parallel  sub-range,  Peaked 
Ridge  and  Three  Top,  allowing  space  between  them  and 
Kell's  for  a  Little  Fort  Valley.  Massanutten  was  crossed  by 
a  good  road,  connecting  New  Market  and  Luray,  which  had 
military  importance  ;  but  in  other  respects,  since  its  enclosed 
valley  was  only  the  scene  of  minor  cavalry  operations,  it 
may  be  remembered  simply  en  bloc. 

The  larger  branch  of  the  Shenandoah,  the  South  Fork, 
flows  through  the  easternmost  of  the  two  valleys  created 
by  Massanutten — called  Page  or  Luray  Valley — while  the 
main  or  Strasburg  Valley,  west  of  the  range,  is  drained  by 
the  other  affluent,  the  North  Fork,  which,  rising  in  the 
North  Mountains,  winds  along  the  west  flank  of  Massa- 
nutten, until,  escaping  around  the  base,  at  Strasburg,  it 
joins  the  South  Fork  near  Front  Eoyal ;  and  the  main  river 
thus  formed  skirts  thenceforth  the  foot  of  the  Blue  Eidge, 
till  it  swells  the  Potomac  at  Harper's  Ferry. 


THE  VALLEY  OF  VIRGINIA.  7 

At  Strasburg,  the  Valley,  relieved  of  the  Massanutten,  re- 
covers its  usual  breadth  of  twenty  miles.  Here  we  ob- 
serve an  historically  important  stream,  Cedar  Creek,  which, 
having  taken  its  rise  and  its  early  course  behind  Little 
North  Mountain,  has  found  its  opportunity  at  Sydnor  Gap 
to  enter  the  Valley  proper,  where,  flowing  southerly,  it  joins 
the  North  Fork  at  Strasburg.  Following  down  the  pike,  we 
leave  the  river  on  the  right,  and,  crossing  Cedar  Creek,  pass 
through  Middletown,  Newtown,  and  Kernstown  to  Winches- 
ter, a  place  of  consequence,  from  which  the  Winchester  and 
Potomac  Kailroad  had  run  to  Harper's  Ferry  until  torn  up, 
like  the  Manassas  Gap  road,  by  the  Confederates,  in  1862. 
From  Winchester  the  pike  proceeds  through  Bunker  Hill  to 
Martinsburg,  the  chief  city  of  the  lower  Valley,  on  the  Balti- 
more and  Ohio  Kailroad.  A  good  macadamized  road  leads 
from  Winchester  to  Harper's  Ferry  through  Berryville,  and 
one  from  Martinsburg  strikes  the  Potomac  opposite  Wil- 
liamsport,  at  the  extreme  north  end  of  the  Valley.  Another 
road,  proceeding  easterly  from  Martinsburg,  reaches  the 
river  at  Shepherdstown,  after  crossing  Opequon  Creek — a 
stream,  which,  rising  south  of  Winchester,  drains  in  its  ex- 
ceedingly tortuous  course  the  western  portion  of  the  lower 
Valley,  being  separated  from  the  Shenandoah  by  Limestone 
Bidge.  The  picturesque  town  of  Harper's  Ferry,  at  the 
junction  of  the  Shenandoah  with  the  Potomac,  is  dominated 
both  by  the  lofty  Loudoun  Heights  on  the  south  bank  of  the 
Potomac  and  by  the  towering  and  precipitous  Maryland 
Heights  on  the  other. 

Military  operations  were  aided  by  the  fine  roads  that  con- 
nected all  the  important  towns  with  each  other  and,  through 
the  leading  gaps,  with  those  of  Eastern  Virginia.  The  Valley 
was  also  so  largely  cleared  and  cultivated  that  troops  could 
march  almost  where  they  liked  through  the  fields,  on  both 


8  THE  SHENANDOAH  VALLEY. 

sides  of  the  roads,  leaving  these  for  the  guns  and  wagons, 
the  whole  column  thereby  advancing  very  rapidly.  The 
creeks  and  rivers  could  be  waded  nearly  everywhere  during 
the  summer  and  autumn,  the  military  significance  of  the 
fords  being  in  most  instances  simply  that  of  levelled  ap- 
proaches to  the  crossing-places  ;  for  often  even  small  streams 
ran  between  high  and  precipitous  banks. 

In  the  Blue  Bidge  there  are  practicable  gaps  all  the  way 
from  the  James  to  the  Potomac,  that  connect  the  Valley 
with  Eastern  Virginia.  Beginning  with  Bockfish,  the  out- 
let of  Staunton,  and  passing  Jaman's,  Brown's,  Semons, 
Powell's,  and  High  Top,  which  give  access  from  Port  Re- 
public to  Charlottesville,  we  come  to  Swift  Bun  Gap, 
through  which  a  turnpike  leads  from  Conrad's  Store  to 
Stannardsville,  and  there  branches  to  Orange  and  Gordons- 
ville.  A  little  farther  north  two  more  turnpikes  cross  the 
Bidge  through  Milani's  and  Thornton  Gaps,  one  leading 
from  New  Market,  across  the  Massanutten  to  Madison,  and 
the  other  diverging  from  it  by  way  of  Luray  to  Culpepper. 
From  Luray  a  very  good  road  runs  northward  between  the 
Bidge  and  the  South  Fork  to  Front  Boyal,  where  another 
pike  gives  access  to  the  country  east  of  the  Bidge  by  Thor- 
oughfare and  Chester  Gaps.  A  few  miles  farther  on,  through 
Manassas  Gap,  ran  the  railroad  of  that  name.  From  Win- 
chester turnpikes  led  through  Ashby's  and  Snicker's  Gaps 
to  Aldie,  while  Gregory's  and  Keyes  Gaps  are  nearer  Har- 
per's Ferry.  Doorways  in  plenty,  therefore,  opened  through 
the  Bidge.  The  best  single  point  for  commanding  these 
passes  was  Gordonsville. 


CHAPTER  H. 

CLOYD'S  MOUNTAIN  AND  NEW  MARKET. 

In  the  spring  of  1864,  the  Department  of  West  Virginia, 
which  included  the  Shenandoah  Valley,  was  under  the  com- 
mand of  Major-General  Franz  Sigel.  A  large  portion  of  his 
forces  was  in  the  Kanawha  region,  under  Brigadier-General 
George  Crook;  the  remainder,  distributed  near  the  Poto- 
mac line,  and  in  the  lower  part  of  the  Valley,  where  were 
his  headquarters.  Apart  from  its  physical  configuration, 
the  chief  feature  of  this  Department  was  its  lines  of  railroad. 
Traversing  its  northern  section  was  the  main  route  of  Union 
communication  between  Washington  and  the  West,  the  Balti- 
more and  Ohio  road,  constantly  used  in  the  transfer  of  troops 
and  supplies — there  were  more  northerly  lines  which  could 
take  its  place  if  needful,  but  its  military  value  was  indisput- 
able. Just  beyond  the  southern  boundary  of  West  Virginia 
ran  a  very  important  Confederate  line,  the  Virginia  and  Ten- 
nessee Railroad,  which  directly  connected  Richmond  and 
the  West.  Between  these  the  Virginia  Central,  also  a  Con- 
federate railway  line,  crossed  the  Shenandoah  Valley  at 
Staunton,  and,  penetrating  the  Blue  Ridge  at  Rockfish  Gap, 
led  through  Charlottesville  and  Gordonsville  to  Richmond. 

It  is  therefore  apparent  that  the  military  problem  in  this 
region  was  of  the  same  nature  for  the  Kanawha  and  the  Shen- 
andoah forces  of  General  Sigel— its  defensive  factor,  the  pro- 
tection of  the  Union  railway,  and  therewith  Maryland  and 
1* 


10  THE   SHENANDOAH    VALLEY. 

Pennsylvania ;  its  aggressive,  the  destruction  of  the  two 
Confederate  lines  of  supply.  Hence,  in  opening  his  Virginia 
campaign,  Lieutenant-General  Grant  directed  Sigel  to  form 
two  columns,  whereof  one,  under  Crook,  should  break  the 
Virginia  and  Tennessee  Railroad  at  the  New  River  bridge, 
and  should  also,  if  possible,  destroy  the  salt  works  at  Salt- 
ville  ;  while  the  other  column,  under  Sigel  himself,  pro- 
ceeding up  the  Shenandoah  Valley,  was  to  distract  atten- 
tion from  Crook  by  menacing  the  Virginia  Central  Railroad 
at  Staunton.  Sigel's  was  primarily  a  defensive  department, 
designed  to  secure  the  North  from  invasion,  but  such  ad- 
vancing columns,  thought  General  Grant,  would  "  give  a 
better  protection  than  if  lying  idle  in  garrison ; "  while,  in 
threatening  important  lines  of  supply,  they  might  detain 
troops  that  otherwise  would  reinforce  Lee's  army. 

Crook,  learning  what  was  expected  of  him,  divided  his 
task  into  two  portions,  assigning  to  the  cavalry,  under  Brig- 
adier-General W.  W.  Averell,  the  attempt  against  Saltville, 
while  for  the  burning  of  the  New  River  bridge  he  reserved 
the  infantry,  under  his  own  command.  The  West  Virginia 
movements  were  timed  to  the  march  of  the  Lieutenant- 
General  from  Culpepper. 

Averell,  with  2,079  officers  and  men,  the  brigades  of  General 
Duffie  and  Colonel  Schoonmaker,  left  Charleston,  W.  Va., 
May  1st,  and  Logan,  May  5th,  wretchedly  supplied  with  trans- 
portation, and  marched  through  Wyoming  and  Tazewell,  there 
capturing  some  Confederate  pickets.  Such  accounts  were 
given  him  of  the  enemy's  defences  at  Saltville  that,  being  with- 
out artillery,  Averell  determined  not  to  attempt  this  place, 
but  to  advance  instead  against  the  lead  works  of  Wytheville. 
Yet  Wytheville  proved  every  whit  as  difficult  of  approach ; 
for  the  Saltville  forces  of  General  John  Morgan,  with  three 
guns,  rapidly  transferred  themselves  thither.    Averell  moved 


CLOYD'S  MOUNTAIN   AND   NEW  MARKET. 


11 


forward  Schoonmaker,  with  the  Fourteenth  Pennsylvania 
and  the  First  Virginia  cavalry,  to  open  the  attack,  while  the 
main  line  was  Duffie,  with  the  Second  and  Third  Virginia 
and  a  part  of  the  Thirty-fourth  Ohio.  But  the  enemy  as- 
sailed him  with  vigor  and  pressed  heavily  upon  both  flanks, 
Averell  resisting  until  night,  when  he  made  off  eastward, 
with  a  loss  in  killed  and  wounded  of  123.     His  hard  ride, 


The  Region  Around  Newbern. 


however,  was  not  wholly  fruitless,  for  he  destroyed  a  part 
of  the  railroad  near  Christian sburg,  with  its  station  and 
repair  shops,  and  found  some  3-inch  guns  which  the  enemy 
had  left  in  the  town.  He  then  drew  off  to  join  Crook  at 
Union. 

Crook  meanwhile  had  met  with  better  fortune.     His  force 
included  eleven  infantry   regiments.     The   First   Brigade, 


12  THE  SHENANDOAH  VALLEY. 

Colonel  E.  B.  Hayes,  comprised  the  Twenty-third,  Thirty. 
fourth,  and  Thirty-sixth  Ohio ;  the  Second,  Colonel  C.  B. 
White,  the  Twelfth  and  Ninety-first  Ohio  and  the  Ninth  and 
Fourteenth  Virginia  ;  the  Third,  Colonel  Sickel,  the  Third 
and  Fourth  Pennsylvania  and  the  Eleventh  and  Fifteenth  Vir- 
ginia. To  these  were  joined  two  battalions  of  artillery,  be- 
sides four  hundred  cavalry  under  Colonel  Oley,  the  whole 
force  being  about  six  thousand  strong.  Leaving  Fayette  May 
3d,  the  column  proceeded  southeastward  for  three  days  with- 
out opposition,  and  then,  near  Princeton,  the  enemy's  skir- 
mishers were  encountered  and  driven  away.  Entering  this 
town,  General  Crook  destroyed  the  tents  of  McCausland's  cav- 
alry, which  had  been  incautiously  left  there.  The  night  of 
the  8th  he  reached  Shannon's,  seven  miles  from  Dublin, 
where  he  found  the  enemy  posted  two  miles  ahead,  on  Cloyd's 
Mountain,  commanding  the  road.  Daybreak  revealed  several 
thousand  men,  under  Generals  W.  E.  Jones  and  Jenkins, 
intrenched  on  a  wooded  spur  behind  rail  breastworks,  with 
their  guns  so  placed  as  to  sweep  a  broad  field  that  fronted 
the  works,  while  a  knee-deep  brook  wound  around  the  foot 
of  the  steep  slope  crowned  by  the  rifle-pits.  "  The  enemy 
is  in  force,  and  in  strong  position,"  said  Crook,  lowering  his 
field-glass ;  "  he  may  whip  us,  but  I  guess  not." 

Forming  under  cover  of  the  thick  timber,  the  Union  com- 
mander sent  White,  with  his  own  brigade  and  two  regiments 
of  Sickel's,  to  turn  the  enemy's  right,  and  the  moment  they 
were  engaged  moved  the  rest  of  his  forces  directly  against 
the  works.  His  men  were  received  with  a  hot  fire  as  they 
struggled  across  the  open,  but,  after  a  hard  contest,  car- 
ried the  intrenchments  at  all  points.  Crook's  loss  was  600, 
Colonel  Woolworth,  Fourth  Pennsylvania,  being  among  the 
killed.  More  than  half  the  casualties  fell  upon  White's 
brigade,  while  Duval's  Ninth  Virginia  regiment  alone  had  45 


CLOYD'S  MOUNTAIN  AND  NEW  MARKET.  13 

killed  and  125  wounded,  out  of  the  450  men  engaged.  The 
enemy's  loss  must  have  been  heavy,  judging  by  the  dead  left 
on  the  field ;  among  his  mortally  wounded  was  General  Jen- 
kins. Had  Averell's  cavalry  been  with  him,  Crook  might 
have  made  his  victory  still  more  marked ;  but  he  had  only 
Oley's  command  to  aid  him  in  the  pursuit.  Nevertheless, 
he  captured  230  unwounded  prisoners  and  two  guns. 

The  enemy  fled  to  Dublin,  where,  two  miles  in  front  of 
the  town,  reinforcements  of  Morgan's  men,  having  arrived 
on  the  cars  from  Saltville  too  late  to  take  part  in  the  main 
action,  covered  the  retreat.  These  troops  Crook  promptly 
put  to  flight,  and  then,  entering  Dublin,  destroyed  sundry 
military  stores  which  had  been  abandoned  there.  The  next 
morning  he  marched  on  to  Newbern,  whither  the  forces  from 
Cloyd's  Mountain  had  retreated  for  the  purpose  of  protecting 
the  bridge  over  New  Biver.  After  an  artillery  duel  of  two 
hours,  with  a  Union  loss  of  but  11  men,  Crook  took  posses- 
sion of  this  important  structure,  and  burned  it.  His  main 
purpose  being  now  accomplished  he  began  his  homeward 
march,  by  way  of  Union,  where  he  had  given  rendezvous  to 
Averell.  He  left  behind,  Avith  surgeons  and  drugs,  200  of 
his  wounded,  who  could  not  have  borne  the  long  journey  in 
that  rugged  region.  Indeed,  what  was  to  have  been  a  four 
days'  march  consumed  nine,  a  prolonged  storm  making  the 
roads  heavy  and  toilsome.  This  delay,  in  turn,  caused  not 
only  rations  but  forage  to  run  short,  so  that  some  of  the 
wagons  had  to  be  abandoned,  the  mules  being  too  weak  to 
drag  them.  The  enemy's  cavalry  endeavored  to  harass  the 
march,  but  was  driven  off,  and  the  19  th  of  May  Crook  and 
Averell  ended  their  weary  tramp  at  Meadow  Bluff. 

This  campaign  of  the  Kanawha  forces  must  be  set  down 
as  achieving  a  good  measure  of  success.  It  is  true  that 
Saltville  and  Wytheville  were  not  reached,  and  that  Averell, 


14  THE  SHENANDOAH  VALLEY. 

on  approaching  them,  was  roughly  handled  by  John  Mor- 
gan's troopers,  as  the  importance  of  these  places  to  the  Con- 
federacy caused  them  to  be  resolutely  defended ;  still,  the 
destruction  of  New  River  bridge  was  the  main  object  of  the 
expedition,  and  this  was  accomplished. 

It  is  perhaps  worth  observing  that  Sigel  hardly  expected 
Averell's  part  of  the  project  to  succeed.  Crook  having  re- 
ported to  him  what  he  proposed  to  do,  Sigel  forwarded  a 
copy  of  the  despatch  to  General  Grant,  with  these  remarks  : 
"  This  plan  of  General  Crook's  may  prove  successful,  and 
may  have  very  important  results,  but  it  is  not  in  accordance 
with  my  views,  because  it  brings  General  Averell  too  far 
west,  and  out  of  reach  of  General  Crook.  His  cavalry  will 
be  used  up,  and  therefore  cannot  assist  General  Crook  in 
future  operations.  Secondly,  because  this  movement  will 
allow  the  enemy  to  concentrate  nearly  all  his  forces  which 
are  between  Staunton  and  Lewisburg  at  Staunton.  Thirdly, 
because  it  makes  all  co-operation  of  forces  here  with  those  of 
General  Crook  impossible.  My  understanding  was  that  all 
the  forces  of  General  Crook  should  operate  between  the 
James  and  New  Rivers,  and  that  the  movements  should  end 
with  a  demonstration  against  Staunton,  with  all  the  forces 
under  Crook — the  cavalry  included ;  but  I  may  be  wrong, 
and  it  is  too  late  to  interfere.  I  will  therefore  say  nothing 
to  General  Crook,  but  wish  him  success,  which  he  so  well 
deserves."  General  Grant,  however,  was  pleased  with  the  bold- 
ness of  Crook's  proposed  march  :  "  To  cut  New  River  bridge," 
he  replied,  "and  the  road  ten  or  twenty  miles  east  from 
there,  would  be  the  most  important  work  Crook  could  do." 
As  for  Sigel's  suggested  movement  of  Crook  to  Staunton,  in 
co-operation  with  a  force  to  march  up  the  Valley,  this  was 
shortly  after  carried  out,  but  under  another  commander. 

Crook's  losses  in  this  expedition  were  109  killed  and  513 


CLOYD'S  MOUNTAIN  AND  NEW  MARKET.  15 

wounded  ;  Averell's,  17  killed,  72  wounded,  34  missing — the 
aggregate,  745.  Crook's  and  Averell's  prisoners  numbered 
nearly  300,  and  the  enemy's  killed  and  wounded  may  Lave 
made  his  total  loss  equal  to  that  of  the  Union  commanders. 

In  the  twofold  campaign  assigned  to  Sigel,  the  portion  set 
apart  for  the  Kanawha  column  had  been  obviously  the  more 
definite  as  well  as  the  more  important ;  in  fact,  after  guard- 
ing even  scantily  the  supply  depots  of  the  lower  Valley  and 
the  Baltimore  and  Ohio  Railroad,  Sigel,  for  a  movement  co- 
operating with  Crook,  would  have  a  field  force  at  most  of  six 
or  seven  thousand  men.  However,  toward  the  end  of  April, 
he  gathered  the  available  troops  from  his  garrisons,  and 
the  30th  started  up  the  Valley.  The  next  day  he  notified 
General  Grant  that  he  was  occupying  "Winchester  with  all 
his  available  forces,  "  consisting  of  about  four  thousand  in- 
fantry, one  thousand  cavalry  and  three  batteries,  and  would 
push  his  advance  toward  Cedar  Creek."  The  following  day 
he  asked  for  more  specific  instructions.  "  I  would  very 
much  like  to  know  what  your  expectations  are.  I  under- 
stand that  I  am  to  occupy  the  line  at  Cedar  Creek,  and  to 
advance  up  the  Shenandoah  Valley  if  circumstances  will 
allow  me  to  do  so.  To  advance  beyond  Strasburg  with  my 
present  force  is  hardly  possible,  if  I  cannot  at  the  same  time 
have  a  pretty  strong  force  opposite  Front  Royal  to  prevent  the 
enemy  from  marching  into  my  rear  or  cutting  off  my  line  of 
communication  with  cavalry.  I  have  only  a  very  vague  idea 
about  the  position  of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac,  and  do  not 
know  whether  there  is  any  force  of  ours  at  or  near  Luray.  If 
I  am  expected  to  make  energetic  and  decisive  movements,  I 
should  have  at  least  five  thousand  more  of  good  infantry,  with 
which  I  could  march  up  the  Shenandoah  Valley.  The  few 
troops  I  have  here  are  excellent,  with  the  exception  of  the  cav- 


16  THE   SHENANDOAH   VALLEY. 

airy."  It  was  certainly  clear  that,  with  so  small  a  number  oi 
men  at  command,  in  order  to  reach  Staunton,  if  the  march 
were  seriously  resisted,  there  needed  to  be  a  co-operative 
movement  from  the  Kanawha  forces  upon  the  same  point — 
yet  Crook  was  starting  for  Newbern.  "  I  do  not  want  you," 
replied  Grant,  the  nest  day,  "  to  move  farther  south  than 
Cedar  River,  to  watch  any  movement  the  enemy  may  attempt 
by  way  of  the  Shenandoah  Valley.  The  Army  of  the  Potomac 
occupies  nothing  between  the  Blue  Ridge  and  Orange  and 
Alexandria  Railroad.  It  is  to  be  hoped  that  efforts  making 
for  raising  troops  will  enable  us  to  send  any  reinforcements 
you  may  require,  should  the  enemy  move  down  the  Valley." 

It  chanced  that,  a  few  days  later,  May  5th,  a  hundred  of 
McNeil's  horsemen  rode  to  the  Baltimore  and  Ohio  Railroad 
at  Piedmont,  in  West  Virginia,  captured  the  guard,  and  there 
and  at  Bloomington  burned  a  few  loaded  cars  and  engines. 
Secretary  Stanton  called  upon  Governor  Brough,  of  Ohio, 
to  send  some  troops  to  defend  the  railroad.  "  Sigel's  ad- 
vance has  exposed  the  Baltimore  and  Ohio  Road,"  he  said. 
Governor  Brough  promptly  furnished  four  hundred-days 
regiments  for  Charleston,  three  for  Parkersburg,  three  for 
New  Creek,  three  for  Harper's  Ferry,  and  two  for  Cumber- 
land, so  that  the  railroad  was  reasonably  guarded ;  and  Gen- 
eral Kelley  took  command  at  Cumberland,  with  orders  to 
watch  the  road  west  of  the  Monocacy,  while  Sigel  sent  five 
hundred  cavalry  to  Moorefield  to  try  to  cut  off  the  retreat  of 
the  raiders.  This  force  was  quickly  defeated,  with  a  loss  of 
fifty  men,  near  Wardensville,  and  driven  to  Romney ;  but 
meanwhile  the  railroad  had  been  put  in  running  order. 
The  chief  importance  of  the  incident  was  in  calling  to  the 
railroad  and  the  Potomac  line  the  Ohio  hundred-days  men. 

On  the  9th  Sigel,  with  Sullivan's  division  of  infantry  and 
Stahel's  cavalry,  moved  up  the  Valley  pike  to  Cedar  Creek, 


CLOYD'S  MOUNTAIN   AND  NEW  MARKET.  17 

and  the  11th  pushed  through  Strasburg  to  Woodstock, 
whence  the  cavalry  advanced  to  Mount  Pleasant  or  Jackson. 
At  Woodstock  he  sent  to  the  Adjutant-General  this  mes- 
sage:  "My  principal  object  in  advancing  up  the  Shenan- 
doah Valley  was  to  threaten  Staunton,  to  divide  the  forces 
of  Breckenridge,  and  to  assist  by  these  means  General 
Crook,  whose  object  is  to  destroy  New  River  bridge.  My 
forces  are  insufficient  for  offensive  operations  in  this  coun- 
try, where  the  cavalry  is  continually  on  my  flank  and  rear. 
My  intention,  therefore,  is  not  to  advance  farther  than  this 
place  with  my  main  force,  but  have  sent  out  strong  parties 
in  every  direction.  Skirmishing  is  going  on  every  day.  If 
Breckenridge  should  advance  against  us,  I  will  resist  him  at 
some  convenient  position." 

On  the  14th  he  moved  Colonel  Moor  with  infantry  to 
Mount  Jackson ;  and  there  Boyd's  First  New  York  Cavalry, 
which  had  been  prudently  sent  three  days  before  to  scout 
through  Luray  Valley,  so  as  to  guard  the  left  flank,  under 
orders  to  rejoin  the  main  body  through  Massanutten  Gap  at 
New  Market,  reported  the  enemy  to  be  in  force  at  the  latter 
point.  On  Moor  advancing  thither  from  Bude's  Hill,  which 
is  a  few  miles  beyond  Mount  Jackson,  east  of  the  North 
Fork,  the  roar  of  hostile  guns  confirmed  the  tidings  that 
the  unchallenged  stage  of  Sigel's  march  was  over. 

The  Confederate  presence  thus  disclosed  was  the  advance 
of  General  Breckenridge,  who,  having  been  intrusted  with 
the  command  of  the  Valley,  and  observing  Sigel's  arrival 
at  Strasburg,  was  marching  rapidly  from  his  post  at  Staun- 
ton to  oppose  him,  with  a  force  of  nearly  5,000  men. 
Moor  had,  besides  cavalry  and  artillery,  two  regiments  of 
his  own  brigade  and  two  of  the  other,  Thoburn's.  General 
Stahel  came  up  next  morning  and  took  command. 

New  Market  is  on  the  Valley  pike,  about   eight   miles 


18 


THE  SHENANDOAH  VALLEY. 


above  Mount  Jackson.  At  the  latter  point,  the  road,  aftei 
having  followed  the  left  bank  of  the  North  Fork  all  the  way 
up  from  Strasburg,  crosses  the  river  and  passes  about  half- 
way between  its  right  bank  and  a  nearly  parallel  little  stream 
known  as  Smith's  Creek.  At  New  Market  the  Valley  pike  is 
joined  by  the  turnpike  which  comes  up  from  Front  Koyal 
to  Luray,  and  thence  traverses  the  Massanutten  Mountains  by 
Massanutten  Gap ;  hence  this  was  one  of  the  points  in  the 
Valley  possessing  a  certain  degree  of  military  importance, 


The  Battle  of  New  Market. 


and  as  good  a  place  as  any  for  Breckenridge  to  execute  his 
purpose  of  attacking  Sigel. 

It  is  obvious  that  the  Union  general  was  not  prepared  for 
battle,  his  forces  being  scattered  along  the  pike.  But 
Moor,  having  established  himself  on  an  elevation  north- 
west of  New  Market,  remained  there  through  the  stormy 
night  of  the  14th,  and  sent  out  his  skirmishers  at  day- 
light;  and,  a  few  hours  later,  Sigel  came  up  with  the 
remainder  of  his   small  army  to   accept   battle.     The   ar- 


CLOYD'S  MOUNTAIN  AND  NEW  MARKET.  19 

rangement  of  tlie  line  under  these  hurried  circumstances 
gave  some  of  the  troops  an  exhausting  tramp  back  and 
forth  through  the  sticky  mud  of  fields  of  young  wheat. 
Moor  was  left  in  advance  to  break  the  enemy's  onset,  drawn 
back,  however,  a  considerable  distance  to  the  rear  of  the 
position  he  had  at  first  reached.  His  troops  consisted 
of  the  Eighteenth  Connecticut  and  One  Hundred  and 
Twenty-third  Ohio  infantry,  with  a  small  body  of  cavalry, 
the  two  regiments  which  had  reinforced  him  being  re- 
turned to  their  proper  brigade,  Thoburn's.  This  latter 
was  formed  as  the  main  line  of  battle,  under  Sigel's  per- 
sonal direction.  The  artillery  was  carefully  disposed.  On 
the  left  of  the  guns  at  the  right  was  the  Thirty-fourth 
Massachusetts,  except  one  company,  detached  and  thrown 
out  as  skirmishers  in  the  woods  of  the  river  bank ;  then 
came  the  First  Virginia  and  Fifty-fourth  Pennsylvania. 
A  few  companies  of  the  Twelfth  "West  Virginia  supported 
the  artillery  on  the  right,  the  others  being  formed  in 
double  column  in  rear  of  the  Thirty -fourth.  The  cavalry 
was  behind  the  centre,  and  on  the  left  flank.  The  line  ex- 
tended across  the  pike  on  rising  ground,  while  another  slope 
in  front  was  held  by  Moor. 

Breckenridge  moved  to  the  attack  with  the  veteran  bri- 
gades of  Echols  and  Wharton  and  some  local  forces,  while 
McLaughlin's  artillery  went  into  action  on  a  sharp  ridge 
that  ran  parallel  with  the  pike.  Overlapping  Moor,  Breck- 
enridge drove  him  in  confusion  to  the  rear,  and,  with 
hardly  a  pause,  came  in  excellent  order  across  the  interven- 
ing depression,  against  Thoburn.  The  shouts  of  his  attack 
were  answered  by  a  handsome  charge  from  the  Union  right 
that  promptly  checked  him.  But  the  left  was  already  in 
difficulty.  Imboden,  who  commanded  Breckenridge's  cav- 
alry, galloping  down  Smith's  Creek,  along  the  eastern  bank,  to 


20  THE  SHENANDOAH  VALLEY. 

the  bridge  on  the  Luray  road,  had  there  recrossed,  and  come 
up  on  the  west  side,  the  manoeuvre  being  such  as  to  bring 
him  upon  Sigel's  left  flank.  He  had  taken  two  guns  with 
him,  and  running  these  up  to  short  range,  opened  on  the 
cavalry  there  and  routed  it.  Pressing  his  advantage,  be  se- 
cured a  flank  and  almost  rear  fire  against  Sigel's  left,  while 
Breckenridge,  charging  heavily  in  front,  compelled  the  en- 
tire force  to  retreat.  Yet  the  Union  troops  contested  the 
ground ;  and  one  of  Sigel's  batteries  was  ill  rewarded  for  its 
good  service  and  reluctant  withdrawal  by  falling  into  the 
enemy's  hands.1 

At  Eude's  Hill  a  new  line  was  formed,  Moor's  troops 
having  rallied,  and  the  Twenty-eighth  and  One  Hundred 
and  Sixteenth  Ohio  being  brought  up  from  the  charge  of 
the  wagons.  But  after  a  brief  halt  Sigel  resumed  his  re- 
treat along  the  turnpike,  bringing  off  all  his  train.  He 
crossed  the  Shenandoah  to  Mount  Jackson  on  the  narrow 
bridge,  which  he  burned  behind  him.  Breckenridge  followed 
only  to  Kude's  Hill,  but  Sigel  inarched  on  till  he  had  en- 
camped his  forces  behind  Cedar  Creek.  His  losses  in 
this  engagement  were  as  follows :  killed,  93 ;  wounded, 
482 ;  missing,  256 — total,  831.  The  Confederate  loss  was 
also  severe  :  killed,  34 ;  wounded,  484 ;  missing,  13 — total, 
531. 2  Sigel's  dead  and  his  badly  wounded  were  left  in  the 
enemy's  hands. 

1  Imboden's  official  report  employs  the  following  language :  "  Sigel's  entire  line 
retired  slowly.  His  artillery  was  especially  damaging,  and  he  (Breckenridge)  de- 
termined to  silence  at  least  one,  and  the  most  mischievous,  battery,  directly  in 
front  of  the  centre  of  his  line;  and  Colonel  Smith,  of  the  Sixty-second  Virginia, 
and  Colonel  Skip,  with  his  Cadets,  were  ordered  to  charge  and  take  it.  .  .  . 
The  battery  was  taken,  but  with  fearful  loss  on  both  sides."  Sigel's  despatches 
speak  of  losing  five  guns ;  other  accounts  give  the  number  as  six.  He  made  no 
official  report  of  the  battle.  • 

2  "  The  Sixty-second  Regiment  alone,"  says  Imboden,  "  reported  241  killed 
and  wounded,  including  seven  of  the  ten  captains,  three  of  whom  were  killed  in 


CLOYD'S  MOUNTAIN  AND  NEW  MARKET.  21 

The  reason  assigned  by  General  Sigel  for  his  defeat  was 
that  the  Confederate  forces  outnumbered  him,  and  that  in 
consequence  of  the  long  trains  he  had  to  guard,  "  he  could 
not  bring  more  than  six  regiments  into  the  fight,  besides  the 
artillery  and  cavalry,  ^.nd  the  enemy  had  about  seven  thou- 
sand infantry,  besides  other  arms."  In  a  previous  despatch 
he  said  that  "  the  battle  was  fought  on  our  side  by  5,500  in 
all,  against  8,000  to  9,000  of  the  enemy."  But  even  if  we 
deduct  from  Sigel's  5,500  the  two  regiments  that  did  not 
participate  in  the  battle,  there  was  little  disparity  in  num- 
bers.1 While  his  force,  almost  wholly  composed  of  troops 
taken  from  garrison,  was  much  too  small,  yet  it  is  palpable 
that  the  battle  was  fought  hurriedly,  and  that  Moor's  line 
was  too  weak  to  check  the  enemy,  yet  too  important  a  frac- 
tion of  the  command  to  be  left  where  it  could  be  made  use- 
less by  an  overwhelming  attack.  The  indefinite  character 
of  Sigel's  task  seems  to  have  left  him  without  a  clear  objec- 
tive, and,  as  a  consequence,  without  a  precise  idea  of  what 
he  might  be  called  upon  to  meet.  But  it  is  due  to  him  to 
say  that  he  spared  no  personal  exertions  to  redeem  the  day. 

the  charge  of  the  captured  battery.  The  corps  of  Cadets  lost  8  killed  and  4  offi- 
cers and  57  privates  wounded,  out  of  a  total  force  of  250  engaged.  General 
Echols's  casualties  were  nearly  300,  including  the  Cadets,  mostly  wounded.  The 
artillery  did  not  lose  over  eight  or  ten  killed  and  wounded." 

1  In  the  Appendix  will  be  found  the  documents  of  the  War  Records  office 
on  this  subject.  In  addition,  General  W.  S.  Lincoln,  in  "The  Thirty  fourth 
Massachusetts  Infantry  in  the  War  of  the  Rebellion,"  has  made  a  special  study  of 
the  rosters,  from  which  it  appears  that  the  official  report  of  Breckenridge's 
strength  the  day  after  the  battle  shows  the  following  aggregate  then  present: 
Wharton's  brigade,  1,309;  Echols's,  1,488  ;  Northwest,  983  ;  Cadet  battalion,  221 ; 
Engineer  Corps,  46 ;  McLaughlin's  artillery,  235 — total  of  infantry  and  artillery, 
4,282.  Imboden,  in  his  report,  gives  the  cavalry  at  800,  which  would  make  the 
total  of  the  three  arms  over  5,000.  He  also  puts  the  infantry  actually  engaged 
at  3,440  and  the  artillery  at  350,  with  18  guns,  making  a  total  of  4,590  men.  The 
report  after  the  battle  presumably  excludes  the  killed  and  missing ;  and  we  may, 
therefore,  safely  set  down  the  Confederate  strength  in  the  engagement  at  from 
4,600  to  5,000  men. 


22  THE  SHENANDOAH  VALLEY. 

Sigel  telegraphed  to  Washington,  the  day  after  the  battle, 
that  the  troops  were  in  good  spirits,  and  would  make  a 
good  fight  if  the  enemy  should  advance ;  and  sending  his 
cavalry  to  Woodstock,  he  moved  his  infantry  across  the 
creek  through  Strasburg,  and  with  his  advance  occupied 
Fisher's  Hill.  But  Grant,  not  regarding  Sigel's  operations 
as  satisfactory,  had  asked  for  his  removal  immediately  on 
hearing  of  his  defeat ;  for  he  had  so  little  expected  this 
event  that  an  hour  before  receiving  news  of  it  he  had  asked 
Halleck  if  Sigel  could  not  go  up  to  Staunton,  and  destroy  the 
road  there.  Halleck  answered  that  "  the  Secretary  of  War 
directs  me  to  say  that  the  President  will  appoint  General 
Hunter  to  command  the  Department  of  West  Virginia  if  you 
desire  it."  Grant  accordingly  welcomed  the  opportunity  of 
placing  Hunter  in  command,  in  Sigel's  stead. 


CHAPTER  III. 

GENERAL  HUNTER'S  LYNCHBURG  CAMPAIGN. 

The  Virginia  and  Tennessee  road  being  broken  at  New 
Eiver,  the  Shenandoah  problem  was  narrowed  and  simpli- 
fied. The  20th  of  May,  the  day  before  Hunter  took  command 
in  the  Valley,  the  Lieutenant-General  expressed  through 
Halleck  his  opinion  of  what  should  be  done  next,  inclin- 
ing to  pursue  the  plan  for  which  Sigel  had  already  given 
instructions.  "  In  regard  to  the  operations,"  he  said,  "  it 
is  better  for  General  Hunter  to  engage  in,  with  the  dispos- 
able forces  at  his  command,  I  am  a  little  in  doubt.  It  is 
evident  that  he  can  move  South,  covering  the  road  he  has 
to  guard,  with  a  larger  force  than  he  can  spare  to  be  re- 
moved to  reinforce  armies  elsewhere.  Then,  too,  under  the 
instructions  of  General  Sigel,1  Crook  was  to  get  through  to 
the  Virginia  and  Tennessee  Railroad,  at  New  Eiver  Bridge, 
and  move  eastward  to  Lynchburg,  if  he  could ;  if  not,  to 
Fincastle,  Staunton,  and  down  the  Shenandoah  Valley. 
Sigel  was  to  collect  what  force  he  could  spare  from  the  rail- 
road, and  move  up  the  Valley  with  a  supply-train,  to  meet 
him.  The  enemy  are  evidently  relying  for  supplies  greatly 
on  such  as  are  brought  over  the  branch  road  running  through 

1  "  On  my  arrival  at  Meadow  Bluffs,  May  19th,  from  the  New  River  expedition, 
I  received  a  despatch  from  Major-G-eneral  Sigel,  then  commanding  the  Depart- 
ment, to  make  a  demonstration  on  Staunton  as  soon  as  possible  "  (General  Crook's 
Report,  July  7th). 


21  THE  SHENANDOAH  VALLEY. 

Staunton.  On  the  whole,  therefore,  I  think  it  would  be  bet- 
ter for  General  Hunter  to  move  in  that  direction,  and  reach 
Staunton  and  Gordonsville  or  Charlottesville,  if  he  does  not 
meet  with  too  much  opposition.  If  he  can  hold  at  bay  a 
force  equal  to  his  own,  he  will  be  doing  good  service." 
Hunter,  therefore,  vigorously  pushed  his  preparations  for  a 
very  long  march.  He  left  Sigel  in  charge  of  the  reserve 
troops  and  the  railroad,  Kelley  and  Weber  reporting  to  him. 
The  26th  of  May  Hunter  broke  camp  at  Cedar  Creek  and 
marched  up  the  pike  to  Woodstock.  He  had  with  him 
Sigel's  former  troops,  reinforced  so  that  they  now  amounted 
to  8,500  men  of  all  arms,  with  twenty-one  guns,  the  infantry 
under  Sullivan  and  the  cavalry  under  Stahel.  At  Woodstock 
he  halted  for  shoes  to  come  up,  and  wrote  Halleck  that  he 
should  "  depend  entirely  on  the  country  [for  food]  and  hope 
to  form  a  junction  with  Crook  at  Staunton,  and  then  move 
immediately  on  Lynchburg."  Halleck  that  same  day  had 
sent  him  word  where  Grant  was,  adding,  "  he  wishes  you  to 
push  on,  if  jjossible,  to  Charlottesville  and  Lynchburg,  and 
destroy  the  railroad  and  canal  beyond  possibility  of  repair 
for  weeks ;  then,  either  return  to  your  original  base  or  join 
Grant,  via  Gordonsville.  In  your  movements  live  as  much 
as  possible  on  the  country."  Grant  had,  in  fact,  just  given 
to  Halleck  these  instructions.  From  Woodstock  Hunter 
marched  past  Mount  Jackson  and  Bude's  Hill  to  New  Mar- 
ket, the  scene  of  Sigel's  defeat,  there  remaining  a  few  days, 
while  sending  out  his  foragers  for  beeves,  sheep,  grain,  and 
flour,  under  the  following  orders  : 

III.  Brigade  and  all  other  Commanders  will  be  held  strictly  responsi- 
ble that  their  commands  are  supplied  from  the  country.  Cattle,  sheep, 
and  hogs,  and,  if  necessary,  horses  and  mules  must  be  taken,  and 
slaughtered.  These  supplies  will  be  seized  under  the  direction  of 
officers  duly  authorized,  and  upon  a  system  which  will  hereafter  be 


GENERAL  HUNTERS  LYNCHBURG  CAMPAIGN.        25 

regulated.  No  straggling  or  pillaging  will  be  allowed.  Brigade  and 
other  commanders  will  be  held  responsible  that  there  is  no  waste  ;  and 
that  there  is  a  proper  and  orderly  division  amongst  their  men,  of  the 
supplies  taksn  for  our  use. 

At  Woodstock  lie  had  ordered  Stahel  to  send  out  foraging 
parties,  "under  command  of  reliable  and  just  officers,  who 
will  collect  such  subsistence  and  forage  as  the  army  needs, 
allowing  no  waste  nor  pillage,  and  giving  such  of  the  resi- 
dents as  claim  to  be  and  are  commonly  reputed  to  be  loyal, 
certificates  of  the  amount  of  stores  taken  for  the  use  of  the 
United  States  Government.  You  will  charge  the  officers 
detailed  for  this  duty  to  hold  their  men  well  in  hand,  and 
to  allow  no  plundering  or  oppression  of  the  inhabitants ; 
nothing  being  seized  except  by  order  of  the  officers  in 
charge  of  such  party."  Three  days  later,  at  Bucle's  Hill,  he 
called  Stahel's  attention  to  "  the  numerous  and  grave  com- 
plaints against  soldiers  of  this  command  for  unauthorized 
pillaging,"  and  insisted  that  they  should  cease.  "  Many  of 
the  residents  of  this  neighborhood,"  he  said,  ' '  have  been  very 
kind  to  our  wounded,  and  it  is  neither  just  nor  politic  to 
allow  wanton  outrage  and  injuries  to  be  inflicted  upon  any 
people."  Hunter's  foraging  soon  proved  useful,  as  a  supply 
train  moving  to  him  from  Martinsburg  was  seized  and  burned 
by  Gilmor's  horsemen  at  Newtown.  Its  escort  consisted 
of  83  men  of  the  Fifteenth  and  Twenty-first  New  York 
cavalry,  under  Lieutenant-Colonel  Root,  of  the  former, 
who  in  the  engagement  lost  10  killed  and  wounded  and  9 
prisoners. 

From  New  Market  Hunter  proceeded  to  Harrisonburg, 
where,  June  2d,  he  found  Imboden  posted  about  seven 
miles  ahead  on  the  pike,  at  Mount  Crawford,  his  right 
at  Rockland  Mills  and  his  left  at  Bridgewater,  the  line 
of  defence  being  the  North  River.  After  examining  this 
XI.— 2 


26 


THE  SHENANDOAH  VALLEY. 


position,  he  moved  by  a  side  road  southeastward  to  Port 
Republic,  where  he  crossed  the  South  Fork  of  the  Shenan- 
doah, flanking  the  Mount  Crawford  position.  A  large  sup- 
ply train  was  overhauled  and  in  part  captured  by  Stahel's 
cavalry. 

The  morning  of  the  5th  he  advanced  toward  Staunton,  and 
found  that  the  enemy,  under  General  W.  E.  Jones,  had 
brought  up  his  forces  from  Lynchburg  to  Piedmont,  to  re- 
sist the  Union  march.     This  little  village  is  four  miles  east 


The  Battle-field  of  Piedmont. 


of  the  Valley  pike,  and  seven  southwest  of  Port  Republic,  on 
a  road  which  farther  south  forks  to  Staunton  and  Waynes- 
boro. Stahel  having  driven  back  Jones's  pickets,  Hunter 
drew  up  in  front  of  the  Piedmont  line,  Moor's  brigade  on 
the  right  and  Thoburn's  on  the  left,  Wynkoop's  brigade  of 
Stahel's  cavalry  massed  in  rear  of  Moor.  After  an  artillery 
fire  of  two  hours,  the  enemy's  guns  slackened. 


GENERAL  HUNTER'S  LYNCHBURG  CAMPAIGN.         27 

Soon  after  noon,  Moor  attacked  the  Confederate  left. 
The  Eighteenth  Connecticut  held  his  extreme  right,  with 
the  Fifth  New  York  Heavy  Artillery  on  its  left.  An  advance 
across  the  open  drove  the  enemy  through  the  woods  to  his 
main  works,  which  were  on  a  curving  range  of  thickly 
timbered  hills  ;  but  these  Moor  could  not  carry,  and  he  fell 
back.  The  enemy  then  attempted  in  turn  to  crush  Hunter's 
right,  but  was  checked  by  Moor,  aided  by  Von  Kleyser's 
battery,  with  a  cross-fire  from  Morton's  and  Carlin's  on  the 
left.  While  Jones  was  concentrating  for  this  attack,  Tho- 
burn  had  been  moved  across  a  ravine  to  gain  the  enemy's 
weakened  right  flank.  There  he  made  a  very  gallant 
charge  on  the  woods  and  heights,  and  Moor  and  Wynkoop 
promptly  co-operating,  the  enemy  abandoned  the  entire 
position,  a  portion  of  his  men  rushing  over  the  steep  bank 
into  the  river  which  covered  his  left. 

Over  one  thousand  of  the  enemy,  including  sixty  officers, 
were  captured  on  the  field,  and  among  the  killed  was  the  Con- 
federate commander.  The  next  day  Hunter  captured  400 
sick  and  wounded.  The  total  number  of  prisoners  was 
about  1,500,  and  to  these  losses  of  the  enemy  must  be 
added  his  killed  and  stragglers.1  Three  guns  and  many 
small  arms  fell  into  the  hands  of  Hunter,  whose  loss  was 
but  420.  Secretary  Stanton  sent  thanks  for  this  victory, 
expressing  the  hope  that,  "  led  on  by  the  courage  and  guided 
by  the  experienced  skill  of  its  commander,  the  Army  of  the 
Shenandoah  will  rival  our  other  gallant  armies  in  the  suc- 
cessful blows  against  the  rebels." 

The  remnant  of  Jones's  troops,  under  Vaughan,  fled  to 
Waynesboro,    abandoning    Staunton,  where    Hunter   estab- 

1  "Went  in  the  fight  yesterday  with  an  aggregate  of  5,600.  I  have  not  over 
3,000  effectives,  including  Imboden's  cavalry,  800."  (Vaughan  to  Bragg,  June 
6th.) 


28  THE   SHENANDOAH  VALLEY. 

lislied  himself  the  next  day.  Here,  the  8th,  he  was  joined 
by  the  troops  of  Crook  and  Averell,  who  had  marched  from 
West  Virginia,  by  way  of  Callaghan's,  Warm  Springs,  and 
Goshen.  Crook,  on  returning  to  Meadow  Bluff,  had  found 
Sigel's  orders  to  proceed  to  Staunton,  but  had  been  delayed, 
"  owing  to  the  miserable  transportation,"  and  was  at  last 
compelled  "  to  leave  on  the  30th  with  many  of  my  men  bare- 
foot and  scantily  supplied  with  rations."  During  his  march 
Crook  burned  the  Virginia  Central  Eailroad  bridge  over 
Calf  Pasture  River  at  Goshen  Springs,  and  destroyed  several 
miles  of  the  track.  Averell  had  skirmished  most  of  the  way 
with  the  cavalry  of  McCausland  and  Jackson,  who,  however, 
rapidly  retreated  when  they  learned  the  fate  that  had  be- 
fallen Jones.  Averell  brought  with  him  4,400  men,  and 
these  with  Crook's  infantry  made  a  total  of  about  10,000, 
with  two  batteries. 

Hunter  was  now  about  18,000  strong,  with  thirty  guns,  and 
well  able  to  make  his  way  to  Lynchburg  ;  meanwhile  he  de- 
stroyed at  Staunton  the  enemy's  factories  and  completed 
stocks  of  saddles,  harness,  military  clothing,  and  shoes. 
The  Virginia  Central  Railroad,  which  runs  through  the  town, 
was  well  broken  for  several  miles,  east  and  west,  the  stations, 
repair  shops,  and  warehouses  being  burned,  the  culverts 
blown  up  and  trestle-work  demolished.  Perhaps  the  most 
conclusive  testimony  to  the  thoroughness  of  Hunter's  work 
is  a  despatch  of  June  17th  from  Colonel  E.  G.  Lee,  com- 
manding the  post  at  Staunton,  to  Adjutant-General  S.  Cooper, 
at  Eichmond :  "  The  depot,  woollen  factory,  government 
stables,  steam  mill,  wagon  shops,  and  storehouses  for  tax  in 
kind,  were  burned.  The  railroad  was  effectually  destroyed 
for  three  miles  and  partially  for  three  more.  The  bridge 
at  Christian's  Creek,  about  fifty  feet  long,  was  burned  ;  the 
telegraph  destroyed  for  six  miles — that  I  have  repaired.   The 


GENERAL  HUNTER'S  LYNCHBURG  CAMPAIGN.        29 

hands  are  slowly  at  work  on  the  railroad.  At  the  rate  they 
are  moving,  it  will  take  a  month  or  more  to  repair  it.  Our 
sick  and  wounded  at  the  hospital,  with  attendants,  were 
paroled  by  the  enemy.  They  left  300  wounded  and  40  nurses 
here,  of  their  own,  with  one  assistant  surgeon.  Upon  arriv- 
ing on  the  12th  I  had  no  guard,  and  did  not  know  whether 
we  would  hold  the  place  or  not,  so,  to  be  at  least  even  with 
the  Yankees,  I  paroled  all  of  them."  This  officer  also  gives 
a  very  long  list  of  commissaiy  stores,  horse  equipments,  and 
ordnance,  the  latter  including  a  thousand  small  arms,  three 
howitzers  and  a  12-pounder  Napoleon,  destroyed  by  Hunter, 
and  a  "quantity  of  provisions  belonging  to  or  intended  for 
the  Ordnance  Department  in  Richmond.  The  agent  in 
charge  of  them  estimates  their  value  at  $400,000." 

At  Staunton,  Crook  and  Averell  got  shoes  for  their  barefoot 
men  ;  while  Hunter  sent  back,  under  Colonel  Moor,  a  con- 
voy of  prisoners,  negroes,  and  refugees  by  way  of  Buffalo 
Gap  and  Beverly,  escorted  by  800  men  whose  enlistments 
had  nearly  expired.  He  also  relieved  Stahel,  in  consequence 
of  a  wound  received  while  gallantly  leading  his  command  at 
Piedmont,  instructing  him  to  collect  a  strong  escort  of  spare 
troops  at  the  foot  of  the  Valley,  and  to  bring  it  forward  in 
charge  of  ah  important  train  of  supplies.  Stahel  proceeded 
to  fulfil  his  instructions,  but  succeeding  events  prevented 
the  sending  of  this  train. 

The  morning  of  June  10th,  the  combined  army  moved  for- 
ward toward  Lynchburg  on  four  nearly  parallel  roads.  Two 
steady  marches,  through  a  charming  country,  abounding  in 
broad  fields  of  luxuriant  wheat,  that  half  hid  from  view  the 
battalions  trampling  through  them,  compassed  the  thirty- 
six  miles  between  Staunton  and  Lexington.  McCausland's 
troopers  retreated  before  Crook's  advance  on  the  right,  burn- 
ing the  bridge  over  the  North  River,  on  which  Lexington  is 


30  THE   SHENANDOAH   VALLEY. 

situated,  and  then  posting  their  sharpshooters  and  artillery 
among  the  buildings  of  the  town.  Hunter  desiring  to  avoid 
opening  fire  on  Lexington,  as  he  might  have  done,  sent 
Averell  to  flank  it,  and  Crook  despatched  White's  brigade  of 
infantry  for  the  same  purpose ;  whereupon  the  enemy  hastily 
withdrew.  Lexington  contained  several  public  buildings 
of  consequence,  notably  the  Virginia  Military  Institute, 
which  had  furnished  to  the  battle  of  New  Market  a  large 
share  of  its  cadets,  under  their  principal,  Colonel  Smith ; 
from  this  building  a  few  defiant  shots  had  been  fired  at  Hun- 
ter's forces.  The  institute  was  burned,  as  also  several  iron 
mills.  A  misguided  sense  of  exclusive  proprietorship  in  the 
fame  of  the  First  President  led  some  of  the  troops  to  seize 
his  statue  from  the  hall  of  Washington  College,  load  it  in 
their  wagons,  and  carry  it  to  Wheeling,  so  as  to  "rescue  it," 
as  Colonel  Cathcart  explained,  "from  the  degenerate  sons  of 
worthy  sires."  At  Lexington  Hunter  found,  he  says,  "a 
violent  and  inflammatory  proclamation  from  John  Letcher, 
lately  Governor  of  Virginia,  inciting  the  population  of  the 
country  to  rise  and  wage  a  guerilla  warfare  on  my  troops ; 
and  ascertaining  that  after  having  advised  his  fellow-citizens 
to  this  cause  the  ex-governor  had  himself  ignominiously 
taken  to  flight,  I  ordered  his  property  to  be  burned,  under 
my  Orders,  published  May  24th,  against  persons  practising 
or  abetting  such  unlawful  and  uncivilized  warfare."  A  few 
prisoners  were  taken  in  Lexington,  and  some  small  arms 
and  cartridges,  while  six  canal  bai'ges,  laden  with  commis- 
sary stores,  and  containing  about  half  a  dozen  cannon  and 
their  ammunition,  were  also  captured  and  destroyed. 

In  setting  out  from  Staunton  the  First  (Stahel's)  division 
of  cavalry,  now  under  Duffie,  moving  to  the  left,  had  demon- 
strated against  the  enemy  at  Waynesboro,  and  finding  him 
in  strong  force  there,  had  crossed  the  Blue  Ridge  further 


GENERAL  HUNTER'S  LYNCHBURG  CAMPAIGN.        31 

south,  at  Tye  River  Gap,  whence  he  moved  to  Amherst 
Court  House,  and  broke  the  Charlottesville  and  Lynchburg 
Railroad  at  Arlington  Station.  Imboden  followed  him, 
but  was  repulsed  with  loss.  Duffle  captured  about  100 
prisoners,  including  17  officers,  together  with  400  horses, 
and  destroyed  two  iron  furnaces,  large  quantities  of  com- 
missary supplies,  and  a  part  of  Imboden's  train,  returning 
by  White's  Gap  without  serious  loss.  While  this  expedition 
was  enterprising,  it  must  be  adjudged,  on  the  whole,  unfor- 
tunate ;  for  General  Hunter  had  already  made  a  long  delay 
at  Staunton,  awaiting  Crook  and  refitting  his  command,  so 
that  to  reach  Lynchburg  before  it  should  be  reinforced  he 
needed  to  leave  Lexington  the  day  after  he  entered  it.  Yet 
he  seems  to  have  felt  constrained  to  wait  for  Duffle,  perhaps 
fearing  he  was  lost,  while  that  officer,  pleased  with  his  new 
command,  went  on  raiding  until  Hunter's  couriers  at  last 
found  him  and  hurried  him  back  ;  but  he  did  not  arrive  till 
after  noon  of  June  13th.  This  delay  at  Lexington  was  enough 
to  prove  the  salvation  of  Lynchburg  ;  and,  after  all,  Duffle's 
breaking  of  the  railroad  was  not  sufficient,  as  we  shall  pres- 
ently observe,  to  prevent  its  use  in  forwarding  troops  to 
Lynchburg  by  the  time  Hunter  arrived  there.  Here,  per- 
haps, a  mistake  was  committed  ;  for  Duffle,  with  a  cavalry 
command,  ought  to  have  been  able,  at  that  season,  at  least 
to  take  care  of  himself,  if  he  could  do  nothing  more.  Prob- 
ably, instead  of  waiting  for  him,  Hunter  might  have  safely 
allowed  him  to  go  on,  and  even  to  make  a  circuit  around 
Lynchburg,  and  then  join  the  main  body  west  of  that  city 
at  Liberty,  for  an  excursion  like  this  was  soon  after  effected 
with  success  by  a  much  smaller  body  of  Hunter's  horsemen. 
There  was  another  cause  of  delay  at  Lexington,  which  per- 
haps had  as  much  influence  as  the  absence  of  Duffle,  whose 
return  was  hourly  expected.     A  train  of  two  hundred  wagons 


32  THE  SHENANDOAH  VALLEY. 

came  up,  guarded  by  two  regiments,  and  loaded  with  rations, 
clothing,  and  ammunition — all  very  acceptable,  and  the  lat- 
ter a  necessity,  for  the  supply  was  running  short.  Hunter 
had  learned  that  this  train  was  on  its  way  up  the  Valley,  and 
"I  delayed  one  day  in  Lexington,"  he  says,  "to  allow  it  to 
overtake  us."  While  anxiously  awaiting  Duffle,  Hunter,  the 
morning  of  the  13th,  sent  Averell  to  Buchanan  to  dislodge 
McCausland,  and  to  secure  the  use  of  the  bridge  over  the 
James.  Meanwhile  Averell  had  detached  200  picked  men 
to  ride  completely  around  Lynchburg,  cut  its  communica- 
tions, and  get  news  of  the  enemy.  That  day  Hunter  learned 
positively  that  Breckenridge  had  taken  command  at  Bock- 
fish  Gap,  and  Duffle's  prisoners  brought  "  rumors  that  a 
formidable  rebel  force  was  hastening  toward  the  Valley  from 
Bichmond,  and  that  Sheridan  had  met  with  a  reverse  near 
Louisa  Court  House,"  while  other  information  represented 
Lynchburg  to  be  weakly  defended.  These  tidings  suggested 
the  possible  success  of  a  rapid  advance  against  the  city  by 
the  comparatively  open  route  through  the  Peaks  of  Otter, 
whereas  the  effort  to  first  dislodge  Breckenridge  in  Bockfish 
Gap  might  cause  a  fatal  delay. 

The  14th,  Hunter  moved  his  army  by  a  hard  march  of 
twenty-five  miles  to  Buchanan,  which  Averell  had  already 
approached,  driving  off  McCausland,  and  capturing  some 
loaded  canal  barges  and  prisoners.  The  river  was  easily 
fordable  here,  but  McCausland  zealously  burned  the  bridge, 
to  the  regret  of  the  people,  and  eleven  buildings  took  fire 
from  it,  Hunter's  troops  helping  to  check  the  flames.  The 
Blue  Bidge  was  crossed  next  day  at  the  Peaks  of  Otter, 
McCausland  felling  the  trees  behind  him,  in  a  vain  effort  to 
obstruct  the  Union  march.  Powell's  brigade,  riding  in 
advance,  occupied  Liberty,  the  county  town  of  Bedford,  on 
the  Virginia  and  Tennessee  Bailroad,  twenty-four  miles  west 


GENERAL  HUNTER'S  LYNCHBURG  CAMPAIGN.        33 

of  Lynchburg.  There  Averell's  picked  men  reported.  They 
had  struck  and  broken  the  Charlottesville  Eailroad  near 
Amherst,  crossed  the  James  below  Lynchburg,  injured  the 
Southside  Eailroad,  burned  two  trains  at  Concordia  Station, 
and  thence  had  moved  westward  to  Liberty;  still  they 
brought  no  trustworthy  news  of  the  enemy's  strength.  Of 
the  prisoners  captured,  "  some  reported  that  Sheridan  had 
been  defeated  near  Louisa  Court  House,  while  others  said 
that  he  was  already  in  Lynchburg." 

Giving  little  heed  to  these  stories,  Hunter,  the  16th,  moved 
through  Liberty  toward  Lynchburg,  sending  Duffie  north 
to  Balcony  Falls  to  see  if  the  enemy  was  there,  and  Crook 
along  the  railroad,  to  destroy  it  as  he  marched.  Averell, 
followed  by  Sullivan's  division,  the  reserve  artillery  and  the 
trains,  advanced  on  the  Bedford  pike,  and  drove  back  Mc- 
Causland,  but  with  increasing  difficulty,  indicating  that  he 
had  now  been  reinforced  by  Imboden.  At  night  Hunter 
encamped  seven  miles  east  of  Liberty,  and  then  sent  through 
Lewisburg  to  Charleston  the  two  hundred  wagons  which 
had  reached  him  at  Lexington,  together  with  many  refu- 
gees, under  guard  of  Colonel  Putnam's  regiment  of  Ohio 
hundred-days  men.  Crook  had  destroyed  the  railroad  from 
Liberty  to  Big  Otter  Creek,  burning  the  ties  and  bending 
the  rails. 

The  next  day  Averell  came  upon  the  enemy  at  Quaker 
church,  five  miles  from  Lynchburg,  and,  aided  by  Duffig, 
charged  his  intrenchments.  The  infantry,  hastening  for- 
ward, carried  the  works,  capturing  70  prisoners  and  one 
cannon.     The  troops  encamped  on  the  field. 

Thus  far  Hunter's  campaign  had  been  not  only  vigorous, 
but  brilliantly  successful ;  while  his  penetration  of  a  vital 
part  of  the  enemy's  country  was  something  new  after  the 
2* 


34  THE  SHENANDOAH  VALLEY. 

mortifying  experiences  of  Union  campaigning  in  the  Valley 
of  Virginia.  Nevertheless,  events  showed  that  in  one  respect 
his  plan  might  have  been  more  fortunate.  Instead  of  march- 
ing to  Lynchburg  from  Staunton  by  way  of  Lexington  and 
Buchanan,  which  had  seemed  the  most  expedient  course, 
from  such  facts  as  were  known  to  him,  a  better  route  might 
have  been  through  Eockflsh  Gap  to  Charlottesville.  Intrin- 
sically, the  occupation  of  this  town  would  have  been  as 
important  as  that  of  Lexington,  and  would  have  formed  a  sat- 
isfactory close  of  the  campaign,  even  had  it  then  proved  im- 
possible to  visit  Lynchburg.  For  Charlottesville  was  more 
closely  connected  than  Lexington  with  the  general  scheme 
of  military  operations  in  Virginia,  and  its  capture  was  the 
most  natural  forerunner  of  a  serious  attempt  on  Lynchburg. 
Not  only  would  a  force  established  there  threaten  Gordons- 
ville  as  well  as  Lynchburg,  thus  dividing  the  enemy's  prep- 
arations for  defence,  but  it  would  break  the  railroad  connect- 
ing them,  and  cut  off  Lynchburg  from  reinforcement.  That 
General  Lee  would  succor  the  latter  city  unless  Richmond 
itself  were  on  the  point  of  capture,  was  obvious,  since,  as  a 
seat  of  manufactures  and  the  key  of  a  region  of  plenty,  it 
was  to  him  the  most  important  town  in  Virginia  west  of  the 
capita],  and  its  occupation  would  cut  his.  chief  line  of  rail- 
road supply.  The  reinforcements  for  this  purpose  would 
naturally  go  by  way  of  Charlottesville  by  rail,  there  being 
no  troops  to  come  from  the  region  west  of  the  Blue  Bidge. 
At  Charlottesville,  Hunter,  learning  whether  these  reinforce- 
ments had  already  gone  forward,  would  also  have  known 
whether  he  could  wisely  move  to  Lynchburg.  Vaughan's 
troops  that  retreated  from  Piedmont  had  themselves  broadly 
suggested  the  line  they  wished  to  secure,  by  escaping  to 
Waynesboro  instead  of  Staunton — this  movement  making 
them  available  for  the  defence  of  Charlottesville  and  Gor- 


GENERAL  HUNTER'S  LYNCHBURG  CAMPAIGN.        35 

donsville  as  well  as  Lynchburg.  Finally,  at  Charlottesville 
Hunter  would  have  covered  his  line  of  retreat  down  the 
Shenandoah  Valley,  whereas  a  column  sent  through  Char- 
lottesville, while  he  was  far  south,  might  force  him  to  drift 
off  along  the  distant  line  of  the  Kanawha ;  and  this  form  of 
withdrawal  in  fact  occurred. 

To  explain  how  Lynchburg  was  relieved,  we  must  go  back 
a  little.  After  Sigel's  defeat  at  New  Market,  Lee  at  once 
summoned  the  infantry  of  Breckenridge  to  reinforce  him 
against  Grant.  Experience  justified  this  step,  because  a 
Union  repulse  in  the  Valley  had  usually  been  followed  by  a 
period  of  dazed  inaction.  But  in  repeating  this  manoeuvre 
with  a  commander  whose  policy  was  that  of  "  hammering 
continuously,"  Lee  committed  an  error.  The  two  brigades 
of  Breckenridge,  Wharton's  and  Echols's,  were  transferred 
to  the  North  Anna  and  were  of  service  there ;  but  mean- 
while the  defeat  at  Piedmont  more  than  counterbalanced 
any  service  they  had  rendered  Lee,  and  they  were  hastily 
sent  back  to  the  Valley,  reaching  Bockfish  Gap  in  season  to 
have  reinforced  Vaughan,  had  Hunter  moved  from  Staunton 
to  Waynesboro.  Breckenridge  pushed  on  to  Lynchburg  by  a 
forced  march,  and  long  before  Hunter's  arrival  had  placed 
his  troops  and  Vaughan's  behind  the  intrenchments,  being 
able  to  add  to  them  a  considerable  array  of  home  guards 
and  convalescents ;  for  Lynchburg  contained  not  a  few  of 
the  sick  and  wounded  of  Lee's  army,  and  Generals  D.  H. 
Hill  and  Hays,  who  were  among  them,  aided  in  the  defence. 

Lee  took  farther  precautions.  He  directed  his  Second 
Corps,  Ewell's,  now  under  Early,  to  withdraw  from  Cold 
Harbor,  June  13th,  and  to  proceed  by  Louisa  and  Charlottes- 
ville through  either  Brown's  or  Swift  Bun  Gap,  across  the 
Blue  Bidge,  so  as  to  strike  the  rear  of  Hunter,  then  sup- 
posed to  be  still  at  Staunton — for  Hunter's  men  had  cut  the 


36  THE  SHENANDOAH  VALLEY. 

railroad  and  telegraph  lines,  "  so  that  there  was  no  commu- 
nication with  Breckenridge."  Early  crossed  the  Chicka- 
horniny,  and  reached  Trevillian's  Station,  June  15th,  in  a 
march  of  a  little  over  two  days  ;  and  the  Bivanna,  near  Char- 
lottesville, the  day  after,  having  marched  eighty  miles  in 
four  days.  His  was  Stonewall  Jackson's  old  corps,  famous 
for  quick  marches — Jackson's  "  foot  cavalry." 

Breckenridge,  at  Lynchburg,  had  scanty  information  of 
Hunter's  progress.  The  11th,  he  telegraphed  Imboden  that 
Hunter's  cavalry  was  passing  through  Tye  River  Gap :  "  Over- 
take, engage  and  whip  him.  You  have  the  force  to  do  it." 
Four  days  later,  both  to  Bragg,  at  Bichmond,  and  to  Imbo- 
den himself  he  telegraphed  bitterly  in  regard  to  the  lat- 
ter's  inactivity.  But  the  16th  Early  was  at  Charlottesville, 
where  the  railroad,  already  repaired,  could  bring  forward 
his  troops  to  Lynchburg,  and  then  Breckenridge's  anxiety 
was  over.  "My  fear  is  that  the  enemy  will  go  away,"  he 
telegraphed  Early  on  that  day ;  and  he  encouraged  General 
Vaughan  by  this  assurance  :  "  There  is  no  occasion  for  any 
disorder.  The  enemy  is  advancing  slowly.  We  will  have 
General  Early  and  large  reinforcements  to-morrow  morning, 
and  if  the  enemy  comes  in  earnest,  he  will  be  destroyed." 
In  truth,  the  next  day,  the  17th,  brought  to  the  city  half 
of  Early's  corps  and  Hunter's  main  body. 

It  has  been  seen  that  Crook  and  Averell  promptly  attacked 
the  outworks  of  Lynchburg,  the  evening  of  the  17th ;  they 
had  shut  up  the  enemy  within  a  redoubt  only  two  miles 
from  the  city.  Early  at  that  time  threw  two  brigades  of 
Bamseur's  division  into  this  redoubt,  and  placed  the  third 
and  a  part  of  Gordon's  division  in  support. 

Throughout  the  night  Hunter  heard  trains  moving,  drums 
beating,  and  constant  cheering,  which  indicated  that  Lynch- 
burg had  been  succored ;  but  he  still  felt  confident  of  tak- 


GENERAL  HUNTER'S  LYNCHBURG  CAMPAIGN.        37 

ing  it,  provided  this  succor  was  not  a  corps  from  Bich- 
mond.  The  next  morning  he  drove  in  the  enemy's  skir- 
mishers to  the  toll-gate  on  the  Bedford  pike,  two  miles 
from  the  town,  and  vigorously  demonstrated  with  infantry, 
cavalry,  and  artillery  against  the  strong  works — redoubts 
protected  by  abatis.  During  the  afternoon  Hunter  attacked 
in  force,  bringing  into  action  his  two  divisions  of  in- 
fantry and  his  artillery  in  the  centre,  on  and  near  the  Bed- 
ford turnpike,  Duffle  along  the  Forest  road  on  the  left,  and 
a  part  of  Averell  along  the  Campbell  road  on  the  right. 
Early's  infantry  sallied  from  their  works  on  the  Bedford 
road  to  meet  this  attack,  but  were  gallantly  driven  back  by 
Sullivan,  aided  by  Crook,  and  the  One  Hundred  and  Six- 
teenth Ohio  even  planted  its  colors  on  Early's  breastworks. 
The  Union  losses  were  about  two  hundred,  and  the  Confed- 
erate must  have  been  severe.  Assured  now  from  many 
sources  that  Early's  corps  had  arrived,  and  that  Lynchburg 
could  not  be  carried,  Hunter  withdrew  at  night  along  the 
turnpike  toward  Liberty,  bivouacking  seven  miles  east  of 
this  town,  and  thence  the  following  day,  July  19th,  march- 
ing on  Buford's  Gap. 

When  Early  discovered  that  Hunter  had  disappeared,  he 
put  all  his  forces  in  pursuit,  Elzey  receiving  the  command 
of  Breckenridge's  troops  during  the  latter's  illness,  while 
Bansom,  having  arrived  from  Bichmond,  assumed  general 
charge  of  the  cavalry.  By  hard  marching  Early's  advance, 
at  4  p.m.,  came  up  with  Hunter's  rear  guard,  under  Averell, 
and  drove  it  through  Liberty  after  an  engagement  of  two 
hours.  Averell's  loss  was  122  men,  chiefly  in  Schoon- 
maker's  brigade. 

Now  the  infelicity  of  General  Hunter's  position  became 
manifest.  With  the  Charlottesville  and  Lynchburg  Bail- 
road  repaired,  and  in  the  enemy's  possession,  he  could  not 


38  THE  SHENANDOAH  VALLEY. 

well  return  by  the  Peaks  of  Otter  to  Lexington  and  Staun- 
ton, for  Early,  sending  a  part  of  his  forces  by  rail,  might 
enter  Rockfish  Gap  in  season  to  plant  himself  on  his  oppo- 
nent's line  of  retreat  and  supply,  or  to  attack  him  in  flank. 
Hunter  could  perhaps  have  fought  his  way  through,  but  he 
no  longer  had  ammunition  for  a  pitched  battle,  or  series  of 
battles,  against  a  force  like  Early's.  His  rations,  too,  were 
nearly  gone,  and  he  was  200  miles  from  his  base.  He  re- 
solved to  retreat,  not  by  his  Shenandoah  line,  but  through 
Buford's  Gap  to  Charleston,  in  the  Kanawha  Valley — a  route 
which  would  be  in  great  part  unmolested,  while  Crook  had 
left  arnple  supplies  under  guard  at  Meadow  Bluff,  and  the 
question  of  rations  was  imperative.1 

At  midnight  the  retreat  was  resumed,  and  Buford's  Gap 
was  reached  the  morning  of  the  20th.  Duffie,  who  had  gone 
forward  to  secure  this  pass,  employed  his  whole  force  in  de- 
stroying the  railroad.  Thence  the  march  was  continued 
through  Bonsack's  Station,  on  the  Tennessee  Railroad,  to 
Salem  ;  and  it  is  worthy  of  note  that,  on  the  way,  as  if  this 
were  still  a  destroying  expedition  instead  of  a  retreat,  all 
bridges,  water-tanks,  and  railroad  stations  were  wrecked,  and 
the  enemy  was  repulsed  wherever  he  attacked.  Even  the 
19th,  the  day  when  Hunter  withdrew  from  Lynchburg,  he 
had  actually  issued  orders  to  Averell  to  break  the  Rich- 
mond and  Danville  Railroad  where  it  crosses  the  Staunton 
River,  far  south  of  Lynchburg,  and  to  return  to  "rejoin  the 

1  At  Sweet  Springs  there  was  a  possibility  of  an  intermediate  route,  nearer  the 
Shenandoah  Valley,  but,  as  General  Hunter's  report  says,  it  was  rejected  for 
sound  reasons  :  "  From  this  point  it  was  suggested  that  we  should  move  north- 
ward by  the  Warm  Springs  and  the  Valley  of  the  South  Branch  of  the  Potomac,  a 
route  lying  west  of  and  running  parallel  to  the  Valley  of  the  Shenandoah.  By 
this  route  the  army  would  have  reached  the  Baltimore  and  Ohio  Railroad  at 
New  Creek  and  Cumberland.  It  was  objected  that  by  this  road  the  troops  would 
find  it  impossible  to  collect  necessary  supplies  and  run  risks  of  being  cut  off  by 
the  enemy  coming  in  by  way  of  Staunton  and  Harrisonburg." 


GENERAL  HUNTER'S  LYNCHBURG  CAMPAIGN.        39 

•j column  moving  in  the  direction  of  Lewisburg."  The  next 
day,  the  20th,  General  Sullivan  was  directed,  as  soon  as  his 
men  were  "somewhat  rested,"  to  "  turn  out  as  many  of  them 
as  possible  to  tear  up  the  railroad  and  destroy  as  much  of  it 
as  possible ;  also,  the  telegraph  line."  Such  orders  indicate 
that  while  at  Washington  Hunter's  westward  withdrawal 
was  soon  after  viewed  simply  as  an  escape,  it  was  for  him  a 
feasible  method  of  completing  a  successful  expedition. 

Salem  was  reached  the  21st.  That  morning  Early's  advance 
was  repulsed  by  Crook  and  Averell,  holding  Buford's  Gap 
in  the  rear.  The  trains  and  reserve  artillery  continued  along 
the  New  Castle  road,  but  through  inadvertence  the  proper 
guard  did  not  go  with  them,  so  that  McCausland,  dashing 
in  on  the  guns,  rapidly  carried  off  or  shot  the  horses,  and 
began  to  destroy  the  caissons  and  limbers.  At  once,  troops 
hastened  up  from  the  rear*,  and  drove  him  away  with  a  loss 
of  about  thirty  men  ;  but  he  made  off  with  three  guns, 
and  five  others  were  abandoned  for  want  of  horses  to  drag 
them,  while  the  wrecked  caissons  and  limbers  were  also, 
of  course,  left  behind.  A  sharp  repulse  of  the  enemy's  cavalry 
the  following  morning  ended  the  pursuit ;  for  Early,  having 
no  mind  to  be  drawn  into  the  Kanawha  Valley  on  a  wild- 
goose  chase,  through  a  desolate  and  waterless  region,  re- 
turned to  Lynchburg. 

Still  the  retreat  was  continued  through  New  Castle  with 
the  same  headlong  speed,  not  through  fear  of  the  enemy, 
but  through  the  necessity  of  reaching  supplies.  During 
the  week  that  elapsed  before  these  were  obtained,  the 
troops  had  no  hard  bread,  and  only  one  issue  of  six  ounces 
of  flour  per  man.  But  there  was  beef  on  the  hoof,  the  cattle 
being  driven  by  day,  and  eaten  the  same  night.  Many 
horses  and  mules  died  for  want  of  fodder  and  rest,  and  not 
a  few  wagons  were  burned  for  lack  of  animals  to  draw  them. 


40  THE  SHENANDOAH  VALLEY. 

The  night  of  June  24th,  having  passed  Sweet  Springs,  the 
column  reached  White  Sulphur  Springs,  and  there  had  deli- 
cious water  and  a  good  rest.  But  suitable  food  was  still 
wanting,  and  the  army  pressed  on  to  Meadow  Bluff.  Here 
the  supplies  were  expected ;  but  the  officer  in  charge  of 
them,  with  400  men,  being  alarmed  at  guerilla  demonstra- 
tions, had  fallen  back  with  all  his  stores  to  Gauley  Bridge. 
At  last,  the  27th,  a  train  with  seventy  thousand  rations  of 
hard-tack,  sugar,  coffee,  and  bacon  reached  the  hungry 
troops,  a  day's  march  short  of  Gauley  Bridge,  and  the  suf- 
ferings of  the  retreat  were  over. 

Here  a  brief  account  may  properly  be  given  of  a  move- 
ment made  by  Grant  to  co-operate  with  Hunter :  for  the 
reader  will  have  surmised  that  since  Lee,  in  his  strait  for 
troops,  found  a  corps  and  a  division  of  infantry  to  spare 
for  checking  this  officer,  the  Lieutenant-General  may  have 
taken  some  steps  to  aid  him  in  his  important  enterjxrise.  In 
his  despatch  to  Halleck,  of  May  25th,  from  Jericho  Ford, 
Grant  used  the  following  language:  "If  Hunter  can  possi- 
bly get  to  Charlottesville  and  Lynchburg,  he  should  do  so, 
living  on  the  country.  The  railroads  and  canals  should  be 
destroyed  beyond  possibility  of  repairs  for  weeks.  Com- 
pleting this,  he  could  find  his  way  back  to  his  original  base, 
or  from  about  Gordonsville  join  this  army."  While  Hun- 
ter was  moving  to  Staunton,  Grant  directed  Major- General 
P.  H.  Sheridan,  commanding  the  cavalry  of  the  Army  of 
the  Potomac,  to  proceed  with  two  divisions  to  Charlottes- 
ville, destroy  the  railroad,  and  thence  accompany  Hun- 
ter's command,  if  found  there,  to  the  Army  of  the  Poto- 
mac. Crossing  the  Pamunkey,  June  7th,  with  Torbert's  and 
Gregg's  divisions,  General  Sheridan  marched  by  Aylett's, 
Dunkirk,  Polecat  Station,  Childsburg,  New  Market,  and  An- 


GENERAL  HUNTER'S  LYNCHBURG  CAMPAIGN.        41 

drews's  Tavern,  and,  after  four  days,  reached  the  Virginia 
Central  Eailroad  at  Trevillian  Station  the  morning  of  June 
11th.  He  found  that  the  enemy's  cavalry  had  stolen  around 
in  his  front,  and  had  constructed  breastworks  in  dense  tim-] 
ber  at  Trevillian,  anticipating  that  he  would  strike  that 
point.  In  a  brilliant  and  severe  engagement,  Sheridan 
drove  the  enemy's  cavalry,  consisting  of  Fitz  Lee's  and 
Hampton's  divisions,  back  to  and  beyond  the  station,  where 
he  camped.  The  next  day,  the  12th,  after  breaking  the  rail- 
road back  to  Louisa  Court  House,  he  made  a  vigorous  effort, 
using  both  Torbert's  division  and  one  brigade  of  Gregg's,  to 
move  toward  Gordonsville  ;  but  he  found  the  enemy  there 
in  too  great  force.  He  had  hoped  and  intended  to  reach  the 
Orange  and  Alexandria  Railroad  at  Cobham's  Station,  and 
to  break  it  in  a  march  toward  Charlottesville  ;  but  this  plan 
had  to  be  given  up,  while  to  reach  Gordonsville  had  become 
apparently  no  less  difficult.  In  his  two  days'  engagements, 
he  had  lost  735  men  in  killed,  wounded,  and  captured,  but 
had  severely  retaliated  on  the  enemy,  bringing  off  377  pris- 
oners. It  seemed  improbable  that  Hunter  could  be  any- 
where around  Gordonsville,  when  such  a  force  of  the  enemy 
was  left  free  at  Trevillian  to  oppose  Sheridan ;  and  captured 
prisoners  reported  that  Hunter  had  not,  up  to  that  time, 
been  near  Charlottesville.  Sheridan  skilfully  and  rapidly 
withdrew  under  cover  of  the  night,  and  a  brief  pursuit  by 
the  enemy  was  easily  repulsed  by  General  Davies.  A  field 
telegram  of  June  16th,  from  General  E.  E.  Lee's  headquar- 
ters at  Drewry's  Bluff  to  Hampton  at  Polecat  Station,  shows 
that  the  Confederate  general  made  an  unsuccessful  effort  to 
cut  off  Sheridan's  withdrawal,  by  means  of  the  cavalry  forces 
which  he  had  retained  on  both  sides  of  the  Chickahominy 
when  despatching  Hampton  to  foil  the  attack  on  Gordons- 
ville and  Charlottesville :  "  Our  cavalry  north  and  south  of 


42  THE  SHENANDOAH   VALLEY. 

Chickahoniiny  have  been  advised  of  movements  by  bearer 
of  despatches ;  also  to  endeavor  to  ascertain  movements  of 
Sheridan,  and  to  unite  with  you  when  practicable  to  crush 
him."  But  Sheridan  succeeded  in  carrying  his  command 
safely  through  to  White  House.  His  subsequent  adventures 
at  that  point  do  not  come  within  the  scope  of  the  present 
volume. 

General  Halleck  had  sent  word  to  Hunter,  June  12th, 
"  that  General  Grant  is  about  to  move  his  army  to  the  James 
Eiver,  at  or  near  City  Point,  and  that  he  will  continue  to 
hold  the  bridge  across  the  Pamunkey,  at  the  White  House, 
to  facilitate  the  junction  of  yourself  and  General  Sheridan 
with  the  Army  of  the  Potomac ; "  but  this  despatch  doubt- 
less reached  Hunter  only  on  his  return  from  Lynchburg. 
Several  days  earlier,  June  6th,  Grant  had  written  Hunter  the 
following  letter,  to  be  delivered  by  Sheridan  : 

General  Sheridan  leaves  to-morrow  morning  with  instructions  to  pro- 
ceed to  Charlottesville,  Va.,  and  to  commence  there  the  destruction  of 
the  Virginia  Central  Railroad,  destroying  this  way  as  much  as  possi- 
bls.  The  complete  destruction  of  this  road  and  of  the  canal  on  James 
River  is  of  great  importance  to  us.  According  to  the  instructions  I 
sent  General  Halleck  for  your  guidance,  you  were  to  proceed  to  Lynch- 
burg for  a  single  day.  But  that  point  is  of  so  much  importance  to 
the  enemy,  that  in  attempting  to  get  it,  such  resistance  may  be  met 
as  to  defeat  your  getting  on  to  the  road  or  canal  at  all.  I  see,  in  look- 
ing over  my  letter  to  General  Halleck  on  the  subject  of  your  instruc- 
tions, that  it  rather  indicates  that  your  route  should  be  from  Staunton 
via  Charlottesville.  If  you  have  so  understood  it,  you  will  be  doing 
just  what  I  want.  The  direction  I  would  now  give  is,  that  if  this  letter 
reaches  you  in  the  Valley  between  Staunton  and  Lynchburg,  you  im- 
mediately turn  east  by  the  most  practicable  road  until  you  strike  the 
Lynchburg  branch  of  the  Virginia  Central  road.  From  there  move 
eastward  along  the  line  of  the  road,  destroying  it  completely  and  thor- 
oughly until  you  join  General  Sheridan.  After  the  work  laid  out  for 
General  Sheridan  and  yourself  is  thoroughly  done,  proceed  to  join  the 


GENERAL  HUNTER'S  LYNCHBURG  CAMPAIGN.   43 

Army  of  the  Potomac  by  the  route  laid  out  in  General  Sheridan's  in- 
structions. If  any  portion  of  your  force,  especially  of  your  cavalry,  is 
needed  back  in  your  department,  you  are  authorized  to  send  it  back. 
If  on  receipt  of  this  you  should  be  near  to  Lynchburg,  and  deem  it  prac- 
ticable to  reach  that  point,  you  will  exercise  your  judgment  about  going 
there.  If  you  should  be  on  the  railroad  between  Charlottesville  and 
Lynchburg,  it  may  be  practicable  to  detach  a  cavalry  force  to  destroy 
the  canal.     Lose  no  opportunity  to  destroy  the  canal. 

This  letter  of  course  did  not  reach  Hunter.  The  19th, 
Secretary  Stanton  wrote  to  Stahel  as  follows :  "  General 
Sheridan,  who  was  sent  by  General  Grant  to  open  commu- 
nication with  General  Hunter,  by  way  of  Charlottesville,  has 
just  returned  to  York  River  without  effecting  his  object. 
It  is  therefore  very  probable  that  General  Hunter  will  be 
compelled  to  fall  back  into  West  Virginia."  A  despatch  of 
Grant  to  Meade,  at  City  Point,  June  21st,  is  also  noteworthy. 
"The  only  word  I  would  send  Hunter,"  he  said,  "would  be 
verbal,  and  simply  to  let  him  know  where  we  are,  and  tell 
him  to  save  his  army  in  the  way  he  thinks  best,  either  by 
getting  back  into  his  own  department  or  by  joining  us.  If 
we  had  the  enemy  driven  north  of  the  Appomattox,  I  think 
he  would  have  no  difficulty  in  joining  us  by  taking  a  wide 
sweep  south." 

Thus  two  campaigns  in  the  Shenandoah  Valley,  Sigel's 
and  -Hunter's,  had  ended.  Grant's  plan  in  regard  to  them 
has  been  pronounced  faulty,  on  the  ground  that  it  unduly 
scattered  his  forces,  rendering  them  liable  to  be  beaten  in 
detail.  This  criticism  seems  strained,  since  when  he  crossed 
the  Eapidan  Grant  had  provided  for  his  main  army  all  the 
troops  it  needed  at  that  time,  and  all  that  could  be  handled 
to  advantage.  The  alternative  instruction  to  Hunter  to  join 
the  Army  of  the  Potomac  from  Gordonsville,  after  a  specific 


44:  THE  SHENANDOAH  VALLEY. 

work,  shows  that  this  outlying  force  was  looked  on  as  a 
reserve,  to  be  used  for  watching  a  dangerous  flank  and  for 
menacing  the  enemy's  communications  till  needed  in  the 
main  army.  Lee,  on  his  part,  so  highly  appreciated  the 
importance  of  the  Valley,  that  he  held  it  at  first  with  a 
large  force.  Even  the  temporary  detention  of  the  division 
of  Breckenridge  from  him  had  made  easier  the  first  stage 
of  Grant's  Virginia  task.  Hunter's  movement  in  turn  forced 
Lee  to  strip  his  Richmond  intrenchments  to  avoid  a  fatal 
disaster  at  Lynchburg. 

General  Hunter  had  relieved  his  command  with  address 
from  a  critical  position,  and  his  campaign  throughout  had 
been  one  of  exceptional  audacity  and  vigor,  even  though  the 
great  effort  made  by  Lee  checked  its  final  stage.  That 
there  was  no  precise  understanding  between  Grant  and 
Hunter  as  to  the  latter's  course  has  been  made  apparent ; 
but  as  the  Lieutenant-General  had  expressly  made  it  op- 
tional with  Hunter  in  all  the  despatches  that  ever  reached 
him,  to  end  his  campaign  either  by  joining  the  Army  of  the 
Potomac  or  by  returning  to  his  own  department,  and  as  the 
results  achieved  surpassed  any  that  Grant  had  expected, 
since  he  had  doubted  whether  this  expedition  could  remain 
at  Lynchburg,  "  for  a  single  day,"  or  be  able  to  reach  the 
Tennessee  Eailroad  at  all,  he  lauded  his  subordinate's  en- 
ergy. 

Hunter's  own  view  of  his  campaign  was  given  in  a  despatch 
from  Loup  Creek,  near  Gauley  Bridge,  June  28th,  in  which 
he  declared  that  the  expedition  had  been  "  extremely  success- 
ful, inflicting'  great  injury  upon  the  enemy,"  going  forward 
until  short  of  ammunition,  and  until  the  hostile  army  had 
been  so  strongly  reinforced  that  he  could  no  longer  collect 
subsistence.  "  The  command,"  he  added,  "  is  in  excellent 
heart  and  health."    Mr.   Stanton,  in  replying,  referred  to 


GENERAL  HUNTER'S  LYNCHBURG  CAMPAIGN.        45 

"  the  great  satisfaction  your  operations  have  given."  Jef- 
ferson Davis  told  the  people  of  Georgia,  after  the  fall  of 
Atlanta,  that  "  an  audacious  movement  of  the  enemy  up  to 
the  very  walls  of  Lynchburg  had  rendered  it  necessary  that 
the  Government  should  send  a  formidable  body  of  troops  to 
cover  that  vital  point,  which  had  otherwise  been  intended 
for  the  relief  of  Atlanta."  Colonel  Strother,  General  Hun- 
ter's chief  of  staff,  in  his  report  of  the  expedition,  sets  forth 
these  results :  "  About  fifty  miles  of  the  Virginia  Central 
Railroad  had  been  effectually  destroyed ;  the  Virginia  and 
Tennessee  road  had  been  destroyed  to  some  extent  for  the 
same  distance ;  an  incredible  amount  of  public  property 
had  been  burned,  including  canal-boats  and  railroad  trains 
loaded  with  ordnance  and  commissary  stores,  numerous  ex- 
tensive iron  works,  manufactories  of  saltpetre,  musket-stocks, 
shoes,  saddles  and  artillery-harness,  woollen  cloths,  and 
grain  mills.  About  three  thousand  muskets  and  twenty 
pieces  of  cannon,  with  quantities  of  shells  and  gunpowder, 
fell  into  our  hands,  while  immense  quantities  of  provisions, 
cattle,  and  horses  were  captured  and  used  by  the  army." 
Colonel  Strother  also  claims  the  infliction  of  a  loss  of  2,000 
killed  and  wounded  on  the  enemy,  besides  the  taking  of 
2,000  prisoners,  with  a  total  loss  of  only  1,500  men  and  eight 
guns  in  Hunter's  command. 

Nevertheless,  it  turned  out  that  Hunter's  success  elimin- 
ated the  defensive  factor  from  the  Valley  more  effectually 
than  his  predecessor's  failure. 


CHAPTER  IV. 

EARLY  MENACES   WASHINGTON. 

When  Lee  saw  that  Hunter's  erratic  line  of  retreat  had 
uncovered  the  Shenandoah  Valley,  he  turned  this  advantage 
to  account  by  a  manoeuvre  which  had  been  serviceable  to 
him  in  former  campaigns,  and  for  the  repetition  of  which 
unexpected  facilities  were  now  furnished.  Instead  of  recall- 
ing Early  and  Breckenridge  to  his  side,  he  despatched 
them  into  Maryland,  correctly  assuming  that  this  stroke,  by 
terrifying  Washington,  would  cause  troops  to  be  sent  to  its 
protection  from  the  Army  of  the  Potomac,  and  so  relieve  his 
own  stress. 

The  scheme  of  invading  the  North  Avas  made  a  part  of 
Early's  instructions  when  he  marched  to  relieve  Lynchburg; 
for  since  it  was  necessary  to  detach  troops  to  save  that  city 
from  capture,  Lee  determined  to  send  a  force  large  enough 
to  exepute  a  decisive  counter-stroke ;  but  as  Hunter,  instead 
of  being  defeated,  had  retreated  into  the  Kanawha  Valley, 
Lee  desired  his  subordinate,  under  the  changed  circum- 
stances, to  judge  whether  to  carry  out  the  original  project 
or  to  abandon  it ;  and  Early's  adventurous  temperament  led 
him  to  choose  the  former  course. 

The  army  assembled  for  the  march  into  Maryland  con- 
sisted of  the  four  infantry  divisions  of  Eodes,  Gordon, 
Ramseur,  and  Echols ;  Eansom's  division  of  cavalry,  in- 
cluding the  brigades  of  Bradley  T.  Johnson  (formerly  W. 


EARLY  MENACES  WASHINGTON.         47 

E.  Jones's),  Imboden,  W.  L.  Jackson,  and  McCausland,  for 
the  brigade  of  Vaughan  served  as  infantry  till  its  return 
from  the  expedition,  when  it  was  remounted;  and  Long's 
three  battalions  of  artillery,  comprising  the  batteries  of 
Nelson,  King,  Braxton,  and  McLaughlin,  whose  guns  num- 
bered about  forty,  many  being  12-pounder  Napoleons.  The 
cavalry  had  additional  pieces.  The  division  ascribed  to 
Echols  was  Breckenridge's  old  command,  temporarily  given 
to  Elzey  at  Lynchburg,  and  afterward,  at  Staunton,  tempo- 
rarily to  Vaughan ;  but  Echols  received  it  in  Maryland. 
Breckenridge  was  assigned  something  resembling  a  corps 
command,  having  under  him  the  two  divisions  of  Gordon 
and  Echols ;  while  the  other  two  infantry  divisions  and  the 
cavalry  reported  directly  to  Early.  The  army  numbered 
apparently  about  17,000  officers  and  men.1 

The  27th  of  June  Early's  army  arrived  at  Staunton,  where 
a  brief  halt  was  made  to  fill  his  wagons  with  provisions 
brought  through  Rockfish  Gap,  and  to  reduce  his  transpor- 
tation, even  regimental  officers  being  obliged  to  carry  with 
them  all  the  underclothing  they  might  need.  The  next 
day  the  Confederate  commander  moved  down  the  pike, 
sending  Imboden  ahead  with  his  brigade  and  a  battery 
through  Brock's  Gap,  in  the  North  Mountain,  to  destroy  the 
railroad  bridges  west  of  Martinsburg.  Early  reached  Win- 
chester the  2d  of  July,  there  receiving  instructions  from  Lee 
to  remain  in  the  Lower  Valley  until  fully  prepared  to  cross 
the  Potomac,  and  meanwhile  to  wreck  the  Baltimore  and 
Ohio  road  and  the  canal. 

McCausland  was  detached  to  burn  the  railroad  bridge  at 


1  See  Appendix.  Partisan  cavalry  forces  were  also  active  coadjutors  of  Early. 
June  29th,  a  force  of  about  500  cavalry  and  two  gnns  plundered  and  ravaged  at 
Duffield's,  five  miles  northwest  of  Harper's  Ferry,  burning  the  storehouses  and 
capturing  25  men. 


48  THE  SHENANDOAH  VALLEY. 

Back  Creek,  and,  after  accomplishing  this,  and  capturing 
the  small  guard  at  North  Mountain  Station,  he  proceeded  to 
Hainesville,  between  Martinsburg  and  Williamsport.  At 
Martinsburg,  an  important  city  and  depot  of  supplies,  Sigel 
had  established  himself  when  Hunter  moved  up  the  Valley 
in  May ;  while  Brigadier-General  Max  "Weber  commanded  at 
Harper's  Ferry.  The  morning  of  July  3d,  Bradley  Johnson 
was  sent  forward  with  directions  to  proceed  through  Smith- 
field  and  Leetown,  to  cross  the  railroad  at  Kearneysville, 
east  of  Martinsburg,  and,  passing  north  of  the  town,  to  unite 
with  McCausland  at  Hainesville,  so  as  to  cut  off  Sigel's  re- 
treat. Early  followed  close  upon  Johnson,  with  Bodes's  and 
Bamseur's  divisions,  while  Breckenridge  moved  directly  to 
Martinsburg  on  the  pike,  driving  before  him  Stahel,  who 
held  an  outpost  on  the  road  thither  at  Darksville.  But  Sigel, 
the  moment  his  pickets  warned  him  of  Early's  approach,  had 
begun  sending  off  the  Government  stores,  telegraphing  for 
empty  trains.  Much  of  this  property  was  thus  saved,  and 
the  remainder  having  been  mostly  destroyed,  Sigel  retreated 
to  Shepherdstown ;  while  Johnson,  arriving  at  Leetown  the 
same  morning,  was  checked  by  Colonel  Mulligan,  and  driven 
back,  after  severe  fighting,  upon  the  infantry  of  Bodes  and 
Bamseur.  Mulligan  then  slowly  withdrew,  having  foiled 
Early's  project  of  capturing  Sigel's  forces,  as  Ewell  had 
captured  Milroy's,  with  these  same  troops,  near  Winchester, 
the  year  before.  Sigel,  joined  by  his  small  garrisons  of 
Leetown  and  Darksville,  withdrew  that  night,  July  3d, 
across  the  Potomac  at  Shepherdstown,  bringing  off  his  Lee- 
town wounded,  and  established  his  command  on  Maryland 
Heights.  There  he  had  a  force  of  two  veteran  regiments, 
four  of  Ohio  militia,  2,500  dismounted  cavalry,  two  battalions 
of  heavy  artillery,  and  twenty-six  field  guns ;  while  hard  by, 
in  Pleasant  Valley,  were  Stahel's  cavalry,  from  1,000  to  1,500 


EARLY  MENACES  WASHINGTON.         49 

strong,  two  companies  of  artillery  acting  as  infantry,  and 
four  guns.  Breckenridge,  after  burning  the  bridges  at  Mar- 
tinsburg  and  on  the  Opequon,  broke  the  railroad  along  to 
Duffield's,  five  miles  from  Harper's  Ferry,  and  then  followed 
Sigel  across  the  river,  Gordon  during  the  two  subsequent 
days  moving  down  the  Antietam,  driving  back  Stahel,  and 
confining  Sigel  within  the  works  on  Maryland  Heights. 

The  4th  of  July,  therefore,  found  Early  master  of  the  Val- 
ley ;  yet  his  plan  had  not  wholly  succeeded,  for  he  had 
neither  captured  Sigel  nor  driven  him  northward.  In  mov- 
ing to  Maryland  Heights,  this  officer  had  gone  precisely 
where  Early  did  not  want  him  to  be,  since  the  Confederate 
general  had  purposed  to  seize  Harper's  Ferry,  and  to  make 
that  his  point  of  departure  for  Washington.  When,  with 
Rodes  and  Eamseur,  he  pressed  Weber  from  Bolivar  back 
to  the  bank  of  the  river,  this  officer  was  protected  by  the 
heavy  guns  on  the  Heights,  to  which  point  he  crossed  at 
night,  taking  up  the  pontoon  bridge.  Mr.  Garrett,  the  pre- 
sident of  the  railroad  company,  had  urged  Weber  to  exert 
himself  to  save  the  trestle  bridge,1  but  Weber  sought  rather 
to  destroy  it. 

Early  found  himself  unable  to  occupy  Harper's  Ferry,  save 

1  Mr.  Garrett,  in  informing  Secretary  Stanton  and  General  Halleck  that  Weber 
had  reported  to  him  that  he  must  retreat  to  the  Heights,  sternly  reminded  them 
that  "  a  want  of  firmness  is  to  be  found  at  Harper's  Ferry.  Your  further  commu- 
nication to  the  commandant  may  aid  in  its  [the  railroad's]  preservation."  Hal- 
leck quickly  told  Weber  to  defend  his  works,  •'  and  the  first  man  who  proposes  a 
surrender,  or  retreats,  should  be  hung."  Garrett,  on  getting  a  request  from 
Weber  for  empty  cars,  asked  "  whether  this  meant  evacuation,"  but  directed 
Weber's  attention  to  "  fully  covering  and  protecting  from  the  Maryland  Heights.'' 
in  case  he  must  abandon  Harper's  Ferry,  "  the  trestle-work  from  the  bridge  a 
mile  west.  With  Sigel's  large  force,"  he  added,  "  I  judge  the  enemy  can  be 
driven  entirely  from  the  road."  Weber,  however,  thought  it  more  important  to 
prevent  the  enemy's  use  of  the  bridge,  and  so  destroyed  the  two  western  spans, 
leaving  the  rest  intact.  Four  train*  loaded  with  Government  supplies  were  saved 
from  Harper's  Ferry,  and  then  Weber,  having  on'y  4U0  men  in  his  command, 
and  not  knowing  where  Sigel  was,  retreated  to  the  Heights. 

XI— 3 


50  THE  SHENANDOAH  VALLEY. 

by  skirmishers,  so  thoroughly  was  it  commanded  by  Sigel's 
artillery  and  sharpshooters.  Accordingly,  after  demonstrat- 
ing there  with  Eodes  and  Eamseur  through  the  5th,  he 
crossed  the  Potomac  at  Shepherdstown.  Breckenridge  contin- 
ued to  demonstrate  against  Maryland  Heights,  cannonading 
going  on  through  the  night  of  July  6th  and  sharp  fighting 
the  next  day.  Finding  his  lines  shelled  for  a  long  distance 
by  Sigel's  batteries,  which  prevented  his  own  from  getting 
into  position,  Early  at  length  drew  off  across  South  Moun- 
tain toward  Frederick.  A  brigade  left  at  Harper's  Ferry 
joined  him,  after  burning  such  captured  stores  as  the  Con- 
federate wagons  had  not  taken  away.  Working  parties  had 
meanwhile  been  employed  in  destroying  the  aqueduct  of  the 
Chesapeake  and  Ohio  Canal  over  the  Antietam,  and  the  locks 
and  boats  there.  Boonsboro  had  been  occupied  by  Johnson, 
while,  July  6th,  McCausland  entered  Hagerstown  and  levied 
a  requisition  of  $>20,000 ;  here  much  hay  and  grain  were 
burned.  As  for  Imboden,  the  3d  of  July  he  had  partly  de- 
stroyed the  railroad  bridge  that  crosses  the  South  Branch 
of  the  Potomac,  but  was  checked  in  some  of  his  purposes  by 
the  guard  in  the  block-house  there  ;  he  had  also  had  only 
partial  success  with  the  Patterson's  Creek  bridge.  Big 
Cacapon  had  been  unsuccessfully  attacked,  July  6th,  the 
bridge  being  saved ;  the  station-houses  on  St.  John's  Bun 
were  burned.  Imboden  had  been  ill,  and  his  brigade,  under 
Colonel  Smith,  now  rejoined  Early. 

"When  it  became  known  that  a  Confederate  army  was  in 
Maryland,  a  natural  terror  seized  on  the  farmers.  Men, 
women,  and  children,  accompanied  by  droves  of  cattle  and 
by  wagons  laden  with  household  goods,  or  carrying  their 
portable  property  on  their  backs,  thronged  the  roads  to  the 
east  and  to  the  north.  Early  had  issued  orders  forbidding 
pillage,  and  reminding  his  army  that  "they  are  engaged  in 


EARLY  MENACES  WASHINGTON.         51 

no  marauding  expedition  and  are  not  making  war  upon  the 
defenceless  and  unresisting.  Such  supplies  as  are  needed  for 
the  army  will  be  taken  by  or  under  the  direction  of  the 
chiefs  of  the  various  departments,  and  payment  made  there- 
for, or  certificate  given,  as  the  owner  may  prefer ;  and  any 
officer  or  man  found  committing  depredations  of  any  sort  will 
be  at  once  arrested  and  summarily  punished."  But  such 
orders  are  apt,  in  military  expeditions,  to  be  either  forgotten 
by  some  troops,  or  taken  with  a  liberal  allowance,  so  that  even 
had  Early's  commands  been  known  to  the  people  of  Mary- 
land they  would  scarcely  have  allayed  apprehension.  Hence 
the  fugitives  encumbered  themselves  with  articles  which  the 
most  rapacious  trooper  might  have  been  puzzled  to  use. 

Startled  by  these  events,  President  Lincoln  called  on  the 
Governors  of  Pennsylvania,  New  York,  and  Massachusetts  for 
hundred-day  volunteers,  to  aid  in  repelling  the  invaders,  and 
Hunter  was  notified  to  move  back  to  the  Valley.  This  of- 
ficer was  already,  of  course,  on  the  way,  surmising  that  the 
enemy  would  seize  the  occasion  of  his  absence  to  march 
North.  Our  account  left  him  near  Gauley  Bridge.  There 
remaining  two  days  to  rest  his  troops,  he  had  moved  them, 
June  30  th,  to  Charleston.  Whatever  the  urgency,  neither 
men  nor  animals  were  fit  to  march,  and  transportation  by 
water  promised  not  only  to  save  time  but  to  rest  the  troops. 
Hunter  therefore  seized  all  available  light-draught  boats — 
for  the  low  water  in  the  rivers  made  others  useless — and  be- 
gan sending  his  troops  down  the  Kanawha  to  Point  Pleasant, 
and  thence  up  the  Ohio  to  Parkersburg.  Here  he  received 
despatches  from  the  War  Department  telling  him  of  Early's 
march,  and  urging  haste.  Unhappily,  owing  to  an  unusual 
drought,  the  shallowness  of  the  rivers  repeatedly  required 
the  men  to  disembark  at  shoals  and  march  around  them,  so 
that  the  boats  might  float  over,  and  often  resort  had  to  be 


52  THE   SHENANDOAH  VALLEY. 

made  to  smaller  boats.  Thus  the  delays  were  great.  From 
Parkersburg  the  Baltimore  and  Ohio  Railroad  took  the 
troops  to  New  Creek  and  Cumberland,  some  time  being  lost 
on  this  route  until  temporary  repairs  could  be  made  to  the 
bridge  at  Green  Spring,  broken  by  Early's  cavalry.     Hun- 


Westminster 


Purccllvllle  |ij*    0^    _^Sv 
,4/0.   Lees  burg/-' 


Silver  Springs/ 


WASHINGTON 
/ 

¥  / 


Early's  Maryland  Campaign. 

ter's  advance,  Sullivan's  division,  reached  Cumberland  July 
8  th,  concentrated  at  Cherry  Run  the  9th,  and  at  noon  of  the 
11th  had  marched  to  Martinsburg. 

Meanwhile  Early  continued  his  eastward  course  to  Fred- 
erick. The  morning  of  the  8th  Breckenridge  moved  through 
Fox's  Gap  and  Bamseur  through  Boonsboro,  both  camping 


EARLY  MENACES   WASHINGTON.  53 

near  Middletown ;  Rodes,  who  had  marched  by  Rohrers- 
ville,  entered  Crainpton's  GajD,  and  crossing  Catoctin  Greek 
camped  near  Jefferson.  Ransom  was  busy  with  the  Union 
cavalry  between  Middletown  and  Frederick  ;  and  McCaus- 
land  set  out  toward  Monocacy  to  cut  the  railroad  and  the 
wires. 

Thus  far  Early  had  met  little  resistance  since  leaving 
Lynchburg.  Urgent  appeals  were  made  to  General  Grant 
for  troops;  but  the  information  brought  him  from  his  own  front 
at  City  Point  was  at  first  remarkably  erroneous,  so  that  he 
could  not  know  the  real  danger.  Before  Early's  presence  in 
the  Valley  was  discovered,  Halleck  had  shrewdly  suggested 
to  Grant  that  it  "  would  be  good  policy  for  them  [the  Con- 
federates], while  Hunter's  army  is  on  the  Kanawha,  to  destroy 
the  Baltimore  and  Ohio  Railroad  and  make  a  raid  in  Mary- 
land and  Pennsylvania  :  Sigel  has  very  little  besides  militia 
at  Harper's  Ferry  and  on  the  railroad  ;  "  but  Grant  replied 
that  "  EwelPs  [Early's]  corps  has  returned  here."  Even  the 
night  of  July  3d,  when  Early  held  Martinsburg,  having 
fought  Sigel  that  day  at  Leetown,  Grant  wrote  that  "  Early's 
corps  is  now  here  ;  there  are  no  troops  that  can  now  be 
threatening  Hunter's  department,  except  the  remnant  of  the 
force  W.  E.  Jones  had,  and  possibly  Breckenridge."  Secre- 
tary Stanton  became  much  impressed  with  this  view,  and 
wrote  as  late  even  as  July  5th  to  Governor  Curtin  that  "  it 
seems  to  be  a  raiding  expedition  by  some  of  the  partisan 
robbers  that  infest  that  region."  The  truth  is  that  slender 
faith  was  reposed,  at  Washington,  in  the  military  perspi- 
cacity of  the  generals  collected  around  Harper's  Ferry, 
although  they  were  now  remarkably  accurate  in  their  re- 
ports. "  The  three  principal  officers  on  the  line  of  the  road," 
wrote  Halleck,  somewhat  cynically,  to  Grant,  "  are  Sigel, 
Stahel,  and  Max  Weber.   You  can  therefore  judge  what  prob- 


54  THE   SHENANDOAH   VALLEY. 

ability  there  is  of  a  good  defence  if  the  enemy  should  attack 
the  line  in  force." l 

By  the  5th  Grant,  convinced  of  Early's  presence  on  the 
Maryland  border,  offered  Halleck  an  army  corps  to  repel 
invasion.  Halleck  answered  that  Grant's  dismounted  cavalry 
might  be  sufficient ;  but  since  he  added  that  "  we  have 
almost  nothing  in  Baltimore  or  Washington  except  militia," 
Grant  decided  to  send  both  the  dismounted  cavalry  and  a 
division  of  infantry,  "  which  will  be  followed  by  the  balance 
of  the  corps,  if  necessary.  "We  want  now  to  crush  out  and 
destroy  any  force  the  enemy  dares  send  North.  Force  enough 
can  be  spared  from  here  to  do  it."  He  directed  General 
Meade  to  "  send  in  one  good  division,"  with  "  all  the  dis- 
mounted cavalry,"  and  Meade  sent  Ricketts's  of  the  Sixth 
Corps,  which  embarked  at  City  Point,  the  6th,  for  Harper's 
Ferry  by  way  of  Baltimore.  But  Grant  afterward  learned 
that  the  dismounted  cavalry  which  had  been  sent  were  odds 
and  ends,  the  larger  part  sick  or  otherwise  unfit  for  good 
service,  instead  of  organized  regiments,  as  he  had  intended ; 
and  this  mistake  proved  costly,  in  the  conduct  of  the 
month's  operations. 

Union  forces  from  other  quarters  were  gathering  in  Early's 
front.  Major-General  Lew  Wallace,  whose  headquarters 
were  in  Baltimore,  reinforcing  the  spare  men  of  his  garrison 
with  home  guards  and  hundred-day  militia,  moved  them 
forward,  under  Brigadier-General  E.  B.  Tyler,  to  Monocacy 
Junction  near  Frederick.  The  map  will  show  the  impor- 
tance of  this  position,  the  salient  of  the  triangle  on  whose 
base,  at  either  end,   equally  distant,   are  Washington  and 


1  "  Sigel  has  been  removed  from  Harper's  Ferry  and  Howe  sent  to  take  his  place 
till  Hunter  arrives.  Of  Couch,  Ord,  and  Gillmore  I  think  the  latter  the  best,  and 
have  sent  for  him  to-night.''  (Halleck  to  Grant,  July  Oth).  "  Won't  General 
Couch  do  well  to  command  until  Hunter  reaches  ?  "  (Grant  to  Halleck,  July  7th). 


EARLY  MENACES  WASHINGTON.  55 

Baltimore.  Frederick  itself  was  not  defensible,  the  line  of 
resistance  being  about  three  miles  south,  where  the  Balti- 
more and  Ohio  Railroad  crosses  the  Monocacy.  As  the 
stream  was  everywhere  fordable,  this  position  could  be 
easily  turned  on  either  flank.  Mosby,  a  few  days  before, 
had  dashed  across  the  Potomac  at  Point  of  Rocks,  with 
about  six  score  men,  there  plundering  the  stores,  and 
Lieutenant-Colonel  Clendenin,  Eighth  Illinois  Cavalry,  230 
strong,  had  been  sent  from  Washington  to  drive  him  off; 
this  force  AVallace  called  to  Monocacy.  It  was  still  doubt- 
ful whether  Early  was  aiming  at  Baltimore  or  at  Washing- 
ton, but  Wallace's  position  within  the  space  of  three  miles 
covered  the  turnpikes  from  Frederick  to  both  cities  and 
therewith  the  railroad. 

The  position  and  purposes  of  the  enemy  remaining 
hidden,  Wallace,  the  7th  of  July,  despatched  Clendenin  on 
a  reconnoissance  five  miles  west  of  Frederick,  toward  Mid- 
dletown.  There  this  officer  ran  against  B.  T.  Johnson's 
skirmishers,  including  the  First  Maryland,  mostly  armed 
with  the  Spencer  rifle,  and  though  his  two  light  guns  did 
good  execution  at  first,  when  the  full  brigade  came  up  he 
was  driven  back  to  Frederick,  whither  his  assailants  fol- 
lowed, yet  only  to  retreat  behind  the  mountains  at  nightfall,1 
when  Gilpin  came  up  and  attacked  them  with  his  regiment 
and  Alexander's  battery.  Apprised  by  Sigel,  the  next  day, 
that  the  enemy's  forces  had  quitted  the  neighborhood  of 
Maryland  Heights,  Wallace  concluded  that  they  must  be 
I  in  force  just  beyond  the  Catoctin  Mountains ;  and  having 

1  General  Wallace  was  at  first  inclined  to  attribute  to  this  action  a  greater  im- 
portance than  it  really  had.  "A  battle  now  taking  place  at  Frederick,"  he 
wrote  Colonel  Lawrence,  of  his  staff,  ,;  with  fair  chance  to  whip  the  enemy.  I 
shall  hold  the  bridge.  Inform  Mr.  Garrett  of  my  purpose  as  to  the  bridge  ;  "  and 
a  little  later,  to  the  same  officer,  thus :  "  Think  I  have  had  the  best  little  battle 
of  the  war.11 


56  THE  SHENANDOAH   VALLEY. 

also  heard  a  rumor  that  Breckenridge  had  moved  past  his 
left  flank  toward  Urbana,  which  is  south  of  Frederick  on 
the  Washington  pike,  he  sent  to  the  rear,  by  highway  and 
rail,  the  surplus  Government  stores,  and  moved  his  advance 
at  night  back  from  Frederick  to  Monocacy  Junction,  Clen- 
denin,  whose  cavalry  was  now  about  450  strong,  withdraw- 
ing from  the  Catoctins,  where  he  had  skirmished  all  day. 
At  dawn  Early  was  in  the  town,  levying  a  contribution  of 
$200,000,  which  was  paid,  and  supplying  himself  with  gar- 
ments, shoes,  bacon  and  flour.  Johnson's  brigade  and  a 
battery  were  sent  to  threaten  Baltimore,  and  to  cut  the  rail- 
roads running  thence  to  Washington,  Philadelphia,  and  Har- 
risburg,  with  instructions  also  to  release,  if  practicable,  the 
Confederate  prisoners  at  Point  Lookout.  With  his  main 
force  Early  girded  himself  to  dislodge  Wallace  from  his 
position  outside  the  town  on  the  left  bank  of  the  Monocacy. 
The  troops  originally  at  the  Union  general's  command 
consisted,  as  has  been  said,  of  companies  from  the  Balti- 
more garrison,  under  General  Tyler,  organized  as  the  first 
separate  brigade,  Eighth  Corps,  and  strengthened  by  hun- 
dred-days men  and  others.  Bat  during  the  evening  of  the 
7th,  Bicketts's  division  of  the  Sixth  Corps  began  to  arrive  at 
Baltimore  from  City  Point,  and  was  hurried  by  Halleck  to 
aid  Wallace.  This  officer  placed  Ricketts  on  his  left,  the 
main  point  of  attack,  covering  the  Washington  pike  and  its 
wooden  bridge,  while  the  miscellaneous  forces  of  Tyler  held 
the  right,  covering  the  railroad  and  the  Baltimore  pike, 
with  its  stone  pier  bridge.  Three  companies  of  Gilpin  held 
Cram's  ford,  above  the  bridges,  and  Clendenin  also  posted 
there  Captain  Leib's  mounted  infantry,  while  on  the  other 
flank  he  watched  the  lower  fords  and  occupied  the  Wash- 
ington pike.  Skirmishers  were  deployed  on  the  western 
bank.     To  oppose  Early's  powerful  artillery  Wallace   had 


EARLY   MENACES   WASHINGTON.  57 

only  one  24-iDounder  howitzer,  planted  near  the  block-house, 
one  mountain  howitzer,  and  six  3-inch  rifles.  Three  of 
these  were  given  to  Bicketts  and  three  to  Tyler. 

Early  moved  out  of  Frederick,  with  Bodes  on  the  left, 
along  the  Baltimore  pike,  and  Bamseur  in  the  centre,  on  the 
Washington  road,  driving  Wallace's  pickets  to  the  river, 
while  Gordon,  preceded  by  McCausland's  cavalry,  was  in- 
clined to  the  right  so  as  to  reach  the  fords  a  mile  below  the 
Union  left.  These  movements  were  covered  by  Long's  ar- 
tillery, consisting  of  the  batteries  of  Nelson,  Braxton,  King, 
and  McLaughlin,  which  crowned  the  heights  near  the  river, 
and  exchanged  shots  with  the  little  Union  battery  on  the 
opposite  bank.  It  need  hardly  be  said  that  Wallace,  with 
his  single  division  of  3,350  veterans  and  his  2,500  troops 
under  Tyler,  many  of  whom  had  never  been  in  action,  wTas 
greatly  inferior  to  Early.  Nevertheless,  the  Confederate 
advance  was  stubbornly  resisted.  Bodes  was  called  upon 
to  do  little  but  demonstrate,  not  even  driving  the  Union 
skirmishers  across  the  stream,  while  Gordon  and  the  cav- 
alry should  turn  the  left  under  Breckenridge's  direction. 
This  was  accomplished  about  noon,  after  the  morning  hours 
had  been  occupied  with  artillery  fire  and  skirmishing. 
McCausland,  dismounting  his  men,  forded  the  river  and 
advanced  against  the  works,  but  was  speedily  driven  back. 
Gordon,  crossing,  then  reinforced  the  cavalry.  Bicketts 
partly  changed  front  to  the  left  to  face  this  strong  column 
marching  up  the  river,  but  he  had  also  to  hold  firmly  by 
his  right,  lest  Bamseur  should  cross.  King's  battery  was  run 
through  the  river,  and  Nelson's  from  the  opposite  bank  was 
turned  on  Bicketts.  Wallace  sent  him  two  more  guns,  and 
burnt  the  wooden  bridge  and  block-house,  in  order  to  release 
the  forces  defending  them.  But  Bicketts  was  overwhelmed 
by  the  combined  infantry  and  artillery  fire,  and  Wallace  di- 
3* 


58  THE   SHENANDOAH   VALLEY. 

rectecl  him  to  withdraw  toward  the  Baltimore  pike,  after  a 
gallant  resistance,  prolonged  till  the  middle  of  the  after- 
noon. Tyler  had  meanwhile  held  on  to  his  stone  pier 
bridge  through  a  series  of  skirmishes,  Brown's  Ohio  troops 
being  posted  there,  on  the  Frederick  side  of  the  stream, 
with  Lieb's  horsemen,  and  its  retention  was  warmly  urged 
by  Wallace,  so  as  to  secure  an  orderly  retreat  on  the  Balti- 
more pike.  But  the  enemy,  pressing  up  from  the  south  on 
the  heels  of  Ricketts,  struck  the  road  before  the  bridge 
guard  could  all  get  away,  and  captured  several  hundred 
prisoners,  General  Tyler  and  his  staff  putting  spurs  to  their 
horses  barely  in  season  to  escape. 

Wallace  fell  back  on  the  Baltimore  turnpike,  while  Barn- 
seur  and  Bodes,  crossing  the  river,  made  a  show  of  pursuit. 
At  New  Market,  the  three  remaining  regiments  of  Bicketts's 
division  came  over  from  Monrovia,  where,  six  miles  from 
the  battle-field,  they  had  halted  several  hours  for  rations ; 
and  they  covered  the  retreat,  which  continued  but  four 
miles  farther.  Early,  too  intent  on  going  to  Washington  to 
think  much  about  Wallace,  drew  back  his  forces  at  sunset. 
Clendenin  had  been  cut  off  on  the  left,  by  Breckenridge's 
move,  and  was  forced  back  by  McCausland  to  Urbana, 
where  he  charged  his  pursuers  and  captured  a  flag.  Two 
companies  Avere  driven  toward  Washington ;  the  rest  reached 
Monrovia  and  Wallace's  rear. 

Wallace's  loss  in  this  battle  was  98  killed,  579  wounded, 
and  1,282  missing;  total,  1,959.  A  train  containing  a  part 
of  the  wounded  was  brought  off.  As  Early  only  claimed 
"  between  600  and  700  unwounded  prisoners,"  some  portion 
of  the  Union  missing  must  have  been  stragglers.  By  far 
the  greater  part  of  the  loss  in  killed,  84,  and  in  wounded, 
511,  was  in  the  division  of  the  Sixth  Corps ;  yet  also,  con- 
trary to  what  is  generally  supposed,  the  greater  part  of  the 


EARLY  MENACES   WASHINGTON.  59 

missing.  1,054,  is  also  attributable  to  it.  Eicketts's  losses 
were  thus  1,649,  or  nearly  half  his  force  engaged.  Wallace 
suggests  that  Tyler's  reports  were  somewhat  imperfect,  as 
his  regiments  were  moved  off  soon  after  the  battle,  so  that 
the  total  losses  may  have  been  over  2,000 ;  but  on  the  other 
band,  the  return  of  stragglers  may  have  eventually  reduced 
it  even  to  1,500.  Early's  loss  in  killed  and  wounded  was 
given  by  him  as  "about  700" — an  evidence  of  the  good  fight 
made  by  Wallace  ;  and  435  of  his  wounded,  mostly  such  as 
could  not  be  moved,  were  found  in  the  Frederick  hospitals 
and  country  houses  when  Sigel's  cavalry  reoccupied  the 
town.  Colonel  Lamar  and  Lieutenant-Colonel  Taverner  were 
among  his  killed,  and  General  Evans  among  the  wounded. 

Hours  counted  in  the  rescue  of  the  national  capital ;  and 
apart  from  the  delay  caused  to  the  invading  army,  Wal- 
lace's merit  is  that  he  went  to  the  right  place  at  the  right 
time,  and  did  the  best  he  could  with  such  force  as  he  had, 
not  seeking  to  postpone  the  task  of  planting  an  obstacle  in 
the  enemy's  path.  He  inflicted  no  little  loss  on  Early,  and 
brought  off  his  stores  and  guns,  Alexander  saving  even  the 
two  howitzers.  "I  did  as  I  promised— held  the  bridge  to 
the  last,"  he  reported  to  Garrett ;  and  to  Halleck  he  tele- 
graphed that  he  was  "  retreating  with  a  foot-sore,  battered, 
and  half-demoralized  column.  I  think  the  troops  of  the 
Sixth  Corps  fought  magnificently." 

Wallace  withdrew  to  Ellicott's  Mills,  where  the  Frederick 
turnpike  crosses  the  Patapsco  ;  but  Early's  selection  of  flank 
attack  had  already  indicated  that  he  had  chosen  Washington 
for  his  objective,  and  his  troops  were  moving  in  that  direc- 
tion, while  Wallace  was  still  retrograding  to  Baltimore. 
That  night  Early  brought  his  trains  across  the  Monocacy, 
and  began  burying  his  dead  and  placing  his  wounded  in  the 
hospitals  of  Frederick ;  and  next  morning,  July  10th,  he  was 


60  THE  SHENANDOAH  VALLEY. 

afoot  by  daylight.  Moving  unopposed  along  the  George- 
town turnpike,  he  camped  that  night  four  miles  north  of 
Boekville,  having  made  twenty  miles  for  all  his  troops, 
while  some  had  marched  thirty- four  during  the  two  days 
that  included  the  battle.  McCausland  encountered  near 
Boekville  the  Union  cavalry,  consisting  of  Major  Fry's 
Sixteenth  Pennsylvania,  500  strong,  and  "Wells's  and  "Wing's 
companies,  Eighth  Illinois,  120  strong,  which  had  been  cut 
off  from  Clendenin's  regiment  at  Monocacy,  and  in  a  sharp 
conflict,  drove  it  beyond  the  town.  Barnseur,  remaining  at 
'Monocacy  to  insure  the  destruction  of  the  railroad  bridge, 
was  attacked  by  Sigel's  cavalry,  and  arrived  at  the  Eock- 
ville camp  only  after  midnight.  Sigel  had  reoccupied  Har- 
per's Ferry  and  Bolivar  Heights  the  night  of  the  8th,  and 
Stahel  had  possessed  himself  of  Sharpsburg,  Boonsboro, 
and  Crampton's  Gap,  skirmishing  with  the  enemy's  rear- 
guard. Couch's  cavalry  duly  moved  into  Hagerstown,  and 
Stahel,  the  10th,  occupied  Frederick. 

The  defeat  of  Wallace,  followed  by  this  swift  swoop  upon 
the  capital,  created  a  profound  sensation  throughout  the 
North.  People  who  had  stoutly  maintained  that  the  whole 
affair  was  the  irruption  of  a  gang  of  horse-thieves  now  gave 
way  as  oracles  to  those  who  computed  the  invading  army  at 
50,000  strong ;  and  some  who  had  suspected  Harry  Gilmor 
of  being  its  presiding  genius  discerned  in  its  marks  of  far- 
reaching  strategy  the  direction  of  General  Bobert  Lee. 
Preceding  summers  had  witnessed  invasions,  but  as  not  one 
of  them  had  come  so  near  the  capital,  it  was  natural  to  attri- 
bute to  Early's  movement  an  exaggerated  strength. 

In  Baltimore  the  bells  that  rang  that  Sunday  morning, 
July  10th,  were  not  calls  to  matins,  but  the  summons  of  citi- 
zens to  line  the  trenches  in  the  suburbs.  Wallace  instructed 
Bicketts  to  withdraw  from  Ellicott's  Mills.     The  2,500  dis- 


EARLY   MENACES   WASHINGTON.  61 

mounted  cavalry  from  Sheridan's  corps  had  arrived,  under 
charge  of  Major  Beaumont,  but  were  ordered  to  Washington ; 
authority,  however,  was  given  to  stop  and  use  Veteran  Re- 
serve  Corps  regiments,  Governor  Seymour's  militia,  and  all 
other  troops  on  the  way  from  the  North.  One  hundred  con- 
valescents were  sent  from  Washington  to  protect  the  ferry 
and  railroad  at  Havre  de  Grace,  where  Major  Judd  caused 
notices  to  be  read  in  all  the  churches,  and  repeated  by  the 
city's  crier  in  the  streets,  for  the  assembly  of  men,  of  whom 
he  raised  a  thirty-day  regiment.  Martial  law  was  proclaimed 
by  Colonel  Eoot,  in  Annapolis,  and  General  E.  O.  C.  Ord 
was  sent  from  City  Point  to  command  at  Baltimore,  Grant 
saying,  "  I  would  give  more  for  him  as  a  commander  in  the 
field  than  for  most  of  the  generals  now  in  Maryland."  The 
12th,  Ord  reported  the  force  at  Baltimore  to  be  Ricketts's, 
2,488  ;  3,000  hundred-day  men  and  armed  citizens  ;  200  sail- 
ors and  500  Africans.  Governor  Bradford,  at  his  request, 
called  for  10,000  militia. 

Meanwhile  the  Confederate  cavalry  gathered  up  grain, 
bacon,  horses,  hogs,  cattle,  sheep,  shoes,  and  clothing,  send- 
ing the  live  stock  back  to  the  Potomac,  whose  fords  they 
held  by  small  cavalry  squads.  At  Frederick,  Johnson's  cav- 
alry brigade  had  been  detached  for  Baltimore.  It  occupied 
Westminster,  Towsontown,  and  Beisterstown,  and  tore  up  the 
Northern  Central  Bailroad  at  Cockeysville.  At  Belleville 
several  hundred  mules  were  captured,  and  wires  were  cut 
at  many  points.  The  damage  would  have  been  more  serious 
in  this  region,  save  that  some  of  the  bridges  were  protected 
by  gunboats.  Gilmor  struck  the  Philadelphia,  Wilmington 
and  Baltimore  Railroad  at  Magnolia  Station,  and  stopping- 
two  passenger  trains  near  the  bridge  where  it  crosses  the 
Gunpowder  River,  burned  them ;  then  he  backed  one  of  the 
trains  upon  this  bridge,  and  the  flaming  mass  soon  set  fire 


62  THE   SHENANDOAH  VALLEY. 

to  tlie  important  structure.  A  force  of  a  few  score  hun- 
dred-day men  were  dispersed,  and  a  Government  steamer, 
near  by,  stationed  expressly  to  guard  the  bridge,  lacked 
steam  at  the  critical  moment.1  General  Franklin  chanced  to 
be  a  passenger  on  one  of  the  trains  and  was  captured,  but 
afterward  made  his  escape.  This  raid  severed  railroad  and 
telegraphic  communication  with  the  North,  thus  reducing 
Early's  danger  of  an  attack  upon  his  left  and  rear.  As  for 
the  attempt  upon  Point  Lookout,  where  many  thousand 
Confederate  prisoners  were  confined,  it  was  imperfectly  ar- 
ranged, and  abandoned;  it  could  not  have  succeeded,  for 
the  place  was  attainable  only  over  ground  commanded  by 
gunboats.  The  dwelling  of  Governor  Bradford,  four  miles 
from  Baltimore,  was  burned,  and  a  score  of  Union  cavalry 
pickets  were  captured  at  Camp  Bradford. 

At  dawn  of  Monday,  July  11th,  Early  pushed  forward 
from  Bockville ;  McCausland,  in  advance,  moved  toward 
Tenallytown,  arriving  by  eight  or  nine  o'clock  north  of 
Georgetown,  where  he  held  Early's  right.  The  main  force 
took  the  Seventh  Street  road,  preceded  by  Imboden's  bri- 
gade, under  Smith,  while  Jackson  moved  on  the  left  flank  ; 
the  Union  cavalry  of  Lowell,  Fry,  and  Wing  were  driven 
back  to  the  works. 

The  day  was  intensely  hot,  the  night  had  been  oppressive  ; 
a  prolonged  drought  had  laid  the  roads  in  dust,  and  men 
who  had  sturdily  tramped  from  Cold  Harbor  to  Lynchburg, 

1  Gilmor,  in  Four  Years  in  the  Saddle,  narrates  that  a  few  months  earlier  he 
ran  a  passenger  train  off  the  track,  by  means  of  fence  rails  and  logs,  near 
Duffield's  Station,  in  the  Valley,  and  burned  it.  "  The  Northern  papers  made 
such  an  outcry  against  me,"  he  says,  "  that  General  Kobert  E.  Lee  ordered  me  to 
be  tried  by  court-martial/'  The  Court  acquitted  him,  as  he  testified  that  the  rob- 
bing of  the  passengers,  which  occurred  while  lie  was  burning  the  train,  had  been 
done  against  his  orders.  Fortunately  for  the  trains  stopped  at  Gunpowder  Bridge, 
Gilmor  did  not  experiment  on  them  with  his  device  of  logs  and  rails — they  might 
not  have  glided  off  so  easily  as  at  Duffleld's. 


EARLY  MENACES  WASHINGTON. 


63 


and  from  Lynchburg  to  Frederick,  fell  by  the  wayside,  ex- 
hausted and  half  suffocated.  But,  between  eleven  o'clock 
and  noon,  Early's  advance  approached  within  eyesight  of 
the  capital,  Frazee's  One  Hundred  and  Fiftieth  Ohio  and 
the  Twenty-fifth  New  York  cavalry  retiring  to  the  works. 
Early's  leading  division,  Eodes's,  having  marched  by  the 
flank,  was  ordered  into  line,  and  when  his  skirmishers  were 
within  range,  about  1.30  p.m.,  the  forts  opened  a  rapid 
shelling,  under  which  his  sharpshooters  drew  back,  and  the 


The  Northern  Defences  of  Washington. 

Union   picket  line   was  re-established   by  600  dismounted 
cavalry,  under  Major  Briggs,  Seventh  Michigan. 

Early's  position  was  near  Silver  Spring,  due  north  of 
Washington,  a  little  west  of  the  Seventh  Street  road,  with 
the  dome  of  the  Capitol  in  full  view ;  he  had  cavalry  camps 
on  his  right  and  left  flanks,  but  his  infantry  was  mostly 
along  this  road,  between  the  houses  of  Blair  and  Batchelor, 
the  latter  two  miles  north  of  the  former.  The  defences 
of  the  city  on  that  side  consisted  of  a  series  of  detached 
forts,  generally  connected  by   rifle-pits.      They  were  regu- 


64  THE  SHENANDOAH  VALLEY. 

larly  built  field  works  of  strong  profile,  and  provided  with 
ditches  and  abatis,  the  timber  havjng  been  felled  where  it 
stood,  within  cannon-range ;  while  everywhere  there  was  a 
sweeping  cross-fire  of  artillery.  The  forts  mounted  many 
32-ponnders,  with  some  30-pounder  and  100-ponnder  Par- 
rotts.  The  one  in  Early's  front  was  Fort  Stevens,  with  De 
Eussy  on  the  west,  and  Slocum  on  the  east.  Between 
Stevens  and  De  Eussy  was  a  deep  ravine,  through  which 
ran  Eock  Creek,  and  this  suggested  shelter  for  a  storming 
party ;  but  the  hollow  had  been  rendered  difficult  by  level- 
ling the  woods  on  each  slope,  while  the  Georgetown  pike, 
beyond,  was  swejDt  by  the  fire  of  Fort  Eeno.  In  this  system 
of  works,  the  carrying  of  one  fort  would  bring  it  under  the 
fire  of  its  neighbors. 

From  his  prisoners  Early  knew  positively  that  troops 
must  have  been  sent  from  Grant's  army,  since  a  division  of 
the  Sixth  Corps  was  as  far  distant  as  Frederick  several  days 
before.  The  newspapers  in  the  towns  through  which  he 
passed  told  him  of  Hunter's  return  to  the  Valley,  and  of 
the  expected  presence  of  large  forces  from  the  Army  of 
the  Potomac  to  defend  the  capital.  Hence,  when  his 
field-glass  revealed  to  him,  immediately  on  arriving,  bodies 
of  troops  filing  into  the  works  in  his  front,  he  naturally 
concluded  that  Washington  had  been  succored  by  this 
army. 

General  C.  C.  Augur,  commanding  the  Department  of 
Washington,  had  collected  heavy  artillery,  hundred-day 
men,  convalescents,  invalid  corps,  marines  and  sailors  from 
the  navy  yard,  militia,  quartermaster's  clerks  and  other 
employees,  and  had  placed  them  in  and  around  the  forts, 
with  General  A.  McD.  McCook  in  command.  The  line 
directly  north  of  the  city  was  garrisoned  chiefly  by  the  One 
Hundred  and  Fiftieth  and  One  Hundred  and  Fiftv-first  Ohio 


EARLY   MENACES   WASHINGTON.  65 

hundred-day  militia,  two  or  three  companies  in  each  fort, 
and  by  detachments  of  volunteer  heavy  artillery,  of  Hardin's 
division  of  the  Twenty- second  Corps,  whose  two  brigades, 
Warner's  and  Haskins's,  held  the  whole  line  from  the  Poto- 
mac to  the  Eastern  Branch.  Warner  was  reinforced,  during 
the  10th,  by  five  regiments  of  Veterans,  the  Seventh,  under 
Lieutenant-Colonel  Thomas,  and  Gile's  brigade.  The  cav- 
alry consisted  of  the  Second  Massachusetts,  Colonel  Lowell, 
the  Sixteenth  Pennsylvania,  Major  Fry,  and  some  smaller 
detachments.  The  Second  D.  C.  Volunteers,  Colonel  Alex- 
ander, the  Ninth  V.  B.  C,  Colonel  Johnsou,  Gibbs's  Ohio 
Battery,  and  Bradbury's  Maine  Battery  were  in  the  rifle- 
pits  on  the  11th,  and  during  the  afternoon  a  body  of  the 
quartermaster's  employees  went  to  the  front,  with  several 
hundred  dismounted  cavalry.1 

Yet  these  troops  would  have  proved  a  very  inadequate  de- 
fence against  an  army  like  Early's.  The  chief  source  of 
safety  came  from  another  quarter.  The  night  of  July  9th,  a 
few  hours  after  Wallace's  defeat  on  the  banks  of  the  Mono- 
cacy,  Major- General  H.  G.  Wright  was  directed  to  march 
the  First  and  Second  divisions  of  the  Sixth  Corps  from  their 
camp  at  Petersburg  to  City  Point,  fourteen  miles  distant, 


1  "  The  effective  forces  were  1,819  infantry,  1,834  artillery,  and  03  cavalry  north 
of  the  Potomac,  and  4,064  infantry,  1,772  artillery,  and  51  cavalry  sonth  thereof. 
There  were  besides,  in  Washington  and  Alexandria,  about  3,900  effectives  .  .  . 
and  about  4,400  (six  regiments)  of  Veteran  Reserves.  .  .  .  The  foregoing 
constitute  a  total  of  about  20,400  men.  Of  that  number,  however,  but  9,000, 
mostly  perfectly  raw  troops,  constituted  the  garrison  of  the  defences.  Of  the 
other  troops,  a  considerable  portion  were  unavailable,  and  the  whole  would  form 
but  an  inefficient  force  for  service  on  the  lines."  (Barnard's  Defences  of  Wash- 
ington.) This  was  the  available  force,  of  course,  exclusive  of  the  Sixth  and 
Nineteenth  Corps.  Behind  strong  works,  some  of  those  troops  who  did  not 
belong  to  the  garrisons  might  have  proved  effective,  for  the  4,400  Veteran  lte- 
6erves,  presumably,  were  old  soldiers,  as  were  many  of  the  quartermaster's  men, 
nearly  2,000  of  whom  were  reported  by  General  Meigs  for  duty  the  night  before 
Early's  arrival. 


68  THE   SHENANDOAH  VALLEY. 

where,  arriving  at  daylight,  they  took  transports,  and  were 
soon  steaming  to  Fort  Monroe.  Before  2  p.m.  of  the  11th,  the 
vessels  touched  the  wharves  of  Washington,  and  there  found, 
also  just  arriving,  an  ocean-going  steamer,  bringing  a  por- 
tion, 800  men,  of  Emory's  division  of  the  Nineteenth  Corps, 
which,  having  reached  Hampton  Eoads  from  New  Orleans, 
had  been  sent  directly  to  the  capital.  President  Lincoln 
stood  on  the  Sixth  Street  wharf  to  greet  the  troops,  the  gaunt 
figure  as  welcome  a  sight  to  them  as  they  to  him.  Quickly 
landing,  they  marched  up  Seventh  Street,  amidst  the  ac- 
claims of  the  people  who  thronged  the  foot-ways,  and  to 
whom  the  Greek  cross  seemed  an  emblem  of  rescue.  Wright 
had  at  first  been  ordered  to  Fort  Sumner  on  the  Potomac, 
but  at  Early's  approach  he  was  directed  instead  to  Fort 
Stevens.  As  his  troops  neared  the  northern  outskirts,  the 
sound  of  artillery  quickened  their  footsteps,  as  it  is  wont  to 
do  with  reinforcements  arriving  at  need. 

About  the  same  time,  therefore,  that  Early  was  arriving 
in  front  of  Fort  Stevens,  Wright  was  approaching  the  other 
end  of  the  city  at  the  river  piers ;  and  while  Eodes,  after  a 
brief  halt  for  his  parched  and  panting  men,  was  deploying  his 
columns  into  line  of  battle  to  test  the  strength  of  the  works, 
Augur's  provisional  levies  were  filing  into  Stevens  and  De 
Bussy. 

From  this  coincidence  of  events  has  resulted  a  diversity 
of  opinion  as  to  whether  Early  could  have  seized  Washing- 
ton by  a  bold  assault  delivered  the  moment  he  reached  the 
city.  A  fair  judgment  seems  to  be  that  Lieutenant-General 
Grant  cannot  be  brought  under  the  imputation  of  neglect 
which  an  affirmative  view  of  this  question  would  necessarily 
imply.  Were  the  safety  of  Washington  dependent  on  the 
fact  that  though  Early  might  have  carried  it,  yet  for  lack 
of  enterprise  he  failed  to  do  so,  its  preservation  would  be 


EARLY  MENACES  WASHINGTON.  67 

due  rather  to  the  good  fortune  than  to  the  vigilance  of 
Grant.  Early  had  been  swift  in  his  later  movements,  having 
brought  his  troops  and  trains  from  the  Oatoctin  Mountains, 
between  morning  of  June  9th  and  noon  of  June  11th,  in  ex- 
traordinary heat  and  dust,  but  the  reinforcements  from 
Petersburg  had  also  come  quickly.  There  was  no  time  to 
spare  ;  but  even  could  Early  have  carried  Stevens  or  De 
Russy,  by  an  immediate  assault,  as  very  likely  he  might 
have  done,  had  he  been  regardless  of  loss,  he  would  have 
afterward  met  the  two  divisions  of  the  Sixth  Corps  and  a 
portion  of  the  Nineteenth  between  the  works  and  the  city 
itself ;  and  unless  we  are  to  suppose  that  he  could  both  have 
taken  one  of  these  forts  and  beaten  all  the  troops  in  the 
city,  his  assault  would  have  involved  him  in  no  little  peril. 
While  McCausland's  cavalry  was  near  Fort  De  Russy  at  nine 
o'clock,  and  Rodes  near  Fort  Stevens  soon  after  noon,  yet 
the  rear  did  not  reach  its  encampment  at  Batchelor's,  two 
miles  from  Silver  Spring,  until  6  p.m.  In  a  despatch  to  Lee 
from  Leesburg,  three  days  later,  Early  gives  this  account  of 
his  actions  and  motives  after  leaving  Frederick  : 

"  The  clay  [the  10th]  was  very  hot,  and  the  roads  exceedingly  dusty, 
but  we  marched  thirty  miles.  On  the  morning  of  the  11th  we  contin- 
ued the  march,  but  the  day  was  so  excessively  hot,  even  at  a  very  early 
hour  in  the  morning,  and  the  dust  was  so  dense,  that  many  of  the  men 
fell  by  the  way,  and  it  became  necessary  to  slacken  our  pace.  Never- 
theless, when  we  reached  the  enemy's  fortifications,  the  men  were  com- 
pletely exhausted,  and  not  in  a  condition  to  make  an  attack.  .  .  . 
I  determined  to  make  an  assault,  but  before  it  could  be  made  it  became 
apparent  that  the  enemy  had  been  strongly  reinforced. 
After  consultation  with  my  division  commanders,  I  became  satisfied 
that  the  assault,  even  if  successful,  would  be  attended  with  such  great 
sacrifice  as  would  insure  the  destruction  of  my  whole  force,  before  the 
victory  could  have  been  made  available,  and  if  unsuccessful  would  ne- 
cessarily have  resulted  in  the  loss  of  the  whole  force." 


68  THE  SHENANDOAH  VALLEY. 

At  4.10  o'clock  that  Monday  afternoon,  Wright,  from  Fort 
Stevens,  addressed  this  note  to  Augur  :  "  The  head  of  my 
column  has  nearly  reached  the  front,  and  at  the  suggestion 
of  Major-General  McCook  I  have  directed  them  to  bivouac 
at  Crystal  Spring,  about  half  mile  in  rear.  The  enemy 
has  been  close  to  Fort  Stevens,  and  although  driven  back 
is  still  not  far  distant.  I  believe  it  to  be  only  a  very 
light  skirmish  line,  and  with  your  permission  will  send  a 
brigade  out  against  it,  and  try  to  clear  it  out.  General  Mc- 
Oook's  men  are  not  as  good  as  mine  for  this  purpose."  He 
added  that  he  held  his  corps  in  reserve,  subject  to  McCook's 
orders.  Augur  replied  that  he  did  not  consider  it  advisable 
to  make  any  advance  "  until  our  lines  are  better  established 
— perhaps  to  morrow."  However,  that  night  the  Sixth  Corps 
relieved  the  provisional  forces  on  picket,  with  900  men,  and, 
in  Virginia  fashion,  promptly  intrenched  the  line.  At  nine 
o'clock,  Quartermaster  General  Meigs  reported  for  duty  with 
1,500  of  his  employees,  armed  and  equipped,  under  immedi- 
ate command  of  General  Eucker,  and  these  were  placed  in 
position  in  the  rifle  pits  on  the  right  and  left  of  Fort  Slocum, 
while  an  hour  later  Colonel  Price  reported  with  his  provi- 
sional brigade  of  2,800  convalescents.1 

Dawn  of  Tuesday,  the  12th,  showed  the  enemy  in  posses- 
sion of  the  Rives  house,  on  the  right  of  the  Silver  Spring 
road ;  it  stood  on  rising  ground,  surrounded  by  shade  trees, 
with  an  orchard  hard  by,  affording  cover  for  his  sharp- 
shooters, who  commanded  the  Union  skirmish  line  from  this 
point  and  from  Mrs.  Lay's  house,  on  the  left  of  the  road. 
TVheaton's  brigade  of  the  Second  (Getty's)  Division,  Sixth 


1  Augur's  telegraphic  order  to  McCook  read  thus  :  Doubleday  to  command  south 
of  Eastern  Branch  ;  G-illmore  north  of  Eastern  Branch  to  mciude  Fort  Slemmer  ; 
Meigs  from  Fort  Totten  to  Forts  De  Russy  and  Kearney,  including  dependent 
batteries ;  Hardin  from  Fort  Reno,  inclusive,  to  the  Potomac. 


EARLY  MENACES  WASHINGTON.  69 

Corps,  was  thrown  out  on  picket  in  front  of  Fort  Stevens, 
and  instantly  puffs  of  white  smoke  and  the  whiz  of  bullets 
from  the  opposite  lines  told  that  the  Confederate  sharp- 
shooters were  at  work.  Skirmishing  continued  through  the 
day ;  by  the  middle  of  the  afternoon  General  Wright  pushed 
out  a  strong  reconnoissance,  with  the  Third  Brigade  of  the 
same  (Getty's)  division,  which  in  these  operations  was  under 
charge  of  General  Wheaton,  during  Getty's  absence.  This 
brigade,  Bidwell's,  was  formed  in  two  lines,  with  the  Seventy- 
seventh  New  York,  Seventh  Maine,  and  Forty-ninth  New 
York  in  the  first,  and  the  Forty-third  New  York,  Sixty-first 
Pennsylvania  and  One  Hundred  and  Twenty-second  New 
York  in  the  second.  The  central  point  of  attack  was  the 
Rives  house,  about  midway  of  the  open.  The  guns  of  Fort 
Stevens  having  cleared  the  way,  Bidwell,  at  a  sign  from 
Wright,  who  stood  on  the  parapet,  advanced  in  good  align- 
ment, passing  through  the  First  Brigade's  line  and  over  a 
slight  acclivity,  beyond  the  orchard  and  grove  to  the  house, 
from  which  Early's  skirmishers  were  soon  expelled.  On  a 
farther  crest,  a  stout  resistance  was  made,  but  after  gallant 
fighting  the  position  was  swept,  and  Early's  pickets  were 
driven  back  a  mile. 

Barely  did  a  minor  engagement  present  so  clear  an  oppor- 
tunity for  viewing  its  progress,  and  rarely  for  such  a  scene 
was  a  more  memorable  group  of  spectators  assembled.  On 
the  parapet  of  Fort  Stevens  stood  the  tall  form  of  Abraham 
Lincoln,  by  the  side  of  General  Wright,  who  in  vain  warned 
the  eager  President  that  his  position  was  swept  by  the  bullets 
of  sharpshooters,  until  an  officer  was  shot  down  within  three 
feet  of  him,  when  he  reluctantly  stepped  below.  Sheltered 
from  the  line  of  fire,  Cabinet  officers  and  a  group  of  citi- 
zens and  ladies,  breathless  with  excitement,  watched  the 
fortunes  of  the  fight.     Strange  as  was  this  spectacle  at  the 


70  THE  SHENANDOAH   VALLEY. 

gates  of  the  national  capital,  it  would  have  seemed  stranger 
still  to  the  onlookers,  could  they  have  known  that  in  the 
camp  yonder,  as  if  in  typical  contrast  to  the  figure  on  the 
parapet,  stood  one  who  four  years  before  had  been  the  Vice- 
President  of  the  United  States. 

It  was  no  mock  battle  that  these  spectators  witnessed. 
Stretchers  soon  came  from  the  field  by  scores,  with  their 
ghastly  loads  ;  the  hospitals  in  the  rear  of  the  fort  were 
astir ;  and  here  and  there,  dotting  the  meadow,  the  orchard 
and  the  dusty  highway,  lay  many  a  lad  for  whom  the  wild 
cheers  of  the  crowd  fell  on  deaf  ears.  Colonel  Visscher 
was  dead,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Johnson  mortally  wounded, 
Major  Jones  dead,  Major  Crosby  with  his  left  arm  gone — 
in  brief,  every  regimental  commander  of  the  Third  Brigade 
killed  or  wounded,  with  a  loss  of  250  in  the  brigade  and  a 
total  loss  of  280  out  of  the  force  engaged.  The  enemy  must 
also  have  suffered  severely,  as  about  30  of  his  dead  and  70  of 
his  most  seriously  wounded  were  left  on  the  field  and  at 
Blair's  house  with  surgeons  and  attendants.  Hardin's  divi- 
sion lost  73  killed  and  wounded  during  the  two  days  of 
Early's  presence,  and  other  casualties  made  the  total  Union 
loss  in  this  demonstration  against  Washington  between  400 
and  500.  A  monument  on  the  slope  fronting  Fort  Stevens 
preserves  the  memory  of  the  Union  dead. 

Early  was  quick  to  read  the  warning  that  it  was  time  for 
him  to  be  away.  That  night  he  fell  back  through  Bockville, 
his  soldiers  having  first  set  fire  to  the  house  of  Montgomery 
Blair  near  his  camp  ;  he  marched  all  night,  and  halted  near 
Darnestown. 


CHAPTEE  V. 

IN  THE  VALLEY  AGAIN". 

The  one  want  now  was  a  field,  commander.  The  12th  of 
July,  Early  being  still  before  Washington,  Assistant  Secre- 
tary C.  A.  Dana  telegraphed  Grant  as  follows:  "Nothing 
can  possibly  be  done  here  toward  pursuing  or  cutting  off  the 
enemy,  for  want  of  a  commander.  Augur  commands  the 
defences  of  Washington,  with  McCook  and  a  lot  of  brigadiers 
under  him,  but  he  is  not  allowed  to  go  outside ;  Wright  com- 
mands his  own  corps ;  Gillmore  has  been  assigned  to  the 
temporary  command  of  those  troops  of  the  Nineteenth  Corps 
in  the  city  of  Washington ;  Ord  to  command  the  Eighth 
Corps  and  all  other  troops  in  the  Middle  Department,  leav- 
ing Wallace  to  command  the  city  of  Baltimore  alone ;  but 
there  is  no  head  to  the  whole,  and  it  seems  indispensable 
that  you  should  at  once  appoint  one.  .  .  .  General 
Halleck  will  not  give  orders,  except  as  he  receives  them. 
The  President  will  give  none ;  and  until  you  direct  posi- 
tively and  explicitly  what  is  to  be  done,  everything  will  go 
on  in  the  deplorable  and  fatal  way  in  which  it  has  gone  on 
for  the  past  week." 

Grant  at  midnight  sent  this  message  to  Halleck  :  "  Give 
orders  assigning  Major-General  H.  G.  Wright  to  supreme 
command  of  all  troops  moving  out  against  the  enemy,  re- 
gardless of  the  rank  of  other  commanders.  He  should  get 
outside  of  the  trenches  with  all  the  force  he  possibly  can, 


72  THE  SHENANDOAH  VALLEY. 

and  should  push  him  [Early]  to  the  last  moment."  To  Dana 
"Boldness  is  all,"  he  said,  "that  is  needed  to  drive  the 
enemy  out  of  Maryland  in  confusion.  I  hope  and  believe 
"Wright  is  the  man  to  assure  that." 

The  morning  of  July  13th  having  disclosed  that  Early 
had  vanished  from  Silver  Spring,  "Wright,  with  the  two 
divisions  of  the  Sixth  Corps,  at  noon  drew  out  of  the 
trenches  for  the  chase,  Emory's  division  of  the  Nineteenth 
being  directed  to  follow.  Lowell's  cavalry,  riding  to  Bock- 
ville,  was  there  driven  back  by  McCausland,  losing  about  30 
killed  and  wounded,  but  bringing  off  38  prisoners. 

Grant  was  so  anxious  to  have  Early  pursued  and  attacked, 
after  his  audacious  foray,  that  he  had  at  first  even  contem- 
plated undertaking  this  task  in  person ;  and  an  ingenious 
speculation  could  be  spun  on  what  might  have  happened 
had  he  carried  this  project  into  effect.  "Forces  enough," 
he  telegraphed  to  Halleck,  July  9th,  "  to  defeat  all  that 
Early  Las  with  him  should  get  in  his  rear,  south  of  him, 
and  follow  him  up  sharply,  leaving  him  to  go  north,  de- 
fending depots,  towns,  etc.,  with  small  garrisons  and  the 
militia.  If  the  President  thinks  it  advisable  that  I  should 
go  to  Washington  in  person,  I  can  start  in  an  hour  after  re- 
ceiving notice,  leaving  everything  here  on  the  defensive." 
Mr.  Lincoln  caught  at  the  hint.  "  What  I  think  is,"  he 
answered,  "  that  you  should  provide  to  retain  your  hold 
where  you  are  certainly,  and  bring  the  rest  with  you  per- 
sonally, and  make  a  vigorous  effort  to  defeat  the  enemy's 
force  in  this  vicinity.  I  think  there  is  really  a  fair  chance 
to  do  this,  if  the  movement  is  prompt.  This  is  what  I  think 
upon  your  suggestion,  and  is  not  an  order."  Early  was  then 
approaching  Washington  from  Frederick,  his  force  un- 
known, and  the  President's  project  was  based  on  the  premise 
that  "  General  Halleck  says  we  have  absolutely  no  force  here 


IN  THE  VALLEY   AGAIN.  73 

fit  to  go  to  the  field  ; "  but  Grant  saw  that  there  might  be 
an  outcry  that  this  v-;.s  the  campaign  of  1862  repeated.  "  I 
have  sent  from  here,"  he  wrote  to  Mr.  Lincoln,  "  a  whole 
corps,  commanded  by  an  excellent  officer,  besides  over  3,000 
other  troops.  One  division  of  the  Nineteenth  Corps,  6,000 
strong,  is  now  on  its  way  to  Washington,  one  steamer  loaded 
with  these  troops  having  passed  Fort  Monroe  to-day.  They 
will  probably  reach  Washington  to-morrow  night.  This 
force  under  Wright  will  be  able  to  compete  with  the  whole 
force  under  Early.  ...  I  think,  on  reflection,  it  would 
have  a  bad  effect  for  me  to  leave  here,  and  with  General 
Orel  at  Baltimore,  and  Hunter  and  Wright  with  the  forces 
following  the  enemy  up,  could  do  no  good.  I  have  great 
faith  that  the  enemy  will  never  be  able  to  get  back  with 
much  of  his  force."  To  Halleck  he  wrote  that  "  a  force 
should  be  collected  in  rear  of  the  enemy,  at  Edward's  Ferry, 
and  follow  him  up  and  cut  off  retreat,  if  possible ;  "  where- 
upon Halleck,  at  his  elirection,  gave  Hunter  a  rendezvous 
with  Wright  at  that  point.  To  Meaele  at  that  time — that 
Sunday  of  panic  in  Washington  and  Baltimore — Grant  had 
said  with  characteristic  equipoise,  "  Taking  all  together, 
everything  looks  favorable  to  me." 

About  noon  of  July  13th,  Halleck  notified  Augur  that 
General  Wright's  forces  ought  to  "  immediately  move  out 
on  the  river  roael  from  Tenallytown,  and  Gillmore  follow  as 
soon  as  possible."  Stanton,  in  a  despatch  directed  to 
Wright  "  on  march,"  declared  that  "  4,600  of  the  Nineteenth 
Corps  in  all  have  arrived  ;  about  1,500  more  are  on  the  river 
coming  up ;  "  anel  added  that  he  need  not  delay  for  want 
of  support.  Everybody  had  welcomed  Wright's  oncoming, 
and  all  were  as  feverish  to  speed  his  parting.  At  5  p.m.  his 
head  of  column  had  reached  Fort  Beno,  and  he  sent  back 
word  to  Stanton  that  the  troops  woulel  be  "  pushed  to  the 
XI.— 4 


74  THE   SHENANDOAH   VALLEY. 

limits  of  the  endurance  of  the  men.  I  can  assure  yourself 
and  the  President  that  there  will  be  no  delay  on  my  part  to 
head  off  the  enemy."  At  6.30  p.m.  he  had  reached  Offutt's 
Cross  Roads,  with  his  cavalry,  and  an  hour  later  with  the 
head  of  his  infantry,  and  there  camped  for  the  night.  He 
had  with  him  Lowell's  cavalry,  750  strong,  about  10,000  ef- 
fective of  the  Sixth  Corps  and  650  of  the  Nineteenth,  while 
about  3,500  of  the  latter  were  toiling  up  in  the  rear.  Gill- 
more  having  sprained  his  foot  at  Offutt's,  Emory,  who  had 
reported  that  day,  went  forward  with  his  (First)  division  of 
the  Nineteenth,  and  in  time  received  charge  of  the  corps. 
During  the  day  and  the  night  previous,  1,689  men  of  the  Sixth 
and  3,560  of  the  Nineteenth  had  debarked  at  Washington. 

The  next  day,  the  14th,  Wright  had  reached  Seneca  Creek, 
when,  his  scouts  reporting  the  enemy  in  force  at  Darnes- 
town,  he  halted  and  sent  out  an  infantry  reconnoissance. 
"I  believe,"  he  wrote  back  to  Halleck,  "that  the  bulk  of 
the  enemy's  force  has  already  crossed  the  river  at  Edward's 
Ferry.  This  fact  will  be  shortly  developed,  and  if  they 
have  left  Darnestown,  I  shall  continue  the  inarch  to  Ed- 
ward's Ferry."  It  was  true  that  Early  was  now  across  the 
Potomac,  with  his  trains,  his  prisoners  captured  at  Mono- 
cacy,  a  large  number  of  beef  cattle,  and  many  horses  for  his 
cavalry  and  artillery;  and  he  had  been  safely  rejoined  by 
the  foraging  parties  that  were  spread  over  Eastern  Mary- 
land. He  had  marched  from  Washington  to  Rockville  dur- 
ing the  night  of  the  12th,  had  rested  during  a  part  of  the 
13th,  at  night  had  gone  forward  to  Poolesville,  and  the 
morning  of  the  14th  crossed  the  Potomac  at  White's  Ford, 
camping  at  Leesburg. 

Wright  reached  Poolesville,  twenty-six  miles  from  Fort 
Stevens,  the  evening  of  the  same  day,  July  14th,  most  of 
Getty's  infantry  and  a  part  of  the  artillery  arriving  at  6  p.m., 


IN  THE  VALLEY   AG  A  LIST.  75 

while  the  train  was  stretched  along  the  road  in  the  rear. 
The  cavalry  had  overtaken  the  enemy's  rear-guard  at  Pooles- 
ville  earlier  that  day,  demonstrating  against  it  as  it  crossed 
White's  Ford  behind  the  infantry,  and  during  the  afternoon 
there  was  artillery  firing  across  the  river  against  Early's 
pickets,  who  held  the  fords.  At  Poolesville  Wright  re- 
mained till  the  morning  of  the  16th,  meanwhile,  on  the 
14th,  informing  the  War  Department  that  the  enemy  had 
crossed.1  Early,  on  his  part,  remained  at  Leesburg,  on  the 
south  side  of  the  Potomac,  as  long  as  Wright  was  at  Pooles- 
ville, on  the  north  side,  namely,  from  the  evening  of  the 
14th  to  the  morning  of  the  16th.  To  Lee  he  reported,  the 
14th,  that  he  had  brought  off  over  1,000  horses,  adding,  "I 
shall  rest  here  a  day  or  two,  and  then  move  to  the  Valley, 
and  drive  from  Martinsburg  a  body  of  cavalry  which  has  re- 
turned there,  and  then  send  the  cavalry  to  destroy  effec- 
tually the  Baltimore  and  Ohio  Railroad  westward,  and  also 
to  destroy  the  coal  mines  and  furnaces  around  Cumberland, 
unless  I  get  different  orders.  I  will  start  for  the  Valley  in 
the  morning.  ...  I  will  retreat  in  forced  marches  by 
land  toward  Richmond." 

To  Wright's  message  that  he  would  halt  for  instructions 
before  going  south  of  the  Potomac,  Halleck  replied  : 

1  "  The  main  body  of  the  enemy,  with  his  trains,  had  crossed  before  we  reached 
this  place.  I  have  sent  the  cavalry  forward  to  see  whether  anything  can  be  done 
against  the  rear-guard,  but  presume  it  will  be  too  late.  The  enemy  had  and  kept 
about  twenty-four  hours  the  start  of  us,  which  gave  him  full  time  to  secure  his 
crossing  of  the  river.  I  have  not  been  able  to  get.  any  intelligence  from  G-eneral 
Hunter's  command,  and  have,  therefore,  for  further  operations  only  tbe  two  divi- 
sions of  my  corps,  numbering,  perhaps,  10,000,  and  some  500  possibly  of  the 
Nineteenth  Corps,  which,  unless  I  overrate  the  enemy's  strength,  is  wholly  insuf- 
ficient to  justify  the  following  up  of  the  enemy  on  the  other  side  of  the  Potomac. 
I  presume  this  will  not  be  the  policy  of  the  War  Department,  and  I  shall  there- 
fore wait  instructions  before  proceeding  farther,  which  I  hope  to  receive  by  the 
time  the  Nineteenth  Corps  arrives."  (Wright  to  Halleck,  Poolesville,  Md.,  July 
14,  1864,  6  p.m.) 


76  THE  SHENANDOAH  VALLEY. 

"General  Grant  directed  that  a  junction  of  your  forces  and  that  of 
General  Hunter  be  made  in  the  vicinity  of  Edward's  Ferry,  to  cut  off 
the  enemy's  retreat,  if  possible  ;  if  not,  to  pursue  him  South,  doing  him 
all  the  damage  you  can.  He  further  says  that  you  must  live  mainly 
upon  the  country.  He  does  not  say  how  far  South  you  are  to  pursue, 
but  I  will  get  his  instructions  on  that  point  and  communicate  them  to 
you.  You  will  therefore  continue  the  pursuit  till  you  receive  further 
orders.  In  giving  you  the  supreme  command  with  only  general  indica- 
tions as  to  what  you  are  to  do,  General  Grant  probably  intended  to 
leave  you  free  to  exercise  your  own  judgment.  As  your  force,  until 
Hunter  or  the  Nineteenth  Corps  reaches  you,  will  be  inferior  to  the  en- 
emy, you  will  move  with  caution.  Ricketts's  division  and  Kenly's  bri- 
gade, under  General  Ord,  left  this  morning  to  join  you.  They  number 
about  5,000.  About  4,000  of  the  Nineteenth  Corps,  under  General 
Emory,  have  also  left." 

This  despatch  illustrated  the  universal  leaning  on  the 
word  and  judgment  of  Grant,  who,  at  City  Point,  could  not 
know,  and  did  not  pretend  to  know,  the  exact  situation, 
from  hour  to  hour,  on  the  Potomac. 

Grant,  though  so  urgent  to  get  a  strong  force  "  south  of 
Early,"  and  so  confident  that  he  could  be  crushed,  was 
quick  to  perceive  that  Eariy  had  probably  made  good  his 
escape,  and  turned  to  a  new  plan.  He  told  Halleck  that 
"  the  Sixth  and  Nineteenth  Corps  should  be  got  here  [City 
Point]  without  any  delay,  so  that  they  may  be  used  before 
the  return  of  the  troops  sent  into  the  Valley  by  the  enemy. 
Hunter,  moving  up  the  Valley,  will  either  hold  a  large  force 
of  the  enemy,  or  he  will  be  enabled  to  reach  Gordonsville 
and  Charlottesville.  The  utter  destruction  of  the  road  at 
and  between  these  two  points  will  be  of  immense  value  to 
us.  I  do  not  intend  this  as  an  order  to  bring  Wright  back 
whilst  he  is  in  pursuit  of  the  enemy  with  any  prospect  of 
punishing  him,  but  to  secure  his  return  at  the  earliest  pos- 
sible moment  after  he   ceases  to  be   absolutely  necessary 


IN  THE  VALLEY   AGAIN.  77 

where  he  is."  This  quiet,  persistent  return  to  ideas  once 
fixed  was  characteristic  of  the  Lieutenant-General,  and  the 
destruction  of  Confederate  railroads  was  one  of  his  fixed 
ideas  ;  while  had  any  officer  ever  taken  Gordonsville,  start- 
ing from  any  quarter  of  the  compass,  there  is  probably  no 
end  of  the  hearty  approval  he  would  have  had  for  him. 

Nevertheless  he  did  not  precisely  like  to  have  the  pursuit 
cease.  "  If  the  enemy  has  left  Maryland,"  he  continued,  "  he 
should  have  upon  his  heels  veterans,  militiamen,  men  on 
horseback,  everything  that  can  be  got  to  follow,  to  eat  out 
Virginia  clear  and  clean,  as  far  as  they  go,  so  that  crows  flying 
over  it,  for  the  balance  of  this  season,  will  have  to  carry 
their  provender  with  them."  Still,  so  mixed  a  force  might 
have  been  only  food  for  Early's  powder  and  statistics  for 
Ould,  the  commissioner  of  prisoners.  Grant,  in  a  letter  of 
the  same  day,  expressed  the  view  that  "  Hunter  should  make 
all  the  Valley  south  of  the  B.  and  O.  road  a  desert,  as  high 
up  as  possible.  I  do  not  mean  that  houses  should  be  burned, 
but  every  particle  of  provisions  and  stock  should  be  re- 
moved, and  the  people  notified  to  move  out."  The  following 
day  he  renewed  his  two  ideas,  declaring  to  Halleck  that 
"  there  can  be  no  use  in  Wright's  following  the  enemy,  with 
the  latter  a  day  ahead,  after  he  has  passed  entirely  beyond 
[south  of]  all  our  communications.  I  want,  if  possible,  to 
get  the  Sixth  and  Nineteenth  Corps  here,  to  use  them  here 
before  the  enemy  can  get  Early  back.1'  Hunter,  he  said, 
could  always  hold  the  Valley  and  protect  Washington,  at 
least  until  aid  should  come  from  City  Point,  provided  he  did 
not  allow  himself  to  be  "  squeezed  out  to  one  side.  I  do 
not  think,"  he  added,  "there  is  now  any  further  danger  of 
an  attempt  to  invade  Maryland.  The  position  of  the  enemy 
in  the  West  and  here  is  such  as  to  demand  all  the  force  they 
can  get  together  to  save  vital  points.     ...     As  soon  as 


78  THE   SHENANDOAH  VALLEY. 

the  rebel  army  is  known  to  have  passed  Hunter's  forces, 
recall  Wright,  and  send  him  back  here  with  all  despatch  ; 
and  also  send  the  Nineteenth  Corps.  If  the  enemy  have  any 
notion  of  returning,  the  fact  will  be  developed  before  Wright 
can  start  back." 

Early  had  not  then  "  passed  Hunter's  forces,"  but  nobody 
knowing  exactly  where  he  was,  Halleck  turned  back  all 
troops  of  the  Sixth  and  Nineteenth  Corps  still  north  of  the 
Potomac  on  their  way  to  join  Wright,  and  the  same  day,  the 
17th,  notified  both  Hunter  and  Wright  of  the  change  of 
plan,  telling  the  latter  that  he  was  to  pursue  the  enemy  only 
far  enough  to  be  certain  that  he  was  really  in  full  retreat 
toward  Richmond,  and  then  to  direct  Crook  and  Sullivan 
"  to  continue  the  pursuit  cautiously,  under  General  Hunter's 
orders."     The  forces  of  Hunter :  had  now,  in  fact,  come  upon 


1  There  had  b?en  a  disposition  at  the  War  Office  to  regard  Hunter  as  the  cause 
of  all  the  mischief  culminating  with  the  siege  of  Washington  ;  but  a  special 
grievance  seemed  to  be  his  neglect  to  telegraph  frequently  to  Halleck  and  Stan- 
ton. General  Halleck,  the  14th,  suggested  to  him  that  "  General  Crook  would  be 
a  suitable  person  for  the  immediate  command  "  of  such  troops  as  he  might  send 
to  form  a  junction  with  Wright,  adding  that  ''for  the  last  two  weeks  little  or 
nothing  of  a  reliable  character  has  been  heard  from  you."  Hunter  replied  in  a 
spirited  letter  to  Stanton,  expressing  regret  for  such  an  imputation  on  the  ground 
that  it  must  be  the  President's,  conveyed  through  Halleck.  He  said  that  if  any 
important  events  had  occurred  in  his  department,  of  which  necessarily  the  War 
Offioe  must  not  have  learned  earlier  than  he,  they  had  not  yet  come  to  his  knowl- 
edge ;  that  his  first  step  on  hearing  of  Sigel's  retreat  from  Martinsburg  had  been 
to  instruct  him  that  he  must  report  directly  to  Washington,  as  he  himself  would 
be  too  far  distant  and  too  much  occupied  ;  it  was  true  that  he  "  could  have  tele- 
graphed many  alarming  rumors  every  hour,"  but  this  was  not  his  practice,  and 
of  reports  without  the  elements  of  knowledge  or  credibility  it  seemed  to  him  that 
there  must  be  already  more  than  enough  in  the  vicinity  of  Baltimore  and  Wash- 
ington ;  moreover,  he  was  too  busy,  night  and  day.  in  the  task  of  hurrying  for- 
ward his  command  against  the  enemy,  to  give  time  to  any  labors  not  of  public 
benefit — probably  it  was  forgotten  that  his  Lynchburg  expedition  had  exhausted 
the  ammunition,  provisions,  and  clothing  of  his  tired  troops ;  that  in  coming  up 
the  Ohio  they  had  to  be  disembarked  at  every  shoal  and  marched  around  it  till 
the  steamers  could  be  sparred  over,  and  that,  after  all,  they  found  the  railroad 
broken  by  Early's  raids.     In  short,  as  the  interests  of  the  service  had  been  his 


IN  THE  VALLEY  AGAIN.  79 

the  scene  ;  and  his  advance,  which  arrived  at  Martinsburg 
July  10th  and  11th,  pausing  two  days  to  refit  and  to  allow 
other  troops  to  get  up  from  Cumberland,  proceeded  to  Duf- 
field's  the  13th,  and  next  day  through  Harper's  Ferry  across 
the  Potomac,  on  the  pontoon  bridge,  camping  at  Knoxville, 
on  the  left  bank.  That  night,  the  14th,  Hunter,  having  ar- 
rived at  Harper's  Ferry,  received  from  Wright  a  notification 
to  join  him  at  Leesburg,  and  early  the  following  morning 
started  eastward  the  divisions  of  Sullivan  and  Mulligan, 
7,000  strong,  under  the  former,  and  Duffle's  division  of  2,000 


highest  aim,  to  be  pursued  at  any  personal  sacrifice,  he  most  respectfully  re- 
quested to  be  relieved  from  command  by  some  officer  more  enjoying  the  confi- 
dence of  the  President.  The  same  day,  July  15th,  he  wrote  to  the  Adjutant- 
General,  requesting  to  be  "relieved  from  the  command  of  this  Department, 
where  my  services  can  he  of  no  further  use,"  and  then  a  second  time  to  the  same 
officer,  reiterating  this  request ;  while  Crook,  arriving  that  day  from  West  Vir- 
ginia with  two  of  his  brigades,  3,400  strong,  was  ordered  by  him  to  relieve  Sulli- 
van and  take  command  of  all  the  forces  in  the  field. 

The  very  day,  July  15th,  that  Hunter  sent  this  letter  from  Harper's  Ferry, 
where  he  had  arrived  from  West  Virginia  the  day  before,  he  received  the  most 
powerful  of  all  reinfoi cements  for  his  cause.  "I  am  sorry,"  wrofo  Grant  to 
Dana,  from  City  Point,  "to  see  such  a  disposition  to  condemn  as  biave  an  old 
soldier  as  Hunter  is  known  to  be  without  a  hearing.  He  is  known  to  have  ad- 
vanced into  the  enemy's  country  toward  their  main  army,  inflicting  a  much 
greater  damage  upon  them  than  they  have  inflicted  upon  us,  with  double  his 
force,  and  moving  directly  away  from  onr  main  army.  Hunter  acted,  too,  in  a 
country  where  we  had  no  friends.  .  .  .  Even  the  enemy  give  him  credit  for 
courage,  and  congratulate  themselves  that  he  will  give  them  a  chance  of  getting 
even  with  him."  Two  days  later  Hunter,  hearing  nothing  from  Washington, 
wrote  a  brief  letter  to  President  Lincoln,  asking  to  be  relieved  from  the  command 
of  his  Department.  "  When  an  officer."  he  said,  "is  selected  as  the  scapegoat  to 
cover  up  the  blunders  of  others,  the  best  'nfcerests  of  the  country  require  that  he 
should  at  once  be  relieved  from  command."  President  Lincoln  replied  frankly : 
'■  You  misconceive.  The  order  you  complain  of  was  only  nominally  mine,  and 
was  framed  by  those  who  really  made  it  with  no  thought  of  making  you  a  scape- 
goat. It  seemed  to  be  General  Grant's  wish  that  the  forces  under  Gener.il 
Wright  and  those  under  you  should  join,  and  drive  at  the  enemy,  under  General 
Wright.  Wright  had  the  larger  part  of  the  force,  but  you  had  the  rank.  It 
was  thought  that  you  would  prefer  Crook's  commanding  your  post  to  your  serv- 
ing in  person  under  Wright.  That  is  all  of  it.  General  Grant  wishes  you  to  re- 
main in  command  of  the  Department,  and  I  do  not  wish  to  order  otherwise." 


80  THE  SHENANDOAH  VALLEY. 

cavalry,  which  had  only  reached  Martinsburg  from  Parkers- 
burg  about  noon  of  the  14th.  The  column  took  the  tow- 
path  of  the  Chesapeake  and  Ohio  Canal  to  Berlin,  and  there 
fording  the  river,  nearly  hip-deep,  marched  for  the  Lees- 
burg  pike,  passing  through  Lovettsville,  and  thence  south- 
ward ;  but  instead  of  pressing  forward  to  the  pike,  Sullivan, 
when  four  miles  short  of  it,  turned  to  the  west,  going  into 
camp  at  Hillsboro. 

Comparison  of  dates  and  places  shows  that  these  West 
Virginia  forces  were  now  coming  in  directly  and  very  fast 
upon  Early's  right  flank,  and  that,  had  it  been  wise  to  do  so, 
they  might  have  been  thrown  exactly  across  his  path ;  but 
the  night  of  the  15th,  while  Sullivan  was  at  Hillsboro, 
Wright  was  still  at  Poolesville,  Md.,  north  of  the  Potomac. 
Had  Wright  and  Sullivan  possessed  a  common  understand- 
ing for  vigorous  action  in  the  best  possible  way,  the  former 
close  on  Early's  heels  with  15,000  men,  and  Ricketts  and 
Kenly  hurrying  forward  with  several  thousand  more,  Sulli- 
van and  Duffle  might  apparently  have  been  able  to  use  their 
9,000  men  with  great  effect  against  Early's  line  of  march, 
from  Leesburg  to  Snicker's  Gap.  The  15th,  on  the  way  from 
Lovettsville  to  Purcellsville,  Sullivan's  advance  captured 
a  few  of  Jackson's  cavalry,  Early's  forerunners. 

The  evening  of  the  15th,  Wright,  at  Poolesville,  had 
received  Halleck's  despatch,  ordering  him  to  continue  the 
pursuit,  but  with  caution,  and  about  the  same  time  had 
learned,  both  from  Hunter's  staff  officers  and  from  his  own 
couriers,  that  Sullivan  was  moving  by  way  of  Hillsboro 
toward  Leesburg.  The  nest  morning,  therefore,  he  crossed 
at  White's  Ford  for  Leesburg,  "  fearing  that  he  [Sullivan] 
might  meet  the  enemy  in  too  strong  force  for  his  com- 
mand." The  troops  of  the  Nineteenth  Corps  had  reached  him 
the  15th.     "  The  necessity  for  supporting  General  Sullivan's 


IN   THE   VALLEY   AGAIN.  81 

movement,"  said  Wright  to  Halleck,  "renders  it  necessary 
to  move  in  advance  of  a  portion  of  the  trains  not  yet  np ; 
but  I  think  they  will  be  sufficiently  covered  by  the  general 
movement  and  the  small  force  left  for  their  protection." 
Wright  camped  at  Clark's  Gap,  three  miles  beyond  Lees- 
burg,  reporting  to  Halleck  that  he  had  struck  the  rear-guard 
of  the  enemy's  cavalry  at  this  place,  but  that  the  latter 
retreated  before  the  infantry  could  get  up. 

Sullivan,  on  his  part,  remained  at  Hillsboro  from  night 
of  the  15th  till  afternoon  of  the  16th ;  and  at  noon  of  the 
latter  day  Crook  came  up  and  assumed  command  of  all 
Hunter's  field  forces.  Four  or  five  hours  later  he  wrote  to 
Hunter  that  he  had  sent  the  cavalry  out  in  different  direc- 
tions, immediately  on  arriving  at  Hillsboro,  "  and  have  lain 
still  until  I  could  learn  something  definite  of  the  enemy's 
movements."  Now,  while  Wright,  that  morning,  leaving 
Poolesville,  had  forded  the  Potomac  and  marched  to  Lees- 
burg,  Early,  who  had  camped  at  Leesburg  since  the  14th, 
marched  through  Hamilton  and  Purcellsville,  to  Snicker's 
and  Ashby's  Gaps.  Crook,  hearing  that  there  was  a  wagon 
train  near  Waterford,  ordered  a  brigade  thither,  to  strike  the 
enemy's  cavalry ;  and  toward  evening  he  marched  his  com- 
mand forward  and  camped  at  Purcellsville,  midway  between 
Leesburg  and  Snicker's  Gap.  A  good  part  of  Early's  trains 
and  columns,  therefore,  must  have  been  for  many  hours  close 
to  Crook's  command ;  but  that  officer,  who  only  arrived  at 
Hillsboro  at  noon,  did  not  know  this,  and  when  his  cavalry 
informed  him,  the  infantry,  he  reported,  could  not  be  got 
over  from  Hillsboro  in  season  to  attack  Early's  flank.  But 
Duffie  had  sent  Tibbets's  small  brigade  to  fall  on  the  trains, 
and  this  it  did  near  Purcellsville,  capturing,  without  much 
difficulty,   one   hundred  and  seventeen  mules   and  horses, 

eighty-two  wagons,  and  50  or  60  prisoners,  Tibbets's  own 

4* 


82  THE  SHENANDOAH   VALLEY. 

loss  being  but  20=  This  spirited  attack  by  three  small  regi- 
ments, a  few  hundred  strong,  is  worth  commemorating,  as 
the  only  instance  in  which  Early  was  forced  to  drop  any  of 
his  Maryland  spoils.  Troops  from  both  Rodes's  and  Ram- 
seur's  divisions  were  hurried  to  repel  this  danger,  and  cap- 
tured a  gun  and  a  caisson  in  doing  so.  Tibbets  brought  off 
thirty-seven  loaded  wagons,  and  burned  over  forty  more. 

The  forces  of  Hunter  and  Wright  had  now  come  together 
just  in  season  to  allow  Early  to  slip  between  them,  grazing 
the  last  of  his  trains  and  their  guard.  The  night  of  the 
16th,  Crook,  from  his  camp  at  Purcellsville,  half  a  dozen 
miles  from  Wright's,  reported  for  orders,  and  was  instructed 
to  move  a  force  to  Snicker's  Gap.  He  despatched  Duffle 
and  Mulligan  for  this  purpose ;  but  Early,  who  had  crossed 
the  Shenandoah  at  Snicker's  Ferry  opposite  the  Gap,  planted 
two  guns  there,  and  checked  farther  approach,  Duffle  los- 
ing 17  men  in  the  affair.  Wright  remained  at  Clark's  Gap, 
near  Leesburg,  and  notified  Halleck  that  he  would  verify 
the  enemy's  retreat  by  sending  a  column  ahead.  The  18th, 
he  instructed  Crook  to  move  in  force  through  Snicker's 
Gap,  where  his  advance  was,  and  he  put  the  Sixth  Corps  in 
motion  for  the  same  point.  Duffle  was  sent  to  Ashby's 
Gap ;  but  there  he  found,  the  next  day,  that  the  enemy  was 
in  force,  and  after  crossing  the  Shenandoah  at  Berry's  Ferry, 
was  driven  back  with  no  little  loss,  about  50  of  his  troops  be- 
ing captured,  and  a  considerable  number  killed  and  wounded. 

Meanwhile,  the  afternoon  of  the  18th,  from  the  summit 
of  the  Blue  Ridge  the  enemy  could  be  seen  on  the  heights 
beyond  the  river.  Early's  force  was  around  Berry ville,  and 
Breckenridge  had  charge  of  the  fords  of  the  Shenandoah. 
About  two  o'clock,  Crook  directed  Thoburn  to  cross  with 
his  own  division  and  the  Third  Brigade  of  the  Second,  to  dis- 
lodge the  forces  there,  and  to  move  for  this  purpose  to  Island 


IN  THE   VALLEY   AGAIN.  83 

Ford,  a  mile  or  more  below  Snicker's  Ferry.  Here  the 
enemy,  who  had  a  picket  behind  bushes,  opened  a  hot  fire ; 
but  Wells's  brigade  found  a  good  wading-place  a  few  hun- 
dred yards  below,  and  dashing  across,  carried  the  ford,  cap- 
turing 15  skirmishers  and  the  captain  commanding  them. 
From  these  it  was  learned  that  Early's  whole  force  was  not 
distant,  and  Gordon  and  Bodes  only  a  mile  or  two  away. 
Thoburn,  on  sending  back  this  news  to  Crook,  was  di- 
rected not  to  attempt  to  move  up  to  hold  Snicker's  Ferry 
for  the  passage  of  the  army,  as  at  first  intended,  but  to  await 
a  division  of  the  Sixth  Corps  which  would  cross  for  his  sup- 
port. Accordingly  a  position  was  selected,  with  the  First, 
Wells's  brigade,  on  the  left,  the  Third,  Frost's,  in  the  centre, 
and  the  Second,  commanded  by  Thoburn  himself,  on  the 
right.  Beyond  the  right  flank  was  a  force  of  about  1,000 
dismounted  cavalry,  odds  and  ends  of  various  regiments 
under  Lieutenant-Colonel  Young,  Fourth  Pennsylvania. 
Fully  half  an  hour  later,  Breckenridge  advanced  against 
Thoburn's  left  and  centre,  with  his  two  divisions,  while  Early 
sent  Bodes  to  fall  on  the  Union  right.  The  dismounted 
cavalry  on  this  flank  was  the  first  to  break,  under  the  fire 
of  Bodes,  and  retreated  across  the  river,  despite  the  efforts 
of  Young  to  rally  it.  Thoburn,  who  was  in  two  lines,  rap- 
idly changed  front  to  stem  the  tide,  but  at  length  the 
heavy  impact  of  Bodes  was  too  much  for  his  force,  which 
was  driven  into  the  stream.  The  left  of  his  line,  less  sharply 
assailed,  withdrew  in  good  order,  considering  that  its  task 
was  the  trying  one  of  retreating  across  a  river  under  fire 
from  the  bank.1     The  dead  and  wounded  were  left  on  the 

1  "  The  head  of  the  column  of  the  Sixth  Corps  had  reached  the  crossing  of  the 
river  by  this  time,  and  as  General  Ricketts,  commanding  the  corps,  did  not  think 
it  prudent  under  the  circumstances  to  cross  his  men,  and  as  the  enemy  were  pre- 
paring for  another  attack  on  my  lines,  I  gave  the  order  to  fall  back,  which  was 
done  in  good  order  by  the  remaining  troops  "  (Crook's  Report,  October  12,  1864). 


84  THE  SHENANDOAH  VALLEY. 

field,  and  Thoburn's  casualties  in  this  engagement  were  65 
killed,  301  wounded,  and  56  missing — total,  422.  The  en- 
emy must  also  have  suffered  severely,  for  the  troops  of  Rodes, 
who  halted  on  the  bank  to  fire  at  the  fugitives,  had  exposed 
themselves  to  the  Union  batteries.  Next  day,  the  Con- 
federates were  busy  burying  their  dead  and  removing  their 
wounded. 

In  this  affair  no  reproach  can  be  applied  to  Thoburn's 
division,  for  it  would  have  been  preposterous  to  suppose  that, 
unaided  and  in  an  unintrenched  position,  it  could  withstand 
the  shock  of  all  the  force  Early  might  choose  to  bring  against 
it.  The  clue  to.  what  Thoburn's  men  considered  an  inex- 
cusable lack  of  support  may  perhaps  be  found  in  a  despatch 
of  Wright  to  Halleck  :  "  The  attempt  at  crossing  was  resisted 
in  strong  force  ;  and  believing  it  better  to  turn  his  position, 
I  designed  doing  so  by  way  of  Keyes  Gap,  thus  effecting  a 
junction  with  some  of  the  forces  of  General  Hunter  lower 
down  the  valley."  But  the  repulse  of  Duffie  at  Ashby's  Gap 
and  other  events  induced  him  "  to  defer  the  movement  by 
way  of  Keyes  Gap,  in  the  belief  that  a  crossing  might  be  ef- 
fected where  we  were."  "Wright  remained  at  Snicker's  Gap 
through  the  19th ;  and  that  night  Early  retreated,  taking 
the  road  to  Strasburg. 

Wright  crossed  the  river  next  day,  the  20  th,  to  the  battle- 
field, where  were  visible  many  Union  dead,  heads,  arms  and 
legs  protruding  from  the  slight  heaps  of  earth  hastily 
shovelled  on  them, while  many  Confederate  graves  also  marked 
the  field.  He  notified  Hunter  that  he  should  move  the 
same  day  "  to  Berryville,  perhaps  farther,  toward  Winches- 
ter," asking  that  supplies  should  be  sent  to  the  former  point, 
and  also  all  spare  troops,  "  to  swell  my  force,  making  it  as 
large  as  possible  to  meet  the  enemy."  Hunter  had  already,  two 
days  before,  pushed  all  his  available  troops  up  the  valley,  in 


IN    THE  VALLEY   AGAIN.  85 

co-operation,  and  now  urged  them  forward  again ;  but  Wright, 
on  more  mature  reflection,  regarded  his  orders  as  contem- 
plating his  return,  when  he  had  verified  the  enemy's  retreat ; 
and  accordingly,  instead  of  moving  to  Winchester,  he  re- 
crossed  the  Shenandoah,  and  marched  back  through  Snicker's 
Ferry  to  Leesburg.  There,  the  21st,  he  addressed  Halleck, 
saying,  "  Conceiving  the  object  of  the  expedition  to  be  ac- 
complished, I  at  once  started  back,  as  directed  in  your  or- 
ders, and  to-night  shall  encamp  on  the  east  side  of  Goose 
Creek,  on  the  Leesburg  Pike.  Two  days'  easy  march  will 
bring  the  command  to  Washington." 

Lieutenant-General  Grant,  who  had  for  several  days  been 
pressed  by  Halleck  in  regard  to  the  defencelessness  of  the 
Maryland  border,  caused  by  the  expiration  of  hundred- 
days  and  other  enlistments,  at  this  time  told  him  that  he 
might  "retain  Wright's  command  until  the  departure  of 
Early  is  assured,  or  other  forces  are  collected  to  make  his 
presence  unnecessary.  If  Early  has  halted  about  Berryville, 
what  is  to  prevent  Wright  and  Hunter  from  attacking  him  ?  " 
Wright,  however,  was  already  returning. 

To  comprehend  Early's  precipitate  retreat  from  the  line 
of  the  Shenandoah,  we  must  now  turn  our  eyes  to  another 
quarter.  At  Harper's  Ferry  Hunter,  whose  troops  from  the 
Kanawha  had  continued  to  arrive  by  rail,  had  at  command 
a  large  body  of  men,  in  addition  to  those  under  Crook. 
Amongst  them  was  Averell's  cavalry,  whose  advance  reached 
Martinsburg  the  17th,  and  immediately  moved  up  the  valley 
to  find  the  enemy.  The  larger  part  of  Crook's  own  infantry 
division  had  also  arrived,  and  when,  the  18th,  Hunter  learned 
that  Crook  was  to  attack  at  Snicker's  and  Ashby's  Gaps,  he  di- 
rected Colonel  E.  B.  Hayes  to  unite  a  portion  of  his  brigade 
to  two  of  Duval's  regiments  then  at  Keyes  Ferry,  and  to 
march  directly  up  the  Shenandoah  to  Snicker's  Ferry,  there 


86  THE   SHENANDOAH    VALLEY. 

to  strike  the  enemy  in  conjunction  with  Crook,  and  then  to 
join  that  officer. 

Hayes  failed  to  get  through,  and  fell  back  to  Keyes  Ferry  ; 
but  Hunter  pushed  him  forward  again,  and  meantime  called 
Averell's  attention  to  Crook's  purposes  at  Snicker's  Ferry. 
"  Perhaps  by  a  prompt  move  in  that  direction,"  he  said, 
"you  can  render  General  Crook  great  assistance,  and  capture 
a  number  of  wagons.  You  must,  however,  exercise  your  own 
good  judgment  in  the  matter,  and  do  as  you  think  best  under 
the  circumstances."  Averellwith  about  1,000  of  his  cavalry, 
consisting  of  the  First  and  Third  Virginia  and  Fourteenth 
Pennsylvania,  with  the  First  Virginia  and  First  Ohio  Bat- 
teries, aided  by  Duval's  infantiy  brigade,  Ninth  and  Four- 
teenth Virginia,  and  Ninety- first  and  Thirty-fourth  Ohio,  1,350 
strong,  in  all  2,350  men,  moved  up  the  pike  from  Martins- 
burg  and  drove  the  Confederate  pickets  from  Darksville  to 
Stephenson's  Depot,  half  a  dozen  miles  from  Winchester. 
This  vigorous  stroke  planted  him  on  Early's  rear,  menacing 
his  trains  ;  and  that  night  the  Confederate  general,  yielding 
the  river  whose  passage  he  had  shown  a  resolution  to  dis- 
pute, retreated  through  Berry ville,  Millwood,  and  White 
Post,  then  westward  to  Newtown  and  Middletown,  thence 
along  the  valley  pike  southward  toward  Strasburg. 

Meanwhile,  to  check  Averell,  he  sent  to  Winchester  Bam- 
seur's  division  and  two  batteries  ; l  the  cavalry  of  Jackson 
and  of  Vaughan,  whose  brigade  had  just  been  remounted, 
were  already  there,  endeavoring  to  keep  him  back.  But  the 
20th,  Averell,  who  had  received  a  reinforcement  of  300  of 
the  Second  Virginia  cavalry,  making  him  about  2,700  strong, 
yet  still  numerically  inferior  to  the  enemy,  moved  up  the 
pike  toward  the  town  in  line  of  battle,  a  regiment  of  infantry 


1  Early  says  one  battery  was  sent,  but  General  A.  L.  Long,  then  his  chief  of  ar- 
tillery, says  that  two  went. 


IN  THE  VALLEY  AGAIN.  87 

on  each  side,  with  skirmishers  out,  another  regiment  on  each 
side  in  column,  in  rear  of  the  right  and  left  flanks,  artillery 
in  the  centre,  and  a  regiment  of  cavalry  on  each  flank. 
Three  miles  north  of  Winchester,  on  Carter's  Farm,  Eamseur 
was  encountered,  "moving  by  the  flank,"  according  to 
Early's  account,  with  intent  to  capture  Averell.  At  all  events 
he  rapidly  formed,  with  Johnson's  brigade  on  his  right, 
Hoke's  on  his  left,  and  Pegram's  in  reserve.  Averell  de- 
ployed the  two  infantry  regiments  which  were  in  column, 
drew  aside  his  cavalry  skirmishers  from  the  front  to  the 
flanks,  and  opened  a  hot  fire  from  his  twelve  guns.  "Without 
pausing,  he  sent  in  all  his  cavalry  and  infantry.  Duval's 
charge  was  across  an  open  field,  the  two  Ohio  regiments  east 
of  the  pike  and  the  two  Virginia  regiments  west.  The  vigor- 
ous assault  broke  Eamseur's  left,  which,  followed  by  the  re- 
mainder of  the  force,  fled  in  confusion  to  Winchester,  leaving 
in  the  Union  general's  hands  four  pieces  of  artillery,  with 
203  killed  and  wounded  on  the  field,  while  the  unwounded 
brought  the  list  of  captured  up  to  17  officers  and  250  men.1 
The  total  Confederate  loss  was  probably  more  than  400, 
including   Generals  Lewis   and  Lilly  among  the  captured 


1  The  Richmond  Examiner  of  that  period  describes  this  action  as  "the  deplor- 
able affair  in  which  Ramseur's  division  was  humiliated  in  the  dust."  Ramseur 
was  severely  criticised  for  this  defeat ;  but  Rodes,  defending  him  in  a  letter  to 
Ewell,  September  12th,  uses  the  following  language  :  "  Hoke"s  two  left  regiments 
broke  and  ran,  behaving  badly,  as  General  Lewis  himself  said.  Ramseur  was 
on  the  right,  or  near  Johnson's  brigade — thought  everything  was  going  on  fine  y 
till  he  saw  this  panic  at  the  left.  He  immediately  endeavored  to  restore  the  line 
by  advancing  Pegram's  brigade,  but  it  being  embarrassed  by  Hoke's  panic-stricken 
men  became  so  itself ;  broke  and  fled,  as  did  the  balance  of  Hoke's  brigade,  and 
finally  Johnson's.  Now,  sir,  this  result  would  not  occur  one  time  in  a  hundred 
with  these  same  troops  under  the  same  circumstances,  and  ought  never  to  have 
occurred  with  old  troops  at  all."  Ramseur  supposed,  from  Vaughan's  reconnois- 
sance  the  day  before,  that  there  were  but  two  or  three  regiments  in  his  front, 
which  caused  him  to  advance  with  too  little  precaution  ;  and  thrown  into  confu- 
sion, the  troops  could  not  be  rallied. 


88  THE   SHENANDOAH  VALLEY. 

wounded,  and  Colonel  Board,  Fifty-eighth.  Virginia,  among 
the  killed.  Averell's  loss  was  208  killed  and  wounded,  and  6 
missing — total  214  ;  and  his  action  of  Carter's  Farm  was  un- 
usually creditable  to  the  Union  arms,  while  seldom  has  a 
Confederate  defeat  been  so  squarely  acknowledged. 

Averell  refrained  from  endeavoring  to  occupy  "Winchester, 
and  fortunately ;  for  Early,  who  was  at  Newtown,  on  the  way 
to  Strasburg,  hearing  of  Rarnseur's  mishap,  hurried  Bodes 
to  his  relief,  and  at  sundown  demonstrated  against  Averell. 
But  knowing  that  his  own  rear  and  all  his  trains  would  now 
again  be  in  danger  should  "Wright  and  Crook  move  rapidly 
against  them  from  Snicker's  Ferry  through  Berryville,  he 
contented  himself  with  assuring  Bamseur's  safety,  and  then 
withdrew  that  night  to  Newtown,  there  halting  his  army  while 
his  trains  moved  south.  The  next  day  he  went  to  Middle- 
town,  and  the  day  after,  July  22d,  to  Strasburg.  Averell 
forthwith  marched  beyond  "Winchester  to  Kernstown,  where, 
the  22d,  he  was  joined  by  Crook  from  Berryville. 

Here  at  Strasburg  the  retreat  of  Early  came  to  an  end ; 
and  accordingly,  although,  as  we  shall  presently  see,  hostili- 
ties were  resumed  without  a  break  between  the  two  forces 
thus  stationed  less  than  twenty  miles  apart  on  the  pike  at 
Strasburg  and  Kernstown,  yet  this  is  a  fitting  stage  at  which 
to  briefly  review  the  campaign. 

The  pursuit  of  Early  was  a  palpable  failure,  accentuated 
by  the  successes  which  followed  the  two  minor  attempts 
made  against  him  by  detachments — Tibbets's  with  a  handful 
of  cavalry  near  Purcellsville,  and  Averell's  handsome  victory 
at  Winchester.  Bat  the  fragmentary  and  extemporized 
character  of  the  pursuing  forces — drawn  from  many  quarters, 
from  the  Army  of  the  Potomac,  from  Louisiana,  from  the 
Kanawha  and  Shenandoah  Valleys,  and  from  the  reserves  of 


IN  THE  VALLEY  AGAIN.  89 

Northern  States — prevented  them  from  being  immediately 
moulded  into  a  good  weapon  of  offence.  Looked  at  in 
retrospect,  with  the  light  of  present  knowledge  of  Early's 
strength  and  aims,  the  positions  occupied  by  the  various 
forces  of  Crook,  Averell,  and  Sigel,  not  far  from  the  enemy's 
prospective  line  of  retreat,  with  Wright's  army  in  his  rear, 
are  seen  to  have  been  favorable  for  endangering  his  march. 
Given  the  problem  of  places,  times,  and  forces,  after  the 
event,  it  might  be  easy  to  show  that  Early  could  either  have 
been  engaged  in  front  and  flank  by  the  Valley  troops  until 
those  from  Washington  should  attack  his  rear,  or  detained 
by  the  latter  till  Crook  could  draw  near.  Still,  he  would 
only  have  needed  to  go  a  little  farther  southward,  in  order 
to  escape,  crossing  the  Blue  Ridge  into  the  Valley  by  some 
gap  higher  up  than  Snicker's  or  Ashby's.  But  it  is  little 
wonder  that  there  was  not  that  systematic  use  of  the  pursu- 
ing forces  which  might  have  been  made  had  they  been  parts 
of  one  army,  under  a  single  effective  head.  Wright's  in- 
structions to  go  only  far  enough  to  verify  the  enemy's  re- 
treat, and  to  be  ready  to  return  speedily  to  City  Point,  must 
also  have  embarrassed  any  purpose  of  vigorous  pursuit. 

Moreover,  when  the  strength  of  Early  is  considered,  the 
cry  for  "  bagging  "  him,  which  arose  from  all  quarters,  was 
unreasonable ;  but  it  was  a  frequent  experience  during  the 
war  that  people  whose  most  ardent  prayers  on  one  day  were 
for  simple  relief  from  an  invading  army,  though  a  bridge  of 
gold  should  be  built  to  entice  it  away,  on  the  next,  when 
the  enemy  had  gone,  clamored  fiercely  for  his  capture. 
Wright  finally  had  a  force  at  command  much  larger  than 
Early's,  but  it  only  joined  him  by  degrees,  and  his  cavalry, 
at  first,  was  not  even  a  thousand  strong. 

Early,  on  the  other  hand,  was  sharply  criticised  at  the 
South  for  lack  of  enterprise  in  not  having  captured  Wash- 


90  THE  SHENANDOAH  VALLEY. 

ingfcon.  Belying  for  its  land  defences  on  many  forts,  con- 
nected by  rifle-pits,  a  large  force  would  be  needed  by  the 
city  to  so  man  these  defences  as  to  guarantee  that  not  one  of 
them  should  be  carried  by  the  sudden  attack  of  a  bold  army. 
Early,  however,  did  not  know,  and  could  not  wisely  have 
taken  for  granted,  the  condition  of  Washington  prior  to  the 
arrival  of  the  transports.  His  expedition  was  based  on  the 
opposite  theory,  that  of  drawing  thither  from  Grant  many 
troops  for  its  defence.  He  was  prepared  to  believe  that 
20,000  or  30,000  veterans  were  concentrated  there,  because 
that  would  have  been  the  complete  accomplishment  and 
vindication  of  his  campaign.  In  the  preceding  chapter  the 
opinion  has  been  expressed  that  Early  acted  prudently  in 
not  assaulting  the  works,  after  arriving  from  Frederick. 
But  while  his  march  from  the  Monocacy  was  as  rapid  as 
possible,  he  had  made  halts  at  previous  stages  of  his  jour- 
ney longer  than  simple  rest  required,  and  the  omission  of 
either  of  these  halts  might  have  enabled  him  to  seize 
Washington,  provided  its  reinforcements  had  arrived  no 
sooner  than  they  actually  did.  The  first  of  his  delays  was 
in  the  lower  Valley ;  his  object  was  the  breaking  of  the  rail- 
road and  canal,  for  which  very  important  task  he  seems  to 
have  received  special  instructions  from  Lee  ;  for  perhaps 
the  Confederate  chief l  aimed  to  make  sure  an  attainable  ad- 
vantage, before  essaying  a  bolder  enterprise  that  seemed  too 
doubtful  of  accornplishnient  to  justify  the  sacrifice  of  genuine 
gains  to  its  mere  possibilities.     The  second  series  of  delays 

1  "Lee  had  been  so  crippled  by  his  losses  in  the  Wilderness  that  he  could  not 
detach  a  force  large  enough  to  endanger  Washington  without  risking  his  position 
at  Richmond ;  and  when  Early  reached  the  capital  he  found  troops  assembled 
there  sufficient  to  repel  him.  .  .  .  Lee  could  have  had  but  little  hope  of  cap- 
turing Washington,  though  he  doubtless  believed  that  Grant  might  be  compelled 
to  weaken  himself  in  front  of  Richmond,  and  perhaps  to  raise  the  siege"  (Ba- 
deau's  Military  History  of  U.  S.  Grant). 


IN  THE  VALLEY  AGAIN.  91 

occurred  in  and  around  Sharpsburg,  where  Early  consumed 
much  time  in  minor  operations,  principally  in  demonstrating 
against  Sigel  at  Maryland  Heights,  a  position,  if  not  hope- 
less, at  least  needless  to  carry.  That  it  would  be  folly  to 
essay  a  costly  assault  on  the  Heights  for  any  resulting  cap- 
tures was  the  conclusion  at  length  reached ;  and  probably  a 
brief  demonstration  against  Sigel  by  a  division,  while  the 
main  body  and  the  trains  were  passing  as  rapidly  as  possi- 
ble from  Shepherdstown  to  Frederick,  would  have  accom- 
plished all  that  Early  needed. 

The  reasonable  inference,  therefore,  from  this  fact,  is  that 
Early  did  not  fully  expect,  in  setting  out  from  Lynchburg, 
to  seize  by  a  petty  side-stroke  the  chief  prize  of  the  war.  A 
city  girt  with  strong  works,1  on  which  much  engineering 
skill  had  been  lavished,  situated  on  a  broad,  navigable  river, 


1  "  Every  prominent  point,  at  intervals  of  eight  hundred  to  one  thousand  yards, 
was  occupied  by  an  inclosed  field  fort,  every  important  approach  or  depression  of 
ground,  unseen  from  the  forts,  swept  by  a  battery  for  field-guns,  and  the  whole 
connected  by  rifle-trenches  which  were  in  fact  lines  of  infantry  parapet,  furnish- 
ing emplacement  for  two  ranks  of  men,  and  affording  covered  communication 
along  the  line,  while  roads  were  opened  wherever  necessary,  so  that  troops  and 
artillery  could  be  moved  rapidly  from  one  point  of  the  immense  periphery  to 
an  ther,  or,  under  cover,  from  point  to  point  along  the  line.  .  .  .  The 
counterscarps  were  surrounded  by  abatis;  bomb-proofs  were  provided  in  nearly 
all  the  forts ;  all  guns  not  solely  intended  for  distant  fire,  placed  in  embrasures 
and  well  traversed.  .  .  .  All  commanding  points  on  which  an  enemy  would 
be  likely  to  concentrate  artillery  to  overpower  that  of  one  or  two  of  our  forts  or 
batteries  were  subjected  not  only  to  the  fire,  direct  and  cross,  of  many  points 
along  the  line,  but  also  from  heavy  rifled  guns  from  distant  points  unattainable 
by  the  enemy's  field  guns.  With  all  these  developments  the  lines  certainly  ap- 
proximated to  the  maximum  degree  of  strength  which  can  be  attained  from  un- 
revetted  earth-works.  .  .  .  Bodies  of  hastily  organized  men,  such  as  team- 
sters, quartermaster's  men,  citizen  volunteers,  etc.,  sent  out  to  the  lines,  could 
hardly  go  amiss.  .  .  .  The  movable  batteries  of  field-guns  found,  without  a 
moment's  delay,  the  appropriate  places  where,  covered  from  the  enemy's  fire,  they 
occupied  the  very  best  positions  which  the  topography  afforded.  .  .  .  Inade- 
quately manned  as  they  were,  the  fortifications  compelled  at  least  a  concentration 
and  an  arraying  of  force  on  the  part  of  the  assailants,  and  thus  gave  time  for  the 
arrival  of  succor"  (Barnard's  Defences  of  Washington). 


92  THE   SHENANDOAH  VALLEY. 

not  fordable  within  thirty  miles,  and  from  which  ships  of 
war  had  a  fire  along  more  than  half  the  contour,  should  not 
be  had  for  the  asking  by  a  mere  expeditionary  column, 
worn  down  by  the  prolonged  tramp  from  Lynchburg, 
especially  when  reinforcement  was  facile  from  the  lines  of 
Petersburg.  Early's  campaign  was  based,  we  must  con- 
clude, not  on  anticipating  but  on  compelling  this  reinforce-, 
ment.  Its  real  purpose  may  be  fairly  considered  such  a 
demonstration  against  Washington  as  would  break  up  the 
campaign  against  Richmond.  Hence  Early  was  inclined  to 
impute  greater  strength  than  they  possessed  to  Sigel's  small 
garrisons,  which,  eluding  his  clutch  at  Martinsburg  and 
Harper's  Ferry,  had  taken  post  at  Maryland  Heights,  as  if 
with  a  purpose  to  molest  his  march.  Hence,  also,  when, 
after  reaching  Frederick,  and  defeating  Wallace,  the  awak- 
ening possibility  of  really  entering  Washington  caused  him 
to  march  thither  at  a  very  rapid  rate,  he  was  prepared  to 
believe  that  Washington  was  reinforced,  since  it  would  have 
been  inexcusable  generalship  to  have  left  it  undefended. 
Though  he  had  passed  unchallenged,  save  at  Monocacy,  all 
the  way  down  the  Valley  to  Harper's  Ferry,  and  east- 
ward to  the  great  cities  of  Baltimore  and  Washington,  it 
was  incredible  that  he  should  have  outstripped  a  force 
that  could  steam  night  and  day  from  Fort  Monroe. 

The  Lieutenant-General,  on  his  part,  presumably  under- 
stood the  effect  of  Early's  circuitous  course,  and  had  calcu- 
lated precisely  the  time  required  to  suitably  succor  Wash- 
ington, without  merely  trusting  to  possible  ignorance  or 
timidity  on  the  part  of  the  enemy  then  marching  upon  it ; 
and  his  report  definitely  declares  that  his  forces  reached 
Washington  before  Early's. 

Still  this,  in  some  respects,  was  an  opportunity  for  attack- 
ing- Washington  such  as  had  not  been  offered  to  the  Con- 


IN  THE   VALLEY  AGAIN.  93 

federate  arms  since  Bull  Run.  Could  Lee  have  known 
beforehand  what  he  afterward  learned,  possibly  the  entire 
portion  of  Early's  march  after  reaching  Winchester  would 
have  assumed  a  different  shape.  With  Hunter  out  of  his 
way,  Early  would  perhaps  have  left  Sigel  and  Harper's  Ferry 
to  take  care  of  each  other,  and,  breaking  the  railroad  with 
cavalry,  would  have  crossed  the  Blue  Bidge,  and  hurried 
through  Loudoun,  devising  some  plan  for  solving  the  hard 
problem  of  supplies  by  that  route,  and  fording  the  Potomac 
at  Edward's  Ferry,  would  have  reached  the  capital  four  days 
earlier  than  he  did. 

Finally,  while  the  Government  was  flattering  itself  that  it 
at  last  held  Secession  in  an  "  anaconda  coil,"  a  discouraging 
similitude  to  the  campaigns  of  previous  years  had  been 
unexpectedly  lent  to  the  military  situation  by  this  invading 
column,  which  camped  in  the  suburbs  of  Baltimore  and 
knocked  at  the  doors  of  Washington.  So  bold  a  march 
revived  for  a  time  the  failing  fortunes  of  the  South,  which 
was  naturally  elated  that  Confederate  battalions  had  once 
more,  as  in  1861,  penned  the  Union  forces  in  their  capital. 
It  also  enabled  the  enemy  to  harvest  in  peace  a  large  part 
of  the  year's  crops  in  the  Valley. 

Yet,  with  this  surface  success  accomplished,  what  lasting 
advantage  had  been  gained?  The  invasion  had  drawn  a 
corps  from  the  Petersburg  trenches,  and  was  destined  to  aid 
in  prolonging  the  war  to  another  year  ;  but  it  had  not  forced 
off  the  clutch  that  was  only  to  be  loosened  after  Appo- 
mattox. 


CHAPTER  VI. 

KERNSTOWN,   CHAMBERSBURG,    AND  MOOREFIELD. 

The  plan  for  disposing  of  the  Sixth  and  Nineteenth  Corps ] 
took  shape,  July  23d,  in  an  order  from  Grant  to  send  him 
the  Sixth,  and  to  permit  the  Nineteenth,  then  at  Washing- 
ton, to  remain  there.     Halleck  feared  a  renewed  invasion  of 

1  This  conclusion,  if  such  it  may  be  called,  was  abandoned  within  forty-eight 
hours,  and  had  not  been  reached  without  some  fluctuations : 

"  You  may  retain  Wright's  command  until  the  departure  of  Early  is  assured." 
(Grant  to  Halleck,  July  21st.) 

"  Acting  on  your  previous  orders,  he  had  given  up  the  pursuit,  and  would  reach 
Washington  to-da}\  He  left  the  enemy  retreating  on  Front  Royal  and  Strasburg. 
In  my  opinion  raids  will  be  renewed  as  soon  as  he  leaves."  (Halleck  to  Grant, 
July  22d,  10  a.m.) 

"  Your  despatch  of  10  a.m.  received.  You  need  not  send  any  troops  back  until 
the  main  force  of  the  enemy  are  known  to  have  left  the  Valley.  Is  Wright  still 
where  he  can  act  in  conjunction  with  Hunter?  If  the  two  can  push  the  enemy 
back,  and  destroy  the  railroad  from  Charlottesville  to  G-ordonsville,  I  would  pre- 
fer that  service  to  having  them  here."     (Grant  to  Halleck,  July  22d,  9  p.m.) 

"  If  Wright  has  returned  to  Washington,  send  him  immediately  back  here,  re- 
taining, however,  the  portion  of  the  Nineteenth  Corps  now  in  Washington  for 
further  orders.  Early  is  undoubtedly  returning  here  to  enable  the  enemy  to  de- 
tach troops  to  go  to  Georgia."     (Grant  to  Halleck,  July  23d.) 

li  General  Wright  in  person  arrived  this  morning,  and  most  of  his  forces  will 
encamp  at  an  outer  line  to-night.  The  rebels  generally  said  to  the  country  peo- 
ple, that  as  soon  as  they  secured  their  plunder,  they  would  return  to  Maryland 
and  Pennsylvania  for  more."     (Halleck  to  Grant.  July  23d,  1  p.m.) 

"Your  despatch  of  1  p.m.  just  received.  You  can  retain  General  Wright  until 
I  learn  positively  what  has  become  of  Early."  (Grant  to  Halleck,  July  24th, 
12  m.) 

"General  Wright,  in  accordance  with  your  orders,  was  about  to  embark  for 
City  'Point.  I  have  directed  him  to  await  yonr  further  orders.  I  shall  exercise 
no  further  discretion  in  this  matter,  but  shall  carry  out  such  orders  as  you  may 
give."     (Halleck  to  Grant,  July  24th,  S  p.m.) 


KERNSTOWN,  CHAMBERSBURG,  MOOREEIELD.  95 

Maryland,  whereas  Grant  believed  that,  should  Early  go 
North  again  at  all,  he  would  march  "  through  "Western  Vir- 
ginia to  Ohio,  possibly  taking  Pittsburg  by  the  way."  Of  the 
Nineteenth  Corps  263  officers  and  5,320  men,  under  Emory, 
were  present  for  duty  at  Washington. 

The  apparent  uncertainty  on  this  subject  was  explicable. 
Grant  had  always  been  eager  to  defeat  Early ;  but  he  did  not 
want  him  simply  escorted  to  Strasburg.  When  informed  that 
the  enemy  had  regained  the  Valley,  he  sought  to  use  "Wright 
and  Emory  for  attacking  Lee's  lines,  before  Early  could  re- 
turn to  Eichmond ;  but  when  the  Confederate  rear-guard 
was  found  still  waiting  at  the  Blue  Ridge,  he  paused  in  this 
purpose  ;  and  when  Duffle's  little  skirmish  at  Purcellville, 
with  a  few  wagons  burned  and  a  few  provisions  taken,  and 
Thoburn's  attempt  at  Snicker's  Ferry,  gave  faint  signs  of 
breaking  the  spell  of  inaction,  Grant's  hopes  so  brightened 
that  he  then  repeatedly  declared  that  he  would  rather  have 
Wright's  forces  engaged  in  destroying  the  Orange  and  Alex- 
andria Railroad  than  helping  him  at  Petersburg.  In  view 
of  his  distance  from  the  scene  of  Shenandoah  operations, 
and  the  necessity  of  instantly  deciding  whether  to  follow 
Early  up  the  Valley,  in  case  he  retreated,  or  to  turn  to  ac- 
count the  Union  advantage  of  rapid  transportation  by  rail 
and  steam  to  Petersburg,  his  final  decision  for  the  latter 
course  was  natural.  For  not  only  had  the  pursuit  been  a 
hopeless  failure,  but  it  would  have  been  in  accordance  with 
Lee's  methods  to  summon  Early  for  a  sudden  attack  in  his 
own  front,  as  he  had  summoned  Jackson  in  1862.  This 
judgment  of  Grant,  however,  though  founded  on  sound  con- 
siderations, proved  erroneous  ;  for  Lee  had  not  recalled  Early 
when  the  Sixth  Corps  moved  back  from  the  Shenandoah, 
having  no  immediate  need  of  him,  and  probably  desiring 
that  he  should  protect  the  gathering  of  the  Valley  harvests. 


96  THE  SHENANDOAH  VALLEY. 

Accordingly  when,  July  23d,  Early,  who  had  halted  at 
Strasburg,  learned  that  the  Sixth  Corps  had  withdrawn  to 
Washington,  and  that  the  forces  occupying  Kernstown,  not 
twenty  miles  distant,  on  the  turnpike,  were  only  those  of 
Crook  and  Averell,  he  resolved  to  attack  them  without  de- 
lay. A  reconnoissance  resulted  in  deploying  the  whole 
Union  force  to  resist  it,  the  cavalry  and  artillery  being 
sharply  engaged. 

Nature  marks  out  strategic  lines  with  her  ridges  and 
rivers,  which  successive  generations  attack  and  defend ; 
battle  after  battle  is  repeated  on  the  same  ground.  The 
military  art  is  so  precise  in  methods,  that,  with  the  face  of 
the  country  unchanged,  successive  leaders  adopt  the  same 
routes  of  march,  the  same  positions,  and  the  same  manoeu- 
vres. To  the  catalogue  of  twice-fought  fields  that  included 
Manassas  and  Chancellorsville,  Corinth  and  Cold  Harbor, 
was  now  to  be  added  another,  since  Crook's  ground,  the 
morning  of  July  24th,  was  the  same  that  Shields  had  occu- 
pied in  his  repulse  of  Jackson.  Early's  whole  army  advanced 
against  Kernstown  on  the  Valley  pike,  and  at  Bartonsville, 
a  few  miles  south  of  the  town,  Eamseur's  division  was 
sent,  in  a  detour,  to  turn  Crook's  right.  The  cavalry  was 
divided  into  two  columns,  one  proceeding  to  the  east  and 
the  other  to  the  west  of  "Winchester,  so  as  to  unite  north  of 
the  town  and  cut  off  Crook's  retreat. 

Crook's  line  covered  the  pike  with  the  infantry  divisions 
of  Sullivan,  Duval,  and  Mulligan,  while  the  cavalry  of 
Averell  and  Duffie  was  on  his  flanks.  The  country  was 
open,  a  little  broken  with  hollows  to  the  east.  Crook  had 
directed  Averell,  who  held  his  left,  to  pass  around  Early's 
right  and  attack  his  trains ;  and  whether  it  was  owing  to 
this  movement  or  to  some  other  disposition  of  the  line, 
Early,  at  all  events,  having  driven  in  the  Union  skirmishers, 


KERNSTOWN,  CHAMBERSBURG,  MOOREFIELD.  97 

perceived  Crook's  left  to  be  assailable,  and  hence,  without 
depending  upon  Rarnseur's  turning  movement  on  the  other 
flank,  directed  Breckenridge  to  move  Echols's  division,  now 
under  Wharton,  around  and  against  the  Union  left.  Whar- 
ton struck  this  flank  in  open  ground,  doubling  it  and  throw- 
ing it  into  confusion.1  Rodes,  Gordon,  and  Eamseur  at 
once  pressing  against  Crook's  centre  and  right,  the  whole 
line  broke  into  retreat.  The  pike  was  quickly  filled  with 
trains  and  the  fields  with  troops,  striving  for  Winchester 
and  beyond.  Eodes  pursued  to  Stephenson's  Depot,  six 
miles  north  of  the  town,  where  he  halted,  his  division  hav- 
ing marched  twenty-seven  miles  that  day.  Early's  cavalry 
fortunately  proved  somewhat  inefficient,  Ransom,  who  had 
been  in  bad  health  ever  since  leaving  Lynchburg,  being  un- 
able to  take  active  command ;  and  as  the  open  fields  and 
broad  pike  were  favorable  for  rapid  retreat,  Crook  brought 
off  all  his  artillery  and  trains,  till  one  of  the  flanking  cavalry 
brigades  at  last  struck  the  column  on  the  pike,  stampeding 
the  teamsters,  and  causing  many  wagons  and  caissons  to  be 
abandoned  and  burned.  One  artillery  officer  cut  loose  his 
horses  from  four  guns,  but  infantry  brought  them  off.  At 
dusk  the  fugitive  troops  reached  Bunker  Hill,  and  crossing 
Mill  Creek,  went  into  camp  on  the  further  bank. 

1  liI  regret  to  say  that  the  greater  portion  of  my  dismounted  cavalry,  along 
with  some  infantry,  the  whole  numbering  some  3,000  or  4,000,  broke  to  the  rear 
at  the  first  fire,  and  all  efforts  to  stop  them  proved  of  no  avail.  They  mostly  got 
into  Martinsburg,  circulating  all  manner  of  reports.  A  few  of  them  were  cap- 
tured, endeavoring  to  escape  my  guards.  I  lost  over  one-third  of  my  cavalry  in 
this  way"  (Crook's  Report,  July  27,  1864).  Hunter  wrote  to  Halleck  that  "the 
cavalry  and  the  dismounted  men  in  the  late  fights  behaved  in  the  most  disgraceful 
manner,  their  officers  in  many  instances  leading  them  off  and  starting  all  kinds  of 
lying  reports,  tending  to  demoralize  the  whole  command,  and  it  was  only  owing 
to  the  steadiness  and  good  conduct  of  the  infantry  which  came  with  us  from  the 
Kanawha  that  the  army  was  saved  from  utter  annihilation.  .  .  .  The  refuse 
force  sent  from  Washington,  representing  twenty-seven  different  regiments,  is 
said  to  have  done  more  injury  than  service." 
XI.— 5 


98  THE   SHENANDOAH  VALLEY. 

Crook's  troops  had  campaigned  too  well  at  Cloyd's  Moun- 
tain and  during  Hunter's  bold  march  to  Lynchburg  to  be 
disgraced  by  this  encounter ;  and  while  some  of  them,  chiefly 
the  recent  additions,  had  proved  of  little  value,  it  must  be 
remembered  that  whatever  efforts  had  been  made  to  chal- 
lenge Early's  retreat  from  Washington  were  the  work  of  this 
command.  Their  defeat  is  not  strange,  for  the  force  soon 
after  assembled  in  the  Valley  as  needful  to  match  Early 
was  thrice  Crook's  at  Kernstowa  ;  and  the  chief  criticism  to 
be  passed  on  this  action  is  that  there  had  been  little  wari- 
ness in  confronting  the  enemy  in  an  open  position  like  this, 
after  most  of  the  Union  forces  had  been  drawn  away.  Prob- 
ably it  would  have  been  wiser  to  occupy  the  contracted  lines 
at  Hallfcown,  in  front  of  Harper's  Ferry.  Yet  it  must  not  be 
inferred  that  Crook  had  given  insufficient  thought  to  the 
peril.  A  despatch  of  July  22d  to  Hunter  furnishes  the  clue 
to  his  purposes.  "I  want  to  remain  here  a  day  or  two,"  he 
said,  "  to  give  the  enemy  the  impression  we  will  not  follow 
them,  so  that  they  may  send  a  good  portion  of  their  com- 
mand to  Eichmond.  I  have  not  force  sufficient  to  meet  all 
their  force  in  this  open  Valley,  and  my  only  hope  is  for 
them  to  divide  their  command."  The  President  had  asked 
Hunter,  the  23d,  "  Are  you  able  to  take  care  of  the  enemy, 
when  he  turns  back  upon  you,  as  he  probably  will,  on  find- 
ing that  Wright  has  left?"  and  Hunter  had  answered,  "My 
force  is  not  strong  enough  to  hold  the  enemy,  should  he 
return  upon  us  with  his  whole  force."  But  he  added  that 
the  information  of  Crook  and  the  reconnoissances  of  Averell 
tended  to  show  that  Early  was  falling  back. 

Crook's  loss  in  this  battle  was  somewhat  uncertain,  on 
account  of  the  number  of  fugitives,  a  part  of  whom  after- 
ward returned  to  their  colors ;  but  it  could  hardly  have  been 
less  than  1,200.     Duval  reported  in  the  Second  infantry  divi- 


KERNSTOWN,  CHAMBERSBURG,  MOOREFIELD.  99 

sion  alone  45  killed,  285  wounded,  and  183  missing — total, 
513.  His  Second  Brigade,  Johnson's  (Ninth  and  Fourteenth 
Virginia  and  Thirty-fourth  and  Ninety-first  Ohio),  holding 
the  extreme  right,  on  the  Komney  pike,  was  not  assailed 
until  the  retreat ;  but  the  other,  E.  B.  Hayes's  (Fifth  and 
Thirteenth  Virginia  and  Twenty-third  and  Thirty-sixth 
Ohio),  was  on  the  left  of  the  Third,  Mulligan's  division, 
east  of  the  pike,  in  the  thick  of  the  fray,  and  Hayes  reported 
a  loss  of  396  men — this  officer  claiming  to  have  continued 
east  of  the  pike  all  the  way  up  to  Bunker  Hill,  thus  keep- 
ing the  road  open  for  the  trains.  Colonel  Campbell  states 
that  the  losses  of  the  Third  Division  were  317,  including 
among  the  mortally  wounded  its  commander,  Mulligan, 
known  for  his  defence  of  Lexington  in  1861.  No  field 
officers  were  left  in  this  division,  which  was  brought  off 
by  Captain  Suter,  and  soon  after  consolidated  as  the  Third 
Brigade  of  the  First  Division.  The  Confederate  loss  was 
light. 

Between  this  engagement  of  Kernstown  and  the  one 
at  Piedmont,  six  weeks  earlier,  there  is  a  suggestive  paral- 
lel, inasmuch  as  the  result  was  in  the  one  case  partly  due  to 
the  withdrawal  of  Breckenridge  by  Lee,  and  in  the  other  to 
the  withdrawal  of  the  Sixth  Corps  by  Grant,  under  a  process 
of  reasoning  that  in  each  case  seemed  sound,  but  proved  fal- 
lacious. The  parallel  was  immediately  pushed  further  by 
the  prompt  restoration  of  the  Sixth  and  Nineteenth  Corps  to 
the  Valley,  as  Breckenridge  had  in  like  fashion  been  re- 
turned after  Piedmont ;  while  Grant,  in  addition,  instead  of 
calling  forces  to  City  Point,  now  sent  to  "Washington  4,600 
more  men  of  the  Nineteenth  Corps.  He  also  insisted  that, 
since  military  conditions  might  wholly  change  while  de- 
spatches were  going  to  and  from  him,  the  events  of  July  had 
shown  it  to  be  "absolutely  necessary  that   some   one  in 


100  THE  SHENANDOAH  VALLEY. 

Washington  should  give  orders  and  make  dispositions  of  all 
the  forces  within  reach  of  the  line  of  the  Potomac." 

In  a  violent  rain-storm,  which  came  up  the  day  after  his 
Kernstown  victory,  Early  followed  Crook  to  Bunker  Hill, 
twelve  miles  from  Winchester,  and  there  halted  his  infantry  ; 
while  at  Martinsburg  the  Union  rear-guard,  turning  upon 
his  cavalry,  drove  it  back  a  mile.  Then,  after  dusk,  leaving 
many  sick  and  wounded  at  Martinsburg,  Crook  retreated 
again  along  the  Williamsport  juke,  and  camped  on  the  Po- 
tomac. The  next  morning,  the  26th,  having  saved  most  of 
his  trains — the  enemy  counting  the  lost  portion  as  twelve 
caissons  and  seventy-two  wagons — Crook  crossed  the  river 
into  Maryland,  and  marched  through  Boonesboro,  ultimately 
taking  post,  by  Hunter's  direction,  at  Sharpsburg,  to  hold 
the  South  Mountain  gaps.  Averell  was  stationed  at  Hagers- 
town,  his  pickets  guarding  the  Potomac  fords. 

Finding  himself  again  in  undisputed  possession  of  the 
Valley,  Early  proceeded,  with  detachments  of  his  infantry, 
to  break  afresh  at  Martinsburg  the  Baltimore  and  Ohio 
Bailroad,  which  had  been  repaired  since  the  beginning  of 
the  month,  while  at  Back  Creek  he  overpowered  the  guard, 
drove  away  the  iron-clad  cars,  and  burned  the  railroad 
bridge.  Still,  these  exploits  did  not  satisfy  him.  He  covet- 
ed another  dash  into  Union  territory,  and  resolved  to  send 
the  cavalry  brigades  of  McCausland  and  Johnson,  under 
command  of  the  former,  to  burn  sundry  Northern  towns, 
unless  they  should  procure  their  safety  by  paying  him 
a  large  money  ransom.  The  first  community  on  which 
McCausland  was  to  direct  himself  was  Chambersburg,  the 
nearest  town  of  importance  in  Pennsylvania ;  thence  he 
was  to  move  to  Cumberland  in  Maryland,  levying  contribu- 
tions upon  that  and  other  towns  able  to  bear  them,  des- 
troying  the   machinery   of  the   Cumberland  coal-pits,  and 


KERNSTOWN,  CHAMBERSBURG,  MOOREFIELD.        101 

the  repair  shops,  stations,  and  bridges  of  the  Baltimore 
Eailroad. 

July  29th,  McCausland,  with  his  two  brigades  and  four 
guns,  crossed  the  Potomac  near  Clear  Spring,  west  of  Wil- 
liamsport,  two  infantry  divisions  covering  the  movement  as 
far  as  the  latter  point,  while  Imboden  and  Jackson  distracted 
attention  by  fording  the  river  below  and  demonstrating 
against  Harper's  Ferry;  and  Vaughan,  driving  away  the 
Union  pickets  at  Williamsport,  rode  to  Hagerstown. 

The  panic  which  had  marked  Early's  previous  incursion 
broke  out  afresh,  and  the  people  flew  in  all  directions  before 
McCausland's  advance.  Appeals  for  aid  arose  from  the 
threatened  region,  but  in  the  jumble  of  conflicting  reports 
the  Government  at  Washington  could  hardly  tell  at  first  why 
or  against  what  its  aid  was  demanded.  It  was  evident  at 
once  that  the  tier  of  counties  in  Southern  Pennsylvania 
could  not  be  left  to  defend  itself.  "  How  could  an  agrieul- 
tural  people,"  pungently  asked  Governor  Curtin,  in  a  mes- 
sage to  the  Legislature,  "  in  an  open  country,  be  expected 
to  rise  suddenly,  and  beat  back  hostile  forces  which  had 
defeated  organized  veteran  armies  of  the  Government?" 
Though  practically  a  border  State,  Pennsylvania  had  sent 
her  troops  to  all  the  Union  armies,  retaining  few  or  none  for 
home  defence. 

Chambersburg  lies  about  twenty-five  miles  northeast  of 
Williamsport,  and  thither  McCausland  directed  himself, 
driving  back  the  pickets  at  McCoy's  Ferry,  which  consisted 
of  about  thirty  men  from  Carlisle  barracks,  under  Lieuten- 
ant McLean,  Sixth  Cavalry.  A  few  miles  west  of  Clear 
Spring,  Gilmor's  two  Maryland  battalions,  of  Johnson's 
brigade,  were  repulsed  with  a  loss  of  seventeen  men  ;  Mc- 
Causland, however,  marched  on  to  Mercersburg. 

At  this  time  General  Couch,  commanding  the  Department 


102  THE  SHENANDOAH  VALLEY. 

of  the  Susquehanna,  was  in  Charnbersburg  with  fewer  than 
one  hundred  and  fifty  men.  "When  McLean,  who  was  under 
his  orders,  fell  back,  Couch  notified  Averell  of  the  enemy's 
approach,  collected  and  moved  northward  the  horses  in  the 
Cumberland  Valley,  and  early  next  morning,  taking  with 
him  the  Government  stores,  withdrew  on  the  railroad  toward 
Harrisburg.     McCausland  was  then  close  to  the  town. 

Averell,  who  had  his  headquarters  at  Hagerstown,  with 
2,600  men,  many  of  whom  were  picketing  the  Potomac 
fords,  had  found  his  communication  with  the  latter  cut, 
about  noon  of  the  29th ;  and  perceiving  that  a  force  of  un- 
known strength,  with  unknown  purposes,  had  succeeded  in 
crossing  the  river,  and  was  rapidly  marching  north  to  Mer- 
cersburg,  he  withdrew  on  a  parallel  route  to  Greencastle, 
thus  reprotecting  his  flanks,  and  covering  the  country  east 
of  his  course.  At  Greencastle  he  reunited  the  brigade 
which  had  been  picketing  the  Potomac,  and  was  scattered 
by  the  enemy's  crossing  at  several  points.  In  leaving  Ha- 
gerstown, Averell  entrusted  to  the  railroad  authorities  a 
train  loaded  with  government  stores ;  a  blunder  left  it  be- 
hind, so  that  when,  a  few  hours  later,  Vaughan  entered  the 
place,  he  found  and  destroyed  the  train. 

Couch  had  caused  McLean,  with  about  60  men  and  a  gun, 
to  keep  up  the  appearance  of  defending  Chambersburg  dur- 
ing the  early  morning  of  the  30th,  about  two  miles  from  the 
town,  being  careful  not  to  fire  from  within  its  limits.  Soon 
after  sunrise,  leaving  the  greater  part  of  his  force  at  the 
Fair  grounds,  McCausland  rode  into  Chambersburg  with 
about  400  men.  The  chief  burgess  being  absent,  he  arrested 
two  score  citizens  and  told  them  his  errand.  The  announce- 
ment that  he  would  burn  the  town  unless  $500,000  in  cur- 
rency or  $100,000  in  gold  should  be  paid  him,  this  being  the 
ransom  fixed  by  Early  in  a  written  order,  was  received  with 


KERNSTOWN,  CHAMBERSBURG,  MOOREFIELD.        103 

incredulity.  Gold  was  out  of  the  question,  and  lie  was  told, 
also,  that  "  there  was  probably  not  $50,000  in  currency  at 
hand."  No  time  remained  for  haggling — his  scouts  brought 
news  that  Averell  was  not  many  miles  away,  pushing  straight 
for  the  town,  and  the  people  seemed  to  be  relying  on  this 
hope  of  succor.  No  sooner,  therefore,  had  McCausland 
taken  his  breakfast  at  the  hotel,  than,  summoning  Major 
Gilmor,  he  directed  him  to  bum  the  town.  The  torches 
were  quickly  applied,  with  a  result  best  described  in  the 
language  of  the  officer  to  whom  the  execution  of  tins  work 
was  intrusted  :  "  Deeply  regretting  that  such  a  task  should 
fall  upon  me,  I  had  only  to  obey.  ...  I  felt  more  like 
weeping  over  Charnbersburg,  although  the  people  covered 
me  with  reproaches,  which  all  who  know  me  will  readily 
believe  I  felt  hard  to  digest ;  yet  my  pity  was  highly  excited 
in  behalf  of  these  poor  unfortunates,  who  were  made  to  suffer 
for  acts  perpetrated  by  the  officers  of  their  own  Government. 
The  day  was  bright  and  intensely  hot.  The  conflagration 
seemed  to  spring  from  one  vast  building.  Dense  clouds  of 
smoke  rose  to  the  zenith,  and  hovered  over  the  dark  plain. 
At  night  it  would  have  been  a  grand  but  terrible  object  to 
behold.  How  piteous  the  sight  of  those  beautiful  green 
meadows — groups  of  women  and  children  exposed  to  the 
rays  of  a  burning  sun,  hovering  over  the  few  articles  they 
had  saved,  most  of  them  wringing  their  hands,  and  with 
wild  gesticulations  bemoaning  their  ruined  homes !  " 

Leaving  Charnbersburg  in  flames,  McCausland  hastily 
marched  westward  to  McConnellsburg  and  camped.  Averell, 
who  had  received  very  tardily  Couch's  messages  announcing 
the  enemy's  approach,  put  his  command  in  the  saddle,  and 
aimed  for  Charnbersburg.  The  burning  town  told  its  own 
story,  and  dashing  through  it,  he  was  speedily  away  after 
McCausland,  correctly   surmising   that   repetitions  of   this 


104  THE   SHENANDOAH    VALLEY. 

deed  would  be  attempted  elsewhere.  It  was  a  great  mishap 
that  with  Averell's  strong  force  at  the  advantageous  position 
of  Hagerstown,  the  disaster  of  Chambersburg  was  not 
averted  ;  but  the  place  had  no  strategic  importance  demand- 
ing special  eagerness  to  converge  troops  there,  and  nobody 
could  have  reasonably  supposed  that  incendiarism  was  the 
enemy's  object.  A  few  miles  from  McConnellsburg,  Averell 
struck  McCausland's  rear,  forcing  him  to  abandon  a  con- 
templated visit  to  Bedford,  and  to  turn  back  to  the  Potomac, 
which  he  reached  by  noon  of  July  31st,  at  Hancock.1  The 
Confederate  commander  was  found  in  line  of  battle,  having 
already  driven  away  with  his  guns  an  iron-clad  car  which 
contested  his  crossing  of  the  Potomac,  and  fired  railroad 
buildings  on  the  Virginia  side.  Averell  attacked  him,  and 
whether  it  was  that  his  artillery,  controlling  the  ford,  pre- 
vented McCausland  from  escaping  there,  or  whether  it  was 
that  the  latter  wished  to  complete  Early's  programme,  he 
withdrew  westward  along  the  National  road  to  Cumberland. 
Probably,  not  only  Hancock,  but  McConnellsburg  and  Bed- 
ford bad  been  saved  by  Averell  from  the  enemy's  torch. 

Beaching  Cumberland  August  1st,  McCausland  found 
there  Kelley,  who  had  been  notified  by  Halleck  to  block  the 
roads  and  destroy  bridges  to  retard  the  enemy's  advance. 
Kelley  had  taken  post  at  Folck's  Mill,  three  miles  from  the 


1  "General  McCausland,"  says  Gilmor,  "ordered  a  levy  upon  this  place  of 
$30,000,  which  was  so  out  of  all  reason  th.it  we  Mary  landers  remonstrated,  but  to 
no  purpose.  He  told  the  pi-incipal  men  of  the  place  that  unless  the  money  was 
paid  he  would  burn  the  town.  To  this  I  and  all  my  men  objected,  saying  that 
too  much  Maryland  blood  had  been  shed  in  defence  of  the  South  for  her  towns  to 
be  laid  under  contribution  or  burned.  I  perceived,  too,  that  his  men  were  in- 
clined to  plunder.  After  a  consultation  with  General  Johnson,  I  brought  in  my 
whole  command  and  stationed  two  men  at  each  house  and  store  for  their  protec- 
tion. Before  the  money  could  be  raised,  AverelFs  troops  arrived  and  attacked  our 
pickets  and  outposts,  and  a  lively  little  fight  occurred,  chiefly  in  the  streets  and 
on  the  high  pine  hills  northeast  of  the  town." 


KERNSTOWjST,  chambersburg,  moorefield.      105 

town,  and  was  engaged  by  McCausland's  battery.  The 
Confederate  commander  now  found  himself  in  a  predica- 
ment, having  Kelley  in  front  and  Averell,  as  he  supposed, 
closing  in  upon  his  rear.  About  the  middle  of  the  after- 
noon he  attacked  Kelley,  and  continued  to  skirmish  until 
late  at  night,  when  he  retreated,  leaving  30  of  his  killed  and 
wounded  on  the  held,  with  two  caissons  and  some  wagons 
and  ammunition.  The  point  for  which  he  made,  with  intent 
to  cross  the  Potomac,  was  Oldtown,  near  the  junction  of  the 
South  Branch.  Beaching  the  ford  by  an  obscure  mountain 
road,  at  daylight,  he  found  a  garrison  of  Ohio  hundred-days 
men  protecting  it.  His  skirmishers  were  driven  back  ;  but 
the  main  body  coming  up,  he  dismounted  three  regiments, 
and  formed  line  of  battle  between  the  river  and  canal.  The 
Union  troops  thereupon  withdrew  across  the  river  to  Green 
Spring  Bun  Station,  on  the  Baltimore  and  Ohio  Bailroad. 
Here  the  defence  was  the  customary  one  of  a  block-house 
and  an  engine  attached  to  a  train  of  cars  strengthened  with 
cross-ties,  covering  the  ford  and  the  bridge.  After  losing  a 
dozen  men,  a  charge  by  one  of  Johnson's  regiments  being 
repulsed,  a  flag  was  sent  to  the  block-house  demanding  its 
surrender,  under  the  threat,  as  Gilrnor  narrates,  that,  if 
taken  by  assault,  no  quarter  would  be  given.  As  the  troops 
had  nearly  finished  their  term  of  enlistment,  those  in  the 
block-house,  numbering  about  80,  surrendered  on  the 
promise  of  being  paroled,  while  the  remainder  escaped  to 
Cumberland.  Destroying  the  cars,  McCausland  made  good 
his  escape  into  West  Virginia.  The  same  afternoon  he 
moved  to  Springfield,  nine  miles  distant,  burning  the  wire 
bridge,  after  passing  over  it,  and  proceeded  the  next  day  to 
Bomney,  on  the  South  Branch.  From  there,  August  4th, 
he  sent  an  expedition  to  seize  the  railroad  post  at  New 
Creek.  The  garrison  was  under  Colonels  Stevenson  and 
5* 


106  THE  SHENANDOAH   VALLEY. 

Hay  and  Major  Simpson.  A  stubborn  fight  of  several  hours 
took  place,  when  McCausland  drew  off  repulsed,  leaving  his 
dead  and  wounded  on  the  field.  The  loss  of  the  garrison 
was  about  75  killed  and  wounded,  and  that  of  the  Confeder- 
ates probably  as  severe.  The  Confederate  general  withdrew 
to  Moorefield,  where  the  South  Fork  joins  the  South  Branch 
of  the  Potomac. 

But  he  was  not  destined  to  rest  in  quiet  here.  August  2d, 
learning  of  McCausland's  repulse  at  Cumberland,  Halleck 
urged  that  Averell  should  be  pushed  to  cut  off  his  retreat ; 
and  Hunter  gave  reiterated  orders  to  that  effect.  Averell 
crossed  the  Potomac  at  Hancock,  the  4th,  and  after  a  forced 
march  through  Bath,  Springfield,  and  Bomney,  at  noon  of 
the  6th  drew  near  McCausland's  camp.  Before  sunrise  of 
the  7th,  his  advance  brigade,  Gibson,  surprised  Bradley 
Johnson,  and  drove  him  through  the  stream  to  the  main 
position  of  the  enemy  on  the  opposite  bank.  Though  Mc- 
Causland had  more  warning,  Powell's  brigade,  charging 
through  the  river,  under  a  hot  fire,  routed  him  as  quickly  as 
Gibson  had  routed  Johnson.  The  whole  body  was  soon  in 
disorderly  retreat,  and  Major  Work,  Twenty-second  Penn- 
sylvania, who  had  been  sent  with  a  battalion,  the  day  before, 
to  co-operate  on  another  road,  also  struck  the  flying  forces, 
and  picked  up  35  prisoners  and  about  one  hundred  horses. 
Averell  captured  four  pieces  of  artillery — all  that  McCaus- 
land had— every  caisson  but  one,  nearly  all  his  wagons,  over 
four  hundred  horses,  three  battle-flags,  many  small  arms, 
and  420  prisoners,  including  38  officers.  His  own  loss  was 
given  as  41  killed  and  wounded ;  but  the  killed  included 
Major  Conger  and  Captain  Clark,  Third  West  Virginia. 
Johnson  was  captured,  and  afterward  escaped.  The  shat- 
tered relics  of  McCausland  and  Johnson  fled  in  various  di- 
rections to  the  shelter  of  the  mountains,  and  made  their  way 


KERNSTOWN,  CHAMBERSBURG,  MOOREFIELD.        107 

as  best  they  could  to  the  Shenandoah  Valley.  "This  af- 
fair," says  Early,  "  had  a  very  damaging  effect  upon  my  cav- 
alry for  the  rest  of  the  campaign." 

While  these  events  were  occurring  in  West  Virginia,  the 
excitement  in  Pennsylvania  had  not  abated.  Ignorance  of 
the  enemy's  strength  and  position  was  always  one  of  the 
most  remarkable  features  in  the  conduct  of  the  war,  and 
led  to  strange  results.1  Mosby  dashed  across  the  Potomac, 
July  30th,  at  Cheek's  Ford,  where  he  overcame  a  picket  of 
the  Eighth  Illinois  Cavalry,  who  lost  half  a  dozen  killed 
and  wounded,  and  perhaps  as  many  prisoners ;  and  this  af- 
fair, so  sensitive  had  public  opinion  become,  increased  the 
fears  of  an  invasion.  The  people  of  Pittsburg,  having  been 
notified  by  General  Couch  that  "it  is  believed  Brecken- 
ridge  is  marching  West "  held  a  mass  meeting  for  defence ; 
while  at  urgent  request  that  officer  proceeded  to  the  city, 
and  enrolled  the  citizens  for  its  protection.  Indeed,  an  at- 
tack on  Wheeling  and  Pittsburg  was  not  at  all  impossible. 
Governor  Curtin  summoned  the  Legislature  of  Pennsylvania 
to  meet  in  special  session,  and  called  out  30,000  militia. 

We  must  now  record  the  movements  of  the  Union  in- 
fantry during  these  events.  The  Sixth  Corps,  on  receiving 
news  of  Crook's  defeat,  was  hurriedly  marched  from  its 
camp  at  Tenallytown,  near  Washington,  to  Harper's  Ferry, 
whence  it  was  ordered  to  Jefferson,  and  then,  the  29th, 
drawn  back  through  Harper's  Ferry  to  Halltown,  four  miles 
beyond.  Crook's  command  made  a  circuitous  march  from 
Sharpsburg  to   Harper's  Ferry,  and  back   across  the  Poto- 

1  "  August  2d,  information  was  received  by  telegraph  from  Washington  that  a 
heavy  column  of  the  enemy  was  moving  on  that  city,  via  Rockville.  Marching 
orders  were  promptly  issued,  and  subsequently  countermanded,  when  it  was 
ascertained  that  the  alarm  had  originated  from  the  appearance  of  a  squad  of 
United  States  cavalry  scouting  near  Rockville  "  (Report  of  Colonel  Strother,  Chief 
of  Staff  to  General  Hunter). 


108  THE  SHENANDOAH  VALLEY. 

mac  to  Pleasant  Valley,  finally  retracing  its  steps  through 
Harper's  Ferry  to  the  rendezvous  at  Halltown,  which  it 
reached  the  same  day  as  the  Sixth.  These  movements  had 
in  part  resulted  from  directions  sent  by  Halleck  to  Hunter, 
which  closed  with  the  hope  "  that  this  time  Wright's  forces 
will  not  be  withdrawn."  In  these  marches,  men  and  horses 
fell  by  hundreds  from  heat  and  lack  of  rest.  "  Oar  infantry 
is  suffering  dreadfully,"  wrote  Hunter  to  Halleck  ;  "  six  fell 
dead  yesterday  in  one  of  our  smallest  brigades."  Arriving 
at  the  bivouac  near  midnight,  the  bugle  would  summon 
the  men  befor'e  dawn  to  renew  their  tramp  under  the  burn- 
ing sun  and  in  the  stifling  dust ;  when  horses  dropped  the 
riders  struggled  on  afoot,  under  the  extra  load  of  the  sad- 
dle, till  they  could  procure  another  mount ;  if  an  unlucky 
beast  revived,  some  infantryman  would  get  another  mile  out 
of  him  bare-back,  till  he  sank  again.  The  casualties  in  this 
expedition  were  all  from  sunstroke,  for  there  was  no  enemy  to 
attack,  Early's  infantry  being  in  camp  south  of  the  Potomac. 
The  day  the  commands  of  Wright  and  Hunter  united  at 
Halltown,  McCausland  began  his  Chambersburg  raid.  Hal- 
leck directed  Hunter  to  move  all  the  forces  east  of  South 
Mountain,  to  guard  against  another  invasion.  Hunter  acted 
promptly,  but  found  that  "General  Wright  reports  his  corps 
so  much  fatigued  and  scattered  as  to  be  unable  to  move  this 
morning."  Halleck's  rejoinder  was  that  "Wright's  and 
Crook's  forces  should  immediately  move  toward  Emmetts- 
burg — they  must  make  a  night  march."  Wright  then  occu- 
pied Crampton's  and  South  Mountain  Passes,  and  Halleck 
forwarded  Emory,  4,600  strong,  to  Frederick.  Inquiring  of 
Couch  whether  the  force  that  entered  Chambersburg  was 
"  a  cavalry  raid  or  the  main  army,"  Halleck  received  the  re- 
ply that  it  was  "about  1,000  cavalry  and  two  pieces  of  artil- 
lery."    However,  as  Wright  and  Crook  were  already  afoot, 


KERNSTOWN,  CHAMBERSBURG,  MOOREFIELD.        109 

lie  determined  to  let  them  concentrate  about  Frederick, 
since  there  was  a  great  and  not  ill-founded  public  fear  of 
another  invasion.  Thus  the  troops  trod  again  the  familiar 
road  through  Sandy  Hook  to  the  line  of  the  Monocacy. 
This  was  the  first  fruit  of  a  new  arrangement.  For  when 
Halleck,  in  despair  over  the  prolonged  uncertainty  about 
what  he  should  do  with  the  Sixth  and  Nineteenth  Corps, 
had  notified  Grant  that  he  would  "exercise  no  further  dis- 
cretion in  the  matter,"  but  would  "  carry  out  such  orders  as 
you  may  give,"  the  disaster  at  Kernstown,  that  very  day, 
only  strengthened  the  Lieutenant- General's  conviction  that, 
as  he  wrote  the  next  morning,  "  despatches  being  so  long 
between  here  [City  Point]  and  Washington,  orders  must  be 
given  from  there  to  meet  pressing  emergencies."  This  view 
he  reiterated  the  following  day,  and  "  General  Halleck,'"  re- 
plied Stanton,  "has  been  ordered  to  give,  subject  to  your 
directions,  such  military  orders  as  may  be  necessary  in  the 
present  juncture,  in  accordance  with  the  suggestion  made  in 
your  telegram  of  yesterday."  This  is  the  explanation  of 
Halleck's  guidance  of  the  operations  that  moved  the  Union 
forces  from  Halltown  to  Frederick. 

In  simply  sensational  effect,  Early's  second  incursion 
had  been  as  remarkable  as  the  first,  for  he  had  caused 
almost  as  great  a  stir  with  two  cavalry  brigades  and  four 
guns  as  if  he  had  used  his  entire  army.  He  prevented  the 
return  of  the  Sixth  and  Nineteenth  Corps  to  Petersburg, 
and  broke  more  effectually  than  ever  the  railroad  and  canal 
which  he  was  determined  to  keep  useless ;  yet  he  had 
bought  his  success  dearly,  for  Averell's  victory  at  Moorefield 
had  wrecked  the  raiding  column. 

The  burning  of  Chambersburg,  the  central  event  of  this 
incursion,  was  wholly  indefensible.     This  was  an  open  town, 


110  THE    SHENANDOAH  VALLEY. 

of  no  strategic  value,  and  not  amenable  to  the  penalty  a 
peaceful  village  sometimes  incurs  through  being  made  the 
refuge  of  troops  that  use  its  dwellings  for  firing  upon  their 
assailants.  Factories  and  granaries  had  been  destroyed 
in  the  Valley  by  Union  commanders  ;  but  to  lay  waste  an 
enemy's  subsistence  in  a  mutual  field  of  operations,  whose 
crops  furnish  him  the  means  of  occupying  it,  is  a  different 
matter  from  putting  the  torch  to  a  town  with  intent  to  lay 
it  in  ashes.  Harboring  and  assisting  guerillas  may  expose  a 
community  to  destruction,  but  of  this  offence  Chambers- 
burg  had  never  been  guilty.  Early's  ground  for  his  act 
was  the  recent  burning  of  the  houses  of  A.  R.  Boteler,  E. 
I.  Lee,  and  Andrew  Hunter,  in  the  lower  Valley,  "and  a 
number  of  towns  in  the  South."  These  towns  he  does  not 
name ;  as  for  the  individuals,  they  were  prominent  public 
men,  whose  residences  ran  a  risk  of  destruction  during  the 
presence  of  armies,  by  the  orders  of  generals  or  the  ill-will 
of  troops,  as  Hunter  had  burned  Governor  Letcher's  house, 
and  as  some  of  Early's  men,  without  his  orders,  burned  Gov- 
ernor Bradford's  near  Baltimore,  and  Mr.  Blair's  near  Wash- 
ington. Such  acts  bore  on  their  face  an  exceptional  char- 
acter, because  thousands  of  other  houses,  equally  within 
the  power  of  the  invading  troops,  had  been  spared.  The 
conflagration  of  towns  in  pure  retaliation  would  have  devas- 
tated the  border  States  without  military  gain ;  and  such  a 
bootless  sacrifice  was  the  holocaust  of  Chambersburg  on  the 
altar  of  revenge. 


CHAPTEK  VII. 

GENERAL  SHERIDAN'S  MARCH  TO  STRASBURG. 

When  Grant  perceived  that  Early's  success  would  prob- 
ably cause  liim  to  be  retained  in  the  Valley  as  a  permanent 
menace  to  the  North,  he  resolved  to  accumulate  against  him 
an  overwhelming  force.  Halleck  having  received  by  degrees, 
for  the  Potomac  line,  first  the  part  of  the  Nineteenth  Corps 
already  there,  then  the  Sixth,  finally  the  remainder  of  the 
Nineteenth  at  City  Point,  next  took  the  responsibility  of 
retaining  for  Wright's  use  on  the  Monocacy  the  cavalry 
detachments  that  had  been  ordered  back  to  the  Army  of  the 
Potomac,  and  then  urged  "  the  importance  of  sending  a 
force  large  enough  to  prevent  his  [Early's]  again  devastating 
Maryland  and  Pennsylvania."  Coupled  with  this  suggestion 
were  complaints  that  the  nominal  force  of  3,000  dismount- 
ed cavalry  which  had  been  sent  North  was  of  little  value, 
whether  on  foot  or  in  the  saddle.  Just  then  the  flames  of 
Chambersburg  alarmed  the  North,  and  Grant  notified  Hal- 
leck that  he  should  have  a  whole  division  of  cavalry.  "  Will 
the  division  come  armed,  mounted,  and  ready  for  the  field," 
asked  Halleck  sceptically,  "or  must  they  be  mounted  and 
fitted  out  here?"     This  was  the  31st  of  July. 

With  two  infantry  corps  and  a  third  of  his  cavalry  now  on 
the  Potomac,  Grant  determined  that  they  must  do  some- 
thing— either  crush  Early,  or  else  so  drive  him  back  as  to 
relieve  the  Eichmond  campaign  of  a  constant  hindrance ; 


112  THE  SHENANDOAH  VALLEY. 

and  lest  the  Confederate  commander,  taking  the  alarm, 
should  retreat  just  out  of  reach,  with  the  view  of  returning 
when  the  Union  force  should  be  withdrawn,  he  purposed  to 
so  devastate  the  Valley  that  the  enemy  could  no  longer  sub- 
sist there,  and  thus  put  an  end  to  its  availability  as  a  high- 
way to  the  North. 

The  first  necessity  was  to  concentrate  under  a  single  head 
several  geographical  commands  :  for  there  was  a  Depart- 
ment of  West  Virginia,  including  that  State  and  Western 
Maryland  ;  a  Department  of  the  Susquehanna,  including  the 
State  of  Pennsylvania  and  three  counties  of  Ohio  ;  a  De- 
partment of  Washington,  including  that  city  and  parts  of 
Virginia  and  Maryland ;  and  a  Middle  Department,  includ- 
ing Delaware  and  a  part  of  Maryland.  The  evil  of  this  sub- 
division into  co-ordinate  provinces  was  aggravated  by  the 
distance  of  the  Lieutenant-General's  headquarters ;  for,  at 
critical  moments,  the  wires  might  be  cut  by  the  enemy  or 
thrown  down  by  a  storm,  causing  fatal  delays  in  the  trans- 
mission of  the  orders  awaited  by  these  various  Departments. 
The  disasters  following  his  withdrawal  of  the  Sixth  Corps 
had  only  strengthened  the  determination  of  Grant  that  the 
Shenandoah  campaign  should  not  be  conducted  from  City 
Point,  except  in  a  supervisory  way,  like  other  distant  opera- 
tions ;  and  already,  July  18th,  after  finding  that  in  the  mul- 
tiplicity of  departments  and  commanders  Early  had  escaped, 
he  had  notified  Halleck  that  "  to  prevent  a  recurrence  of 
what  had  just  taken  place  in  Maryland  "  he  deemed  it  ne- 
cessary to  have  those  four  departments  merged  into  one. 
"  What  are  now  departments  will  be  districts  or  corps.  The 
one  commander  will  then  control  all  troops  that  co-operate 
in  any  movement  of  the  enemy  toward  Maryland  or  Penn- 
sylvania. I  should  name  Major  General  W.  B.  Franklin  for 
such  commander."     This  nomination  was  received  coldly. 


GENERAL  SHLRIDAN'S  MARCH  TO  STRASBURG.       113 

Two  days  later  G:ant  wrote  that  he  had  failed  to  hear  what 
had  been  decided  upon  this  subject,  and  Halleck  replied 
that  the  telegram  was  in  Stanton's  hands.  "  I  have  no  good 
reason,"  he  said,  "  for  removing  or  superseding  General 
Augur.  He  is  capable  and  efficient.  General  Franklin 
would  not  give  satisfaction.  The  President  ordered  him  to 
be  tried  for  negligence  and  disobedience  of  orders  when 
here  before,  but  General  McClellan  assumed  the  responsi- 
bility of  his  reported  delays  in  obeying  orders."  Grant 
next  appealed  to  the  President :  "I  do  not  insist,"  he  said, 
"  that  the  Departments  should  be  broken  up,  nor  do  I  insist 
upon  General  Franklin  commanding.  All  I  ask  is  that  one 
general  officer,  in  whom  I  and  yourself  have  confidence, 
should  command  the  whole.  General  Franklin  was  named 
because  he  was  available,  and  I  know  him  to  be  capable  and 
believe  him  to  be  trustworthy.  It  would  suit  me  equally 
as  well  to  call  the  four  departments  referred  to  a  '  Military 
Division,'  and  to  have  placed  in  command  of  it  General 
Meade.  In  this  case  I  would  suggest  General  Hancock  for 
command  of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  and  General  Gibbon 
for  the  command  of  the  Second  Corps.  "With  General 
Meade  in  command  of  such  a  Division,  I  would  have  every 
confidence  that  all  the  troops  within  the  Military  Division 
would  be  used  to  the  very  best  advantage,  from  a  personal 
examination  of  the  ground,  and  would  adopt  means  of  get- 
ting the  earliest  information  of  any  advance  of  the  enemy, 
and  would  prepare  to  meet  it.  During  the  last  raid  the 
wires  happened  to  be  down  between  here  and  Fort  Monroe, 
and  the  cable  broken  [between]  there  and  Cherrystone. 
This  made  it  take  from  twelve  to  twenty-four  hours  each 
way  for  despatches  to  pass.  Under  such  circumstances  it 
was  difficult  for  me  to  give  positive  orders  or  directions, 
because  I  could  not  tell  how  the  conditions  might  change 


114  THE  SHENANDOAH  VALLEY. 

during  the  transit  of  despatches.  Many  reasons  might  be 
assigned  for  the  changes  here  suggested,  some  of  which  I 
would  not  care  to  commit  to  paper,  but  would  not  hesitate 
to  give  verbally." 

In  its  new  form  this  proposition  for  the  consolidation  of 
commands  was  apparently  not  received  with  more  warmth 
than  the  old — possibly  because  great  changes  would  be  in- 
volved by  sending  the  commander  of  the  Army  of  the  Poto- 
mac into  what  then  seemed  to  be  a  subordinate  field.  At  all 
events,  the  President's  reply  was  a  request  that  Grant  would 
name  a  time  when  they  could  meet  at  Fort  Monroe.  But 
just  then,  and  for  a  week  thereafter,  operations  of  high  im- 
portance were  carried  on — Hancock's  attack  at  Deep  Bottom 
and  the  explosion  of  the  mine  on  Meade's  Petersburg  front ; 
while,  perhaps  inferring  that,  had  the  President  approved 
his  plan,  he  would  have  said  so  simply,  Grant  made  a  new 
and  most  fortunate  nomination. 

Early's  second  foray,  wholly  a  cavalry  affair,  was  now  in 
progress,  and  to  check  it  Grant  had  already  ordered  to  the 
Valley  one  division  of  Army  of  the  Potomac  cavalry,  and 
within  three  days  was  to  send  another ;  to  Meade,  August 
1st,  he  sent  the  following  despatch :  "I  see  the  artillery 
belonging  to  the  cavalry  division  is  being  shipped  first ;  my 
instructions  were  that  the  cavalry  should  be  got  off  first. 
The  enemy's  cavalry  is  now  in  Pennsylvania,  and  it  is  impor- 
tant that  we  should  get  a  mounted  force  after  them.  If 
Sheridan  is  able  for  duty,  I  wish  you  would  send  him  to  me 
in  person.  I  shall  send  him  to  command  all  the  forces 
against  Early."  Sheridan  reported  forthwith,  and  the  next 
day  was  relieved  temporarily  of  duty  in  the  Army  of  the  Po- 
tomac, and  was  ordered  to  report  with  his  staff  to  Halleck. 
"lam  sending  General  Sheridan,"  wrote  Grant,  "for  tem- 
porary duty,  whilst  the  army  is  being  expelled  from   the 


GENERAL  SHERIDAN'S  MARCH  TO  STRASBURG.   115 

border.  Unless  General  Hunter  is  in  the  field  in  person,  I 
want  Sheridan  put  in  command  of  all  the  troops  in  the  field, 
with  instructions  to  put  himself  south  of  the  enemy,  and 
follow  him  to  the  death.  Wherever  the  enemy  goes,  let  our 
troops  go  also.  Once  started  up  the  Valley,  they  ought  to 
be  followed  till  we  get  possession  of  the  Virginia  Central 
Railroad."  Halleck  answered  that  "  if  Sheridan  is  not 
placed  in  general  command,  I  think  he  should  take  all  the 
cavalry,  but  not  the  Sixth  Corps ;  to  make  that  and  the 
cavalry  a  single  and  separate  command  will,  in  my  opinion, 
be  a  very  bad  arrangement.  If  Sheridan  is  placed  in  gen- 
eral command,  I  presume  Hunter  will  again  ask  to  be  re- 
lieved." The  President  wrote  to  Grant  that  his  language 
was,  he  thought,  "  exactly  right  as  to  how  our  troops  should 
move ;  but  please  look  over  the  despatches  you  may  have 
received  from  here  even  since  you  made  that  order,  and  dis- 
cover, if  you  can,  that  there  is  any  idea  in  the  head  of  any 
one  here  of  putting  our  army  south  of  the  enemy  or  of  fol- 
lowing him  to  the  death  in  any  direction.  I  repeat  to  you, 
it  will  neither  be  done  nor  attempted,  unless  you  watch  it 
every  day  and  hour,  and  force  it." 

The  3d  of  August  Sheridan  reached  Washington,  and 
Halleck  wrote  Grant  as  follows:  "General  Sheridan  has 
just  arrived.  He  agrees  with  me  about  his  command,  and 
prefers  the  cavalry  alone  to  that  and  the  Sixth  Corps.  How 
would  it  do  to  make  a  Military  Division  of  Departments  of 
Pennsylvania,  Washington,  Maryland,  and  West  Virginia, 
and  put  Sheridan  in  general  command,  so  far  as  military 
operations  are  concerned?  Only  about  three  regiments  of 
Sheridan's  cavalry  have  arrived,  and  he  thinks  it  will  not  all 
be  here  for  several  days.  It  is  important  to  hurry  it  up,  for 
if  the  enemy  should  make  a  heavy  cavalry  raid  toward  Pitts- 
burg or  Harrisburg,  it  would  have  so  much  the  start  that  it 


116  THE  SHENANDOAH  VALLEY. 

would  do  immense  damage  before  Sheridan  could  possibly 
overtake  it.  He  thinks  that  for  operations  in  the  open 
country  of  Pennsylvania,  Maryland,  and  Northern  Virginia, 
cavalry  is  much  better  than  infantry,  and  that  the  cavalry 
arm  can  be  much  more  effective  there  than  about  Richmond 
or  south.  He  therefore  suggests  that  another  cavalry  divi- 
sion be  sent  here,  so  that  he  can  press  the  enemy  clear  down 
to  the  James  River."  Grant  replied  in  a  practical  way  by  a 
despatch  to  Meade  :  "  Send  another  division  of  cavalry  to 
Washington  at  once." 

The  questions  raised  by  Halleck  as  to  commands  requiring 
prompt  decision,  Grant  determined  to  visit  Hunter  and  con- 
fer with  him.1  He  left  City  Point  for  this  purpose  August 
4th,  and  arrived  at  Frederick,  Hunter's  headquarters,,  the 
next  evening,  not  stopping  at  Washington  on  the  way.  The 
position  selected  by  Hunter  as  the  proper  one  for  concen- 
trating his  forces  in  the  Valley,  just  a  week  before,  had  been 
the  admirable  one  of  Halltown,  four  miles  beyond  Harper's 
Ferry.  A  very  brief  interchange  of  views  between  Grant 
and  Hunter  showed  that  there  was  no  reason  why  the  latter's 
Halltown  position,  the  most  impregnable  in  the  Valley,  with 
Maryland  Heights  in  possession,  should  not  be  resumed  at 
once,  since  the  threatened  peril  under  which  Halleck  had 
ordered  the  forces  to  Frederick  no  longer  existed. 

But  Grant  went  further.  With  characteristic  vigor,  he 
directed  Hunter,  by  an  order  dated  "Headquarters  in  the 
Field,  Monocacy  Bridge,  Mel.,  August  5,  1864,"  first  to 
concentrate  all  the  forces,  consisting  thus  far  of  the  com- 
mands of  Generals  Wright,  Emory,  and  Crook  —  Averell 
being  then  absent  in  pursuit  of  McCausland — in  the  vicinity 

1  "lean  give  no  instructions  to  either  [Hunter  or  Sheridan]  till  you  decide 
upon  their  commands.  I  await  your  orders,  and  shall  strictly  carry  them  out 
whatever  they  may  be"  (Halleck  to  Grant,  August  4th). 


GENERAL  SHERIDAN'S  MARCH  TO  STRASBURG.   117 

of  Harper's  Ferry,  leaving  in  Maryland  only  such  railroad 
guards  and  garrisons  for  public  property  as  should  be  neces- 
sary; next,  if  it  should  be  found  that  the  enemy  had  moved 
north  of  the  Potomac  in  large  force,  to  follow  and  attack 
him,  wherever  he  went ;  but  should  it  be  found  that  only  a 
small  force  was  north  of  the  river,  then  Hunter  was  to  move 
up  the  Valley  and  attack  the  main  body,  detaching  "  under 
a  competent  commander  a  sufficient  force  to  look  after  the 
raiders  and  drive  them  to  their  homes.  In  detailing  such  a 
-force,"  added  General  Grant,  "the  brigade  of  cavalry  now 
en  route  from  Washington  via  Rockville  may  be  taken  into 
account.  There  are  now  on  the  way  to  join  you  three  other 
brigades  of  the  best  of  cavalry,  numbering  at  least  5,000 
men  and  horses.  These  will  be  instructed,  in  the  absence 
of  further  orders,  to  join  you  by  the  south  side  of  the  Poto- 
mac. One  brigade  will  probably  start  to-morrow."  The 
absence  of  nearly  all  the  cavalry  in  pursuit  of  McCausland 
and  the  employment  of  the  rest  in  guarding  the  Potomac 
line  made  it  impossible  to  learn  from  Frederick  Early's 
exact  location  and  purposes ;  but  Grant's  instructions  cov- 
ered every  contingency,  as  they  amounted  to  an  order  to 
Hunter  to  attack  the  enemy  wherever  he  might  be,  with  an 
assurance  of  reinforcements  enough  to  sustain  him. 

Hunter  at  once  carried  out  these  instructions,  beginning 
by  the  re-establishment  of  his  strong  Halltown  lines,  as  a 
basis  for  the  proposed  operations.  That  same  night  Crook's 
advance  forded  the  Potomac  and  occupied  Halltown,  his 
left  division  extending  to  the  Shenandoah ;  Emory,  with  his 
own  division  and  the  part  of  Grover's  that  had  arrived,  the 
next  morning  occupied  the  centre  of  the  line  on  the  right 
of  Crook,  with  his  right  on  the  left  of  the  pike ;  the  Sixth 
Corps  took  position  on  the  right  of  the  line,  the  Second 
division,  Getty,  on  the  right  of  the  pike,  connecting  with 


118  THE  SHENANDOAH  VALLEY. 

the  Nineteenth,  the  Third,  Bicketts,  on  the  right  of  the  Sec- 
ond, and  the  First,  Russell,  on  the  right  and  rear  of  the 
Third,  extending  almost  to  the  Potomac,  with  the  picket- 
line  reaching  that  river. 

One  point  in  Hunter's  instructions  was  of  particular  im- 
port, as  the  key-note  of  the  subsequent  campaign  : 

In  pushing  up  the  Shenandoah  Valley,  as  it  is  expected  you  will  have 
to  go,  first  or  last,  it  is  desirable  that  nothing  should  be  left  to  invite 
the  enemy  to  return.  Take  all  provisions,  forage,  and  stock  wanted 
for  the  use  of  your  command ;  such  as  cannot  be  consumed,  destroy. 
It  is  not  desirable  that  buildings  should  be  destroyed — they  should 
rather  be  protected  ;  but  the  people  should  be  informed  that  so  long  as 
an  army  can  subsist  among  them,  recurrences  of  these  raids  must  be 
expected,  and  we  are  determined  to  stop  them  at  all  hazards. 

Bear  in  mind,  the  object  is  to  drive  the  enemy  south  ;  and  to  do  this 
you  want  to  keep  him  always  in  sight.  Be  guided  in  your  course  by  the 
course  he  takes. 

Make  your  own  arrangements  for  supplies  of  all  kinds,  giving  regu- 
lar vouchers  for  such  as  may  be  taken  from  loyal  citizens. 

The  emphatic  words,  "  It  is  not  desirable  that  buildings 
should  be  destroyed,  they  should  rather  be  protected," 
coupled  with  the  other  phrase,  "Take  all  provisions,  forage, 
and  stock  wanted  for  the  use  of  your  command — such  as 
cannot  be  consumed,  destroy,"  indicate  the  extent  and  yet 
the  limits  of  the  campaign  now  authorized. 

During  the  first  three  days  of  August,  Early  had  remained 
quiet,  with  his  main  body  at  Bunker  Hill ;  but  the  4th,  he 
had  moved  in  force  toward  the  Potomac,  camping  six  miles 
beyond  Martinsburg,  while  his  cavalry  advance  crossed  the 
river  at  Shepherdstown,  and  drove  the  pickets  from  Antietam 
ford.  Bodes  and  Bamseur,  the  5th,  crossed  at  Williams- 
port,  taking  position  at  St.  James's  College,  and  Breck- 
enridge  crossed  at  Shepherdstown,  occupying  Sharpsburg, 


GENERAL  SHERIDAN'S  MARCH  TO  STRASBURG.   119 

while  Vauglian  entered  Hagerstown.  Early's  wagons  accom- 
panied the  forces,  and  wheat  was  gathered  into  them  from 
farms  near  Sharpsburg.  Union  cavalry  from  Maryland 
Heights  attacked  Jackson's  brigade,  which  was  with  Breck- 
enridge's  command,  till  Gordon  forced  it  to  retire.  Early 
says  that  his  object  in  this  movement  was  to  protect  Mc- 
Causland's  withdrawal  from  Maryland,  and  "to  keep  Hunter 
in  a  state  of  uncertainty."  At  all  events,  his  whole  army 
was  hastily  recalled  to  Martinsburg  the  morning  of  the  6th 
— a  result  possibly  not  disconnected  with  Hunter's  advance 
from  Frederick  to  Halltown,  where  he  threatened  Early's 
rear.  It  is  very  noteworthy  that,  though  Early's  crossing  of 
the  river  in  force  produced  some  alarm,  Grant,  who  was  still 
at  Frederick,  did  not  recall  his  orders  for  massing  the  troops 
at  Halltown.  "From  the  despatches  received  by  General 
Hunter,  it  appears  to  me  evident,"  he  wrote  to  Halleck, 
August  6th,  from  Monocacy,  "  there  is  no  great  force  of  the 
enemy,  likely  not  more  than  2,000  men,  north  of  the  Poto- 
mac, and  they  engaged  in  gathering  and  moving  off  stock 
and  produce  ;  I  believe  they  will  be  gone  before  our  troops 
can  get  near  them."  This  latter  belief  was  perfectly  well- 
founded  ;  Grant  was  in  error  in  regard  to  the  numbers 
north  o*f  the  Potomac,  for  nearly  all  Early's  army  was  there, 
but  it  was  necessary  that  cavalry  should  arrive  before  he  or 
Hunter  could  tell  where  the  enemy  really  was. 

The  evening  of  the  5th,  Grant,  at  Monocacy,  had  informed 
Halleck  of  the  conclusion  he  had  arrived  at.  "I  have  or- 
dered," he  said,  "  the  concentration  of  all  available  forces 
under  General  Hunter — to  be  concentrated  at  once  at  Har- 
per's Ferry,  and  to  follow  the  enemy  promptly  wherever  he 
may  go ;  if  it  is  found,  as  I  suspect,  nothing  but  a  small  raid- 
ing force  is  north  of  the  Potomac,  then  he  is  to  move  up  the 
Valley,   detaching  sufficient  to   attend   [to]  any  force   left 


120  THE  SHENANDOAH   VALLEY. 

north  of  him  by  the  enemy."  But  Hunter  was  destined 
never  again  to  move  up  the  Valley ;  for  very  soon  after,  in 
the  early  hours  of  August  6th,  Halleck  received  this  memor- 
able direction  :  "  Send  Sheridan  by  morning  train  to  Harper's 
Ferry,  calling  here  on  his  way  to  see  if  General  Hunter  has 
left.  Give  him  orders  to  take  general  command  of  all  the 
troops  in  the  field  within  the  Division.  General  Hunter  will 
turn  over  to  him  my  letter  of  instructions."  During  Grant's 
conference  with  Hunter,  the  fact  had  become  developed  that 
he  had  selected  Sheridan  to  conduct  the  field  operations 
against  Early,  and  Hunter  expressing  his  willingness  to  be  re- 
lieved also  from  all  command,  Sheridan,  who  had  been  wait- 
ing at  Washington,  was  summoned  by  the  despatch  just  cited. 

He  arrived  at  Monocacy  that  day,  August  6th,  and  every- 
thing now  being  arranged,  Grant  returned  the  same  evening 
to  Washington,  while  Sheridan  crossed  the  Potomac,  and 
entered  his  new  field,  the  Shenandoah  Valley.  The  next 
day  an  order  was  issued  from  the  War  Department,  consti- 
tuting the  four  Departments  already  spoken  of  as  the  Middle 
Military  Division,  under  Sheridan's  temporary  command, 
and  he  formally  assumed  command  at  Harper's  Ferry.  Thus 
the  famous  campaign  carried  out  by  him  in  this  new  sphere 
dates  from  August  7,  1864. 

The  Army  of  the  Shenandoah,  as  his  force  came  to  be 
called,  and  as  it  was  afterward  officially  designated  by  Sher- 
idan's order  of  November  17th,  had  at  hand  the  Sixth 
Corps,  three  divisions ;  one  division  and  a  portion  of  an- 
other of  the  Nineteenth ;  Crook's  Army  of  West  Virginia, 
two  divisions;  Torbert's  division  of  Army  of  the  Potomac 
cavalry,  and  Lowell's  provisional  brigade  of  cavalry.  In 
the  Union  army,  as  in  the  Confederate,  most  of  the  regi- 
ments had  been  largely  reduced  by  casualty,  for  each  side 
had  inflicted  great  slaughter  on  the  other;  and  the  terms 


GENERAL  SHERIDAN'S  MARCH  TO  STRASBURG.   121 

brigade,  division,  and  corps  rarely  meant  as  much  numeri- 
cally as  at  the  beginning  of  the  campaign.  Nevertheless, 
this  was  by  far  the  most  effective  Union  force  ever  assem- 
bled in  the  Valley,  and,  in  addition,  Averell's  division  and 
Dufhi's  command  of  West  Virginia  cavalry,  and  Wilson's 
division  of  Army  of  the  Potomac  cavalry,  were  on  the  way, 
besides  the  remainder  of  the  Nineteenth  Corps  under  Gro- 
ver.  The  cavalry  amounted  to  a  full  corps,  and  needed  a 
commander.  Sheridan  naturally  desired  for  this  important 
post  one  of  his  old  subordinates.  "Do  not  hesitate,"  wrote 
Grant,  "to  give  command  to  officers  in  whom  you  repose 
confidence,  without  regard  to  claims  of  others  on  account  of 
rank.  If  you  deem  Torbert  the  best  man  to  command  the 
cavalry,  place  him  in  command,  and  give  Averell  some  other 
command,  or  relieve  him  from  the  expedition,  and  order  him 
to  report  to  General  Hunter.  What  we  want  is  prompt  and 
active  movements  after  the  enemy,  in  accordance  with  the 
instructions  you  already  have.  I  feel  every  confidence  that 
you  will  do  the  very  best,  and  will  leave  you,  as  far  as  pos- 
sible, to  act  on  your  own  judgment,  and  not  embarrass  you 
with  orders  and  instructions."  '  Torbert  was  made  Chief  of 
Cavalry,  and  Merritt  received  Torbert's  division. 


1  The  portion  of  the  Nineteenth  Corps  at  Halltown,  August  Ctli,  consisted  of 
Emory's  (First)  division,  under  command  of  General  Dwight,  and  also  eight  regi- 
ments, 2,750  strong,  from  Grover's  (Second)  division,  temporarily  organized  into 
two  brigades  under  command  of  General  Molineux.  Additions  to  Crook's  com- 
mand from  what  had  been  the  Eighth  Corps,  caused  it  usually  to  be  called  by  the 
latter  name,  to  avoid  the  cumbrous  term,  "  The  Army  of  West  Virginia,"  which 
was  a  more  exact  designation. 

Torbert  described  Sheridan's  cavalry  force  at  this  time  as  consisting  of  three 
divisions,  Merritt's,  Averell's,  and  Dnffic's,  besides  Lowell's  brigade,  afterward 
assigned  as  Merritt's  third  brigade.  But  Averell  was  in  West  Virginia  or  at  Cum- 
berland, and  Duffle's  so-called  division,  at  Hancock,  was  only  about  1.0U0  effective ; 
August  27th,  a  part  of  it  was  given  to  Averell,  a  part  went  to  Harper's  Ferry, 
and  the  rest  was  sent  to  Cumberland  to  remount.  The  Appendix  shows  the  nu- 
merical strength  of  the  army. 

XI. -6  11 


122  THE  SHENANDOAH  VALLEY. 

Sheridan  learned  that  the  enemy  had  been  collecting  wheat 
about  Sharpsbuig,  but  "thought  it  best,"  he  said,  "to  let 
them  go  on  until  I  can  get  Torbert's  division  here  ;  then  I 
will  strike  for  Winchester,  which  is  the  key,  and  pick  up 
the  parties  on  the  north  side  of  the  Potomac."  Torbert  ar- 
riving the  9th,  and  Grant  assuring  Sheridan  the  same  day 
that  not  one  brigade  had  been  sent  by  Lee  to  reinforce 
Early,  and  that  he  would  "  endeavor  to  hold  them  and 
rather  create  a  tendency  to  draw  from  your  front  than  allow 
them  to  reinforce,"  Sheridan,  the  morning  of  the  10th, 
marched  out  from  Halltown  for  Winchester.  The  movement 
was  divided  into  two  stages,  the  first  being  the  occupation 
of  a  line  from  Clifton  to  Berryville.  The  Sixth  Corps  moved 
through  Charlestown  to  Clifton,  there  occupying  the  right 
of  the  infantry  line ;  the  Nineteenth  along  the  Berryville 
pike,  till  its  right  joined  the  left  of  the  Sixth ;  the  Eighth 
through  Kabletown  to  Berryville,  on  the  left  of  the  Nine- 
teenth ;  Torbert,  first  to  Summit  Point,  where  he  left  Lowell 
in  position,  and  then  along  the  base  of  Limestone  Ridge, 
through  Berryville  to  White  Post,  where  he  established 
Merritt  on  the  extreme  left. 

By  this  initial  step,  occupying  an  easy  day's  march,  the 
troops  were  drawn  out  of  Halltown  in  a  method  that  guaran- 
teed the  marching  columns  against  the  danger  of  a  flank  at- 
tack, and  were  placed  in  a  new  position,  which,  though  only 
preliminary  to  a  second  movement  framed  in  the  General's 
mind,  was  strong  in  itself,  covering  Snicker's  Gap,  through 
which  reinforcements  were  to  come.  The  position  is  spe- 
cially worth  noting  at  the  outset,  because  Sheridan  repeat- 
edly returned  to  it  in  subsequent  movements.  The  orders 
for  the  march  were  admirably  clear  and  precise. 

Next  morning,  the  Sixth  Corps  was  directed  to  move 
across  the  country  to  the  ford  of  the  Opequon  on  the  Berry- 


GENERAL  SHERIDAN'S  MARCH  TO  STRASBURG.       123 

ville  pike,  and  to  occupy  the  crossing;  the  Nineteenth  to 
move  through  Berryville  on  the  White  Post  road  for  one 
mile,  file  to  the  right,  by  heads  of  regiments,  at  deploying- 
distances,  and  carry  and  hold  the  crossing  of  Opequon  Creek 
at  a  ford  about  three-fourths  of  a  mile  from  the  left  of  the 
Sixth  ;  Crook  to  move  on  the  "White  Post  road  a  mile  and  a 
half  beyond  Berryville,  file  to  the  right,  and  secure  the 
crossing  of  Opequon  Creek  at  a  ford  about  a  mile  to  the  left 
of  the  Nineteenth.  The  cavalry  had  equally  specific  tasks  as- 
signed it — Merritt  to  move  along  the  Millwood  pike  toward 
Winchester,  while  Lowell  was  to  close  in  from  Summit 
Point  on  the  right  of  the  Sixth  Corps. 

These  well-jointed  movements  were  executed  with  pre- 
cision ;  their  purpose  was  to  approach  the  enemy,  and  en- 
gage him  in  battle.  But  Early,  observing  the  manoeuvre  of 
the  10th,  and  divining  its  aim,  marched  his  troops  that  day 
south  from  Bunker  Hill,  and  at  night  took  up  a  position 
covering  Winchester,  holding  the  junction  of  the  Millwood 
and  Front  Boyal  roads.  Though  his  formation  was  line  of 
battle,  the  Confederate  general  did  not  wish  to  fight  there. 
While  his  opponent  had  received  large  reinforcements,  his 
own,  which  Lee,  accepting  Grant's  challenge  to  make  the 
Valley  a  main  scene  of  military  operations,  had  already  des- 
patched, were  still  on  the  road,  and  were  to  join  him  by  way 
of  Culpepper. l    His  proper  move,  therefore,  was  to  retreat  to 

1  "Enemy  has  detached  a  division  of  cavalry  with  a  body  of  infantry  to  Wash- 
ington. General  R.  H.  Anderson,  with  infantry  and  cavalry,  is  in  Culpepper  to 
observe  their  movements"  (Lee  to  Early,  August  8th).  A  day  later  than  this, 
August  9th,  Grant  had  written  Sheridan  as  follows:  '•  Information  derived  from 
deserters,  refugees,  and  a  man  sent  from  here  to  Richmond,  all  corroborating, 
locates  every  division  and  brigade  of  Hill's,  Longstreet's,  and  Beauregard's  forces. 
Not  one  brigade  has  been  sent  from  here."  Grant  had  sent  the  best  information 
he  had,  yet  Anderson's  force  included  a  division  of  infantry  and  one  of  cavalry. 
But  there  was  nothing  unusual  in  this  ;  the  field  despatches,  and  even  the  official 
reports  are  crowded  with  thousands  of  such  instances,  relating  not  only  to  the 


124  THE  SHENA.NDOAH  VALLEY. 

the  strong  defences  in  the  rear  of  Strasburg  and  there  effect 
this  junction ;  and  should  he  be  forced  beyond  that  point, 
the  Richmond  column  could  be  instructed  to  cross  the 
Blue  Bidge  higher  up.  The  first  necessity  was  to  escape 
from  his  present  position.  Accordingly,  while  Sheridan,  the 
morning  of  the  11th,  was  moving  out  to  carry  the  fords  of 
the  Opequon,  Early  was  shifting  his  army  above  Winchester, 
toward  Cedar  Creek  and  Strasburg. 

When  Torbert's  cavalry  discovered  this  manoeuvre,  by  en- 
countering the  enemy  on  the  Millwood  pike  in  a  sharp 
skirmish,  Sheridan  bent  his  efforts  toward  harassing,  since 
he  could  no  longer  prevent  it.  Torbert,  riding  with  Mer- 
ritt's  command,  was  deflected  from  the  direction  of  Win- 
chester southward  toward  Newtown,  while  Lowell  came 
straight  through  the  former  place  along  the  pike.  Wright, 
who  had  halted  some  time  at  the  Opequon  till  the  new  dis- 
positions could  be  made,  and  also  Emory,  were  now  ordered 
to  turn  to  the  left,  moving  up  the  right  bank  of  the  creek. 
At  5  p.m.  the  Sixth  Corps  was  halted  for  the  night  where  the 
Millwood  pike  crosses  the  stream,  the  Nineteenth  being 
between  this  and  the  Front  Eoyal  pike,  while  Crook  reached 
Nineveh,  or  Stony  Point,  about  five  miles  east  of  Middle- 
town.  Early  marched  his  forces  chiefly  between  the  pike 
and  the  Union  cavalry,  so  as  to  keep  the  macadamized  road 
open  for  his  trains  and  artillery ;  and  hence  when  Merritt 
moved    toward    Newtown,   he    encountered    Imboden   and 

movements  but  also  and  especially  to  the  positions  and  the  numbers  of  the 
enemy.  There  were,  no  doubt,  at  least  as  great  facilities  for  getting  correct  in- 
formation at  City  Point  as  elsewhere,  and  General  Badeau  even  thinks  that,  by 
comparison,  "  at  Grant's  headquarters  the  accumulation  of  information  of  this 
character  was  reduced  to  a  science ;  "  still,  even  experienced  scouts  were  often 
positive  on  what  they  knew  little  about,  making  themselves  the  subjects  of  a 
coveted  attention  in  one  of  two  ways,  either  by  sensational  yarns  or  else  by  find- 
ing out  what  color  of  information  their  questioner  wanted,  and  then  supplying  it 
lavishly. 


GENERAL  SHERIDAN'S  MARCH  TO  STRASBURG.   125 

Vaughan  at  the  toll-gate  where  the  Front  Royal  pike  inter- 
sects the  White  Post  and  Newtown  road.  These  he  drove 
toward  Newtown,  bnt  was  there  checked  by  Gordon's  infantry, 
which  had  established  itself  for  the  night,  Early  having 
gone  into  camp  between  that  point  and  Middletown.  Sheri- 
dan's losses  that  day  were  thought  by  him  to  be  about 
125,  nearly  or  quite  all  in  Torbert's  cavalry.  Colonel  Ed- 
wards's brigade,  of  the  Sixth  Corps,  sent  back  by  orders 
to  Winchester,  the  nest  morning,  to  escort  a  wagon  train 
thence,  which  it  did  with  success,  found  about  60  Confed- 
erate and  70  Union  wounded  in  the  hospitals,  and  others 
of  both  sides  were  reported  to  be  in  the  care  of  private 
families.1 

The  next  day  Early  moved  on,  crossing  Cedar  Creek  and 
occupying  Hupp's  Hill  on  the  southern  bank.  Toward 
evening  he  withdrew  his  main  body  a  few  miles,  to  the 
stronger  position  of  Fisher's  Hill,  two  miles  south  of  Stras- 
burg,  and  there  establishing  himself  with  his  right  on  the 
north  fork  of  the  Shenandoah,  and  his  left  extending  toward 
Little  North  Mountain,  awaited  signs  of  his  reinforcements. 
Sheridan,  following,  halted  on  the  left  bank  of  Cedar  Creek, 
with  the  Sixth  Corps  on  the  right  of  the  line,  the  Nine- 
teenth in  the  centre,  and  the  Eighth  on  the  left,  the  latter 
east  of  the  pike ;  the  cavalry  were  of  course  disposed  on 
the  flanks.  A  skirmish  line  from  the  Sixth  and  Eighth 
Corps  crossed  the  creek  at  once,  on  either  side  of  the  pike, 
and  from  four  to  eight  o'clock  in  the  evening  demonstrated 
against  the  pickets  at  Hupp's  Hill.     The  next  morning  the 

1  Unlike  Martin  sburg,  on  the  railroad  line,  which  was  largely  Union  in  senti- 
ment, Winchester  was  mostly  for  secession,  so  that  it  is  well  to  quote  these  words 
from  Edwards's  report :  ''Too  much  praise  cannot  be  given  to  the  loyal  Union 
families  of  Winchester.  They  attended  our  wounded  night  and  day,  and  have 
used  all  their  tea  and  coffee,  sugar,  etc.,  for  sick  and  prisoners,  so  much  so  that 
they  are  in  actual  want  themselves." 


126  THE   SHENANDOAH   VALLEY. 

cavalry  reconnoitred  the  neighborhood  of  Strasburg  on  the 
Back  road,  west  of  the  Valley  pike ;  and  as  the  enemy  was 
found  to  be  holding  Hupp's  Hill  with  his  pickets  only, 
"Wright  was  directed  to  occupy  this  point  in  force  and  move 
his  skirmishers  into  Strasburg.  It  was  then  seen  that  the 
main  position  of  the  enemy  was  at  Fisher's  Hill,  and  that  he 
was  intrenching  westward  across  the  Valley. 

Early  was  now  receiving  his  expected  reinforcements. 
First  came  McCausland's  pair  of  brigades,  of  Chambersburg 
notoriety,  or  such  parts  of  them  as  had  escaped  from  Moore- 
field.  Vastly  more  important  were  Kershaw's  division  of 
infantry,  Fitz  Lee's  of  cavalry,  and  Cutshaw's  battalion  of 
artillery,  all  under  General  Anderson,  now  commanding  the 
First  (Longstreet's)  Corps,  Army  of  Northern  Virginia, -whom 
B.  E.  Lee,  though  robbing  "the  cradle  and  the  grave," 
as  Grant  phrased  it,  for  his  own  needs,  yet  spared  for  a  cam- 
paign which,  he  saw,  might  have  a  decisive  effect  on  the 
war.  Early  had  sent  a  despatch  to  Anderson,  explaining  the 
purpose  of  his  retreat,  and  asking  him  to  come  in  through 
Chester  Gap  to  Front  Boyal,  so  as  to  guard  the  Luray  Val- 
ley— Imboden  being  meanwhile  sent  to  watch  this  Valley. 
Early  also  established  a  signal  station  on  the  westerly  sum- 
mit of  Three  Top,  the  westernmost  of  the  triple  parallel 
ridges  of  the  Massanutten  Mountains,  which  here  sink  ab- 
ruptly into  the  plain. 

Sheridan  learned  in  season  one  of  the  chief  objects  of 
the  signalling  from  this  station.  At  noon  of  July  11th,  while 
still  near  Winchester,  W7eber  had  sent  him  from  Harper's 
Ferry  this  important  message  :  "I  have  information  from  a 
source  always  found  reliable  that  reinforcements  under  Hill 
and  Longstreet  are  within  five  days'  march  of  Early's  pres- 
ent position,  moving  up  the  Valley ;  that  if  attacked  Early 
proposes  to  show  fight  and  retire,  until  a  junction  can  be 


GENERAL  SHERIDAN'S  MARCH  TO  STRASBURG.       127 

formed  with  the  advancing  forces."  Captain  Leets  sent  a 
like  telegram.  Nevertheless,  as  Grant's  message  of  the  9th 
had  been  positive  the  other  way,  Sheridan  awaited  more 
precise  intelligence.  "I  am  exceedingly  anxious,"  he  wrote 
to  Halleck,  the  12th,  "to  hear  whether  Longstreet  has  left 
to  come  here  or  not ; "  and  he  notified  Grant,  the  next  day, 
that  "reports  from  citizens  here,  Washington,  and  Harper's 
Ferry  report  Longstreet's  Corps  coming  this  way  from  Staun- 
ton ;  but  I  still  rely,"  he  added,  "  on  your  telegram  that  it  is 
not  so."  However,  as  measures  of  precaution,  Devin's  bri- 
gade of  Merritt's  cavalry  division  was  sent  to  keep  watch  at 
Cedarville,  seven  miles  east,  on  the  Front  Royal  and  Win- 
chester pike,  and  Wright,  who  had  occupied  Strasburg  with 
his  skirmishers  that  morning,  was  drawn  back  at  night  to 
the  north  side  of  Cedar  Creek,  with  his  pickets,  as  during 
the  12th,  on  the  south  side  ;  whereupon  the  enemy's  outposts 
reoccupied  Hupp's  Hill. 

The  morning  of  July  14th,  Colonel  N.  P.  Chipman,  of  the 
Adjutant-General's  office,  rode  in  hot  haste  into  Sheridan's 
lines,  escorted  by  a  regiment  of  cavalry,  with  a  despatch 
which  he  had  brought  from  Washington  through  Snicker's 
Gap — a  telegram  from  Grant  to  Halleck,  written  two  days 
before,  directing  him  to  inform  Sheridan  that  Lee  had  sent 
Early  "two  divisions  of  infantry,  some  cavalry,  and  twenty 
pieces  of  artillery" — for  such  the  report  then  was,  though 
the  real  force  was  soon  afterward  discovered  to  be  one  divi- 
sion of  infantry  and  one  of  cavalry,  with  artillery.  "He 
[Sheridan]  must  be  cautious,"  said  General  Grant,  "and  act 
now  on  the  defensive,  until  movements  here  force  them  to 
detach  to  send  this  way.  Early's  force  with  this  increase 
cannot  exceed  4.0,000,  but  this  is  too  much  for  Sheridan  to 
attack.  Send  Sheridan  the  remaining  brigade  of  the  Nine- 
teenth Corps.     I  have  ordered  to  Washington  all  the  hun- 


128  THE  SHENANDOAH  VALLEY. 

dred-days  men.  Their  time  will  soon  be  out,  but  for  the 
present  they  will  do  to  stand  in  the  defences."  ' 

On  the  receipt  of  this  despatch,  General  Sheridan  pre- 
pared to  retreat ;  for  he  considered  this  to  be  wiser  than  to 
remain  where  he  was,  in  the  presence  of  an  enemy  of 
strength  as  yet  unknown.  "  So  far  as  I  have  been  able  to 
see,"  he  wrote  Grant,  "there  is  not  a  military  position  in 
this  Valley  south  of  the  Potomac.  The  position  here  [Cedar 
Creek]  is  a  very  bad  one,  as  I  cannot  cover  the  numerous 
rivers  that  lead  in  on  both  of  my  flanks  to  the  rear.  I  am 
not  aware  that  you  knew  where  my  command  was  when  you 
ordered  me  to  take  up  the  defensive.  I  should  like  very 
much  to  have  your  advice."  To  Halleck  he  wrote  that  he 
had  "taken  up  for  the  present  the  line  of  Cedar  Run,  but 
will,  at  my  leisure,  take  position  at  Winchester.  This  line 
cannot  be  held,  nor  can  I  supply  my  command  beyond  that 
point  with  the  ten  days'  rations  with  which  I  started.  I 
expected  to  get  far  enough  up  the  Valley  to  accomplish  my 
objects,  and  then  quickly  return." 

During  the  15th,  Custer's  and  Gibbs's  brigades  of  Merritt's 
division  were  sent  to  Cedarville  and  Stony  Point,  on  the  Front 
Eoyal  pike,  lest  the  enemy  should  turn  that  flank,  and  there 
was  sharp  skirmishing  in  the  afternoon  by  the  pickets  of 
Wright  and  Crook  beyond  Cedar  Creek,  the  Jersey  brigade  of 


1  "  The  movement  to  the  north  side  of  the  James  River  today  developed  the 
presence  of  Field's  division  of  Longstreet's  Corps  which  I  supposed  had  gone  to 
the  Valley.  Pickett's  division  is  also  here.  We  captured  six  pieces  of  artillery 
and  over  100  prisoners.  Longstreet's  troops  were  under  marching  orders,  and 
this  move  will  detain  it  for  the  present.  I  think  Sheridan  is  still  superior  to 
Early  in  numbers,  but  not  sufficiently  so  to  attack  fortifications"  (Grant  to  Hal- 
leck. August  14th).  "It  is  now  posit'. ve  that  Kershaw's  division  has  gone,  but 
no  other  infantry  has.  This  reinforcement  to  Early  will  put  him  nearer  on  an 
equality  with  you  in  numbers  than  I  want  to  see,  and  will  make  it  necessary  for 
you  to  observe  more  caution  about  attacking.  I  would  not,  however,  change  my 
instructions  further  than  to  ir<join  caution"  (Grant  to  Sheridan,  August  14th). 


GENERAL  SHERIDAN'S  MARCH  TO  STRASBURG.       129 

Eussell's  division  supporting  Wright's  line.  Early's  pickets 
resisted  with  increased  pertinacity,  at  one  time  driving  back 
the  Union  skirmishers  on  both  sides  of  the  pike,  though  the 
line  was  afterward  re-established.  During  the  night  the 
Nineteenth  Corps  began  the  retreat.  Its  departure  was  not 
observed,  and  the  Sixth  and  Eighth  did  not  follow  till  8  p.m. 
the  next  day,  Wright  marching  all  night  and  reaching  Win- 
chester about  five  o'clock  in  the  morning ;  and  the  whole 
operation  was  conducted  so  secretly  in  the  darkness  au  not  to 
be  discovered. 

At  daybreak  of  the  17th  the  signal  station  on  Three  Top, 
which  looked  down  into  both  camps,  perceived  that  Sheri- 
dan's had  been  abandoned ;  and,  being  notified  of  this,  both 
Early's  forces  and  those  of  Anderson  pushed  forward  in  pur- 
suit, the  former  from  Strasburg  and  the  latter  from  Front 
Eoyal.  A  part  of  Anderson's  forces,  the  day  before,  cross- 
ing the  Shenandoah,  had  encountered  at  the  ford  two  of 
Merritt's  brigades,  Devin  and  Custer,  who  drove  them  across 
the  river  with  heavy  loss,  nearly  300  prisoners,  mostly  of 
Kershaw's  division,  and  two  infantry  flags  being  secured  as 
trophies  of  this  handsome  exploit.  Merritt,  whose  loss  was 
but  GO  men,  afterward  withdrew  to  White  Post. 

Early  moved  rapidly  in  pursuit  of  his  opponent  along  the 
Valley  pike ;  but  as  the  rear  of  Sheridan's  infantry  was 
breakfasting  at  Winchester  while  Early  was  still  at  Stras- 
burg, his  speed  did  not  avail  him.  For  Sheridan,  though  at 
first  intimating  to  Halleck,  as  has  been  seen,  that  he  would 
"take  position  at  Winchester,"  had  determined,  even  before 
leaving  Cedar  Creek,  that  Winchester  was  not  a  defensible 
position,  and  had  accordingly  notified  Halleck  that  instead 
he  would  move  back  to  Berryville,  holding  Snicker's  Gap. 
Thither  he  now  directed  his  forces,  while  Torbert  was  left 
at  Winchester,  the  afternoon  of  the  17th,  to  cover  the  with- 
6*  11 


133  THE  SHENANDOAH   VALLEY. 

drawal,  Wilson  having  fortunately  reported  to  him  there 
with  his  division  of  cavalry.  To  Wilson  and  Lowell,  as  rear- 
guard, were  added  Penrose's  Jersey  brigade  of  the  first  divi- 
sion of  the  Sixth  Corps.  Penrose,  numbering  but  eight 
hundred  and  fifty  muskets  in  line — the  Fourth,  Tenth,  and 
Fifteenth  regiments,  under  Colonels  Campbell  and  Tay 
and  Major  Boeman  —  was  deployed  by  Torbert  along  a 
small  affluent  of  the  Opequon,  winding  south  of  Winchester 
near  the  town,  with  Mcintosh's  brigade  of  Wilson,  dis- 
mounted, piecing  out  the  line,  and  the  remainder  of  the  cav- 
alry massed  near  the  town,  a  cavalry  battery  aiding  with 
its  canister  from  the  heights  in  the  rear.  The  Jerseymen 
held  Early's  horsemen  in  check  all  the  afternoon,  and  only 
when  Wharton's  division  of  infantry  attacked  their  right, 
and  Eamseur's  division  their  front,  while  Gordon's  advanced 
against  the  cavalry,  was  the  line  broken.  The  Union  casual- 
ties in  this  engagement  were  more  than  350,  for  Penrose  had 
97  killed  and  wounded,  and  lost  200  prisoners,  and  the  cav- 
alry lost  about  50  prisoners.  The  captures  were  chiefly  due 
to  the  pertinacity  with  which  the  line  had  been  held  until 
late  at  night. 

Meanwhile  from  Winchester  the  retrograde  of  the  main 
ai-my  had  been  continued,  with  the  clockwork  precision  that 
had  marked  the  advance,  toward  the  old  Clifton-Berry- 
ville  line,  Wright  re  occupying  the  crossing  of  the  Ope- 
quon, and  Crook  and  Emory  their  places  near  Berryville. 
Merritt  withdrew  in  like  manner  to  White  Post ;  and  when 
Wilson  and  Lowell  fell  back  at  night  from  Winchester  to 
Summit  Point,  the  whole  army  was  positioned  very  nearly 
as  when  a  week  before  it  had  moved  to  intercept  Early. 

The  considerations  that  commend  Early's  retreat  from 
Bunker  Hill  to  Strasburg  must  also  approve  Sheridan's  from 
Strasburg  to  Berryville.     Independently  of  the  express  in- 


GENERAL  SHERIDAN'S  MARCH  TO  STRASBURG.       131 

structions  he  liad  received  from  General  Grant,  coupled 
with  his  own  judgment  that  the  Clifton-Berryville  line  was 
a  better  defence  than  Cedar  Creek,  the  conjunction  of  Early 
and  Anderson  in  the  neighborhood  of  Strasburg  might 
soon  have  led  to  his  defeat.  And  there  was  still  another 
justification  of  this  retrograde  movement  in  the  reinforce- 
ments which  he  wrell  knew  were  marching  to  join  him, 
through  Snicker's  Gap,  consisting,  as  has  been  said,  of  the 
remaining  portion  of  Grover's  infantry,  and  the  whole  of 
Wilson's  cavalry ;  while  Averell's  division  of  cavalry  had 
also  two  days  earlier  reported  at  Martinsburg,  and  Duffle's 
was  at  Charlestown.  With  these  strong  reinforcements,  and 
with  the  Opequon  between  him  and  the  enemy,  Sheridan  was 
much  better  situated  than  at  Cedar  Creek  for  advantageously 
executing  the  imperative  orders  he  had  received  to  act  on 
the  defensive. 

At  Berryville,  Sheridan  set  forth  more  fully  to  Grant  the 
reason  for  his  withdrawal  from  Cedar  Creek  :  "  The  position 
I  held  in  front  of  Strasburg  was  a  very  bad  one,  from  which 
I  could  be  forced  at  any  time  precipitately.  Winchester  is 
untenable,  except  as  a  provisional  garrison.  I  have  there- 
fore taken  a  position  near  Berryville,  which  will  enable  me 
to  get  in  their  rear,  if  they  should  get  strong  enough  to 
push  north.  Winchester  is  now  held  by  the  cavalry,  with 
one  brigade  of  infantry  of  the  Sixth  Corps  to  act  with  it." 
As,  however,  the  enemy's  activity  at  Winchester  showed  him 
to  be  in  strong  force,  it  was  deemed  best  to  move  to  a  more 
compact  line,  and  the  next  day  Wright  was  ordered  to  draw 
back  through  Clifton  to  Welch's  Spring,  two  and  one-half 
miles  west  of  Charlestown  on  the  Smithfield  or  Middleway 
pike,  and  Emory  to  the  same  distance  south  of  Charlestown 
on  the  Berryville  pike,  Crook,  a  day  or  two  later,  coming 
back  to  the  left  and  rear  of  Emory.    Merritt  was  then  drawn 


132  THE   SHENANDOAH  VALLEY. 

into  Berryville,  with  his  pickets  out  from  Snicker's  Ferry, 
via  Stony  Church  on  the  Millwood  pike,  across  to  the  Ope- 
qnon,  while  Wilson  at  Summit  Point  watched  the  crossing 
of  the  Opequon,  the  left  of  his  picket  line  connecting  with 
Merritt's,  and  scouting  the  east  bank  of  the  creek  and  the 
country  up  to  the  Valley  pike,  where  Averell,  with  his  main 
force  at  Shepherdstown,  guarded  the  region  back  to  the 
Potomac,  his  pickets  going  up  to  Martinsburg.  The  in- 
fantry line  crossed  the  Oharlestown  juke  at  the  north  fork  of 
Bullskin  Run,  and  extended  to  Welch's  Spring  on  the  Sum- 
mit Point  road. 

Although  the  successive  moves  from  Strasburg  to  Win- 
chester, Winchester  to  Berryville,  and  Berryville  to  Charles- 
town,  were  made  with  a  military  judgment  fully  justified  at 
last,  they  excited  some  alarm  at  first  among  those  ignorant 
of  the  reason,  who  already  in  imagination  saw  the  enemy 
moving  across  the  Potomac.  The  true  statement  of  the  case 
at  this  time  was  the  one  given  by  Sheridan  to  Grant.  Hav- 
ing explained  the  manner  in  which  Torbert  was  compelled 
to  evacuate  Winchester,  he  added  these  words  :  "  There  has 
been  no  advance  toward  Martinsburg.  I  destroyed  all  the 
wheat,  hay,  and  provisions  south  of  Winchester  and  Berry- 
ville, and  drove  off  all  the  cattle.  The  enemy  is  very  much 
chagrined  at  it.  If  the  enemy  should  go  north  of  the  Poto- 
mac I  will  follow  him.  There  is  no  occasion  for  alarm." 
Before  leaving  Berryville  that  morning,  Sheridan  informed 
Averell,  who  was  near  Martinsburg,  that  Torbert  had  fallen 
back  to  Summit  Point  from  Winchester,  and  directed  him 
to  move  his  command  "to  the  north  side  of  the  Potomac,  if 
necessary,  and  cover  the  country  from  Williamsport  to 
Sharpsburg." 

When  Early  found  that  Sheridan  had  retired  from  the 
Clifton-Berryville  line,  where  he  would  always  be  threaten- 


GENERAL  SHERIDAN'S  MARCH  TO  STRASBURG.   133 

ing  Winchester,  being  within  a  short  march  of  it,  he  ven- 
tured to  move  his  own  forces,  the  19th,  to  Bunker  Hill,  yet 
leaving  all  Anderson's  troops  to  guard  Winchester,  while 
Ransom's  cavalry,  now  under  Lomax,  who  at  Fisher's  Hill 
had  relieved  Eansom,  made  reconnoissances  to  Martinsburg 
and  Shepherdstown.  Sheridan,  however,  knowing  that  Av- 
erell  could  easily  cross  the  river  and  hold  the  north  fords, 
cared  little  for  these  demonstrations.  "In  fact,"  said  his 
orders  to  this  officer,  the  night  of  the  19th,  "the  General 
rather  desires  that  the  enemy  should  cross  ;  "  while  to  Grant 
he  wrote  that  he  had  "  left  everything  in  that  direction  for 
them,  but  they  have  not  accepted  the  invitation  as  yet." 
Early  contented  himself  with  going  just  far  enough  down 
the  Valley  to  insure  keeping  the  Baltimore  and  Ohio  Rail- 
road broken,  and  to  be  where  he  could  get  grain  and 
forage  ; '  for  Sheridan  had  burned  the  Valley  above  Winches- 
ter.    Thus  three  days  of  comparative  quiet  passed. 

The  force  which  Anderson  brought  with  him  consisted, 
as  has  been  said,  of  Kershaw's  division,  Cutshaw's  battalion 
of  artillery,  and  two  brigades  of  cavalry  under  Fitz  Lee. 
Anderson  ranked  Early,  but  declined  to  take  command,  not 
being  sent  there  for  the  purpose  of  superseding  him.  Al- 
though Sheridan  knew  from  the  prisoners  he  had  taken  that 
these  reinforcements  had  arrived,  he  could  not  be  sure  that 
others  were  not  on  the  way,  and  all  his  information  was  to 
the  effect  that  at  least  one  additional  division  of  Longstreet's 
old  corps  was  already  in  the  Valley.  Indeed,  it  seemed  very 
improbable  that  Anderson  himself,  who  now  commanded 
the  corps,  would  accompany  a  single  division  of  it  to  the 
Valley,    while   the    greater  part    remained    at   Richmond. 

1  "  No  wheat  has  been  burned  in  this  country,  and  if  we  can  stay  here  we  can 
live.  I  have  sent  Lomax  to  Martinsburg.  I  think  Fitz  Lee  had  better  try  and 
Bhove  the  enemy  back  on  the  Berryville  road"  (Early  to  Anderson,  August  19th). 


134  THE  SHENANDOAH  VALLEY. 

Grant's  scouts,  on  the  other  hand,  brought  him  news  totally 
different  from  Sheridan's  reports,  and  some  uncertainty  was 
thus  caused.  August  16th  Grant  wrote  that  "  Fitz  Lee's 
division  is  not  in  the  Valley.  We  took  quite  a  number  of 
prisoners  from  it  yesterday,  north  of  the  James.  Kershaw's 
division  has  gone  to  the  Valley,  and  probably  two  brigades 
of  Wilcox's  division.  Some  cavalry  has  gone,  but  I  do  not 
know  whose.  I  would  not  advise  an  attack  on  Early  in  an 
intrenched  position,  but  would  watch  him  closely  with  the 
cavalry,  and  if  he  attempts  to  move  north,  follow  him." 
Sheridan  answered  the  next  day  that  "  Kershaw's  division 
is  here,  and  Wickham's  and  Lomax's  brigades  of  Fitzhugh 
Lee's  cavalry  division  ;  also  another  brigade  from  Ream's 
Station.  One  division  of  A.  P.  Hill's  corps  is  reported  here. 
My  impression  is  that  troops  are  still  arriving."  The  17th, 
Grant  wrote  that  his  movement  to  the  north  of  James  River 
had  "  undoubtedly  prevented  sending  reinforcements  to  the 
Valley,"  and  that  a  large  part  of  Early's  force  was  likely  to 
be  recalled.  "  Be  prepared  to  move  at  any  moment.  If  you 
find  Early  sending  off  any  of  his  troops,  strike  suddenly  and 
hard."  Sheridan  rejoined  that  all  his  reports  were  that 
Early  was  steadily  receiving  reinforcements  ;  and  the  19th 
he  again  wrote  as  follows:  "I  receive  constant  reports  of 
the  passage  of  troops  across  to  this  Valley  from  Culpepper. 
I  have  taken  the  defensive  until  their  strength  is  more  fnlly 
developed.  I  still  think  that  two  divisions  of  infantry  have 
come  here,  and  Fitzhugh  Lee's  cavalry."  The  20th,  Grant 
responded  that  "As  stated  in  previous  despatches,  no  division 
or  brigade  has  gone  from  Lee's  army  to  the  Valley  except 
Kershaw's  and  Fitz  Lee's." 

While  the  Confederate  strength  and  purposes  thus  re- 
mained obscure,  Early  and  Anderson  determined,  the  21st, 
to  attack  Sheridan  in  a  combined   movement,  the  former 


GENERAL  SHERIDAN'S  MARCH  TO  STRASBURG.       135 

proceeding  through  Smithfield  towards  Charlestown,  while 
Anderson  was  to  advance  by  the  direct  road  that  runs 
through  Summit  Point..  Sheridan's  cavalry  pickets  on  the 
Opequon  were  so  quickly  driven  in  that  Early  pressed  at 
once  against  the  Sixth  Corps,  advancing  the  divisions  of 
Bodes  and  Raruseur.  A  sharp  engagement  ensued.  Rick- 
etts  was  transferred  from  his  position  in  reserve  to  the  left 
of  the  corps  line,  and  the  lost  position  was  regained  at  night- 
fall, though  with  the  loss  of  260  killed  and  wounded,  mainly 
in  Getty's  division.  The  Eighth  Corps  drew  up  to  co-ope- 
rate on  the  left  and  the  Nineteenth  on  the  right.  But  the 
attack  was  over  ;  for  Anderson,  moving  from  Winchester  and 
having  a  somewhat  longer  road  to  travel,  did  not  take  part, 
his  advance  having  been  handsomely  retarded  by  Merritt's 
cavalry  division  at  Berry ville  and  Wilson's  at  Summit 
Point.  The  consequence  was  that  dusk  found  him  still  at 
the  latter  place,  where  accordingly  he  went  into  camp.  At 
midnight  Sheridan  drew  in  Merritt  and  Wilson,  and  moved 
the  whole  army  back  to  Halltown,  which  was  a  far  better, 
and,  indeed,  an  impregnable  position.  For,  with  a  river  on 
either  flank,  and  a  compact  line  stretching  between  them, 
the  Sixth  Corps  on  the  right,  the  Nineteenth  in  the  centre, 
and  the  Eighth  on  the  left,  his  fine  corps  of  cavalry  watch- 
ful, strong  intrenchments  all  along  his  front,  and  aided  by  the 
heavy  guns  of  the  Heights,  he  had  the  best  defensive  posi- 
tion in  the  Valley.1 

While  Sheridan  was  at  Cedar  Creek,  Mosby  with  a  few 
score  men  made  a  dash  at  Berry  ville  upon  one  of  his  trains 


1  "My  position  at  best  being  a  very  bad  one,  and  as  there  is  much  depending  on 
this  army,  I  fell  back  and  took  a  new  position  in  front  of  Halltown"  (Sheridan 
to  Halleck,  August  22d).  "  Some  of  my  scouts  report  Pickett's  and  Field's  divisions 
here,  and  that  they  will  go  through  Snicker's  Gap.  I  do  not  believe  they  are 
there,  but  the  rebels  have  been  very  bold  "  (Sheridan  to  Augur,  August  23d). 


136  THE  SHENANDOAH  VALLEY. 

proceeding  to  the  front,  dispersed  the  guard,  Kenly's  bri- 
gade of  hundred-days  men,  ran  off  three  hundred  and 
fifty  mules,  and  burned  the  wagons  with  such  of  their  con- 
tents as  his  band  and  helpful  citizens  could  not  carry  away. 
The  wagons  were  chiefly  loaded  with  forage,  subsistence, 
and  the  officers'  baggage  and  regimental  property  of  Mer- 
ritt's  cavalry  division.  The  15th,  Lieutenant  "Walker,  First 
United  States  Cavalry  was  killed,  and  Lieutenant  Dwyer, 
Fifth  Cavalry,  wounded  and  captured  by  Mosby's  troopers  ; 
and  the  following  day  Lieutenant  Barry,  First  Cavalry,  was 
attacked  and  suffered  the  loss  of  7  men. 

Although  this  primary  move  of  the  new  campaign  had 
come  to  naught,  yet  it  was  the  Lieutenant-General  himself 
who  superseded  his  original  instructions  by  an  express  order 
to  assume  the  defensive,  until  a  specific  time,  namely,  when 
Lee's  necessities  should  weaken  Early  by  the  withdrawal  of 
some  of  his  troops  to  Eichmond. 

In  moving  back  from  Cedar  Creek  to  Winchester,  Sheridan 
had  instructed  Torbert  to  burn,  as  he  withdrew,  the  barns 
and  crops,  and  to  seize  all  mules,  horses,  and  cattle  that 
might  be  useful  to  the  Union  army.  "  Loyal  citizens,"  he 
said,  "  can  bring  in  their  claims  against  the  Government  for 
this  necessary  destruction.  No  houses  will  be  burned,  and 
officers  in  charge  of  this  delicate,  but  necessary  duty,  must 
inform  the  people  that  the  object  is  to  make  this  valley  un- 
tenable for  the  raiding  parties  of  the  rebel  army."  Sheridan 
wrote  to  Grant  that  he  had  "  destroyed  everything  eatable 
south  of  Winchester,  and  they  will  have  to  haul  supplies 
from  well  up  toward  Staunton." 


CHAPTER  VTfl. 

THE  SHENANDOAH  LINES  IN  SEPTEMBER. 

The  Army  of  the  Shenandoah  had  again  fallen  back  to 
Harper's  Ferry,  much  as  when,  on  former  occasions,  it  had 
received  the  soldiers'  nickname  of  "  Harper's  "Weekly,"  in 
allusion  to  a  pretended  regularity  of  arrivals  and  reissues  at 
this  spot.  What  a  story  of  marchings  and  countermarch- 
ings  the  soil  of  the  lower  Valley  might  tell !  What  a  his- 
tory is  that  of  its  villages  from  1861  to  1865 — now  in  Seces- 
sion and  anon  in  Union  keeping;  sometimes  sheltering 
"Yanks"  at  dawn,  swarming  with  "Eebs"  at  noon,  and 
again  sleeping  under  the  stars  and  stripes  at  night !  "  We 
have  walked  the  pike-road  so  often,"  writes  an  Alabama  of- 
ficer, "  that  we  know  not  only  every  house,  fence,  spring,  and 
shade-tree,  but  very  many  of  the  citizens,  their  wives,  and 
children."  The  Valley  turnpike  had  come  to  be  known  as 
the  race-course  of  armies. 

Early  occupied  three  days  in  demonstrating  against  Hall- 
town,  principally  on  the  fronts  of  Crook  and  Emory.  Find- 
ing the  position  impregnable,  he  left  Anderson  facing  the 
Halltown  lines,  with  Kershaw's  division,  McCausland's  cav- 
alry, and  one  regiment  of  Fitz  Lee's,  and,  August  25th,  sent 
the  main  part  of  Fitz  Lee's  force  to  Williamsport,  while  he 
himself  moved,  with  Eodes,  Ramseur,  Gordon,  and  Wharton, 
and  their  artillery,  northward  to  Shepherdstown,  Cutshaw 
remaining  with  Anderson.     The  alleged    purpose   of  this 


138  THE   SHENANDOAH   VALLEY. 

seemingly  imprudent  division  of  his  forces  was  "  to  keep  up 
the  fear  of  an  invasion  of  Maryland  and  Pennsylvania." 
Eitz  Lee  started  on  his  way  through  Leetown  and  Martins- 
burg.  Early,  following,  turned  off  at  Leetown,  and  between 
this  place  and  Kearneysville  came  upon  the  greater  part  of 
Merritt's  and  Wilson's  divisions,  under  Torbert,  who,  sup- 
posing he  had  only  cavalry  to  deal  with,  attacked  sharply, 
driving  back  Wharton  in  confusion.  That  Torbert's  troop- 
ers were  immediately  afterward  roughly  handled  is  riot  to 
their  discredit,  since  they  were  confronted  by  four  divisions 
of  infantry,  though  Breckenridge's  corps  was  the  only  force 
much  engaged.  Pressing  against  the  Union  cavalry,  Early 
cut  off  the  brigade  of  Custer  ;  but  this  vigorous  soldier,  by 
great  exertions,  escaped  through  Shepherdstown  across  the 
Potomac,  the  Confederate  commander  fortunately  having  no 
cavalry  at  hand  with  which  to  follow  him.  Wilson  and  the 
remainder  of  Merritt  found  their  way  back  safely,  by  differ- 
ent roads,  to  the  army.  In  this  affair  there  were  losses  on 
each  side,  Colonel  Monaghan,  Sixth  Louisiana,  commanding 
a  brigade,  being  among  the  Confederate  killed. 

When  Merritt  and  Wilson  came  back  to  the  Union  lines 
with  the  account  of  what  had  befallen  them,  preparations 
were  made  for  the  emergency.  "Early  and  Breckenridge," 
telegraphed  Sheridan  to  Halleck,  "  moved  this  morning  in 
the  direction  of  Shepherdstown.  It  is  possible  that  I  may 
have  to  cross  the  river  to  the  north  side,  should  the  enemy 
cross."  To  Grant  he  said  that  there  was  not  much  doubt  of 
the  presence  of  two  divisions  of  Longstreet's  corps.  "  The 
cavalry  were  forced  to  give  up  Shepherdstown,  all  but  one 
brigade  coming  back  to  Halltown.  This  brigade,  it  is  sup- 
posed, crossed  at  the  Shepherdstown  ford.  I  cannot  say 
whether  the  enemy  will  attempt  to  cross  in  the  morning — 
they  must  be  very  strong  to  do  so.     My  information  is  that 


THE   SHENANDOAH   LINES   IN   SEPTEMBER.         139 

Early  marched  with  that  intention.  The  enemy  are  in  very 
strong  force.  I  will  not  give  up  this  place,"  he  added,  con- 
fidently, "  and  hojDe  to  be  able  to  strike  the  enemy  divided.  I 
hardly  think  that  they  will  attempt  to  go  to  Washington."  He 
hurried  Wilson  across  the  Potomac  to  Boonsboro,  to  hold  the 
South  Mountain  gaps,  and  next  day  directed  Averell  to  unite 
with  Wilson,  should  Lee  ford  at  Williamsport.  "Wilson," 
he  said,  "  is  at  one  of  the  lower  crossings  of  Antietam.  You 
would  then  be  strong  enough  to  take  care  of  the  enemy's 
cavalry  until  I  could  get  Merritt's  division  with  you." 

But  Early's  project,  whatever  its  real  nature  may  have 
been,  had  already  come  to  an  end ;  for  Fitzhugh  Lee,  reach- 
ing the  Potomac,  found  Averell's  cavalry  guarding  the  fords 
on  the  north  side,  and  after  a  little  skirmishing,  drew  off  to- 
ward Shepherdstown. 

Meanwhile..  Anderson  had  been  left  in  so  small  force  be- 
fore Halltown,  that  Crook,  reconnoitring,  the  26th,  with 
Duval's  division  and  a  part  of  Thoburn's,  Lowell's  cavalry 
co-operating,  broke  the  enemy's  skirmish  line,  and  reported 
that  he  had  also  driven  two  brigades  from  their  position 
behind  earthworks.  Lowell  captured  7  or  8  officers  and  69 
privates.     Crook's  infantry  loss  was  141  killed  and  wounded. 

The  Confederate  commander  had  now  found  it  hopeless  to 
attack  Sheridan  in  front  at  Halltown ;  impossible  to  get  at 
his  river-protected  flanks  and  rear,  with  Maryland  Heights 
behind ;  and  perilous  to  invade  the  North,  with  three  divi- 
sions of  cavalry,  one  of  them  beyond  the  Potomac,  free  to 
fall  on  his  trains.  He  resolved  to  move  back  to  his  old 
position,  west  of  the  Opequon.  The  26th  he  marclied  his 
infantry  from  Shepherdstown  to  Leetown,  and  the  following 
day  from  Leetown  to  Bunker  Hill,  while  Anderson  moved 
back,  the  night  of  the  26th,  from  the  Halltown  front  to 
Stephenson's  Depot. 


140         THE  SHENANDOAH  VALLEY. 

Lest  rumor  should,  as  usual,  magnify  and  distort  Early's 
latest  demonstration,  Sheridan  wrote  to  Halleck  that  "the 
movement  of  the  enemy  toward  Shepherdstown  yesterday 
amounted  to  nothing.  It  did  not  disturb  me,  nor  cause  me 
to  make  any  changes,  except  to  send  one  division  of  cavalry 
to  Antietam  Creek,  on  the  north  side.  No  attempt  was 
made  to  cross  the  ford,  although  it  was  left  open  for  the 
enemy.  They  must  have  retired  to  the  vicinity  of  Charles- 
town.  I  think  I  can  manage  this  affair.  I  have  thought  it 
best  to  be  very  prudent,  everything  considered."  The  same 
night  Grant  informed  Sheridan,  that,  after  the  great  battles 
just  delivered  around  Petersburg,  ending  in  the  seizure  of 
the  Weldon  Eailroad,  "  all  troops  will  be  ordered  back 
from  the  Valley,  except  what  they  believe  to  be  the  mini- 
mum number  to  detain  you.  I  think,"  he  added,  "I  do  not 
overstate  the  loss  of  the  enemy  in  the  last  two  weeks  at 
10,000  killed  and  wounded.  Watch  closely,  and  if  you  find 
this  thing  correct,  push  with  all  vigor.  Give  the  enemy  no 
rest,  and  if  it  is  possible  to  follow  to  the  Virginia  Central 
Koad,  follow  that  far.  Do  all  the  damage  to  railroads  and 
crops  you  can.  Carry  off  stock  of  all  descriptions  and 
negroes,  so  as  to  prevent  further  planting.  If  the  war  is  to 
last  another  year,  we  want  the  Shenandoah  Valley  to  remain 
a  barren  waste."  These  views  accorded  with  Early's  latest 
movements,  and  Sheridan  wrote  to  Washington  that  "  the 
indications  to-day  are  that  they  will  fall  back  out  of  the 
Valley." 

The  main  army  lay  quiet  that  day,  but  the  morning  of 
the  28th,  it   moved J   forward   to  Charlestown,  meeting  no 


1  General  Grant  had  written  Lo  Sheridan  as  follows  :  "  If  you  are  so  situated  as 
to  feel  the  enemy  strongly  without  compromising  the  safety  of  your  position,  I 
think  it  advisable  to  do  so.  I  do  not  know  positively  that  any  troops  have  re- 
turned yet  from  the  Valley,  but  think  you  will  find  the  enemy  in  your  immediate 


THE  SHENANDOAH  LINES  IN  SEPTEMBER.         141 

opposition.  Sheridan  had  apparently  fixed  upon  the  Clif- 
ton-Berryville  line  as  the  true  counter-position  to  occupy, 
whenever  Early  established  .  himself  at  Bunker  Hill ;  for 
there  he  could  strike  the  turnpike  south  of  Winchester, 
should  it  become  advisable  to  resume  the  offensive,  or  could 
retire  to  Halltown  should  the  enemy  be  found  in  too  great 
strength.  Toward  this  line  he  now  moved,  yet  by  gradual 
approaches,  as  the  country  was  very  open,  and  the  enemy's 
purposes  not  fully  known.  While  the  infantry  advanced  to 
Charlestown,  Averell  crossed  from  Hagerstown  through 
Williamsport  to  Martinsburg,  and  Wilson  also  returned 
south  of  the  Potomac  at  Shepherdstown,  and  Custer  at 
Harper's  Ferry.  Merritt  moved  forward  to  Leetown,  and 
there  finding  a  cavalry  force,  handsomely  defeated  it,  driv- 
ing it  with  the  sabre  to  Smithfield  and  across  the  Opequon. 
The  next  day,  two  of  Early's  infantry  divisions  expelled 
Merritt  from  Smithfield  and  re-established  the  Confederate 
cavalry  there  ;  but  Bicketts's  division  of  the  Sixth  Corps 
being  hurried  to  Merritt's  relief,  drove  out  the  enemy's 
troopers  and  definitely  secured  the  position  for  Merritt. 
The  loss  of  Gibbs's  brigade,  Merritt's  division,  was  35  killed 
and  wounded.  The  following  day,  August  30th,  Lowell's 
brigade,  which  in  August  had  held  the  right  at  Smithfield, 
now  resumed  that  charge,  while  the  remainder  of  Merritt's 
division  and  Wilson's  were  sent,  in  conformity  with  the  old 
dispositions,  to  Berryville.  The  enemy  making  no  effort  to 
impede  this  change,  after  a  few  days  the  infantry  were 
moved  to  the  old  line,  threatening  Winchester,  the  Sixth 
Corps  on  the  right  at  Clifton,  next  the  Nineteenth,  and  then 
the  Eighth   at   Berryville — Merritt's  and  Wilson's    cavalry 

front  weaker  than  yon  are."  Sheridan's  orders,  however,  to  move  out  of  the 
Halltown  position,  had  been  given  and  executed  before  this  despatch  arrived,  the 
Sixth  Corps  marching  at  7  a.m.,  and  the  Nineteenth  Corps  connecting  on  its  left. 


142  THE   SHENANDOAH   VALLEY. 

divisions  of  course  guarding  that  flank.  This  positioning 
was  effected  September  3d,  six  days  after  leaving  the  Hall- 
town  lines. 

A  source  of  annoyance  to  Sheridan  at  this  time  were  the 
calls  made  upon  him  to  detach  troops  from  his  army  to 
repel  the  enemy's  incursions  into  West  Virginia,  on  the 
ground  that  this  region  belonged  to  his  Military  Division. 
"  There  is  considerable  panic  in  West  Virginia,"  wrote  Hal- 
leck,  August  27th,  "  from  apprehended  rebel  raids  to  de- 
stroy the  Baltimore  and  Ohio  Bailroad,  while  Early  is  hold- 
ing you  in  check  at  Harper's  Ferry.  We  have  no  troops  to 
send  to  that  Department,  and  must  leave  its  protection 
entirely  to  your  forces."  Grant,  in  a  different  spirit,  wrote 
to  Sheridan,  the  29th,  as  follows  :  "  If  it  is  ascertained  cer- 
tainly that  Breckenridge  has  been  detached  to  go  into 
Wes^orn  Virginia,  attack  the  remaining  force  vigorously 
with  every  man  you  have."  Sheridan  denied  this  suppo- 
sition, which  was,  in  fact,  groundless,  as  "  a  copperhead  re- 
port," adding  the  prophetic  words,  "I  believe  no  troops 
have  yet  left  the  Valley,  but  I  believe  they  will,  and  that  it 
■will  be  their  last  campaign  in  the  Shenandoah."  Crook  notified 
Kelley  to  do  the  best  he  could  for  West  Virginia,  aided  by 
the  dismounted  men  of  DufBe's  command,  whom  Sheridan 
spared  to  "  quiet  the  fears  of  the  people." 

As  soon  as  Early  retired  to  Bunker  Hill,  Averell,  as  we 
have  seen,  had  moved  up  the  pike  from  Williamsport  to 
Martinsburg.  Perceiving  that  there  he  could  cover  the 
repair  of  the  railroad,  Early  sent  against  him  Bodes,  who 
drove  him  back  to  Falling  Waters.  But  September  2d, 
Early,  breaking  up  his  camp  at  Bunker  Hill,  moved  with 
three  divisions  of  infantry  and  a  part  of  McCausland's 
cavalry  across  the  country  toward  Summit  Point,  on  a  recon- 
noissance,  while  Bodes  accompanied  the  trains  to  Stephen- 


THE   SHENANDOAH   LINES   IN   SEPTEMBER.         143 

son's.  Averell  thereupon  immediately  marched  back  from 
Falling  "Waters  to  Martinsburg,  and,  continuing  to  Bunker 
Hill,  found  Vaughan's  and  Johnson's  brigades,  which  he 
routed  in  succession,  capturing  55  prisoners,  two  flags,  a 
herd  of  cattle  and  some  loaded  wagons.  Driving  the  two 
brigades  pell-mell  before  him  to  Stephenson's,  he  there 
came  upon  the  inevitable  Bodes,  and  at  once  made  off  out  of 
his  reach.  But  the  news  of  the  disaster  to  Johnson  and 
Vaughan,  reaching  Early,  arrested  his  movement  toward 
Summit  Point,  and  recrossing  the  Opequon  he  massed  at 
Stephenson's.  The  next  day  Rodes  moved  down  the  pike, 
and  drove  Averell  from  Bunker  Hill,  establishing  himself 
there. 

In  studying  this  campaign  of  the  lower  Valley,  nothing  is 
more  noticeable  than  the  singularly  different  purposes  on 
which  the  minds  of  the  two  opposing  leaders  were  bent. 
Early's  attention  was  much  absorbed  in  breaking  and  keep- 
ing broken  the  Union  line  of  railroad,  not  only  as  a  material 
damage  to  the  Northern  cause,  but  on  account  of  the  moral 
effect  of  this  step  as  an  evidence  of  Confederate  strength  in 
laying  hold  and  keeping  control  of  the  chief  military  line 
between  Washington  and  the  West.  For  this  reason,  the 
daily  skirmishes  and  reconnoissances  on  the  Halltown  front, 
even  when  favorable  to  his  troops,  and  his  larger  success  in 
pushing  Sheridan  back  from  Berryville  to  Charlestown  and 
from  Charlestown  to  Halltown,  evidently  seemed  to  him  of 
minor  consequence,  and  caused  him  little  elation ;  whereas 
the  occupation  of  Martinsburg,  on  the  railroad,  even  by  a 
handful  of  Union  cavalry,  was  always  enough  to  affect  the 
movements  of  his  whole  army,  if  necessary,  to  dislodge  it. 
Sheridan,  on  the  contrary,  was  wholly  intent  on  the  problem 
of  how  to  make  sure  of  a  victory  over  the  enemy  in  his  im- 
mediate front,  and  hence  paid  comparatively  little  attention 


144  THE  SHENANDOAH  VALLEY. 

to  what  was  going  on  along  the  railroad.  The  probable 
issue  of  this  diversity  of  aims  was  that  sooner  or  later  Sheri- 
dan, by  persistency  and  vigilance,  would,  unobserved,  or  at 
least  unmolested,  move  into  a  position  dangerous  to  Early, 
while  the  Confederate  general,  too  regardless  of  his  imme- 
diate opponent's  projects,  in  his  warfare  against  the  North  as 
a  whole,  would  sacrifice  his  own  safety. 

A  new  and  decisive  element  was  now  to  enter  into  the 
campaign.  Four  weeks  had  elapsed  since  Lee  sent  Ander- 
son to  Early's  relief,  and  he  now  desired  his  return.  Af- 
fairs in  the  Valley  seemed  to  justify  this  recall,  for  Early 
had  been  able  to  maintain  himself  a  long  time  at  Bunker 
Hill,  and  to  keep  his  opponent  confined  within  a  short 
radius  of  Harper's  Ferry.  On  the  other  hand,  the  campaign 
at  Petersburg  had  brought  Lee  to  a  desperate  need  of 
troops.  Since  the  departure  of  Kershaw  and  Fitz  Lee, 
Grant  had  extended  his  right  to  Deep  Bottom,  north  of  the 
James,  thus  compelling  a  similar  Confederate  prolongation 
to  protect  Fiichmond ;  and  he  had  seized  the  Weldon  road, 
to  regain  which  his  opponents  had  made  desperate  assaults, 
at  great  cost.  Accordingly,  Lee  informed  Early  of  his  need 
of  the  troops  temporarily  lent  him,  and  this  notification  is 
the  key  to  Early's  moves  at  this  juncture. 

The  31st  of  August,  Anderson  had  withdrawn  from  Ste- 
phenson's to  Winchester  ;  thence,  three  days  later,  Septem- 
ber 3d,  he  started  with  his  command  toward  Berryville,  to 
recross  the  Blue  Bidge  on  the  way  to  Bichmond.  But  it 
chanced  that  while,  up  to  this  time,  the  road  had  been  open, 
this  was  the  very  day  on  which  Sheridan  was  finishing  his 
reoccupation  of  the  Clifton-Berryville  line,  which,  as  has 
been  seen,  in  repeating  the  original  arrangement,  positioned 
Crook  at  Berryville.     Merritt  and  Wilson  had  been  sent  to 


THE  SHENANDOAH  LINES  IN  SEPTEMBER         145 

reconnoitre  beyond  the  new  infantry  left,  moving-  through 
Millwood  and  White  Post  to  Front  Royal  pike.  Accord- 
ingly Anderson,  marching  to  Berryville,  which  he  reached 
an  hour  before  sunset,  stumbled  upon  the  Eighth  Corps 
going  into  camp  there — the  surprise  being  mutual ;  and  an 
engagement  resulted  between  Crook  and  Kershaw,  which 
only  night  put  an  end  to.  About  three  score  prisoners  were 
captured  from  Anderson ;  Crook's  total  loss  was  166.  An- 
derson had  his  trains  with  him,  homeward-bound  to  Peters- 
burg ;  but  the  darkness  which  immediately  followed  fa- 
vored concealment  of  this  fact,  and  Early,  learning  of  the 
unexpected  encounter — for  Sheridan's  reoccupation  of  the 
Clifton-Berryville  position  had  not  attracted  his  attention — 
hurried  at  dawn  of  the  4th  with  three  divisions  to  Ander- 
son's aid,  Gordon  being  left  to  cover  Winchester.  He  found 
Kershaw  extended  in  skirmish  line,  as  yet  not  fully  under- 
standing what  he  had  in  his  front ;  and  fearing  that  the  nature 
of  Anderson's  movement  might  become  known,  when  it  would 
be  followed  by  a  cavalry  attack  on  his  trains,  Early  left  an 
infantry  division  in  line  on  Kershaw's  left,  and  then  moved 
across  toward  what  he  had  presumed  to  be  Sheridan's  right, 
to  withdraw  attention  from  Anderson  by  demonstrating 
there.  A  march  along  rising  ground  gave  him  for  the  first 
time  a  full  view  of  the  new  Union  position,  which,  by  the 
aid  of  field-glasses,  he  could  see  extending  to  Summit  Point, 
strengthened  by  intrenchments,  at  which  the  troops  were 
still  digging,  all  along  the  front.  It  was  decided  that  An- 
derson must  return  to  Winchester,  and  start  for  the  Blue 
Ridge  again  by  a  more  southerly  road,  carrying  him  past 
the  Union  left.  Early  therefore  withdrew  his  whole  army 
across  the  Opequon — after  a  spirited  skirmish  at  Berryville, 
in  which  Torbert,  returning  from  the  left,  was  involved — 
Anderson's  trains  going  first.  The  Eighth  Corps  had  that 
XI.— 7 


146  THE  SHENANDOAH  VALLEY. 

morning  been  ordered  to  fall  back  to  Clifton  ;  and  five  days 
after,  with  Custer's  and  Lowell's  brigades  of  Merritt's  divi- 
sion, it  was  sent  across  to  Summit  Point,  to  assure  the  right 
flank  and  the  communications  with  Harper's  Ferry.  Crook's 
ambulance  train,  during  these  operations,  was,  in  Sheridan's5 
language,  "  attacked  and  badly  stampeded  by  six  of  Mosby's 
men." 

Kodes,  on  the  5th,  getting  back  to  Stephenson's  Depot, 
found  that  Averell  was  again,  as  usual,  driving  toward  Win- 
chester the  Confederate  cavalry  that  had  been  left  on  the 
Martinsburg  road,  and  accordingly,  also,  as  usual,  Eodes,  in 
his  turn,  drove  Averell  back  to  Bunker  Hill.  During  ten 
days  thereafter  there  was  manoeuvring  and  skirmishing 
along  the  Opequon,  without  results  of  special  moment  to 
the  campaign.  The  most  brilliant  of  these  minor  opera- 
tions was  executed  by  General  Mcintosh,  who,  taking  his 
fine  brigade,  comprising  the  Second  Ohio,  Third  New  Jer- 
sey, Fifth  and  Second  New  York,  and  First  Connecticut 
regiments  of  cavalry,  and  a  section  of  "M"  battery,  Second 
United  States  Artillery,  proceeded,  on  the  13th,  by  order  of 
General  Wilson,  to  reconnoitre  the  Berryville  pike.  On  his 
way  he  captured  about  30  dismounted  cavalry,  and  then 
pressing  on  toward  Winchester,  caught  sight  of  an  infan- 
try line  in  his  front,  and  charged  it.  The  enemy  broke, 
and  made  for  a  piece  of  woods,  which  Mcintosh  sur- 
rounded, there  capturing  the  Eighth  South  Carolina  infantry, 
Colonel  Henagan,  of  Kershaw's  command,  with  its  battle- 
flag.  The  remainder  of  Kershaw's  division,  which  was 
not  far  away,  hurried  forward,  but  Mcintosh  sounded  the 
recall,  and  was  off  in  season.  He  secured  14  officers  and 
92  men  of  Henagan's  command,  being  the  entire  regi- 
ment, besides  2  officers  and  35  men  belonging  to  no  fewer, 
it  was  said,  than  six  different  Virginia  mounted  organiza- 


THE  SHENANDOAH   LINES  IN  SEPTEMBER.         147 

tions.1  The  Third  New  Jersey  and  Second  Ohio  especially 
distinguished  themselves  in  this  affair. 

This  same  day,  the  13th,  Lowell  captured  an  officer  and 
11  men,  and  Wright  made  a  reconnoissance  with  the  second, 
Getty's,  division  of  the  Sixth  Corps,  in  conjunction  with 
Merritt's  cavalry,  to  Gilbert's  ford,  on  the  Opequon,  where 
the  enemy  was  found  in  force ;  Getty's  losses  were  only  a 
dozen  wounded.  The  position  of  the  cavalry  from  the  5th 
to  the  19th  of  September  was  substantially  as  follows :  Wil- 
son, from  Snicker's  Gap  to  the  Opequon  Creek  on  the  Berry- 
ville  pike ;  Merritt,  from  the  latter  point  to  Smithfield ; 
Averell,  from  Smithfield  to  Martinsburg  and  also  along  the 
Potomac. 

The  14th  of  September  Anderson  again  started,  with  Ker- 
shaw's infantry  and  Cutshaw's  artillery,  to  cross  the  Blue 
Bidge,  this  time  taking  the  precaution  to  move  for  Ches- 
ter Gap,  his  road  bringing  him  far  past  the  Union  left,  toward 
Front  Boyal.  Fitz  Lee  was  to  remain  with  Early.  Thus 
General  B.  E.  Lee  had  at  last  drawn  away  the  greater  part 
of  the  reinforcements  sent  to  Early's  relief  at  a  time  when  the 
latter's  opponent  had  even  two  divisions  less  than  he  had 
now.  Lee's  own  forces  at  Bichmond  had  been  so  steadily 
crumbling  under  Grant's  attacks  as  to  require  repairing. 

At  this  juncture  a  figure  reappeared  upon  the  scene, 
whose  presence  betokened  something  urgent  and  decisive. 
Though  the  defensive  attitude  so  long  maintained  by  Sheri- 

1  Lest  it  be  supposed  that  this  report  was  exaggerated,  it  may  he  noted  that 
Terry's  brigade  of  Gordon's  division  had  an  "  aggregate  present  for  duty  "  of  858 
officers  and  men,  and  an  "aggregate  present"  of  963;  but  it  contained  the  2d, 
4th,  5th,  27th,  33d,  21st,  25th,  42d,  44th,  48th,  50th,  10th,  23d,  and  37th  Virginia 
regiments.  York's  brigade  of  the  same  division  contained  the  1st,  2d,  5th,  6th, 
7th,  8th,  9th,  10th,  14th,  and  15th  Louisiana  regiments,  and  showed  an  aggre- 
gate "present  for  duty,"  August  20th,  of  614  officers  and  men,  and  an  "aggregate 
present "  of  803.  Thus  there  is  nothing  improbable  in  the  assertion  th^t  the  37 
prisoners  captured  represented  half  a  dozen  different  organizations. 


148  THE  SHENANDOAH  VALLEY. 

dan  was  adopted  at  the  express  orders  of  General  Grant,  and 
steadily  sanctioned  by  him,  yet  he  had  long  been  hoping 
that  Lee  would  weaken  Early,  m  order  that  the  latter  might 
be  attacked,  and  the  lower  Valley  thus  relieved  of  his  an- 
noying and  humiliating  presence.1  Holding  the  line  of  the 
Opequon,  Early  had  for  weeks  not  only  kept  Maryland  and 
Pennsylvania  quaking  with  apprehension,  but  had  persist- 
ently maintained  his  grasp  on  the  Baltimore  and  Ohio  Boad 
and  the  Chesapeake  and  Ohio  Canal,  checking  every  effort 
to  repair  these  conduits  to  the  capital,  and  greatly  imped- 
ing their  travel  and  trade.  His  own  communications, 
meanwhile,  were  not  cut,  and  the  Virginia  Central  Boad 
behind  him  was  in  free  operation  between  Staunton  and 
Bichmond.2 

Nevertheless,  the  records  very  clearly  show  not  only  that 
Sheridan's  defensive  attitude  was  taken  up  by  the  orders 

1  There  is  a  remarkable  despatch  fro  n  Lee  to  Anderson,  showing  that,  no 
sooner  had  the  Confederate  Commander-in-Chief  withdrawn  Kershaw's  division, 
than  he  foresaw  the  probable  result,  and  sought  to  avert  it  by  countermanding 
his  instructions:  "I  have  been  desirous  fur  some  time  of  recalling  you  to  me. 
But  my  unwillingness  to  diminish  the  force  in  the  Valley  has  prevented.  A  vic- 
tory over  Sheridan  would  materially  change  the  aspect  of  affairs.  I  fear  General 
Early's  force  without  Kershaw's  division  would  be  insufficient.  Upon  the  receipt 
of  this,  therefore,  should  circumstances  permit,  I  wish  you  would  with  your  staff 
return  here,  and  take  command  of  the  other  divisions  of  your  corps,  and  direct 
General  Kershaw  to  report  with  his  division  to  General  Early,  for  the  present. 
Should  you  and  General  Early  agree  that  the  presence  of  Kershaw's  division  in 
the  Valley  is  unnecessary,  you  can  bring  it  to  Gordonsville  with  you.  Otherwise 
let  it  remain  until  I  can  see  farther.  Let  me  know  what  is  your  determination  " 
(Lee  to  Anderson,  September  17th).  The  date  of  this  despatch  somewhat  sug- 
gests that  Lee  may  not  have  been  aware  that  Kershaw  was  already  on  his 
way. 

2  The  Lieutenant-General,  in  his  report,  states  the  facts  clearly.  "Defeat  to 
us,'*  he  says,  "  would  open  to  the  enemy  the  States  of  Maryland  and  Pennsylvania 
for  long  distances  before  another  army  could  be  interposed  to  check  him.  Under 
these  circumstances  I  hesitated  about  allowing  the  initiative  to  be  taken.  Finally, 
the  use  cf  the  Baltimore  and  Ohio  Railroad  and  the  Chesapeake  and  Ohio  Canal, 
which  were  both  obstructed  by  the  enemy,  became  so  indispensably  necessary  to 
us,  and  the  importance  of  relieving  Pennsylvania  and  Maryland  from  continu- 


THE  SHENANDOAH  LINES  IN  SEPTEMBER.         149 

of  General  Grant,  but  that  it  was  expressly  approved  and 
sustained  by  him  from  time  to  time,  and  indeed  almost  con- 
stantly day  by  day ;  and  that  there  was  perfect  accord  be- 
tween them.  As  late  as  September  8th,  he  had  written  to 
Sheridan  as  follows :  "If  you  want  to  attack  Early,  you 
might  reinforce  largely  from  Washington.  Whilst  you  are 
close  in  front  of  the  enemy,  there  is  no  necessity  for  a  large 
force  there.  This  is  not  intended  to  urge  an  attack,  because 
I  believe  you  will  allow  no  chance  to  escape  which  promises 
success."  Sheridan's  own  views  were  clear  and  positive.  That 
day  he  telegraphed  Grant  a  simple  and  striking  statement 
of  them :  "  I  have  not  deemed  it  best  to  attack  him,  but 
have  watched  closely  to  press  him  hard  so  soon  as  he  com- 
mences to  detach  troops  for  Richmond,  This  was  the  tenor  of 
your  telegram  to  me  after  I  took  up  the  defensive."  The  next 
day  brought  from  Grant  a  decisive  authorization  of  this  very 
policy  :  "  I  would  not  have  you  make  an  attack  with  the  ad- 
vantage against  you,  but  would  prefer  just  the  course  you  seem 
to  be  pursuing — that  is,  pressing  closely  upon  the  enemy, 
and  when  he  moves,  follow  him  up,  being  ready  at  all 
times  to  pounce  upon  him  if  he  detaches  any  considerable 
force." 

Still  there  was  a  great  pressure  on  Sheridan  to  take  the 
offensive,  all  sorts  of  stories  being  constantly  sent  him  in 
regard  to  the  alleged  withdrawal  of  Kershaw  and  Fitz  Lee 
and  Breckenridge,  so  that  they  seemed  almost  manufactured 
for  the  sake  of  bringing  on  prematurely  the  date  at  which 
Sheridan  was  fixed  in  his  determination  to  offer  battle.  One 
report,  brought  by  a  scout  to  Washington,  thence  forwarded 

ously  threatened  invasion  so  great,  that  I  determined  the  risk  should  be  taken. 
But  fearing  to  telegraph  the  order  for  an  attack  without  knowing  more  than  I  did 
of  General  Sheridan's  feelings  as  to  what  would  be  the  probable  result,  I  left  City 
Point  on  the  15th  of  September  to  visit  him  at  his  headquarters,  to  decide  after 
conference  with  him  what  should  be  done." 


150  THE  SHENANDOAH  VALLEY. 

to  him  for  his  guidance,  and  vouched  for  as  "  reliable," 
was  that  Early  himself  was  at  Gordonsville,  August  28th, 
looking  on  while  his  troops  passed  through  to  Eichmond. 
Halleck,  alluding  to  the  rumor  that  Breckenridge  was  soon  to 
be  in  Lewisburg  and  Charlestown,  used  this  language  :  "  The 
disappearance  of  Breckenridge  from  your  front  gives  weight 
to  the  rumor  that  he  was  expected  in  the  Kanawha  Valley  in 
about  ten  days.  If  you  do  not  propose  engaging  the  enemy 
immediately,  that  Valley  should  be  looked  to."  Sheridan 
quietly  replied  that  "  it  should  be  remembered  that  it  is 
three  hundred  miles  from  here  to  Charleston,  via  Lewis- 
burg. This  would  require  a  march  of  not  less  than  twenty 
days.  General  Crook  says  that  for  one  hundred  miles  of 
this  distance  a  cricket  could  not  subsist  on  the  country." 
The  12th  of  September  Grant  received  from  Sheridan 
another  clear  statement  of  his  plans.  "  It  is  exceedingly 
difficult  to  attack  him  in  this  position.  Opequon  Creek  is  a 
very  formidable  barrier.  There  are  various  crossings,  but 
all  are  difficult.  The  banks  are  formidable.  I  have  thought 
it  best  to  remain  on  the  defensive  until  he  detaches,  unless 
the  chances  are  iu  my  favor.  The  troops  here  are  in  fine 
spirits;  some  of  them,  however,  have  not  seen  very  hard 
fighting,  and  some  of  them  are  not  entirely  reliable.  There 
is  no  interest  suffering  here  except  the  Baltimore  and  Ohio 
Eailroad,  and  I  will  not  divide  my  force  to  protect  it."  Soon 
after,  Grant  received  another  pressing  appeal  on  behalf  of  the 
railroad  company,  sent  through  Halleck ; '  and  he  left  City 

1  "It  is  represented  to  me  by  reliable  business  men  that  the  long  and  continued 
interruption  of  the  Ohio  and  Chesapeake  and  Baltimore  and  Ohio  Railroads  is 
very  seriously  affecting  the  supply  of  provisions  and  fuel  for  public  and  private 
use  in  Baltimore,  Washington,  Georgetown,  and  Alexandria.  Unless  the  canal 
can  be  opened  very  soon  a  sufficient  supply  of  winter's  coal  cannot  be  procured 
before  the  close  of  navigation.  The  gas  companies  are  already  thinking  of  stop- 
ping their  works  for  want  of  coal.     The  canal  and  railroad   have   been  several 


THE   SHENANDOAH   LINES   IN   SEPTEMBER.         151 

Point  the  day  following  to  talk  over  the  subject  with  Sheri- 
dan, and  get  his  views. 

Just  then  Sheridan  heard  of  the  long-expected  withdrawal 
of  Kershaw,  and  informed  Grant,  on  his  arrival  at  Charles- 
town,  that  the  desired  change  had  come  over  the  situation. 
Sheridan  proposed  at  once  to  move  to  the  pike  south  of 
Winchester,  Early's  line  of  supply  and  retreat.  As  soon 
as  he  announced  this  plan,  which  would  force  a  battle,  Grant 
sanctioned  it,  and  "  asked  him  if  he  could  get  out  his  teams 
and  supplies  in  time  to  make  an  attack  on  the  ensuing 
Tuesday  morning" — for  his  trains  and  provisions  were 
at  Harper's  Ferry.  This  question  was  asked  on  Friday, 
"but  his  reply  was,"  says  Grant's  report,  "that  he  could 
before  daylight  on  Monday,"  thus  being  ready,  with  little 
more  than  two  days'  preparation,  to  resume  the  aggressive. 
Grant  had  taken  with  him  a  plan  of  battle,1  but  Sheridan  did 
not  need  it.  "  I  saw,"  says  Grant,  "  there  were  but  two  words 
of  instruction  necessary — ' Goin /'"  humorously  adding  that 
"  the  result  was  such  that  I  have  never  since  deemed  it  ne- 
cessary to  visit  General  Sheridan  before  giving  him  orders." 

But  was  even  this  visit  necessary  ?  Or,  rather,  would  not 
General  Sheridan  have  resumed  the  aggressive  even  had  it 
not  been  made?     We  cannot  doubt  that  he  would  have  done 


times  repaired  and  as  often  destroyed.  They,  therefore,  urge  the  great  impor- 
tance of  driving  Early  far  enough  south  to  secure  these  lines  of  communication 
from  rebel  raids,  and  that  if  Sheridan  is  not  strong  enough  to  do  this  he  should 
be  reinforced  "  (Halleck  to  Grant,  September  14th). 

Sheridan  wrote  to  Grant,  September  15th.  "  There  is  as  yet  no  indications  of 
Early's  detaching.  It  seems  impossible  to  get  at  the  enemy's  cavalry.  It  is  in 
poor  condition,  and  is  kept  in  close  on  their  infantry. "  This  despatch  was  re- 
ceived the  16th,  after  Grant  had  started. 

1  "  You  may  recollect  that,  when  I  visited  Sheridan  at  Charlestown,  I  had  a 
plan  of  battle  with  me  to  give  him.  But  I  found  him  so  thoroughly  ready  to 
move,  so  confident  of  success  when  he  did  move,  and  his  plan  so  thoroughly  ma- 
tured, that  I  did  not  let  him  know  this,  and  gave  him  no  order  whatever  except 
the  authority  to  move  "  (Grant  to  Badeau,  June,  1878). 


152  THE  SHENANDOAH  VALLEY. 

so ;  for  the  very  contingency  on  which  his  proposed  ceas- 
ing to  act  on  the  defensive  was  based,  had  just  then  hap- 
pened, Anderson  being  well  on  his  way  toward  Richmond. 
This  fact,  Sheridan  states,  had  become  known  to  him  the 
night  before  Grant  arrived  at  Charlestown ;  and  thus  it 
was  that  when  the  latter  reached  Sheridan's  headquarters, 
he  found  this  officer  very  eager  to  go  forward  and  take 
advantage  of  the  enemy's  error.  It  may  also,  we  think, 
fairly  be  presumed,  that  had  Kershaw's  division  effected 
its  withdrawal  on  September  3d,  when  its  first  attempt  was 
foiled  by  accident,  Sheridan  would  have  moved  long  before 
he  did.  His  report  distinctly  says  that  he  had  "  patiently 
awaited  its  withdrawal  before  attacking,  believing  the  con- 
dition of  affairs  throughout  the  country  required  great 
prudence  on  my  part,  that  a  defeat  of  the  forces  at  my 
command  could  be  ill  afforded."  Within  a  few  days  Lis 
sound  judgment  was  to  be  vindicated  by  a  brilliant  victory. 
The  aggressive  movement,  in  short,  really  did  date,  as 
Sheridan  had  decided  that  it  ought  to  date,  from  the  weak- 
ening of  Early  by  the  departure  of  a  portion  of  his  forces 
to  Eichmond.  "  Then,"  says  Sheridan,  "  our  time  had 
come." 


CHAPTER  IX. 

THE  BATTLE  OF  THE  OPEQUON. 

The  very  air  seemed  laden  now  with  omens  of  victory. 
With  Kershaw  out  of  the  way,  had  doubts  prevailed  as  to  the 
result  of  a  pitched  battle,  Early  would  have  removed  them 
by  choosing  this  moment  for  giving  freer  rein  than  ever  to 
his  main  error  in  the  campaign.  Had  he  not  wofully  mis- 
taken his  young  opponent's  character,  the  elder  general  would 
at  once,  on  losing  Kershaw,  have  so  repositioned  his  forces 
as  to  be  able  to  retire  up  the  Valley  to  Stiasburg  the 
moment  his  adversary  should  give  sign  of  attack.  The  ser- 
vice rendered  him,  it  is  true,  by  the  departing  troops,  had 
gone  little  beyond  the  immediate  purpose  for  which  they 
had  been  sent.  A  singular  ill-fortune  even  had  attended 
whatever  movements  Anderson's  troops  had  taken  part  in. 
On  three  occasions  during  his  brief  stay  he  had  lost  infantry 
prisoners  to  Union  cavalry— once,  near  Front  Eoyal,  on  arriv- 
ing, to  Merritt ;  a  second  time,  near  Winchester,  to  Mcin- 
tosh ;  a  third,  near  Halltown,  to  Lowell.  It  had  not  been 
his  luck  to  strike  Sheridan's  left  and  rear  at  Cedar  Creek, 
and  a  subsequent  attempt  at  co-operation  was  also  frustrated 
— the  one  of  August  21st,  when  Sheridan  retired  from 
Charlestown  to  Halltown.  But  while  Early  cannot  there- 
fore have  felt  as  if  an  invaluable  source  of  reliance  had  been 
taken  away  from  him,  in  the  departure  of  Kershaw  and  Cut- 
shaw  for  their  own  corps  at  Petersburg,  yet  so  serious  a  sub- 
7*  11 


154  THE  SHENANDOAH  VALLEY. 

traction  of  numerical  strength  should  have  led  him  at  once 
to  alter  his  campaign  to  suit  the  new  contingency.  He  had 
retreated  up  the  Valley  in  August  the  moment  his  opponent 
menaced  him  from  the  precise  Clifton-Berryville  line  he  now 
reoccupied.  Yet  his  own  strength  was  now  greater  than 
then  by  only  a  single  division  of  cavalry,  while  his  oppo- 
nent's was  greater  by  two  divisions  of  cavalry  and  part  of  a 
division  of  infantry.  If  in  August  it  was  a  sound  military 
move  to  seek  a  more  defensible  line,  it  was  now  a  move  ab- 
solutely necessary.  "What  Early  actually  did  at  this  junc- 
ture was  not  only  to  fail  to  occupy  a  position  that  would  se- 
cure retreat  as  soon  as  his  enemy  should  move  upon  the  pike 
between  Winchester  and  Strasburg,  but  to  send  a  large  part 
of  his  army  to  Martinsburg,  twenty-two  miles  north  of  Win- 
chester. 

This  movement  was  made  in  the  following  manner.  The 
17th  of  September,  hearing  that  the  railroad  was  again 
under  repair,  be  went  from  Stephenson's  with  Bodes's  and 
Gordon's  divisions,  and  Braxton's  artillery,  to  Bunker  Hill, 
and  next  day  with  Gordon,  a  part  of  Lomax's  cavalry  and  a 
few  guns,  to  Martinsburg.  Having  driven  away  Averell, 
who  was  found  there,  he  regained  Bunker  Hill,  where  he 
left  Gordon  with  orders  to  return  to  Stephenson's  the  next 
morning,  whither  Bodes  marched  that  night.  Thus,  on  the 
eve  of  a  day  destined  to  witness  a  great  and  decisive  battle, 
the  Confederate  forces  were  strung  along  the  pike — cavalry 
at  Martinsburg,  Gordon  at  Bunker  Hill,  Bodes  on  the 
way  to  Stephenson's,  W7harton  with  King's  battery  at  Ste- 
phenson's, Bamseur  with  Nelson's  battery  across  the  Berry- 
ville  pike.  Early's  venturesome  journey  to  Martinsburg  had 
also  greatly  aided  his  opponent's  plans.  For  when,  the  18th, 
Averell  sent  word  that  he  had  been  attacked  by  two  infantry 
divisions,  Sheridan  eagerly  changed  the  orders  of  march  he 


THE  BATTLE  OF  THE  OPEQUON.        155 

had  prepared  to  issue,  and,  instead  of  directing  his  forces 
south  of  Winchester  to  Newtown,  moved  them  directly 
against  the  former  place,  in  the  hope  of  striking  the  two  di- 
visions supposed  to  be  there,  and  thus  easily  overwhelming 
his  adversary  in  detail.  It  turned  out  that  Rodes  and  Gor- 
don returned  in  season  to  take  part  in  the  main  action ;  but 
this  fact  did  not  diminish  the  alacrity  and  confidence  with 
which  the  knowledge  of  Early's  division  of  his  forces  had  in- 
spired the  Union  generals.  For  the  new  move  had  dis- 
pelled the  anxiety  always  felt  in  regard  to  the  army's  com- 
munications in  a  move  to  the  pike  south  of  Winchester ;  and 
the  battle  was  to  be  delivered  precisely  where  at  the  outset 
Sheridan  had  desired. 

The  Union  commander's  plan  was  to  move  his  infantry, 
preceded  by  a  division  of  cavalry,  along  the  Berry ville  pike 
against  Winchester,  and  the  other  two  divisions  of  horse  to 
Stephenson's.  His  orders  were,  as  usual,  clear  and  precise. 
Torbert  was  to  advance  across  the  Opequon  from  Summit 
Point,  with  Merritt's  division,  and  to  form  a  junction  near 
Stephenson's  with  Averell,  who  was  to  move  up  the  pike  for 
this  puiq>ose  from  Darksville.  Wilson  was  to  march  rapidly 
along  the  Berry  ville  pike,  carry  the  crossing  of  the  Opequon, 
and  charge  through  the  long  ravine  beyond,  toward  Win- 
chester. The  Sixth  and  Nineteenth  Corps,  the  former  in 
advance,  and  Emory  reporting  to  Wright  on  reaching  the 
Opequon,  were  to  move  along  the  Berry  ville  pike  as  thus 
cleared  by  Wilson.  The  Army  of  West  Virginia  was  to 
march  across  country,  taking  position  in  reserve  at  the  cross- 
ing of  the  Opequon. 

The  terrain  of  the  battle  now  to  be  fought  demands  a  brief 
description.  Opequon  Creek,  rising  half  a  dozen  miles 
south  of  Winchester,  pursues  its  course  down  the  Valley 


THE  BATTLE  OF  THE  OPEQUON.        155 

had  prepared  to  issue,  and,  instead  of  directing  his  forces 
south  of  Winchester  to  Newtown,  moved  them  directly 
against  the  former  place,  in  the  hope  of  striking  the  two  di- 
visions supposed  to  be  there,  and  thus  easily  overwhelming 
his  adversary  in  detail.  It  turned  out  that  Eodes  and  Gor- 
don returned  in  season  to  take  part  in  the  main  action  ;  but 
this  fact  did  not  diminish  the  alacrity  and  confidence  with 
which  the  knowledge  of  Early's  division  of  his  forces  had  in- 
spired the  Union  generals.  For  the  new  move  had  dis- 
pelled the  anxiety  always  felt  in  regard  to  the  army's  com- 
munications in  a  move  to  the  pike  south  of  Winchester ;  and 
the  battle  was  to  be  delivered  precisely  where  at  the  outset 
Sheridan  had  desired. 

The  Union  commander's  plan  was  to  move  his  infantry, 
preceded  by  a  division  of  cavalry,  along  the  Berry ville  pike 
against  Winchester,  and  the  other  two  divisions  of  horse  to 
Stephenson's.  His  orders  were,  as  usual,  clear  and  precise. 
Torbert  was  to  advance  across  the  Opequon  from  Summit 
Point,  with  Merritt's  division,  and  to  form  a  junction  near 
Stephenson's  with  Averell,  who  was  to  move  up  the  pike  for 
this  purpose  from  Darksville.  Wilson  was  to  march  rapidly 
along  the  Berry  ville  pike,  carry  the  crossing  of  the  Opequon, 
and  charge  through  the  long  ravine  beyond,  toward  Win- 
chester. The  Sixth  and  Nineteenth  Corps,  the  former  in 
advance,  and  Emory  reporting  to  Wright  on  reaching  the 
Opequon,  were  to  move  along  the  Berryville  pike  as  thus 
cleared  by  Wilson.  The  Army  of  West  Virginia  was  to 
march  across  country,  taking  position  in  reserve  at  the  cross- 
ing of  the  Opequon. 

The  terrain  of  the  battle  now  to  be  fought  demands  a  brief 
description.  Opequon  Creek,  rising  half  a  dozen  miles 
south  of  Winchester,  pursues  its  course  down  the  Valley 


156  THE  SHENANDOAH  VALLEY. 

four  or  five  miles  to  the  east  of  that  city,  and,  continuing  in 
its  general  direction  parallel  to  the  pike,  joins  the  Potomac 
below  Falling  Waters.  The  watershed  which  enables  it  to 
share  with  the  Shenandoah  the  drainage  of  the  lower  Valley 
is  Limestone  Ridge.  The  turnpike  from  Berryville  to 
Winchester,  after  crossing  the  Opequon,  passes  through  a 
wooded  ravine  or  canon.  Eunning  nearly  due  east  into  the 
Opequon,  and  crossing  the  Valley  pike  about  a  mile  south  of 
Winchester,  is  Abraham's  Creek ;  while  a  nearly  parallel 
little  affluent,  about  a  mile  and  a  half  north  of  Winches- 
ter, is  Eed  Bud  Run,  the  Berryville  pike  being  between 
them.  The  selection  by  the  Confederates  of  Stephenson's 
Depot,  six  miles  north  of  Winchester,  as  a  central  point  for 
massing  troops,  was  obviously  due  to  the  convergence  there 
of  four  roads  that  led  from  positions  occupied  by  Sheri- 
dan's forces — from  Martinsburg,  Charlestown  via  Smithfield, 
Summit,  and  Berryville  via  Jordan's  Springs.  The  distance 
from  Berryville  to  Winchester  is  ten  and  a  half  miles,  the 
crossing  of  the  Opequon  on  the  pike  being  about  six  from 
the  former  point.  Both  from  Berryville,  therefore,  on  the 
Union  left,  and  from  Summit  Point  on  the  Union  right,  the 
intervals  to  be  passed  over  before  reaching  the  enemy's 
lines  were  not  serious.  The  region  in  the  suburbs  of  Win- 
chester was  undulating,  covered  here  and  there  with  patches 
of  woods,  but  generally  high  and  open,  with  meadows,  corn- 
fields and  some  houses.  Abraham's  Creek  runs  through  a 
deep  hollow,  but  there  is  high  open  ground  beyond  on  the 
Front  Royal  and  Millwood  roads,  while  to  the  north  the 
country  slopes  to  the  Red  Bud,  which  is  lower  and  more 
marshy  ;  and  north  of  the  Red  Bud  the  country  is  open,  and 
excellent  for  cavalry. 

Early's  position  prior  to  his  movement  of  two  corps  to 
Martinsburg  was  this  :  Ramseur,  with  Nelson's  artillery,  a 


THE  BATTLE  OF  THE  OPEQUON.        157 

mile  east  of  Winchester,  across  the  Berry ville  pike,  along  an 
elevated  plateau  between  Abraham's  Creek  and  Bed  Bud 
Run  ;  Bodes,  Gordon,  Wharton,  with  Braxton's  and  King's 
batteries,  at  Stephenson's  ;  one  division  of  cavalry  picketing 
the  Opequon,  extending  its  outpost  line  northward,  and  then 
crossing  the  Martinsburg  pike  westward  toward  the  moun- 
tains, to  cover  the  left ;  the  other  division  picketing  the 
right  along  the  Millwood  and  Front  Royal  roads  to  the 
Shenandoah. 

The  morning  of  September  19th  broke  auspiciously. 
Sheridan's  army  was  astir  by  one  or  two  o'clock,  and  march- 
ing by  three,  in  order  to  reach  the  enemy  betimes.  Wilson, 
galloping  through  the  Berryville  gorge,  which  is  two  or 
three  miles  long,  Mcintosh's  brigade  in  advance,  at  dawn 
carried  the  earthwork  at  the  mouth  of  the  defile,  capturing 
some  of  its  garrison.  The  infantry  followed  in  the  path 
thus  cleared.  The  Sixth  Corps,  Getty's  division  leading, 
crossed  the  country  to  a  point  on  the  Berryville  pike  about 
two  miles  from  the  Opequon.  There  the  head  of  the  Nine- 
teenth was  found,  ready  to  turn  in,  and  was  halted  by 
Wright,  to  whom  Emory  had  reported,  until  the  Sixth 
should  pass.  The  troops  marched  on  either  side  of  the 
pike,  the  artillery,  ambulances,  and  such  of  the  train  as  was 
carried  taking  the  macadamized  road.  Then  the  column 
crossed  the  Opequon  near  the  junction  of  Abraham's  Creek, 
and  thence  moved  through  the  ravine.  Debouching  there, 
it  found  Wilson  still  in  his  captured  earthwork,  unmolested. 
Just  beyond  this  work,  rolling  ground  offered  sufficient  pro- 
tection for  deploying  the  column  ;  and  the  troops  that  had 
been  halted  in  the  ravine  being  gradually  drawn  up  on  the 
line,  the  first  stage  of  the  enterprise  was  successfully  accom- 
plished. 

The   position  now   taken  up  was   two   miles  from  Win- 


158  THE  SHENANDOAH  VALLEY. 

Chester  ,  but  as  the  enemy  was  more  than  a  mile  in  front  of 
the  city,  the  Sixth  Corps  went  into  line  under  a  heavy 
artillery  fire,  to  which  the  Union  guns  soon  replied.  The 
Third  Division,  Eicketts,  was  on  the  right  of  the  pike,  the 
Second,  Getty,  on  the  left ;  the  First,  Eussell,  in  reserve. 
Four  batteries,  as  they  came  up,  were  placed  on  the  corps 
front,  under  charge  of  Colonel  C.  H.  Tompkins,  Chief  of 
Artillery.  The  formation  was  designed  to  be  in  two  lines, 
but  the  Second  Division  was  mostly  placed  in  one  line,  in 
order  to  cover  its  ground.  Wilson  took  position  on  the  left 
of  the  Sixth  Corps. 

Infantry  on  marches  lasting  many  days  often  tire  cavalry  ; 
but  for  brief  tramps  the  horsemen  have  the  advantage.  It 
had  seemed  long  from  Wilson's  attack  at  5  o'clock  until  9, 
and  it  was  to  seem  a  delay  still  more  trying  before  the  in- 
fantry lines  should  be  fully  formed.  Marching  two  corps, 
one  behind  the  other,  fording  a  stream  and  moving  through 
a  long  gorge,  a  distance  of  six  or  eight  miles,  consumes 
many  hours ;  and  there  had  been  additional  distances  for 
subdivisions  to  make  across  country  before  striking  the 
pike. 

The  Nineteenth  Corps  had  been  halted  to  allow  the  Sixth 
to  pass,  and  was  further  impeded  by  the  guns  and  wagons 
of  this  corps ;  but  Wright,  at  Emory's  request,  at  length 
ordered  these,  except  one  battery,  to  the  side  of  the  road,  so 
that  the  Nineteenth  might  have  a  better  chance.1  Still  it  was 
almost  noon  before  the  line  was  ready  to  move  forward,  the 


1  Sheridan,  with  his  characteristic  study  of  details  and  careful  preparation, 
had  ordered  that  only  the  necessary  trains  should  be  taken :  "  Corps  and  other 
independent  commanders  will  have  their  commands  in  readiness  to  march  at  9 
o'clock  p.m. — to-night.  All  regimental  and  other  wagons  that  will  inconvenience 
the  quick  movement  of  the  troops  will  be  parked  at  Summit  Point  with  the  sup- 
ply train,  and  sent  under  guard  to  Harper's  Ferry  at  3  o'clock  p.m.  to-day" 
(Confidential  Circular,  September  18th). 


THE  BATTLE  OF  THE  OPEQUON.        159 

Second  division,  Grover's,  of  the  Nineteenth,  having  eome 
ia  upon  the  right  of  the  Sixth,  the  First,  Dwight's,  being 
held  as  a  reserve  in  the  rear,  and  the  last  of  the  Sixth  Corps 
batteries  ha'ving  come  up.1 

During  the  morning  hours,  Eamseur's  division  had  been 
the  only  infantry  immediately  confronting  Sheridan  at  Win- 
chester, aided  by  Nelson's  battery.  Jackson's  and  a  part  of 
Johnson's  cavalry,  under  Lomax,  watched  the  valley  of 
Abraham's  Creek  and  the  Front  Boyal  road,  on  Rarnseur's 
right,  and  a  detachment  of  Johnson  the  space  betwixt  his 
left  and  the  Red  Bud.  But  while  the  Union  line  was  form- 
ing in  front  of  Ramseur,  Gordon  and  Rodes  were  hurried 
from  Stephenson's,  and  the  former,  arriving  first,  between 
ten  and  eleven  o'clock,  was  placed  in  the  timber  on  Ram- 
seur's left  near  the  Red  Bud,  Johnson's  cavalry  detachment 
being  moved  to  the  right  for  this  purpose,  while  Rodes,  when 
he  came  up,  was  positioned  between  Gordon  and  Ramseur. 
Had  the  Union  march  through  the  ravine  been  as  rapid  as 
was  hoped,  Ramseur  might  have  been  overwhelmed  before 
aid  could  arrive.     The  change  in  the   situation   was   that 


1  Wright,  a  week  later,  having  his  attention  called  by  Emory  to  an  entirely  ill- 
founded  statement  imputing  to  the  latter's  fault  a  delay  in  marching  up  his 
corp=,  answered  as  follows  :  "According  to  the  order  of  march,  you  were  to  follow 
the  artillery  and  trains  of  the  Sixth  Corps,  and  when  the  head  of  the  column 
reached  the  pike  it  was  met  by  yours,  which  was  then  halted  03'  my  order,  to  per- 
mit my  command  to  pass.  That  you  moved  up  as  rapidly  as  practicable,  after  it 
had  been  decided  to  park  the  trains  on  the  east  side  of  the  Opequon,  instead  of 
taking  them  across,  I  have  had  no  reason  to  doubt ;  nor  is  there  the  slightest 
doubt  that  your  command  passed  the  trains,  and  moved  forward  through  the  de- 
file by  which  the  battle-ground  was  reached  as  rapidly  as  infantry  could  be 
moved.  As  an  act  of  justice  to  yourself  and  corps,  I  have  brought  the  matter  to 
the  notice  of  the  Major- General  commanding  this  army,  and  take  pleasure  in 
saying  that  he  will  effectually  correct  the  misstatement  in  his  next  despatch  to 
Lieutenant-General  Grant.-1  Sheridan  wrote  that  he  had  seen  a  statement  that 
the  Nineteenth  Corps  was  late  in  coming  into  the  battle  at  Winchester.  "  I  was 
entirely  unconscious  of  this,"  he  said,  "until  I  saw  it  in  the  paper;  "  and  he  de- 
clared the  assertion  to  be  incorrect. 


160  THE   SHENANDOAH   VALLEY. 

Sheridan   had   now   unexpectedly   to   fight    Early's    whole 
army. 

At  twenty  minutes  before  mid-day,  the  line  moved  across 
the  open  to  the  belt  of  woods  opposite,  where  thfe  flashes  of 
the  enemy's  cannon  had  told  of  his  presence.  No  sooner 
had  the  infantry  gone  forward  than  the  battle  became  at 
once  deadly,  and  so  continued  through  the  day,  being  fought 
without  field-works.  On  the  left,  south  of  Abraham's  Creek, 
near  Greenwood  Church  and  school-house,  Wilson  moved 
along  the  Senseny  road,  which  runs  parallel  to  the  Berry- 
ville  pike,  more  than  a  mile  distant  from  it,  here  holding 
Lomax  in  check,  and  very  soon  forcing  him  back.  The 
Sixth  Corps,  pressing  forward  on  both  sides  of  the  Berry  ville 
pike,  through  an  almost  open  country,  drove  back  Bamseur 
and  Bodes.  The  Nineteenth  Corps  sharply  attacked  Gordon. 
Grover,  in  advance,  was  formed  with  his  First  and  Third  Bri- 
gades, Birge  and  Sharpe,  in  the  front  line,  and  the  Fourth 
and  Second,  Shunk  and  Molineux,  in  the  second.  The  ef- 
fort to  keep  connection  with  the  left  of  the  line  made  a  gap 
which  was  filled  by  bringing  Molineux  into  the  front  line 
between  Birge  and  Sharpe.  Grover  now  assailed  the 
enemy's  left  with  great  effect.  "  Evans's  brigade  of  Gor- 
don's division,"  says  Early,  "which  was  on  the  extreme  left 
of  our  infantry,  received  a  check  from  a  column  of  the 
enemy,  and  was  forced  back  through  the  woods  from  behind 
which  it  had  advanced,  the  enemy  following  to  the  very  rear 
of  the  woods,  and  to  within  musket  range  of  seven  pieces  of 
Braxton's  artillery  which  were  without  support.  This 
caused  a  pause  in  our  advance,  and  the  position  was  most 
critical,  for  it  was  apparent  that  unless  this  force  was  driven 
back  the  day  was  lost.  Braxton's  guns,  in  which  now  was 
our  only  hope,  resolutely  stood  their  ground." 

The  success  thus   gained  against  the   Georgia   brigade, 


THE  BATTLE  OF  THE  OPEQUON.        161 

which  was  driven  into  the  woods,1  broke  up  the  continuity  of 
the  Union  infantry  line.  Even  before  this,  Colonel  Keifer, 
commanding  the  right  brigade  of  Ricketts,  which  formed 
the  right  of  the  Sixth  Corps,  had  noticed  that  the  turnpike, 
on  which  the  division  was  dressing,  bore  to  the  left,  causing 
an  interval  between  it  and  the  left  of  the  Nineteenth  Corps, 
and  he  had  pushed  three  regiments  into  this  space.  Lieuten- 
ant-Colonel Neafie,  commanding  the  One  Hundred  and  Fifty- 
sixth  New  York,  of  the  Third  Brigade  (Sharpe's)  of  Grover's 
division,  whose  regiment  was  on  the  left  of  that  corps,  says, 
"  I  was  ordered  to  advance  and  guide  on  the  right  of  the 
Sixth  Corps,  which  order  I  executed,  and  in  order  to  do  so  I 
was  obliged  to  oblique  my  regiment  very  much  to  the  left. 
The  advance  was  made  under  a  very  severe  fire."  Braxton's 
grins,  concentrating  against  the  triumphant  Union  assail- 
ants, soon  had  a  visible  effect  in  checking  their  advance  ; 
and  at  this  moment  Battle's  brigade  of  Rodes's  division, 
which  had  just  arrived  from  Stephenson's,  and  had  formed 
in  the  rear  of  Evans,  came  through  the  woods  in  a  charge — 
fresh  troops  at  a  critical  hour.  They  struck  the  thinly  cov- 
ered junction  of  the  right  of  the  Sixth  and  the  left  of  the 
Nineteenth  Corps,  and  quickly  supported  on  their  flanks  by 
the  remainder  of  Bodes  and  all  of  Gordon,  the  broken  bri- 
gade rallying  with  the  rest,  they  succeeded  in  driving  back 
Ricketts's  division  of  the  Sixth  Corps  and  Grover's  of  the 
Nineteenth,  while  the  whole  line  to  some  extent  felt  the  ef- 
fect and  came  back  somewhat  toward  the  position  in  front 


1  "  Charged  with  fixed  bayonets  at  double  quick,  broke  his  lines  on  the  active 
front  of  the  brigade,  and  drove  him  through  and  out  of  the  woods.  As  the  troops 
entered  the  woods,  I  was  ordered  by  General  Grover  to  halt  and  hold  that  position, 
and  not  to  go  further  into  the  woods,  but  the  charge  was  so  rapid  and  impetuous, 
and  the  men  so  much  excited  by  the  sight  of  the  enemy  in  full  retreat  before 
them,  that  it  was  impossible  to  execute  the  order,  and  the  whole  line  pressed  for- 
ward to  the  extreme  edge  of  the  timber  "  (Report  of  General  Birge.) 


162  THE   SHENANDOAH   VALLEY. 

of  the  ravine  from  which  it  had  advanced.  This  temporary 
advantage,  which  caused  the  chief  loss  of  prisoners  suffered 
by  the  Union  forces,  cost  Early  the  life  of  Eodes,  one  of 
the  most  experienced  and  skilful  of  Confederate  division 
commanders. 

At  this  juncture  Eussell's  division  of  the  Sixth  Corps 
splendidly  improved  a  golden  opportunity.  Ordered  at 
once  to  move  up  into  the  front  line,  now  needing  rein- 
forcement, this  change  brought  it  into  the  gap  created  by 
the  Confederate  charge,  and  continuing  its  advance  it 
struck  the  flank  of  the  hostile  force  which  was  sweeping 
away  the  Union  right,  and  aided  by  the  Fifth  Maine  battery, 
which  enfiladed  the  enemy's  line  with  canister,  at  once 
turned  the  tide.  The  enemy  retreated,  the  line  was  re-es- 
tablished, the  fugitives  were  gathered  from  the  woods  in 
which  they  had  taken  refuge,  while  the  gallant  division 
took  position  on  the  right  of  its  corps.  But  in  the  hour  of 
his  triumph  Eussell  had  fallen.1  "  His  death,"  said  Sheri- 
dan, "  brought  sadness  to  every  heart  in  the  army."     The 

1  The  report  of  the  operations  of  the  division  was  made  by  Major  Dalton,  A.  A.G. 
"  The  enemy,"  he  s.iys,  "  having  pushed  back  the  Second  Division  of  the  Nine- 
teenth Corps  and  a  portion  of  the  Third  Division  of  this  corps,  moved  down 
toward  the  pike,  delivering  a  severe  fire  of  musketry  from  the  woods  and  corn- 
fields on  the  right.  The  Third  Brigade  (Edwards)  was  now  rapidly  moved  by  the 
flank  to  the  righc  of  the  pike,  then  forward  with  the  First  Brigade  (Campbell), 
under  a  heavy  fire,  to  a  crest  commanding  the  woods  and  fields  through  which 
the  enemy  moved.  This  advance  was  very  much  assisted  by  the  First  New  York 
Battery,  commanded  by  Lieutenant  Johnson,  which  did  splendid  execution,  and 
was  fought  with  gallantry  under  a  very  annoying  musketry  fire.  At  this  time. 
General  Upton  moved  his  brigade  into  line  to  the  right  of  the  pike  at  an  oblique 
angle  to  it,  thence  forward  into  the  woods,  delivering  heavy  volleys  into  masses 
of  the  enemy,  who  were  coming  up.  This  fresh  fire  from  the  Second  Brigade 
[Upton]  soon  caused  the  enemy  to  fall  back,  so  that  the  whole  line  moved  forward 
to  a  position  which  was  easily  held  till  the  latter  part  of  the  afternoon,  though  oc- 
casionally sharp  musketry  fire  was  interchanged.  While  personally  superintend- 
ing the  advance  of  the  First  and  Third  Brigades  to  the  crest  previously  referred 
to,  and  which  he  considered  of  the  utmost  importance,  General  Russell  was  killed 
by  a  piece  of  shell  which  passed  through  his  heart — he  had  just  before  received  a 


THE  BATTLE  OF  THE  OPEQUON.       163 

broken  portion  of  Bicketts's  line  was  quickly  re-formed  be- 
hind the  First  Division,  now  under  Upton,  and  again  moved 
forward,  while  Dwigkt's  division  having  taken  the  place  of 
Grover's  on  the  right  of  the  line,  the  latter  was  promptly 
rallied  and  brought  up. 

It  was  now  long  past  midday,  and  after  the  fierce  and  con- 
tinuous struggle  which  had  included  Sheridan's  initial  ad- 
vance, his  recoil  under  the  charge  from  the  Confederate  left, 
and  his  rally  and  re-advance  toward  Early's  position  in  the 
woods,  there  was  a  comparative  lull,  which  the  Union  com- 
mander employed  in  preparing  for  a  culminating  effort  with 
his  full  strength.  The  Army  of  West  Virginia,  which  had 
been  left  in  reserve,  was  now  moving  on  the  scene.  Sheri- 
dan's original  purpose  had  been  to  use  it  on  the  left  for  seiz- 
ing the  Valley  pike,  when  he  had  supposed  that  he  would 
have  but  half  the  enemy's  force  to  meet  at  Winchester,  and 
that  it  would  attempt  escape  to  Strasburg  ;  but  the  temporary 
repulse  of  the  Union  right,  and  the  strength  developed  by  the 
enemy  there,  made  it  evident  that  whatever  danger  was  to 


bullet  wound  in  the  left  breast,  but  had  not  mentioned  this  to  any  of  his  staff, 
continuing  to  urge  forward  his  troops." 

General  Upton's  account  is  as  follows  :  "After  marching  about  half  a  mile,  the 
troops  on  the  right  of  the  pike  gave  way  ;  line  was  immediately  formed,  and  soon 
after  Lieutenant-Colonel  Kent  gave  me  the  order  to  move  the  brigade  to  the 
right.  The  brigade  was  faced  to  the  right  and  marched  across  the  pike  into  a 
narrow  belt  of  timber,  where  the  second  line  was  halted  and  faced  to  the  front. 
The  Second  Connecticut  continued  the  march,  inclining  to  the  right,  making  our 
line  oblique  to  that  upon  which  the  enemy  was  advancing.  Bayonets  were  fixed, 
and  instructions  given  not  to  fire  till  within  close  range.  The  enemy's  left,  ex- 
tending far  beyond  our  right,  advanced  till  within  two  hundred  yards  of  our  line, 
when  a  brisk  flank  fire  was  opened  by  the  One  Hundred  and  Twenty-first  New 
York  and  Sixty-fifth  New  York,  causing  him  to  retire  in  great  disorder.  The 
Second  Connecticut  immediately  moved  forward  and  opened  fire.  The  whole  line 
then  advanced,  driving  the  enemy  and  inflicting  a  heavy  loss  in  the  killed  and 
wounded.  The  brigade  was  halted  at  the  edge  of  the  wood,  which  position  it 
held  till  the  attack  was  renewed  in  the  afternoon.  On  the  left  of  the  brigade  the 
Thirty-seventh  Massachusetts  Volunteers  rendered  invaluable  service  in  support- 
ing Stevens's  [Fifth  Maine]  Battery." 


164  THE  SHENANDOAH  VALLEY. 

be  apprehended  would  come  from  that  flank — this,  indeed, 
was  probable  at  the  outset,  since  the  absent  Confederate 
divisions,  hurrying  in  from  Stephenson's  and  beyond  to 
Ramseur's  relief,  or  driven  in  by  the  cavalry  there,  must 
necessarily  fall  upon  the  Union  right. 

Leaving  a  small  portion  of  the  corps  to  guard  his  trains, 
Crook  was  ordered  to  move  the  rest  rapidly  to  the  front,  on 
the  pike.  Thoburn,  marching  forward  with  the  First  and 
Third  Brigades  of  his  division,  found  the  ravine  "  filled  with 
wagons,  artillery,  ambulances,  and  stragglers,"  seriously  im- 
peding his  progress  and  that  of  Duval,  commanding  the 
Second  Division.  Thoburn,  under  Crook's  direction,  formed 
in  two  lines,  Wells  the  first  and  Harris  the  second,  on  the 
right  of  the  pike,  behind  the  heavy  wood,  in  front  of  which 
Emory  was  fighting,  and  then  moved  forward  to  Emory's 
right,  connecting  closely  with  ifc  and  compactly  filling  the 
space  to  the  swampy  hollow  drained  by  Red  Bud  Run. 
Duval  went  on  the  north  side  of  the  run,  holding  Crook's 
right.  Sheridan  at  that  moment  arrived,  and  directed  Tho- 
burn, as  soon  as  Duval  was  up,  and  connecting  with  him,  to 
charge  directly  through  the  woods  in  his  front.  A  rousing 
cheer  announced  Duval's  approach,  and  both  he  and  Tho- 
burn rushed  at  the  woods  with  a  confident  eagerness  that 
broke  Gordon's  division,  which  was  at  that  point. 

But  this  was  not  the  only  fresh  force  that  now  threatened 
the  Confederate  left.  Torbert,  setting  out  early  in  the 
morning  with  Merritt's  division,  had  crossed  the  Opequon 
at  Ridgway's  and  Locke's  fords,  while  Averell  had  come  up 
the  Martinsburg  pike.  Merritt  dispersed  the  enemy's  pick- 
ets, but  a  mile  and  a  half  beyond  found  himself  checked 
by  Wharton's  division  of  infantry  and  King's  battery,  which 
were  at  Stephenson's,  and  had  advanced  to  meet  him.  The 
incident  was  vexatious ;  but  Averell,  driving  the  enemy  in 


THE  BATTLE  OP  THE  OPEQUON.       165 

his  own  front,  comprising  Imboden's  cavalry,  now  under 
Smith,  and  McCausland's,  now  under  Ferguson,  all  the  way 
up  the  pike  from  Darksville  to  Stephenson's,  thus  came 
into  the  rear  of  the  infantry  facing  Merritt,  which  thereupon 
abandoned  its  position.  Only  with  difficulty  and  some  hard 
fighting  did  Breckenridge  succeed  in  bringing  off  Wharton 
on  the  pike  from  Stephenson's,  arriving  at  "Winchester  about 
2  p.m.  Patton's  brigade  was  left  to  help  Fitz  Lee's  cavalry 
to  withstand  Torbert ;  but  before  long  the  latter  was  driving 
in  both  Patton  and  Fitz  Lee,  "  the  cavalry,"  says  Early, 
"  coming  back  in  great  confusion,  followed  by  the  enemy's." 
To  add  to  the  stress,  Wilson,  far  on  the  left,  had  so  threat- 
ened the  Millwood  and  Valley  pikes,  that  Early  was  com- 
pelled to  weaken  Fitz  Lee,  even  in  his  need,  by  detaching 
Wickham's  brigade,  so  as  to  secure  a  route  for  a  retreat, 
which  was  all  he  could  now  hope  for.  He  had  also  at  first 
moved  two  of  Wharton's  three  brigades  toward  his  right, 
where  he  feared  being  cut  off;  but  almost  immediately  these 
were  sent  back,  for  by  four  o'clock  Crook  and  Torbert  were 
simultaneously  attacking  Early's  left  flank — Averell  on  the 
west  of  the  Martinsburg  pike,  Merritt  on  the  east,  and 
Crook  on  Merritt's  left. 

Crook,  on  entering  the  fight  along  Red  Bud  Bun,  had 
struck  Patton's  infantry  brigade  and  Payne's  cavalry,  which 
had  been  trying  to  hold  back  Torbert  from  coming  in  on  the 
rear  of  Early's  left  flank.  Breckenridge  was  accordingly 
now  employing  the  other  two  brigades  of  Wharton  and 
King's  battery  in  checking  Torbert.  As  Breckenridge's  line 
was  necessarily  at  right  angles  with  the  Martinsburg  pike, 
its  flank  was  in  turn  exposed  to  Crook,  who  was  advancing 
between  Wharton  and  Gordou.  The  latter,  therefore,  put 
in  Evans's  brigade  to  fill'  this  gap ;  and  Thoburn  soon  re- 
ceived a  flank  fire.     He  saw  he  must  change  front  to  the 


166  THE  SHENANDOAH  VALLEY. 

left,  "  but  the  instincts  of  the  soldiers,"  he  says,  with  a  fine 
frankness,  "  prompted  to  the  proper  movement ;  before  my 
commands  could  be  conveyed,  each  man  was  marching  and 
facing  toward  the  enemy's  fire.  Colonel  Duval's  division 
crossed  Red  Bud  Run  or  morass  at  this  point,  and  his  com- 
mand and  my  own  mingled  together  and  acted  together  until 
the  pursuit  was  over.  'Tis  true  our  lines  were  broken  and  gone ; 
but  had  we  moved  in  such  a  manner  as  to  preserve  our  lines, 
the  enemy  would  have  escaped  unhurt,  or  else  driven  us  back." 
While  Crook  and  Torbert  were  coming  in  on  the  right, 
the  Sixth  and  Nineteenth  Corps  had  been  advanced  with 
equal  success  on  their  fronts,  driving  Rainseur  and  Rodes 
steadily  back  to  Winchester.  For  "as  soon  as  the  firing 
was  heard  in  rear  of  our  left  flank,"  says  Early,  "  the  infantry 
commenced  falling  back  along  the  whole  line."  A  mile 
of  such  progress  on  both  flanks  brought  the  Union  troops 
close  to  the  town,  where  a  lino  of  breastworks,  constructed 
early  in  the  war,  gave  the  shattered  Confederate  forces  some 
refuge,  and  batteries  were  planted  there  and  also  at  the  toll- 
gate  and  the  cemetery.  Wickham,  hurrying  back  to  Early's 
left,  now  took  position  on  Fort  Hill,  confronting  Averell. 
The  remainder  of  the  Confederate  line  was  as  before, 
namely,  Fitz  Lee,  Wharton,  Gordon,  Rodes,  Raniseur,  and 
Loniax,  the  latter  partly  opposite  the  Union  left,  and  partly 
at  the  junction  of  the  Millwood  and  Valley  jukes,  the  for- 
mer of  which  Wilson  held.  The  effort  to  retain  this  line 
was  fruitless.  "The  enemy's  cavalry,"  says  Early,  "again 
charged  around  my  left  flank,  and  the  men  began  to  give  way 
again."  As  day  ended,  Early's  forces  broke  through  Win- 
chester in  complete  retreat.  "  I  never  saw  our  troops  in  such 
confusion  before,"  wrote  a  wounded  and  captured  Confederate 
officer  in  his  diary.  "Night  found  Sheridan's  hosts  in  full 
and  exultant  possession  of  much-abused,  beloved  Winchester. 


THE  BATTLE  OF  THE  OPEQUON.        167 

The  hotel  hospital  was  pretty  full  of  desperately  wounded 
and  dying  Confederates.  The  entire  building  was  shrouded 
in  darkness  during  the  dreadful  night.  Sleep  was  impossible, 
as  the  groans,  sighs,  shrieks,  prayers,  and  oaths  of  the  wretched 
sufferers,  combined  with  my  own  severe  pain,  banished  all 
thought  of  rest.  .  .  .  Our  scattered  troops,  closely  fol- 
lowed by  the  large  army  of  pursuers,  retreated  rapidly  and  in 
disorder  through  the  city.  It  was  a  sad,  humiliating  sight." 
The  Sixth  Coips,  on  the  left,  moved  over  to  the  pike  south 
of  Winchester,  but  as  it  had  been  a  hard  and  long  day  of 
marching  and  fighting,  there  was  no  attempt  at  infantry  pur- 
suit, and  probably  nothing  would  have  been  gained  by  push- 
ing these  tired  troops  after  the  flying  enemy.  The  cavalry 
only  followed  him  up  the  pike  to  Kernstown,  where  Eam- 
seur,  by  maintaining  his  organization,  effectually  covered 
the  retreat,  which  afterward,  under  the  shelter  of  the  dark- 
ness, was  continued  toward  Strasburg.  The  Union  forces 
were  overjoyed  at  their  success,  and  their  enthusiasm  became 
unbounded  when  General  Sheridan,  with  Generals  Wright, 
Emory,  and  Crook,  rode  in  front  of  their  lines.  The  com- 
mander-in-chief, elated  with  his  first  victory  as  the  leader  of 
an  army,  hastened  to  indite  a  despatch  which  told  the  story 
of  the  day  in  the  electric  phraseology  that  soon  came  to  be 
popularly  associated  with  him :  "  We  have  just  sent  them 
whirling  through  Winchester,  and  we  are  after  them  to- 
morrow. This  army  behaved  splendidly."  The  note  of  ex- 
ultation was  taken  up  throughout  the  North,  and  the  phrase 
"  whirling  through  Winchester  "  was  on  every  tongue.  Grant 
ordered  each  of  his  two  Richmond  armies  to  fire  a  salute  of 
one  hundred  guns,  and  added  in  his  despatch  to  Sheridan, 
"  If  practicable,  push  your  success  and  make  all  you  can  of 
it,"  and  President  Lincoln,  on  the  day  after  the  battle,  at  the 
suggestion  and  urgent  wish  of  Grant,  gave  the  victor  the 


168 


THE  SHENANDOAH  VALLEY. 


well-merited  appointment  of  brigadier-general  in  the  regu- 
lar army,  besides  the  permanent  command  of  the  Middle 
Division,  to  which  his  appointment  had  till  then  been  but 
temporary.  Congratulations  from  all  sides  poured  in,  but 
none  heartier  than  the  following  : 

"  Have  just  heard  of  your  great  victory.  God  bless  you  all,  officers 
and  men.     Strongly  inclined  to  come  up  and  see  you.     A.  Lincoln." 

Grant  followed  his  first  terse  despatch  with  a  longer  one : 

' '  I  congratulate  you  and  the  army  serving  under  you  for  the  great  vic- 
tory just  achieved.  It  has  been  most  opportune  in.  point  of  time  and 
effect.  It  will  open  again  to  the  Government  and  to  the  public  the  very 
important  line  of  road  from  Baltimore  to  the  Ohio,  and  also  the 
Chesapeake  Canal.  Better  still,  it  wipes  out  much  of  the  stain  upon  our 
arms  by  previous  disasters  in  that  locality.  May  your  good  work  con- 
tinue is  now  the  prayer  of  all  loyal  men." 

The  conflict  had  been  a  bloody  one.  The  Union  loss  was 
from  4,900  to  5,000  men,  and  of  these  about  4,300  were  killed 
or  wounded,  the  killed  including  Eussell,  and  the  wounded 
Generals  Upton,  Mcintosh,  who  lost  a  leg,  and  Chapman, 
and  Colonels  Duval,  commanding  a  division,  and  Sharpe, 
commanding  a  brigade.  The  exact  figures  are  not  ascer- 
tainable, since  in  the  following  table  the  losses  of  Crook's 
Army  of  West  Virginia  include  the  very  slight  casualties 
it  suffered  at  Fisher's  Hill,  while  those  of  the  other  three 
corps  embrace  only  Winchester  : 


Killed. 

Wounded. 

Missing. 

Total. 

Cavalry  Corps 

65 
313 
375 
105 

658 

267 
1,434 
1,228 

840 

109 

48 
453 

8 

441 

1,685 

1.956 

953 

3,759 

618 

5,035 

THE  BATTLE  OF  THU  OPEQUON.       169 

Early's  loss  was  from  3,900  to  4,000.  He  officially  re- 
ported the  casualties  of  the  infantry  and  artillery  in  this 
battle  to  be  3,611 ; '  and  supposing  his  cavalry  loss  to  be  in 
the  same  ratio  as  that  of  the  Union  cavalry,  i.e.,  about  one- 
eleventh  of  the  whole,  we  reach  the  figures  already  indi- 
cated. Of  his  casualties  nearly  2,000  were  prisoners  ;  and 
many  of  his  wounded,  also,  were  left  in  the  Winchester  hos- 
pitals or  elsewhere  along  the  Valley.  Among  his  killed 
were  Generals  Eodes  and  Godwin  and  Colonel  Patton,   a 


111  In  this  battle  the  loss  in  the  infantry  and  artillery  was:  killed,  226; 
wounded,  1,567  ;  missing,  1,818 — total,  3,011.  There  is  no  full  report  of  the  cav- 
alry, but  the  total  loss  in  killed  and  wounded  from  September  1st  to  October  1st  is  : 
killed,  60  ;  wounded,  288 — total,  348  ;  but  many  were  captured,  though  a  good  many 
are  missing  as  stragglers,  and  a  number  of  them  reported  missing  in  the  infantry 
were  not  captured,  but  are  stragglers  and  skulkers"  (Early  to  Lee,  October  9th). 
Sheridan  stated  that  "  most  of  the  enemy's  wounded  and  all  of  their  killed  fed 
into  our  hands,''  and  Surgeon  Brinton  reported  to  Surgeon-General  Barnes,  two 
or  three  days  after  the  battle,  as  follows  :  •'  On  my  arrival  here  I  found  about 
4,000  Union  and  1,200  rebel  wounded."  On  a  subsequent  day  he  telegraphed 
again  :  "  I  sent  yesterday  (September  22d)  TOO  wounded  to  Sandy  Hook  Hospital. 
There  are  still  3,800  here,  including  700  rebels.  I  learn  that  more  wounded  men 
are  on  their  way  to  this  place  from  the  fiont  [i.e.,  Fisher's  Hill]. 

An  unsigned  memorandum  or  enclosure,  accompanying  Early's  report  of  the 
battle,  gives  this  statement  of  the  killed  and  wounded  in  the  aitillery  : 


Killed. 

Wounded. 

Total. 

89 
42 
32 
23 
13 

597 
285 
364 
194 

68 

686 
327 

396 

217 

81 

199 

1,508 

1,707 

Early's  report,  however,  as  has  been  said,  gives  the  number  of  killed  and 
wounded  as  1,793 — the  slight  discrepancy  being  not  unusual.  It  will  be  under- 
stood, of  course,  that  Early's  old  division  was  commanded  by  Ramseur,  and 
Breckenridge's  by  Wharton. 

In  the  Nineteenth  Corps  earlier  returns  had  indicated  a  greater  loss  in  the  bat- 
tle of  the  Opequon.  A  return  of  the  Second  (Grover's)  Division,  made  the  next  day, 

XI.-8 


170 


THE  SHENANDOAH  VALLEY. 


brigade  commander;  among  his  severely  wounded,  Gen- 
erals Fitz  Lee  and  York.  By  promptly  recognizing  his  im- 
pending defeat,  Early  was  able  to  save  his  trains  and  stores, 
and  the  transportable  portion  of  his  sick  and  wounded ;  but 
he  left  as  trophies  to  the  victor  five  pieces  of  artillery  and 
nine  battle-flags,  captured  on  the  field. 


September  20th,  near  Strasburg,  was,  by  brigades,  as  follows,  for  the  ten  days 
preceding. 


Killed. 

Wounded. 

Missing. 

Total. 

Strength. 

94 

58 

38 

33 

2 

348 
344 
215 
141 
6 

271 

262 

74 

21 

0 

713 
664 
327 
195 
8 

1,495 

1,268 

3.  Sharpe  

4.  Shnnk 

796 
1,194 

137 

225 

1,054 

628 

1,907 

4,890 

The  last  column  in  this  table  is  the  aggregate  "  effective  strength,"  officers  and 
men,  after  action,  showing  also  that  the  division  had  an  effective  strength  of 
6,797  men  just  before  the  battle.  But  the  remarks  on  the  original  return  are  that 
"the  lists  of  killed  and  wounded  ai-e  made  up  from  actual  knowledge  ;  the  missing 
will  be  greatly  decreased,  as  men  are  constantly  coming  in."  This  last  statement 
proved  to  be  true,  according  to  the  revised  table  given  in  the  text.  A  return  of 
the  whole  Nineteenth  Corps  by  divisions  for  the  ten  days  preceding  September 
20th,  which  is  nearly  equivalent  to  the  losses  at  Winchester,  since  there  were  not 
fifty  casualties  apart  from  that  battle,  was  as  follows : 


Killed. 

Wounded. 

Missing. 

aggregate 
Casualties. 

£ 
O 

C3 

o 

1 

o 

a! 
o 

o 

£ 
O 

c 
a> 

"3 
o 
H 

03 
U 

s 
o 

a 
3 

"3 
o 

1 .  Owight 

6 
ID 

25 

65 
206 

71 
225 

21 
98 

414 
977 

435 
1.054 

io 

10 

60 
618 

60 
628 

27 
106 

133 

539 
1,801 

566 
1,907 

271 

296 

1,391 

1,489 

678 

688 

2,340 

2,473 

These  casualties  were  reduced  by  the  arrival  of  many  who  were  missing,  and 
perhaps  also  by  the  return  to  duty  of  some  of  the  wounded  before  the  date  of  the 
revised  records. 


THE  BATTLE  OF  THE  OPEQUON.        171 

This  battle  of  the  Opequon — for  so  the  engagement  was 
styled  by  General  Sheridan,  to  distinguish  it  from  previous 
contests  around  Winchester — restored  the  lower  Valley  to 
Union  control,  from  which  it  was  never  again  wrested ;  it 
permanently  relieved  Maryland  and  Pennsylvania  from  the 
periodical  invasions  to  which  they  had  been  subjected  during 
three  years,  and  the  national  capital  from  further  humilia- 
tions. This  result  had  been  accomplished  by  a  battle  which, 
taken  with  its  sequences,  inflicted  upon  the  Confederate  forces 
losses  in  troops  nearly  as  great  as  those  which  were  sustained 
by  the  Union  arms — an  experience  fatal  to  the  fast  dwin- 
dling forces  of  the  South. 

The  moral  effect  of  this  victory  on  the  North  was  most 
wholesome.  The  discouragement  which  had  prevailed  re- 
garding operations  in  the  Shenandoah  Valley,  over  which  a 
sinister  fortune  had  brooded  since  the  year  1861,  wholly  dis- 
appeared. The  magnetism  the  young  commander  exercised 
upon  his  troops  spread  through  the  country,  and  henceforth 
caused  his  fortunes  in  the  Valley  to  be  watched  with  the 
eager  expectation  and  hearty  good-will  which  fall  to  the  lot 
of  the  favorite  soldier. 

As  to  his  unfortunate  antagonist,  his  chagrin  manifested 
itself  in  a  declaration,  more  than  two  years  later,  that  he 
could  only  attribute  his  escape  from  utter  annihilation  to 
the  incapacity  of  his  opponent;  that  "instead  of  being  pro- 
moted, Sheridan  ought  to  have  been  cashiered  for  this  bat- 
tle;'' and  that  "a  skilful  and  energetic  commander  of  the 
enemy's  forces  would  have  crushed  Eamseur  before  any  as- 
sistance could  have  reached  him,  and  thus  insured  the  de- 
struction of  my  whole  force  ;  and,  later  in  the  day,  when  the 
battle  had  turned  against  us,  with  the  immense  superiority 
in  cavalry  which  Sheridan  had,  and  the  advantage  of  the 
open  country,  would  have  destroyed  my  whole  force,  and 


172  THE  SHENANDOAH  VALLEY. 

captured  everything  I  had."  In  his  ill-concealed  vexation, 
the  Confederate  general  here  passes  upon  himself  as  severe 
a  condemnation  as  his  most  bitter  detractors  could  frame ; 
for  the  act  of  leaving  Ramseur  isolated  was  his  own  ;  and  the 
great  superiority  of  the  Union  cavalry  was,  or  should  have 
been,  as  well  known  to  him  before  as  after  the  battle  at 
Winchester,  and  should  have  dissuaded  him  from  risking  an 
engagement  in  that  open  country.  Early  deserves,  never- 
theless, the  credit  of  great  vigor  and  skill  in  fighting 
the  battle  thus  forced  upon  him,  and  in  saving  his  trains 
and  his  army  out  of  the  ruin  his  opponent  bad  prepared 
for  him. 

The  battle  of  the  Opequon  was  universally  accepted  as  a 
vindication  of  Sheridan's  views  and  policy.  His  belief  that 
he  ought  to  wait  until  Early  should  be  weakened,  before  as- 
saulting him,  had  been  shown  to  be  one  that  comported  with 
extraordinary  energy ;  and  a  striking  feature  of  the  action  of 
the  Opequon  had  been  the  personal  presence  and  supervision 
of  Sheridan  at  every  important  point  in  the  front  line.  If  it 
be  true,  as  Sheridan's  report  says,  that  "  at  Winchester,  for 
a  moment,  the  contest  was  uncertain,"  might  not  the  presence 
of  Kershaw  at  that  juncture  have  turned  the  scale  the  other 
way  ?  Beyond  question,  the  confidence  with  which  the  Union 
general  that  day  inspired  his  troops  proved  invaluable  in  the 
subsequent  stages  of  the  campaign. 


CHAPTEK  X. 

THE  BATTLE  OP  FISHER'S  HILL. 

At  daylight,  Sei^tember  20th,  Sheridan  marched  up  the 
Valley  pike,  the  Sixth  Corps  on  the  left,  the  Nineteenth  on 
the  right,  and  the  Eighth  bringing  up  the  rear,  in  pursuit  of 
the  enemy.  The  cavalry  had  preceded,  Averell  on  the  Back 
road,  Merritt  on  the  Valley  pike,  and  Wilson  on  the  Front 
Royal  pike.  Early  simultaneously  retreated  to  his  old  posi- 
tion on  Fisher's  Hill,  two  miles  south  of  Strasburg. 

Fisher's  Hill  offers  the  first  strong  defensive  line  to  a 
force  advancing  from  Winchester.  Here  the  main  Valley, 
twenty  miles  wide  below,  narrows  to  four,  through  the  inter- 
position of  the  isolated  Massanutten  chain,  which  rises  half 
way  between  North  Mountain  on  the  west  and  the  Blue 
Kidge  on  the  east.  The  westernmost  tier  of  the  Massanut- 
ten system  is  composed  of  Peaked  Ridge  and  Three  Top, 
lying  in  the  same  straight  line,  and  substantially  a  part  of 
the  same  upheaval.  Its  western  base  is  washed  by  the 
North  Fork  of  the  Shenandoah,  which  turns  sharply  to  the 
east  around  the  north  terminus  of  Three  Top,  at  Strasburg, 
and  makes  a  confluence  with  the  South  Fork  ten  miles  be- 
yond, near  Front  Royal.  Cedar  Creek  winds  southward  into 
the  North  Fork  just  below  Strasburg,  while  to  a  rivulet 
which  adds  its  waters  to  the  North  Fork,  two  miles  above 
the  town,  is  given  the  expressive  name  of  Tumbling  Run. 
West  of  the  North  Fork  runs  the  Valley  pike  from  Strasburg 


174  THE   SHENANDOAH   VALLEY. 

to  Staunton,  and  by  its  side  the  then  broken  and  disused 
Manassas  Gap  Railroad.  Fisher's  Hill  is  the  precipitous 
bluff  beyond  and  overhanging  Tumbling  Run,  which  at  that 
point  still  further  narrows  the  Valley.  Here  Early  halted, 
the  hill  with  the  Shenandoah  beyond  protecting  his  right, 
while  to  seal  his  left  against  approach  he  began  to  erect  ad- 
ditional works  across  the  Valley,  westward  to  the  North 
Mountain.  The  pike,  which  runs  over  the  hill  in  a  depres- 
sion, was  for  a  long  distance  under  fire  from  his  guns  ;  and 
so  secure  did  he  feel,  that  the  ammunition-boxes  were  taken 
from  the  caissons  and  placed  for  convenience  behind  the 
breastworks.  His  line  was  substantially  the  same  as  when 
he  had  occupied  this  position  in  August,  Wharton  being  on 
the  right,  Gordon  next,  then  Pegram  (commanding  Ram- 
seur's  old  division),  then  Ramseur  (now  transferred  to 
Rodes's  former  division),  and  finally  Lomax's  cavalry,  dis- 
mounted, on  Ramseur's  left.  Fitz  Lee's  cavalry,  now  under 
Wickham,  was  sent  to  the  right,  to  prevent  the  flanking  of 
Fisher's  Hill  through  the  Luray  Valley,  the  chief  position 
selected  for  him  being  at  Millford,  on  the  pike,  about  twelve 
miles  above  Front  Royal.  Here  the  South  Fork  nears  the 
Rlue  Ridge,  leaving  a  narrow  defensible  gorge  between. 
Early,  while  at  Fisher's  Hill,  was  deprived  of  the  services  of 
Breckenridge,  who  received  orders  from  Richmond  to  return 
to  Southwest  Virginia.  With  Breckenridge,  Rodes,  and  Fitz 
Lee  gone,  he  had  fewer  lieutenants  on  whose  aid  and  vig- 
ilance to  rely. 

During  the  afternoon  of  the  20th,  Wright  and  Emory  ar- 
rived at  Cedar  Creek,  and  crossing,  went  into  position  on  the 
heights  fronting  Strasburg,  with  the  Sixth  CorjDS  on  the 
right,  and  the  Nineteenth  on  the  left,  the  latter  extending 
nearly  to  the  Front  Royal  road,  which,  in  fact,  was  crossed 
by  a  detached  subdivision  ;  while  the  Eighth,  when  it  came 


THE  BATTLE  OF  FISHER'S  HILL.  175 

up,  was  halted  upon  the  left  bank  of  the  stream.  By 
evening  the  Union  pickets  occupied  the  northern  part  of 
Strasburg  and  the  Confederate  pickets  the  southern. 

Throughout  the  21st,  Sheridan  was  occupied  in  posi- 
tioning his  main  infantry  line,  which,  advancing  through 
the  town,  drove  the  enemy's  skirmishers  back  to  the  de- 
fences at  Fisher's  Hill.  "When  the  morning  mist  cleared 
away,  Early  was  found  to  have  been  busy  through  the 
night  in  further  strengthening  his  position  with  works  of 
earth  and  stone  and  in  throwing  down  abatis.  Starting  out 
with  his  staff  early  in  the  day,  Sheridan  rode  from  one  end 
to  the  other  of  the  picket  line,  noting  the  ground.  Accom- 
panied by  General  Wright,  he  reconnoitred  especially  the 
right  flank,  and  there,  well  in  advance,  the  chief  point  to  oc- 
cupy was  seen  to  be  the  high  land  on  the  north  of  Tumbling 
Run,  confronting  the  enemy's  main  position.  Wright  at  once 
sent  three  regiments,  two  from  his  Third  Division  and  one 
from  the  Second,  to  seize  this  spot ;  but  the  enemy  also 
knew  its  value,  and  repulsed  the  Union  forces.  The  remain- 
der of  Warner's  brigade  of  the  Second  was  added,  and  the 
position  most  gallantly  carried  by  Warner.  From  that  time 
till  sundown  the  axes  of  the  pioneers  resounded,  making 
a  way  for  planting  the  artillery  on  the  important  vantage- 
ground  thus  secured,  while  the  excellent  view  now  obtain- 
able showed  that  the  enemy  had  not  ceased  his  defensive 
labors. 

But  neither  gradual  approaches  nor  experimental  assaults 
on  these  frowning  heights  formed  the  sum  of  the  purposes 
of  the  Union  commander.  He  resolved  to  repeat  his  tactics 
of  the  Opequon  by  again  turning  the  enemy's  left  flank  with 
Crook's  command,  doing  this  with  all  secrecy,  since  the  Con- 
federate station  on  Three  Top  commanded  both  camps.  At 
the  same  time  he  proposed  to  move  Torbert  up  the  Luray 


176  THE  SHENANDOAH  VALLEY. 

f 
Valley,  there  getting  past  the  enemy's  right  flank,  if  possible, 

and  crossing  Massanutten  to  his  rear.  The  night  of  the  21st 
he  sent  this  despatch  to  Grant  :  "  General  Wilson's  cavalry 
division  charged  the  enemy  at  Front  Royal  pike  this  morn- 
ing, and  drove  them  from  Front  Royal  up  the  Luray  Val- 
ley for  a  distance  of  six  miles.  I  directed  two  brigades 
of  the  First  Cavalry  Division,  with  General  Wilson's  divi- 
sion, to  follow  the  enemy  up  that  Valley,  and  to  push  them 
vigorously." 

The  Sixth  Corps  continued  its  lodgment  on  the  valuable 
line  it  had  gained,  confronting  the  enemy  along  Tumbling 
Run.  The  difficult  ground,  densely  wooded,  broken  by 
ledges  and  cut  up  by  ravines,  made  this  an  all-night  task  ; 
and  at  daybreak  the  Nineteenth  was  shifted  to  the  right 
and  front  of  its  first  position,  occupying  the  ground  held 
on  the  21st  by  the  Sixth,  with  which  latter  its  right  then 
connected.  The  skirmish  line  of  the  Nineteenth,  extend- 
ing to  the  left,  and  its  reserves  along  the  railroad,  were 
not  changed,  nor  the  regiment  ordered  to  reconnoitre  the 
extreme  left  the  day  before.  The  troops  intrenched,  and 
the  artillery  was  placed  in  position.  Sheridan  finding  the 
enemy's  right  impregnable,  and  planning  to  turn  his  left, 
had  already  by  degrees  moved  the  two  corps  well  to  the 
right ;  but  to  connect  with  Crook  when  the  latter  should 
reappear  on  the  scene,  besides  hiding  his  movements  in 
the  interim,  Ricketts's  division  of  the  Sixth  Corps,  which 
was  already  on  the  right,  took  a  desirable  position,  during 
the  afternoon,  still  farther  to  the  front,  very  handsomely 
driving  in  the  enemy's  skirmish  line,  aided  by  the  three  rifle 
batteries  of  the  Sixth  Corps.  Averell  came  up  on  the  right  of 
Ricketts.  The  Second  Division  of  the  corps  was  then 
moved  to  the  right  and  front,  connecting  with  Ricketts,  and 
the  First  to  connect  with  the  Second.     It  was  hardly  half  a 


THE  BATTLE   OP  FISHER'S  HILL.  177 

mile  from  the  ridge  thus  gained  to  the  Fisher's  Hill  trenches 
across  the  ravine. 

These  movements  occupied  the  day ;  and  Early,  fearing 
rather  than  hoping  attack,  thought  it  had  begun  with  the 
last  movements  of  Ricketts  and  Averell.  When  he  saw 
their  advance,  "orders  were  given"  he  says,  "for  my  troops 
to  retire  after  dark,  as  I  knew  my  force  was  not  strong 
enough  to  resist  a  determined  assault."  Just  before  sunset, 
Crook,  who,  with  admirable  silence  and  secrecy,  had  been  all 
day  moving  toward  and  then  along  Little  North  Mountain, 
under  the  cover  of  the  woods,  till  he  had  gained  the  enemy's 
left  flank  and  rear,  rushed  across  the  intervening  space,  and, 
before  the  enemy  could  recover  from  his  surprise,  was  over 
his  intrenchments.  "  Had  the  heavens  opened,"  writes  one 
officer,  "and  we  been  seen  descending  from  the  clouds,  no 
greater  consternation  would  have. been  created." 

More  quickly  than  the  story  can  be  told,  the  divisions  of 
Thoburn  and  Duval  swept  along  the  enemy's  left  flank,  taking 
his  line  in  reverse,  and  driving  before  them  the  astonished 
dismounted  cavalry  of  Lomax.  In  a  few  minutes  Ricketts 
had  joined  his  right  to  Crook's  left,  and  the  remainder  of 
the  Sixth  Corps  and  the  Nineteenth,  taking  up  the  charge, 
descended  into  the  ravine  of  Tumbling  Rim,  with  a  head- 
long rush  over  fields,  walls,  rocks,  and  felled  trees.  Making 
their  way  across  the  brook,  they  were  soon  scrambling  up 
heights  that  it  had  seemed  madness  to  attack,  while  Sheri- 
dan and  his  -admirable  staff  were  on  every  part  of  the  line, 
shouting  "  Forward !  Forward  everything ! "  and  to  all  in- 
quiries for  instructions  the  reply  was  still,  "  Go  on,  don't 
stop,  go  on  !  "  Formations  were  little  heeded  in  the  rush  : 
but  the  whole  Confederate  line  broke  from  its  trenches, 
Lomax's  dismounted  cavalry  on  the  left  giving  way  first, 
whereupon  Ramseur  and  Pegram  were  routed  in  turn.     "  My 


178  THE   SHENANDOAH   VALLEY. 

whole  force  retired  in  considerable  confusion,"  says  General 
Early.  In  truth,  between  sundown  and  dark  every  portion 
of  the  strong  position  at  Fisher's  Hill  was  carried,  the  action 
being  so  rapid  that  the  enemy  had  not  even  time  to  get  his 
guns  out  of  position  upon  the  pike,  and  sixteen  of  them  were 
captured  by  the  Union  forces. 

Early  fled  in  disorder,  under  '  cover  of  the  darkness, 
through  Woodstock  to  a  point  about  four  miles  beyond, 
called  Narrow  Passage,  just  north  of  Edenburg.  Sheridan 
pushed  after  him  all  night  with  Devin's  brigade  of  Merritt's 
cavalry  and  the  Nineteenth  and  Sixth  Corps,  both  corps  re- 
porting to  Wright,  and  the  Nineteenth  in  advance,1  as  far  as 
Woodstock ;  but  the  darkness  rendered  this  pursuit  unavail- 
ing. Devin  received  instructions  from  Sheridan  himself, 
Torbert  being  in  Luray  Valley,  but  "  found  the  roads  blocked 
up  with  our  infantry  advancing,"  and  only  reached  the  head 
of  the  column  about  ten  o'clock.  He  then  got  two  guns  in 
position,  and  opened  on  the  enemy's  rear,  but  was  afterward 
sent  into  the  fields  on  the  left  of  the  turnpike,  on  a  line 
parallel  with  the  head  of  the  infantry.  The  latter,  since  the 
night  had  been  thus  employed,  were  halted  from  dawn  till 
afternoon  of  the  next  day  for  sleep  and  food. 

Unfortunately  Torbert  did  not  succeed  in  driving  Wick- 

J  "The  advance  was  made  with  as  much  rapidity  as  the  darkness  and  the 
nature  of  the  ground  would  permit.  About  9.30  p.m.  our  skirmish  line  was  fired 
at,  and  by  some  unfortunate  mistake,  the  regiments  in  the  rear,  not  belonging  to 
my  command,  opened  fire  upon  my  reserves  and  skirmish  line,  from  which  I 
lost  a  number  of  men.  Hardly  had  we  advanced  a  distance  of  a  mile  before  a 
brisk  fire  was  again  opened  upon  us  from  musketry  and  artillery,  and  again  I 
sustained  a  fire  from  our  own  troops  in  the  rear.  The  enemy  was  evidently  pre- 
pared to  meet  us  at  this  point,  wire  and  other  obstacles  had  been  placed  to  delay 
the  skirmish  line,  and  two  pieces  of  artillery  were  well  trained  upon  the  road. 
After  a  short  delay,  the  advance  was  again  made,  and  the  enemy  driven  with  but 
little  opposition.  The  road  was  found  strewn  with  the  remains  of  burning 
wagons,  and  a  large  number  of  prisoners  was  captured  by  this  command  and 
sent  to  the  rear.  At  3.30  a.m.  we  bivouacked  on  the  south  side  of  Woodstock'" 
(ilolineux's  Report). 


THE  BATTLE  OF  FISHER'S  HILL.  179 

ham's  cavalry  from,  its  strong  defensive  position  at  Millford, 
and  hence  the  portion  of  Sheridan's  plan  which  contem- 
plated cutting  off  the  enemy's  retreat  by  seizing  the  pike 
at  New  Market,  was  not  carried  out.  The  21st  Torbert  had 
moved  through  Front  Royal  into  the  Luray  Valley,  with 
the  divisions  of  Merritt  and  Wilson,  excepting  Devin's  bri- 
gade of  the.  former,  which  was  left  to  guard  the  rear  of  the 
army  at  Cedar  Creek.  He  found  Wickham,  with  his  own 
and  Payne's  brigade,  posted  on  the  south  side  of  Gooney 
Run.  At  2  a.m.  of  the  22d,  Custer's  brigade  was  sent  back 
across  the  South  Fork,  with  orders,  says  Torbert,  to  march 
around  the  enemy's  flank  to  his  rear,  as  he  seemed  too 
strong  to  attack  in  front ;  but  Torbert,  on  moving  forward 
at  daylight,  found  that  the  enemy  had  retreated  to  a  still 
stronger  position  on  the  south  side  of  Millford  Creek,  with 
his  left  on  the  Shenandoah  and  his  right  on  a  knob  of  the 
Blue  Ridge,  occupying  a  short,  compact  line.  The  bank  of 
the  creek  seemed  to  Torbert  too  precipitous  for  a  direct  at- 
tack ;  and  "  not  knowing,"  he  says,  "  that  the  army  had 
made  an  attack  at  Fisher's  Hill,  and  thinking  that  the  sacri- 
fice would  be  too  great  to  attack  without  that  knowledge,  I 
concluded  to  withdraw  to  a  point  opposite  McCoy's  Ferry." 
The  23d,  Wilson  crossed  McCoy's  ford,  and  Merritt  went 
back  through  Front  Royal,  where  he  skirmished  with 
Mosby,  driving  him  off  with  loss.  During  the  afternoon 
"  news  was  received  of  the  victory  at  Fisher's  Hill,  and 
directions  to  make  up  the  Luray  Valley."  Both  divisions 
at  once  moved  forward  and  bivouacked  at  Millford  Creek, 
which  the  enemy  had  evacuated.1     Had  they  been  able  to 


1  "Its  operations  [the  cavalry's]  up  the  Luray  Valley,  on  which  I  calculated  so 
much,  were  an  entire  failure.  They  were  held  at  Millford  by  two  small  brigades 
of  Fitz  Lee's  cavalry,  and  then  fell  back  toward  Front  Royal,  until  after  they  had 
learned  of  our  success  at  Fisher's  Hill"  (Sheridajf  to  Grant,  September  25th). 


180 


THE  SHENANDOAH   VALLEY. 


move  the  day  before  across  the  South  Fork  through  Massa- 
nutten  Gap,  a  powerful  body  of  horse  would  have  been  in 
the  rear  of  the  enemy,  upon  his  line  of  retreat ;  but  Early 
was  fully  alive  to  this  danger,  and  had  guarded  against  it 
with  Wickham's  force. 

Sheridan's  loss  at  the  battle  of  Fisher's  Hill  was  only  about 
400  men;  Early's,  between  1,300  and  1,400,  the  language 
of  his  despatch  to  Lee  being  as  follows :  "  The  loss  in  the 
infantry  and  artillery  was  30  killed,  210  wounded,  and  995 
missing ;  total  1,235.'  I  have  been  able  to  get  no  report  of  the 
loss  in  the  cavalry,  but  it  was  slight."  As  Lomax  received 
the  brunt  of  Crook's  attack,  he  must  have  suffered  his  share  of 
the  loss ;  and  since  Sheridan  reported  that  he  had  1,100  prison- 
ers, the  difference  of  105  between  Early's  and  Sheridan's  tally 
can  be  safely  ascribed  to  the  cavalry,  thus  making  Early's 
total  loss  1,340,  besides  some  cavalry  killed  and  wounded. 

Winchester  and  Fisher's  Hill  were  really  parts  of  the  same 
move.  If  we  take  the  two  together,  we  have  a  total  loss  for 
Sheridan  as  follows : 


Cavalry  Corps 

Sixth  Corps 

Nineteenth  Corps 
Eighth  Corps  . . . 


Killed. 


65 

237 
286 
105 

693 


Wounded. 


267 
1,634 
1,275 

840 


4.016 


Missing. 


109 

51 

455 


623 


441 
1,922 
2,016 

953 


5,332 


In  the  affair  of  Fisher's  Hill  the  cavalry  losses  are  not  in- 
cluded, but  they  could  hardly  bring  the  total  up  to  5,400. 


1  The  unsigned  memorandum  accompanying  Early's  despatch  to  Lee,  spoken  of 
on  a  previous  page,  gave  these  details  of  the  killed  and  wounded  :  Ramseur,  105 ; 
Pegram,  64;  Gordon,  49;  Wharton,  14;  Artillery,  29;  total,  261,  32  being  killed 
and  229  wounded. 


THE  BATTLE  OF  FISHERS  HILL. 


181 


This  is  almost  exactly  Early's  loss  for  the  two  battles — nearly 
4,000  at  Winchester  and  over  1,350  at  Fisher's  Hill.  Thus 
Sheridan's  victories  had  been  won  with  a  loss  on  his  part  only 
equal  to  the  enemy's,  while  the  guns,  the  flags,  the  military 
positions,  and  the  moral  effect  were  his  prizes.  Besides,  in 
ratio  to  his  total  strength  he  had  suffered  a  loss  far  less  than 
the  enemy's,  and  it  was  precisely  this  fact  that  was  to  ruin 
the  Confederate  campaign  in  the  Valley.  He  had  taken  a  great 
number  of  prisoners — a  matter  of  vital  consequence  in  the  wan- 
ing days  of  the  revolt — while  he  had  lost  very  few,  the  highest 
proportion  to  the  total  casualties  being  in  the  cavalry.1 


1  The  returns  of  Crook's  West  Virginia  army,  as  has  already  been  noted,  lumped 
its  casualties  at  Winchester  and  Fisher's  Hill,  but  the  other  two  corps  (the  cavalry 
being  too  little  engaged  to  be  included)  suffered  as  follows  at  the  latter  point : 


Sixth  Corps 

Nineteenth  Corps 


Killed.      Wounded.    Missing.     Aggregate. 


210 
47 


237 
GO 


Here,  also,  some  discrepancies  occur  in  earlier  reports.  A  list  of  casualties  for 
the  Nineteenth  Corps  at  Fisher's  Hill,  made  out  six  days  later,  September  28:h, 
at  Harrisonburg,  runs  as  follows : 


Division. 

Killed. 

Wounded. 

Missing. 

Total. 

4 
8 

29 
47 
9 

'2 

33 

57 
9 

12 

85 

2 

99 

A  list  of  the  killed  and  wounded  in  the  corps  in  both  battles,  made  at  the  same 
date  and  place,  called  "Casualties  for  the  ten  days  ending  September  29th,"  and 
there  were  hardly  a  score  after  September  22d,  gives  those  of  the  First  Division, 
exclusive  of  the  missing,  as  83  killed  and  474  wounded — total  557 ;  the  Second 
Division,  254  killed  and  1,125  wounded — total  1,379  ;  the  reserve  artillery,  9 
wounded.  This  would  make  the  total  of  killed  and  wounded  of  the  corps  in  both 
battles  1,945,  instead  of  1,561,  as  in  the  text.  But  no  doubt  the  revised  figures 
of  the  text  are  the  more  accurate. 


182  THE  SHENANDOAH  VALLEY. 

Fisher's  Hill  was  the  corollary  of  Winchester.  It  was  a 
hurricane  battle,  totally  unlike  the  one  delivered  three  days 
before ;  and  the  Union  troops  were  as  palpably  inspirited  by 
their  previous  triumph  as  the  Confederates  were  unnerved 
from  the  same  cause.  Early  expressly  attributes  the  capture 
of  so  many  of  his  men  to  their  attempt  to  "  make  their  way 
across  the  North  Fork  to  Massanutten  Mountain,  under  the 
impression  that  the  enemy  had  possession  of  the  Valley  pike 
in  our  rear."  The  turning  of  the  enemy's  left  flank  at  Win- 
chester made  the  repetition  of  this  manoeuvre  at  Fisher's  Hill 
the  more  easy  of  accomplishment,  the  fugitives  instinctively 
bolting  for  the  right  of  their  line,  even  though  they  scat- 
tered among  the  mountains  in  so  doing.  And  that  the  effect 
of  Winchester  was  not  greater  on  the  troops  than  it  was  on 
their  commanders,  is  attested  by  the  promptness  and  auda- 
city with  which  Sheridan  attacked  Fisher's  Hill,  a  position 
vastly  stronger  than  any  his  adversary  had  occupied  in  the 
Lower  Valley ;  while  Early,  who  had  been  underrating  his 
opponent,  parading  before  his  fortified  front  at  Halltown, 
and  unhesitatingly  scattering  his  divisions  along  the  pike  to 
Martinsburg,  had,  just  before  being  attacked  at  Fisher  Hill, 
given  the  order  to  retreat  from  this  stronghold,  simply  because 
he  observed  that  an  assault  on  him  was  contemplated. 

Early's  second  reverse  was  not  due  to  any  mistaken  esti- 
mate in  regard  to  the  natural  strength  of  his  position,  but 
to  his  delay  to  occupy  it  until  he  no  longer  had  men  enough 
to  properly  cover  it.  The  time  to  hold  Fisher's  Hill  was 
when  Kershaw's  departure  had  imperilled  his  communica- 
tions between  that  point  and  Winchester.  The  first  line  he 
took  up  in  the  Valley,  that  of  the  Opequon,  was  admirably 
selected  for  its  purpose.  Although  it  risked  a  swift  ad- 
vance from  Harper's  Ferry  to  Winchester,  yet  this  movement 
would  in  turn  be  exposed  to  an  assault  from  Bunker  Hill 


THE   BATTLE   OF   FISHER'S   HILL.  183 

on  its  rear.  Thus  Early's  Opeqnon  position,  differing  from 
the  simpler  and  more  obvious  device  of  a  line  stretched 
across  the  pike,  where  the  rivers  and  mountains  gave  a  nar- 
row passage,  was  really  less  hazardous  than  it  seemed.  In 
addition,  as  his  opponent,  in  proceeding  from  Halltown  to 
Winchester,  occupied  two  marches  for  that  purpose,  the  first 
one  carrying  him  to  the  Clifton-Berryville  line,  Early  had 
always  ample  time  to  retreat  up  the  Valley,  without  accejot- 
ing  battle.  This  line  of  the  Opequon  was  advantageous  in 
constantly  threatening  Maryland,  and  in  keeping  the  rail- 
road broken.  But  when  the  Union  commander  was  found 
stationing  himself  permanently  on  the  Clifton-Berryville 
line,  and  when  Early's  own  army  was  weakened  by  the  de- 
tachment of  Kershaw,  a  few  hours'  march  might  at  any  time 
bring  Sheridan  to  the  outworks  of  Winchester;  and  even 
Stephenson's  D5pot  as  a  main  camp  was  too  far  north  to 
escape  the  necessity  of  accepting  battle.  In  the  case  of  an 
attack  still  farther  south,  on  his  communications,  Early 
might  have  been  in  a  still  worse  plight. 

Besides,  he  had  remained  in  the  Lower  Valley  till  he 
had  exhausted  his  supplies.  He  had  already  been  receiving 
his  food  from  the  Upper  Valley,  on  a  long  line,  exposed  to 
the  attacks  of  cavalry,  in  which  arm  his  opponent  was  very 
strong.  "Nearly  the  whole  of  our  bread,"  he  says,  "was 
obtained  by  threshing  the  wheat  and  then  having  it  ground 
by  details  from  my  command,  and  it  sometimes  happened 
that  while  my  troops  were  fighting,  the  very  flour  which  was 
to  furnish  them  with  bread  for  their  next  meal  was  being 
ground  under  the  protection  of  their  guns.1     Latterly  our 


1  "  I  think  now  that  Sheridan  is  superior  to  Early — besides  the  latter  being 
where  it  must  take  a  good  part  of  his  force  to  collect  supplies  for  the  balance" 
(Grant  to  Halleck,  August  29th).  Some  of  the  first  prisoners  taken  in  the  August 
advance  from  Halltown  were  Confederate  soldiers  threshing  wheat  in  barns. 


184  THE  SHENANDOAH    VALLEY. 

flour  had  been  obtained  from  the  Upper  Valley,  but  also  by 
details  sent  for  that  purpose.  The  horses  and  mules,  in- 
cluding the  cavalry  horses,  were  sustained  almost  entirely 
by  grazing."  Why  then  did  he  remain,  under  such  circum- 
stances, between  Winchester  and  Martinsburg  ?  We  must 
resort  again  to  his  own  explanation  :  "  I  knew  my  danger, 
but  I  could  occupy  no  other  position  that  would  have  en- 
abled me  to  accomplish  the  desired  object.  If  I  had  moved 
up  the  Valley  at  all,  I  could  not  have  stopped  short  of  New 
Market,  for  between  that  place  and  the  country  in  which  I 
was  there  was  no  forage  for  my  horses  ;  and  this  would  have 
enabled  the  enemy  to  resume  the  use  of  the  railroad  and 
canal,  and  return  all  the  troops  from  Grant's  army  to  him." 

Still,  Early  could  not  forever  hold  on  to  the  Baltimore 
and  Ohio  Railroad,  with  Sheridan's  strong  army  many  miles 
south  of  it,  threatening  his  rear.  Sooner  or  later,  he  must 
abandon  it.  The  railroad,  after  all,  was  but  one  of  several 
Union  lines  between  East  and  West,  and  holding  it  deprived 
him  of  the  same  opportunity  for  threatening  his  immediate 
adversary's  communications  that  the  latter  had  for  molesting 
his.  When  at  last  he  went  by  compulsion  to  Fisher's  Hill, 
it  was  with  a  force  too  broken  and  dispirited  to  hold  it. 

Writing  to  Lee  from  Port  Republic,  three  days  after  his 
second  discomfiture,  Early  used  the  following  language  : 

li  The  enemy's  immense  superiority  in  cavalry  and  the  inefficiency  of 
the  greater  part  of  mine  has  been  the  cause  of  all  my  disasters.  In  the 
affair  at  Fisher's  Hill  the  cavalry  gave  way,  but  it  was  flanked.  This 
would  have  been  remedied  if  the  troops  had  remained  steady,  but  a 
panic  seized  them  at  the  idea  of  being  flanked,  and,  without  being  de- 
feated, they  broke,  many  of  them  fleeing  shamefully.  The  artillery 
was  not  captured  by  the  enemy,  but  abandoned  by  the  infantry.  My 
troops  are  very  much  shattered,  the  men  very  much  exhausted,  and 
many  of  them  without  shoes." 


THE   BATTLE  OP  FISHER'S  HILL.  185 

Two  days  later,  the  27th,  Lee  replied  from  Petersburg  as 
follows  : 

"As  far  as  I  can  judge  at  this  distance,  you  have  operated  more  with 
divisions  than  with  your  concentrated  strength.  Circumstances  may 
have  rendered  it  necessary,  but  such  a  course  is  to  be  avoided  if  possi- 
ble. It  will  require  the  greatest  watchfulness,  the  greatest  promptness, 
and  the  most  untiring  energy  on  your  part  to  arrest  the  progress  of  the 
euemy  in  his  present  tide  of  success.  All  the  reserves  in  the  Valley 
have  been  ordered  to  you.  Breckenridge  will  join  you  or  co-operate,  as 
circumstances  will  permit,  with  all  his  force.  Rosser  left  this  morning 
for  Burkesville  (intersection  of  Danville  and  Southside  Railroads), 
where  he  will  shape  his  course  as  you  direct.  I  have  given  you  all  I 
can.  You  must  use  the  resources  you  have,  so  as  to  gain  success.  The 
enemy  must  be  defeated,  and  I  rely  upon  you  to  do  it.  I  will  endeavor 
to  have  shoes,  arms,  and  ammunition  supplied  you.  Set  all  your  offi- 
cers to  work  bravely  and  hopefully,  and  all  will  go  well." 

On  the  North  this  second  great  victory  had  an  effect  no 
less  cheering  than  the  first.  Grant  again  ordered  a  salute  of 
one  hundred  guns.  "Keep  on,"  he  said  to  Sheridan,  "and 
your  good  work  will  cause  the  fall  of  Richmond."  Stanton 
sent  orders  for  the  firing  of  one  hundred  guns  each  to  Wal- 
lace, Oadwalader,  Couch,  Heintzelman,  Hovey,  Burbridge, 
Rosecrans,  Pope,  Curtis,  Steele,  Washburne,  Rousseau,  Can- 
by,  Payne,  and  Brayman — a  salvo  of  fifteen  hundred  guns 
for  Fisher's  Hill. 


CHAPTEE  XI. 

PURSUING   EARLY    AND   LAYING  WASTE  THE  VALLEY. 

At  1  p.m.  of  the  23d,  the  day  following  the  battle  of 
Fisher's  Hill,  having  rested  after  the  hard  night's  pursuit, 
Sheridan's  infantry  moved  up  the  pike  from  Woodstock,  ex- 
cept Crook's  command,  which  was  lefi,  to  bury  the  dead  and 
care  for  the  wounded.  Early  thereupon  continued  his  re- 
treat from  the  Narrow  Passage  to  Mount  Jackson,  about 
half  way  to  New  Market.  There  his  main  body  halted,  while 
his  sick  and  the  small  part  of  his  wounded '  which  he  had 
brought  off  with  him  from  his  two  battles,  his  hospital 
stores,  and  his  trains — for  these  he  had  managed  to  save  at 
Fisher's  Hill — were  carried  farther  to  the  rear. 

But  the  Confederates  were  not  to  remain  long  at  Mount 
Jackson  ;  for  that  same  afternoon,  about  three  o'clock,  they 
were  attacked  by  Averell,  aided  by  Devin,  the  latter  having 
energetically  driven  in  the  Confederate  pickets  during  the 
morning,  and  being  already  engaged  when  Averell  at  last 
came  up.  Although  there  was  no  infantry  support,  since  the 
Sixth  aud  Nineteenth  Corps  had  been  compelled  to  halt  a 
mile  south  of  Edenburg  till  their  rations  could  be  brought 
up,  Early  abandoned  Mount  Jackson,  upon  this  vigorous 
demonstration,  and  retreated  across  the  North  Fork  of  the 


1  Sheridan  found  most  of  these  on  his  way  up  the  Valley,  the  greater  part  at 
Harrisonburg.  Early  also  abandoned  many  wagons  and  four  caissons  during  his 
retreat. 


PURSUING  EARLY.  187 

Shenandoah.  His  account  of  the  affair  is  as  follows  :  "  In 
the  afternoon,  Averell's  division  of  cavalry  came  up  in  pur- 
suit, and  after  some  heavy  skirmishing  was  driven  back.  I 
then  moved  to  Eude's  Hill,  between  Mount  Jackson  and  New 
Market." 

The  morning  of  the  24th,  the  Sixth  and  Nineteenth  Corps, 
with  the  cavalry,  occupied  Mt.  Jackson,  at  which  point  the 
Eighth,  after  a  long  march  from  Fisher's  Hill,  arrived  at 
night.  Early's  skirmishers  were  driven  through  the  town 
and  across  the  North  Fork  to  his  main  position  at  Eude's 
Hill  on  the  east  side.  Devin's  brigade  was  sent  to  gain  his 
right  flank,  and  Averell's  division,  now  under  Powell,1  to 
move  around  his  left,  while  the  infantry  marched  across  the 
North  Fork  on  the  bridge.  Wright's  advance  batteries  were 
very  soon  shelling  the  enemy's  lines  ;  but  when  Early,  from 
his  post  on  Eude's  Hill,  saw  these  preparations,  he  re- 
treated. His  retrograde  was  in  line  of  battle,  and  Sheridan 
closely  followed  him,  the  Sixth  Corps  on  the  left  of  the  pike 
and  the  Nineteenth  on  the  right,  with  Devin  in  advance. 
The  smooth  and  open  country  was  favorable  to  rapid  march- 
ing both  by  pursuers  and  pursued ;  but  Early's  advantage 
at  the  start  was  maintained.  Desperation  lent  wings  to  the 
heels  of  the  fugitives,  and  victory  lightened  the  footsteps  of 
those  in  chase.  One  stretch  of  thirteen  miles  was  made 
without  a  halt  by  the  infantry,  while  Taylor's  battery,  mov- 
ing with  Devin's  advance,  opened  on  the  enemy  whenever  he 
attempted  to  halt,  receiving  iron  missives  in  return.  The 
two  armies  hurried  through  New  Market,  near  which  place 


1  "I  have  relieved  Averell  from  his  command.  Instead  of  following  the  enemy 
when  he  was  broken  at  Fisher's  Hill  so  that  there  was  not  a  company  organiza- 
tion left,  he  went  into  camp,  and  let  me  pursue  the  enemy  for  a  distance  of  fif- 
teen miles  wi^h  infantry  during  the  night"  (Sheridan  to  Grant,  from  Harrison- 
burg, September  25th). 


188  THE  SHENANDOAH  VALLEY. 

De.vin  was  checked  for  a  moment  by  a  hot  fire,  but  soon  re- 
covered and  charged  through  the  town. 

About  half  a  dozen  miles  beyond  New  Market  the  road 
forks,  the  pike  keeping  on  to  Harrisonburg,  and  an  earth  road 
leading  more  to  the  east  through  Keezeltown  and  Cross 
Keys  to  Port  Eepublic.  Early  took  the  latter,  and  at  sunset 
halted  at  this  fork  in  order  to  protect  the  transfer  of  his 
trains  to  the  Keezeltown  road,  and  formed  line  of  battle, 
sending  out  skirmishers,  as  if  to  make  known  his  purpose  of 
securing  there  a  night's  bivouac.  The  result  was  some  skir- 
mishing, with  losses  on  both  sides  ;  but  at  length  Sheridan's 
leg-weary  men  went  into  camp,  nearly  within  range  of  Early's 
guns.  As  soon  as  the  darkness  covered  his  intent,  the  Con- 
federate general  quietly  put  five  miles  between  him  and  his 
pursuer  before  re-bivouacking,  so  as  to  have  a  safe  start  for 
the  next  day.  Through  the  night  of  the  24th  Early's  army 
remained  at  a  point  about  fourteen  miles  north  of  Port  Ee- 
public. During  that  day,  the  Second  Cavalry  Division, 
Powell's,  holding  the  Union  right,  had  driven  Lomax  rap- 
idly up  the  Middle  and  Back  roads,  west  of  the  Valley  pike, 
towards  Harrisonburg,  until,  says  Early,  Lomax  "  retired  to 
the  latter  place  in  considerable  disorder."  Powell  regained 
the  pike  near  Lacy's  Springs,  capturing  there  nine  wagons 
and  some  prisoners. 

The  morning  of  the  25th,  Early  resumed  his  retreat,  and, 
passing  through  Keezeltown,  marched  to  Port  Republic,  on 
the  tongue  of  land  formed  at  the  intersection  of  South  with 
Middle  River,  below  the  junction  of  the  latter  with  North 
River,  the  triple  stream  there  becoming  the  South  Eork  of 
the  Shenandoah.  But  he  did  not  pause  here  ;  for  he  had 
had  a  special  purpose  in  selecting  this  direction  for  his  re- 
treat, and  a  prospect  of  relief  in  his  trouble.  Two  days  be- 
fore the  battle  of  the  Opequon,  as  has  been  noted,  Lee,  fear- 


PURSUING  EARLY.  189 

ing  the  effect  of  the  withdrawal  of  Kershaw  from  Early,  had 
provided  for  his  return  ;  accordingly,  between  the  battles  at 
Winchester  and  Fisher's  Hill,  he  directed  that  Kershaw 
should  join  Early  from  Culpepper,  and  renewed  these  instruc- 
tions immediately  after  the  defeat  of  Fisher's  Hill.  This, 
then,  was  the  key  to  Early's  selection  of  the  Port  Bepublic 
road  for  retreat,  instead  of  the  pike  to  Harrisonburg,  where 
he  might  try  to  cover  Staunton.  He  needed  to  bear  east- 
ward toward  the  Blue  Bidge,  in  order  to  unite  with  Ker- 
shaw.1 He  accordingly  made  his  final  halt  between  Port 
Bepublic  and  Brown's  Gap,  in  front  of  and  covering  the  lat- 
ter. There,  the  25th,  the  cavalry  of  Lomax,  which  had  been 
driven  from  Mount  Jackson  to  Harrisonburg,  and  also  Fitz 
Lee's,  now  under  Wickham,  retreating  from  the  Luray  Val- 
ley, rejoined  the  infantry.  The  next  day  Kershaw  came  up 
from  Swift  Bun  Gap. 

Meanwhile,  the  morning  of  the  25th,  when  Early  withdrew 
to  Port  Bepublic,  Sheridan  marched  the  Sixth  and  Nine- 
teenth Corps  up  the  Valley  pike  to  Harrisonburg,  where 
they  arrived  at  4  p.m.,  while  the  Eighth  was  left  temporarily 
at  the  junction  of  the  Keezeltown  road  and  the  pike,  where 
the  forces  had  camped.  Torbert,  the  same  evening,  came 
into  Harrisonburg  with  the  divisions  of  Merritt  and  Wilson. 

1  "  Sheridan  is  in  Early's  front,  fortifying.  Wilson  is  moving  up  Luray  Valley  ; 
Lee's  division  is  opposed  to  him,  but  may  be  too  weak.  Move  Kershaw  to  Gor- 
donsville  or  Charlottesville,  as  occasion  requires,  or  to  Swift  Run  Q-ap  "  (Lee  to 
Anderson,  September  22d). 

"Early  has  again  met  with  a  reverse,  falling  back  to  New  Market.  Send  Ker- 
shaw's division,  with  a  battalion  of  artillery,  through  Swift  Run  Gap  to  report  to 
him  at  once.  You  had  best  report  here  in  person  with  your  staff,  according  to 
previous  orders"  (Lee  to  Anderson,  September  23d).  That  same  day,  Early, 
then  at  Mount  Jackson,  had  suggested  this  line  of  approach  :  "  Kershaw's  division 
had  better  be  sent  to  my  aid  through  Swift  Run  Gap,  at  once." 

"  General  Early  reports  enemy  advanced  against  him  on  24th  at  New  Market, 
when  he  fell  back  to  Pore  Republic,  to  unite  with  Kershaw.  On  the  20th,  the 
enemy  advanced  toward  Harrisonburg'"  (Lee  to  Seddon,  September  26th). 


190  THE  SHENANDOAH  VALLEY. 

After  the  cavalry  action  at  Millford,  the  22d,  Early  had  sent 
in  haste  for  one  brigade  of  Wickkarn's  force  to  join  him  at 
New  Market,  through  the  Massanutten  Gap.  Torbert,  using 
this  advantage,  fell  upon  the  other  brigade,  Payne's,  drove 
it  from  Millford,  and  compelled  it  to  retreat  again  near  Luray, 
Custer  capturing  70  prisoners.  Thence,  crossing  through 
Massanutten  Gap  to  New  Market,  he  proceeded  up  the  pike 
to  Harrisonburg,  while  Powell  had  gone  forward  to  Mount 
Crawford. 

Having  all  his  cavalry  with  him  again,  at  and  near  Harri- 
sonburg, Sheridan,  the  26th,  sent  Merritt  with  a  brigade  to 
strengthen  Devin  at  Port  Eepublic,  while  he  directed  Tor- 
bert, with  Wilson's  division  and  Lowell's  brigade,  to  proceed 
through  Staunton  to  Waynesboro,  and  there  destroy  the 
Virginia  Central  Railroad  bridge  over  the  South  River.  Each 
officer  went  on  his  errand,  and  Merritt,  whose  demonstra- 
tions near  Port  Republic  served  to  divert  attention  from 
Torbert,  after  driving  back  Confederate  cavalry,  reported 
himself  checked  by  infantry — Kershaw's  on  its  way  to  Brown's 
Gap.  Some  skirmishing  near  the  latter  point,  in  which  ar- 
tillery was  used,  indicated  that  Early  was  disposed  to  halt 
and  make  a  stand. 

Here,  then,  in  front  of  Brown's  Gap,  with  the  Union  army 
at  Harrisonburg,  the  long  retreat  of  Early  came  to  an  end. 
He  had  received  reinforcements  that  largely  repaired  his 
losses  in  battle,  and  the  very  morning  after  their  arrival 
sought  to  retrieve  his  fortunes.  His  first  step  was  to  drive 
Merritt  across  the  South  Fork  at  Port  Republic,  where  he 
encamped,  as  if  to  make  this  a  base  of  operations  ;  but  there 
learning  that  Torbert  was  threatening  Staunton  and  Waynes- 
boro, lie  hastily  quitted  Port  Republic  wich  his  whole  force, 
at  dawn  of  the  2Sth.     Wickham,  with  his  own  brigade,  was 


PURSUING  EARLY.  191 

hurried  up  South  Biver  near  the  mountain,  to  endeavor  to 
reach  Bockfish  Gap  before  Torbert's  arrival ;  the  infantry 
followed  in  two  columns,  one,  consisting  of  Pegram,  Whar- 
ton, and  Bamseur,  guarding  the  trains,  while  the  other, 
composed  of  Kershaw,  Gordon,  and  the  artillery,  moved  on 
the  right  through  Mount  Meridian,  Piedmont,  and  New 
Hope.  McCausland's  brigade,  now  under  Ferguson,  held 
Brown's  Gap,  and  Lomax,  strengthened  by  Payne,  watched 
the  right  flank  and  rear.  The  reason  of  this  careful  adjust- 
ment was  that  Early  was  moving  over  an  area,  in  which  he 
had  the  Blue  Ridge  on  his  left,  the  river  on  his  right,  strong 
hostile  cavalry  forces  in  front  and  rear,  and  the  main  army 
of  his  antagonist  on  his  right  and  rear  at  Harrisonburg. 

Torbert,  having  destroyed  at  Staunton,  arms,  ammunition, 
tents,  hay,  harness,  wagons,  and  provisions,  and  captured  57 
prisoners,  had  moved  to  Waynesboro,  destroying  the  track 
on  the  way,  and  also  burning  the  bridge  over  Christian's 
Creek,  twelve  miles  southeast.  He  found  two  companies  of 
reserves,  from  Staunton  and  Charlottesville,  with  two  guns 
in  position  at  Bockfish  Gap,  protecting  the  railroad  tunnel 
through  the  Blue  Bidge.  His  working  parties  were  busily 
engaged  in  tearing  up  and  throwing  into  the  river  the  iron 
railroad  bridge — the  station  with  a  neighboring  tannery  and 
its  contents  being  already  burned — when  Wickham,  hurry- 
ing forward,  opened  on  them  with  his  guns  from  a  neigh- 
boring ridge.  Pegram  soon  joined  Wickham.  Early's  whole 
army  thus  approaching,  Torbert  withdrew  to  Spring  Hill, 
on  the  Back  road  between  Staunton  and  Harrisonburg, 
and  thence  returned,  the  29th,  to  Bridgewater,  on  the  North 
Biver. 

Sheridan's  brilliant  successes  had  made  him  confident, 
but  not  careless.  Even  before  reaching  Harrisonburg  he  had 


192  THE  SHENANDOAH  VALLEY. 

notified  the  Lieutenant-General  of  the  extreme  difficulty  of 
maintaining  so  long  a  line  of  supply.  When  Grant,  after 
Fisher's  Hill,  wrote  "Keep  on  and  your  good  work  will 
cause  the  fall  of  Kichmond,"  Sheridan  answered,  from  New 
Market,  "I  am  now  eighty  miles  from  Martinsburg,  and  find 
it  exceedingly  difficult  to  supply  this  army.  The  engage- 
ments of  Winchester  and  Fisher's  Hill  broke  up  my  original 
plan  of  pushing  up  the  Valley  with  a  certain  amount  of  sup- 
plies and  then  returning.  There  is  not  sufficient  in  the  Val- 
ley, to  live  off  the  country."  Grant  rejoined,  "  Your  victories 
have  caused  the  greatest  consternation.  If  you  can  possibly 
subsist  your  army  to  the  front  for  a  few  days  more,  do  it, 
and  make  a  great  effort  to  destroy  the  roads  about  Char- 
lottesville, and  the  canal  whenever  your  cavalry  can  reach 
it."  He  then  told  Halleck  to  see  that  the  railroad  was  re- 
paired toward  Sheridan,  even  if  troops  were  removed  from 
Washington  to  guard  the  construction.  "  After  reaching 
Manassas  Junction  I  would  like  Sheridan  to  decide  which 
road  should  be  opened.  If  he  moves — as  I  expected  him — 
to  Charlottesville,  the  road  to  Culpepper  would  be  the  one  to 
repair."  Halleck,  accordingly,  the  28th,  wrote  to  Sheridan 
that  "  General  Grant  telegraphs  that  he  expects  you  will  be 
able  to  push  forward  to  Staunton  or  Charlottesville ; "  and 
the  same  day  Sheridan  received  Grant's  letter. 

The  night  of  the  28th,  Sheridan  sent  orders  to  Merritt — 
who  that  morning  had  been  instructed  to  go  to  Port  Eepublic 
and  open  communication  with  Torbert — to  leave  only  small 
forces  at  Port  Republic  and  Swift  Run  Gap,  and  proceed 
with  the  rest  of  his  command,  then  comprising  two  divisions 
of  cavalry,  to  Piedmont,  and  to  swing  around  from  that  point 
toward  Staunton,  "burning  forage,  mills,  and  such  other 
property  as  might  be  serviceable  to  the  rebel  army  or  Con- 
federacy," and  on  his  return  to  go  into  camp  on  the  left  of 


PURSUING   EARLY.  193 

the  Sixth  and  Nineteenth  Corps,  which  were  ordered  forward 
from  Harrisonburg  to  Mount  Crawford  in  support  of  his  and 
Torbert's  movements.  This  instruction  was  thoroughly  exe- 
cuted the  next  day,  and  Torbert,  who  had  received  like 
orders,  also  executed  his  the  same  day,  starting  for  Bridge- 
water.  The  whole  region  which,  as  Sheridan  says,  had 
abounded  in  food  and  forage  as  far  up  as  Staunton,  and  had 
hitherto  enabled  Early's  army  to  subsist,  from  that  moment 
became  desolate,  and  of  comparatively  little  value  to  Early, 
should  he  return  to  collect  supplies  there ;  and  he  wrote 
that  night  in  reply  to  Grant's  letter  as  follows  : 

"  This  morning  I  sent  around  Merritt's  and  Custer's  divisions,  via 
Piedmont,  to  burn  grain,  etc.,  pursuant  to  your  instructions.  My  im- 
pression is  that  most  of  the  troops  which  Early  had  left  passed  through 
the  mountains  to  Charlottesville.  Kershaw's  division  came  to  his  as- 
sistance, and,  I  think,  passed  along  the  west  base  of  the  mountain  to 
Waynesboro.  The  advance  of  my  infantry  is  at  Mount  Crawford,  eight 
miles  south  of  Harrisonburg.  I  will  go  on  and  clear  out  the  Valley.  I 
am  getting  from  25  to  40  prisoners  daily,  who  come  in  from  the  moun- 
tains on  each  side  and  deliver  themselves  up.  From  the  most  reliable 
accounts  Early's  army  was  completely  broken  up,  and  is  dispirited.  It 
will  be  exceedingly  difficult  for  me  to  carry  the  infantry  column  over 
the  mountain  and  strike  at  the  Central  road.  I  cannot  accumulate 
sufficient  rations  to  do  so,  and  think  it  best  to  take  some  position  near 
Front  Royal,  and  operate  with  the  cavalry  and  infantry.  I  will,  how- 
ever, stay  here  for  a  few  days.  .  .  .  The  country  from  here  to 
Staunton  was  abundantly  supplied  with  forage  and  grain." 

The  next  day  the  two  infantry  corps  moved  back  from 
Mount  Crawford  to  Harrisonburg,  and  Merritt,  the  day  fol- 
lowing, reoccupied  Port  Eepublic  ;  while  Early,  having  re- 
mained two  days  at  Waynesboro,  guarding  the  repair  of  the 
bridge,  which  Torbert  had  very  seriously  damaged,  now,  the 
1st  of  October,  moved  his  army  across  the  country  to  Mount 
XI.— 9 


194  THE  SHENANDOAH   VALLEY. 

Sidney,  on  the  Valley  pike,  and  took  position  between  that 
place  and  North  River,  about  half  way  between  Stannton 
and  Harrisonburg.1 

Here  the  opposing  forces  remained  quiet  during  four  or 
five  days,  Early  awaiting  the  arrival  of  Eosser's  brigade 
of  cavalry,  which,  as  Lee  had  informed  him,  started  from 
Petersburg  September  27th,  to  reinforce  him. 

Sheridan,  as  has  been  noted,  was  meanwhile  shaping  his 
movements  for  a  return  down  the  Valley  ;  for  he  was  opposed 
to  the  march  against  Charlottesville  on  military  grounds,  and 
had  considered  it  better  to  put  the  upper  part  of  the  Valley 
beyond  the  pale  of  military  occupation.  "  The  difficulty," 
he  wrote  to  Grant,  "  of  transporting  this  army  through  the 
mountain  passes  on  to  the  railroad  at  Charlottesville  is  such 
that  I  regard  it  as  impracticable  with  my  present  means  of 
transportation.  The  rebels  have  given  up  the  Valley,  except 
Waynesboro,  which  has  been  occupied  by  them  since  my 
cavalry  was  there.  I  think  that  the  best  policy  will  be  to  let 
the  burning  of  the  crops  of  the  Valley  be  the  end  of  this 

1  This  march  from  Wa;  nesboro  across  to  the  Valley  pike  below  Staunton  was 
one  of  the  grounds  assigned  by  Governor  William  Smith  of  Virginia  for  his 
request,  made  through  Lee,  that  Early  should  be  superseded.  Smith  quoted  a 
letter  which  he  had  received  from  an  officer  in  Early "s  army,  dated  from  Mount 
Sidney,  October  2d,  running  as  follows :  "  We  left  Waynesboro  yesterday  at  8  a.m. 
in  the  rain,  and  marched  all  day  through  the  hardest,  coldest,  and  bleakest  storm 
of  the  season  ;  winter  has  few  more  severe  days.  .  .  .  Unless  it  was  impera- 
tive it  was  cruel  and  injudicious — cruel,  because  a  great  many  of  the  command  are 
shoeless  and  without  blankets,  and  injudicious,  because  the  Quartermaster  states 
that  shoes  enough  to  supply  the  army  were  expected  at  Waynesboro.  .  .  .  The 
army  once  believed  him  a  safe  commander,  and  felt  that  they  could  trust  tj  his 
caution,  but  unfortunately  this  has  been  proven  to  be  a  delusion."  Smith  alleged 
various  other  grounds  of  complaint  against  Early,  asking  that  Breclienridge 
should  be  appointed  to  succeed  him.  Lee  answered,  "  As  far  as  I  have  been 
able  to  judge  at  this  distance,  he  [Early]  has  conducted  the  military  operations  of 
the  Valley  well."  Smith  rejoined,  reiterating  his  complaints,  but  Lee  again  said, 
'•So  far  as  my  information  extends.  General  Early  has  conducted  his  operations 
with  judgment,  and,  until  his  late  reverses,  rendered  very  valuable  services  con- 
sidering the  means  at  his  disposal." 


PURSUING  EARLY.  195 

campaign,  and  let  some  of  this  army  go  somewhere  else." 
This  despatch  was  written  the  morning  of  October  1st,  when 
Early's  troops  were  still  at  Waynesboro,  as  it  stated.  The 
evening  of  the  same  day,  when  also  Early's  new  position  had 
not  been  made  known,  Sheridan  wrote  again  : 

"  My  judgment  is  that  it  would  be  best  to  terminate  this  campaign 
by  the  destruction  of  the  crops,  etc.,  in  this  Valley,  and  the  transfer  of 
the  troops  to  the  armies  operating  against  Richmond.  If  the  Orange 
and  Alexandria  Railroad  is  opened  it  will  take  an  army  corps  to  protect 
it,  as  there  is  no  enemy  in  the  Valley  to  operate  against.  Early  is  with- 
out doubt  fortifying  at  Charlottesville,  holding  Rockfish  Gap.  It  is 
no  easy  matter  to  pass  through  mountain  gaps  and  attack  Charlottes- 
ville, hauling  supplies  through  difficult  passes  fourteen  miles  in  length, 
and  with  a  line  of  communication  from  one  hundred  and  thirty-five  to 
one  hundred  and  forty-five  miles  in  length,  without  the  organization  of 
supply  trains  and  all  the  appointments  of  an  army  making  a  permanent 
advance.  At  present  we  are  organized  for  a  raid  up  the  Valley,  with 
no  trains  except  the  corps  trains.  All  the  regimental  trains  had  to  be 
used  as  supply  wagons  to  subsist  us  as  far  as  this  place,  and  can't  do  it 
at  that.  I  am  ready  and  willing  to  cross  the  Blue  Ridge,  but  know, 
from  present  indications,  that  the  enemy  will  strongly  fortify  at  Char- 
lottesville and  Gordonsville,  and  that  these  places  cannot  be  taken 
without  the  expenditure  of  a  largely  superior  force  to  keep  open  the 
line  of  communication.  With  my  present  means  I  cannot  accumulate 
supplies  enough  to  carry  me  through  to  the  Orange  and  Alexandria 
Railroad." 

This  letter  was  received  by  Grant  the  3d  of  October,  and 
he  immediately  replied  as  follows :  "  Yon  may  take  up  such 
position  in  the  Valley  as  you  think  can  and  ought  to  be  held, 
and  send  all  the  force  not  required  for  this  immediately 
here.  Leave  nothing  for  the  subsistence  of  an  army  on  any 
ground  you  abandon  to  the  enemy.  I  will  direct  the  rail- 
road to  be  pushed  toward  Front  Royal,  so  that  you  may  send 
your  troops  back  that  way.     Keep  all  of  Crook's  forces  and 


196  THE  SHENANDOAH  VALLEY. 

the  new  troops  that  have  been  sent  to  you."  '  This  acquies- 
cence in  the  wishes  of  Sheridan  indicated  a  cordial  appre- 
ciation of  services  which  entitled  him,  in  a  case  fairly  ad- 
mitting of  doubt  and  an  intelligent  difference  of  opinion,  to 
choose  his  own  way  for  ending  his  campaign. 

Up  to  that  time  exertions  had  been  made  both  to  forward 
supplies  to  Sheridan  for  the  proposed  march  to  Charlottes- 
ville, and  to  repair  the  Orange  and  Alexandria  Railroad 
toward  Culpepper,  so  that  he  might  use  and  hold  it.  By  the 
1st  of  October,  a  long  wagon  train,  loaded  with  supplies,  was 
close  upon  him  and  within  reach ;  the  same  day  a  train  of 
over  two  hundred  additional  wagons  left  Martinsburg,  and 
was  shortly  after  sent  with  a  guard  of  1,500  men  from  Ed- 
wards' post  at  Winchester ;  and  a  third  train,  still  larger,  was 
ordered  to  go  to  the  front  two  days  later.  Meanwhile,  Ed- 
wards wrote  to  Stevenson  that  he  learned  from  General 
Wilson,'2  who  left  Sheridan's  front  the  1st,  that  the  army  was 
well  supplied.  But,  despite  these  preparations,  in  reality 
the  Shenandoah  Valley  was  at  this  time  swarming  with 
men  of  Mosby's  stamp,  who  were  cutting  off  small  parties 
of  troops  and  threatening  trains  ;  and  it  was  perfectly  ob- 
vious that,  whatever  quantities  of  supplies  were  sent  for- 
ward to  Sheridan,  it  would  be  very  difficult  to  maintain  so 
long  a  line.  A  picket  post  of  150  cavalry  at  Mount  Jackson 
about  this  time  was  captured  and  sent  back  to  Winchester, 
some  or  all  of  them  paroled  by  the  Seventh  Virginia  cav- 

1  Another  despatch  of  Grant's,  of  this  same  date,  has  the  same  bearing  :  "  A 
despatch  is  just  received  from  Sheridan  up  to  the  1st  instant.  The  enemy  have 
entirely  left  his  front  and  gone  to  Charlottesville  or  Gordonsville.  He  cannot 
reach  them  ttere,  so  that  we  may  now  confidently  expect  the  return  here  of  at 
least  Kershaw's  division  and  Rosser's  cavalry  It  will  require  very  close  watch- 
ing to  prevent  being  surprised  by  the  reinforcement." 

2  This  officer  was  on  his  way  to  Tennessee,  having  been  selected  as  chief  of 
Gen.  Thomas's  cavalry  in  the  Nashville  campaign.  General  Custer  then  received 
General  Wilson's  division. 


PURSUING  EARLY.  197 

airy.  Stevenson  wrote  to  Stanton  that  one  train  of  five  hun- 
dred and  sixty-one  wagons,  which  was  to  go  to  Sheridan, 
would  have  a  guard  of  2,000  men,  "  unless  this  should  be 
too  few." 

Meanwhile  the  work  on  the  railroad  toward  Charlottes- 
ville had  of  course  been  abandoned.  Halleck,  writing  to 
Grant  the  2d  of  October,  that  he  inferred,  from  Sheridan's 
despatch  of  three  days  before,  that  he  would  not  go  to  Char- 
lottesville, reported  that  the  construction  party  on  the 
Orange  road  was  between  Manassas  Junction  and  the  Rap- 
pahannock, and  asked  whether  it  would  not  be  better  to 
change  it  over  to  the  Manassas  Gap  Railroad,  leading  by  Pied- 
mont to  Front  Royal.  This  Grant  at  once  approved.  The 
next  day  Halleck  received  a  despatch  from  Sheridan,  dated  the 
1st,  giving  the  situation  of  affairs  as  then  reported  to  him  : 

"All  the  crops,  mills,  etc.,  have  been  destroyed  from  Staunton  to 
Mount  Crawford,  which  is  my  present  front.  I  will  make  another  raid 
with  cavalry  and  infantry  to  Staunton  and  Lexington.  Early  was 
driven  out  of  the  Valley,  and  only  saved  himself  by  getting  through 
Brown's  Gap  in  the  night,  and  has  probably  taken  position  at  Char- 
lottesville, and  will  fortify,  holding  Waynesboro  and  Rockfish  Gap." 

Sheridan  added  that  he  had  advised  Grant  to  end  the  cam- 
paign with  his  destruction  of  the  crops,  and  the  transfer  of  the 
Sixth  and  Nineteenth  Corps  to  Richmond  :  "  With  Crook's 
force  the  Valley  can  be  held.  If  this  course  is  not  deemed 
best,  then  the  Orange  and  Alexandria  should  be  opened ;  if  it 
is,  it  will  require  an  army  corps  to  protect  it.  This  force 
cannot  be  furnished  from  this  army,  and  wherever  the  troops 
come  from,  it  will  be  a  loss  of  that  number  of  men  from  the 
fighting  force.  There  is  no  objective  point,  except  Lynch- 
burg, and  it  cannot  be  invested  on  the  line  of  this  Valley, 
and  the  investing  army  supported."     Halleck  answered  that 


198  THE  SHENANDOAH   VALLEY. 

Grant  had  now  changed  the  workmen  to  the  Manassas  Gap 
road  for  Front  Koyal.1  Thornton's  and  Chester  Gaps,"  con- 
tinued Halleck,  "  should  therefore  be  occupied,  so  as  to  cover 
that  place." 

But  this,  also,  did  not  exactly  meet  the  judgment  of  Sher- 
idan, who  wrote  to  Grant  as  follows  : 

"I  would  have  preferred  sending  troops  to  you  by  the  Baltimore  and 
Ohio  Railroad.  It  would  have  been  the  quickest  and  most  concealed 
way  of  sending  them.  The  keeping  open  of  the  road  to  Front  Royal 
will  require  large  guards  to  protect  it  against  a  very  small  number  of 
partisan  troops  ;  it  also  obliges  me  to  have  a  pontoon  train,  if  it  is  to 
be  kept  open,  to  bridge  the  Shenandoah,  to  keep  up  communication 
with  Winchester  ;  however,  in  a  day  or  two  I  can  tell  better.  I  sent  a 
party  of  cavalry  through  Thornton  Gap,  and  directed  the  balance  of 
the  division  of  cavalry  which  I  have  in  the  Luray  Valley  to  take  post 
at  Millwood,  occupying  Chester  Gap  and  Front  Royal.  Thornton  Gap 
I  have  given  up  as  of  no  value.  With  this  disposition  of  forces  I  will 
move  infantry  round  the  mountains,  via  Strasburg,  as  soon  as  pos- 
sible." 

Grant's  consent  to  Sheridan's  plan  of  ending  the  campaign 
reached  him  October  5th,  and  the  next  morning  the  col- 
umns were  in  motion  down  the  Valley.  Following  in  the 
rear  of  the  infantry,  the  cavalry  stretched  across  from  the 

i  "My  intelligence  from  telegraphic  operators  is  that  the  Front  Royal  road  is 
very  little  broken,  and  might  be  put  in  running  order  before  Sheridan  could  get 
his  Sixth  and  Nineteenth  there,  say  in  three  days.  With  a  rapid  accumulation 
of  rolling  stock  of  the  Government  and  Baltimore  road  they  eould  be  moved  at 
once  to  Alexandria,  and  with  an  adequate  supply  of  water  transportation  reach 
you  by  Saturday  morning,  if  you  conclude  to  adopt  Sheridan's  suggestion  of 
sending  them  to  you"  (Stanton  to  Grant,  October  3d). 

"  I  will  follow  General  Sheridan's  suggestion  of  bringing  the  Sixth  and  Nine- 
teenth corps  here,  and  yours  as  to  bringing  them  by  rail  from  Front  Royal  " 
(Grant  to  Halleck,  October  3d,  7  p.m.)  .  Stanton  also  informed  Sheridan  that  the 
railroad  was  within  sixteen  miles  of  Front  Royal,  and  would  be  at  Piedmont, 
only  fourteen  miles  distant,  by  Wednesday  noon,  with  transportation  enough  there 
for  the  two  corps  to  go  directly  to  Alexandria,  should  he  choose  that  route  and 
march  them  to  Piedmont. 


PURSUING  EARLY.  199 

Blue  Ridge  to  the  North  Mountain,  and  burned  the  mills, 
barns,  and  crops,  sparing,  however,  the  dwellings,  except  in 
one  section,  as  explained  in  the  following  despatch  sent  from 
Woodstock  by  Sheridan  to  Grant  : 

"I  commenced  moving  back  from  Port  Republic,  Mount  Crawford, 
Bridgewater,  and  Harrisonburg,  yesterday  morning.  The  grain  and 
forage  in  advance  of  these  points  had  previously  been  destroyed.  In 
moving  back  to  this  point  the  whole  country,  from  the  Blue  Ridge  to 
the  North  Mountain,  has  been  made  entirely  untenable  for  a  rebel 
army.  I  have  destroyed  over  2,000  barns  filled  with  wheat,  hay,  and 
farming  implements  ;  over  70  mills  filled  with  flour  and  wheat ;  have 
driven  in  front  of  the  army  over  four  hard  of  stock,  and  have  killed 
and  issued  to  the  troops  not  less  than  3,000  sheep.  This  destruction 
embraces  the  Luray  Valley  and  Litcle  Fort  Valley,  as  well  as  the  main 
Valley.  A  large  number  of  horses  have  been  obtained,  a  proper  esti- 
mate of  which  I  cannot  now  make. 

"  Lieutenant  John  R.  Meigs,  my  engineer  officer,  was  murdered  l  be- 
yond Harrisonburg,  near  Dayton.  For  this  atrocious  act  all  the  houses 
within  an  area  of  five  miles  were  burned.  Since  I  came  into  the  Val- 
ley from  Harper's  Ferry,  every  train,  every  small  party,  and  every 
straggler  has  been  bushwhacked  by  people,  many  of  whom  have  protec- 
tion papers  from  commanders  who  have  been  hitherto  in  that  Valley. 

"  From  the  vicinity  of  Harrisonburg  over  four  hundred  wagon-loads  of 
refugees  have  been  sent  back  to  Martinsburg.  Most  of  the  people  were 
Dunkers,  and  had  been  conscripted.  The  people  here  are  getting  sick 
of  the  war.  Heretofore  they  have  had  no  reason  to  complain,  because 
they  have  been  living  in  great  abundance. 

"  I  have  not  been  followed  by  the  enemy  to  this  point,  with  the  ex- 
ception of  a  small  force  of  the  rebel  cavalry  that  showed  themselves 
some  distance  behind  my  rear-guard  to-day. 

' '  A  party  of  one  hundred  of  the  Eighth  Ohio  Cavalry,  which  I  had 
stationed  at  the  bridge  over  the  North  Shenandoah,  near  Mount  Jack- 


1  It  was  ascertained  after  the  war  that  this  gallant  youth,  a  soldier  of  brilliant 
gifts  and  promise,  the  son  of  the  Quartermaster-General,  fell  at  the  hands  of  an 
enlisted  Confederate  soldier,  of  Wickham's  brigade,  engaged  in  scouting ;  but  the 
belief  at  the  time  was  the  one  stated  in  Sheridan's  telegram. 


200  THE  SHENANDOAH  VALLEY. 

• 

son,  was  attacked  by  McNeil,  with  seventeen  men,  while  they  were 
asleep,  and  the  whole  party  dispersed  or  captured.  I  think  that  they 
will  all  turn  up.  I  learn  that  fifty-six  of  them  had  reached  Winches- 
ter. McNeil  was  mortally  wounded,  and  fell  into  our  hands.  This 
was  fortunate,  as  he  was  the  most  daring  and  dangerous  of  all  the 
bushwhackers  in  this  section  of  the  country.     .     .     . " 

Huge  clouds  of  smoke,  filling  the  Valley  from  one  moun- 
tain wall  to  the  other,  and  follow  ing  down  the  army,  attested 
the  thoroughness  with  which  this  work  was  done.  Its  first 
effect  was  soon  visible  in  the  lack  of  subsistence  for  Earlv's 
army ;  but  there  was  another  important  effect,  not  imme- 
diately obvious.  This  devastation  of  the  crops  reduced  the 
strength  of  the  Confederate  forces  by  giving  to  some  whose 
families  were  in  want  a  plausible  ground  for  deserting  the 
service.  There  was  an  urgent  appeal  from  the  Harrison- 
burg region  for  exemption  from  conscription  on  the  ground 
of  Sheridan's  ravages.  "Many  who  are  liable,"  wrote  Mr. 
Wartmann,  presiding  justice  of  Eockingham  County,  "are 
without  a  pound  of  meat,  bread,  or  anything  to  live  on,  to 
say  nothing  of  fire-wood.  It  will  require  the  daily  and 
hourly  exertions  of  the  poor  and  those  who  have  been  burnt 
out  to  procure  a  scanty  subsistence  to  sustain  life  during  the 
winter.  When  the  soldier  now  in  the  army  learns  that  his 
neighbor,  on  whom  his  family  have  leaned  for  support  dur- 
ing all  this  war,  is  himself  called  into  service,  and  his  fam- 
ily (his  wife  and  little  children  at  home)  are  sure  to  suffer, 
he  will  become  uneasy  in  his  place,  and  will  weigh  the  duty  he 
owes  his  family ;  and  what  the  promptings  of  nature  would 
be  is  not  difficult  to  determine.  .  .  .  We  have  no  slave 
labor,  and  this  call  taxes  our  principal  working  force. 
What  is  to  become  of  a  corn  crop  ?  What  is  to  become  of 
any  spring  crop  ?  " 


CHAPTEE  XII. 

THE  BATTLE  OF  TOM'S  BROOK. 

As  soon  as  Early  found  that  Sheridan  was  moving  down  the 
Valley,  he  pushed  his  forces  in  pursuit.1 

The  positions  of  the  two  armies  during  the  four  days  pre- 
vious bad  been  as  follows  :  Sheridan's  infantry  at  Harrison- 
burg, and  his  cavalry,  except  Powell,  seven  miles  beyond,  at 
Mount  Crawford ;  Early's  infantry  at  Mount  Sidney,  seven 
miles  above  Mount  Crawford,  with  his  cavalry  close  to  Tor- 
bert's.2  There  had  been  skirmishing  along  the  North  Kiver, 
both  at  Mount  Crawford  and  at  Bridgewater;  while  the  2d 
of  October  a  Confederate  reconnoissance  had  been  repulsed. 
Powell,  moving  back  to  Luray,  had  thence  sent  Major  Fara- 
bee,  First  Virginia  Cavalry,  to  destroy  the  railroad  bridge  at 
the  Rapidan,  from  which  exploit  he  returned  by  way  of  Cul- 
pepper and  Sperryville.  It  was  the  morning  of  October  6th 
when  Sheridan  left  Harrisonburg,  and  that  night  he  camped 
at  Rude's  Hill. 

Reinforced  by  Kershaw,  Early  was  already  stronger  than  at 
any  time  since  his  defeat  at  Winchester,  and  his  aggressive 


1  "General  Early  reports  Sheridan's  whole  force  commenced  retiring  down  the 
Valley  the  night  of  the  5th.  Our  troops  followed  them  through  Harrisonburg  the 
next  day  "  (Lee  to  Seddon,  October  7th). 

2  "General  Early  moved  to  the  vicinity  of  Mount  Crawford  on  the  1st  instant. 
The  enemy  is  north  of  North  River,  his  cavalry  occupying  the  north  banks  of  that 
stream"  (Lee  to  Seddon,  October  4th). 

9*  A 


202  THE  SHENANDOAH  VALLEY. 

instincts  were  again  alert.'  But  lie  had  learned  the  need  of 
circumspection,  and  patiently  awaited  the  arrival  of  Eosser, 
who,  besides  bringing  his  brigade  from.  Petersburg,  was  to 
take  command  of  Fitz  Lee's  division,  in  place  of  Wickkam. 
Eosser  drew  up  October  5th,  and  Early  had  prepared  to" 
move  out  toward  Sheridan  at  Harrisonburg,  when  the  next 
morning  his  pickets  brought  him  word  that  the  Union  army 
was  retiring. 

Eosser  came  to  his  task  with  fresh  energy.  His  brigade, 
it  is  true,  had  been  worn  down  by  a  hard  march  from  Eich- 
mond,  during  which  the  men  got  little  to  eat,  and  the  horses 
needed  rest ;  but  at  least  it  was  full  of  confidence.  Eager 
to  redeem  the  cavalry  mishaps  in  the  Valley,  he  instantly 
pressed  Custer  on  the  Back  and  Middle  roads,  attacking 
him  at  Brock's  Gap,  through  which  Dry  Eiver  enters  the 
North  Fork,  about  twenty -seven  miles  from  "Woodstock  ;  and 
Lomax  moved  down  the  Valley  pike  against  Merritt.  This 
officer  camped  the  following  day  within  two  miles  of  Wood- 
stock, and  Custer  near  Columbia  Furnace ;  "the  rear-guard  of 
this  column,"  says  Torbert,  referring  to  Custer's,  "  was  fight- 
ing all  day."  Powell  in  the  Luray  Valley  kept  his  relative 
position  with  the  other  forces  by  moving  down  to  Millford. 
Early's  infantry  arrived  that  night,  the  7th,  at  New  Market, 
and  Sheridan's  the  next  day  at  Strasburg,  while  Merritt, 
covering  the  rear,  reached  Tom's  Brook,  which  crosses  the 
Valley  pike,  three  miles  south  of  the  town,  at  the  foot  of 
Bound  Top.  Thence  Torbert  hurried  him  back  to  the  aid 
of  Custer,  whose  rear-guard  had  been  harassed  throughout 
the  march. 

Sheridan,  resenting  this  boldness  of  an  enemy  so  lately 

1  Sheridan  also  had  received  some  reinforcements,  but  of  much  less  consequence  : 
"  About  5,000  men  leave  here  to  day  for  General  Sheridan.  Send  them  forward 
with  trains  "  (Halleck  to  Stevenson,  September  23d). 


THE  BATTLE  OF  TOM'S  BROOK.        203 

routed,  directed  Torbert  to  start  out  at  daylight  and  "  whip 
the  rebel  cavalry  or  get  whipped  himself."  Torbert  was  in 
the  saddle  at  dawn  of  the  9th,  and,  continuing  the  disposi- 
tions of  the-  day  before,  Merritt  was  to  move  Lowell  up  the 
pike,  the  Second  Brigade  on  his  right,  and  the  First  on  the 
right  of  the  Second,  connecting  with  Custer.  A  spirited 
fight  of  two  hours  ended  in  the  rout  both  of  Lomax  and 
Eosser,  Merritt  chasing  the  former  twenty  miles  up  the  pike 
to  Mount  Jackson,  and  Custer  driving  Rosser  on  the  Back 
road  to  Columbia  Furnace.  Merritt  captured  five  cavalry 
guns  and  Custer  six — as  fair  a  division  of  spoils  as  was  pos- 
sible with  an  odd  number  of  pieces  to  share.  About  330 
prisoners  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  victors,  together  with 
ambulances,  caissons,  a  battery  forge,  the  headquarters 
wagons  of  Rosser,  Lomax,  Wickham,  and  Pollard,  and  other 
wagons,  forty-seven  in  number — in  brief,  almost  "  every- 
thing on  wheels." 

Of  this  engagement  Torbert  enthusiastically  reported  that 
"  the  cavalry  totally  covered  themselves  with  glory,  and 
added  to  their  long  list  of  victories  the  most  brilliant  one  of 
them  all,  and  the  most  decisive  the  country  has  ever  wit- 
nessed." Sheridan  promptly  sent  the  tidings  to  Grant :  "I 
directed  Torbert  to  attack  at  daylight  this  morning,  and  finish 
this  '  savior  of  the  Valley.'  .  .  .  The  enemy,  after  being 
charged  by  our  gallant  cavalry,  were  broken  and  ran.  They 
were  followed  by  our  men  on  the  jump,  twenty-six  miles, 
through  Mount  Jackson  and  across  North  Fork  of  the  Shen- 
andoah. I  deemed  it  best  to  make  this  delay  of  one  day 
here  and  settle  this  new  cavalry  general."  The  engagement 
at  Tom's  Brook  was  a  fine  offset  to  the  check  received  by 
Torbert  at  Millford,  for  the  same  two  Union  divisions  had 
now  routed  the  combined  divisions  of  Lomax  and  Rosser, 
inflicting  a  loss  of  about  400  men,  while  Torbert  had  but  9 


204  THE  SHENANDOAH  VALLEY. 

killed  and  48  wounded.  Some  of  the  captured  artillery  was 
fresh  from  the  "  Tredegar  "Works  "  ;  and  with  the  five  guns 
taken  at  Winchester,  the  sixteen  at  Fisher's  Hill,  and  the 
eleven  at  Tom's  Brook,  point  was  given  to  the  jest  that  can- 
non sent  from  Richmond  to  the  Valley  were  marked  "P.  H. 
Sheridan,  care  of  General  Early." 

The  moral  effect  of  Sheridan's  victory  at  Tom's  Brook  was 
very  great.  The  Confederate  cavalry  in  the  Shenandoah  Val- 
ley had  been  feeble,  compared  with  the  infantry,  and  Sheri- 
dan, while  at  Charlestown,  had  remarked  that  it  was  "  in 
poor  condition  "  and  was  kept  so  close  to  the  infantry  that 
his  own  large  and  well-appointed  corps  of  horsemen  could 
not  get  at  it.  Fitz  Lee's  contingent  had  strengthened  it, 
but  the  battle  at  Winchester  and  the  subsequent  defeat  at 
Fisher's  Hill,  in  both  of  which  the  cavalry  held  the  flank 
that  was  turned  by  Crook,  had  again  greatly  dispirited  it. 
The  arrival  of  Bosser  had  revived  the  hope  of  restoring  the 
cavalry  to  passable  efficiency ;  for  though  this  officer  pos- 
sessed more  dash  than  discretion,  he  had  gained  a  success 
in  this  region  early  in  the  year,1  and  had  been  so  fortunate 
at  Bichmond  that  his  men  returned  to  the  Valley  confident 
of  victory  there.  The  assurance  with  which  Bosser  chal- 
lenged Custer  all  the  way  down  from  Harrisonburg  showed 
that  he  had  no  conception  of  Sheridan's  mounted  strength, 
though  his  fatal  zeal  was  probably  due  in  part  to  the  excite- 
ment of  his  men  at  seeing  their  farms  and  houses  in  flames ; 
for  many  of  Early's  cavalrymen  were  from  this  region.  Their 
eagerness  to  exact  retribution  brought  upon  them  double 
mortification  and  suffering,  and  the  disaster  of  Tom's  Brook 


1  Toward  the  end  of  January  Rosser  had  captured  at  Moorefield  a  train  of 
ninety-five  wagons,  with  valuable  subsistence  stores,  had  destroyed  the  railroad 
property  at  Patterson's  Creek,  with  the  bridges  over  the  Potomac  and  the  canal, 
and  had  brought  off  1,200  cattle,  500  sheep,  and  80  prisoners. 


THE  BATTLE  OF  TOM'S  BROOK.        205 

crushed  all  hope  of  effecting  anything  with  the  Confederate 
cavalry,  and  almost  dazed  Rosser's  immediate  command. 
The  chief  value  of  Sheridan's  victory  was  not  made  evident 
until  ten  days  later,  at  Cedar  Creek,  where  the  Union  cav- 
alry, flushed  with  success,  developed  great  staunchness, 
while  Early's  horsemen  proved  fatally  weak. 

The  luckless  Confederate  commander,  from  his  headquar- 
ters at  New  Market,  reported  to  Lee  that  night  his  latest 
reverse : 

"This  is  very  distressing  to  me,  and  God  knows  I  have  done  all  in 
my  power  to  avert  the  disasters  which  have  befallen  this  command  ; 
but  the  fact  is  that  the  enemy's  cavalry  is  so  much  superior  to  ours, 
both  in  numbers  a*nd  equipment,  and  the  country  is  so  favorable  to  the 
operations  of  cavalry  that  it  is  impossible  for  ours  to  compete  with 
his.  Lomax's  cavalry  is  armed  entirely  with  rifles,  and  has  no  sabres, 
and  the  consequence  is  that  they  cannot  fight  on  horseback,  and,  in 
this  open  country,  they  cannot  successfully  fight  on  foot  against  large 
bodies  of  cavalry  ;  besides,  the  command  is  and  has  been  demoralized 
all  the  time.  It  would  be  better  if  they  could  all  be  put  into  the  in- 
fantry ;  but,  if  that  were  tried,  I  am  afraid  they  would  all  run  off. 

"  Sheridan's  infantry  moved  off  from  Fisher's  Hill  this  morning,  and 
I  am  satisfied  that  he  does  not  intend  moving  this  way  again,  as  he 
burned  all  the  bridges  in  his  rear  as  he  went  down,  and  the  question 
now  is  what  he  intends  doing — whether  he  will  move  across  the  Ridge, 
send  a  part  of  his  force  to  Grant,  or  content  himself  with  protecting 
the  Baltimore  and  Ohio  Railroad.  .  .  .  He  has  laid  waste  nearly 
all  of  Rockingham  and  Shenandoah,  and  I  will  have  to  rely  on  Augusta 
for  my  supplies,  and  they  are  not  abundant  there.  Sheridan's  purpose, 
under  Grant's  orders,  has  been  to  render  the  Valley  untenable  by  our 
troops  by  destroying  the  supplies.  My  infantry  is  now  in  good  heart 
and  condition,  and  I  have  sent  a  special  messenger  to  you  to  get  your 
views." 

The  day  after  the  action  at  Tom's  Brook,  Sheridan  moved 
his  army  across  Cedar  Creek,  and  there  occupied  the  heights, 
with  the  Nineteenth  Corps  on  the  west  side  of  the  pike  and 


206  THE  SHENANDOAH  VALLEY. 

the  Eighth  on  the  east,  Merritt  and  Custer  taking  post  re- 
spectively on  the  left  and  right  flank.  The  Sixth  Corps  was 
sent  to  Front  Royal,  on  its  way  to  Washington.  Lomax 
followed  Powell  down  the  Luray  Valley  as  far  as  Millford, 
while  Eosser  in  the  main  valley  took  lip  the  line  of  Stony 
Creek,  from  Columbia  Furnace  to  Edenburg. 

Grant  now  directed  that  Sheridan  should  retain  the  Nine- 
teenth Corps,  and  should  only  send  him  the  Sixth  and  a 
division  of  cavalry  when  he  thought  it  advisable ;  accord- 
ingly Wright's  command  was  detained  a  day  or  two  at  Front 
Royal.  Finding  that  the  Manassas  Gap  Railroad  was  re- 
paired only  as  far  as  Piedmont,  Sheridan  ordered  the  corps 
to  march  to  Alexandria  through  Ashby's  Gap,  instead  of  pro- 
ceeding to  Piedmont,  fifteen  miles  distant,  and  thence  by 
rail;  while  he  directed  Augur,  whose  troops  were  at  Rector- 
town,  guarding  the  road,  to  move  back  to  Manassas  Junction 
or  Bull  Run.  "He  could  not  complete  the  railroad  to 
Front  Royal,"  explained  Sheridan  to  Halleck,  "without  ad- 
ditional force  from  me,  and  to  give  him  that  force  to  do  the 
work  and  transport  the  troops  by  railroad  to  Alexandria 
would  require  more  time  than  to  march  across,  via  Ashby's 
Gap."  The  truth  was  that  Sheridan's  judgment  could  not 
approve  the  opening  of  this  railroad  at  this  time ;  he  re- 
garded the  project  as  premature,  as  unquestionably  it  was ; 
he  had  counselled  the  stopping  of  repairs,  and  his  orders 
to  Augur,  by  withdrawing  the  guard,  would  practically 
put  an  end  to  them.  These  instructions,  a  copy  of  which 
Augur  transmitted  to  Halleck,  led  to  an  issue  between  the 
opposing  opinions ;  for  Stanton  and  Halleck  were  bent  on 
this  scheme,  which  superficially  seemed  a  repossession  of 
Northern  Virginia.  "The  Secretary,"  wrote  Halleck  to 
Sheridan,  the  13th,  "  wishes  you  to  come  to  Washington  for 
consultation,  if  you  can  safely  leave  your  command.     Gen- 


THE  BATTLE  OF  TOM'S  BROOK.        207 

eral  Grant's  wishes  about  holding  a  position  up  the  Valley 
as  a  basis  against  Gordonsville,  etc.,  and  the  difficulty  of 
wagoning  supplies  in  the  winter,  may  change  your  views 
about  the  Manassas  Gap  road ; "  while  Stanton  the  same 
day  wrote  to  the  same  effect :  "If  you  can  come  here,  a  con- 
sultation on  several  points  is  extremely  desirable.  I  propose 
to  visit  General  Grant,  and  would  like  to  see  you  first." 
Stanton  meanwhile  directed  Augur  to  remain  where  he  was, 
at  Eectortown,  until  Sheridan  should  meet  him,  and  then 
act  according  to  the  latter's  instructions. 

It  was  a  characteristic  of  Grant  that  when  a  military  pro- 
ject once  clearly  presented  itself  to  him  as  desirable,  his 
mind  was  sure  to  revert  to  it,  even  when,  in  consequence  of 
temporary  obstacles,  he  ^  seemed  to  have  abandoned  it. 
Though  accepting,  to  a  limited  extent,  his  lieutenant's 
advice  in  regard  to  transferring  the  Shenandoah  troops  to 
Petersburg,  permitting  the  return  of  one  corps  of  infantry 
and  one  division  of  cavalry,  he  soon  returned  to  his  original 
plan  of  an  advance  on  Charlottesville  and  Gordonsville.  He 
had  distinctly  told  Sheridan,  the  3d,  yielding  to  the  latter's 
earnest  argument,  "  You  may  take  up  such  position  in  the 
Valley  as  you  think  can  and  ought  to  be  held,  and  send  all 
the  force  not  required  for  this  immediately  here."  But 
eight  days  later,  on  reflection,  and  in  view  of  the  military 
situation  in  Virginia  as  a  whole,  he  told  Halleck  that  Sher- 
idan should  "  keep  up  as  advanced  a  position  as  possible 
toward  the  Virginia  Central  road,  and  be  prepared  to  ad- 
vance on  that  road  at  Gordonsville  and  Charlottesville  at 
any  time  the  enemy  weakens  himself  sufficiently  to  admit  of 
it.  The  cutting  of  that  road  and  of  the  canal  would  be  of 
vast  importance  to  us."  The  substance  of  this  despatch  was 
sent  by  Halleck  to  General  Sheridan,  with  these  additional 
suggestions  :  "It  [the  position]  must  be  strongly  fortified 


208  THE  SHENANDOAH  VALLEY. 

and  provisioned.  Some  point  in  the  vicinity  of  Manassas 
Gap  would  seem  best  suited  to  all  purposes.  Colonel  Alex- 
ander, of  the  Engineers,  will  be  sent  to  consult  with  you,  as 
soon  as  you  connect  with  General  Augur."  Sheridan  had 
just  ordered  Wright  to  start  for  Alexandria,  and  had  also 
written  Halleck  as  follows  : 

"Information  received  from  Colonel  Powell,  at  Sperryville,  reports 
Early  (or  Longstreet,  I  do  not  yet  know  which  is  in  command,  but  think 
Early  is)  with  the  bulk  of  his  force  at  Craig's  Creek,  between  Brown's 
Gap  and  Waynesboro.  I  object  to  the  opening  of  the  railroad  and  an 
advance  on  the  old  ftapidan  line,  on  account  of  the  waste  of  fighting 
force  to  protect  railroads,  and  the  additional  waste  of  force,  as  some 
would  have  to  be  left  in  this  valley.  You  see  how  many  troops  might 
then  be  rendered  unavailable.  I  believe  concentrating  at  vital  points 
and  the  destruction  of  subsistence  resources  to  be  everything  ;  but  do 
not  let  my  views  influence  your  better  judgment.  I  believe  that  a  rebel 
advance  down  this  valley  will  not  take  place." 

But  on  receiving  Halleck's  despatch,  he  promptly  acceded 
to  the  Gordonsville  scheme,  although  against  his  judgment, 
saying,  "  If  any  advance  is  to  be  made  on  Gordonsville  and 
Charlottesville,  it  is  not  best  to  send  troops  away  from  my 
command,  and  I  have  therefore  countermanded  the  order 
directing  the  Sixth  Corps  to  march  to  Alexandria.  I  will  go 
over  and  see  General  Augur  and  Colonel  Alexander,  and 
communicate  with  you  from  Rectortown."  Halleck  now 
directed  Augur  to  continue  repairing  the  railroad  till  fur- 
ther orders. 

Sheridan,  however,  did  not  go  to  Rectortown,  for  the 
campaign  suddenly  developed  an  unexpected  phase.  Early, 
who  was  conjectured  to  be  either  "at  Gordonsville  or  at 
Charlottesville,"  as  Sheridan  had  just  written  Augur,  or  else 
around  Brown's  Gap  and  Waynesboro,  as  Powell's  scouts 
reported,  having  learned  that  his  opponent  was  preparing 


THE  BATTLE  OF  TOM'S  BROOK.        209 

to  send  troops  to  Petersburg,  now  moved  forward  his  in- 
fantry from  its  camp  at  New  Market,  and  the  13th  reoccu- 
pied  Fisher's  Hill,  pushing  his  advance,  without  pausing, 
through  Strasburg  to  Heap's  Hill,  for  the  purpose  of  re- 
connoitring. While  thus  engaged,  he  observed  a  body  of 
infantry  on  Sheridan's  left  that  had  "  stacked  arms  in  an 
open  field,"  and  ran  out  a  battery  to  fire  upon  it.  Tho- 
burn's  division,  of  Crook's  command,  the  one  thus  visited, 
had  the  day  before  sent  a  reconnoissance  toward  Strasburg 
without  discovering  any  signs  of  the  enemy,  and  the  cavalry 
had  also  failed  to  find  him  ; '  so  that  a  big  shell,  suddenly 
dropped  near  an  officers'  mess-table  just  after  dinner- call 
from  the  bugles,  made  a  startling  addition  to  the  feast. 
Another  followed,  and  another  ;  and  now  the  assembly  was 
sounding,  and  Thoburn's  men,  driven  from  their  meal,  were 
forming  in  line,  with  Wells's  brigade  on  the  left  and  Harris's 
on  the  right.  Between  the  knoll  upon  which  their  camp 
was  placed  and  the  creek  in  front  extended  a  piece  of  low, 
open  ground,  which  the  battery  on  Hupp's  Hill  swept  with 
its  fire  ;  but  the  two  brigades  quickly  descended  the  slope, 
crossed  the  interval,  forded  the  creek,  and  began  to  toil  up 
the  elevations  that  lie  between  the  stream  and  Strasburg. 

It  happened  that  a  timbered  ridge  presented  itself  to  the 
advancing  troops,  and,  as  they  moved  along  either  side  of  it, 
Wells  and  Harris  were  thrown  a  little  apart.  It  became 
equally  obvious  to  both,  however,  that  Early  was  in  force  ; 
yet  the  rage  for  capturing  guns  had  seized  Sheridan's  army, 
and  Thoburn's  men  went  forward  through  the  plunging  fire 
from  the  brow  of  Hupp's  Hill,  until  Early  was  forced  to 
throw  out  Kershaw's  infantry,  Conner's  brigade  leading,  to 

1  "  October  12th.  I  sent  reconnoissances  from  the  First  and  Third  Divisions  up 
the  Valley  pike  and  the  Back  road  for  ten  or  twelve  mile?,  but  could  find  no  signs 
of  the  enemy  "  (Torbert's  Report). 


210  THE  SHENANDOAH  VALLEY. 

check  them.  Harris  was  driven  back,  but  this  "Wells  did 
not  see  till  Conner  had  gained  his  right  flank,  and  then  his 
own  retreat  was  hurriedly  ordered.  The  casualties  of  this 
engagement,  thought  to  be  between  200  and  300,  were  chiefly 
in  the  First  Brigade,  whose  right  regiment,  the  Thirty- 
fourth  Massachusetts,  alone  lost  about  a  hundred  men, 
Wells,  the  gallant  brigade  commander,  being  among  those 
that  fell,  mortally  wounded,  into  the  enemy's  hands.  On 
the  Confederate  side  Conner  lost  a  leg  from  the  fire  of  the 
Union  batteries  across  the  creek,  and  the  casualties  were 
unofficially  reported  as  between  50  and  75.  Early,  having 
completed  his  reconnoissance,  withdrew  to  Fisher's  Hill,  by 
no  means  pleased  with  the  appearance  of  the  position  in 
which  he  had  found  his  opponent. 

During  the  affair  on  Hupp's  Hill  Early's  cavalry  forded 
the  creek  on  the  Back  road,  and  attacked  Custer,  who  drove 
them  back,  while  Merritt  put  his  division  in  the  saddle,  and 
by  Torbert's  order,  moved  it  west  of  the  pike,  to  Caster's 
left,  ready  to  aid  him.  This  march  brought  both  divisions 
together  on  the  right  of  the  infantry ;  and,  as  it  was  an  auda- 
cious and  unexpected  stroke  for  the  enemy  to  cross  the 
creek  and  attack,  Merritt  was  retained  there.1 

The  ulterior  importance  of  battles  is  not  measured  by  the 

1  "  They  succeeded  in  driving  part  of  the  cavalry  pickets  across  Cedar  Creek, 
and  advanced  about  a  mile.  Brigadier-General  Custer  moved  out  promptly,  and 
drove  the  enemy  back  across  the  creek,  and  held  that  line.  When  the  attack 
commenced,  Brigadier-General  Merritt  put  his  division  (First)  in  the  saddle,  and 
late  in  the  afternoon  the  First  Division  (Brigadier-General  Merritt)  was  moved  on 
the  right  of  the  army  and  to  the  left  of  the  Third  Division  (Brigadier-General 
Custer). 

"October  14th.  The  First  and  Third  Divisions  (Brigadier-Generals  Merritt 
and  Custer)  were  in  camp  on  the  right  of  the  army,  covering  the  country  for  five 
or  six  miles  to  the  right  of  the  infantry.  Brigadier-General  Custer  sent  recon- 
noissances  out  on  the  Back  road,  and  found  the  enemy  had  retired  to  the  line  of 
Fisher's  Hill. 

"  October  15th.     Remained  in  camp.     AH  quiet "  (Torbert's  Report). 


THE  BATTLE  OF  TOM'S  BROOK.        211 

number  of  men  engaged,  nor  always  by  the  magnitude  of 
the  slaughter.  Thoburn's  combat  at  Stickley's  Farm,  which 
even  lacks  an  official  name,  brought  on  momentous  se- 
quences ;  for  when  Early's  presence  in  force  was  die  closed 
by  this  encounter,  a  courier  hastened  to  Wright  with  orders 
to  return  to  Sheridan's  army.  The  messenger  found  the 
Sixth  Corps  on  the  banks  of  the  Shenandoah,  opposite 
Ashby's  Gap,  whither  it  had  marched  that  day  from  Front 
Boyal.1  The  corps,  which  was  just  about  fording  the  river, 
was  at  once  faced  about,  and  at  noon  of  the  14th,  arrived  at 
Cedar  Creek.  As  the  Eighth  Corps  was  on  the  left  of  the 
pike,  and  the  Nineteenth  on  the  right,  Sheridan  put  the 
Sixth  on  the  right  and  rear  of  the  Nineteenth,  ready  to  sup- 
port either  of  the  others  ;  from  this  point  he  could  easily 
despatch  it  again  to  Grant,  without  disturbing  his  main  de- 
fensive line.  Merritt  and  Custer  were  on  the  right  of  the 
position  assigned  to  the  Sixth. 

If  it  be  admitted  that  one  of  Lee's  objects  at  this  time  was 
to  aid  in  prolonging  the  defence  of  Petersburg  through  the 
winter  by  detaining  in  the  Valley  all  the  Union  forces, 
Early's  clamorous  announcement  of  his  presence  in  the 
reconnoissance  of  the  13th  may  be  regarded  as  successful, 
since  it  was  followed  by  the  return  of  the  Sixth  Corps  to  the 
Cedar  Creek  lines ;  but,  in  a  broader  view,  the  shelling  of 
Thoburn's  camp  proved  a  misfortune  to  Early,  since,  save 
for  that,  a  few  days  later  the  Sixth  Corps  might  have  been 
beyond  timely  recall,  and  Early  might  have  fallen  upon  and 
crushed  the  remainder  of  the  army.  In  point  of  fact,  he 
had  heard  that  his  opponent  was  preparing  to  send  away 
troops,  but  did  not  know  that  any  had  actually  started. 

Sheridan  warned  his  subordinates  the  night  of  the  13th  to 

1  "  On  the  same  day,  in  consequence  of  the  advance  of  the  enemy  to  Fisher's 
Hill,  it  was  recalled ''  (Sheridan's  Report). 


212  THE  SHENANDOAH  VALLEY. 

be  ready  to  give  battle  the .  next  morning  ;  but  Early  made 
no  further  demonstrations,  and  reconnoissances  on  the  14th, 
both  by  a  brigade  of  the  Eighth  Corps,  on  the  pike,  and  by 
the  cavalry,  showed,  after  some  skirmishing,  that  he  was  at 
Fisher's  Hill ;  still,  his  strength  could  not  be  determined. 

The  following  day,  the  15th,  Sheridan  received  from  Grant 
important  instructions.  "  What  I  want,"  said  Grant,  "  is  for 
you  to  threaten  the  Virginia  Central  Railroad  and  canal  in 
the  manner  your  judgment  tells  you  is  best,  holding  your- 
self ready  to  advance  if  the  enemy  draw  off  their  forces.  If 
you  make  the  enemy  hold  a  force  equal  to  your  own  for  the 
protection  of  these  thoroughfares,  it  will  accomplish  nearly 
as  much  as  their  destruction.  If  you  cannot  do  this,  then 
the  next  best  thing  to  do  is  to  send  here  all  the  force  you 
can.  I  deem  a  good  cavalry  force  necessary  for  your  offen- 
sive as  well  as  defensive  operations.  You  will  not,  there- 
fore, send  here  more  than  a  division  of  cavalry."  Sheridan 
directed  Torbert  to  move  Merritt's  division  to  Front  Royal, 
that  same  night,  with  a  view  of  sending  it  through  Chester 
Gap  toward  the  Virginia  Central  Railroad,  and  of  reinforcing 
the  expedition  with  Powell's  division.  He  accompanied 
Merritt's  command  in  person  as  far  as  Front  Royal,  intend- 
ing to  pay  his  postponed  visit  to  Augur  at  Rectortown,  and  • 
thence,  by  the  repaired  road,  to  proceed  to  Washington,  ac- 
cording to  Stanton's  request. 

But  when  he  had  reached  Front  Royal,  just  before  the 
cavalry  was  setting  out  on  its  errand,  he  received  a  startling 
message  from  Wright,  who,  as  senior  officer,  had  been  left 
in  charge  of  the  troops  at  Cedar  Creek  :  "  General,  I  en- 
close you  despatch  which  explains  itself.  If  the  enemy 
should  be  strongly  reinforced  in  cavalry,  he  might,  by  turn- 
ing our  right,  give  us  a  great  deal  of  trouble.  I  shall  hold 
on  here  until  the  enemy's  movements  are   developed,  and 


THE  BATTLE  OF  TOM'S  BROOK.        213 

shall  only  fear  an  attack  on  my  right,  which  I  shall  make 
every  preparation  for  guarding  against  and  resisting."  The 
following  was  the  despatch  enclosed  : 

"  To  Lieutenant-General  Early  : 

"  Be  ready  to  move  as  soon  as  my  forces  join  you,  and  we  will  crush 
Sheridan. 

"  Longstkeet,  Lieutenant- General." 

This  message  had  been  taken  from  the  signal  flag  at  the 
Confederate  station  on  Three  Top.  There  was  something 
very  strange  about  it,  and,  as  far  as  the  present  writer  is 
aware,  no  complete  solution  of  the  mystery  has  ever  been 
given — although  now  that  its  fictitious  character  is  known, 
it  would  be  easy  to  offer  several  conjectural  clues,  of  vary- 
ing degrees  of  value.  But  it  was  of  great  worth  to  Sheri- 
dan. For,  although  he  was  naturally  inclined  to  consider  it 
a  ruse,  yet,  as  Wright's  language  implied,  one  of  the  divi- 
sions of  cavalry  had  been  taken  away  from  the  position  at 
Cedar  Creek ;  and  in  any  possibility  of  attack  Sheridan  did 
not  wish  his  subordinates  there  to  want  for  any  troops 
that  he  could  give  them.  Hence,  with  his  habitual  pru- 
dence, which  in  this  instance  was  to  prove  of  great  value, 
he  put  off  the  cavalry  expedition,  and  gave  Torbert  direc- 
tions to  return  to  the  lines  at  Cedar  Creek. 

But  should  Sheridan  himself  also  return,  or  should  he 
continue  his  journey  to  Washington  ?  There  had  been  re- 
cent reconnoissances  and  skirmishes,  which  indicated  that 
Early  was  at  Fisher's  Hill  in  some  force,  and  an  attack  by 
him,  with  the  aid  of  Longstreet's  troops,  would  be  no  trifling 
affair.  On  the  other  hand,  the  intercepted  despatch  was 
very  obscure,  false  alarms  about  Longstreet  had  been 
sounded  ever  since  Sheridan  came  to  the  Valley,  and  the 
settlement  of  the  disputed  policy  affecting  the  Manassas 
Gap  Railroad,  the  operations  against  Gordonsville,  and  the 


214  THE   SHENANDOAH   VALLEY. 

despatch,  of  troops  to  Petersburg,  had  become  urgent  and 
imperative.  .Besides,  the  Secretary  himself  had  already — 
three  days  before — requested  his  presence  at  Washington. 
Sheridan  was  entitled  to  presume  that  his  four  lieutenants 
would  be  specially  watchful  over  their  commands  during 
his  absence.     He  sent  to  Wright  the  following  note  : 

"  Major-General  H.  G.  Wright,  Commanding  Sixth  Army  Corps  : 

"  General — The  cavalry  is  all  ordered  back  to  you.  Make  your  posi- 
tion strong.  If  Longstreet's  despatch  is  true,  he  is  under  the  impres- 
sion that  we  have  largely  detached.  I  will  go  over  to  Augur,  and  may 
get  additional  news.  Close  in  Colonel  Powell,  who  will  be  at  this  point. 
If  the  enemy  should  make  an  advance,  I  know  you  will  defeat  him. 
Look  well  to  your  ground,  and  be  well  prepared.  Get  up  everything 
that  can  be  spared.  I  wili  bring  up  all  I  can,  and  will  be  up  on  Tues- 
day, if  not  sooner." 

Sheridan  then  rode  on  the  same  morning  to  Eectortown, 
where  he  took  the  precaution  to  telegraph  to  Halleck,  be- 
fore two  o'clock,  that  an  intercepted  despatch  "  would  indi- 
cate that  Lorjgstreet  was  marching  to  join  Early  with  con- 
siderable force,  and  was  not  far  off ; "  and  he  inquired 
whether  he  had  heard  of  any  such  movement.  Several 
hours  passed  without  an  answer.  Sheridan  still  waited,  for 
the  matter  was  important.  At  length,  at  5  o'clock,  he  again 
telegraphed  to  Halleck,  repeating  the  exact  words  of  the  in- 
tercepted message.  "Wright,  in  command,"  he  added, 
"  has  made  every  preparation  to  meet  the  threat  of  Long- 
street,  if  the  despatch  should  be  true,  and  I  feel  confident  of 
good  results.  I  would  like  to  see  you.  Is  it  best  for  me  to 
go  to  see  you?"  A  reply  at  last  answered  both  despatches, 
indicating  that  in  the  meantime  Halleck  had  consulted  the 
Lieutenant-General  at  City  Point  :  "  General  Grant  says 
that  Longstreet  brought  with  him  no  troops  from  Richmond, 
but  I  have  very  little  confidence  in  the  information  collected 


THE  BATTLE  OF  TOM'S  BROOK.        215 

at  his  headquarters.  If  you  can  leave  your  command  with 
safety,  come  to  Washington,  as  I  wish  to  give  you  the  views 
of  the  authorities  here."  Then  Sheridan  went  forward  to 
Alexandria. 

One  sign  of  aggressiveness  on  the  part  of  the  enemy's  cav- 
alry attracted  Torbert's  attention  immediately  on  his  return 
to  Cedar  Creek.  Merritt  had  resumed  at  noon  of  the  16th 
the  position  on  the  right  and  rear  of  the  Sixth  Corps,  from 
which  he  had  set  out  the  evening  before,1  and  Custer  had 
remained  where  he  could  watch  the  fords  near  the  Back 
road.  That  night  Eosser,  whose  scouts  had  reported  that 
one  of  Custer's  brigades  was  apparently  detached  from  the 
main  body,  was  allowed  by  Early  to  undertake  its  capture 
with  a  brigade  of  infantry  mounted  behind  the  same  num- 
ber of  cavalry ;  and  the  whole  of  the  Confederate  army  was 
moved  out  at  dawn,  to  cover  Eosser's  return.  However,  he 
found  only  a  picket  of  three  officers  and  two  score  men  of 
the  First  Connecticut  Cavalry,  instead  of  a  brigade,  and 
these  he  captured. 

Perceiving  that  the  left  of  the  line  needed  cavalry,  Sheri- 
dan had  directed  Wright  to  "  close  in  Colonel  Powell ;  "  ac- 
cordingly, Moore's  brigade  of  Powell's  division  was  moved 
in  several  miles  to  Buckton  ford,  on  the  Shenandoah,  so 

1  "  October  15th.  After  dark,  the  First  Division  (Brigadier-General  Merritt)  was 
ordered  to  move  to  Front  Royal.  The  Second  Division  (Colonel  Powell)  was  or- 
dered to  concentrate  at  the  same  point.  Both  of  these  divisions  being  designed 
for  a  ra!d  on  Charlottesville  and  Gordonsville,  I  moved  to  the  Shenandoah  near 
Front  Royal  in  the  afternoon,  to  go  in  command  of  the  expedition,  which  was  to 
start  on  the  morning  of  the  16th.     .     .     . 

"  October  16th.  The  First  Division  (Brigadier-General  Merritt)  was  ordered 
back  to  the  army,  and  took  position  on  the  right  of  the  infantry.  The  Second 
Division  was  ordered  to  resume  its  old  position,  and  I  returned  to  the  army  on 
Cedar  Creek.  Brigadier-General  Custer  made  a  reconnoissance  in  his  front,  but 
could  fini  no  enemy  outside  of  their  lines  on  Fisher's  Hill"  (Torbert's  Report). 

"At  12  M.  the  brigade  returned  to  camp,  near  Middletown"  (Devin's Report). 


216  THE  SHENANDOAH  VALLEY. 

that  its  pickets  might  connect  with  Crook's  on  the  infantry- 
left.1  The  other  two  brigades  remained  posted  near  Front 
Royal,  to  prevent  Lomax  from  coming  down  through  Lnray 
Valley  past  the  Union  left,  so  striking  the  pike  in  the  rear. 
Crook's  command  worked  at  prolonging  the  line  of  intrench- 
ments  in  its  front. 

In  Early's  camp,  meanwhile,  there  was  busy  study.  Sheri- 
dan's torches  had  laid  waste  the  Valley,  the  provisions  and 
forage  which  the  Confederate  general  had  brought  from 
New  Market  were  nearly  exhausted,  and  he  was  forced  either 
to  attack  or  retreat.  He  chose  the  former  alternative.  For 
not  only  would  attack,  he  thought,  delay  that  meditated 
transfer  of  forces  to  Grant's  army,  whose  importance  Sheri- 
dan had  been  so  quick  to  see,  but  in  addition  Early  had 
some  ground  for  hoping  to  win  at  least  a  partial  success, 
since  he  had  received  heavy  reinforcements,  amounting,  ex- 
clusive of  the  Valley  reserves  that  may  have  joined  him,  to 
nearly  5,000  men. 

Having  reached  this  determination,  he  set  about  planning 
an  attack.  Gordon,  taking  a  brigade,  went  forward  to 
Hupp's  Hill,  to  find  whether  Sheridan's  position  was  forti- 
fied, and  reported  that  it  was ;  Early,  therefore,  resolved  to 
take  the  intrenchments  in  reverse.  Pegram  was  sent  to  re- 
connoitre the  Union  right,  but  the  project  of  turning  that 
flank  was  abandoned,  "because,"  as  Early  wrote  to  Lee  two 
days  later,  "the  greater  part  of  the  enemy's  cavalry  was  on 
his  right,  and  Eosser's  attempt  had  caused  that  flank  to  be 
closely  picketed."  There,  also,  the  banks  of  Cedar  Creek 
were  found  to  be  high  and  precipitous.     Yet,  on  the  other 


1  "  October  17th.  The  same  day,  one  brigade  of  Second  Division  (Colonel 
Powell)  was  moved  nearer  the  infantry,  and  posted  at  Buekton'sford,  on  the  Shen- 
andoah River,  connecting  their  pickets  with  the  left  of  the  infantry  "  (Torbert  a 
Report). 


THE  BATTLE  OF  TOM'S  BROOK.        217 

hand,  "  to  get  around  the  enemy's  left  was  a  difficult  under- 
taking, as  the  river  had  to  be  crossed  twice,  and  between 
the  mountain  and  river,  where  the  troops  had  to  pass  to  the 
lower  ford,  there  was  only  a  rugged  pathway."  Early,  how- 
ever, upon  the  whole,  decided  that  the  chances  of  success 
would  be  greater  here,  "  from  the  fact  that  the  enemy  would 
not  expect  a  move  in  that  direction,  on  account  of  the  diffi- 
culties attending  it,  and  the  great  strength  of  their  position 
on  that  flank."  Careful  examination  by  Gordon  and  by  Cap- 
tain Hotchkiss,  of  Early's  staff,  from  the  signal  station  on 
Three  Top,  also  showed  that  Sheridan's  left  flank  "was 
lightly  picketed,  and  that  there  was  but  a  small  cavalry 
picket  on  the  North  Fork  of  the  Shenandoah,  below  the 
mouth  of  the  creek." 

From  Three  Top  Gordon  and  Hotchkiss  could  look  down 
into  both  camps — rivers,  hills,  roads,  fords,  woods,  and 
clearings  all  spread  out  before  them,  and  not  less  clearly 
the  troops  and  the  tents,  the  guns  and  the  parapets.  Not 
only  did  they  discover  the  positions  of  Sheridan's  forces, 
but  they  had  found  that  it  was  possible  to  move  infantry 
along  the  base  of  Three  Top,  on  the  edge  of  the  river,  so 
as  to  cross  below  Cedar  Creek.  The  North  Fork  makes  a 
bend  in  front  of  Fisher's  Hill,  by  Strasburg,  enclosing  there 
several  farms,  which  were  occupied  by  Payne's  brigade  of 
cavalry.  The  proposed  flanking  route  first  forded  the  Shen- 
andoah from  the  right  of  the  position  at  Fisher's  Hill,  then 
traversed  this  bend  and  crossed  again  at  Mclnturff's  and 
Bowman's  fords,  the  former  being  a  few  hundred  feet  below 
the  mouth  of  Cedar  Creek,  and  the  latter  half  a  mile  below. 
Moving  thence  through  the  dense  woods,  a  column  of  in- 
fantry could  be  secretly  placed  less  than  half  a  mile  from 
Crook's  camp,  taking  it  in  reverse.  The  ground  fronting 
Cooley's  house  was  seen  to  be  favorable  for  forming  the 
XI.— 10 


218         THE  SHENANDOAH  VALLEY. 

troops  in  the  attack.  We  can  hardly  exaggerate  the  advan- 
tage of  the  bird's-eye  view  from  Three  Top. 

For  this  turning  movement  were  set  apart  the  divisions  of 
Gordon,  Eamseur,  andPegram,  all  under  Gordon,  with  Payne's 
brigade  of  cavalry,  the  latter  being  directed  to  try  to  capture 
Sheridan  at  the  Belle  Grove  House,  for  his  absence  was  not 
known.  Early  was  to  manage  the  divisions  of  Kershaw  and 
Wharton,  and  all  the  artillery,  since  this  could  not  be  moved 
on  the  blind  path  taken  by  Gordon.  The  cavalry  were  to 
co-operate — Rosser  to  move  with  two  brigades,  his  own  and 
Wickham's,  on  the  Back  road  across  Cedar  Creek,  and  attack 
Custer  at  5  a.m.,  while  Lomax  was  to  come  down  through 
the  Luray  Valley,  cross  the  river,  and  strike  the  Valley  pike 
wherever  he  might  find  the  battle  going  on. 

The  execution  of  the  plan  followed  hard  on  its  conception. 
Immediately  after  dark  of  the  18th,  Gordon,  crossing  the 
North  Pork,  proceeded  to  the  foot  of  Three  Top,  and  there 
halted  to  give  the  troops  a  few  hours'  sleep.  An  additional 
intrenchment  being  reported  by  Pegram  as  thrown  up  on 
Crook's  lines  since  Gordon  and  Hotchkiss  made  their  exam- 
ination, Early,  lest  this  work  should  in  any  way  interfere 
with  Gordon's  plan,  at  a  late  hour  altered  the  line  of 
march  of  the  force  under  his  immediate  command,  allowing 
Wharton  to  proceed,  as  before,  over  Hupp's  Hill,  but  de- 
flecting Kershaw  to  the  right  near  Strasburg,  so  as  to  strike 
Cedar  Creek  at  the  left  of  Sheridan's  line,  a  short  distance 
above  the  mouth  of  the  creek. 

Stealthily,  an  hour  after  midnight,  the  Confederate  col- 
umns moved  forward.  Since  silence  was  essential  to  suc- 
cess, swords  and  canteens  were  left  in  camp,  lest  their 
clinking  should  betray  the  march ;  while  the  artillery  was 
massed  on  the  pike  at  Fisher's  Hill,  there  to  wait  until  the 
hour  set  for  the  infantry  attack,  when  it  was  to  move  at  a 


THE  BATTLE  OF  TOM'S  BROOK.        219 

gallop  through  the  town  to  Hupp's  Hill — for  an  earlier 
advance  might  betray  the  secret  by  the  rumbling  of  the 
heavy  wheels,  in  the  dead  of  night,  over  the  macadamized 
road.  Early  accompanied  Kershaw,  his  centre  column,  and 
"  came  in  sight  of  the  Union  fires  at  3.30  o'clock ;  the 
moon,"  he  adds,  "  was  now  shining,  and  we  could  see  the 
camps."  Kershaw  was  halted  under  cover,  and  while  his 
men  shivered  in  the  chill  night  air,  Early,  during  the  hour 
that  followed,  pointed  out  precisely  how  and  when  this  part 
of  the  attack  should  be  made.  Kershaw  was  to  "  cross  his 
division  over  the  creek  as  quietly  as  possible,  and  to  form  it 
into  column  of  brigades  as  he  did  so,  and  advance  in  that 
manner  against  the  enemy's  left  breastwork." 

The  scene  was  memorable.  The  Union  camps  on  the  hills 
beyond  the  creek  wrapped  in  slumber ;  a  corps  of  infantry, 
Jackson's  old  corps,  and  a  brigade  of  cavalry,  stealing  along 
the  base  of  Massanutten,  to  gain  the  rear  of  its  unsuspect- 
ing foes ;  in  the  background  forty  guns  and  more,  awaiting 
the  signal  to  rush  down  the  pike ;  an  infantry  division 
creeping  over  Hupp's,  and  another  crouching  yonder  nearer 
the  creek.  Before  five  o'clock,  Early  ordered  Kershaw  for- 
ward again,  and  after  a  time  came  the  welcome  sound  of  a 
light  crackle  of  musketry  on  the  Confederate  right,  where 
Union  picket  stations  had  been  set  near  the  fords  at  which 
Gordon  was  crossing.  This  petty  sound  did  not  disturb  the 
dreaming  camps,  but  to  the  attent  ears  of  Kershaw  and 
Wharton  it  was  the  signal  of  attack.  Kershaw  quickly 
moved  down  to  the  creek ;  and  meanwhile,  as  if  nature  had 
enlisted  to  aid  in  this  enterprise,  the  moon  had  vanished, 
and  a  thick  fog,  clouding  the  landscape,  now  hid  from  sight 
the  Confederate  march. 


CHAPTER  Xm. 

THE  BATTLE  OP  CEDAR  CREEK. 

The  morning  of  October  19th  brought  to  the  Union  camps 
little  presage  of  the  approaching  peril.  The  enemy's  cav- 
alry dashes  and  his  disclosure  of  infantry  on  Hupp's  Hill 
had  been  looked  upon  by  many  as  bravado,  the  prevailing 
belief  being  that  Early's  army  could  not  risk  serious  at- 
tack. The  plans  for  sending  away  the  Sixth  Corps  and  a 
division  of  cavalry  had  additionally  lulled  the  troops  into  a 
certain  sense  of  security,  not  wholly  disturbed  by  the  tem- 
porary recall  of  the  Sixth.  The  daily  reconnoissances  from 
both  flanks  had  confirmed  this  prevailing  impression ;  while 
those  of  Tuesday,  October  18th,  had  been  specially  reassur- 
ing.1 A  reconnoitring  brigade,  Colonel  Harris's,  of  General 
Crook's  command,  even  reported  that  night  that  the  enemy 
had  apparently  retreated  up  the  Valley.  As  the  destruction 
of  the  crops  and  forage  made  it  necessary  for  Early,  while 
keeping  troops  at  Fisher's  Hill,  to  haul  supplies  from  Staun- 
ton in  wagons,  the  Union  commanders  had  been  expecting 
for  some  days  that  he  would  either  attack  or  retreab ;  hence 

1  "October  18th.  All  quiet,  and  cavalry  in  same  position.  Reconnoissances 
showed  no  enemy  in  their  immediate  front "  (Torbert's  Report). 

"About  9  o'clock  of  that  evening  [the  18th]  1  was  called  upon  by  Major-Gen- 
eral Crook,  commanding  the  Army  of  West  Virginia,  who  reported  that  the  re- 
connoissance  of  a  brigade  sent  out  by  him  that  day  to  ascertain  the  position  of 
the  enemy,  had  returned  to  camp  and  reported  that  nothing  was  to  be  found  in 
his  old  camp,  and  that  he  had  doubtless  retreated  up  the  Valley"  (Wright's 
Report). 


THE  BATTLE   OF  CEDAR  CREEK.  221 

the  report  tliat  he  had  chosen  the  latter  course  occasioned 
no  surprise.  The  probability  is  that  the  reconnoitring  of- 
ficer, in  reporting  that  nothing  was  to  be  found  in  the  en- 
emy's old  camp,  referred  to  the  position  temporarily  occu- 
pied on  Hupp's  Hill,  from  which,  five  days  before,  Early  had 
shelled  the  lines  of  this  very  command ;  and  this  position 
the  enemy  had  certainly  abandoned.  The  further  belief 
that  he  had  retreated  up  the  Valley  was  of  course  erroneous ; 
yet  the  very  part  of  the  army  destined  for  attack  by  the  en- 
emy that  same  night  was  unfortunately  the  one  most  likely 
to  be  influenced  by  this  error.  If  the  reconnoitring  party, 
returning  through  its  own  lines,  spread  amongst  its  com- 
rades '  its  news  of  the  enemy's  departure,  a  movement  de- 
signed for  precaution  may  have  tended  to  lessen  vigilance 
where  it  chanced  to  be  specially  needed.  Wright,  at  all 
events,  immediately  ordered  two  more  reconnoissances,  and 
since  the  evening  was  already  misty,  after  a  fine  autumn 
day,  the  time  of  their  departure  was  expressed  in  the  in- 
structions as  "at  daylight  in  the  morning,  or  as  soon  there- 
after as  the  fog  will  permit  of  objects  being  clearly  distin- 
guished"— one  from  the  Nineteenth  Corps,  up  the  pike  to 
Strasburg,  and  the  other  by  the  cavalry  on  the  Back  road. 
The  object  is,  said  the  orders,  "to  ascertain  if  the  enemy  is 
still  on  the  line  of  Fisher's  Hill  in  force,  and  the  General 
desires  the  troops  pushed  far  enough  to  the  front  to  accom- 
plish this  object." 

The  army  of  Sheridan  was  camped  on  the  left  bank  of 
Cedar  Creek,  just  above  its  junction  with  the  Shenandoah. 
Such  are  the  bends  of  the  creek  that  at  that  point  the  three 
infantry  corps,  in  facing  it,  fronted  somewhat  southerly,  so 

1  "Relying  upon  the  report  of  our  reconnoitring  party,  all  slept  in  confidence 
and  security.  But.  notwithstanding  that  report.  Early  was  near  at  hand"  (His- 
tory of  the  Thirty-fourth  Massachusetts,  of  Thoburn's  Division). 


222  THE   SHENANDOAH    VALLEY. 

that  although  its  general  direction  is  by  no  means  east  and 
west,  the  army  was  yet  visually  spoken  of  as  being  on  the 
"  north,"  instead  of  the  east  bank  of  the  creek.  Owing  to 
these  same  bends,  in  taking  advantage  of  the  ground,  the 
three  corps  were  positioned,  as  we  have  seen,  partly  en 
echelon — the  Eighth  near  the  junction  of  the  creek  and  the 
river ;  the  Nineteenth,  at  the  right  and  rear  of  the  Eighth ; 
the  Sixth,  at  the  right  and  rear  of  the  Nineteenth.  The 
creek  could  be  waded  everywhere,  as  could  also,  for  that 
matter,  the  Shenandoah  itself  in  that  season  and  in  that 
neighborhood,  the  main  value  of  the  fords  here  as  elsewhere 
in  the  Valley,  during  the  summer  and  autumn  of  1864,  being 
that  at  them  the'  high  banks  fall  away  or  are  cut  down,  so 
that  easy  access  is  given  to  wagons  that  may  desire  to  cross  ; 
and  this  advantage  was  equally  needful  for  the  orderly  pas- 
sage of  troops  and  trains.  The  steep  banks  of  the  creek 
were  in  themselves  defences  along  a  large  part  of  the  line, 
and  far  beyond  the  extreme  right  of  the  infantry. 

Crook's  corps,  the  Army  of  West  Virginia,  on  the  left  of 
the  pike,  was  encamped  in  two  portions.  The  First  Division, 
Thobnrn,  in  front,  and  on  the  extreme  left  of  the  infantry 
line,  occupied  a  round  hill  or  high  mound,  and  was  in- 
trenched, with  the  line  of  works  facing  in  general  toward 
the  junction  of  the  creek  and  the  river.  This  knoll  with  its 
guns  commanded  two  fords  of  the  creek,  one  on  the  right, 
near  by,  connecting  with  the  pike  just  beyond  the  bridge,  and 
the  other  several  hundred  yards  distant,  in  front,  leading  by 
a  dirt  road  to  Strasburg.  There  were  woods  to  the  left,  ex- 
tending part  way  across  Thoburn's  front.  The  Second  Divi- 
sion, Duval's,  now  under  Colonel  E.  B.  Hayes,  and  Kitch- 
ing's  provisional  division,  were  in  rear  or  north  of  Thoburn, 
on  another  hill,  or  another  part  of  this  same  hill,  close  upon 
the  pike.     This  second  elevation  was  the  highest  on  the 


222  THE   SHENANDOAH   VALLEY. 

that  although  its  general  direction  is  by  no  means  east  and 
west,  the  army  was  yet  usually  spoken  of  as  being  on  the 
"  north,"  instead  of  the  east  bank  of  the  creek.  Owing  to 
these  same  bends,  in  taking  advantage  of  the  ground,  the 
three  corps  were  positioned,  as  we  have  seen,  partly  en 
echelon — the  Eighth  near  the  junction  of  the  creek  and  the 
river ;  the  Nineteenth,  at  the  right  and  rear  of  the  Eighth ; 
the  Sixth,  at  the  right  and  rear  of  the  Nineteenth.  The 
creek  could  be  waded  everywhere,  as  could  also,  for  that 
matter,  the  Shenandoah  itself  in  that  season  and  in  that 
neighborhood,  the  main  value  of  the  fords  here  as  elsewhere 
in  the  Valley,  during  the  summer  and  autumn  of  1864,  being 
that  at  them  the'  high  banks  fall  away  or  are  cut  down,  so 
that  easy  access  is  given  to  wagons  that  may  desire  to  cross  ; 
and  this  advantage  was  equally  needful  for  the  orderly  pas- 
sage of  troops  and  trains.  The  steep  banks  of  the  creek 
were  in  themselves  defences  along  a  large  part  of  the  line, 
and  far  beyond  the  extreme  right  of  the  infantry. 

Crook's  corps,  the  Army  of  West  Virginia,  on  the  left  of 
the  pike,  was  encamped  in  two  portions.  The  First  Division, 
Thoburn,  in  front,  and  on  the  extreme  left  of  the  infantry 
line,  occupied  a  round  hill  or  high  mound,  and  was  in- 
trenched, with  the  line  of  works  facing  in  general  toward 
the  junction  of  the  creek  and  the  river.  This  knoll  with  its 
guns  commanded  two  fords  of  the  creek,  one  on  the  right, 
near  by,  connecting  with  the  pike  just  beyond  the  bridge,  and 
the  other  several  hundred  yards  distant,  in  front,  leading  by 
a  dirt  road  to  Strasburg.  There  were  woods  to  the  left,  ex- 
tending part  way  across  Thoburn's  front.  The  Second  Divi- 
sion, Duval's,  now  under  Colonel  E.  B.  Hayes,  and  Kitch- 
ing's  provisional  division,  were  in  rear  or  north  of  Thoburn, 
on  another  hill,  or  another  part  of  this  same  hill,  close  upon 
the  pike.     This  second  elevation  was  the  highest  on  the 


THE  BATTLE  OF  CEDAR  CREEK.        223 

Union  line,  thirty  feet  higher  even  than  the  highest  part  of 
the  ridge  across  the  pike,  on  which  the  Nineteenth  Corps 
was  encamped,  and  at  its  treeless  summit  one  hundred  and 
ninety  feet  higher  than  the  level  of  the  creek.  The  position 
was  not  intrenched,  but  Hayes  and  Kitching  could  either 
reinforce  Thoburn,  from  whom  a  wooded  hollow  separated 
them,  or,  facing  to  the  left,  could  defend  the  pike  from  an 
enemy  coming  in  there. 

The  Nineteenth  Corps,  at  the  right  of  the  Eighth,  and 
west  of  the  pike,  was  encamped  on  an  elevated  plain,  being 
separated  from  the  Sixth  Corps  by  Meadow  Brook,  a  rivulet 
feeding  Cedar  Creek  in  a  direction  generally  like  that  of  the 
pike.  The  corps  was  compactly  established  and  intrenched 
in  a  space  of  three-fourths  of  a  mile,  the  creek  in  its  front, 
the  right  of  its  First  Division  on  Meadow  Brook,  and  the 
left  of  its  Second  on  the  pike.  On  this  left  was  the  greater 
part  of  its  artillery,  which  commanded  the  road  and  the 
bridge  across  the  creek.  The  line  of  intrenchment  was 
nearly  one  hundred  and  twenty  feet  above  the  creek,  to 
which  the  ridge  fell  off  somewhat  abruptly ;  and  the  plain 
rose  gradually  in  the  rear  of  the  intrenchment.  Back  of 
this  camp,  on  elevated  ground,  was  Belle  Grove  House,  the 
headquarters  of  Sheridan  and  also  of  Crook,  the  portion  of 
the  Commanding  General's  staff  that  had  not  gone  to  Wash- 
ington with  him  continuing  to  occupy  it  during  his  tempo- 
rary absence. 

The  Sixth  Corps,  beyond  Meadow  Brook,  was  not  in- 
trenched. Its  position  was  a  supplementary  one,  in  reserve, 
and  it  was  intended  that  the  corps  should  be  foot -loose  for 
use  anywhere  on  the  main  line,  which  had  been  formed  with 
the  expectation  of  sending  the  Sixth  to  City  Point.  The 
cavalry  were  in  the  positions  before  indicated — Merritt's 
camp  near  that  of  the  Sixth  Corps,  on  the  right  of  the  in- 


224  THE  SHENANDOAH   VALLEY. 

fantry  line,  at  Middle  Marsh  Brook  ;  Custer's  about  one  mile 
and  a  half  beyond  Merritt's,  watching  the  fords  where  the 
Back  and  Mine  Bank  roads  cross  the  creek,  and  the  neigh- 
borhood of  Kupp's  Mill ;  Moore's  brigade,  two  miles  or 
more  beyond  Crook's  left,  at  Buckton's  ford,  where  the 
Front  Koyal  road  leads  to  Middletown ;  the  rest  of  Powell's 
division  at  or  near  Front  Royal.  As  events  turned  out,  it 
might  have  been  much  better  to  transfer  Merritt  again  to 
the  left  of  Crook.  For  though  this  change  would  not  neces- 
sarily have  prevented  Kershaw's  advance  directly  on  Crook's 
front,  it  would,  of  course,  have  prevented  Gordon's  corps  from 
being  formed  unperceived  in  front  of  Cooley's.  Possibly 
such  a  change  might  have  forced  Early  to  choose  a  different 
form  of  surprise  and  attack — putting  his  main  column  on 
Kershaw's  path,  for  example,  or  even  assailing  the  other 
flank.  Suppositions  apart,  "Wright,  save  for  drawing  in 
Moore,  seems  to  have  retained  the  line  as  he  found  it  when 
his  corps  entered  it  the  14th  of  October. 

Long  before  sunrise,  a  ringing  volley  of  musketry  startled 
the  men  of  Thoburn's  division  from  their  sleep ;  and  as 
they  came  bewildered  from  their  tents  to  learn  the  cause, 
over  every  part  of  their  parapets,  through  the  darkness  and 
the  fog,  rushed  Kershaw's  infantry.1  The  position  was 
swept  in  an  instant,  with  its  seven  guns,  from  which  not  a 
shot  had  been  fired.  Such  of  Thoburn's  men  as  escaped 
capture  fled  to  the  rear,  which  was  the  only  thing  left  for 


1  A  battalion  of  the  Fifth  New  Vork  Heavy  Artillery  was  on  picket  from  Tho- 
burn's division,  and  the  Thirty-fourth  Ohio  from  Hayes's.  "  The  evening  be- 
fore the  battle  the  regiment  [Thirty-fourth  Ohio],  under  command  of  Lieutenant- 
Colonel  L.  Furney,  was  sent  on  picket.  In  the  morning,  before  dawn,  when  the 
surprise  occurred,  the  colonel  and  18  of  his  men  were  taken  prisoners.  The 
colonel  escaped  at  Mount  Jackson,  and  joined  his  command  a  few  days  there- 
after. The  loss  of  the  Thirty-fourth  in  this  affair  was  2  killed,  12  wounded,  and 
IS  prisoners"  (Ohio  in  the  War). 


THE  BATTLE  OF  CEDAR  CREEK.        223 

them  to  do.  Kershaw  turned  the  guns  on  the  retreating- 
troops,  since  he  had  no  artillery  of  his  own ;  and  leaving 
him  to  advance  against  Hayes's  camp  on  the  further  knob  of 
the  ridge,  at  the  pike,  Early  rode  back  to  Hnpp's  Hill,  to 
urge  forward  Wharton's  division  and  Carter's  artillery.1 

Boused  by  the  noise  of  the  firing,  Emory  was  quickly  at 
the  pike,  followed  by  Crook  from  Belle  Grove  and  Wright 
from  his  headquarters,  the  latter  having  simultaneously 
heard  Kershaw's  volley  firing  on  the  Union  left,  and  Bosser's 
lighter  rattle  on  the  Union  right.  They  all  exerted  them- 
selves at  once  to  form  a  line  for  the  defence  of  the  road,  with 
Crook's  Second  Division  (Hayes)  and  Kitching's  provisional 
command  as  a  basis,  the  Nineteenth  Corps  aiding,  while 
Wright  sent  to  Bicketts,  commanding  the  Sixth  Corps  (Col- 
onel Keifer  being  in  charge  of  the  Third,  Bicketts's,  division), 
to  hurry  two  divisions  forward  to  the  pike.  Happily  the 
orders  given  for  a  reconnoissance  from  Emory's  front  at  day- 
light had  caused  Grover's  Second  Brigade,  Molineux,  to  be 
standing  ready  to  move  ;  and  this  brigade  was  immediately 
available,  a  part  of  it  being  sent  by  Emory  to  the  new  pike 
line,  and  the  rest  holding  the  trenches  in  the  proper  front  of 
the  Nineteenth  Corps.'2 


1  The  point  where  Kershaw  crossed  the  creek  is  given  on  the  official  map,  and 
hence  in  the  map  of  the  present  volume,  as  near  the  house  of  J.  Roberts.  It  may 
be  well  to  note  that  Roberts  did  not  live  there  at  the  time  of  the  battle,  nor  dur- 
ing the  summer  of  1882,  when  the  writer  was  examining  the  region,  so  that  it 
might  be  misleading  to  speak  of  this  important  point  in  the  opening  scene  as 
Roberts's  ford,  he  being  only  a  temporary  resident  there  at  the  time  of  the  mil- 
itary survey  made  ten  years  ago. 

2  "I  caused  breakfast  to  be  prepared  for  the  men  at  an  early  hour,  and  at  the 
appointed  time  we  were  in  line  awaiting  orders.  At  about  5.40  a.m.  I  heard  the 
sound  of  heavy  firing  in  the  direction  of  the  position  of  the  Eighth  Corps,  and 
apprehending  an  attack,  immediately  ordered  my  command  into  the  rifle-pit% 
turning  out  a  few  sharpshooters  to  give  me  early  intimation  should  an  attack  be 
made  in  my  front.  Shortly  afterward  I  received  orders  to  detach  two  regiments 
to  my  left  to  support  the  battery  which  commanded  the  pike  and  ground  about 
the  main  bridge,  and  accordingly  I  sent  the  Twenty-second  Iowa  and  Third  Mas- 

10* 


22G  THE   SHENANDOAH  VALLEY. 

Under  ordinary  circumstances  this  effort  to  form  a  line  at 
the  pike  would  have  been  entirely  effective  against  the  force 
which  had  destroyed  Thoburn,  while  at  the  same  time 
enough  of  the  Nineteenth  Corps  could  have  been  left  to 
guard  its  trenches  facing  the  creek,1  to  hold  off  the  advance 
of  Wharton — for  the  latter  had  now  come  nearly  to  the  creek, 
capturing  a  few  pickets  on  that  side  of  the  stream,  and 
Early's  artillery  was  exchanging  shots  with  the  Union  guns. 
But  at  this  moment,  while  the  Union  troops  were  intent  on 
the  approach  of  Kershaw,  who  was  already  firing  upon  Hayes's 
camp  with  the  artillery  captured  in  Thoburn's,  a  second  and 
no  less  startling  surprise  fell  upon  them.  Sheltered  by 
the  fog  till  close  at  hand,  and  also  greatly  aided  by  the 
clamor  that  had  gone  on  since  the  beginning  of  Kershaw's 

Fachusetts  dismounted  cavalry.  By  this  time  a  battery  of  the  enemy,  directly  in 
my  front,  on  the  other  side  of  the  creek,  opened  a  fire  of  shell  upon  us,  and  the 
mist,  breaking  from  the  Valley,  discovered  a  line  apparently  prepared  to  attack  us. 
It  was  not  long  before  a  fire  of  shell,  enfilading  our  line  from  the  left,  with  an- 
other directly  in  my  rear,  and  a  sharp  musketry  fire  from  the  same  direction  (the 
position  occupied  by  the  Eighth  Corps),  showed  me  that  the  enemy  had  outflanked 
lis  ;  I  sheltered  my  men  as  much  as  possible  in  the  rifle-pits,  and  awaited  orders. 
In  the  meantime  the  troops  on  my  left  and  the  batteries  passed  me.  together  with 
the  two  regiments  of  this  brigade  which  had  been  sent  in  support  of  the  batteries, 
all  apparently  striving  toward  the  pike  (these  two  regiments  mentioned  rejoined 
me  subsequently) ;  and  finding  that  we  were  completely  outflanked,  that  the  re- 
treat was  general,  and  that  my  men  were  rapidly  falling  from  a  fire  they  could 
not  return,  and  "that  a  line  of  battle  was  being  formed  in  the  rear  by  the  Sixth 
Corps,  I  moved  out  by  the  flank,  in  good  order,  detaching  the  Eleventh  Indiana, 
by  order  of  Brevet-Major  General  Emory,  to  hold  the  hollow  stone  wall  near  the 
headquarters  of  the  Second  Division  "  (Molineux's  Report). 

1  Brigadier-General  McMillan,  in  temporary  command  of  the  First  Division, 
Nineteenth  Corps,  says  he  was  directed  by  Emory  to  put  the  Second  Brigade  on 
Grover's  left,  nearly  perpendicular  to  the  intrenchments,  to  resist  the  enemy  then 
coming  in  from  the  rear.  "I  put  the  Second  Brigade,  Colonel  Thomas,  in  the  po- 
sition indicated,  occupying  a  deep  ravine  and  thick  copse  of  wood,  from  which  it 
was  soon  driven  by  overwhelming  force,  but  not  until  completely  flanked,  and 
nearly  one-third  of  its  members  were  killed,  wounded,  or  captured."  McMillan 
meanwhile  had  ordered  his  First  Brigade,  Colonel  Davis,  to  hold  the  hill  as  long 
as  possible  with  the  Thirtieth  Massachusetts  and  One  Hundred  and  Fourteenth 
and  Ninetieth  New  York.     Those  troops  gallantly  obeyed  their  orders. 


THE  BATTLE  OF   CEDAR  CREEK.  227 

attack,  Gordon  came  through  the  woods  in  a  direction  nearly 
perpendicular  to  the  pike,  and  suddenly  burst  upon  the  left 
flank  of  the  divisions  of  Kitching  and  Hayes,  which  had  no 
intrenchments.  Already  shaken  by  the  disaster  of  their 
comrades,  who  were  streaming  through  their  camp  to  the 
rear,  the  remainder  of  Crook's  corps  broke  under  this  for- 
midable onslaught  from  a  wholly  unexpected  quarter,  and 
thereby  uncovered  the  position  of  the  Nineteenth  Corps, 
which  was  immediately  brought  under  a  concentrated  fire 
that  enfiladed  and  took  in  reverse  its  entire  line  of  works. 
It  being  impossible  to  maintain  the  original  position,  Wright 
commanded  this  corps  to  fall  back.1 

Conjectural  comparisons  in  regard  to  the  behavior  of  dif- 
ferent commands  were  never  more  out  of  place  than  as  ap- 
plied to  this  morning's  calamity.  An  attack  like  Kershaw's, 
successfully  initiated  at  that  hour,  against  a  single  unarmed 
division,  as  thoroughly  surprised  as  if  it  had  had  no  pickets 
out,  could  not  have  resulted  otherwise  than  it  did,  no 
matter  what  troops  might  have  been  thus  assaulted.  Nor 
was  it  remarkable  that  the  remainder  of  Crook's  bewildered 
forces,  and  the  portion  of  the  two  divisions  of  the  Nineteenth 
Corps  that  had  joined  them,  should  have  been  unable  to 
withstand  a  quickly  following  combined  assault  of  Ramseur, 
Pegram,  Gordon,  Kershaw,  and  Wharton,  the  greater  part 
of  it  coming  in  upon  the  rear.  It  is  even  probable  that  had 
the  attack  of  Kershaw  not  been  delivered  at  all,  and  the  sur- 
prise been  wholly  left  to  Gordon,  the  same  or  a  greater 
success  would  have  been  achieved,  and  Thoburn's  division 
captured  as  a  body,  instead  of  largely  dispersed.     It  should 

1  "  Seeing  that  no  part  of  the  original  line  could  be  held,  as  the  enemy  was 
already  on  the  left  flank  of  the  Nineteenth  Corps,  I  at  once  sent  orders  to  the 
Sixth  Corps  to  fall  back  to  some  tenable  position  in  rear :  and  to  General  Emory, 
commanding  the  Nineteenth  Corps,  that  as  his  left  was  turned,  he  should  fall 
back  and  take  position  on  the  right  of  the  Sixth"  (Wright's  .Report). 


228  THE  SHENANDOAH  VALLEY. 

further  be  observed  that  though  Early's  army  was  smaller 
than  Sheridan's,  he  was  able,  by  concentrating  first  against 
the  Eighth  Corps,  then  against  the  Nineteenth,  and  then 
against  the  Sixth,  to  have  the  more  powerful  force  at  the  ac- 
tual points  of  conflict.  It  must  not  be  supposed  that  Crook's 
command  had  broken  to  the  rear  with  no  attempt  whatever 
to  show  fight ;  its  loss  that  day  was  46  killed  and  268 
wounded,  as  well  as  533  missing.  From  it  had  been  cap- 
tured seven  guns,  ten  caissons,  and  sundry  wagons ;  the 
Ohio  battery  escaped,  and  fired  its  guns  during  the  retreat. 
The  Nineteenth  Corps  lost  eleven  guns,  through  being 
unable  to  get  them  away  from  the  crest  of  the  hill  when 
Gordon  crossed  the  pike  in  rear  of  the  intrenchments ;  and 
even  the  Sixth  Corps  afterward  lost  six,  so  that  twenty-four 
pieces  in  all  fell  into  Early's  hands.  Most  of  Crook's  am- 
bulance train,  many  army  wagons,  much  camp  equipage,  and 
more  than  1,300  prisoners  were  also  captured  during  this  dis- 
astrous morning.  As  for  the  gallant  Thoburn,  he  had  yield- 
ed his  life  in  breasting  the  tide  of  his  ill-fortune. 

The  Sixth  Corps  was  now  coming  on  the  scene,  halting 
first  on  a  wooded  knoll  not  far  from  the  pike,  and  holding 
off  the  enemy  there.  Emory  was  directed  to  place  his  corps 
on  the  right  of  the  Sixth,1  which  immediately  began  to  re- 
ceive the  combined  assault  of  Gordon's  corps  and  Kershaw's 
division.  Kicketts  was  soon  wounded,  and  the  management 
of  the  corps  thereafter  devolved  on  Getty,  while  the  senior 
officer  of  Getty's  division  was  Grant,  of  the  Vermont  brigade. 
Fog  and  smoke  still  shrouded  both  the  combatant  forces, 
but  Early  soon  learned  that  the  Sixth  Corps  had  been  able 
to  "  take  position  so  as  to  arrest  our  progress."     The  first 

i  '•  The  Sixth  Corps,  of  which  two  divisions  were  on  the  march  to  the  support 
of  the  left,  at  once  moved  to  the  rear,  on  receiving  instructions  to  that  effect,  as 
did  the  Nineteenth  Corps"  (Wright's  Iteport). 


THE  BATTLE  OP  CEDAR  CREEK.        229 

stand  of  much  consequence  beyond  the  wooded  knoll  first 
occupied  was  near  Middletown,1  about  a  mile  to  the  rear  of 
the  camp  of  the  Second  Division  of  the  corps.  This  divi- 
sion,2 in  the  hard  task  of  retiring  slowly  and  checking  the 
enemy  at  every  available  point,  performed  superb  service, 
whose  importance  to  the  fortunes  of  the  day  cannot  be  ex- 
aggerated ;  for,  being  on  the  extreme  left  of  the  infantry, 
near  the  pike,  it  bore  the  brunt  of  the  attacks. 

In  the  position  taken  up  on  the  ridge  west  of  Middletown, 
the  Sixth  Corps  batteries  were  in  or  near  the  cemetery.  The 
enemy  was  forced  by  this  halt  to  consolidate  and  strengthen 
his  own  line,  and  Ramseur  and  Pegram,  who  confronted  the 
Union  left,  reported  that  they  must  have  assistance,  as  they 
could  not  break  through  ;  accordingly  Wharton,  some  of 
whose  men,  after  crossing  Cedar  Creek  on  the  pike  bridge, 
had  rushed  from  their  ranks  to  plunder  the  Nineteenth 
Corps  camps,  was  ordered  forward  to  their  aid.  Getty's  own 
division,  now  under  Grant,  was  posted  with  Bidwell's  bri- 
gade on  the  left,  nearest  the  pike,  the  Vermonters  in  the 

1  "  It  [the  Sixth  Corps]  was?  found  posted,"  says  Early,  "on  a  ridge  on  the  west 
of  the  pike  and  parallel  to  it,  and  this  corps  offered  considerable  resistance.  The 
artillery  was  brought  up  and  opened  upon  it,  when  it  fell  back  to  the  north  of 
Middletown,  and  made  a  stand  on  a  commanding  ridge  running  across  the  pike." 

Although  the  lines  of  the  elaborate  official  map  are  reproduced,  as  the  best  at- 
tainable authority,  in  the  one  which  accompanies  the  present  volume,  they  are  to 
be  regarded  as  only  approximating  the  actual  lines  of  the  battle.  There  is  con- 
siderable evidence  to  show  that  a  temporary  stand  was  made  by  a  portion  of  the 
Nineteenth  Corps  immediately  on  the  arrival  of  the  Sixth,  not  far  from  the  Bplle 
Grove  House,  where  some  of  the  regiments  could  see  their  own  camps  plundered 
by  the  Confederate  soldiers :  still,  temporary  halts,  which  did  not  affect  the  course 
of  the  battle,  are  naturally  not  represented  on  the  map. 

Wright's  report  indicates  but  two  lines  as  undertaken  by  him,  apparently  view- 
ing any  intermediate  ones  as  temporary  halts  to  check  the  enemy.  The  first  of 
these  was  the  one  broken  by  Gordon's  onset  before  the  Sixth  Corps  came  up,  "on 
a  ridge  to  the  eastward  of  and  nearly  parallel  to  the  pike,"  that  is,  at  the  camps 
of  Hayes  and  Kitching.     The  second  was  the  one  north  of  Middletown. 

2  "A  portion  of  the  First  Division,  under  Generals  Wheaton  and  Mackenzie, 
and  a  part  of  the  artillery  of  the  corps,  also  behaved  admirably  "  (Wright's  Report). 


230         THE  SHENANDOAH  VALLEY. 

centre,  and  Warner  on  the  right.  A  fresh  attacking  divi- 
sion, thrown  in  at  such  a  juncture,  not  seldom  carries  ail 
before  it ;  but  Wharton's  was  greeted  with  a  tremendous  fire, 
under  which  his  whole  line  recoiled.  Bushing  forth  from 
their  places  in  the  cemetery  and  the  adjoining  grove,  Grant's 
command  drove  Wharton  down  the  hill ;  but  Early's  artil- 
lery, which  had  followed  close,  checked  the  gallant  counter- 
charge with  a  withering  fire  from  eighteen  or  twenty  guns, 
and  the  division  fell  back,  Bidwell  being  among  the  mor- 
tally wounded.1 

Three  hours  had  now  elapsed  since  the  opening  of  the 
battle.  It  was  between  eight  and  nine  o'clock,  and  the  sun 
had  dispelled  the  fog,  allowing  the  Union  generals  to  see 
what  there  was  in  their  front,  and  how  best  to  meet  it.  From 
causes  which  soon  became  better  understood,  the  vigor  of 
the  enemy's  attack  was  slackening.  The  peculiar  character 
of  the  engagement  thus  far  was  explicable.  The  position  en 
echelon  of  the  Union  corps  had  caused  each  to  be  farther 
north  than  the  one  on  its  left ;  hence,  when  Early  turned  the 
left  of  the  Cedar  Creek  line,  the  successive  marching  across 
of  the  Union  forces  to  confront  him,  brought  them  farther 
and  farther  down  the  pike.  Thus  the  Second  Division  of  the 
Sixth  Corps,  if  it  marched  by  the  shortest  cut  to  the  main 
road,  would  already  be  two  and  a  quarter  miles  in  rear  of 


1  "  Whi'e  I  was  endeavoring,"  says  Early,  "  to  discover  the  enenvy's  line  through 
the  obscurity,  Wharton's  division  came  back  in  some  confusion,  and  General 
Wharton  informed  me  that,  in  advancing  to  the  position  pointed  out  to  him  by 
Generals  Ramseur  and  Pegram,  his  division  had  been  driven  back  by  the  Sixth 
Corps,  which  he  said  was  advancing.  He  pointed  out  the  direction  from  which 
he  said  the  enemy  was  advancing,  and  some  pieces  of  artillery  which  had  come 
up  were  brought  into  action.  The  fog  soon  rose  sufficiently  for  us  to  see  the  en- 
emy's position  on  a  ridge  to  the  west  of  Middletown,  and  it  was  discovered  to  be 
a  strong  one.  After  driving  back  Wharton's  division  he  had  not  advanced,  but 
opened  on  us  with  artillery,  and  orders  were  given  for  concentrating  all  our  guns 
on  him." 


THE  BATTLE  OF  CEDAR  CREEK.        231 

Thoburn's  camp,  and  fully  a  mile  below  the  point  where 
Gordon's  column  first  struck  the  pike ;  while  if  Merritfc's 
men  should  ride  from  their  camp  by  the  shortest  straight 
line  to  the  pike,  they  would  come  upon  it  at  Middletown. 
Again,  the  very  success  of  the  morning  attacks  of  Gordon 
and  Kershaw  had  caused  them  to  pursue  their  retreating 
enemy  across  and  west  of  the  turnpike  ;  so  that  the  Sixth 
Corps,  when  encountered,  was  well  over  to  the  Confederate 
right.  These  two  elements  in  the  situation  forced  the  vic- 
torious assailants  to  laborious  changes  of  position  before 
they  could  secure  a  line  that  would  properly  confront  the 
two  corps  not  surprised  and  now  getting  into  supporting 
position,  namely,  the  Sixth  and  Torbert's.  The  attack  of 
Early's  reserve  division,  Wharton,  on  the  Union  left,  was 
repulsed,  as  has  been  seen ;  but  when  repetitions  of  Whar- 
ton's attempt  and  a  concentration  of  Early's  artillery  threat- 
ened to  once  rnore  turn  that  flank,  the  Union  troops  with- 
drew north  of  Middletown,  fully  two  miles  to  the  rear  of 
Getty's  camp.  After  Early  had  brought  up  his  fagged  lines 
to  this  new  position,  he  found  his  task  increasing  in  diffi- 
culty, for  the  Union  cavalry  now  extended  beyond  the  pike. 
The  manner  in  which  this  force  had  entered  into  the  main 
battle  requires  an  explanation. 

When,  before  daylight,  firing  had  broken  out  simultane- 
ously on  the  right  and  left,  Torbert's  first  effort  was  to  check 
Rosser,  who  appeared  on  the  Back  road  and  attacked  Cus- 
ter. Hardly  were  adequate  arrangements  made  for  this 
purpose,  before  a  rush  of  stragglers  came  through  the  cav- 
alry lines,  going  to  the  right  and  rear.  "  I  deployed  my 
escort,  First  Ehode  Island  Cavalry,"  says  Torbert,  "  as  did 
Brigadier-General  Merritt  his,  the  Fifth  United  States  Cav- 
alry. After  an  hour  or  two's  work  it  proved  to  be  a  fruitless 
effort.     The  escorts  were  drawn  in,  and  officers  sent  farther 


232  THE  SHENANDOAH   VALLEY. 

to  the  rear,  to  form  the  men.  By  this  time  the  enemy  had 
come  near  enough  for  the  cavalry  batteries  to  open  on  them, 
which  they  did.  The  enemy  did  not  bring  their  lines  in  the 
open  country  between  them  and  the  cavalry,  but  kept  them 
under  cover  of  the  woods.  Between  nine  and  ten  o'clock  I 
was  ordered  by  Major  General  Wright,  commanding  the 
army  temporarily,  Major-General  Sheridan  being  temporarily 
absent,  to  move  my  whola  cavalry  force  on  the  left  of  the 
army."  Torbert  promptly  made  this  transfer,  which  occu- 
pied but  a  short  time  ;  and  he  left  three  regiments  to  picket 
the  right  and  to  hold  Bosser  from  the  pike  on  that  flank, 
while  a  horse  battery  also  remained  there  until  the  infantry 
line  at  that  point  was  ordered  back,  when  it  rejoined  Devin's 
brigade  on  the  left.  Moore's  command,  which  had  been 
stationed  at  Buckton's  ford  picketing  the  left  flank,  after 
being  cut  off  from  the  main  army  by  Gordon's  movement, 
had  promptly  regained  it  at  Middletown. 

While  the  Union  generals  had  thus  secured  the  valua- 
ble assistance  of  the  greater  part  of  the  cavalry  in  the 
main  stress  of  battle,  Early  was  little  aided  by  this  arm. 
Payne's  brigade  was  all  the  mounted  force  he  had  at  the 
pike.  A  piece  of  good  fortune,  among  much  ill-luck  for 
the  Union  forces,  was  this  collapse  of  the  Confederate  cav- 
alry. Neither  Bosser  nor  Lomax  was  able  to  strike  the  pike, 
although  Early's  surprise  of  the  infantry  camps  had  filled  it 
with  fugitives.  Bosser  had  indeed  promptly  attacked  Cus- 
ter, on  the  Back  road,  at  Kupp's  Mill,  but  there,  as  in 
Emory's  front,  a  reconnoissance  had  been  ordered  for  day- 
break ;  and  besides,  Bosser's  minor  attempt,  two  days  be- 
fore, put  the  Union  horsemen  on  their  guard  against  sur- 
prise. Lomax  had  crossed  the  river  at  Front  Boyal,  after 
much  delay  from  Powell's  force,  which  fortunately  was  there 
confronting  him,  and  his  whole  division  was  occupied  all 


THE   BATTLE   OF   CEDAR  CREEK.  233 

day  in  pressing  back  Powell's  two  brigades  to  Stony  Point 
and  Newtown,1  so  that  he  did  not  reach  the  main  battle-field, 
but  returned  to  Luray  Valley  the  way  he  came.  The  feeble- 
ness of  Rosser's  efforts  can  be  best  judged  from  the  fact  that 
the  entire  loss  of  Custer's  division  in  the  all-day  battle,  end- 
ing in  a  pursuit  which  yielded  scores  of  cannons,  caissons, 
and  wagons,  was  2  killed  and  22  wounded.  Indeed,  the 
greater  part  of  the  Union  mounted  forces  had  been  left  free 
to  aid  in  holding  the  pike ;  while  the  inestimable  value  of 
this  service  is  attested  by  Early's  haunting  anxiety  lest  the 
cavalry  should  flank  him  there.  The  best  fruit  of  Tom's 
Brook  was  plucked  at  Cedar  Creek. 

The  Union  line,  then,  as  has  been  said,  was  at  length 
drawn  or  driven  back  a  mile  and  a  quarter  northeast  of  Mid- 
dletown,  and  four  miles  in  rear  of  Thoburn's  camp.  Yet 
Early  was  no  nearer  his  goal ;  for,  after  having  reckoned  as 
one  advantage  of  attacking  the  Union  left  the  massing  of 
the  cavalry  on  the  other  flank,  he  found  this  powerful  force 
threatening  to  envelop  his  own  right.  He  therefore 
crowded  his  troops  further  to  the  east.  Pegram,  moving 
through  Middletown,  took  position  across  the  pike  ;  Ker- 
shaw was  put  into  the  gap  left  by  Pegram ;  Wharton,  re- 
formed, was,  with  YVofford's  brigade,  which  had  become 
separated  from  Kershaw's  division,  put  east  of  the  pike,  to 
check  Torbert. 

But  discouraged,  at  length,  by  the  presence  of  the  Union 
cavalry,  and  by  Getty's  gallant  resistance,  Early  determined 


1  "  During  this  time  the  Second  Brigade,  Second  Division  (Colonel  Powell  com- 
manding division),  fell  back  slowly  by  order  on  the  Front  Royal  and  Winchester 
pike  to  Stony  Point,  and  then  to  a  point  near  Newtown,  followed  by  the  rebel 
General  Lomax1s  division  of  cavalry,  where  they  remained  a  greater  part  of  the 
day.  Colonel  Powell  thus  prevented  the  enemy's  cavalry  from  getting  on  the 
pike  to  attack  our  trains  and  rear  "  (Torbert's  Report). 


234  THE  SHENANDOAH  VALLEY. 

to  essay  an  attack  from  his  other  flank,1  and  sent  an  aid  to 
direct  an  immediate  advance  there.  This  officer,  says  Early, 
returned  with  the  report  "  that  he  delivered  my  order  to 
General  Kershaw,  but  the  latter  informed  him  that  his  divi- 
sion was  not  in  a  condition  to  make  the  attack,  as  it  was  very 
mnch  scattered,  and  there  was  a  cavalry  force  threatening 
him  in  front.  Lieutenant  Page  also  stated  that  he  had  seen 
Gordon's  division  in  Kershaw's  rear  re-forming,  and  that  it 
was  also  much  scattered,  and  that  he  had  not  delivered  the 
order  to  General  Gordon  because  he  saw  that  neither  his 
division  nor  Kershaw's  was  in  a  condition  to  execute  it !  '' 
The  discreditable  fact  was  that  not  only  had  the  enforced 
lull  occurred  which  is  so  familiar  where  troops  have  been 
marching  and  fighting  since  midnight,  but  in  addition 
Early's  organization  was  broken  by  the  absence  of  men 
plundering  the  captured  camps.2 

Meanwhile  had  occurred  the  most  dramatic  incident  in 
the  annals  of  the  Valley.     Journeying  from  Rectortown  to 


1  "  Discovering  that  the  Sixth  Corps  could  not  be  attacked  with  advantage  on 
its  left  flank,  because  the  approach  in  that  direction  was  through  an  open  flat  and 
across  a  boggy  stream  with  deep  banks,  I  directed  Captain  Powell,  serving  on 
General  Gordon's  staff,  who  rode  up  to  me  while  the  artillery  was  being  placed  in 
position,  to  tell  the  general  to  advance  against  the  enemy's  right  flank,  and  attack 
it  in  couj unction  wit"i  Kershaw,  while  a  heavy  fire  of  artillery  was  opened  from 
our  right "  (Early's  Memoir). 

2  Early"s  official  report  to  Lee  the  day  after  the  battle,  confesses  this  fact :  '  •  So 
many  of  our  men  had  stopped  in  the  camp  to  plunder  (in  which  I  am  sorry  to  say 
that  officers  participated),  the  country  was  so  open  and  the  enemy's  cavalry  so 
strong,  that  I  did  not  deem  it  prudent  to  press  fnrther,  especially  as  Lomax  had 
not  come  up.  I  determined,  therefore,  to  content  myself  with  trying  to  hold  the 
advantages  I  had  gained,  until  all  my  troops  had  come  up,  and  the  captured 
property  was  secured."  In  the  same  report  he  spoke  of  the  extraordinary  inability 
of  his  left  to  advance,  when  ordered  to  do  so  :  "  Word  was  sent  to  Gordon,  who 
had  got  on  the  left  with  his  division,  and  Kershaw,  who  were  then  also  to  swing 
around  and  advance  with  their  divisions;  but  the3'  stated  in  reply  that  a  heavy 
force  of  cavalry  had  got  in  their  front,  and  that  their  ranks  were  so  depicted  (by 
the  number  of  men  who  had  stopped  in  the  camps  to  plunder)  that  they  could  not 
advance  them." 


THE  BATTLE  OP  CEDAR  CREEK.        235 

Washington  the  night  of  the  16th,  Sheridan  had  completed 
his  business  there  the  next  morning,  the  17th,  and  had  hur- 
ried by  the  noon  train  to  Martinsburg. '  Finding  himself 
again  in  the  Valley,  with  no  apparent  urgency  for  his  pres- 
ence at  Cedar  Creek,  he  deemed  it  expedient  to  remain 
and  finish  the  business  on  which  Colonels  Alexander  and 
Thorn  had  accompanied  him.  The  morning  of  the  19th 
found  him  at  Winchester ;  and  when,  about  7  o'clock,  an 
officer  on  picket  reported  the  sounds  of  artillery,  he  gave 
no  special  heed  to  the  matter,  supposing  that  this  firing 
resulted  from  a  reconnoissance.  However,  about  two  hours 
later,  mounting  his  horse,  he  rode  through  Winchester,  and 
then  the  sound  of  the  artillery  made  a  battle  unmistaka- 
ble ;  while  at  Mill  Creek,  half  a  mile  beyond  the  town, 
he  found  trains  and  troops  already  there  from  the  broken 
line. 

Hastily  giving  orders  to  park  the  retreating  trains,  and  to 
use  the  spare  brigade  at  Winchester  to  form  a  cordon  across 
the  pike  and  fields,  so  as  to  stop  the  stragglers,  Sheridan 
dashed  up  the  pike,  with  an  escort  of  twenty  men.  He  called 
to  the  fugitives  to  turn  about  and  face  the  enemy ;  and,  as 
he  well  phrases  it,  "hundreds  of  the  men  who,  on  reflection, 
found  they  had  not  done  themselves  justice,  came  back  with 
cheers."  On  reaching  the  army,  then  eleven  and  a  half  miles 
from  Winchester,  he  was  received  with  a  tempest  of  joy  and 
enthusiasm.2 

1  "  General  Sheridan  has  just  been  here.  He  has  not  yet  fully  decided  about 
the  Manassas  road,  but  will  do  so  in  a  day  or  two.  He  has  gone  back  with 
Coloneis  Alexander  and  Thorn,  to  make  a  fuller  reconnoissance"  (Halleck  to 
Grant,  October  17th,  12.30  P.M.). 

2  " Far  away  in  the  rear  was  heard  cheer  after  cheer.  What  was  the  cause? 
Were  reinforcements  coming  ?  Yes,  Phil.  Sheridan  was  coming,  and  he  was  a 
host.  .  .  .  Dashing  along  the  pike,  he  came  upon  the  line  of  battle.  '  What 
troops  are  those  ?' shouted  Sheridan.  'The  Sixth  Corps,'  was  the  response 
from  a  hundred  voices.     '  We  are  all  right,'  said  Sheridan,  as  he  swung  his  old 


236  THE  SHENANDOAH  VALLEY. 

When  Sheridan  arrived,  the  enemy  had  just  been  forced 
to  relinquish  his  latest  attempts  to  seize  the  pike,  yet  had 
not  completed  his  arrangements  for  attacking  the  Union 
right ;  and  the  only  parts  of  the  army  which  Sheridan 
found  engaged  were  the  Second  Division  of  the  Sixth  Corps 
and  the  cavalry,  while  even  these  were  comparatively  little 
engaged.  Affairs  at  the  pike,  therefore,  being  no  longer 
urgent,  he  proceeded  at  once  to  the  most  important  task  now 
demanding  attention,  namely,  that  of  securing  a  strong  for- 
mation of  his  line.1  For,  in  the  concentration  of  exertions 
on  the  one  side  to  carry,  and  on  the  other  to  hold  the  turn- 
pike as  the  key-point  of  the  battle,  both  the  Union  and  the 
Confederate  lines,  as  a  whole,  were  much  broken ;  and  mov- 
ing and  fighting  across  several  miles  of  uneven  ground  had 
left  divisions  disjointed,  and  some  in  rear  of  others.  Sheri- 
dan, therefore,  rode  off  to  personally  aid  his  staff  in  bring- 
ing up  all  his  available  troops  on  a  line  about  perpendicular 
to  the  pike,  extending  Getty's  line,  while,  as  the  left  was 
now  more  than  adequately  guarded,  he  caused  all  of  Custer's 

hat  and  dashed  along  the  line  toward  the  right.  '  Never  mind,  boys,  we'll  whip 
them  yet,  we'll  whip  them  yet !  We  shall  sleep  in  our  old  quarters  to-night ! ' 
were  the  encouraging  words  of  the  chief  as  he  rode  along,  while  the  men  threw 
their  hats  high  in  air,  leaped  and  danced  and  cheered  in  wildest  joy  "  (Three 
Years  in  the  Sixth  Corps). 

1  "One  thing  at  once  struck  me  as  curious — that  the  stream  of  men  was  now 
going  toward  Middletown.  Astonished,  I  left  Wheaton  and  galloped  over  to  the 
pike,  where  I  learned  that  Sheridan  had  just  passed  up— as  well  as  can  be  ascer- 
tained, it  was  half  past  eleven  o'clock — and  directly  after,  meeting  General  Forsyth, 
chief  of  staff,  I  received  orders  to  go  to  Newtown,  form  a  guard,  and  collect  all 
the  stragglers  I  could,  and  bring  them  up  to  the  front.  This  I  proceeded  to  do, 
and  finally  collected  about  two  thousand  men  of  all  corps,  and  brought  them  up 
and  turned  them  over  to  the  command  of  General  Crook,  then  on  our  extreme 
left  and  rear.  From  the  time  the  Sixth  Corps  became  engaged,  at  about  nine  a.m.  , 
until  Sheridan  came  up,  about  noon,  the  attacks  of  the  enemy  were  on  the  whole 
feeble  and  ineffective.  .  .  .  Sheridan  rode  along  his  line,  seeing  for  himself 
all  his  troops,  and  saying  a  word  or  two  as  he  went  along  to  encourage  them,  to 
which  they  responded  with  cheers ''  (Colonel  B.  W.  Crowninshield's  Cedar 
Creek). 


THE  BATTLE  OF  CEDAR  CREEK.        237 

cavalry  to  be  brought  together  on  the  right.1  From  the 
moment  that  he  saw  the  situation  of  the  battle,  he  had  de- 
termined not  to  allow  the  enemy  to  remain  in  possession  of 
the  field,  but  to  recover  it  as  soon  as  all  should  be  ready  for 
attack.  This  assurance  he  gave  to  the  troops  as  he  rode 
along  the  lines,  and  the  splendid  inspiration  of  his  pres- 
ence was  the  best  omen  of  coming  victory. 

We  must  now  turn  again  to  the  lines  of  the  assailants. 
Astonished  at  the  reports  brought  him  from  his  left,  Early 
had  proceeded  thither  to  direct  an  attack.  About  one 
o'clock  he  succeeded  in  getting  some  of  his  troops  ready, 
and  the  Nineteenth  Corps  and  Wheaton's  division  of  the 
Sixth  were  assaulted ;  but  the  enemy  was  easily  repulsed. 
The  affair  might  have  proved,  however,  very  serious,  had 
not  the  Union  right  been  strengthened  by  Sheridan,  and 
made  ready  to  receive  the  onset,  a  temporary  breastwork  of 
rails  and  logs  having  been  hastily  thrown  up. 

The  repulse  of  Early's  left  told  him  that  fortune  had 
quitted  his  standards.  He  thenceforth  contented  himself 
with  the  endeavor  to  get  his  prisoners  and  his  captured  guns 
and  wagons  back  to  Fisher's  Hill.  But  at  four  o'clock  Sher- 
idan ordered  an  advance,  and  the  whole  Union  line  gallantly 
responded.  Wright  was  on  the  left,  Emory  on  the  right, 
Crook  in  column  in  reserve,  Merritt  and  Custer  on  the  left 
and  right  flanks.  The  enemy  had  improved  the  two  or  three 
hours  that  had  elapsed  since  he  ceased  his  aggression  to 
establish  himself  behind  stone  walls,  and  to  make  other  de- 
fensive preparations.  But  his  dread  of  being  flanked  by  the 
cavalry  caused  him  to  so  extend  his  lines  as  to  make  them 

1  "I  hastened  from  Winchester,  where  I  was  on  my  return  from  Washington, 
and  found  the  armies  between  Middletowu  and  Newtown,  having  been  driven 
back  four  miles.  I  here  took  the  affair  in  hand,  and  quickly  united  the  corps — 
formed  a  compact  line  of  battle  just  in  time  to  repulse  an  attack  of  the  enemy  " 
(Sheridan  to  Grant,  Ootober  19th,  10  p.m.). 


238  THE  SHENANDOAH   VALLEY. 

unduly  thin.  Still,  in  Emory's  front  the  advance  was  stoutly 
contested,  until  a  spirited  dash  of  a  portion  of  Dwight's 
division,  under  the  personal  direction  J  of  Sheridan,  put  the 
enemy  to  flight  at  that  point.  The  tactical  movement  se- 
lected had  been  a  left  half-wheel — the  same  that  Sheridan 
had  employed  at  Winchester  and  Fisher's  Hill ;  and  Dwight's 
division,  which  was  on  the  wheeling  flank,  made  such  pro- 
gress that  a  portion  of  it  came  under  the  fire  of  a  Sixth 
Corps  battery,  which  was  nearer  the  pivot.  Grover,  of  the 
Nineteenth  Corps,  and  Wheaton,  of  the  Sixth,  on  their  fronts 
handsomely  broke  the  enemy's  line  ;  while  of  the  infantry 
and  cavalry  at  the  pike  it  is  enough  to  say  that  they  fought 
with  the  vigor  they  had  exhibited  throughout  the  battle. 
Custer,  on  the  right,  charged  with  his  usual  spirit. 

Now  consternation  spread  along  the  Confederate  ranks, 
until  division  after  division  gave  way,  and  the  army  that  had 
swept  over  the  field  in  triumph  at  dawn  was  a  mass  of  fugi- 
tives at  night.  Though  Sheridan's  opponents  were  among  the 
choice  troops  of  the  South,  who,  up  to  a  month  before,  had 
considered  themselves  invincible,  at  least  in  the  Valley,  yet 
never  was  greater  rout  seen  on  a  battle-field  since  Bull  Kim.'2 

1  General  Dwight  now  resuming  charge  of  the  division,  McMillan  had  returned 
to  his  brigade.  "The  Second  Brigade,"  says  McMillan,  '-encountered  a  most 
murderous  fire  from  a  hidden  enemy  on  the  right  and  rear.  At  this  critical  mo- 
ment I  wheeled  the  Second  Brigade,  and,  by  Colonel  Davis's  assistance,  two  of 
his  regiments  to  the  right  forming  a  line  perpendicular  to  the  one  of  direct  at- 
tack, in  a  few  moments  drove  the  enemy  flying  from  his  cover.  After  moving  to 
the  right  a  short  distance,  I  began  to  get  my  command  in  its  former  position 
to  the  left  and  front,  when  Major-General  Sheridan  rode  up  and  told  me  to  move  to 
the  left,  so  as  to  complete  the  line  as  when  it  first  advanced.  So  rapidly  had  we 
driven  the  enemy  that  horsemen  could  with  difficulty  get  through  the  woods  as 
rapidly.  After  changing  the  direction  of  the  troops  by  direction  of  Major  Forsyth, 
of  Major-General  Sheridan's  staff,  1  halted  my  command  to  wait  for  General  Cus- 
ter to  get  into  position  to  protect  my  right." 

2  Early's  own  language  sustains  the  truth  of  the  assertion  in  the  text :  "A  por- 
tion of  the  enemy  had  penetrated  an  interval  which  was  between  Evans's  brigade, 
on  the  extreme  left,  and  the  rest  of  the  iine,  when  that  brigade  gave  way,  and 


THE  BATTLE  OF  CEDAR  CREEK.        239 

The  Union  line,  hurrying  over  the  field,  captured  fugitives 
by  scores.  At  Cedar  Creek  the  infantry  pursuit  stopped, 
but  the  cavalry  kept  on.  A  bridge  across  a  little  brook  be- 
tween Strasburg  and  Fisher's  Hill  broke  down,  and  at  once 
the  road  became  blocked  with  a  mass  of  guns,  caissons,  am- 
bulances and  wagons.  Custer  and  Devin,  swooping  upon 
these,  gathered  them  up ;  for  the  disorganized  mob  took  to 
the  fields,  neither  attempting  to  check  the  pursuit  nor  to 
save  anything.  During  the  evening  Dwight's  division  crossed 
the  creek,  and  camped  at  Hupp's  Hill. 

Early's  loss  in  this  engagement  seems  to  have  been  about 
3,100 — 1,860  killed  and  wounded,  and  "  something  over  1,000 
prisoners,"  according  to  his  own  account ;  but  about  1,200 
had  fallen  into  the  hands  of  Sheridan.  Twenty-four  Con- 
federate guns  were  captured ;  the  twenty-four  lost  by  the 
Union  troops  in  the  morning  were  all  retaken,  with  all  the 
captured  ambulances,  and  fifty-six  of  Early's  ;  and  a  number 
of  battle-flags  were  among  the  spoils.  The  cavalry  also  set 
fire  to  scores  of  abandoned  wagons  and  ambulances.  The 
only  trophies  retained  by  Early  were  1,429  prisoners,  whom 
he  had  taken  the  precaution  to  send  betimes  to  the  rear,  and 
to  forward  to  Richmond,  where  they  arrived  a  few  days 
later. 

The  Union  loss  in  killed,  wounded,  and  missing  was  5,764, 
distributed  as  follows  : 


Gordon's  other  brigades  soon  followed.  .  .  .  Every  effort  was  made  to  stop 
and  rally  Kershaw's  and  Ramseur's  men,  but  the  mass  of  them  resisted  all  appeals 
and  continued  to  go  to  the  rear."  He  adds  that  Ramseur  only  succeeded  in  re- 
taining with  him  200  or  300  men  out  of  his  whole  division,  and  Major  Goggm,  of 
Kershaw's  staff,  about  the  same  number  of  Conner's  brigade ;  and  when  these 
troops  were  overwhelmed,  and  Ramseur  was  mortally  wounded,  Pegram  alone 
got  "  a  portion  of  his  command  "  across  Cedar  Creek  in  an  organized  condition  ; 
"  but  this  small  force  soon  dissolved."  A  part  of  Evans's  brigade  had  bee n  ral- 
lied in  the  rear,  and  held  a  ford  above  the  bridge  for  a  short  time,  "  but  it  followed 
the  example  of  the  rest." 


240 


THE   SHENANDOAH   VALLEY. 


Cavalry  Corps  . . . 

Sixth  Corps 

Nineteenth  Corps 
Eighth  Corps 


Killed. 


25 
255 
243 

40 

5b9 


Wounded. 


139 
1,666 

1,352 
268 

3,425 


Missing. 


50 

294 
893 
533 

1,770 


Aggregate. 


214 
2,215 

2,488 
847 


5,764 


In  the  morning  Colonel  Thoburn  and  General  Bidwell 
were  killed,  and  Colonel  Kitching  fatally  wounded  ;  Generals 
Wright,  Grover,  and  Ricketts  were  also  wounded,  and  Col- 
onels Mackenzie  and  Penrose,  commanding  brigades.  In 
Merritt's  final  charge  at  Middletown  fell  the  accomplished 
and  ckivalric  Lowell,  commanding  the  Reserve  or  Regular 
Brigade,  whose  commission  as  brigadier-general  had  been 
signed  that  day.  His  command  had  performed  admirable 
service,  having  held,  during  the  morning,  an  advanced  posi- 
tion, dismounted,  behind  a  stone  wall,  from  which  the  enemy 
could  not  drive  it.  "I  do  not  think  there  was  a  quality," 
said  Sheridan,  "  which  I  could  have  added  to  Lowell.  He 
was  the  perfection  of  a  man  and  a  soldier." 

When  it  became  known  throughout  the  North  how  glory 
had  been  plucked  out  of  calamity  in  this  memorable  battle 
at  Cedar  Creek,  the  country  rang  with  praises  of  Sheridan. 
Grant  caused  a  salute  of  one  hundred  guns  to  be  fired  from 
each  of  his  armies  at  City  Point,  in  honor  of  the  achieve- 
ment. "  Turning  what  had  bid  fair  to  be  a  disaster  into 
glorious  victory,"  he  wrote  to  Stanton,  "  stamped  Sheridan 
what  I  have  always  thought  him,  one  of  the  ablest  of  gen- 
erals." Meade,  on  receiving  the  news,  wrote  to  Grant  that 
"to  achieve  such  results,  after  having  met  the  reverse  he 
describes,  is  one  of  the  most  brilliant  feats  of  the  war." 
Congress,  a  few  months  later,  passed  a  resolution  tendering 


THE  BATTLE  OP  CEDAR  CREEK.        241 

its  thanks  to  "  Major-General  Philip  H.  Sheridan,  and  to  the 
officers  and  men  under  his  command,  for  the  gallantry,  mili- 
tary skill,  and  courage  displayed  in  the  brilliant  series  of  vic- 
tories achieved  by  them  in  the  Valley  of  the  Shenandoah,  and 
especially  for  their  services  at  Cedar  Eun,  on  the  19th  day  of 
October,  1864,  which  retrieved  the  fortunes  of  the  day,  and 
thus  averted  a  great  disaster."  State  Legislatures  passed  reso- 
lutions of  eulogy.  President  Lincoln,  on  receiving  news  of 
the  battle,  sent  to  General  Sheridan  the  following  message  : 

"  With  great  pleasure  I  tender  to  you  and  your  brave  army  the  thanks 
of  the  nation,  and  my  own  personal  admiration  and  gratitude  for  the 
month's  operations  in  the  Shenandoah  Valley,  and  especially  for  the 
splendid  work  of  October  19,  1861." 

When,  a  few  weeks  later,  the  President  appointed  Sheri- 
dan a  Major-General  in  the  army,  the  appointment  was  ex- 
pressed to  be  "  for  the  personal  gallantry,  military  skill,  and 
just  confidence  in  the  courage  and  patriotism  of  your  troops, 
displayed  by  you  on  the  19fch  day  of  October,  at  Cedar  Run, 
whereby,  under  the  blessing  of  Providence,  your  routed 
army  was  reorganized,  a  great  national  disaster  averted, 
and  a  brilliant  victory  achieved  over  the  rebels  for  the  third 
time  in  pitched  battle  within  thirty  days."  These  words 
were  dictated  by  Abraham  Lincoln. 

Cedar  Creek,  the  crown  of  Sheridan's  campaign  in  the 
Valley,  presents  an  illustration  of  the  part  which  the  unex- 
pected often  plays  in  war.  This  engagement  was  the  sequel 
of  a  retrograde  from  Harrisonburg  which  had  been  under- 
taken with  no  prevision  that  such  a  combat  could  occur. 
Grant  and  Sheridan,  under  the  impression  that  the  enemy's 
army  in  the  Valley  was  hopelessly  dispirited  and  nearly  de- 
stroyed, were  arranging  new  combinations  of  much  import- 
ance. These  included  the  transfer  of  an  infantry  corps  and 
XI.— 11 


242  THE  SHENANDOAH  VALLEY. 

a  division  of  cavalry  to  Petersburg,  and  the  beginning  of 
operations  east  of  the  Blue  Ridge  by  a  portion  of  the  forces. 
Only  the  chance  discovery  of  an  obscure  and  even  fictitious 
warning,  taken  from  a  Confederate  signal  station,  gave  to  the 
Union  army  the  services  of  the  two  cavalry  divisions  that 
were  just  departing  on  an  expedition  to  the  Virginia  Central 
Railroad.  Only  a  needless  display  of  a  portion  of  Early's  infan- 
try in  a  reconnoissance  caused  Wright's  command  to  be  hurried 
back  from  Ashby's  Gap  ;  and  no  seer  would  have  been  needed 
to  foretell  the  result  of  the  battle  at  Cedar  Creek,  with  the 
part  played  by  the  Sixth  Corps  left  out.  But  Early  also  had 
his  share  of  good  fortune  in  the  timely  fog  that  screened  his 
attack,  and  favored  a  surprise  which  alone  could  warrant  a 
reasonable  hope  of  success ;  above  all,  he  was,  without  suspect- 
ing it,  greatly  aided  in  his  initial  stroke  by  the  temporary  ab- 
sence of  the  leader  of  the  Union  forces.  This  latter  piece  of 
luck,  again,  was  more  than  counterbalanced  by  the  return  of 
Sheridan  at  the  very  moment  when  his  presence  was  most  po- 
tent to  turn  the  wavering  scale ;  for  the  Union  army  received 
an  inestimable  reinforcement  in  regaining  its  commander. 

Yet,  strange  as  was  the  entrance  of  fortuitous  elements 
into  this  battle,  they  cannot  be  said  to  have  controlled  its 
issue  ;  for  the  inspiration  and  strength  which  Sheridan's 
personality  lent  to  his  forces  that  day  were  the  fruit  of  a 
thorough  confidence  in  him,  which  had  been  steadily  grow- 
ing ever  since  he  had  taken  command,  and  which,  at  his 
sudden  and  unexpected  appearance  on  this  field,  burst  forth 
in  an  enthusiasm  unexampled  in  the  war.  "  The  accident 
of  the  morning,"  declared  Sheridan,  in  his  despatch  to 
Grant,  "turned  to  our  advantage  as  much  as  though  the 
whole  movement  had  been  planned."  Certainly  no  train  of 
events  could  well  have  been  framed  to  bring  into  a  more 
vivid  and  dramatic  light  his  qualities  as  a  leader  of  men. 


CHAPTER  XIV. 

WAYNESBORO. 

The  battle  of  Cedar  Creek  put  an  end,  for  a  time,  to  the 
project  of  transferring  a  part  of  the  Army  of  the  Shenan- 
doah to  City  Point.  For,  though  utterly  routed,  Early's 
plight  was  apparently  no  worse  then  than  it  had  been  after 
the  action  of  Fisher's  Hill ;'  and  his  resumption  of  a  danger- 
ous aggressive  after  that  overthrow,  clearly  suggested  that,  if 
again  reinforced,  and  the  Union  army  should  be  diminished, 
he  might  repeat  the  attempt  which  had  just  come  so  perilously 
near  success.  Besides,  he  was  now  numerically  stronger 
than  after  his  September  defeats.  "  These  reinforcements," 
he  says,  speaking  of  Kershaw's  and  Rosser's  troops,  "  about 
made  up  my  losses  at  Winchester  and  Fisher's  Hill ;  "  hence 
as  his  casualties  at  Cedar  Creek  were  a  third  less  than  in  the 
two  former  battles  combined,  he  must  have  brought  more 
troops  out  of  that  encounter  than  out  of  the  two  preceding 
ones.  Finally,  the  burning  of  the  Valley  all  the  way  down 
from  Staunton,  which  had  made  it  impracticable  for  the  Con  - 
federate  army  to  sustain  itself  save  for  a  few  days  at  Fisher's 
Hill,  also  rendered  difficult  any  serious  pursuit. 

During  the  night  after  its  defeat  at  Cedar  Creek,  the 
Southern  army  rested  in  its  intrenchments  on  Fisher's  Hill, 


1  "  I  feel  certain  that  its  rout  from  Fisher's  Hill  was  such  that  there  was 
scarcely  a  company  organization  held  together"  ( Sheridan"  s  Report,  February  3, 
I860). 


244  THE  SHENANDOAH  VALLEY.       . 

but  long  before  dawn  retreated  to  New  Market.  Rosser  re- 
mained some  hours  as  rear-guard  at  Fisher's  Hill,  but  in 
his  turn  soon  retreated,  sharply  pursued  by  the  Union  cav- 
alry to  or  beyond  Woodstock.  He  then  established  his  line 
on  Stony  Creek,  from  Columbia  Furnace  to  Edenburg,  about 
half-way  between  Woodstock  and  Mount  Jackson.  Lomax 
drew  back  through  the  Luray  Valley,  and  took  post  in  the 
narrow  gorge  at  Millford,  which  he  successfully  held  against 
Powell,  covering  Early's  right  flank  beyond  the  Massanutten. 

At  New  Market  Early  remained  three  weeks,  and  there 
received  many  convalescents  and  hundreds  of  conscripts,  who 
had  been  absent  on  details ;  and  to  these  was  now  added  Cros- 
by's brigade  fromBreckenridge's  Department  of  Southwestern 
Virginia.  Despite  these  reinforcements,  he  contented  him- 
self with  remaining  on  the  defensive.  The  24th  of  October, 
Powell  made  a  reconnoissance  of  Lomax's  position  in  the 
Luray  Valley,  and  two  days  later  attacked  in  force  ;  he  was 
compelled,  however,  to  withdraw,  since  the  Millford  defenses 
were  too  strong  to  carry.  The  principal  other  operation 
in  the  Military  Division,  during  October,  was  the  repulse 
of  Moss  Hill  and  360  men,  by  the  garrison  of  Beverly,  con- 
sisting of  the  Eighth  Ohio  cavalry.  In  this  affair  Hill  was 
said  to  have  lost  140  men. 

Sheridan's  success  in  the  Valley  had  been  too  marked  for 
his  opinions  to  fail  of  receiving  great  consideration,  both  at 
Washington  and  City  Point.  Grant  wrote  to  him  :  "  If  it  is 
possible  to  follow  up  your  great  victory  until  you  can  reach 
the  Central  road,  do  it,  even  if  you  have  to  live  on  half  ra- 
tions. I  say  nothing  about  reaching  Lynchburg  with  a  por- 
tion of  your  force,  because  I  doubt  the  practicability  of 
it."  Sheridan,  however,  was  tenacious  in  his  opinion.  "I 
have  found  it,"  he  wrote,  October  25th,  "impossible  to 
move  on  the  Central  Railroad  as  joxi  desire.     If  I  do  so,  it 


WAYNESBORO.  245 

must  be  up  the  Valley,  via  Swift  Bun  Gap  or  Brown's  Gap, 
or  across,  via  Front  Boyal  and  Chester  Gap.  To  move  up  the 
Valley  via  the  routes  designated  would  be  exceedingly  diffi- 
cult, on  account  of  supplies  and  forage,  and  would  demoralize 
the  troops,  now  in  magnificent  trim.  To  move  by  Chester  Gap 
I  would  have  to  leave  at  least  5,000  (the  whole  of  Crook)  in 
the  Valley.  To  open  the  Orange  and  Alexandria  Bailroad 
would  require  a  corps  on  it  to  protect  it,  which  would  leave 
me  very  little  to  operate  with  successfully.  To  advance 
against  Gordonsville  and  Charlottesville  with  a  line  of  com- 
munication lip  this  Valley  and  through  the  Blue  Bidge,  is 
impracticable.  I  have  been  meditating  cavalry  operations 
against  the  Central  Bailroad  as  soon  as  the  necessary  prep- 
arations can  be  made."  Soon  after,  the  Winchester  and  Po- 
tomac Bailroad  was  rebuilt,  and  the  relaid  road,  from  Pied- 
mont back  to  Manassas,  taken  up.  Thus  both  the  railroad 
question  and  the  proposed  Charlottesville  campaign  were 
settled  as  Sheridan  advised  and  desired.1 

November  9th,  Sheridan  withdrew  his  army  to  Kerns- 
town,  where  it  would  find  better  quarters  in  the  waning 
season,  and  a  shorter  line  of  supply.  Informed  by  his 
scouts  of  this  movement,  and  thinking  it  might  mean  the 
detachment  of  troops  to  Petersburg,  Early  the  next  morn- 
ing hurried  his  whole  army  from  New  Market,  and,  cross- 
ing Cedar  Creek,  advanced  down  the  pike  to  Middletown. 
Sheridan  soon  had  his  army  in  readiness  to  deliver  battle, 
and   directed  Torbert,   about  noon  of  the   12th,   to   move 


1  "  Colonel  Mosby,  under  date  of  the  6th  instant,  reports  that  the  enemy  are 
taking  up  the  rails  of  the  Manassas  Gap  Railroad,  and  using  them  to  repair  the 
Winchester  and  Potomac  road,  which  has  been  completed  as  far  as  Charlestown. 
From  the  time  the  enemy  occupied  the  Manassas  road  until  its  abandonment, 
Colonel  Mosby  states  that  his  command  killed  and  captured  about  600  men,  an 
equal  number  of  horses,  ten  wagons,  etc.  "  (R.  E.  Lee  to  Seddo-n,  November 
11th). 


246  THE  SHENANDOAH  VALLEY. 

out  the  cavalry  corps — Merritt's  and  Ouster's  divisions  to 
the  right,  on  the  Back  and  Middle  roads,  against  Rosser, 
and  Powell  to  the  left,  on  the  Front  Royal  pike,  against 
Lomax. 

Eosser  was  speedily  driven  across  Cedar  Creek  by  the 
Union  horsemen,  with  Pennington  in  advance,  being  so 
hotly  pressed  that  Lomax  was  moved  over  to  his  assistance. 
Thereupon  Powell,  falling  upon  McCausland's  brigade  at 
Stony  Point,  routed  it,  driving  it  completely  across  the 
Shenandoah  and  through  Front  Eoyal  up  the  Luray  Valley, 
capturing  its  two  guns  and  several  caissons  and  ammunition 
wagons,  besides  20  officers  and  225  men,  with  two  battle- 
flags.  Dudley's  brigade  of  the  Nineteenth  Corps  and  a  skir- 
mish line  of  the  Sixth  moved  out  in  support  of  the  cavalry, 
advancing  three  miles  from  the  intrenchments ;  and  the 
whole  army  was  ordered  to  be  on  the  alert  for  the  13th. 

But  Early  had  withdrawn  under  cover  of  the  night,  his 
rear-guard  of  infantry  being  slightly  harassed  by  Merritt. 
He  returned  to  his  camp  at  New  Market  the  14th.  "Citi- 
zens report,"  wrote  Sheridan  to  Grant,  the  following  day, 
"  Early's  army  very  much  increased  in  numbers  ; "  and  cer- 
tainly his  inspection  reports  indicated  a  comparatively  large 
infantry  force.  But  he  had  withdrawn  from  Middletown 
without  venturing  an  attack. 

Kershaw's  division  was  now  returned  to  its  proper  corps 
at  Petersburg,  and  Crosby's  brigade  to  Southwest  Virginia, 
where  important  operations  were  at  hand.  These  move- 
ments caused  the  rumor  to  reach  City  Point  that  Early's 
whole  army  had  been  recalled  from  the  Valley,  and  Grant 
thereupon  directed  Sheridan,  if  he  was  satisfied  that  this 
was  the  fact,  to  send  him  the  Sixth  Corps  without  delay. 
"  If  your  cavalry,"  he  added,  "  can  cut  the  Virginia  Central 
road,  now  is  the  time  to  do  it."     To  Halleck  he  said,  the 


WAYNESBORO.  247 

next  day,  that  one  division  of  cavalry  ought  also  to  be  sent 
to  City  Point,  "  unless  they  can  get  through  to  cut  the  Cen- 
tral road  and  canal."  Sheridan  at  once  ordered  his  cavalry 
up  the  Valley  to  determine  whether  it  would  be  best  to 
detach  these  forces. 

Torbert  marched  his  Second  and  Third  Divisions  up  the 
Valley  to  Mount  Jackson,  driving  in  Early's  cavalry  pickets 
from  the  Stony  Creek  line,  and  crossing  the  North  Fork 
into  Meem's  Bottom,  at  the  foot  of  Rude's  Hill.  He  caused 
the  enemy,  as  he  reported,  "to  develop  about  10,000  infantry 
and  artillery,  and  one  division  of  cavalry."  Torbert's  loss 
was  only  about  30,  and  prisoners  were  captured,  from  whom 
it  was  learned  that  Kershaw's  was  the  only  division  that  had 
left  the  Valley. 

Sheridan,  accordingly,  the  25th,  notified  Halleck  that 
"there  are  still  here  four  divisions  of  infantry  and  seven 
brigades  of  cavalry.  .  .  .  Unless  there  is  some  great 
necessity  for  sending  off  the  Sixth  Corps  immediately,  I 
deem  it  best  to  wait  until  the  season  is  a  little  further  ad- 
vanced." 

Throughout  Sheridan's  campaign  the  Confederate  trooper 
Mosby  had  continued  the  peculiar  system  of  warfare  for 
which  long  before  he  had  become  noted.  As  his  headquar- 
ters were  in  Loudoun  County,  he  moved  now  across  the 
Potomac  into  Maryland,  and  now  through  the  Blue  Ridge 
into  the  Valley,  surprising  pickets  at  the  fords,  bushwhack- 
ing stray  soldiers,  burning  supply  trains,  and  surrounding 
and  paroling  small  detachments.  The  restless  activity  of 
men  like  Mosby,  White,  and  McNeil  kept  many  regiments 
of  Union  troops  engaged  in  hunting  them  down. 

August  16th  Grant  had  written  to  Sheridan  :  "  If  you  can 
possibly  spare  a  division  of  cavalry,  send  them  through 
Loudoun  County  to  destroy  and  carry  off  the  crops,  animals, 


248  THE  SHENANDOAH  VALLEY. 

negroes,  and  all  men  under  fifty  years  of  age  capable  of 
bearing  arms.  In  this  way  yon  will  get  many  of  Mosby's 
men.  All  male  citizens  under  fifty  can  fairly  be  field  as 
prisoners  of  war,  and  not  as  citizen  prisoners.  If  not  already 
soldiers,  tfiey  will  be  made  so  tfie  moment  tlie  rebel  army 
gets  bold  of  them."  An  exenrption  was  soon  made  in  favor 
of  "all  loyal  persons;"  however,  Sheridan  could  not  then 
carry  out  this  plan. 

Toward  the  end  of  November  Sheridan  sent  a  division  of 
cavalry,  under  Merritt,  into  Loudoun  County  to  "  consume 
and  destroy  all  forage  and  subsistence,  burn  all  barns  and 
mills  and  their  contents,  and  drive  off  all  stock."  The  move- 
ment was  described  to  be  "  in  retaliation  for  the  assistance 
and  sympathy  given  them  [Mosby  and  his  men]  by  the  inhabi- 
tants of  Loudoun  Valley,"  and  the  orders  were  executed,  Mer- 
ritt bringing  off  among  his  spoils  between  three  thousand  and 
four  thousand  sheep,  nearly  one  thousand  hogs,  several  hun- 
dred cattle,  and  over  five  hundred  horses.  Pew  of  Mosby's 
men,  however,  could  be  found. 

While  these  operations  were  starting  in  Loudoun  County, 
Early  again  attacked  the  Baltimore  and  Ohio  road.  Rosser 
crossed  the  Great  North  Mountain  with  two  brigades,  his 
own  and  Payne's,  marched  to  New  Creek  on  the  railroad, 
and  surprised  that  fortified  post,  commanded  by  Colonel 
Latham,  capturing  about  500  of  its  garrison,  with  their 
arms  and  colors,  and  its  seven  guns ;  four  of  these  being 
heavy  pieces,  were  spiked  and  left,  the  carriages  being 
burned.  All  the  Government  buildings  and  the  supplies  in 
them  were  soon  aflame,  and  Rosser  carried  off  about  two 
hundred  and  fifty  horses. 

At  the  beginning  of  December  Lee  called  for  the  return 
of  his  entire  Second  Corps  to  Petersburg ;  for  infantry  cam- 
paigning in  the  Valley  was  ended,  whereas  it  was  still  possi- 


WAYNESBORO.  249 

ble  around  Eichmond.  Almost  simultaneously  Grant  called 
for  the  Sixth  Corps ;  and  both  bodies  started,  a  division  at 
a  time.  Not  long  after,  Early  broke  up  his  camp  at  New 
Market,  leaving  cavalry  pickets  there  and  a  signal  party  on 
Three  Top,  and  moved  his  remaining  infantry,  Wharton's 
division,  with  the  artillery  and  cavalry,  back  to  Staunton  for 
winter  quarters.  The  9th  of  December,  two  brigades  of  the 
last  division  of  the  Sixth  Corps  left  Kernstown,  and  Warner's 
quitted  Monocacy  the  12th,  so  that  by  the  middle  of  the 
month  the  whole  corps  was  again  with  the  Army  of  the  Po- 
tomac. Crook's  command  next  departed,  one  division  to 
City  Point  and  the  other  afterward  to  West  Virginia,  to 
check  the  enemy's  operations  there.  At  the  close  of  the 
year,  Sheridan  had  left  of  infantry  only  the  Nineteenth 
Corps,  and  early  in  1865  one  of  its  divisions  went  South. 

Meanwhile  the  cavalry  had  proved,  by  a  rough  experience, 
the  futility  of  further  operations  until  Spring.  Decem- 
ber 19th,  in  conformity  with  Grant's  urgent  desire,1  Sheri- 


1  On  December  4th  Grant  had  asked  Sheridan  if  he  tho.ight  it  possible  to 
send  cavalry  through  to  break  the  Central  road,  as  he  conceived  snch  an  enter- 
prise to  be  very  desirabie.  Sheridan  replied  that  he  had  contemplated  the  move, 
but  had  "  not  estimated  the  breaking  of  the  road  as  very  important.  I  am  satis- 
fied," he  said,  "that  no  supplies  go  over  the  road  toward  Richmond  from  any 
point  north  of  the  road  or  from  the  Shenandoah  Valley.  On  the  contrary,  rebel 
forces  here  in  the  Valley  have  drawn  supplies  from  the  direction  of  .Richmond. 
To  break  the  road  [at]  Charlottesville  and  up  to  Gordonsville  would  only  be 
breaking  the  circuit.  The  supplies  south  of  the  load  and  between  it  and  the 
James  could  he  hauled  on  straight  lines  to  the  road,  and  run  in  both  directions 
via  Louisa  and  via  Lynchburg  to  Richmond.  I  have  the  best  of  evidence  to 
show  that  there  is  no  depot  at  Gordonsville  or  Charlottesville,  and  that  the  trains 
passing  through  these  places  are  only  burdened  by  necessities  of  Early's  army.  I 
think  that  the  rebels  have  looked  at  this  matter  about  as  I  do,  and  they  have  not 
been  at  all  fearful  of  my  going  in  that  direction,  as  the  temporary  destruction 
would  only  inconvenience  them,  and  would  be  of  no  great  value  to  me."  Grant, 
however,  the  12th,  answered  that  "the  inhabitants  of  Richmond  are  supplied  ex- 
clusively on  the  road  north  of  James  River.  If  it  is  possible  to  destroy  the  Vir- 
ginia Central  road,  it  will  go  far  toward  starving  out  the  garrison  of  Richmond. 
If  the  enemy  are  known  to  have  retired  to  Staunton,  you  will  either  be  able  to 
11* 


250  THE  SHENANDOAH  VALLEY. 

dan  despatched  Torbert,  with  8,000  cavalry,  encumbered  by 
neither  guns  nor  wagons,  to  strike,  if  possible,  the  Virginia 
Central  Railroad.  The  divisions  of  Merritt  and  Powell,  un- 
der Torbert's  own  command,  were  to  move  through  Chester 
Gap  toward  Gordonsville,  while  Custer  was  to  march  against 
Staunton. 

Early,  who  had  shortly  before  reached  Staunton  for  winter 
quarters,  having  been  informed  of  both  marches  by  his  sig- 
nal on  Three  Top  and  his  pickets  at  New  Market,  moved 
Lomax  to  Gordonsville  and  Rosser  below  Harrisonburg, 
sending  Wharton  also  to  the  latter  point.  Torbert  drove 
Jackson's  brigade,  the  22d,  from  Madison  to  Liberty  Mill, 
where  it  joined  McCausland,  blew  up  the  bridge  at  the  river, 
and  planted  two  guns  there.  Crossing  his  divisions,  one  on 
each  flank,  by  a  wide  detour,  Torbert  brought  them  together 
beyond  the  stream,  and  captured  the  guns,  with  several  of 
the  gunners.  At  Gordonsville,  the  next  day,  he  demon- 
strated strongly,  but  finding  that  infantry  had  succored  the 
place,  desisted.  His  withdrawal  was  not  molested,  and  he 
brought  off  about  two  hundred  cattle. 

Custer,  the  evening  of  the  20th,  had  reached  Lacy's 
Springs,  nine  miles  north  of  Harrisonburg,  and  there 
bivouacked.  Before  daylight  Rosser,  with  his  own  and 
Payne's  brigade,  dashed  in  among  the  slumberers.  Custer 
withdrew  down  the  Valley,  with  a  loss  of  22  killed  and 
wounded.  He  reported  the  capture  of  27  prisoners,  and  the 
enemy  that  of  40  prisoners.     Wharton's  infantry  had  been 

make  a  dash  on  the  communications  north  of  the  James  or  spare  a  part  of  your 
command.  Let  me  know  your  views  as  to  the  best  course — to  make  a  dash  on  the 
Central  road  and  canal,  or  to  detach  from  yonr  command."  Sheridan  in  answer 
strongly  advised  the  withdrawal  of  infantry,  saying  that  "  one  division  can  now 
be  spared  and  perhaps  two  in  a  very  short  time."  As  to  the  railroad,  he  said  he 
would  try  to  break  it  as  soon  as  the  weather  would  permit ;  but  there  was  then 
snow  on  the  ground,  and  the  weather  was  wintry. 


WAYNESBORO.  251 

sent  forward  to  check  Custer ;  but  on  the  latter's  retreat 
was  moved  back  through  Staunton  to  Charlottesville,  to  aid 
Lomax  in  checking  Torbert.  This  officer,  however,  had  also 
withdrawn,  the  infantry  that  caused  his  retreat  having  been 
a  force  despatched  from  Eichmond.  The  cavalry  suffered 
greatly  from  the  intense  cold,  while  the  roads  were  slippery 
with  ice,  and  during  the  march  there  was  a  furious  hail- 
storm. The  expedition  proved  that  the  campaigning  season 
in  the  Valley  was  ended  for  the  year. 

Before  winter  was  over,  Grant  began  to  desire  the  repeti- 
tion of  the  attempt  to  reach  Staunton  and  Gordonsville, 
which  had  been  thwarted  in  December.  February  8th  he 
wrote  to  Sheridan  that  he  believed  "  there  is  no  enemy  now 
to  prevent  you  from  reaching  the  Virginia  Central  Railroad, 
and  possibly  the  canal,  when  the  weather  will  permit  you 
to  move,"  and  the  20th  he  added:  "As  soon  as  it  is  pos- 
sible to  travel,  I  think  you  will  have  no  difficulty  about 
reaching  Lynchburg  with  a  cavalry  force  alone.  From 
there  you  could  destroy  the  railroad  and  canal  in  every  di- 
rection." 

Before  Sheridan  started  on  this  expedition  one  or  two 
minor  exploits  had  attracted  attention.  February  4th,  Lieu- 
tenant-Colonel Whitaker,  First  Connecticut  Cavalry,  with  300 
picked  men,  was  piloted  by  Colonel  Young,  Sheridan's  valu- 
able chief  of  scouts,  on  a  difficult  march  of  seventy  miles 
across  the  mountains  into  Hardy  County,  and  captured  Major 
Harry  Gilmor.  A  few  weeks  later,  McNeil's  and  Woodson's 
men,  under  the  command  of  Jesse  McNeil,  dashed  into 
Cumberland  at  night,  and  captured  and  brought  off  Gener- 
als Crook  and  Kelley.  Rosser  crossing  the  mountains  in 
the  snow,  January  11th,  surprised  the  post  of  Beverly,  garri- 
soned by  the  Thirty -fourth  Ohio  and  the  dismounted  portion 


252  THE  SHENANDOAH  VALLEY. 

of  the  Eighth  Ohio  cavalry.  Over  500  prisoners  were  taken 
and  sundry  stores. 

After  this  affair  Rosser's  brigade  was  temporarily  dis- 
banded, most  of  the  men  taking  their  horses  to  their  homes, 
subject  to  call,  as  Early  could  not  obtain  winter  forage  for 
them.  Fitz  Lee's  two  brigades  were  sent  to  Petersburg, 
Lomax's  cavalry  to  West  Virginia,  most  of  the  artillery 
horses  in  various  directions,  and  one  brigade  of  Wharton's 
division  to  Southwestern  Virginia.  Wharton's  two  remain- 
ing brigades,  with  a  portion  of  the  artillery,  were  now  the 
sole  relics  of  Early's  army. 

The  27th  of  February  Sheridan  moved  up  the  Valley  from 
Winchester  with  a  superb  column  of  10,000  sabres — the 
Third  Division,  Custer's,  4,840  aggregate  effective,  and  the 
First,  Devin's,  5,047,  with  two  sections  of  artillery,  100,  all 
under  the  immediate  command  of  General  Merritt,  now 
Chief  of  Cavalry.  Sheridan's  orders  were  to  destroy  the 
Central  Railroad  and  the  canal,  to  capture  Lynchburg,  if 
practicable,  and  then  to  either  join  Sherman  in  North  Caro- 
lina, or  return  to  Winchester,  as  might  seem  best.  Trans- 
portation was  reduced  to  a  minimum. 

The  spring  thaws  had  come  on,  with  hard  rains ;  the  roads 
were  heavy,  and  the  streams  swollen.  Rosser,  ordered  to  col- 
lect his  men  in  the  Valley,  with  a  few  hundred  of  these  at- 
tempted to  resist  Sheridan's  march  at  Mount  Crawford,  but 
was  swept  away,  and  thirty  of  his  troopers,  with  a  score  of 
ambulances  and  wagons,  captured.  The  next  morning  Sher- 
idan entered  Staunton,  and  found  that  Early  had  taken  post 
at  Waynesboro.  He  at  once  sent  forward  his  troops  to  at- 
tack this  position,  Custer,  with  Wells's,  Pennington's,  and 
Capehart's  brigades,  in  advance,  followed  closely  by  Devin, 
with  Gibbs's,  Fitzhugh's,  and  Stagg's  brigades.  The  morn- 
ing of  March  2d,  Early  was  found  posted  on  a  ridge  west  of 


WAYNESBORO.  253 

Waynesboro,  with  Wharton's  two  brigades  of  infantry,  Nel- 
son's battalion  of  six  guns,  and  Rosser's  cavalry.  Custer  at 
once  sent  three  regiments  around  the  enemy's  left  flank, 
while  at  the  same  time  charging  in  front  with  the  other  two 
brigades.  The  position  was  carried  in  an  instant,  with  lit- 
tle, if  any,  loss  on  either  side,  and  almost  the  entire  force 
captured — all  Early's  wagons  and  subsistence,  tents,  ammu- 
nition, seventeen  flags,  eleven  guns  (including  five  found  in 
the  town),  and,  first  and  last,  about  1,600  officers  and  men. 
The  prisoners  were  sent  back  to  Winchester  under  a  strong 
guard,  commanded  by  Colonel  Thompson,  First  New  Hamp- 
shire, who  was  attacked  by  Rosser,  near  Mount  Jackson ; 
but  Thompson  drove  off  his  assailants  with  loss.  As  for 
Early,  Long,  Wharton,  and  the  other  Confederate  generals, 
they  fled  into  the  woods,  and  Early  himself  soon  after 
barely  escaped  capture  by  Sheridan's  cavalry,  while  making 
his  way  to  Richmond. 

The  victory  at  Waynesboro  left  Sheridan  complete  master 
of  the  Valley.  His  lieutenants  now  began  the  destruction  of 
the  railroad  and  canal.  The  iron  bridge  over  the  South 
Fork  of  the  Shenandoah  was  wrecked,  and  the  troops  entered 
Charlottesville.  From  that  point  the  railroad  was  thor- 
oughly broken,  both  toward  Gordonsville  and  toward  Lynch- 
burg. Delays  to  the  trains  caused  by  the  incessant  rains 
forced  the  Union  commander  to  abandon  the  project  of 
capturing  Lynchburg,  since  sufficient  time  elapsed  for  suc- 
cor to  reach  it.  The  6th  of  March,  Merritt  set  out,  with 
Devin's  division,  along  the  canal,  and  destroyed  every  lock 
from  Scottsville  to  New  Market,  and  from  New  Market  to 
Duguidsville,  besides  burning  flour-mills  and  factories. 
Meanwhile  Sheridan,  with  Custer's  division,  broke  the 
Lynchburg  Railroad  as  far  as  Amherst. 

The  events  of  the  expedition  had  made  it  impracticable 


254  THE  SHENANDOAH  VALLEY. 

to  reach  Sherman,  and  Sheridan  therefore  determined  to  make 
his  way  through  to  Grant,  and  to  utterly  ruin  the  canal  as 
he  went  on.  The  10th  of  March  he  reached  Columbia, 
where  he  was  joined  by  Fitzkughs  brigade,  which  had  de- 
stroyed the  canal  for  a  distance  of  about  eight  miles  east  of 
Goochland.  Thence  he  notified  Grant  of  his  successes,  and 
asked  that  supplies  might  be  forwarded  to  White  House, 
at  which  point  he  arrived  the  19th.  "  There  perhaps  never," 
says  Sheridan,  in  his  picturesque  language,  "  was  a  march 
where  nature  offered  such  impediments,  and  shrouded  herself 
in  such  gloom,  as  upon  this.  Incessant  rain,  deep  and  almost 
impassable  streams,  swamps,  and  mud,  were  overcome  with 
constant  cheerfulness  on  the  part  of  the  troops  that  was 
truly  admirable.  Both  officers  and  men  appeared  buoyed 
up  by  the  thought  that  we  had  completed  our  work  in  the 
Valley  of  the  Shenandoah,  and  that  we  were  on  our  way  to 
help  our  brothers  in  arms  in  front  of  Petersburg,  in  the  final 
struggle." 

The  war  in  the  Valley  was  now  ended,  the  purpose  for 
which  Sheridan  was  sent  there  having  been  completely  ful- 
filled. During  its  progress  his  sound  military  judgment 
and  tactical  skill  had  shown  him  to  be  one  of  the  ablest  and 
surest  of  the  great  Union  soldiers ;  while  his  fiery  energy 
on  the  field  of  battle  had  secured  him  imperishable  renown 
as  a  popular  hero  of  the  War.  When  he  entered  the  Valley, 
it  was  wholly  under  Confederate  control;  he  left  it  with 
Confederate  power  there  wholly  broken. 


APPENDIX  A. 


OPPOSING  FOKCES  IN  THE  SHENANDOAH  VALLEY. 


I. — Organization  of  the  Army  of  the  Shenandoah,  in  the  Middle  Mili- 
tary Divisio?i,  commanded  by  Major-General  PHILIP  H. 
SHERIDAN,  date  August  31,  1S64. 

(General  Headquarters  Escort,  Sixth  U.  S.  Cavalry.) 

CAVALRY  FORCES.1 

Brigadier-General  ALFRED  T.  A.  TORBERT,  Commanding. 

FIRST   DIVISION   (A.  P.  C). 

Brigadieb-Geneeal  WESLEY  MERRITT. 


First  Brigade. 
Brig.-Gen.  George  A.  Custeb. 
1st  Michigan. 
5th  Michigan. 
6th  Michigan. 
7th  Michigan. 

Third  Brigade. 
Colonel  Charles  R.  Lowell,  Jr. 
1st  Maryland  (P.  H.  B.). 
2d  Massachusetts. 
25th  New  York. 


Second  Brigade. 
Colonel  Thomas  C.  Devin. 
4th  New  York. 
6th  New  York. 
9th  New  York. 
17th  Pennsylvania. 
1st  U.  S.  Art.,  Batteries  K  and  L. 

Reserve  Brigade. 
Colonel  Alfred  Gibbs. 
1st  New  York  Dragoons. 
6th  Pennsylvania. 
1st  United  States. 
2d  United  States. 
5th  United  States. 
2d  U.  S.  Artillery,  Battery  D. 


THIRD   DIVISION  (A.  P.  C). 
Brigadier-General  JAMES  H.  WILSON. 


First  Brigade. 


Second  Brigade. 


Brig.-Gen.  J.  B.  McIntosh.    Brig.-Gen.  G.  H. 


1st  Connecticut. 
3d  New  Jersey. 
2d  New  York. 
5th  New  York. 
2d  Ohio. 
ISth  Pennsylvania. 


Chapman. 
3d  Indiana  (det.). 
1st  New  Hampshire. 
8th  New  York. 
22d  New  York. 
1st  Vermont. 


Reserve  Horse  Art.  Brigade. 
Capt.  LaRhettL.  Livingston. 
1st  U.  S.  Art.,  Battery  I. 
2d  U.  S.  Art.,  Battery  A. 
2d  U.  S.  Art.,  Batteries  B  and  C. 
2d  U.  S.  Art.,  Battery  M. 
3d  U.  S.  Art.,  Battery  C. 
4th  U.  S.  Art.,  Batteries  C  and  E. 


1  The  cavalry  divisions  of  Averell  and  Duffle  are  transferred  to  this  head  from 
the  roster  of  the  West  Virginia  troops,  on  which  the}'  are  borne,  inasmuch  as 
they  were  under  Torbert's  orders.  Of  Duffle's  division,  four  days  prior  to  August 
31st,  some  troops  had  been  given  to  Averell,  others  to  the  post  at  Harper's  Ferry, 
and  the  remainder  were  sent  to  Cumberland  to  remount.  Custer  afterward  re- 
ceived Wilson's  division ;  Powell,  Averell's;  and  Lowell,  the  reserve  brigade. 


256 


THE  SHENANDOAH  VALLEY. 


FIRST   DIVISION   (W.  Va.  C.). 
Brigadier-General  ALFRED   N.   DUFFIE. 
First  Brigade.  Second  Brigade. 

Colonel  William  B.  Tibbets.  Colonel  John  E.  Wynkoop. 

2d  Maryland,  P.  H.  B.  (Co.  F).  15th  New  York. 

1st  New  York  (Lincoln).  20th  Pennsylvania. 

1st  New  York  (Veteran).  22d  Pennsylvania. 

21st  New  York. 
14th  Pennsylvania. 

SECOND  DIVISION »  (W.  Va.  C.). 
Brigadikr-General  WILLIAM  W.   AVERELL. 
8th  Ohio.  2d  West  Virginia.  5th  West  Virginia. 

1st  West  Virginia.  3d  West  Virginia.  5th  U.  S.  Art.,  Battery  L. 


SIXTH  AKMY  CORPS. 

Major-General  HORATIO  G.  WRIGHT,  Commanding. 

FIRST  DIVISION. 

Brigadier-General  DAVID  A.  RUSSELL. 


First  Brigade. 

Col.  W.  H.  Penrose. 

4th  New  Jersey. 

10th  New  Jersey. 

15th  New  Jersey. 


Second  Brigade. 
Brig.-Gen.  Emory  Upton. 
2d  Connecticut  Heavy  Art. 
65th  New  York. 
67th  New  York  (det.). 
121st  New  York. 
95th  Pennsylvania. 
96th  Pennsylvania. 


Third  Brigade. 
Col.  Oliver  Edwards. 

7th  Massachusetts  (det. ). 
10th  Massachusetts  (det.). 
37th  Massachusetts. 
23d  Pennsylvania  (det.). 
49th  Pennsylvania. 
82d  Pennsylvania. 
119th  Pennsylvania. 
2d  Rhode  Island  Battalion. 
Wisconsin  Battalion. 


SECOND   DIVISION. 
Brigadier-General  GEORGE  W.  GETTY. 


First  Brigade. 

Brig.-Gen.  Frank  Whea- 

ton. 

62d  New  York. 
93d  Pennsylvania. 
98th  Pennsylvania. 
102d  Pennsylvania. 
139th  Pennsylvania. 


Second  Brigade. 
Brig.-Gen.   Lewis  A. 
Grant. 
2d  Vermont  (det.). 
3d  Vermont  (det.). 
4th  Vermont. 
5th  Vermont. 
6th  Vermont. 
11th  Vermont. 


Third  Brigade. 
Brig.-Gen.  Daniel  D.  Bid- 
well. 
7th  Maine. 
43d  New  York. 
49th  New  York. 
77th  New  York. 
122d  New  York. 
61st  Pennsylvania. 


THIRD   DIVISION. 
Brigadier-General  JAMES  B.  RICKETTS. 
First  Brigade.  Second  Brigade. 

Colonel  William  Emerson.  Colonel  J.  Warren  Keifer. 

1 4th  New  Jersey.  6th  Maryland. 

106th  New  York.  9th  New  York  Heavy  Artillery. 

151st  New  York.  110th  Ohio. 

S7th  Pennsylvania.  122d  Ohio. 

10th  Vermont.  126th  Ohio. 

67th  Pennsylvania. 
138th  Pennsylvania. 

1  The  returns  for  this  division  are  obviously  imperfect  in  the  roster  from  which 
the  foregoing  is  compiled.  Colonel  Powell  and  Major  Gibson  commanded  the  bri- 
gades, and  there  was  afterward  a  third  brigade. 


APPENDIX  A.  257 

Artillery  Brigade. 

Colonel  Charles  H.  Tompkins. 

Maine  Light  Artillery,  5tH  Battery.  1st  Rhode  Island  Light  Art.,  Battery  C. 

1st  Massachusetts  Light  Art.,  Battery  A.     1st  Rhode  Island  Light  Art.,  Battery  G. 

New  York  Light  Artillery,  1st  Battery.       5th  United  States,  Battery  M. 


NINETEENTH  ARMY  CORPS. 
Brigadier-General  WILLIAM  H.  EMORY. 

FIRST   DIVISION. 
Brigadier-General  WILLIAM  DWIGHT. 
First  Brigade.  Second  Brigade.  Third  Brigade. 

Col.  George  L.  Beal.   Brig.-Gen.  J.  W.  McMillan.    Col.  L.  1).  H.  Currie. 
29th  Maine.  12th  Connecticut.  3Uth  Maine. 

30th  Massachusetts.  13th  Maine.  133d  New  York. 

90th  New  York.  1 5th  Maine.  162d  New  York. 

114th  New  York.  160th  New  York.  165th  New  York. 

116th  New  York.  47th  Pennsylvania.  173d  New  York. 

153d  New  York.  8th  Vermont. 

Artillery — New  York  Light  Artillery,  5th  Battery. 
SECOND   DIVISION. 
Brigadier-General  CUVIER  GROVER. 
First  Brigade.  Second  Brigade. 

Brig-Gen.  Henky  W.  Birge.  Colonel  Edward  L.  Molineux. 

9th  Connecticut.  13th  Connecticut. 

12th  Maine.  3d  Massachusetts  Cavalry  (dis. ). 

14th  Maine.  11th  Indiana. 

26th  Massachusetts.  22d  Iowa. 

14th  New  Hampshire.  131st  New  York. 

75th  New  York.  159th  New  York. 

1  Third  Brigade.  Fourth  Brigade. 
Colonel  Jacob  Shabpe.                             Colonel  David  Shunk. 

38th  Massachusetts.  8th  Indiana. 

128th  New  York.  18th  Indiana. 

156th  New  York.  24th  Iowa. 

175th  New  York.  28th  Iowa. 
176th  New  York. 

Artillery — Maine  Light  Artillery,  1st  Battery. 

Reserve  Artillery. 
1st  Rhode  Island  Light  Artillery,  Battery  D.    Indiana  Light  Artillery,  17th  Battery. 


ARMY  OP  WEST  VIRGINIA. 
Brigadier-General  GEORGE  CROOK,  Commanding. 

FIRST   DIVISION. 
Colonel  JOSEPH  THOBURN. 

First  Brigade.                    Second  Brigade.  Third  Brigade. 

Col.  Geobge  D.  Wells.       Col.  William  G.  Ely.  Col.  Jacob  M.  Campbell. 

34th  Massachusetts.                 18th  Connecticut.  23rt  Illinois. 

5th  New  York  Heavy  Artil-    2d  Eastern  Shore,  Md.  54th  Pennsylvania, 

lery  (4  Companies).               1  st  West  Virginia.  10th  West  Virginia. 

116th  Ohio.                                4th  West  Virginia.  11th  West  Virginia. 

123d  Ohio.                                 12th  West  Virginia.  15th  West  Virginia. 


258  THE  SHENANDOAH  VALLEY. 

SECOND   DIVISION. 
Colonel  ISAAC  H.  DUVAL. 

First  Brigade.  Second  Brigade. 

Colonel  Rutherfokd  B.  Hayes.  Colonel  Daniel  D.  Johnson. 
23d  Ohio.  34th  Ohio. 

36th  Ohio.  91st  Ohio. 

5th  West  Virginia.  9th  West  Virginia. 

13th  West  Virginia.  14th  West  Virginia. 

MILITARY  DISTRICT  OF  HARPER'S  FERRY. 
Brigadier-General  JOHN  D.  STEVENSON. 

Cavalry. 
12th  Pennsylvania.  Virginia  Bangers.         Loudoun  Independent  Co. 

Artillery. 

Indiana  Light  Artillery,  17th  Battery.  New  York  Light  Artillery,  32d  Battery. 

Kentucky  Light  Artillery,  1st  Battery.  Ohio  Light  Artillery,  1st  Battery. 

Maryland  Light  Artillery,  Battery  A.  1st  Ohio  Light  Artillery,  Battery  L. 

Maryland  Lt.  Art.,  Baltimore  Battery.  1st  Pennsylvania  Light  Art..  Battery  G-. 

5th  New  York  Heavy  Artillery.  1st  West  Virginia  Light  Art ,  Battery  A. 

New  York  Light  Art.,  30th  Battery.  1st  West  Virginia  Light  Art.,  Battery  P. 

Infantry. 

1st  Maryland  P.  H.  B.  135th  Ohio.  161st  Ohio. 

2d  Maryland  P.  H.  B.  160th  Ohio. 


FORCES  WEST  OF  SLEEPY  CREEK. 
Brigadier-General  BENJAMIN  F.  KELLEY. 

Cavalry. 
Ohio  3d  Independent  Company.  6th  West  Virginia. 

Artillery. 
1st  Illinois,  Battery  L.        1st  W.  Virginia,  Battery  H.       1st  Maryland,  Battery  B. 

Infantry. 
122d  Ohio.  6th  West  Virginia.  165th  Ohio. 


KANAWHA  VALLEY  FORCES. 
Brigadier-General  JEREMIAH  C.  SULLIVAN. 

7th  West  Virginia  Cavalry. 

1st  Pennsylvania  Light  Art. ,  Battery  D.  Veteran  Reserve  Corps,  132d  Co., 2d  Bat'y. 

Pennsylvania  Acting  Engineers,  Inde-  1st  West  Virginia  Light  Art.,  Battery  D. 

pendent  Company.  1st  West  Virginia  Light  Art.,  Battery  E, 

Virginia  Exempts,  Independent  Co.  A.  5th  United  States  Artillery,  Battery  B. 


APPENDIX  A.  259 

II. — Organization  of  the  Army  of  the  Valley  District,  commanded  by 
Lieutenant-General  JUBAL  A.  EARLY,  date  September 
30,  1864. 

RODES'S   DIVISION-. » 

Major  General  S.  D.  RAMSETJR,  Commanding. 

6rimes,s  Brigade.  C'oolc's  Brigade 

Brig.-Gen.  Bryan  Grimes.  Brig.-Gen.  Phil.  Cook. 

32d  North  Carolina,  Col.  D.  G.  Covvand.  4th  Georgia,  Lt.-Col.  W.  H.  Willis. 

43d  North  Carolina,  Col.  J.  R.  Winston.  12th  Georgia,  Capt.  James  Everett. 

45th  North  Carolina,  Col.  J.  R.  Winston.  21st  Georgia,  Capt.  H.  J.  Battle. 

53d  North  Carolina,  Col.  D.  G.  Covvand.  44th  Georgia,  Lt.-Col.  J.  W.  Beck. 
2d  North  Carolina  Battalion,  Col.  D.  G. 
Cowand. 

Cox's  Brigade.  Battle's  Brigade. 

Brig.-Gen.  W.  R.  Cos.  Brig.-Gen.  C.  A.  Battle. 

1st  N.  Carolina,  Capt.  W.  H.  Thompson.  3d  Alabama,  Col.  Chas.  Forsyth. 

2d  North  Carolina,  Capt.  T.  B.  Beall.  5th  Alabama,  Lt.-Col.  E.  L.  Hobson. 

3d  N.  Carolina,  Capt.  W.  H.  Thompson.  6th  Alabama,  Capt.  J.  Green. 

4th  North  Carolina,  Col.  Ed.  A.  Osborn.  12th  Alabama,  Capt.  P.  D.  Rose. 

14th  North  Carolina,  Capt.  Jos.  Jones.  61st  Alabama,  Maj.  W.  E.  Pinokard. 
30th  N.  Carolina,  Capt.  J.  C.  McMillan. 

GORDON'S  DIVISION.2 

Major-General  JOHN  B.  GORDON,  Commanding. 

Hays's  Brigade.3  Stafford's  Brigade.3 

Colonel  Wm.  Monaghan.  Colonel  Eugene  Waggaman. 

5th  Louisiana,  Major  A.  Hart.  1st  Louisiana,  Capt.  Joseph  Taylor. 

6th  Louisiana,  Lt. -Colonel  J.  Hanlon.  2d  Louisiana,  Lt.-Col.  M.  A.  Grogan. 

7th  Louisiana,  Lt.-Colonel  T.  M.  Terry.  10th  Louisiana,  Lt.-Col.  H.  D.  Monier. 

8th  Louisiana,  Capt.  L.  Prados.  14th  Louisiana,  Lt.-Col.  David  Zable. 

9th  Louisiana,  Col.  Wm.  R.  Peck.  15th  Louisiana,  Capt.  H.  J.  Egan. 

Evans's  Brigade. 

Colonel  E.  N.  Atkinson. 
(October  30th,  Brig.-Gen.  C.  A.  Evans.) 
13th  Georgia,  Col.  John  H.  Baker.  60th  Georgia,  Capt.  Milton  Russell. 

26th  Georgia,  Lt.-Col.  James  S.  Blain.       61st  Georgia,  Capt.  E.  F.  Sharpe. 
31st  Georgia,  Col.  John  H.  Lowe.  12th   Georgia    Battalion,    Capt.    J.  W. 

3Sth  Georgia,  Major  Thos.  H.  Bomar.  Anderson. 


1  "  I  would  call  attention  to  the  great  scarcity  of  officers  in  the  entire  command. 
The  best  and  most  efficient  officers  in  nearly  every  brigade  have  for  the  most  part 
been  either  killed  or  wounded  during  this  campaign.  .  .  .  Cox's  brigade  had 
not  a  single  field  officer  present,  and  the  Fourth  Regiment  in  it  is  commanded  by 
a  second  lieutenant"  (from  Inspection  Report  of  Rodes's  Division,  September 
30th). 

2  From  Inspection  Returns  of  August. 

3  These  brigades  were  united  under  General  Zebulon  York,  succeeded  by  Lieut.  - 
Colonel  D.  Zable. 


260 


THE    SHENANDOAH   VALLEY. 


2d  Virginia. 
4th  Virginia. 
5th  Virginia. 
5J7th  Virginia. 
33d  Virginia. 


(Stonewall  Brigade.) 


1,131.1 

I  Col.  J.  H.  S.  Funk 

'     Oct.  30th,  Col.  A, 

Spangler. 


Terry's  Brigade.1 
Brig. -Gen.  Wm.  Terry. 

21st  Virginia. 


25th  Virginia. 

42d  Virginia. 

44th  Virginia. 

48th  Virginia. 

50th  Virginia. 
10th  Virginia.  )  (G.  H.  Steuart's  Brigade.) 
23d  Virginia.    V-    Lt. -Col  S.H.Saunders; 
37th  Virginia.  )    Oct.  30th,  Lt.-Col.  Martz. 


(J.  M.  Jones's  Brigade.) 
I     Col.  R.  H.  Dungan ; 
'    Oct.  30th,  Col.  W.  A. 
Witcher. 


EARLY'S   DIVISION.* 
Brigadier-General  JOHN  PEGRAM,  Commanding. 


JPegram's  Brigade. 
Colonel  John  S.  Hoffman. 
13th  Virginia,  Capt.  Felix  Heiskell. 
31st  Virginia,Lt.- Col.  J.S.K.McCutchen. 
49th  Virginia,  Capt.  John  G.  Lobban. 
52d  Virginia,  Capt.  J.  M.  Humphreys. 
58th  Virginia,  Capt.  L.  C.  James. 


Johnston's  Brigade. 
Brig.-Gen.  Robert  D.  Johnston. 
5th  North  Carolina,  Col.  John  W.  Lea.3 
12th  North  Carolina,  Col.  Henry  E.  Cole- 
man.3 
20th  North  Carolina,  Col.  T.  F.  Toon. 
23d  North  Carolina,  Col.  C.  C.  Blacknall.  3 


Godwin's  Brigade. 

Lieut.-Colonel  W.  T.  Davis. 

6th  N.  Carolina,  Lt.-Col.  S.  McD.  Tate.     57th  North  Carolina, Capt  M.H.  Hunter. 

21st  North  Carolina,  Maj.  W.  I.  Pfohl.      1st  N.  Carolina  Battalion,  Capt.  R.  E. 

54th  North  Carolina,  Capt.  A.  H.  Martin.  Wilson. 


WHARTON'S   DIVISION. 
Brigadier-General  G.  C.  WHARTON,  Commanding. 


Echols's  Brigade. 

Captain  Edmund  S.  Read. 

22d  Virginia,  Capt.  Henry  S.  Dickerson. 

23d  Virginia,  Capt.  John  M.  Pratt. 

26th  Virginia,  Capt.  Frank  S.  Burdett. 


Wiarton's  Brigade. 
Captain  R.  H.  Logan. 
45th  Virginia,  Maj.  Alex.  M.  Davis. 
51st  Virginia,  Col.  August  Fosberg.4 
30th  Virginia  Battalion,  Lt.-Col.  J.  Lyle 
Clarke.4 


1  Composed  of  the  "  fragmentary  remains  of  fourteen  of  the  regiments  of  John- 
son's division,  most  of  which  was  captared  by  the  enemy,  May  12,  1864."  The 
inspection  report  of  August  21st  says  that  the  fusing  of  Hays's  and  Stafford's 
brigades  into  one,  under  York,  and  the  consolidation  of  three  brigades,  "there- 
mains  of  fourteen  regiments,"  into  one,  under  Terry,  produced  a  bad  effect  on 
the  discipline  of  the  troops,  who  lost  their  chance  of  perpetuating  their  brigade 
history ;  and  that  Evans's  brigade  had  lost  by  casualty  so  many  valuable  officers  as 
to  interfere  seriously  with  its  good  management. 

2  Commanded  by  Ramseur,  until  he  took  Rodes's  division,  after  the  battle  of  the 
Opeqnon. 

3  These  officers  absent  and  actual  commanders  not  indicated.  October  31st, 
after  the  battle  of  Cedar  Creek,  the  officers  in  place  of  Lea,  Coleman,  and  Black- 
nall, respectively,  were  Captains  E.  M.  Duguid,  Kemp  Plummer,  and  Abner  D. 
Peace. 

4  These  officers  absent  and  actual  commanders  not  indicated.  The  Fifteenth 
Virginia,  Vander venter's,  is  ascribed  to  this  brigade  in  a  roster  of  October  31st. 


APPENDIX   A. 


261 


Smith's  Brigade. 
Colonel  Thomas  Smith. 
3fith  Virginia,  Lieut.  Jaekson  Vin.  45th  Virginia  Battal'n.  Capt.  W.  B.  Eensly. 

60th  Virginia,  Capt.  A.  G.  P.  George.     Thomas  Legion,  Lt.-Col.  J.  R.  Love. 


KERSHAW'S  DIVISION. 
Majob-Genebal  J.  B.  KERSHAW,  Commanding. 


Wofford's  Brigade. 
Col.  C  C.  Sandees. 
16th  Georgia,  Major  J.  S.  Gholston. 
18th  Georgia,  Col.  Joseph  Armstrong. 
24th  Georgia,  Col.  C.  C.  Sanders. 
3d  Georgia    Battalion,   Lt.-Col.    N.    L. 

Hutchins. 
Cobb's  Legion,  Lt.-Col.  L.  J.  Glenn. 
Phillips's  Legion,  Lt.-Col.  J.  Hamilton. 


Kershaio's  Brigade. 
Brig. -Gen.  Conner. 
2d  S.  Carolina,  Col.  J.  D.  Kennedy. 
3d  S.  Carolina,  Col.  W.  D.  Rutherford. 
7th  S.  Carolina,  Capt.  E.  J.  Goggans. 
8  h  S.  Carolina,  Col.  J.  W.  Henagan. 
15'h  S.  Carolina,  Col.  J.  B.  Davis. 
20th  S.  Carolina,  Col.  S.  M.  Boykin. 
3d  S.  Carolina  Battalion,   Lieut.   [Col.] 
W.  G.  Rice. 


Humphreys's  Brigade. 
Brig.-Gen.  B.  G.  Humfhbeys 
13th  Mississippi,  Lt.-Col.  A.  G.  O'Brien. 
17th  Mississippi,  Capt.  J.  C.  Cochran. 
18th  Mississippi,  Colonel  T.  M.  Griffin. 
21st  Mississippi,  Col.  D  N.  Moody. 


Bryan's  Brigade. 
Brig.-Gen.  Goode  Beyan. 
10th  Georgia,  Col.  W.  C.  Holt. 
50th  Georgia,  Col.  P.  McGloshan.1 
51st  Georgia,  Col.  E.  Ball.1 
53d  Georgia,  Col.  J.  P.  Simms. 


ARTILLERY  DIVISION. 

Colonel  T.  H.  CARTER,  Commanding. 

Braxton's  Battalion.  Culshaio's  Battalion."* 

Lieut.-Col.  C.  M.  Beaxton.  Major  W.  E.  Cutshaw. 

Alleghany  Artillery,   Va.,    Capt.  J.  C.     Orange  Artillery,  Va.,  Capt.  C.  W.  Pry. 

Carpenter.  Staunton   Artillery,    Va.,    Capt.  A.  W. 

Stafford  Artillery,   Va.,   Capt.    W.  P.            Garber. 

Cooper.  Courtney    Battery,   Va.,   L.    F. 

Lee  Battery,  Va.,  Lieut.  W.  W.  Hard-  Jones, 
wick. 


McLaughlin's  Battalion. 

Major  Wm.  McLaughlin. 
Bryan's  Virginia  Battery. 
Chapman's  Virginia  Battery. 
Lowry's  Virginia  Battery. 


Nelson's  Battalion. 

Lieut.-Col.  Wm.  Nelson. 

Amherst    Artillery,    Va.,    Capt.   T.   J. 

Kirkpatrick. 
Fluvanna  Aitillery,    Va.,    Capt.  J.    L. 

Massie. 
Milledge's  Artillery,    Ga.,   Capt.    John 
Milledge. 


1  Absent  wounded,  and  actual  commnnders  of  these  regiments  not  stated.  The 
foregoing  organization  is  for  August,  when  Kershaw  arrived  in  the  Valley. 

-  In  an  earlier  roster  Fry's  Orange  Battery  is  ascribed  to  Carter's  battalion,  and 
in  its  place  appears  the  Charlottesville  Artillery,  Captain  J.  M.  Carrington. 


262  THE  SHENANDOAH  VALLEY. 

CAVALRY  FORCES.1 

LOMAX'S  DIVISION. 
Major-General  J.  J.  LOMAX. 
McCauslancCs  Brigade.  Johnso?i's  Brigade,  Jackson's  Brigade. 

Brig.-Gen.  J.  McCausland.  Brig.-Gen.  B.T.  Johnson.  Brig.-Gen.  H.B.Davidson. 
14th  Virginia.  8th  Virginia.  1st  Maryland. 

16th  Virginia.  21st  Virginia.  19th  Virginia. 

17th  Virginia.  22d  Virginia.  20th  Virginia. 

25th  Virginia.  34th  Virginia  Battery.         46th  Virginia  Battalion. 

37th  Virginia  Battalion.       36th  Virginia  Battery.         47th  Virginia  Battalion. 

fmbodeti's  Brigade. 
Colonel  George  H.  Smith. 
18th  Virginia.  23d  Virginia.  62d  Mounted  Infantry. 

LEE'S  DIVISION. 
Major-General  FITZHUGH  LEE. 
Wiclham's  Brigade.  Lomax's  Brigade. 

Brig.-Gen.  W.  0.  Wickham.  Brig.-Gen.  L.  L.  Lomax. 

1st  Virginia,  Col.  Carter.  5th  Virginia,  Col.  H.  Clay  Pate. 

2d  Virginia,  Col.  Munford.  6th  Virginia,  Col.  Julien  Harrison. 

3d  Virginia,  Col.  Owen.  15th  Virginia,  Col.  C.  R.  Collins. 

4th  Virginia,  Col.  Payne. 

Hosser's  Brigade. 
Brig.-Gen.  Thomas  L.  Rossek. 
7th  Virginia,  Col.  B.  H.  Dulany.  12th  Virginia.  Col.  A.  W.  Harman. 

ilth  Virginia,  Col.  O.  R.  Funsten.  35th  Virginia  Batt'n,  Lt.-Uol.  E.  V.  White. 


1  These  forces  are,  for  convenience,  here  grouped  together,  although  the  reader 
of  the  text  will  observe  that  they  were  not  all  present  September  30th  in  this  exact 
form.  Rosser's  brigade,  for  example,  was  at  that  time  only  on  its  way  to  the  Val- 
ley:  and  when  it  ai  rived  Rosser  received  command  of  the  division.  The  orgnniza- 
tion  of  Lomax's  cavalry  is  from  the  roster  of  October  30th,  after  the  battle  of  Cedar 
Creek. 


[Note. — For  the  foregoing  rosters  and  for  the  statistics  of  numerical  strength 
in  Appendix  B,  the  writer  is  indebted  to  the  War  Records  Office.  In  the  original 
returns  the  Union  regimental  commanders  were  not  indicated.  The  troops  of 
Generals  Stevenson,  Kelley,  and  Sullivan,  though  reckoned  on  the  official  Depart- 
ment Returns,  were  in  garrison,  not  in  the  marching  army. 

It  must  be  carefully  noted  that  Sheridan's  line-of-battle  strength  was,  from  sev- 
eral causes,  at  all  times  far  below  the  totals  of  these  official  returns,  which,  in 
addition,  take  in  the  Department;  and  also  that  Early's  Valley  reserves,  with 
which,  in  part,  he  repaired  his  heavy  losses,  do  not  appear,  as  such,  on  his  in- 
spection reports.] 


APPENDIX   B. 


TABLES  INDICATING  NUMEEICAL   STBENGTH. 


-Abstract  from  Tri-monthly  Return  of  the  Department  of  West 
Virginia,  Major-General  Franz  Sigel,  Commanding,  for 
April  30,  1864. 


Commanding  Officer. 

Command. 

Present 
fob  Duty. 

Station. 

E 
o 

a 
bo 

01 

u 
so 
to 

< 

Martinsburg . . 

Charleston 

Harper's  Ferry 
Nhw  Creek  . . . 

Major-Gen.  Franz  Sigel. . 
Bg.-Gen.  J.  C.  Sullivan.. 
Brig.-Gen.  Geo.  Crook  . . 
Brig. -Gen.  Max  Weber  . . 

Col.  N.  Wilkinson 

Capt.  Ewald  Over  

Major-Gen   Jul.  Stahel  . 
Brig.-Gen. W.  W.  Averell. 
Brig.-Gen.  A.  N.  Duffle.. 
Col.  J.  E.  Wynkoop 
Col.  R.  M.  Richardson  . . 
Capt.  Frank  Smith 

General  and  Staff. 
First,  Division  .... 
Third  Division. . . . 
Separate  Brigade. . 
Separate  Brigade . . 
Independent  Co. . . 

Total  Infantry.. 

General  and  Staff. 
Second  Division. . . 

10 
208 
145 
114 
103 
3 

i597 
3,331 
3.  til  2 
2,545 

71 

10 
5,435 
4,359 

4,177 

2,968 

82 

578 

14,156 

17,021 

Cumberland  . . 

Charleston 

Charleston 

3 

139 

97 

65 

28 
1 
2 
3 

3,'355 
2,747 
1,676 

730 
48 
51 
40 

3 

4,392 
3,343 

Cumberland  . . 

2,008 

Burlington  . .  . 
Cumberland . . 
Cumberland  . . 
Webster 

15th  New  York.... 
3d  Ind.  Co.  Ohio.. 
Co.  M,  4th  Va  . . . . 
Co   C,  16di  Illinois 

Total  Cavalry . .  . 

1,007 
68 
56 
56 

Bg.-Gen.  J.  C.  Sullivan.. 

338 

S,647 

10,933 

8 
3 
7 
48 
14 
3 

361 
76 

248 
2.075 

531 
29 

SS4 

Charleston  . . . 

Bg.-Gen.  W.  W.  Averell. 

79 

Charleston  . . . 

283 

Harper's  Ferry 

2,539 

Col.  N.  Wilkinson 

570 

Wheeling 

85 

Lieut.  James  Drysdale  . . 
Lieut.  V.  N.  Hisrgins. . . . 
Capt.  F.  E.  Town 

Total  Artillery1. 

132dCo.  V.  R.  C. .. 
147th  Co.  V.R.C... 
Det.  Signal  Corps  . 

Total 

83 

3,320 

3,S90 

Frederick 

Cumberland  . . 
Cumberland  . . 

1 

1 

13 

18 

40 
96 

54 
41 

112 

1,024 

26,277 

32,061 

1  Eighty -six  pieces  of  artillery. 


264 


THE  SHENANDOAH  VALLEY. 


II. — Abstract  from  Return  of  the  Army  of  Western  Virginia,  Maj.- 
Gen.  John  C.  Breckinridge,  C.  S.  Army,  Commanding,  for 
the  month  of  April,  1864. 


General  Staff 

Echols's  Brigade  1 

McOausland's  Brigade 

Wharton's  Brigade  2 

Forty-fifth  Virginia  Regiment 

Bosang's  Company 

Total  Infantry 

Jackson's  Brigade 

Jenkins's  Brigade  (collecting) 

Thirty-seventh  Virginia  Bat'n,  Co  H. 

Total  Cavalry 

Artillery  (7  batteries) 

Engineer  Troops  (1  Co. ) 

Grand  total 


Present  for 
Duty. 

"3 
1 
>  a 
1| 

Sfcj  Q, 

0 

si 

< 

0  a 

u 

(0 

o 

o 

a 

*  w  S 

< 

21 

~1^339~ 
1,548 

"749 
39 

3,675 
810 

1,332 
67 

2,209 

21 

1,615~~ 
1,774 

"840 
48 

21 

10? 
99 

"42 

1.139 

1,548 

'  749 
41 

2,182 
2,257 

"971 
96 

248 

3,677 

4,277 
1,010 
1.616 
71 
2.697 

5,506 

89 

115 

4 

208 

810 

1,315 

67 

2,192 

1,994 

3,008 

99 

5,101 

30 

642 

597 

57 

6,538 

675 
7,731 

822 

3 

57 

73 

510 

6,568 

11,523 

III. — Strength  of  the  Infantry  of  the  Army  of  the   Valley  District, 
August  20,  1 864,  as  shown  by  Inspection  Report  of  this  date. 


Troops. 

Aggregate 
present 
for  duty. 

Aggregate 
present. 

Aggregate 

present 
and  absent. 

Gordon's  Division 

7 

614 

858 

1,344 

803 
963 

1,597 

8 
3,708 

Terry's  Brigade 

Evans's  Brigade 

6,042 
4,254 

Total 

2,823 

3,370 

14,012 

966 
918 
699 
803 

1.154 
1,113 

902 
991 

3,271 
3,317 

2,447 
4,085 

Total 

3,386 

4.160 

13,120 

11 

595 
600 
854 

11 
831 
742 
928 

12 

2,334 

2,410 
2,627 

Total 

2,060 

2,512 

7,383 

8,269 

10,042 

34,515 

1  "  This  brigade,  under  the  command  of  Major-General  John  Echols,  entered  upon 
the  campaign  of  1864  with  2.150  men  and  a  full  complement  of  officers  on  May  6,  1864. 
The  brigade  was  then  well  armed,  equipped,  and  provided  with  a  full  supply  of  cloth- 
ing, and  in  a  thorough  state  of  discipline  and  efficiency.  .  .  .  The  military  bearing 
and  appearance  of  the  brigade  was  soldierly  and  inspiring.  In  this  thorough  state  01 
organization  and  discipline  the  brigade  opened  its  campaigning  with  the  battle  of  New 
Market"  (abstract  from  Inspection  Report  of  Col.  G.  S.  Pattern's  brigade.  Sept.  29th). 

"The  brigade  entered  the  present  campaign  with  an  aggregate  effective  of  2,100 
men.  It  now  numbers  but  little  over  400  aggregate  effective.  ...  At  Cloyd's  Farm, 
May  9,  1864,  it  fought  the  Eighth  Corps,  and  June  5th,  at  Piedmont,  in  conjunction 
with  a  small  force  of  dismounted  cavalry  and  the  orty -fifth  regiment  of  infantry,  it 
fought  the  command  of  General  Hunter  "  ( abstract  from  Inspection  Report  of  Smith's 


brigade.  Wharton's  division.  September  29th J. 
2  Not  reported,  the  returns  being  delayed. 


APPENDIX  B. 


265 


IV. — Abstract  from  the  Rtturn  of  the  Middle  Military  Division,  Majok- 
Genekal  P.  H.  SnEKiDAN,  Commanding,  for  August,  18ti4. 


Present 

for  Duty. 

Aggreg'te 
present. 

Ag'gate 

present 

andabs't. 

Officers. 

Men. 

t*'3. 

General  Headquarters  

Department  of  West  Virginia — 

24 

538 
241 

120 

11,898 
6.231 

2,877 

216 

14,032 
8,457 
3,521 

389 

23,443 
14,722 

4,478 

Total  Dept.  West  Virginia. . . 

862 

21,006 

26,010 

42,643 

Sixth  Army  Corps — 

635 
24 

11,333 
623 

15,717 
697 

29,599 
S12 

24 

Total  Sixth  Army  Corps 

659 

11,956 

16,414 

80,411 

24 

Bet.  Nineteenth  Army  Corps — 
Artillery 

657 
15 

12,068 
436 

14,187 
458 

14,645 

21,0=11 
559 

20 

Total  Nineteenth  Army  Corps 

672 

12,504 

21,640 

20 

Cavalry  Forces- 

371 
22 

7,891 
611 

10,347 
701 

20,028 
979 

32 

24 

Total  Cavalry  forces 

393 

8,502 

11,048 
68,333 

21,007 

56 

2,610 

54,008 

116,090 

100 

V. — Strength  of  Eakly's  Infantry,    August  31,    1864,    as  shown  by 
Abstract  from  Monthly  Returns. 


1  Commanded  by  Wharton  when  a  corps  command  of  this  division  and  Gor- 
don's was  given  t  >  Breckenridge. 

?  Present  at  this  time  with  Early's  army  ;  not  present  in  battles  of  Opequon 
and  Fisher's  Hill,  but  present  at  Cedar  Creek. 

XL— 12 


266 


THE  SHENANDOAH   VALLEY. 


Ten  days  later  than  the  foregoing,  September  10,  the  figures  of   "  present  for 
duty  "  were ; 


Commands,  etc. 

Officers. 

Men. 

Aggregate. 

194 
307 
271 
182 
39 
353 

2,172 
3,244 
2,690 
2,010 
818 
3,215 

2,366 
3  551 

2,961 

2,192 

857 

3.568 

1,346 

14,149 

15,495 

The  Inspection  Reports  of  June  30th  gave  Fitz  Lee's  division  130  officers  and 
1,553  men — aggregate,  1,683 ;  those  of  July  10th,  1 15  officers  and  1,591  men — 
aggregate,  1,706  ;  those  of  November  30th,  "total  effective,"  1,455.  If  1,700,  for 
Fitz  Lee,  should  be  added  to  the  figures  already  given,  the  total,  without  Ker- 
shaw, would  be  17,195;  with  Kershaw,  about  September  10th,  the  total  would  be, 
in  round  numbers,  about  21,000. 

VI. — Sheridan's  Strength,  September  10,  1864. 

Headquarters  Middle  Military  Division, 
September  13,  1864. 
General — I  have  the  honor  to  forward  as  complete  a  field  return  as  is  possible 
at  the  present  time.  The  most  strenuous  exertions  are  being  made  by  me  to 
obtain  a  full  return,  but  the  difficulty  in  obtaining  such  from  the  commanding 
officer  Department  of  West  Virginia,  because  of  his  command  covering  so  great 
an  extent  of  country,  has  so  far  prevented. 

The  enclosed  return  does  not  include  the  cavalry  under  Averell,  about  2,500, 
or  the  troops  of  the  Departments  of  Washington,  Susquehanna,  or  Middle. 

I  simply  forward  it  you  as  a  statement  showing  the  number  of  men  for  duty 
south  of  the  Potomac.     Hoping  soon  to  furnish  complete  all  reports  required, 
Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

P.  H.  SHERIDAN, 
Brigadier-General  L.  Thomas,  Major- General. 

Adjutant  General,  United  States  Army. 

Field  Return  of  Troo])s  in  the  Field,  belonging  to  the  Middle  Military 
Division,  September  10,  1864. 


Sixth  Army  Corps,  Infantry 

"  "  Artillery 

Nineteenth  Army  Corps,  Infantry 

"  Artillery 

Army  of  West  Virginia,  Infantry. 

"  "  Artillery  . 

Cavalry  (Torbert's) 

Artillery 

Military  District,  Harper's  Ferry. . 


Present  for  Duty. 


Officers.     Men.     Aggreg'te. 


668 

22 

660 

7 

306 

12 

339 

7 

204 

2.2031 


12,028 

626 

12,150 

208 

6,834 

355 

6,126 

346 

4.611 


43,284 


12,696 

64S 

12,810 

215 

7,140 

367 

6,465 

353 

4,815 


45,487i 


1  A  clerical  error  in  casting  up  the  first  column  of  the  foregoing  table,  which 
is  taken  from  Badeau's.  Military  History  of  Q.  S.  Grant,  makes  it  read  2,203 
instead  of  2,225  ;  and  the  aggregate,  in  like  manner,  should  be  45,509. 


APPENDIX  B. 


267 


VII. — Abstract  from  Return  of  the  Middle  Military  Division,  Major- 
General  P.  H.  Sheridan,  Commanding,  for  September,  1864. 


Present  fCr 
Duty. 

0> 

Ci    r-    O) 

MS; 

»  a.  -° 

^       a 

Commands. 

1 
o 

CD 

o 

22 

380 
167 

88 

66 

9.917 
4,591 
3,0U6 

145 

11,077 
6,537 
3,061 

281 

19,475 
14.833 

4,502 

Department  of  West  Virginia: 

Total  Department  West  Virginia. 

635 

17,514 

21,275 

38,810 

Sixth  Army  Corps : 

419 
24 

9.648 
516 

13,068 
C62 

28,690 
776 

24 

443 

10,224 

13,730 

29,466 

24 

Detachment  Nineteenth  Army  Corps : 

502 
12 

10,360 
405 

12,244 
438 

21,134 
527 

20 

Total  Nineteenth  Array  Corps 

514 

10,765 

12,682 

21,661 

20 

Cavalry  Forces  : 

267 
22 

6,076 
520 

8.318 
614 

19,7S5 
858 

24 

289 

6,596 

8.932 
56,764 

20.643 

24 

1,903 

45,165 

110,861 

68 

VIII. — Partial  Strength  of  Early's  Army,  September  30,  18G4,  as 
shown  by  Inspection  Heports. 


Troops. 

■£  *=  >? 

<S  c  ~ 

U    CD    t. 
61  S-    o 

< 

61  p, 

60S  * 
60  o,T3 

Rodes's  Division  (Ramseur com'd'g),  Gen'l  Staff. 
Battle's  Brigade,  Brig.-Gen.  C.  A.  Battle 
Grimes's  Brigade,  Brig.-Gen.  Bryan  Grimes. . . 

Cook's  Brigade,  Brig.-Gen.  Phil.  Cook 

17 
743 
795 
579 
442 

2,576 

17 

973 

1,018 

800 

663 

19 
2.9:2 
3,310 
3,889 
2,359 

Total 

3,471 

12.509 

268 


THE  SHENANDOAH  VALLEY. 


VIII. — Partial  Strength  of  Early's  Army,   September  30,  1864,   as 
shown  by  Inspection  Reports — Continued. 


Troops. 

.8.0  >> 

s  ■£-£ 
a?  $  'S 

bo  »<K 
< 

0) 
6£  § 

be  C. 
<l 

Early's  Division  (Pegram  com'd'g),  Gen'l  Staff.. 

Pegram's  Brigade,  Col.  John  S.  Hoffman 

Johnston's  Brigade,  Brig.-Gen.  R.  D.  Johnston. 
Gordon's  Brigade,  Lt.-Col.  Win.  T.  Davis  .... 

12 
437 
450 
712 

12 
663 
627 
843 

12 

2,308 
2,438 
2,984 

Total 

1,617 

2,145 

7,742 

Wharton's  Div.  (Wharton  com"d'g),  Gen'l  Staff. 

11 
286 
417 
457 

12 

416 
578 
632 

14 
1,092 

Smith's  Brigade,  Col.  Thos.  Smith 

2,131 
1,494 

Total 

1,171 

1,638 

4,731 

222 

381 
239 
259 

259 
460 
886 

305 

420 

1,138 
457 

4-19 

Total 

1,101 

1,310 

2,464 

IX. — Strength  of  the  Army  of  the  Valley  District,  December  31,  1864, 
as  shown  by  Inspection  Reports. 


Troops. 

Aggregate 
present 
for  duty. 

Aggregate 
Present. 

Aggregate 

Present 

and  absent 

Pieces 
of 

artillery. 

7 
12 
570 
809 
592 
942 

7 

12 

663 

1,043 

733 

1,153 

10 
13 
1.981 
2.697 
1,993 
2,391 

Wharton's  Division — Staff  . .. 

28 

Total  Infantry  and  Artillery. 

2,932 

3,611 

9,085 

28 

"  The  camps  of  the  artillery  an  1  infantry  of  the  army  are  located  near  Fish- 
erville,  Augusta  County,  Va.,  about  seven  miles  south  of  Staunton,  on  the  Vir- 
ginia Central  Railroad.  Major-General  Lomax's  cavalry  division  is  cantoned 
from  Swift  Run  Gap,  in  Rockingham  County,  Va.,  across  the  Blue  Ridge  to 
Madison  Court  House,  and  Major-General  Rosser's  is  collected  near  Swoop's 
Depot,  nine  miles  south  of  Staunton,  on  the  Central  Railroad." 

1  Thirty-five  guns  and  499  serviceable  horses. 


APPENDIX  C. 

LIST  OF  CASUALTIES  AND  CAPTURES. 

I. — Casualties  in  the  Shenandoah  Valley  Forces  of  General  Sheri- 
dan, 1864. 


Command. 

Battle. 

■a 
a 
s 
o 

to 

1 

C3 

to 

ho 
to 

Sixth  Army  Corps 

21.3 

24 

255 

86 

5T8 

1,424 

210 

1,666 

665 

48 

3 

294 

11 

1  685 

Fisher's  Hill 

237 

2,215 

762 

Reconnoissances  and 
minor  engagements. 

3,965 

356 

4  899 

Nineteenth  Army  Corps  . 

275 

11 

243 

57 

1,228 

47 
1,352 

446 

453 

2 

893 

13 

1,956 

Fisher"  s  Hill 

60 

2,488 

Reconnoissances  and 
minor  engagements. 

516 

Total 

586 

3,073 

1.361 

5,020 

Opequon  and  Fisher's 
Hill 

Army  of  West  Virginia . . 

105 
46 

150 

301 

840 
268 

839 

8 
533 

96 

953 

817 

Reconnoissances   and 
minor  engagements. 

1,085 

Total 

1,947 

637 

2,885 

19 

91 

121 

231 

65 

9 

25 

355 

267 

4S 

139 

2,363 

109 

"50 
487 

441 

57 

214 

Twenty  six  (26)  other 

3,205 

454 

2,817 

646 

3,917 

1,938 

11,893 

3,121 

16,952 

270  THE  SHENANDOAH  VALLEY. 

II — Official  Report  of  Prisoners  Received  in  the  Military  Division. 

Headquarters  Military  Division  of  the  Gulf, 
New  Orleans,  November  18,  1S65. 
General — I  have  the  honor  to  report  that  the  number  of  Confederate  prison- 
ers received  by  the  forces  under  your  command,  from  August  1,  1864,  to  March 
1,  1865.  was  about  thirteen  thousand  (13,000).'  The  names  of  nearly  that  num- 
ber are  recorded  on  the  books  recently  used  in  the  office  of  the  Provost-Marshal- 
General  Middle  Military  Division. 

Respectfully  submitted, 

E.  B.  PARSONS, 
Late  Provost- Marshal- General  Middle  Military  Division. 
Maj.-Gen.  P.  H.  Sheridan,  United  states  Army. 

III. — Summary  of  General  Sheridan's  Official  Statement  of  Cap- 
tures and  Destructions  in  the  Middle  Military  Division,  from 
August  8,  1864,  to  January  1,  1865. 

One  hundred  and  one  pieces  of  artillery,  83  artillery  carriages  and  limbers,  35 
caissons,  128  double  sets  of  artillery  harness,  2  anvils,  5,067  small  arms;  in  addi- 
tion, 23,000  rounds  of  artillery  ammunition,  131  wagons,  137  ambulances,  7  medi- 
cal wagons,  1,006  sets  of  harness,  1.040  sets  of  horse  equipments,  49  battle-flags, 
14,163  small  arms,  1,061,000  rounds  of  small-arm  ammunition,  4,240  horses,  553 
mules,  120  flour-mills,  1  woollen  mill,  8  saw-mills,  1  powder-mill,  3  saltpetre  works, 
2,300  barns,  7  furnaces  1  railroad  depot,  1  locomotive,  6  distilleries,  3  box-cars. 
4  tanneries,  460,072  bushels  of  wheat,  22.000  bushels  of  oats,  157.076  bushels  of 
corn.  874  barrels  of  flour,  51,3S0  tons  of  hay,  500  tons  of  fodder,  450  tons  of  straw, 
16,438  beef  cattle,  17,837  sheep,  16,141  swine,  250  calves,  12,000  pounds  of  bacon 
and  ham,  10,000  pounds  of  tobacco,  947  miles  of  rails,  2,500  bushels  of  potatoes, 
1,665  pounds  of  cotton  yarn,  3  factories. 

IV. — Summary  of  General  Sheridan's  Official  Statement  of  Cap- 
faires  and  Destructions  in  Expedition  from  Winchester  to  Peters- 
burg, March,  1865. 

Three  breaches  in  James  River  canal,  60  canal  locks,  5  aqueducts,  40  bridges, 
2  naval  repair-shops,  2  dredges,  1  machine  shop,  1  forge,  9  portable  forges,  1  lum- 
ber-yard, 1  foundry,  21  warehouses,  6  government  warehouses,  606  hogsheads, 
500  kegs,  58  boxes,  and  3,000  pounds  of  tobacco;  1  tobacco  factory  valued  at 
$200,000,  336  sacks  and  500  bushels  of  salt,  12  barrels  of  potash,  29  canal  boats 
and  6  flat  boats  loaded  with  stores  and  ammunition,  41  miles  of  railroad  and  27 
of  telegraph,  10  depots,  400  feet  of  trestle  work,  4  cars,  23  bridges  and  6  cul- 
verts, 400  cords  of  wood,  3,000  pairs  of  trousers,  2,000  shirts  and  drawers,  50  kegs 
of  powder,  500,000  pounds  of  ritle  ammunition.  1  barrel  of  oil,  400  gross  of  buckles 
and  rings,  3  saw-mills,  7  flour-  and  grist-mills,  1  cloth-mill  with  manufactured 
gray  cloth,  3  cotton-mills,  1,500  pounds  of  wool.  35  bales  of  cotton,  1  candle  manu- 
factory, 1,01)0  pounds  of  candles,  3  tanneries,  1,500  bushels  of  wheat,  1,000  grain 
sacks,  600  barrels  of  flour,  18  wagon  loads  of  grain  and  stores,  1  military  jail  at 
Goochland,  225  ambulances  and  wagons,  98  wagons  loaded  with  ammunition  and 
stores,  75  beef  cattle,  100,000  feet  of  bridge  timber,  1,500  cotton  quilts,  1,000  pounds 
of  bacon,  7  water-tanks,  3,000  pounds  of  fixed  ammunition,  2,000  tents,  500  sad- 
dles, 110  sides  of  leather,  904  sets  of  harness.  1,600  prisoners.  17  pieces  of  artillery, 
6  caissons,  1,900  small  arms,  60  carbines,  a  quantity  of  shells  and  small  arms,  16 
battle-flags,  2  United  States  guidons,  2,143  horses  and  mules. 

1  "Altogether,  during  the  campaign,  I  had  on  the  Provost-Marshal's  books  rec- 
ord of  7,000  ucwounded  prisoners,  who  were  soldiers,  besides  which  there  were  a 
large  number  of  civil  prisoners  sent  to  the  rear.  Colonel  E.  B.  Parsons,  who  suc- 
ceeded me  as  Provost-Marshal-General,  in  an  official  communication,  puts  the 
actual  number  of  prisoners  on  the  books  at  13.000  ;  and  this  from  August,  1864, 
to  March,  1865  "  (Colonel  B.  W.  Crowninshield's  Cedar  Creek). 


APPENDIX  D. 

CONFEDERATE   ACCOUNTS   OF  EVENTS. 

I. — Action  at  New  Market,  Matj  15,  1864. 

Colonel  J.  Stoddard  Johnston,  of  Breckenridge's  staff  ("  Southern  Hist.  Soc. 
Papers.-'  June,  1879),  says  that  m  May,  1864,  Breckenridge's  entire  infantry  was 
ready  to  prevent  Crook's  march  against  Neivbern  when  Lee  directed  him  to  march 
at  once,  with  all  his  available  force,  to  the  defence  of  Staunton,  news  being  re- 
ceived of  Sigel's  advance  from  Maitinsburg,  and  his  occupation  of  New  Market 
with  a  part  of  his  column.  "  Breckenridge  marched  at  one  o'clock  the  morning 
of  May  15th,  and  by  daylight  was  in  line  of  battle  two  miles  south  of  New  Mar- 
ket, his  front  being  covered  by  Imboden's  cavalry,  Harmon's  command  being  left 
as  rear-guard  to  the  trains,  a  mile  farther  in  the  rear.  .  .  .  To  accomplish 
the  defeat  of  Sigel's  advance  he  had  but  a  meagre  force — the  aggregate  of  in- 
fantry muskets  being  but  thirty  one  hundred.  With  this  command,  as  the  morning 
opened,  he  advanced  in  line  of  battle ;  the  cavalry  of  Imboden  giving  way  to  our 
infantry  skirmishers  and  going  to  the  right,  with  instructions  to  operate  during 
the  day  as  a  cover  to  our  right  flank,  and  to  endeavor,  as  the  battle  progressed,  to 
gain  the  rear  of  Sigel,  and  to  burn  the  bridge  across  the  Shenandoah  near  Mount 
Jackson,  four  miles  from  New  Market.     .     .     . 

"  General  Breckenridge  formed  his  line  of  battle  with  the  right  resting  on  the 
turnpike,  and  his  left  on  the  summit  of  the  ridge,  placing  the  cadets  in  the  centre 
between  the  two  brigades.  He  had  but  one  line  of  battle  in  two  ranks,  with  no 
reserves.  It  was  not  long  before  the  skirmish  line  of  the  opposing  forces  became  en- 
gaged, and  after  sharp  firing  the  enemy  fell  back  beyond  New  Market.  Then  ensued 
heavy  artillery  firing,  which  occupied  the  greater  part  of  the  morning.  A  recon- 
noissance  showed  that  Sigel,  finding  he  was  opposed  by  infantry  instead  of  cav- 
alry, had  abandoned  the  offensive  and  assumed  the  defensive.  To  this  end  he 
had  retired  with  his  main  force  to  the  crest  of  the  hill  about  a  mile  north  of  New 
Market,  where,  with  open  ground  in  his  front  and  his  flanks  well  covered  by  the 
topography  already  described,  he  occupied  an  exceedingly  strong  defensive  posi- 
tion. The  rain  was  almost  continuous  during  the  day,  and  Breckenridge's  forces 
had  operated  in  wheat-fields,  which  made  it  very  laborious,  particularly  in  hand- 
ling artillery.     .     .     . 

"  When  his  line  had  reached  within  two  hundred  yards  of  that  of  the  enemy,  Lhe 
position  was  very  critical,  and  for  a  time  it  seemed  doubtful  as  to  which  would  be 
the  first  to  give  way.  At  this  junctnre  Sigel's  cavalry,  on  his  left,  were  seen  de- 
ploying for  a  charge  down  the  pike.  Breckenridge,  with  his  keen  eye,  detected 
the  manoeuvre  and  ordered  the  guns  to  be  double-shotted  with  canister.  It  had 
scarcely  been  done  before  they  were  seen  advancing  in  squadron  front,  when, 
coming  in  range,  the  artillery  opened  and  the  charge  was  repulsed  disastrously — 
not  more  than  a  score  reaching  our  lines,  and  they  as  prisoners,  lying  on  the  necks 
of  their  horses.  This  seemed  to  turn  the  tide  of  battle,  for  in  a  few  moments 
Sigel's  line  gave  way  and  our  troops  pressed  to  the  crest,  only  to  see  the  enemy 
in  full  retreat.  Pursuit  was  given  as  soon  as  our  line  could  be  reformed.  Sigel 
made  a  brief  stand  at  Rood's  Hill  to  cover  his  retreat,  which  he  effected  beyond 
the  Shenandoah,  burning  the  bridge  as  his  rear-guard  passed  over.     Had  Imbo- 


272  THE  SHENANDOAH  VALLEY. 

den  succeeded  in  can-ying  ont  his  instructions,  the  whole  of  Sigel's  command 
would  have  been  captured.  As  it  was,  Breckenridge  captured  five  pieces  of  artil- 
lery, which  were  abandoned  on  the  field,  besides  five  or  six  hundred  prisoners,  ex- 
clusive of  the  wounded  left  on  the  field.  His  own  loss,  though  not  nearly  so  large 
as  Sigel's,  was  several  hundred  killed  and  wounded." 

II. — General  Gordon's  Report  of  the  Battle  of  the  Monocacy. 

"About  2.30  p.m.,  July  9th,  I  was  ordered  by  Major-General  Breckenridge, 
commanding  corps,  to  move  my  division  to  the  right  and  cross  the  Monocacy 
about  one  mile  below  the  bridge  and  ford.  ...  I  ordered  the  command  to 
advance  en  echelon  by  brigades  from  the  right.  The  troops  emerged  from  the 
woods  seven  hundred  yards  in  front  of  the  enemy's  left,  under  heavy  fire  from  in- 
fantry and  artillery.  .  .  .  This  battle,  though  short,  was  severe.  I  desire,  in 
this  connection,  to  state  a  fact  of  which  I  was  an  eye-witness,  and  which,  for  its 
rare  occurrence  and  the  evidence  it  affords  of  the  sanguinary  character  of  this 
struggle,  I  consider  worthy  of  official  mention.  One  portion  of  the  enemy's  second 
line  extended  along  a  branch  from  which  he  was  driven,  leaving  many  dead  and 
wounded  in  the  water  and  upon  its  banks.  This  position  was  in  turn  occupied  by 
a  portion  of  Evans's  brigade  in  the  attack  on  the  enemy's  third  line.  So  profuse 
was  the  flow  of  blood  from  the  killed  and  wounded  of  both  these  forces  that  it 
reddened  the  stream  for  mere  than  a  hundred  yards  below.  It  has  not  been  my 
fortune  to  witness  on  any  battlefield  a  more  commendable  spirit.  ...  I  regret 
to  state  that  my  loss  was  heavy  in  both  officers  and  men,  amounting  in  the  aggre- 
gate, as  shown  by  tabular  report  of  brigade  commanders,  to  698." 

IH. — Sheridan's  Pursuit  of  Early,  August,  1864. 

"  It  was  on  this  retreat  [from  Winchester  to  Strasburg,  August  11th]  that  Gen- 
eral Breckenridge  and  General  Early  were  riding  along  together  very  moodily  at 
the  prospect,  both  of  the  Valley  campaign  and  the  general  course  of  Southern 
independence,  when  General  Early  spoke  up  quizzically  and  said  :  '  Well,  Brecken- 
ridge, what  do  you  think  of  our  rights  in  the  territories  now  ?  '  The  inquiry  was 
so  humorous,  and  in  a  vein  so  much  in  contrast  with  the  gloomy  feelings  of  the 
company,  that  General  Breckenridge  and  all  present  were  thrown  into  good  spirits 
at  once.  Early  was  an  old  Whig,  and  up  to  the  breaking  out  of  the  war  a  violent 
Union  man,  always  the  antipodes  of  Breckenridge  in  politics  "  (Col.  J.  S.  Johnston, 
as  above). 

IV. — Early's  Menace,  of  Washington. 

In  a  comparatively  recent  statement,  regarding  his  march  to  Washington,  Early 
says:  "My  advance,  a  small  body  of  cavalry,  ai-rived  for  the  first  time  in  front  of 
the  defences  about  noon  of  the  11th,  and  I  followed  this  advance  in  person,  arriv- 
ing in  sight  of  the  defences  a  little  after  noon.  The  main  body  of  my  command 
did  not  get  up  until  some  two  or  three  hours  later."  Speaking  of  the  skirmish  at 
1.30  p.m.  that  day,  he  says  that  his  cavalry  only  was  then  engaged:  "At  that 
time  the  leading  brigade  of  my  command  had  not  come  up,  but  soon  after  came 
up,  formed  line,  and  sent  forward  skirmishers,  who  drove  those  of  the  enemy  back 
to  the  cover  of  his  works.  It  took  some  time  to  get  the  remainder  of  the  leading 
division  into  line,  and  it  was  much  later  when  the  rest  of  my  command  was 
brought  up.  .  .  .  My  troops  did  not  all  get  up  and  into  line  before  four  o'clock, 
and  my  leading  brigade  was  not  in  line  before  two  o'clock."  While,  therefore, 
General  Badeau's  statement  that  "  Washington  had  really  been  in  very  little  dan- 
ger, for  the  works  were  so  admirable  that  the  merest  handful  of  men  could  hold 
off  an  army  until  reinforcements  arrived  "  may  be  a  somewhat  extreme  assertion, 
General  Grant's  official  report  that  adequate  reinforcements  arrived  before  Early's 
troops  did  seems  to  be  within  bounds. 

Colonel  Johnston,  of  Breckenridge's  staff,  in  the  article  already  cited,  speaks  of 
Early's  command  as  including.  July  3d,  Breckenridge's  corps,  two  divisions,  Early's 
corps,  also  two  divisions,  and  "  a  corps  of  cavalry,  commanded  by  General  Ran- 


APPENDIX  D.  273 

som,  .  .  .  the  whole  being  about  3,000  cavalry,  most  of  it  being  known  as  wild 
cavalry — of  the  inefficiency  of  which  there  was  constant  complaint  and  almost 
daily  exhibition." 

As  to  Early's  numbers,  in  marching  from  Staunton,  if  to  the  10,663  aggregate  in- 
fantry present  for  duty,  exclusive  of  Kershaw's,  on  his  inspection  reports  of  August 
31st,  be  added  the  3,000  cavalry  spoken  of  in  round  numbers,  by  Colonel  Johnston, 
or  rather  the  aggregate  of  3,568  of  Lomax's  (previously  Ransom's)  cavalry  com- 
mand, present  for  duty  September  10th,  we  get  a  force  of  over  14,000  infantry  and 
cavalry.  The  artillery  must  have  bronght  the  total  to  15,000,  inasmuch  as,  Sep- 
tember 30th,  after  a  hard  campaign,  the  three  battalions  that  went  to  Washing- 
ton still  numbered,  aggregate  present  for  duty,  820.  Early  could  hardly  have  lost 
fewer  than  2,000  men  prior  to  the  inspection  returns  of  August  31st,  since 
Gordon  reports  that  his  division  alone  suffered  698  casualties  at  Monocacy,  where 
McCausland  was  also  heavily  engaged  ;  and  Ramseur  is  known  to  have  lost  about 
400,  perhaps  more,  at  Carter's  Farm,  August  20th.  In  addition  there  were  the 
losses  at  Leetown,  Maryland  Heights,  Fort  Stevens,  and  Snicker's  Ferry,  and 
McCausland's  cavalry  loss  of  75  at  Cumberland,  and  of  fully  400  at  Moorefleld. 
Early  also  speaks  of  hundreds  of  stragglers.  Making  allowance  for  the  very  few 
reinforcements  received  on  returning  to  the  Valley,  we  reach  the  approximate 
estimate  of  17,000  given  in  the  text.  Of  course  Early  had  no  such  force  with 
which  to  attack  Fort  Stevens,  as  several  thousand  must  be  deducted  for  the  losses 
then  already  suffered  in  battle  and  haid  marching,  and  for  the  part  of  his  cavalry 
absent  around  Baltimore;  and  Ins  artillerj men  and  train  guards  would  also  have 
to  be  deducted  from  a  possible  storming  column. 

V.  —  Official  Diary  of  First  Corps,  A.  If.  V.i  (Extracts'). 

"  August  7th. — Leave  Richmond  at  7.30  a.m.  by  rail,  and  arrive  at  Mitchell's 
Station  at  dark. 

"  August  8th. — Last  of  Kershaw's  division  arrives  to-day. 

"August  11th. — Cutshaw's  artillery  horses  and  Fitz  Lee's  cavalry  division  ar- 
rive.    Hear  of  Early  at  Bunker  Hill. 

"With  Kershaw's  division  and  Cutshaw's  battalion  of  artillery,  we  move  from 
Mitchell's  Station  soon  after  sunrise,  and  halt  at  Culpeper  at  midday. 

"  August  16th. — To  hold  Guard  Hill  and  cover  the  passage  of  the  Shenandoah, 
Wofford's  brigade  of  infantry  and  Wickham's  of  cavalry  and  artillery  are  sent 
to  seize  the  position,  which  is  done  with  the  loss  of  but  e:ght  or  ten  men.  Wof- 
ford,  however,  moves  off  to  the  right  to  attack  the  enemy's  cavalry,  and  the 
enemy,  just  at  that  moment,  having  charged  and  driven  back  our  own  cavalry, 
pitches  into  Wofford  and  drives  him  back  in  confusion  and  with  loss. 

"  August  25th.— Kershaw  moves  at  daylight  with  Cutshaw  to  relieve  Rodes  and 
Ramseur.  Early's  force  moves  to  threaten  Martinsburg,  and  Fitz  Lee  (who  has 
resumed  command  of  all  the  cavalry)  toward  Williamsport. 

"  August  26th. — Enemy  in  position,  and  quiet  until  afternoon  about  five  o'clock, 
when  he  advances  four  or  five  regiments  of  infantry  and  one  of  cavalry  to  feel 
our  lines.  The  picket  line  of  the  15th  South  Carolina  Regiment,  Kershaw's  bri- 
gade, breaks,  and  about  100  men  of  it  aie  captured.  The  enemy  soon  retires. 
During  the  night  we  hear  from  Early,  who  is  at  Leetown. 

"  September  3d.— Move  at  12  m.  from  Winchester  for  Berryville,  by  the  pike. 
Strike  the  enemy  about  four  miles  from  Berryville. 

"  September  15th. — Move  at  sunrise  with  Kershaw  and  Cutshaw  up  the  Valley 
pike,  and  camp  or  North  Fork  of  Shenandoah." 

J  From  Southern  Hist.  Soc.  Papers. 
12* 


INDEX. 


Note. — Regiments,  batteries,  etc.,  are  indexed  under  the  names  of 
their  States,  excepting  batteries  called  by  their  captain's  or  by  some 
other  special  name.     These  are  indexed  under  Batteries. 


Abingdon,  Va.,  5 

Alexander,  Colonel,  battery  of,  55, 
59,  65,  208,  238 

Alexandria,  Va.,  150  (note),  198 
(note),  206,  215 

Amherst,  Va.,  33,  253 

Anderson,  General  R.  H.,  123 
(note),  126,  129,  131,  133  et 
8eq.  ;  before  Halltown,  137, 
139, 144  et  seq.,  147, 148  (note), 
152etseq.,  189  (note) 

Annapolis,  Md.,  61 

Antietam,  Md.,  118,  139  et  seq. 

Arrington  Station,  Va.,  31 

Augur,  General  C.  C,  64,  66,  68 ; 
at  Washington,  71,  73,  113, 
206  et  seq.,  212,  214 

Averell,  Brigadier-General  W.  W., 
at  Saltville,  10  et  seq.  ;  at 
Meadow  Bluff,  13  et  seq.  ;  joins 
Hunter,  28  et  seq.  ;  sent  to  dis- 
lodge McCausland,  32  et  seq., 
36  et  seq.  ;  at  Harper's  Perry, 
85  et  seq.  ;  at  Kernstown,  96, 
98;  at  Hagerstown,   100,    102 


et  seq. ;  defeats  McCausland, 
106  ;  at  Moorefield,  109,  116, 
121  ;  at  Martinsburg,  131  et 
seq.  ;  to  join  Wilson,  139,  141 
et  seq.  ;  drives  the  Confederate 
cavalry,  146  et  seq.  ;  driven 
from  Martinsburg,  154  et  seq. ; 
at  the  Opequon,  164  et  seq., 
173  ;  at  Fisher's  Hill,  176  et 
seq.  ;  attacks  Early,  186  et  seq. 

Badeatj,  General,  90  (note),  124 

(note),  151  (note) 
Baltimore,  Md.,  54  et  seq.,  71,  73, 

92  et  seq.,  110,  150  (note)  168 
Barnard,  65  (note),  91  (note) 
Barnes,       Surgeon-General,       169 

(note) 
Barry,  Lieutenant,  136 
Bartons ville,  Va.,  96 
Batchelor,  house  of,  63,  67 
Bath,  W.  Va.,  106 
Batteries:  First  New  York,   162 

(note);  First  Ohio,  86;  First 

Virginia,  86 ;  Fifth  Maine,  162, 


276 


INDEX. 


163  (note);  Alexander's,  55,  59; 
Bradbury's,  65  ;  Braxton's,  47, 
57,154, 157,160  et  seq.;  Gibbs's, 
65;  King's,   47.    57,    154,  157, 

164  et  seq.  ;  McLaughlin's,  47, 
57;  Nelson's,  47,  57,  154,  156, 
159,  253 ;  Taylor's,  187 ;  Von 
Kleyser's,  27 

Battle,  brigade  of,  161 
Beaumont,  Major,  61 
Bedford,  Pa.,  104 
Bedford,  Va.,  32  efc  seq.,  37 
Belle  Grove  House,  218,  223,  225, 

229  (note) 
Belleville,  Va.,  61 
Berry's  Ferry,  Va.,  82 
Berry ville,  Va.,  7,  82,  84  et  seq., 

88,  122  et  seq.,  129  et  seq.,  135, 

141,   143  et  seq.,   154  et  seq., 

183,  216  (note) 
Beverly,  W.  Va.,  29,  244,  251 
Bidwell,   brigade    of,    69,    229    et 

seq.,  240 
Birge,    General,    brigade   of,    160, 

161  (note),  170  (note) 
Blair,  Montgomery,  house  of,  63, 

70,  110 
Bloomington,  Md.,  16 
Board,  Colonel,  88 
Boeman,  Major,  130 
Bolivar,  W.  Va.,  49,  60 
Bonsack's  Station,  Va.,  38 
Boonsboro,  Md.,  50.  52,  60, 100,  139 
Boteler,  A.  R.,  110 
Bradbury,  battery  of,  65 
Bradford,  Governor,  61  etseq.,  110 
Braxton,  battery  of,  47,  57,  154; 

at  the   Opequon,    157,    160  et 

seq. 
Breckenridge,  General,  17  et  seq., 

32,  35  et  seq.,  44,  46  et  seq., 

52  et   seq.,  56   et   seq.,  82  et 


seq.,  97,  99,  107,  118  et  seq., 
138,  142,  149  et  seq.  ;  at  the 
Opequon,  165,  169  (note),  174, 
185,  194  (note) 

Bridgewater,  Va.,  25,  191,  193, 
199,  201 

Briggs,  Major,  63 

Brinton,  Surgeon,  169  (note) 

Brough,  Governor,  16 

Brown,  Colonel,  58 

Buchanan,  Va.,  32,  34 

Bull  Run,  Va.,  93,  96,  197  et  seq, 
206,  238,  245 

Bunker  Hill,  W.  Va.,  7,  97,  99  et 
seq,  118,  123,  130,  133,  139, 
141  et  seq.,  146,  154,  182 

Burbridge,  General,  185 

Burkesville,  Va.,  185 

Cadwalader,  General,  185 
Callaghan's,  W.  Va.,  28 
Campbell,  Colonel,  brigade  of,  99, 

130,  162  (note) 
Capehart,  brigade  of,  252 
Carlin,  27 

Carter,  artillery  of,  225 
Carter,  farm  of,  87  et  seq. 
Cathcart,  Colonel,  30 
Cedar  Creek,  205,  211  et  seq..  213, 

215,  216  (note),  217,  219,  221  et 

seq. 
Cedarville,  127  et  seq. 
Chambersburg,   Pa.,  100  et   seq., 

126 
Chapman,  General,  168 
Charleston,  W.  Va.,  10,  16,  33,  38, 

57 
Charlestown,    W.  Va.,  122,  131  et 

seq.,  135,  140  et  seq.,  143, 149, 

151  etseq,  156,  204,  245  (note) 
Charlottesville,  Va.,  6,  8  et  seq., 

24,  31,  34  et  seq.,  40   et  seq., 


INDEX. 


277 


70,  94  (note),  ISO  (note),  191 
et  seq.,  207  et  seq.,  215  (note), 
245,  249  (note),  251,  253 

Chipman,  Colonel  N.  P.,  127 

City  Point,  42  et  seq.,  53  et  seq., 
56,  61,  65,  76  et  seq.,  79  (note), 
89,  94  (note),  99,  109,  111  et 
seq.,  116,  149  (note),  150  et 
seq.,  214,  223,  240,  243  et  seq., 
246  et  seq.,  249 

Clark,  Captain,  106 

Clendenin,  Lieutenant-Colonel,  55 
et  seq.,  58 

Clifton,  Va.,  122, 130  et  seq.,  141, 
145  et  seq.,  154,  1S3 

Cloyd's  Mountain,  Va.,  12  et  seq., 
98 

Cockeysville,  Md.,  61 

Columbia,  Va.,  254 

Columbia  Furnace,  Va.,  202  et  seq., 
206,  244 

Conger,  Major,  106 

Connecticut,  regiments  of  :  First 
Cavalry,  146,  215,  251 ;  Second 
Cavalry,  163  (note)  ;  Eight- 
eenth Cavalry,  19,  27 

Conner,  brigade  of,  209  et  seq.,  239 
(note) 

Cooley,  house  of,  218,  224 

Cosby,  brigade  of,  246 

Couch,  General,  54  (note),  60,  101 
et  seq.,  107  et  seq.,  185 

Crook,  Brigadier-General  George, 
in  the  Kanawha  region,  9  et 
seq.  ;  on  to  Lynchburg,  23  et 
seq.  ;  joins  Hunter,  28  et  seq., 
31 ;  destroys  the  railroads,  33, 
36  et  seq.,  78,  79  (note);  at 
Purcellsville,  81  et  seq.  ;  at 
Harper's  Ferry,  85  et  seq.  ;  at 
Kernstown,  88  et  seq.,  96  et 
seq.  ;  retreat  of,   107  et  seq., 


116  et  seq.  ;  with  Sheridan, 
120  et  seq.  ;  at  Cedar  Creek, 
128 ;  near  Berryville,  ISO  et 
seq.;  at  Halltown,  137,  139, 
142;  at  Berryville,  144  et 
seq.,  150  ;  at  the  Opequon,  164 
et  seq.  ;  losses  of,  168,  175- et 
seq.  ;  at  Fisher's  Hill,  180  et 
seq. ;  at  Woodstock,  186,  195, 
197,  204;  at  Strasburg,  209, 
216,  220 ;  at  Cedar  Creek,  222 ; 
at  Belle  Grove  House,  223  et 
seq.,  227  et  seq.,  236  (note), 
239  ;  at  City  Point,  249  ;  cap- 
ture of,  251 

Crosby,  Major,  brigade  of,  70, 
244 

Cross  Keys,  Va.,  3,  188 

Crowninshield,  Colonel  B.  W.,  236 
(note) 

Culpepper,  8,  10,  123, 134,  189, 192, 
196,  201 

Cumberland,  Md.,  16,  38  (note), 
52,  75,  79,  100,  104  et  seq.,  121 
(note) 

Curtin,  Governor,  53,  101,  107 

Curtis,  General,  185 

Custer,  General,  128  et  seq.,  138, 
141,  146,  179,  190,  193,  196 
(note)  ;  attacked  by  Rosser, 
202  et  seq.,  204,  206  ;  attacked 
by  Early,  210,  et  seq.,  215,  218, 
224,  231  et  seq.,  236  et  seq.,  246, 
250  et  seq. 

Cutshaw,  battalion  of,  126,  133, 
137,  147,  153,  216  (note) 

Dalton,  Major,  162  (note) 
Dana,  Secretary  C.  A.,  71  et  seq., 

79  (note) 
Darksville,  48,  86,  155,  165 
Davies,  General,  41 


278 


INDEX. 


Davis,   Colonel,    226    (note),    238  j 
(note) 

De  Russy,  Fort,  Md.,  64,  66  et  seq., 
68  (note) 

Devin,  brigade  of,  127,  129,  178, 
etseq.,  186  et  seq.,  190,  215 
(note)  232,  239,  252  et  seq. 

Doubleday,  Abner,  General,  68 
(note) 

Dublin,  Va.,  12  et  seq. 

Dudley,  brigade  of,  246 

Dufiie,  General,  10  et  seq.,  30  et 
seq.,  33,  37  et  seq.,  79 etseq., 
84,  95  et  seq.,  121,  131,  142 

Duffield's,  W.  Va.,  47  (note),  49, 
62  (note) 

Duguidsville,  253 

Duval,  Colonel,  brigade  of,  12,  85 
et  seq.,  96,  98,  139;  at  tbe 
Opequon,  164  et  seq.,  168,  177, 
222 

Dwight,  General,  division  of,  121 
(note),  159,  163,  170  (note), 
181  (note),  238  (note),  239 

Dwyer,  Lieutenant,  136 

Early,  General,  3,  35  et  seq.;  men- 
aces Washington,  46  et  seq.  ; 
losses  of,  58  et  seq.  ;  despatch 
of,  67  et  seq.  ;  at  Washington, 
71  et  seq.  ;  at  Leesburg,  81  et 
seq.  ;  takes  the  road  to  Stras- 
burg,  84  et  seq  ;  retreat  of,  86 
et  seq.,  104,  107  et  seq.  ;  in 
Pennsylvania,  114,  117  et  seq.; 
at  Fisher's  Hill,  125  et  seq.  ; 
before  Halltown,  137  et  seq.  ; 
purpose  of,  143  et  seq.  ;  posi- 
tion of,  156 ;  at  the  Opequon, 
160  et  seq. ;  retreat  of,  166 ; 
at  Fisher's  Hill,  173  et  seq. ; 
losses  of,  180  et  seq.  ;  retreat 
of,    186    et  seq.  ;   at  Brown's 


Gap,  190  et  seq.  ;  at  Mount 
Sidney,  193  et  seq. ;  moves 
down  the  Valley,  201  et  seq., 
204  et  seq.  ;  re-occupies  Fish- 
er's Hill,  209  et  seq.  ;  Long- 
street's  despatch  to,  213  et 
seq.  ;  plans  an  attack,  216  et 
seq.  ;  at  Hupp's  Hill,  225 ; 
success  of,  228  et  seq.  ;  returns 
to  Fisher's  Hill,  237;  rout  of, 
238  et  seq.  ;  at  New  Market, 
244  et  seq.  ;  at  Staunton,  249 
et  seq.  ;  at  Waynesboro,  252 
et  seq.  ;  escapes  to  Richmond, 
253 

Echols,  General,  brigade  of,  19,  21 
(note),  35,  46,  et  seq.,  97 

Edwards,  Colonel,  brigade  of,  125, 
162  (note),  196 

Elzey,  37,  47 

Emory,  General,  division  of,  66, 
72,  74,  76,  95,  108,  116  et  seq., 
121  (note),  124,  130  et  seq., 
137;  at  Opequon,  155,  157  et 
seq.,  159  (note),  164,  167;  at 
Cedar  Creek,  174,  225,  226 
(note),  227  (note),  228,  232, 
237  et  seq. 

Evans,  General,  brigade  of,  59, 
160  et  seq.,  165,  238  (note),  239 

Ewell,  General,   3,  35,  48,  53,  87 

Falling  Waters,  W.  Va.,  142  et 
seq.,  156 

Farabee,  Major,  201 

Ferguson,  cavalry  of,  165, 191 

Fisher's  Hill,  125,  133,  1(58,  169 
(note),  173  et  seq.,  192,  204  et 
seq.,  209 etseq.,  213,  215  (note), 
216  (note),  217  et  seq.,  238  efc 
seq. ,  243  et  seq. 

Fitzhugh,  brigade  of,  252,  254 


INDEX. 


279 


FoJck'sMill,  Md.,  104 

Forsyth,  General,  236  (note),  248 
(note) 

Franklin,  General,  W.  B.,  62; 
nominated  to  the  command 
of  four  departments,  112  et 
seq. 

Frazee,  Lieutenant-Colonel,  63 

Frederick,  Md.,  50,  52  et  seq.,  57 
et  seq.,  72,  90  et  seq.,  108  et 
seq.,  116  et  seq.,  119 

Front  Royal,  Va.,  3,  6,  8,  15,  18, 
94  (note),  123  et  seq.,  126  et 
seq.,  145,  147,  153,  156  et  seq., 
159,  173  et  seq.,  176,  179,  193, 
195,  197  et  seq.,  206,  211  et 
seq.,  215  (note),  216,  224,  232, 
233  (note),  245  et  seq. 

Frost,  brigade  of,  83 

Fry,  Major,  60,  62,  65 

Furney,  Lieutenant-Colonel,  224 

Garkett,  49,  55  (note),  59 
Getty,  division  of,  69,  74,  117,  135, 

147;  at  the  Opequon,   157  et 

seq.,    228    et    seq.,    231,    233, 

236 
Gibbon,  General,  113 
Gibbs,  battery  of,  65,  128,  141 
Gibbs,  brigade  of,  252 
Gibson,  Major,  106 
Gile,  brigade  of,  65 
Gillmore,    General,    54   (note),  68 

(note),  71,  73  et  seq. 
Gilmor,  Major  Harry,  3,  25,  60  et 

seq.,  62  (note),  101,  103  et  seq., 

104  (note),  105,  251 
Gilpin,  regiment  of,  55  et  seq. 
Godwin,  General,  168 
Gordon,   General,   division  of,  36, 

46  et  seq.,  49,  57,  83,  97,  119, 

125  ;  at  Winchester,  130,  137, 


145,  147  (note),  154  et  seq.  ;  at 
the  Opequon,  157,  159  et  seq., 
164  et  seq.,  169  (note) ;  at 
Fisher's  Hill,  174,  180  (note), 
191,  216  et  seq.,  224,  227  et 
seq.,  229  (note)  ;  at  Cedar 
Creek,  231,  232,  234,  239  (note) 

Gordonsville,  Va. ,  6,  8  et  seq. ,  24, 
34,  40  et  seq.,  43,  76  et  seq.,  94 
(note),  148  (note),  150,  189 
(note),  195,  196  (note),  207  et 
seq,  213,  215  (note),  245,  249 
(note),  250  et  seq.,  253 

Grant,  brigade  of,  228  et  seq. 

Grant,  Lieutenant-General,  U.  S., 
his  directions  to  Sigel,  10,  14, 
et  seq.  ;  removes  Sigel,  22  et 
seq. ,  35  ;  directs  Sheridan  to 
join  Hunter,  40  ;  his  letter  to 
Hunter,  42  et  seq. ,  53  et  seq.  ; 
his  opinion  of  Ord,  61 ;  his 
telegram  to  Halleck,  127  et 
seq.  ;  despatches  to,  138  et 
seq.  ;  his  correspondence  with 
Sheridan,  149  et  seq.  ;  con- 
gratulates Sheridan,  167  et 
seq.  ;  Sheridan's  dispatch  to, 
176,  179  (note),  183  (note)  ; 
congratulates  Sheridan,  185, 
187  (note)  ;  his  correspondence 
with  Sheridan,  192  et  seq., 
205  et  seq.,  211 ;  his  instruc- 
tions to  Sheridan,  212,  214, 
216,  235  (note),  237  (note), 
240  et  seq.,  244,  246,  et  seq.  ; 
despatch  to  Sheridan,  251,  254 

Green  Spring  Run  Station,  105 

Gregg,  division  of,  40  et  seq. 

Grover,  division  of,  117,  121,  131 ; 
at  the  Opequon,  159  et  seq., 
163,  169  (note),  170  (note),  181 
(note),  225,  238,  240 


280 


INDEX. 


Hagerstown,  Md.,  50,  60,  100  et 
seq.,  104,  119,  141 

Halleck,  General,  22  et  seq.,  40, 
42,  49  (note),  53  et  seq.,  56,  71 
et  seq. ;  his  reply  to  Wright, 
75  et  seq.  ;  Wright's  despatch 
to,  84  et  seq.,  94,  97  (note), 
104,  106,  108  et  seq.,  Ill  et 
seq. ;  despatches  to,  127  et 
seq.  ;  despatches  to,  138  et 
seq.  ;  his  despatches  to  Sheri- 
dan, 150,  183  (note),  192,  197 
et  seq.,  202  (note),  206  et  seq.  ; 
Sheridan's  despatch  to,  214, 
235  (note),  246  et  seq. 

Halltown,  98,  107  et  seq.,  116  et 
seq.,  119,  121  (note),  122,  135, 
137  et  seq.,  153,  182  et  seq. 

Hampton,  division  of,  41 

Hancock,  General  W.  S.,  113 

Hancock,  Md.,  104, 106,  121  (note) 

Hardin,  division  of,  65,  68  (note) 

Harper's  Ferry,  W.  Va.,  3,  5  et 
seq.,  16,  47  (note),  48  et  seq., 
53  et  seq.,  60,  79,  85,  92  et 
seq.,  98,  101,  107  et  seq.,  116 
et  seq.,  119  et  seq.,  126  et  seq., 
137,  141  et  seq.,  144,  146,  151, 
158  (note),  182,  199 

Harris,  Colonel,  164,  209  et  seq., 
220 

Harrisonburg,  Va.,  5  et  seq.,  25,  38 
(note),  181  (cote),  186  (note), 
187  (note),  188  et  seq.,  190  et 
seq.,  193  et  seq.,  199  et  seq., 
204,  241,  250 

Haskins,  brigade  of,  65 

Havre-de-Grace,  Md.,  61 

Hay,  Colonel,  106 

Hayes,  Colonel,  R.  B.,  12,  85  et 
seq.,  99,  222  et  seq. ,  224  (note), 
225  et  seq.,  229  (note) 


Hays.  General,  35 

He.ntzelmann,  General,  185 

Henagan,  Colonel,  146,  216  (note) 

Hill,  General  D.  H.,  35, 123  (note), 
126 

Hill,  Moss.,  244 

Hotchkiss,  Captain,  217  et  seq. 

Howe,  General,  54  (note) 

Hunter,  Andrew,  110 

Hunter,  General,  given  command 
of  Department  of  West  Vir- 
ginia, 22  et  seq.  ;  his  march  to 
Lynchburg,  23  et  seq.  ;  letter 
from  Grant,  42  et  seq. ;,  his 
campaign  reviewed,  44  et  seq.  ; 
returns  to  the  Valley,  51  et 
seq.  ;  letter  to  Stanton,  78 
(note),  et  seq.  ;  in  the  Shenan- 
doah Valley,  115  et  seq. 

Illinois,  Regiment  of,  Eighth 
Cavalry,  55,  60,  107 

Imboden,  3,  19,  20  (note).  (21  note), 
25,  27  (note) ;  repulse  of,  31, 
33,  36,  47,  50,  62,  101,  124,  126 

Indiana,  Regiment  of,  Eleventh, 
226  (note) 

Iowa,  Regiment  of,  Twenty- 
second,  225  (note) 

Jackson,  General  '■  Stonewall," 
3,  28,  £6,  62,  80,  86,  95  et 
seq. 

Jackson,  W.  L.,  47,  119;  at  the 
Opequon,  159,  250 

Jenkins,  General,  12  et  seq. 

Johnson,  Bradley  T.,  46  et  seq., 
50,  55  et  seq.,  61,  87,  100  et 
seq.,  104  (note),  105  et  seq., 
143  ;  at  the  Opequon,  159 

Johnson,  Colonel,  65,  70,  99 

Johnson,  Lieutenant ,  162  (note) 


INDEX. 


281 


Jones,   General  W.   E.,   12,  26  et 

seq.,  47,  53 
Jones,  Major,  70 
Judd,  Major,  61 

Kabletown,  122 

Kearney,  Fort,  Md.,  68  (note) 

Keifer,  Colonel,  161,  225 

Kelley,  General,  16,  24, 104  et  seq., 
142  ;  capture  of,  251 

Kenly,  brigade  of,  76,  80,  136 

Kent,  Lieutenant-Colonel,  163 

Kernstown,  Va.,  7,  88,  94  et  seq., 
109,  167,  245,  249 

Kershaw,  General,  division  of,  126, 
149;  withdraws,  151  et  seq., 
172,  183  et  seq.,  189,  190  et 
seq.,  193,  196  (note) ;  rein- 
forces Early,  201,  209,  216 
(note),  218  et  seq.,  224  et  seq., 
231 ,  233  et  seq. ,  243  ;  246  et  seq. 

King,  battery  of,  47,  57,  154;  at 
Opequon,  157,  164  et  seq. 

Kitching,  Colonel,  division  of,  222 
ct  seq.,  225,  227,  229  (note), 
240 

Lact's  Springs,  Va.,  250 

Lamar,  Colonel,  59 

Latham,  Colonel,  248 

Lay,  Mrs.,  house  of,  68 

Lee,  Colonel  E.  G,  28 

Lee,  General  Fitz  Hugh,  41,  126, 
133  et  seq.,  137  et  seq.,  144, 
147, 149  ;  at  the  Opequon,  165, 
166,  169;  at  Fisher's  Hill,  174, 
179  (note),  189,  202,  204;  at 
Petersburg,  252 

Lee,  General  Robert  E.,  2  et  seq., 
4,  10,  34  et  seq.,  40  et  seq., 
44,  46  et  seq.,  60,  62  (note), 
67,  75,  90,   93,   95,  99,  122  et 


seq.,  126  et  seq.,  134,  136, 
144,  147  et  seq.,  169  (note), 
180 ;  Early's  despatch  to,  184 
et  seq.,  188,  189   (note),  194, 

201  (note) ;  Early's  report  to, 
205,  211 ;  Early's  despatch  to, 
201,  234  (note),  245  (note),  248 

Leetown,  W.  Va.,  48,  53,  13S 

Leets,  Captain,  127 

Leib,  Captain,  56,  58 

Letcher,  Governor  Jno. ,  30,  110 

Lewisburg,  W.  Va.,  14,  33,  39,  149 

Lewis,  General,  87 

Lexington,  Va.,  5,  29  et  seq.,  31, 
33  et  seq.,  3S,  99,  197 

Liberty,  Va.,  5,  31  et  seq.,  37,  250 

Lilly,  General,  87 

Lincoln,  General  W.  S.,  21  (note) 

Lincoln,  President  Abraham,  22, 
51,  66;  witnesses  the  attack 
on  Washington,  69,  71  et  seq., 
98,  113  et  seq.;  congratulates 
Sheridan,  167  et  seq.;  his  con- 
gratulations to  Sheridan,  241 

Lomax,  General,  cavalry  of,  133  et 
seq.,  154;  at  the  Opequon,  159 
et  seq.,  166,  174,  177,  180,  188 
et  seq.,  191 ;  attacks  Merritt, 

202  et  seq.,  205  et  seq.,  216, 
218,  232,  233  (note),  234  (note) ; 
withdraws  through  the  Luray 
Valley,  244,  246 ;  at  Gordons- 
ville,  250  et  seq. 

Long,  General  A.  L.,  47,  57,  88 
Longstreet,  General,  123  (note), 
126  et  seq.,  128  (note),  133, 
138,  208 ;  his  despatch  to  Early, 
213  et  seq. 
Louisiana,  regiments  of :  First, 
147  (note) ;  Second,  147  (note)  ; 
Fifth,  147  (note) ;  Sixth,  138, 
147     (note);      Seventh,      147 


282 


INDEX. 


(note);  Eighth,  147  (note); 
Ninth,  147  (note) ;  Tenth,  147 
(note)  ;  Fourteenth,  147 
(note) ;  Fifteenth,  147  (note) 

Lowell,  Colonel,  cavalry  of,  62,  65, 
72,  74,  120  et  seq.,  130,  139, 
141,  146  et  seq.,  153,  190,  203, 
240 

Luray,  Va.,  6,  8,  15,  18,  20,  126, 
174  et  seq.,  178  et  seq.,  189  et 
seq.,  11)8  et  seq.,  201  et  seq., 
206,  216,  218,  233,  244,  246 

Lynchburg,  Va.,  4  et  seq.,  23  et 
seq.,  26,  28  et  seq.,  31  et  seq., 
40,  43  et  seq.,  62,  78  (note), 
244,  251  et  seq. 

McCausland,  cavalry  of,  12,  28 
et  seq.,  31  et  seq.,  39,  47  et 
seq.,  50,  53,  57  et  seq.,  60,  62, 
67,  72 :  invades  Pennsylvania, 
100  et  seq.,  116  et  seq.,  119, 
126,  137,  142,  165,  191;  at 
Stony  Point,  246,  250 

McClellan,  General  Geo.  B.,  3,  113 

McCook,  General  A.  McD.,  64,  68 

Mcintosh,  General,  brigade  of, 
130 ;  brilliant  operation  of, 
146,  153,  157,  168,  216  (note) 

Mackenzie,  229,  240 

McLaughlin,  artillery  of,  19,  21 
(note).  47,  57 

McLean,  Lieutenant,  101  et  seq. 

McMillan,  General,  226  (note),  238 

McNeil,  16,  200,  247,  251 

Magnolia  Station,  61 

Maine,  regiments  of :  Seventh, 
Sixty-ninth  ;  batteries  of : 
Fifth,  162,  163  (note) 

Maps  :  Around  Newbern,  11 ;  Bat- 
tle of  Newmarket,  18;  Battle- 
field of  Piedmont,  26  ;  Early's 


Maryland  Campaign,  52 ; 
Northern  defences  of  Wash- 
ington, 63 

Maryland  Heights,  Md.,  49  et  seq. 
55,  91  et  seq.,  116,  119,  139 

Maryland,  regiments  of :  First,  55 

Massachusetts,  regiments  of :  Sec- 
ond, 65;  Third,  225  (note); 
Thirtieth,  226  (note) ;  Thirty- 
fourth,  19,  21  (note),  210,  221 ; 
Thirty-seventh,  163  (note) 

Meade,  General,  43,  54,  73,  113  et 
seq.,  116.  240 

Meadow  Bluff,  W.  Va.,  13,  23 
(note),  28,  38,  40 

Meigs,  General,  65  (note),  68,  199 
(note) 

Meigs,  Lieutenant  Jno.  R.,  199 

Merritt,  General,  division  of,  121, 
123  et  seq.,  127  et  seq.,  131  et 
seq.,  135,  138  et  seq.,  141,  144, 
146  et  seq.,  153;  position  of, 
155 ;  at  the  Opequon,  164  et 
seq.,  173,  178  et  seq.,  189  et 
seq.,  192  et  seq.;  attacked  by 
Lomax,  204  et  seq..  206;  goes 
to  Custer's  aid,  210  et  seq., 
212,  215;  at  Middle  Marsh 
Brook,  223  et  seq.,  231,  237, 
240,  246;  sent  into  Loudoun 
County,  248,  250;  chief  of 
cavalry,  252  et  seq. 

Michigan,  regiments  of :  Seventh, 
63 

Millford,  Va.,  178, 190,  202  et  seq., 
206,  244 

Millwood,  86,  123  et  seq.,  145,  156 
et  seq.,  165  et  seq.,  174,  198 

Molineux,  General,  brigade  of,  121 
(note)  ;  at  the  Opequon,  160, 
169  (note),  178  (note),  225,  226 
(note) 


INDEX. 


283 


Monaghan,  Colonel,  138 
Monocacy,  Md.,  53  et  seq.,  56,  60, 

65,  74,  92,  116,  119  et  seq.,  249 
Moor,  Colonel,   brigade  of,   17  et 

seq,  26  et  seq.,  29,  215,  224, 

232 
Moorefield,  W.  Va.,  16, 106  et  seq., 

126,  204 
Morgan,  General  John,  10 
Morton,  27 
Mosby,    Colonel,    3,    55,    107,    135 

et    seq.,    146,    179,    196,    245 

(note),  247  et  seq. 
Mulligan,  Colonel,  48,  79,  82,  96, 

99 

Nashville,  Tenn.,  196  (note) 

Neafie,  Colonel,  161 

Nelson,    battery  of,   47,    57,  154; 

at  the  Opequon,  156,  159,  253 
Newbern,  Va.,  5,  11,  IB,  16 
New  Creek,  W.  Va.,  16,  38  (note), 

52,  105 
New    Hampshire,     regiment    of: 

First,  253 
New  Jersey,  regiments  of  :  Third, 

146    et    seq.;     Fourth,     130; 

Tenth,  130  ;  Fifteenth,  130 
New  Market,  Va.,  5  et  seq.,  8,  17 

et  seq.,  24  et  seq.,  30,  35,  40, 

178  et  seq.,   184,   186  et  seq., 

189  (note),  190,  193,  202,  205, 

209,  216,  244  et  seq.,  249  et 

seq.,  253 
Newtown,  Va.,  7,  25,  86,  8S,   124 

et   seq.,  155,  233,  236   (note), 

237  (note) 
New  York,  regiments  of :    First, 

Cavalry,     17 ;     Second,     146 ; 

Fifth,  146 ;  Fifth  Artillery,  27, 

224    (note)  ;    Fifteenth,     25 ; 

Twenty-first,  25;  Twenty-fifth 


Cavalry,  63  ;  Forty-third,  69 ; 
Forty-ninth,  69;  Sixty-fifth, 
163  (note)  ;  Seventy-seventh, 
69  ;  Ninetieth,  226  (note);  One 
Hundred  and  Fourteenth,  226 
(note)  ;  One  Hundred  and 
Twenty-first,  163  (note)  ;  One 
Hundred  and  Twenty-second, 
69  ;  One  Hundred  and  Fifty- 
sixth,  161.  Battery  of :  First, 
162  (note) 
North  Mountain  Station,  48 

Offutt's  Cross  Roads,  Md. ,  74. 

Ohio,  regiments  of :  Second,  146 
et  seq.  ;  Eighth,  244,  252 ; 
Eighth  Cavalry,  199  ;  Twelfth, 
12;  Twenty-third,  12,  99; 
Twenty-eighth,  20;  Thirty- 
fourth,  11  et  seq.,  86  et  seq., 
99,  224  (note),  251  ;  Thirty- 
sixth,  12,  99 ;  Ninety-first,  12, 
86,  et  seq. ,  99  ;  One  Hundred 
and  Sixteenth,  20,  37 ;  One 
Hundred  and  Twenty-third, 
19;  One  Hundred  and  Fiftieth, 
et  seq.  ;  One  Hundred  and 
Fifty-first,  64.  Battery  of: 
First,  86 

Oldtown.  W.  Va.,  105 

Oley,  Colonel.,  12  et  seq. 

Ord,  General  E.  O.  C-,  54  (note), 
61,  71,  73,  76 

Page,  Lieutenant,  234 
Parkersburg,  W.  Va.,  16,  51 
Patton,  Colonel,  brigade  of,  165 
Payne,  cavalry  of,  165,  179,   185, 

190  et  seq.,  217  et  seq.,  232, 

218,  250 
Pegram,    brigade  of,  87,  174,  177, 

180  (note),    191 ;   sent  to  re- 


284 


INDEX. 


connoitre,  217  et  seq.,  227  ;  at 

Cedar  Creek,  229,  230  (note), 

233,  239  (note) 
Pennington,  pursues  Rosser,  246, 

252 
Pennsylvania,       regiments       o  f : 

Third,    12;    Fourth,    12,    83; 

Fourteenth,  11,  86 ;  Sixteenth, 

60,   65  ;   Twenty-second,  106  ; 

Fifty-fourth,  19;  Sixty-First, 

69 
Penrose,  brigade  of,  130  ;  wounded, 

240 
Petersburg,  65,  67,  92  et  seq.,  95, 

109,  114,  140.  144  etseq.,  153, 

185,   194,   202,  207,   209,   211, 

214,  242,  245  et  seq.,  248,  252, 

254 
Piedmont,  Va.,  26,  29,  34  et  seq., 

99,     192     et    seq.,    197,    198 

(note),  206,  245 
Piedmont,  W.  Va.,  16 
Pittsburg,  Pa.,  95,  107,  115 
Point  Lookout,  56,  62 
Pollard,  203 
Poolesville,    Md.,    74  et    seq,    80 

et  seq. 
Port  Republic,  Va.,  5,  8,  26,  184, 

188,  et  seq.,  192,  etseq.,  199 
Powell,  Colonel,  brigade  of,  32, 106, 

187  et  seq,  190,  201  et  seq.  ; 

in  the  Luray  Valley,  206,  208, 

212,  214  et  seq.,  224,  232    et 

seq.,  244,  246,  250 
Price,  Colonel,  6S 
Princeton,  W.  Va.,  12 
Purcellsville,  Va. ,  80  et  seq. ,  88 
Putnam,  Col.,  33 

Ramseur,  at  Lynchburg,  36 ;  in 
Maryland,  46,  48  et  seq.,  52, 
57  et  seq.,  60.  82  ;  at  Winches- 


ter, 86  et  seq. ;  at  Cedar  Creek, 
229,  230  (note),  239  (note) 

Ransom,  37,  46,  53,  97,  133,  135 

Rectortown,  206  et  seq.,  212,  214, 
234 

Reno  Fort,  Md.,  64,  68  (note),  73 

Rhode  Island,  regiment  of :  First 
Cavalry,  231 

Ricketts,  sent  to  Harper's  Ferry, 
54;  reinforces  Wallace,  56  et 
seq.,  76,  80,  S3  (note)  ;  at 
Halltown,  118,  135,  141;  at 
the  Opequon,  158,  161,  163; 
at  Fisher's  Hill,  176  et  seq., 
225  ;  wounded,  228,  240 

Rives,  house  of,  68  et  seq. 

Roberts,  J.,  house  of,  225  (note) 

Rockville,  Md.,  60,  62,  70,  72,  74, 
107  (note),  117 

Rodes,  General,  in  Maryland,  46, 
48;  at  the  Opequon,  157,  159 
et  seq.;  death  of,  162,  166,  169, 
174 

Root,  Lieutenant-Colonel,  25,  61 

Rosser,  185,  194,  196  (note),  202  et 
seq.,  243  et  seq.,  246,  248  ;  be- 
low Harrisonburg,  250  et 
seq. 

Rucker,  General,  68 

Russell,  division  of,  118, 129,  158; 
gallant  charge  and  death  of, 
162,  168 

Salem,  Va.,  5,  38  et  seq. 
Sandy  Hook  Hospital,  1G9  (note) 
Schoonmaker,  Colonel,  10  et  seq., 

37 
Sharpe,  Colonel,  brigade  of,  160  et 

seq.,  168,  170  (note) 
Sheridan,     Major-General    Philip 

H,  32  et  seq.,  40  et  seq.,  61 ; 

reports  to  Halleck,  114  et  seq.; 


INDEX. 


285 


takes  general  command  in  the 
Shenandoah  Valley,  120  et 
seq.  ;  despatches  to  Halleck 
and  Grant,  127  et  seq.;  at  Ber- 
ry ville,  131  et  seq.;  at  Hall- 
town,  135  et  seq.;  despatches 
of,  138  et  seq.;  purpose  of,  143 
et  seq. ;  correspondence  with 
Grant,  149  et  seq.;  plan  of 
battle,  155  et  seq.;  at  the 
Opequon,  160  ;  victory  of,  167 
et  seq. ;  prepares  for  battle  of 
Fisher's  Hill,  173,  175  et  seq.; 
losses  of,  180  et  seq.;  pursues 
Early,  186  et  seq.,  201 ;  corre- 
spondence with  Grant,  192  et 
seq. ;  effect  of  his  victory 
at  Tom's  Brook,  204  et  seq.; 
instructions  from  Grant,  212 
et  seq.;  goes  to  Washington, 
215  et  seq.,  221,  223,  228,  232  ; 
returns  to  field  of  battle,  235 
et  seq.;  congratulated  on  his 
victory,  240  et  seq.;  corre- 
spondence with  Grant,  244  et 
seq.  ;  enters  Staunton,  252 ; 
complete  triumph  of  his  cam- 
paign and  high  character  of 
his  soldiership,  254 

Shunk,  brigade  of,  160,  170  (note) 

Sickel,  Colonel,  12 

Sigel,  Major-General  Franz,  com- 
mands Department  of  West 
Virginia,  9  et  seq.;  his  des- 
patch to  Grant,  14  et  seq.; 
defeat  of,  20  et  seq. ,  23,  35, 
43 ;  at  Martinsburg,  48  et 
seq,  53,  54  (note),  55,  59  et 
seq.,  78  (note),  89,  91  et  seq. 

Simpson,  Major,  106 

Skip,  Colonel,  20  (note) 

Slocum,  Fort,  Ind.,  64,  68 


Smith,  William,  Governor  of  Vir- 
ginia, 194  (note) 

South  Carolina,  regiment  of : 
Eighth,  146 

Sperry ville,  Va.,  201,  208 

Stagg,  brigade  of,  252 

Stahel,  cavalry  of,  16  et  seq.,  24  et 
seq.,  29  et  seq.,  43,  48  et  seq. 

Stanton,  Secretary  Edwin  M.,  16, 
22,  27,  43  et  seq,  53,  73,  78 
(note),  109,  113,  185,  197,  198 
(note),  206  et  seq.,  212,  214,  216 
(note),  240 

Stevens,  battery  of,  163  (note) 

Stevens,  Fort,  Md.,  64,  60  et  seq. 

Stevenson, Colonel,  105, 196  et  seq., 
202  (note),  216  (note) 

Stickley's  Farm,  211 

Stony  Point,  124,  128,  233,  246 

Strother,  Colonel,  45,  107  (note) 

Sullivan,  General,  division  of,  16, 
24,  33,  37,  39,  52,  78  et  seq.,  96 

Summit  Point,  122  et  seq.,  132, 
135,  142  et  seq.,  145  et  seq., 
155  et  seq.,  158  (note) 

Suter,  Captain,  99 

Taveijnek,  Lieutenant-Colonel, 
59 

Tay,  Colonel,  130 

Taylor,  battery  of,  187 

Terry,  brigade  of,  147 

Thoburn,  Colonel,  brigade  of,  17, 
19,  26  et.  seq,  82  et  seq.,  95, 
139;  at  the  Opequon,  164  et 
seq,  177;  at  Strasburg,  209; 
at  Stickley's  Farm,  211,  221 
(note)  ;  at  Cedar  Creek,  222 
et  seq,  226  et  seq.,  231,  233; 
killed,  240 

Thomas,  Lieutenant-Colonel,  65, 
226  (note) 


286 


INDEX. 


Thorn,  Colonel,  235 

Thompson,  Colonel,  253 

Tibbets,  brigade  of,  81  et  seq.,  88 

Tompkins,  Colonel  C.  H.,  158 

Tom's  Brook,  203  et  seq. 

Torbert,  with  General  Sheridan, 
40  et  seq.,  120;  made  chief 
of  cavalry,  121  et  seq  ;  at  Win- 
chester, 129  et  seq  ;  at  Summit 
Point,  132 ;  instructions  from 
Sheridan,  136 ;  attacked  by, 
Early,  138  ;  at  Berry  ville,  145  ; 
at  the  Opequon,  155, 164etseq.; 
in  the  Luray  Valley,  175, 178  et 
seq.;  at  Harrisonburg,  189  et 
seq,  201,  et  seq,  209  (note)  ; 
at  Hupp's  Hill,  210,  212  et 
seq;  at  Cedar  Creek,  215,  216 
(note),  220  (note),  231  et  seq., 
245,  247,  280  et  seq. 

Totten,  Fort,  68  (note) 

Trevillian's  Station,  36 

Tyler,  Brigadier  General  E.  B., 
54,  56  et  seq 

Union,  W.  Va.,  11,  13 

United  States,  regiments  of  :  First 

Cavalry,  136 ;  Fifth  Cavalry, 

136,  231 
Upton,  General,  162  (note)  et  seq., 

168 

Vaughan,  27,  34  et  seq,  47,  86, 
87,  (note)  101  et  seq,  119,  125, 
143 

Virginia,  regiments  of  :  First  Cav- 
alry, 11,  86,  201;  First,  19; 
Second,  11,  86,  147,  (note); 
Third,  11,  S6 ;  Fourth,  147, 
(note);  Fifth,  99,  147,  (note); 
Seventh  Cavalry,  196 ;  Ninth, 
12,  86,  99 ;  Tenth,  147  (note)  ; 


Eleventh,  12 ;  Thirteenth,  99 ; 
Fourteenth,  12,  86,  99;  Fif- 
teenth, 12  ;  Twenty-first,  147 ; 
Fifty-eighth,  88;  Sixty-sec- 
ond, 20.  Battery  of,  First, 
86 
Visscher.  Colonel,  70 
Von  Kleyser,  battery  of,  27 

Walker,  Lieutenant,  136 

Wallace,  Major-General  Lew,  54, 
et  seq.,  losses  of,  58  et  seq.  ; 
65 ;  at  Baltimore,  71,  92,  185 

Warner,  brigade  of,  65,  175,  230, 
249 

Wartmann,  Wm.,  200 

Waynesboro,  Va. ,  6,  26  et  seq  , 
30,  34  et  seq..  190  et  seq.,  193 
et  seq.,  197,  208,  252  et  seq. 

Weber,  Brigadier-General  Max, 
24,  48  et  seq.,  53,  126 

Wells,  60,  83, 164,  209  et  seq.,  252 

West  Virginia,  Regiments  of: 
Third,  106;  Twelfth,  19.  Also, 
see  Virginia. 

Wharton,  with  Breckenridge,  19, 
21  (note)  ;  on  the  North  Anna, 
35  ;  commands  Echols's  divi- 
sion, 97,  130  ;  at  Hupp's  Hill, 
225  et  seq.,  229  et  seq.,  233, 
249  et  seq.,  252 

Wheaton,  brigade  of  68,  et  seq., 
229  (note),  236  (note),  237 

Whitaker,  Lieutenant-Colonel,  251 

White,  Colonel  C.  B.,  under  Crook, 
12,30 

Wickham,  brigade  of.  134,  105  et 
seq.  ;  at  Fisher's  Hill,  174, 178 
et  seq.,  189  et  seq.,  199  (note), 
202  et  seq.,  218 

Wilson,  General,  his  division  to 
reinforce    the    Army   of    the 


INDEX. 


287 


Shenandoah,  121  ;  at  Winches- 
ter, 130  et  seq.  ;  at  Halltown, 
135 ;  attacked  by  Early,  138 
et  seq.  ;  at  Shepherdstown, 
141 ;  sent  to  reconnoitre,  144 
et  seq.  ;  at  the  Opequon,  155, 
157  et  seq.,  165  et  seq.  ;  on  the 
Front  Royal  pike,  173,  176 ;  in 
the  Luray  Valley,  179 ;  at 
Harrisonburg,  189  et  seq., 
186 

Winchester,  Va.,  5,  7  et  seq.,  15, 
47  et  seq.,  84  et  seq.,  93,  96  et 
seq.,  122  et  seq.,  141,  144  et 
seq.,  151,  153  et  seq.,  163,  165 
et  seq.,  192,  196,  198,  200  et 
seq.,  204,  233  (note),  235,  237 
(note),  238,  243,  252  et  seq. 

Wing,  60,  62 

Woftord,  brigade  of,  233 


Woodson,  under  McNeill,  251 

Woolworth,  Colonel,  12  - 

Work,  Major,  106. 

Wright,  Major-General  H.  G,  C5 
et  seq.,  68  et  seq. ,  S4  et  seq., 
88  et  seq.,  93,  108,  111,  116, 
124 ;  at  Strasburg,  126  et  seq., 
147  ;  at  Opequon,  155,  157  et 
seq.,  167  ;  at  Cedar  Creek,  174 
et  seq.,  178;  at  Rude's  Hill, 
187;  at  Front  Royal,  206, 
220  (note),  221,  224  et  seq., 
227,  228  et  seq.  (notes\  232, 
237 ;  wounded,  240,  242 

Wynkoop,  brigade  of,  26  et  seq. 

Wytheville,  Va.,  5,  10,  13 

York,  brigade  of  147  (note),  170 
Young,     Lieutenant-Colonel,     83, 
251 


Messrs.  CHARLES  SCRIBNER'S  SONS 

publish,  under  the  general  title  of 

The  CAMPAIGNS  of  the  CIVIL  WAR, 

A  Series  of  volumes,  contributed  by  a  number  of  leading 
actors  in  and  students  of  the  great  conflict  of  i86i-'65,  with 
a  view  to  bringing  together,  for  the  first  time,  a  full  and 
authoritative  military  history  of  the  suppression  of  the 
Rebellion. 

The  final  and  exhaustive  form  of  this  great  narrative,  in  which  every 
doubt  shall  be  settled  and  every  detail  covered,  may  be  a  possibility- 
only  of  the  future.  But  it  is  a'matter  for  surprise  that  twenty  years 
after  the  beginning  of  the  Rebellion,  and  when  a  whole  generation 
has  grown  up  needing  such  knowledge,  there  is  no  authority  which  is 
at  the  same  time  of  the  highest  rank,  intelligible  and  trustworthy,  and 
to  which  a  reader  can  turn  for  any  general  view  of  the  field. 

The  many  reports,  regimental  histories,  memoirs,  and  other  materi- 
als of  value  for  special  passages,  require,  for  their  intelligent  reading, 
an  ability  to  combine  and  proportion  them  which  the  ordinary  reader 
does  not  possess.  There  have  been  no  attempts  at  general  histories 
which  have  supplied  this  satisfactorily  to  any  large  part  of  the  public. 
Undoubtedly  there  has  been  no  such  narrative  as  would  be  especially 
welcome  to  men  of  the  new  generation,  and  would  be  valued  by  a  very 
great  class  of  readers  ; — and  there  has  seemed  to  be  great  danger  that 
the  time  would  be  allowed  to  pass  when  it  would  be  possible  to  give 
to  such  a  work  the  vividness  and  accuracy  that  come  from  personal 
recollection.     These  facts  led  to  the  conception  of  the  present  work. 

From  every  department  of  the  Government,  from  the  officers  of  the 
army,  and  from  a  great  number  of  custodians  of  records  and  special  infor- 
mation everywhere,  both  authors  and  publishers  have  received  every  aid 
that  could  be  asked  in  this  undertaking  ;  and  in  announcing  the  issue  of 
the  work  the  publishers  take  this  occasion  to  convey  the  thanks  which 
the  authors  have  had  individual  opportunities  to  express  elsewhere. 


The  volumes  are  duodecimos  of  about  250  pages  each, 
illustrated  by  maps  and  plans  prepared  under  the  direction 
of  the  authors. 

The  price  of  each  volume  is  $1.00. 


The  following  volumes  are  now  ready  : 

I. — The  Outbrea7c  of  Rebellion.  By  John  G.  Nicolay, 
Esq.,  Private  Secretary  to  President  Lincoln ;  late  Consul- 
General  to  France,  etc. 

A  preliminary  volume,  describing  the   opening;  of  the  war,  and   covering   the 
period  from  the  election  of  Lincoln  to  the  end  of  the  first  battle  of  Bull  Run. 


JJ. — From  Fort  Henry  to  Corinlh.  By  the  Hon.  M. 
F.  Force,  Justice  of  the  Superior  Court,  Cincinnatti;  late 
Brigadier- General  and  Bvt.  Maj.  Gen'l,  U.S.V.,  commanding 
First  Division,  17th  Corps:  in  1862,  Lieut.  Colonel  of  the 
20th  Ohio,  commanding  the  regiment  at  Shiloh ;  Treasurer  of 
the  Society  of  the  Army  of  the  Tennessee. 

The  narrative  of  events  in  the  West  from  the  Summer  of  1861  to  May,  1862  ; 
covering  the  capture  of  Fts.  Henry  and  Donelson,  the  Battle  of  Shiloh,  etc.,  etc. 

III. — The  Peninsula.  By  Alexander  S.  Webb,  LL.D., 
President  of  the  College  of  the  City  of  New  York :  Assistant 
Chief  of  Artillery,  Army  of  the  Potomac,  i86i-'62  ;  Inspector 
General  Fifth  Army  Corps;  General  commanding  2d  Div., 
2d  Corps ;  Major  General  Assigned,  and  Chief  of  Staff,  Army 
of  the  Potomac. 

The  history  of  McClellan's  Peninsula  Campaign,  from  his  appointment  to  the 
end  of  the  Seven  Days'  Fight. 

IV. — The  Army  under  Pope.  By  John  C.  Ropes,  Esq., 
of  the  Military  Historical  Society  of  Massachusetts,  the  Massa- 
chusetts Historical  Society,  etc. 

From  the  appointment  of  Pope  to  command  the  Army  of  Virginia,  to  the  appoint- 
ment of  McClellan  to  the  general  command  in  September,  1862 

V.— The  AnUetam  and  Fredericksburg.  By  Francis 
Winthrop  Palfrey,  Bvt.  Brigadier  Gen'l,  U.S.V.,  and  form- 
erly Colonel  20th  Mass.  Infantry  ;  Lieut.  Col.  of  the  20th 
Massachusetts  at  the  Battle  of  the  Antietam ;  Member  of 
the  Military  Historical  Society  of  Massachusetts,  of  the  Massa- 
chusetts Historical  Society,  etc. 

From  the  appointment  of  McClellan  to  the  general  command,  September,  1862,  to 
the  end  of  the  battle  of  Fredericksburg. 

VI.—  Chancellor sville  and  Gettysburg.  By  Abner 
Doubleday,  Bvt.  Maj.  Gen'l,  U.S.A.,  and  Maj.  Gen'l, 
U.S.V. ;  commanding  the  First  Corps  at  Gettysburg,  etc. 

From  the  appointment  of  Hooker,  through  the  campaigns  of  Chancellorsville  and 
Gettysburg,  to  the  retreat  of  Lee  after  the  latter  battle. 

VII.— The  Army  of  the  Cumberland.  By  Henry  M. 
Cist,  Brevet  Brig.  Gen'l  U.S.V.  ;  A.A.G.  on  the  staff  of 
Major  Gen'l  Rosecrans,  and  afterwards  on  that  of  Major  Gen'l 
Thomas  ;  Corresponding  Secretary  of  the  Society  of  the  Army 
of  the  Cumberland. 

From  the  formation  of  the  Army  of  the  Cumberland  to  the  end  of  the  battles  at 
Chattanooga,  November,  1863. 


VIII.— The  Mississippi.  By  Francis  Vinton  Greene, 
Lieut,  of  Engineers,  U.  S.  Army;  late  Military  Attache  to  the 
U  S.  Legation  in  St.  Petersburg;  Author  of  "The  Russian 
Army  and  its  Campaigns  in  Turkey  in  1877-78,"  and  of 
"  Army  Life  in  Russia." 

An  account  of  the  operations— especially  at  Vicksburg  and  Port   Hudson-bv 
which  the  Mi=s.ssippi  Puver  and  its  shores  were  restored  to  the  control  of  the  Union. 

IX.— Atlanta.  By  the  Hon.  Jacob  D.  Cox,  Ex-Governor  of 
Ohio;  late  Secretary  of  the  Interior  of  the'  United  States; 
Major  General  U.  S.V.,  commanding  Twenty- third  Corps 
during  the  campaigns  of  Atlanta  and  the  Carolinas,  etc.,  etc. 

,      f/om  Sherman's  first  advance  into  Georgia  in  May,  1864,  to  the  beginning  of 
the  March  to  the  Sea.  & 

X.—TJie  March  to  the  Sea— Franklin  and  Nashville. 

By  the  Hon.  Jacob  D.   Cox. 

From  the  beginning  of  the  March    to  the  Sea  to  the  surrender  of  Johnston- 
including  also  the  operations  of  Thomas  in  Tennessee. 

XI.— The  Shenandoah  Valley  in  1864.  The  Cam- 
paign of  Sheridan.  By  George  E.  Pond,  Esq.,  Asso- 
ciate Editor  of  the  Army  and  Navy  Journal. 

XII. — Grant  in  Virginia.  By  Andrew  A.  Humphreys, 
Brigadier  General  and  Bvt.  Major  General,  U.S.A.  ;  late  Chief 
of  Engineers;  Chief  of  Staff,  Army  of  the  Potomac,  1863-  64  ; 
commanding  Second  Corps,  1864-65,  etc.,  etc.     In  Press. 

Covering  the  Virginia  Campaigns  of  1864  and  '65,  to  Lee's  surrender. 


SUPPLEMENTARY     VOLUME. 

Statistical  Ttecord  of  the  Armies  of  the  United  States. 

It  has  been  decided  to  publish,  as  a  Supplementary  Volume  to  the  Campaign 
Series,  an  exceedingly  valuable  and  complete  "  Statistical  Record"  compiled  with  the 
greatest  care  and  accuracy  from  official  sources,  by  Colonel  Frederick  Phisterer, 
late  Captain  U.  S.  Army.  The  nature  of  the  volume  may  be  gathered  from  some 
leading  heads  in  the  Ii=t  of  its  contents,  which  includes  the  figures  of  the  quotas  and 
men  actually  furnished  by  all  States  ;  a  list  of  all  organizations  mustered  into  the  U. 
S.  service;  the  strength  of  the  armv  at  various  periods  ;  its  organization  in  armies, 
corps,  etc.  :  the  divisions  of  the  country  into  departments,  etc.  ;  chronological  list  of 
all  engagements,  with  the  losses  in  each  ;  tabulated  statements  of  all  losses  in  the 
war,  with  the  causes  of  death,  etc.  ;  and  full  lists  of  all  general  officers. 
The  volume  will  be  in  all  respects  uniform  with  others  of  the  series. 


*$*  The  abmie  bonks  for  sale  by  all  booksellers,  or   will  be  sent,  postpaid, 
upon  receipt  of  pr.'ce,  by 

CHARLES  SCRIBNER'S  SONS, 

743  and  745  Broadway,  New  York. 


Special  Announcement. 


It  has  been  decided  to  publish,  as  a  Supplementary- 
Volume  to  the  Campaign  Series,  an  exceedingly  valua- 
ble and  complete  "Statistical  Record  of  the  Civil  War," 
compiled  with  the  greatest  care  and  accuracy  from 
official  sources,  by  Colonel  FREDERICK  Phtsterer, 
late  Captain  U.  S.  Army.  The  nature  of  the  volume, 
and  its  value  to  every  student  of  the  war  history,  may 
be  gathered  from  some  leading  heads  in  the  list  of  its 
contents,  which  includes  the  figures  of  the  quotas  and 
men  actually  furnished  by  all  States  ;  a  list  of  all  organ- 
izations mustered  into  the  U.  S.  service  ;  the  strength 
of  the  army  at  various  periods;  its  organization  into 
armies,  corps,  &c;  the  divisions  of  the  country  into 
departments,  &c;  chronological  list  of  all  engage- 
ments, with  the  losses  in  each  ;  tabulated  statements  of 
all  losses  in  the  war,  with  the  causes  of  death,  &c. ;  and 
full  lists  of  all  general  officers. 

The  volume  will  be  in  all  respects  uniform  with 
others  of  the  series,  and  will  be  published  with  Volume 
XII.     Early  orders  are  solicited. 


CHARLES   SCRIBNER'S   SONS,  Publishers, 
743  and  745  Broadway,  New  York. 


VI.Z003.  OSU.  05355 


