# George E. Pond, The Shenandoah Valley in 1864: Early's raid passages, v1

## transcription-note

Digital OCR of a Lincoln Financial Foundation Collection scan (Internet Archive shenandoahvalley00pond); not verified against print. Whitespace collapsed; all other characters retained, including OCR errors, split words, running headers, page numbers, footnotes interleaved with the text and a duplicated page image where the scan repeats one. Local headings are editorial. Bounded passages on the engagements of Early's raid only; the book's own maps and appendix tables are not selected here.

## title-and-preface

CAMPAIGNS OF THE CIVIL WAR.— XL THE SHENAIDOAH VALLEY In 1864 BY GEOKGE E. POND, ASSOCIATE EDITOR OF THE ARMY AND NAVY JOURNAL NEW YORK CHARLES SCRIBNER'S SONS 1883 Copyright, 1883, by CHARLES SCRIBNBR'S SONS Trow's Printing and Bookbinding Company 201-213 East i2t/i Street NEW YORK PKEFACE. The Author desires to acknowledge his indebtedness to Colonel E. N. Scott, U. S. A., for the facilities furnished him at the War Records Office, in studying the official documents relating to the events described in the present volume. In making free use of field despatches, many of which have never hitherto been published, it has not been deemed desirable to strike out occasional errors of statement, arising from imperfect information; since, in order to profitably study and rightly understand the military opera- tions herein described, it is necessary to know the views on which they were based, and to recall, in 1883, the facts as they appeared in 1864. New York, January, 1883.

## early-army

The army assembled for the march into Maryland con- sisted of the four infantry divisions of Eodes, Gordon, Ramseur, and Echols ; Eansom's division of cavalry, in- cluding the brigades of Bradley T. Johnson (formerly W. EARLY MENACES WASHINGTON. 47 E. Jones's), Imboden, W. L. Jackson, and McCausland, for the brigade of Vaughan served as infantry till its return from the expedition, when it was remounted; and Long's three battalions of artillery, comprising the batteries of Nelson, King, Braxton, and McLaughlin, whose guns num- bered about forty, many being 12-pounder Napoleons. The cavalry had additional pieces. The division ascribed to Echols was Breckenridge's old command, temporarily given to Elzey at Lynchburg, and afterward, at Staunton, tempo- rarily to Vaughan ; but Echols received it in Maryland. Breckenridge was assigned something resembling a corps command, having under him the two divisions of Gordon and Echols ; while the other two infantry divisions and the cavalry reported directly to Early. The army numbered apparently about 17,000 officers and men.1

## monocacy

Union forces from other quarters were gathering in Early's front. Major-General Lew Wallace, whose headquarters were in Baltimore, reinforcing the spare men of his garrison with home guards and hundred-day militia, moved them forward, under Brigadier-General E. B. Tyler, to Monocacy Junction near Frederick. The map will show the impor- tance of this position, the salient of the triangle on whose base, at either end, equally distant, are Washington and 1 " Sigel has been removed from Harper's Ferry and Howe sent to take his place till Hunter arrives. Of Couch, Ord, and Gillmore I think the latter the best, and have sent for him to-night.'' (Halleck to Grant, July Oth). " Won't General Couch do well to command until Hunter reaches ? " (Grant to Halleck, July 7th). EARLY MENACES WASHINGTON. 55 Baltimore. Frederick itself was not defensible, the line of resistance being about three miles south, where the Balti- more and Ohio Railroad crosses the Monocacy. As the stream was everywhere fordable, this position could be easily turned on either flank. Mosby, a few days before, had dashed across the Potomac at Point of Rocks, with about six score men, there plundering the stores, and Lieutenant-Colonel Clendenin, Eighth Illinois Cavalry, 230 strong, had been sent from Washington to drive him off; this force AVallace called to Monocacy. It was still doubt- ful whether Early was aiming at Baltimore or at Washing- ton, but Wallace's position within the space of three miles covered the turnpikes from Frederick to both cities and therewith the railroad. The position and purposes of the enemy remaining hidden, Wallace, the 7th of July, despatched Clendenin on a reconnoissance five miles west of Frederick, toward Mid- dletown. There this officer ran against B. T. Johnson's skirmishers, including the First Maryland, mostly armed with the Spencer rifle, and though his two light guns did good execution at first, when the full brigade came up he was driven back to Frederick, whither his assailants fol- lowed, yet only to retreat behind the mountains at nightfall,1 when Gilpin came up and attacked them with his regiment and Alexander's battery. Apprised by Sigel, the next day, that the enemy's forces had quitted the neighborhood of Maryland Heights, Wallace concluded that they must be I in force just beyond the Catoctin Mountains ; and having 1 General Wallace was at first inclined to attribute to this action a greater im- portance than it really had. "A battle now taking place at Frederick," he wrote Colonel Lawrence, of his staff, ,; with fair chance to whip the enemy. I shall hold the bridge. Inform Mr. Garrett of my purpose as to the bridge ; " and a little later, to the same officer, thus : " Think I have had the best little battle of the war.11 56 THE SHENANDOAH VALLEY. also heard a rumor that Breckenridge had moved past his left flank toward Urbana, which is south of Frederick on the Washington pike, he sent to the rear, by highway and rail, the surplus Government stores, and moved his advance at night back from Frederick to Monocacy Junction, Clen- denin, whose cavalry was now about 450 strong, withdraw- ing from the Catoctins, where he had skirmished all day. At dawn Early was in the town, levying a contribution of $200,000, which was paid, and supplying himself with gar- ments, shoes, bacon and flour. Johnson's brigade and a battery were sent to threaten Baltimore, and to cut the rail- roads running thence to Washington, Philadelphia, and Har- risburg, with instructions also to release, if practicable, the Confederate prisoners at Point Lookout. With his main force Early girded himself to dislodge Wallace from his position outside the town on the left bank of the Monocacy. The troops originally at the Union general's command consisted, as has been said, of companies from the Balti- more garrison, under General Tyler, organized as the first separate brigade, Eighth Corps, and strengthened by hun- dred-days men and others. Bat during the evening of the 7th, Bicketts's division of the Sixth Corps began to arrive at Baltimore from City Point, and was hurried by Halleck to aid Wallace. This officer placed Ricketts on his left, the main point of attack, covering the Washington pike and its wooden bridge, while the miscellaneous forces of Tyler held the right, covering the railroad and the Baltimore pike, with its stone pier bridge. Three companies of Gilpin held Cram's ford, above the bridges, and Clendenin also posted there Captain Leib's mounted infantry, while on the other flank he watched the lower fords and occupied the Wash- ington pike. Skirmishers were deployed on the western bank. To oppose Early's powerful artillery Wallace had EARLY MENACES WASHINGTON. 57 only one 24-iDounder howitzer, planted near the block-house, one mountain howitzer, and six 3-inch rifles. Three of these were given to Bicketts and three to Tyler. Early moved out of Frederick, with Bodes on the left, along the Baltimore pike, and Bamseur in the centre, on the Washington road, driving Wallace's pickets to the river, while Gordon, preceded by McCausland's cavalry, was in- clined to the right so as to reach the fords a mile below the Union left. These movements were covered by Long's ar- tillery, consisting of the batteries of Nelson, Braxton, King, and McLaughlin, which crowned the heights near the river, and exchanged shots with the little Union battery on the opposite bank. It need hardly be said that Wallace, with his single division of 3,350 veterans and his 2,500 troops under Tyler, many of whom had never been in action, wTas greatly inferior to Early. Nevertheless, the Confederate advance was stubbornly resisted. Bodes was called upon to do little but demonstrate, not even driving the Union skirmishers across the stream, while Gordon and the cav- alry should turn the left under Breckenridge's direction. This was accomplished about noon, after the morning hours had been occupied with artillery fire and skirmishing. McCausland, dismounting his men, forded the river and advanced against the works, but was speedily driven back. Gordon, crossing, then reinforced the cavalry. Bicketts partly changed front to the left to face this strong column marching up the river, but he had also to hold firmly by his right, lest Bamseur should cross. King's battery was run through the river, and Nelson's from the opposite bank was turned on Bicketts. Wallace sent him two more guns, and burnt the wooden bridge and block-house, in order to release the forces defending them. But Bicketts was overwhelmed by the combined infantry and artillery fire, and Wallace di- 3* 58 THE SHENANDOAH VALLEY. rectecl him to withdraw toward the Baltimore pike, after a gallant resistance, prolonged till the middle of the after- noon. Tyler had meanwhile held on to his stone pier bridge through a series of skirmishes, Brown's Ohio troops being posted there, on the Frederick side of the stream, with Lieb's horsemen, and its retention was warmly urged by Wallace, so as to secure an orderly retreat on the Balti- more pike. But the enemy, pressing up from the south on the heels of Ricketts, struck the road before the bridge guard could all get away, and captured several hundred prisoners, General Tyler and his staff putting spurs to their horses barely in season to escape. Wallace fell back on the Baltimore turnpike, while Barn- seur and Bodes, crossing the river, made a show of pursuit. At New Market, the three remaining regiments of Bicketts's division came over from Monrovia, where, six miles from the battle-field, they had halted several hours for rations ; and they covered the retreat, which continued but four miles farther. Early, too intent on going to Washington to think much about Wallace, drew back his forces at sunset. Clendenin had been cut off on the left, by Breckenridge's move, and was forced back by McCausland to Urbana, where he charged his pursuers and captured a flag. Two companies Avere driven toward Washington ; the rest reached Monrovia and Wallace's rear. Wallace's loss in this battle was 98 killed, 579 wounded, and 1,282 missing; total, 1,959. A train containing a part of the wounded was brought off. As Early only claimed " between 600 and 700 unwounded prisoners," some portion of the Union missing must have been stragglers. By far the greater part of the loss in killed, 84, and in wounded, 511, was in the division of the Sixth Corps ; yet also, con- trary to what is generally supposed, the greater part of the EARLY MENACES WASHINGTON. 59 missing. 1,054, is also attributable to it. Eicketts's losses were thus 1,649, or nearly half his force engaged. Wallace suggests that Tyler's reports were somewhat imperfect, as his regiments were moved off soon after the battle, so that the total losses may have been over 2,000 ; but on the other band, the return of stragglers may have eventually reduced it even to 1,500. Early's loss in killed and wounded was given by him as "about 700" — an evidence of the good fight made by Wallace ; and 435 of his wounded, mostly such as could not be moved, were found in the Frederick hospitals and country houses when Sigel's cavalry reoccupied the town. Colonel Lamar and Lieutenant-Colonel Taverner were among his killed, and General Evans among the wounded. Hours counted in the rescue of the national capital ; and apart from the delay caused to the invading army, Wal- lace's merit is that he went to the right place at the right time, and did the best he could with such force as he had, not seeking to postpone the task of planting an obstacle in the enemy's path. He inflicted no little loss on Early, and brought off his stores and guns, Alexander saving even the two howitzers. "I did as I promised— held the bridge to the last," he reported to Garrett ; and to Halleck he tele- graphed that he was " retreating with a foot-sore, battered, and half-demoralized column. I think the troops of the Sixth Corps fought magnificently." Wallace withdrew to Ellicott's Mills, where the Frederick turnpike crosses the Patapsco ; but Early's selection of flank attack had already indicated that he had chosen Washington for his objective, and his troops were moving in that direc- tion, while Wallace was still retrograding to Baltimore.

## fort-stevens

At dawn of Monday, July 11th, Early pushed forward from Bockville ; McCausland, in advance, moved toward Tenallytown, arriving by eight or nine o'clock north of Georgetown, where he held Early's right. The main force took the Seventh Street road, preceded by Imboden's bri- gade, under Smith, while Jackson moved on the left flank ; the Union cavalry of Lowell, Fry, and Wing were driven back to the works. The day was intensely hot, the night had been oppressive ; a prolonged drought had laid the roads in dust, and men who had sturdily tramped from Cold Harbor to Lynchburg, 1 Gilmor, in Four Years in the Saddle, narrates that a few months earlier he ran a passenger train off the track, by means of fence rails and logs, near Duffield's Station, in the Valley, and burned it. " The Northern papers made such an outcry against me," he says, " that General Kobert E. Lee ordered me to be tried by court-martial/' The Court acquitted him, as he testified that the rob- bing of the passengers, which occurred while lie was burning the train, had been done against his orders. Fortunately for the trains stopped at Gunpowder Bridge, Gilmor did not experiment on them with his device of logs and rails — they might not have glided off so easily as at Duffleld's. EARLY MENACES WASHINGTON. 63 and from Lynchburg to Frederick, fell by the wayside, ex- hausted and half suffocated. But, between eleven o'clock and noon, Early's advance approached within eyesight of the capital, Frazee's One Hundred and Fiftieth Ohio and the Twenty-fifth New York cavalry retiring to the works. Early's leading division, Eodes's, having marched by the flank, was ordered into line, and when his skirmishers were within range, about 1.30 p.m., the forts opened a rapid shelling, under which his sharpshooters drew back, and the The Northern Defences of Washington. Union picket line was re-established by 600 dismounted cavalry, under Major Briggs, Seventh Michigan. Early's position was near Silver Spring, due north of Washington, a little west of the Seventh Street road, with the dome of the Capitol in full view ; he had cavalry camps on his right and left flanks, but his infantry was mostly along this road, between the houses of Blair and Batchelor, the latter two miles north of the former. The defences of the city on that side consisted of a series of detached forts, generally connected by rifle-pits. They were regu- 64 THE SHENANDOAH VALLEY. larly built field works of strong profile, and provided with ditches and abatis, the timber havjng been felled where it stood, within cannon-range ; while everywhere there was a sweeping cross-fire of artillery. The forts mounted many 32-ponnders, with some 30-pounder and 100-ponnder Par- rotts. The one in Early's front was Fort Stevens, with De Eussy on the west, and Slocum on the east. Between Stevens and De Eussy was a deep ravine, through which ran Eock Creek, and this suggested shelter for a storming party ; but the hollow had been rendered difficult by level- ling the woods on each slope, while the Georgetown pike, beyond, was swejDt by the fire of Fort Eeno. In this system of works, the carrying of one fort would bring it under the fire of its neighbors. From his prisoners Early knew positively that troops must have been sent from Grant's army, since a division of the Sixth Corps was as far distant as Frederick several days before. The newspapers in the towns through which he passed told him of Hunter's return to the Valley, and of the expected presence of large forces from the Army of the Potomac to defend the capital. Hence, when his field-glass revealed to him, immediately on arriving, bodies of troops filing into the works in his front, he naturally concluded that Washington had been succored by this army. General C. C. Augur, commanding the Department of Washington, had collected heavy artillery, hundred-day men, convalescents, invalid corps, marines and sailors from the navy yard, militia, quartermaster's clerks and other employees, and had placed them in and around the forts, with General A. McD. McCook in command. The line directly north of the city was garrisoned chiefly by the One Hundred and Fiftieth and One Hundred and Fiftv-first Ohio EARLY MENACES WASHINGTON. 65 hundred-day militia, two or three companies in each fort, and by detachments of volunteer heavy artillery, of Hardin's division of the Twenty- second Corps, whose two brigades, Warner's and Haskins's, held the whole line from the Poto- mac to the Eastern Branch. Warner was reinforced, during the 10th, by five regiments of Veterans, the Seventh, under Lieutenant-Colonel Thomas, and Gile's brigade. The cav- alry consisted of the Second Massachusetts, Colonel Lowell, the Sixteenth Pennsylvania, Major Fry, and some smaller detachments. The Second D. C. Volunteers, Colonel Alex- ander, the Ninth V. B. C, Colonel Johnsou, Gibbs's Ohio Battery, and Bradbury's Maine Battery were in the rifle- pits on the 11th, and during the afternoon a body of the quartermaster's employees went to the front, with several hundred dismounted cavalry.1 Yet these troops would have proved a very inadequate de- fence against an army like Early's. The chief source of safety came from another quarter. The night of July 9th, a few hours after Wallace's defeat on the banks of the Mono- cacy, Major- General H. G. Wright was directed to march the First and Second divisions of the Sixth Corps from their camp at Petersburg to City Point, fourteen miles distant, 1 " The effective forces were 1,819 infantry, 1,834 artillery, and 03 cavalry north of the Potomac, and 4,064 infantry, 1,772 artillery, and 51 cavalry sonth thereof. There were besides, in Washington and Alexandria, about 3,900 effectives . . . and about 4,400 (six regiments) of Veteran Reserves. . . . The foregoing constitute a total of about 20,400 men. Of that number, however, but 9,000, mostly perfectly raw troops, constituted the garrison of the defences. Of the other troops, a considerable portion were unavailable, and the whole would form but an inefficient force for service on the lines." (Barnard's Defences of Wash- ington.) This was the available force, of course, exclusive of the Sixth and Nineteenth Corps. Behind strong works, some of those troops who did not belong to the garrisons might have proved effective, for the 4,400 Veteran lte- 6erves, presumably, were old soldiers, as were many of the quartermaster's men, nearly 2,000 of whom were reported by General Meigs for duty the night before Early's arrival. 68 THE SHENANDOAH VALLEY. where, arriving at daylight, they took transports, and were soon steaming to Fort Monroe. Before 2 p.m. of the 11th, the vessels touched the wharves of Washington, and there found, also just arriving, an ocean-going steamer, bringing a por- tion, 800 men, of Emory's division of the Nineteenth Corps, which, having reached Hampton Eoads from New Orleans, had been sent directly to the capital. President Lincoln stood on the Sixth Street wharf to greet the troops, the gaunt figure as welcome a sight to them as they to him. Quickly landing, they marched up Seventh Street, amidst the ac- claims of the people who thronged the foot-ways, and to whom the Greek cross seemed an emblem of rescue. Wright had at first been ordered to Fort Sumner on the Potomac, but at Early's approach he was directed instead to Fort Stevens. As his troops neared the northern outskirts, the sound of artillery quickened their footsteps, as it is wont to do with reinforcements arriving at need. About the same time, therefore, that Early was arriving in front of Fort Stevens, Wright was approaching the other end of the city at the river piers ; and while Eodes, after a brief halt for his parched and panting men, was deploying his columns into line of battle to test the strength of the works, Augur's provisional levies were filing into Stevens and De Bussy. From this coincidence of events has resulted a diversity of opinion as to whether Early could have seized Washing- ton by a bold assault delivered the moment he reached the city. A fair judgment seems to be that Lieutenant-General Grant cannot be brought under the imputation of neglect which an affirmative view of this question would necessarily imply. Were the safety of Washington dependent on the fact that though Early might have carried it, yet for lack of enterprise he failed to do so, its preservation would be EARLY MENACES WASHINGTON. 67 due rather to the good fortune than to the vigilance of Grant. Early had been swift in his later movements, having brought his troops and trains from the Oatoctin Mountains, between morning of June 9th and noon of June 11th, in ex- traordinary heat and dust, but the reinforcements from Petersburg had also come quickly. There was no time to spare ; but even could Early have carried Stevens or De Russy, by an immediate assault, as very likely he might have done, had he been regardless of loss, he would have afterward met the two divisions of the Sixth Corps and a portion of the Nineteenth between the works and the city itself ; and unless we are to suppose that he could both have taken one of these forts and beaten all the troops in the city, his assault would have involved him in no little peril. While McCausland's cavalry was near Fort De Russy at nine o'clock, and Rodes near Fort Stevens soon after noon, yet the rear did not reach its encampment at Batchelor's, two miles from Silver Spring, until 6 p.m. In a despatch to Lee from Leesburg, three days later, Early gives this account of his actions and motives after leaving Frederick : " The clay [the 10th] was very hot, and the roads exceedingly dusty, but we marched thirty miles. On the morning of the 11th we contin- ued the march, but the day was so excessively hot, even at a very early hour in the morning, and the dust was so dense, that many of the men fell by the way, and it became necessary to slacken our pace. Never- theless, when we reached the enemy's fortifications, the men were com- pletely exhausted, and not in a condition to make an attack. . . . I determined to make an assault, but before it could be made it became apparent that the enemy had been strongly reinforced. After consultation with my division commanders, I became satisfied that the assault, even if successful, would be attended with such great sacrifice as would insure the destruction of my whole force, before the victory could have been made available, and if unsuccessful would ne- cessarily have resulted in the loss of the whole force." 68 THE SHENANDOAH VALLEY. At 4.10 o'clock that Monday afternoon, Wright, from Fort Stevens, addressed this note to Augur : " The head of my column has nearly reached the front, and at the suggestion of Major-General McCook I have directed them to bivouac at Crystal Spring, about half mile in rear. The enemy has been close to Fort Stevens, and although driven back is still not far distant. I believe it to be only a very light skirmish line, and with your permission will send a brigade out against it, and try to clear it out. General Mc- Oook's men are not as good as mine for this purpose." He added that he held his corps in reserve, subject to McCook's orders. Augur replied that he did not consider it advisable to make any advance " until our lines are better established — perhaps to morrow." However, that night the Sixth Corps relieved the provisional forces on picket, with 900 men, and, in Virginia fashion, promptly intrenched the line. At nine o'clock, Quartermaster General Meigs reported for duty with 1,500 of his employees, armed and equipped, under immedi- ate command of General Eucker, and these were placed in position in the rifle pits on the right and left of Fort Slocum, while an hour later Colonel Price reported with his provi- sional brigade of 2,800 convalescents.1 Dawn of Tuesday, the 12th, showed the enemy in posses- sion of the Rives house, on the right of the Silver Spring road ; it stood on rising ground, surrounded by shade trees, with an orchard hard by, affording cover for his sharp- shooters, who commanded the Union skirmish line from this point and from Mrs. Lay's house, on the left of the road. TVheaton's brigade of the Second (Getty's) Division, Sixth 1 Augur's telegraphic order to McCook read thus : Doubleday to command south of Eastern Branch ; G-illmore north of Eastern Branch to mciude Fort Slemmer ; Meigs from Fort Totten to Forts De Russy and Kearney, including dependent batteries ; Hardin from Fort Reno, inclusive, to the Potomac. EARLY MENACES WASHINGTON. 69 Corps, was thrown out on picket in front of Fort Stevens, and instantly puffs of white smoke and the whiz of bullets from the opposite lines told that the Confederate sharp- shooters were at work. Skirmishing continued through the day ; by the middle of the afternoon General Wright pushed out a strong reconnoissance, with the Third Brigade of the same (Getty's) division, which in these operations was under charge of General Wheaton, during Getty's absence. This brigade, Bidwell's, was formed in two lines, with the Seventy- seventh New York, Seventh Maine, and Forty-ninth New York in the first, and the Forty-third New York, Sixty-first Pennsylvania and One Hundred and Twenty-second New York in the second. The central point of attack was the Rives house, about midway of the open. The guns of Fort Stevens having cleared the way, Bidwell, at a sign from Wright, who stood on the parapet, advanced in good align- ment, passing through the First Brigade's line and over a slight acclivity, beyond the orchard and grove to the house, from which Early's skirmishers were soon expelled. On a farther crest, a stout resistance was made, but after gallant fighting the position was swept, and Early's pickets were driven back a mile. Barely did a minor engagement present so clear an oppor- tunity for viewing its progress, and rarely for such a scene was a more memorable group of spectators assembled. On the parapet of Fort Stevens stood the tall form of Abraham Lincoln, by the side of General Wright, who in vain warned the eager President that his position was swept by the bullets of sharpshooters, until an officer was shot down within three feet of him, when he reluctantly stepped below. Sheltered from the line of fire, Cabinet officers and a group of citi- zens and ladies, breathless with excitement, watched the fortunes of the fight. Strange as was this spectacle at the 70 THE SHENANDOAH VALLEY. gates of the national capital, it would have seemed stranger still to the onlookers, could they have known that in the camp yonder, as if in typical contrast to the figure on the parapet, stood one who four years before had been the Vice- President of the United States. It was no mock battle that these spectators witnessed. Stretchers soon came from the field by scores, with their ghastly loads ; the hospitals in the rear of the fort were astir ; and here and there, dotting the meadow, the orchard and the dusty highway, lay many a lad for whom the wild cheers of the crowd fell on deaf ears. Colonel Visscher was dead, Lieutenant-Colonel Johnson mortally wounded, Major Jones dead, Major Crosby with his left arm gone — in brief, every regimental commander of the Third Brigade killed or wounded, with a loss of 250 in the brigade and a total loss of 280 out of the force engaged. The enemy must also have suffered severely, as about 30 of his dead and 70 of his most seriously wounded were left on the field and at Blair's house with surgeons and attendants. Hardin's divi- sion lost 73 killed and wounded during the two days of Early's presence, and other casualties made the total Union loss in this demonstration against Washington between 400 and 500. A monument on the slope fronting Fort Stevens preserves the memory of the Union dead. Early was quick to read the warning that it was time for him to be away. That night he fell back through Bockville, his soldiers having first set fire to the house of Montgomery Blair near his camp ; he marched all night, and halted near Darnestown.

## snickers-ferry

At 6.30 p.m. he had reached Offutt's Cross Roads, with his cavalry, and an hour later with the head of his infantry, and there camped for the night. He had with him Lowell's cavalry, 750 strong, about 10,000 ef- fective of the Sixth Corps and 650 of the Nineteenth, while about 3,500 of the latter were toiling up in the rear. Gill- more having sprained his foot at Offutt's, Emory, who had reported that day, went forward with his (First) division of the Nineteenth, and in time received charge of the corps. During the day and the night previous, 1,689 men of the Sixth and 3,560 of the Nineteenth had debarked at Washington. The next day, the 14th, Wright had reached Seneca Creek, when, his scouts reporting the enemy in force at Darnes- town, he halted and sent out an infantry reconnoissance. "I believe," he wrote back to Halleck, "that the bulk of the enemy's force has already crossed the river at Edward's Ferry. This fact will be shortly developed, and if they have left Darnestown, I shall continue the inarch to Ed- ward's Ferry." It was true that Early was now across the Potomac, with his trains, his prisoners captured at Mono- cacy, a large number of beef cattle, and many horses for his cavalry and artillery; and he had been safely rejoined by the foraging parties that were spread over Eastern Mary- land. He had marched from Washington to Rockville dur- ing the night of the 12th, had rested during a part of the 13th, at night had gone forward to Poolesville, and the morning of the 14th crossed the Potomac at White's Ford, camping at Leesburg. Wright reached Poolesville, twenty-six miles from Fort Stevens, the evening of the same day, July 14th, most of Getty's infantry and a part of the artillery arriving at 6 p.m., IN THE VALLEY AG A LIST. 75 while the train was stretched along the road in the rear. The cavalry had overtaken the enemy's rear-guard at Pooles- ville earlier that day, demonstrating against it as it crossed White's Ford behind the infantry, and during the afternoon there was artillery firing across the river against Early's pickets, who held the fords. At Poolesville Wright re- mained till the morning of the 16th, meanwhile, on the 14th, informing the War Department that the enemy had crossed.1 Early, on his part, remained at Leesburg, on the south side of the Potomac, as long as Wright was at Pooles- ville, on the north side, namely, from the evening of the 14th to the morning of the 16th. To Lee he reported, the 14th, that he had brought off over 1,000 horses, adding, "I shall rest here a day or two, and then move to the Valley, and drive from Martinsburg a body of cavalry which has re- turned there, and then send the cavalry to destroy effec- tually the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad westward, and also to destroy the coal mines and furnaces around Cumberland, unless I get different orders. I will start for the Valley in the morning. ... I will retreat in forced marches by land toward Richmond." To Wright's message that he would halt for instructions before going south of the Potomac, Halleck replied : 1 " The main body of the enemy, with his trains, had crossed before we reached this place. I have sent the cavalry forward to see whether anything can be done against the rear-guard, but presume it will be too late. The enemy had and kept about twenty-four hours the start of us, which gave him full time to secure his crossing of the river. I have not been able to get. any intelligence from G-eneral Hunter's command, and have, therefore, for further operations only tbe two divi- sions of my corps, numbering, perhaps, 10,000, and some 500 possibly of the Nineteenth Corps, which, unless I overrate the enemy's strength, is wholly insuf- ficient to justify the following up of the enemy on the other side of the Potomac. I presume this will not be the policy of the War Department, and I shall there- fore wait instructions before proceeding farther, which I hope to receive by the time the Nineteenth Corps arrives." (Wright to Halleck, Poolesville, Md., July 14, 1864, 6 p.m.) 76 THE SHENANDOAH VALLEY. "General Grant directed that a junction of your forces and that of General Hunter be made in the vicinity of Edward's Ferry, to cut off the enemy's retreat, if possible ; if not, to pursue him South, doing him all the damage you can. He further says that you must live mainly upon the country. He does not say how far South you are to pursue, but I will get his instructions on that point and communicate them to you. You will therefore continue the pursuit till you receive further orders. In giving you the supreme command with only general indica- tions as to what you are to do, General Grant probably intended to leave you free to exercise your own judgment. As your force, until Hunter or the Nineteenth Corps reaches you, will be inferior to the en- emy, you will move with caution. Ricketts's division and Kenly's bri- gade, under General Ord, left this morning to join you. They number about 5,000. About 4,000 of the Nineteenth Corps, under General Emory, have also left." This despatch illustrated the universal leaning on the word and judgment of Grant, who, at City Point, could not know, and did not pretend to know, the exact situation, from hour to hour, on the Potomac. Grant, though so urgent to get a strong force " south of Early," and so confident that he could be crushed, was quick to perceive that Eariy had probably made good his escape, and turned to a new plan. He told Halleck that " the Sixth and Nineteenth Corps should be got here [City Point] without any delay, so that they may be used before the return of the troops sent into the Valley by the enemy. Hunter, moving up the Valley, will either hold a large force of the enemy, or he will be enabled to reach Gordonsville and Charlottesville. The utter destruction of the road at and between these two points will be of immense value to us. I do not intend this as an order to bring Wright back whilst he is in pursuit of the enemy with any prospect of punishing him, but to secure his return at the earliest pos- sible moment after he ceases to be absolutely necessary IN THE VALLEY AGAIN. 77 where he is." This quiet, persistent return to ideas once fixed was characteristic of the Lieutenant-General, and the destruction of Confederate railroads was one of his fixed ideas ; while had any officer ever taken Gordonsville, start- ing from any quarter of the compass, there is probably no end of the hearty approval he would have had for him. Nevertheless he did not precisely like to have the pursuit cease. " If the enemy has left Maryland," he continued, " he should have upon his heels veterans, militiamen, men on horseback, everything that can be got to follow, to eat out Virginia clear and clean, as far as they go, so that crows flying over it, for the balance of this season, will have to carry their provender with them." Still, so mixed a force might have been only food for Early's powder and statistics for Ould, the commissioner of prisoners. Grant, in a letter of the same day, expressed the view that " Hunter should make all the Valley south of the B. and O. road a desert, as high up as possible. I do not mean that houses should be burned, but every particle of provisions and stock should be re- moved, and the people notified to move out." The following day he renewed his two ideas, declaring to Halleck that " there can be no use in Wright's following the enemy, with the latter a day ahead, after he has passed entirely beyond [south of] all our communications. I want, if possible, to get the Sixth and Nineteenth Corps here, to use them here before the enemy can get Early back.1' Hunter, he said, could always hold the Valley and protect Washington, at least until aid should come from City Point, provided he did not allow himself to be " squeezed out to one side. I do not think," he added, "there is now any further danger of an attempt to invade Maryland. The position of the enemy in the West and here is such as to demand all the force they can get together to save vital points. ... As soon as 78 THE SHENANDOAH VALLEY. the rebel army is known to have passed Hunter's forces, recall Wright, and send him back here with all despatch ; and also send the Nineteenth Corps. If the enemy have any notion of returning, the fact will be developed before Wright can start back." Early had not then " passed Hunter's forces," but nobody knowing exactly where he was, Halleck turned back all troops of the Sixth and Nineteenth Corps still north of the Potomac on their way to join Wright, and the same day, the 17th, notified both Hunter and Wright of the change of plan, telling the latter that he was to pursue the enemy only far enough to be certain that he was really in full retreat toward Richmond, and then to direct Crook and Sullivan " to continue the pursuit cautiously, under General Hunter's orders." The forces of Hunter : had now, in fact, come upon 1 There had b?en a disposition at the War Office to regard Hunter as the cause of all the mischief culminating with the siege of Washington ; but a special grievance seemed to be his neglect to telegraph frequently to Halleck and Stan- ton. General Halleck, the 14th, suggested to him that " General Crook would be a suitable person for the immediate command " of such troops as he might send to form a junction with Wright, adding that ''for the last two weeks little or nothing of a reliable character has been heard from you." Hunter replied in a spirited letter to Stanton, expressing regret for such an imputation on the ground that it must be the President's, conveyed through Halleck. He said that if any important events had occurred in his department, of which necessarily the War Offioe must not have learned earlier than he, they had not yet come to his knowl- edge ; that his first step on hearing of Sigel's retreat from Martinsburg had been to instruct him that he must report directly to Washington, as he himself would be too far distant and too much occupied ; it was true that he " could have tele- graphed many alarming rumors every hour," but this was not his practice, and of reports without the elements of knowledge or credibility it seemed to him that there must be already more than enough in the vicinity of Baltimore and Wash- ington ; moreover, he was too busy, night and day. in the task of hurrying for- ward his command against the enemy, to give time to any labors not of public benefit — probably it was forgotten that his Lynchburg expedition had exhausted the ammunition, provisions, and clothing of his tired troops ; that in coming up the Ohio they had to be disembarked at every shoal and marched around it till the steamers could be sparred over, and that, after all, they found the railroad broken by Early's raids. In short, as the interests of the service had been his IN THE VALLEY AGAIN. 79 the scene ; and his advance, which arrived at Martinsburg July 10th and 11th, pausing two days to refit and to allow other troops to get up from Cumberland, proceeded to Duf- field's the 13th, and next day through Harper's Ferry across the Potomac, on the pontoon bridge, camping at Knoxville, on the left bank. That night, the 14th, Hunter, having ar- rived at Harper's Ferry, received from Wright a notification to join him at Leesburg, and early the following morning started eastward the divisions of Sullivan and Mulligan, 7,000 strong, under the former, and Duffle's division of 2,000 highest aim, to be pursued at any personal sacrifice, he most respectfully re- quested to be relieved from command by some officer more enjoying the confi- dence of the President. The same day, July 15th, he wrote to the Adjutant- General, requesting to be "relieved from the command of this Department, where my services can he of no further use," and then a second time to the same officer, reiterating this request ; while Crook, arriving that day from West Vir- ginia with two of his brigades, 3,400 strong, was ordered by him to relieve Sulli- van and take command of all the forces in the field. The very day, July 15th, that Hunter sent this letter from Harper's Ferry, where he had arrived from West Virginia the day before, he received the most powerful of all reinfoi cements for his cause. "I am sorry," wrofo Grant to Dana, from City Point, "to see such a disposition to condemn as biave an old soldier as Hunter is known to be without a hearing. He is known to have ad- vanced into the enemy's country toward their main army, inflicting a much greater damage upon them than they have inflicted upon us, with double his force, and moving directly away from onr main army. Hunter acted, too, in a country where we had no friends. . . . Even the enemy give him credit for courage, and congratulate themselves that he will give them a chance of getting even with him." Two days later Hunter, hearing nothing from Washington, wrote a brief letter to President Lincoln, asking to be relieved from the command of his Department. " When an officer." he said, "is selected as the scapegoat to cover up the blunders of others, the best 'nfcerests of the country require that he should at once be relieved from command." President Lincoln replied frankly : '■ You misconceive. The order you complain of was only nominally mine, and was framed by those who really made it with no thought of making you a scape- goat. It seemed to be General Grant's wish that the forces under Gener.il Wright and those under you should join, and drive at the enemy, under General Wright. Wright had the larger part of the force, but you had the rank. It was thought that you would prefer Crook's commanding your post to your serv- ing in person under Wright. That is all of it. General Grant wishes you to re- main in command of the Department, and I do not wish to order otherwise." 80 THE SHENANDOAH VALLEY. cavalry, which had only reached Martinsburg from Parkers- burg about noon of the 14th. The column took the tow- path of the Chesapeake and Ohio Canal to Berlin, and there fording the river, nearly hip-deep, marched for the Lees- burg pike, passing through Lovettsville, and thence south- ward ; but instead of pressing forward to the pike, Sullivan, when four miles short of it, turned to the west, going into camp at Hillsboro. Comparison of dates and places shows that these West Virginia forces were now coming in directly and very fast upon Early's right flank, and that, had it been wise to do so, they might have been thrown exactly across his path ; but the night of the 15th, while Sullivan was at Hillsboro, Wright was still at Poolesville, Md., north of the Potomac. Had Wright and Sullivan possessed a common understand- ing for vigorous action in the best possible way, the former close on Early's heels with 15,000 men, and Ricketts and Kenly hurrying forward with several thousand more, Sulli- van and Duffle might apparently have been able to use their 9,000 men with great effect against Early's line of march, from Leesburg to Snicker's Gap. The 15th, on the way from Lovettsville to Purcellsville, Sullivan's advance captured a few of Jackson's cavalry, Early's forerunners. The evening of the 15th, Wright, at Poolesville, had received Halleck's despatch, ordering him to continue the pursuit, but with caution, and about the same time had learned, both from Hunter's staff officers and from his own couriers, that Sullivan was moving by way of Hillsboro toward Leesburg. The nest morning, therefore, he crossed at White's Ford for Leesburg, " fearing that he [Sullivan] might meet the enemy in too strong force for his com- mand." The troops of the Nineteenth Corps had reached him the 15th. " The necessity for supporting General Sullivan's IN THE VALLEY AGAIN. 81 movement," said Wright to Halleck, "renders it necessary to move in advance of a portion of the trains not yet np ; but I think they will be sufficiently covered by the general movement and the small force left for their protection." Wright camped at Clark's Gap, three miles beyond Lees- burg, reporting to Halleck that he had struck the rear-guard of the enemy's cavalry at this place, but that the latter retreated before the infantry could get up. Sullivan, on his part, remained at Hillsboro from night of the 15th till afternoon of the 16th ; and at noon of the latter day Crook came up and assumed command of all Hunter's field forces. Four or five hours later he wrote to Hunter that he had sent the cavalry out in different direc- tions, immediately on arriving at Hillsboro, " and have lain still until I could learn something definite of the enemy's movements." Now, while Wright, that morning, leaving Poolesville, had forded the Potomac and marched to Lees- burg, Early, who had camped at Leesburg since the 14th, marched through Hamilton and Purcellsville, to Snicker's and Ashby's Gaps. Crook, hearing that there was a wagon train near Waterford, ordered a brigade thither, to strike the enemy's cavalry ; and toward evening he marched his com- mand forward and camped at Purcellsville, midway between Leesburg and Snicker's Gap. A good part of Early's trains and columns, therefore, must have been for many hours close to Crook's command ; but that officer, who only arrived at Hillsboro at noon, did not know this, and when his cavalry informed him, the infantry, he reported, could not be got over from Hillsboro in season to attack Early's flank. But Duffie had sent Tibbets's small brigade to fall on the trains, and this it did near Purcellsville, capturing, without much difficulty, one hundred and seventeen mules and horses, eighty-two wagons, and 50 or 60 prisoners, Tibbets's own 4* 82 THE SHENANDOAH VALLEY. loss being but 20= This spirited attack by three small regi- ments, a few hundred strong, is worth commemorating, as the only instance in which Early was forced to drop any of his Maryland spoils. Troops from both Rodes's and Ram- seur's divisions were hurried to repel this danger, and cap- tured a gun and a caisson in doing so. Tibbets brought off thirty-seven loaded wagons, and burned over forty more. The forces of Hunter and Wright had now come together just in season to allow Early to slip between them, grazing the last of his trains and their guard. The night of the 16th, Crook, from his camp at Purcellsville, half a dozen miles from Wright's, reported for orders, and was instructed to move a force to Snicker's Gap. He despatched Duffle and Mulligan for this purpose ; but Early, who had crossed the Shenandoah at Snicker's Ferry opposite the Gap, planted two guns there, and checked farther approach, Duffle los- ing 17 men in the affair. Wright remained at Clark's Gap, near Leesburg, and notified Halleck that he would verify the enemy's retreat by sending a column ahead. The 18th, he instructed Crook to move in force through Snicker's Gap, where his advance was, and he put the Sixth Corps in motion for the same point. Duffle was sent to Ashby's Gap ; but there he found, the next day, that the enemy was in force, and after crossing the Shenandoah at Berry's Ferry, was driven back with no little loss, about 50 of his troops be- ing captured, and a considerable number killed and wounded. Meanwhile, the afternoon of the 18th, from the summit of the Blue Ridge the enemy could be seen on the heights beyond the river. Early's force was around Berry ville, and Breckenridge had charge of the fords of the Shenandoah. About two o'clock, Crook directed Thoburn to cross with his own division and the Third Brigade of the Second, to dis- lodge the forces there, and to move for this purpose to Island IN THE VALLEY AGAIN. 83 Ford, a mile or more below Snicker's Ferry. Here the enemy, who had a picket behind bushes, opened a hot fire ; but Wells's brigade found a good wading-place a few hun- dred yards below, and dashing across, carried the ford, cap- turing 15 skirmishers and the captain commanding them. From these it was learned that Early's whole force was not distant, and Gordon and Bodes only a mile or two away. Thoburn, on sending back this news to Crook, was di- rected not to attempt to move up to hold Snicker's Ferry for the passage of the army, as at first intended, but to await a division of the Sixth Corps which would cross for his sup- port. Accordingly a position was selected, with the First, Wells's brigade, on the left, the Third, Frost's, in the centre, and the Second, commanded by Thoburn himself, on the right. Beyond the right flank was a force of about 1,000 dismounted cavalry, odds and ends of various regiments under Lieutenant-Colonel Young, Fourth Pennsylvania. Fully half an hour later, Breckenridge advanced against Thoburn's left and centre, with his two divisions, while Early sent Bodes to fall on the Union right. The dismounted cavalry on this flank was the first to break, under the fire of Bodes, and retreated across the river, despite the efforts of Young to rally it. Thoburn, who was in two lines, rap- idly changed front to stem the tide, but at length the heavy impact of Bodes was too much for his force, which was driven into the stream. The left of his line, less sharply assailed, withdrew in good order, considering that its task was the trying one of retreating across a river under fire from the bank.1 The dead and wounded were left on the 1 " The head of the column of the Sixth Corps had reached the crossing of the river by this time, and as General Ricketts, commanding the corps, did not think it prudent under the circumstances to cross his men, and as the enemy were pre- paring for another attack on my lines, I gave the order to fall back, which was done in good order by the remaining troops " (Crook's Report, October 12, 1864). 84 THE SHENANDOAH VALLEY. field, and Thoburn's casualties in this engagement were 65 killed, 301 wounded, and 56 missing — total, 422. The en- emy must also have suffered severely, for the troops of Rodes, who halted on the bank to fire at the fugitives, had exposed themselves to the Union batteries. Next day, the Con- federates were busy burying their dead and removing their wounded. In this affair no reproach can be applied to Thoburn's division, for it would have been preposterous to suppose that, unaided and in an unintrenched position, it could withstand the shock of all the force Early might choose to bring against it. The clue to. what Thoburn's men considered an inex- cusable lack of support may perhaps be found in a despatch of Wright to Halleck : " The attempt at crossing was resisted in strong force ; and believing it better to turn his position, I designed doing so by way of Keyes Gap, thus effecting a junction with some of the forces of General Hunter lower down the valley." But the repulse of Duffie at Ashby's Gap and other events induced him " to defer the movement by way of Keyes Gap, in the belief that a crossing might be ef- fected where we were." "Wright remained at Snicker's Gap through the 19th ; and that night Early retreated, taking the road to Strasburg.

## stephensons-depot

To comprehend Early's precipitate retreat from the line of the Shenandoah, we must now turn our eyes to another quarter. At Harper's Ferry Hunter, whose troops from the Kanawha had continued to arrive by rail, had at command a large body of men, in addition to those under Crook. Amongst them was Averell's cavalry, whose advance reached Martinsburg the 17th, and immediately moved up the valley to find the enemy. The larger part of Crook's own infantry division had also arrived, and when, the 18th, Hunter learned that Crook was to attack at Snicker's and Ashby's Gaps, he di- rected Colonel E. B. Hayes to unite a portion of his brigade to two of Duval's regiments then at Keyes Ferry, and to march directly up the Shenandoah to Snicker's Ferry, there 86 THE SHENANDOAH VALLEY. to strike the enemy in conjunction with Crook, and then to join that officer. Hayes failed to get through, and fell back to Keyes Ferry ; but Hunter pushed him forward again, and meantime called Averell's attention to Crook's purposes at Snicker's Ferry. " Perhaps by a prompt move in that direction," he said, "you can render General Crook great assistance, and capture a number of wagons. You must, however, exercise your own good judgment in the matter, and do as you think best under the circumstances." Averellwith about 1,000 of his cavalry, consisting of the First and Third Virginia and Fourteenth Pennsylvania, with the First Virginia and First Ohio Bat- teries, aided by Duval's infantiy brigade, Ninth and Four- teenth Virginia, and Ninety- first and Thirty-fourth Ohio, 1,350 strong, in all 2,350 men, moved up the pike from Martins- burg and drove the Confederate pickets from Darksville to Stephenson's Depot, half a dozen miles from Winchester. This vigorous stroke planted him on Early's rear, menacing his trains ; and that night the Confederate general, yielding the river whose passage he had shown a resolution to dis- pute, retreated through Berry ville, Millwood, and White Post, then westward to Newtown and Middletown, thence along the valley pike southward toward Strasburg. Meanwhile, to check Averell, he sent to Winchester Bam- seur's division and two batteries ; l the cavalry of Jackson and of Vaughan, whose brigade had just been remounted, were already there, endeavoring to keep him back. But the 20th, Averell, who had received a reinforcement of 300 of the Second Virginia cavalry, making him about 2,700 strong, yet still numerically inferior to the enemy, moved up the pike toward the town in line of battle, a regiment of infantry 1 Early says one battery was sent, but General A. L. Long, then his chief of ar- tillery, says that two went. IN THE VALLEY AGAIN. 87 on each side, with skirmishers out, another regiment on each side in column, in rear of the right and left flanks, artillery in the centre, and a regiment of cavalry on each flank. Three miles north of Winchester, on Carter's Farm, Eamseur was encountered, "moving by the flank," according to Early's account, with intent to capture Averell. At all events he rapidly formed, with Johnson's brigade on his right, Hoke's on his left, and Pegram's in reserve. Averell de- ployed the two infantry regiments which were in column, drew aside his cavalry skirmishers from the front to the flanks, and opened a hot fire from his twelve guns. "Without pausing, he sent in all his cavalry and infantry. Duval's charge was across an open field, the two Ohio regiments east of the pike and the two Virginia regiments west. The vigor- ous assault broke Eamseur's left, which, followed by the re- mainder of the force, fled in confusion to Winchester, leaving in the Union general's hands four pieces of artillery, with 203 killed and wounded on the field, while the unwounded brought the list of captured up to 17 officers and 250 men.1 The total Confederate loss was probably more than 400, including Generals Lewis and Lilly among the captured 1 The Richmond Examiner of that period describes this action as "the deplor- able affair in which Ramseur's division was humiliated in the dust." Ramseur was severely criticised for this defeat ; but Rodes, defending him in a letter to Ewell, September 12th, uses the following language : " Hoke"s two left regiments broke and ran, behaving badly, as General Lewis himself said. Ramseur was on the right, or near Johnson's brigade — thought everything was going on fine y till he saw this panic at the left. He immediately endeavored to restore the line by advancing Pegram's brigade, but it being embarrassed by Hoke's panic-stricken men became so itself ; broke and fled, as did the balance of Hoke's brigade, and finally Johnson's. Now, sir, this result would not occur one time in a hundred with these same troops under the same circumstances, and ought never to have occurred with old troops at all." Ramseur supposed, from Vaughan's reconnois- sance the day before, that there were but two or three regiments in his front, which caused him to advance with too little precaution ; and thrown into confu- sion, the troops could not be rallied. 88 THE SHENANDOAH VALLEY. wounded, and Colonel Board, Fifty-eighth. Virginia, among the killed. Averell's loss was 208 killed and wounded, and 6 missing — total 214 ; and his action of Carter's Farm was un- usually creditable to the Union arms, while seldom has a Confederate defeat been so squarely acknowledged. Averell refrained from endeavoring to occupy "Winchester, and fortunately ; for Early, who was at Newtown, on the way to Strasburg, hearing of Rarnseur's mishap, hurried Bodes to his relief, and at sundown demonstrated against Averell. But knowing that his own rear and all his trains would now again be in danger should "Wright and Crook move rapidly against them from Snicker's Ferry through Berryville, he contented himself with assuring Bamseur's safety, and then withdrew that night to Newtown, there halting his army while his trains moved south. The next day he went to Middle- town, and the day after, July 22d, to Strasburg.

## kernstown

Accordingly when, July 23d, Early, who had halted at Strasburg, learned that the Sixth Corps had withdrawn to Washington, and that the forces occupying Kernstown, not twenty miles distant, on the turnpike, were only those of Crook and Averell, he resolved to attack them without de- lay. A reconnoissance resulted in deploying the whole Union force to resist it, the cavalry and artillery being sharply engaged. Nature marks out strategic lines with her ridges and rivers, which successive generations attack and defend ; battle after battle is repeated on the same ground. The military art is so precise in methods, that, with the face of the country unchanged, successive leaders adopt the same routes of march, the same positions, and the same manoeu- vres. To the catalogue of twice-fought fields that included Manassas and Chancellorsville, Corinth and Cold Harbor, was now to be added another, since Crook's ground, the morning of July 24th, was the same that Shields had occu- pied in his repulse of Jackson. Early's whole army advanced against Kernstown on the Valley pike, and at Bartonsville, a few miles south of the town, Eamseur's division was sent, in a detour, to turn Crook's right. The cavalry was divided into two columns, one proceeding to the east and the other to the west of "Winchester, so as to unite north of the town and cut off Crook's retreat. Crook's line covered the pike with the infantry divisions of Sullivan, Duval, and Mulligan, while the cavalry of Averell and Duffie was on his flanks. The country was open, a little broken with hollows to the east. Crook had directed Averell, who held his left, to pass around Early's right and attack his trains ; and whether it was owing to this movement or to some other disposition of the line, Early, at all events, having driven in the Union skirmishers, KERNSTOWN, CHAMBERSBURG, MOOREFIELD. 97 perceived Crook's left to be assailable, and hence, without depending upon Rarnseur's turning movement on the other flank, directed Breckenridge to move Echols's division, now under Wharton, around and against the Union left. Whar- ton struck this flank in open ground, doubling it and throw- ing it into confusion.1 Rodes, Gordon, and Eamseur at once pressing against Crook's centre and right, the whole line broke into retreat. The pike was quickly filled with trains and the fields with troops, striving for Winchester and beyond. Eodes pursued to Stephenson's Depot, six miles north of the town, where he halted, his division hav- ing marched twenty-seven miles that day. Early's cavalry fortunately proved somewhat inefficient, Ransom, who had been in bad health ever since leaving Lynchburg, being un- able to take active command ; and as the open fields and broad pike were favorable for rapid retreat, Crook brought off all his artillery and trains, till one of the flanking cavalry brigades at last struck the column on the pike, stampeding the teamsters, and causing many wagons and caissons to be abandoned and burned. One artillery officer cut loose his horses from four guns, but infantry brought them off. At dusk the fugitive troops reached Bunker Hill, and crossing Mill Creek, went into camp on the further bank. 1 liI regret to say that the greater portion of my dismounted cavalry, along with some infantry, the whole numbering some 3,000 or 4,000, broke to the rear at the first fire, and all efforts to stop them proved of no avail. They mostly got into Martinsburg, circulating all manner of reports. A few of them were cap- tured, endeavoring to escape my guards. I lost over one-third of my cavalry in this way" (Crook's Report, July 27, 1864). Hunter wrote to Halleck that "the cavalry and the dismounted men in the late fights behaved in the most disgraceful manner, their officers in many instances leading them off and starting all kinds of lying reports, tending to demoralize the whole command, and it was only owing to the steadiness and good conduct of the infantry which came with us from the Kanawha that the army was saved from utter annihilation. . . . The refuse force sent from Washington, representing twenty-seven different regiments, is said to have done more injury than service." XI.— 5 98 THE SHENANDOAH VALLEY. Crook's troops had campaigned too well at Cloyd's Moun- tain and during Hunter's bold march to Lynchburg to be disgraced by this encounter ; and while some of them, chiefly the recent additions, had proved of little value, it must be remembered that whatever efforts had been made to chal- lenge Early's retreat from Washington were the work of this command. Their defeat is not strange, for the force soon after assembled in the Valley as needful to match Early was thrice Crook's at Kernstowa ; and the chief criticism to be passed on this action is that there had been little wari- ness in confronting the enemy in an open position like this, after most of the Union forces had been drawn away. Prob- ably it would have been wiser to occupy the contracted lines at Hallfcown, in front of Harper's Ferry. Yet it must not be inferred that Crook had given insufficient thought to the peril. A despatch of July 22d to Hunter furnishes the clue to his purposes. "I want to remain here a day or two," he said, " to give the enemy the impression we will not follow them, so that they may send a good portion of their com- mand to Eichmond. I have not force sufficient to meet all their force in this open Valley, and my only hope is for them to divide their command." The President had asked Hunter, the 23d, " Are you able to take care of the enemy, when he turns back upon you, as he probably will, on find- ing that Wright has left?" and Hunter had answered, "My force is not strong enough to hold the enemy, should he return upon us with his whole force." But he added that the information of Crook and the reconnoissances of Averell tended to show that Early was falling back. Crook's loss in this battle was somewhat uncertain, on account of the number of fugitives, a part of whom after- ward returned to their colors ; but it could hardly have been less than 1,200. Duval reported in the Second infantry divi- KERNSTOWN, CHAMBERSBURG, MOOREFIELD. 99 sion alone 45 killed, 285 wounded, and 183 missing — total, 513. His Second Brigade, Johnson's (Ninth and Fourteenth Virginia and Thirty-fourth and Ninety-first Ohio), holding the extreme right, on the Komney pike, was not assailed until the retreat ; but the other, E. B. Hayes's (Fifth and Thirteenth Virginia and Twenty-third and Thirty-sixth Ohio), was on the left of the Third, Mulligan's division, east of the pike, in the thick of the fray, and Hayes reported a loss of 396 men — this officer claiming to have continued east of the pike all the way up to Bunker Hill, thus keep- ing the road open for the trains. Colonel Campbell states that the losses of the Third Division were 317, including among the mortally wounded its commander, Mulligan, known for his defence of Lexington in 1861. No field officers were left in this division, which was brought off by Captain Suter, and soon after consolidated as the Third Brigade of the First Division. The Confederate loss was light. Between this engagement of Kernstown and the one at Piedmont, six weeks earlier, there is a suggestive paral- lel, inasmuch as the result was in the one case partly due to the withdrawal of Breckenridge by Lee, and in the other to the withdrawal of the Sixth Corps by Grant, under a process of reasoning that in each case seemed sound, but proved fal- lacious. The parallel was immediately pushed further by the prompt restoration of the Sixth and Nineteenth Corps to the Valley, as Breckenridge had in like fashion been re- turned after Piedmont ; while Grant, in addition, instead of calling forces to City Point, now sent to "Washington 4,600 more men of the Nineteenth Corps. He also insisted that, since military conditions might wholly change while de- spatches were going to and from him, the events of July had shown it to be "absolutely necessary that some one in 100 THE SHENANDOAH VALLEY. Washington should give orders and make dispositions of all the forces within reach of the line of the Potomac." In a violent rain-storm, which came up the day after his Kernstown victory, Early followed Crook to Bunker Hill, twelve miles from Winchester, and there halted his infantry ; while at Martinsburg the Union rear-guard, turning upon his cavalry, drove it back a mile. Then, after dusk, leaving many sick and wounded at Martinsburg, Crook retreated again along the Williamsport juke, and camped on the Po- tomac. The next morning, the 26th, having saved most of his trains — the enemy counting the lost portion as twelve caissons and seventy-two wagons — Crook crossed the river into Maryland, and marched through Boonesboro, ultimately taking post, by Hunter's direction, at Sharpsburg, to hold the South Mountain gaps. Averell was stationed at Hagers- town, his pickets guarding the Potomac fords.

## raid-orders

Finding himself again in undisputed possession of the Valley, Early proceeded, with detachments of his infantry, to break afresh at Martinsburg the Baltimore and Ohio Bailroad, which had been repaired since the beginning of the month, while at Back Creek he overpowered the guard, drove away the iron-clad cars, and burned the railroad bridge. Still, these exploits did not satisfy him. He covet- ed another dash into Union territory, and resolved to send the cavalry brigades of McCausland and Johnson, under command of the former, to burn sundry Northern towns, unless they should procure their safety by paying him a large money ransom. The first community on which McCausland was to direct himself was Chambersburg, the nearest town of importance in Pennsylvania ; thence he was to move to Cumberland in Maryland, levying contribu- tions upon that and other towns able to bear them, des- troying the machinery of the Cumberland coal-pits, and KERNSTOWN, CHAMBERSBURG, MOOREFIELD. 101 the repair shops, stations, and bridges of the Baltimore Eailroad. July 29th, McCausland, with his two brigades and four guns, crossed the Potomac near Clear Spring, west of Wil- liamsport,

## cumberland-and-moorefield

A few miles from McConnellsburg, Averell struck McCausland's rear, forcing him to abandon a con- templated visit to Bedford, and to turn back to the Potomac, which he reached by noon of July 31st, at Hancock.1 The Confederate commander was found in line of battle, having already driven away with his guns an iron-clad car which contested his crossing of the Potomac, and fired railroad buildings on the Virginia side. Averell attacked him, and whether it was that his artillery, controlling the ford, pre- vented McCausland from escaping there, or whether it was that the latter wished to complete Early's programme, he withdrew westward along the National road to Cumberland. Probably, not only Hancock, but McConnellsburg and Bed- ford bad been saved by Averell from the enemy's torch. Beaching Cumberland August 1st, McCausland found there Kelley, who had been notified by Halleck to block the roads and destroy bridges to retard the enemy's advance. Kelley had taken post at Folck's Mill, three miles from the 1 "General McCausland," says Gilmor, "ordered a levy upon this place of $30,000, which was so out of all reason th.it we Mary landers remonstrated, but to no purpose. He told the pi-incipal men of the place that unless the money was paid he would burn the town. To this I and all my men objected, saying that too much Maryland blood had been shed in defence of the South for her towns to be laid under contribution or burned. I perceived, too, that his men were in- clined to plunder. After a consultation with General Johnson, I brought in my whole command and stationed two men at each house and store for their protec- tion. Before the money could be raised, AverelFs troops arrived and attacked our pickets and outposts, and a lively little fight occurred, chiefly in the streets and on the high pine hills northeast of the town." KERNSTOWjST, chambersburg, moorefield. 105 town, and was engaged by McCausland's battery. The Confederate commander now found himself in a predica- ment, having Kelley in front and Averell, as he supposed, closing in upon his rear. About the middle of the after- noon he attacked Kelley, and continued to skirmish until late at night, when he retreated, leaving 30 of his killed and wounded on the held, with two caissons and some wagons and ammunition. The point for which he made, with intent to cross the Potomac, was Oldtown, near the junction of the South Branch. Beaching the ford by an obscure mountain road, at daylight, he found a garrison of Ohio hundred-days men protecting it. His skirmishers were driven back ; but the main body coming up, he dismounted three regiments, and formed line of battle between the river and canal. The Union troops thereupon withdrew across the river to Green Spring Bun Station, on the Baltimore and Ohio Bailroad. Here the defence was the customary one of a block-house and an engine attached to a train of cars strengthened with cross-ties, covering the ford and the bridge. After losing a dozen men, a charge by one of Johnson's regiments being repulsed, a flag was sent to the block-house demanding its surrender, under the threat, as Gilrnor narrates, that, if taken by assault, no quarter would be given. As the troops had nearly finished their term of enlistment, those in the block-house, numbering about 80, surrendered on the promise of being paroled, while the remainder escaped to Cumberland. Destroying the cars, McCausland made good his escape into West Virginia. The same afternoon he moved to Springfield, nine miles distant, burning the wire bridge, after passing over it, and proceeded the next day to Bomney, on the South Branch. From there, August 4th, he sent an expedition to seize the railroad post at New Creek. The garrison was under Colonels Stevenson and 5* 106 THE SHENANDOAH VALLEY. Hay and Major Simpson. A stubborn fight of several hours took place, when McCausland drew off repulsed, leaving his dead and wounded on the field. The loss of the garrison was about 75 killed and wounded, and that of the Confeder- ates probably as severe. The Confederate general withdrew to Moorefield, where the South Fork joins the South Branch of the Potomac. But he was not destined to rest in quiet here. August 2d, learning of McCausland's repulse at Cumberland, Halleck urged that Averell should be pushed to cut off his retreat ; and Hunter gave reiterated orders to that effect. Averell crossed the Potomac at Hancock, the 4th, and after a forced march through Bath, Springfield, and Bomney, at noon of the 6th drew near McCausland's camp. Before sunrise of the 7th, his advance brigade, Gibson, surprised Bradley Johnson, and drove him through the stream to the main position of the enemy on the opposite bank. Though Mc- Causland had more warning, Powell's brigade, charging through the river, under a hot fire, routed him as quickly as Gibson had routed Johnson. The whole body was soon in disorderly retreat, and Major Work, Twenty-second Penn- sylvania, who had been sent with a battalion, the day before, to co-operate on another road, also struck the flying forces, and picked up 35 prisoners and about one hundred horses. Averell captured four pieces of artillery — all that McCaus- land had— every caisson but one, nearly all his wagons, over four hundred horses, three battle-flags, many small arms, and 420 prisoners, including 38 officers. His own loss was given as 41 killed and wounded ; but the killed included Major Conger and Captain Clark, Third West Virginia. Johnson was captured, and afterward escaped. The shat- tered relics of McCausland and Johnson fled in various di- rections to the shelter of the mountains, and made their way KERNSTOWN, CHAMBERSBURG, MOOREFIELD. 107 as best they could to the Shenandoah Valley. "This af- fair," says Early, " had a very damaging effect upon my cav- alry for the rest of the campaign."

## raid-summary

In simply sensational effect, Early's second incursion had been as remarkable as the first, for he had caused almost as great a stir with two cavalry brigades and four guns as if he had used his entire army. He prevented the return of the Sixth and Nineteenth Corps to Petersburg, and broke more effectually than ever the railroad and canal which he was determined to keep useless ; yet he had bought his success dearly, for Averell's victory at Moorefield had wrecked the raiding column.
