# Humphreys, The Virginia Campaign of ’64 and ’65: Richmond-Petersburg selections, v1

## transcription-note

Digital OCR of a University of Illinois scan; not verified against print. Whitespace collapsed; all other characters retained, including OCR errors, split words, soft-hyphen marks (¬), running headers, page numbers and footnotes interleaved with the text. Local headings are editorial. Bounded passages only; page locators refer to unverified OCR page markers. Reports, returns, despatches and memoirs quoted or summarized by Humphreys are not separately inspected originals.

## june-9-petersburg

On the 9th of June, General Butler sent General Gillmore and General Kautz on an expedition against Petersburg, the object being to capture the city and destroy the railroad bridge across the Appomattox. General Gillmore had with him 1,800 infantry of his own troops, under the command of Colonel Hawley, and 1,200 of General Hinks’s, which were to move up from City Point and join him. General Kautz had about 1,500 cavalry. General Gillmore says that the ponton PASSAGE OP JAMES RIVER. 197 bridge over the Appomattox at Port Walthall was not muf¬ fled as it was promised it should be, and that the crossing of Kautz’s cavalry could be heard for miles, and, no doubt, put the enemy on his guard. General Wise, with his brigade, 2,400 strong, and such local troops as could be got together under exigencies, had charge of the defences of Petersburg. General Gillmore arrived before the works on the City Point road at seven o’clock in the morning ; General Hinks at the same hour before those on a road a mile from Gillmore’s left. General Kautz moved on the Jerusalem plank road four or five miles on the left of Gillmore, and was expected to at¬ tack at nine o’clock. Wise’s command held the intrench- ments in front of Gillmore and Hinks. Manned as strongly as they were, General Gillmore was satisfied, after careful examination (in which opinion General Hinks and Colonel Hawley both concurred), that he could not cany them. He did not, therefore, make the attempt. Receiving no com¬ munication from General Kautz during the day, he withdrew at half -past one from the front of the intrencliments, and at three o’clock began his return march. Kautz attacked the intrencliments on the Jerusalem plank road with Colonel Spear’s brigade at half -past eleven. The force defending them was small, for no part of Wise’s brigade was posted there, but it was sufficient to repel three front at¬ tacks. The works were then turned with a part of the bri¬ gade, and Kautz advanced close to the water-works of the town. But here he found an earth intrenchment and stock¬ ade on Reservoir Hill, which had infantry and artillery in it. General Dearing’s brigade, sent over by General Beauregard, now came up, and the artillery opened. Kautz, satisfied that he could not capture the town, withdrew, followed by Dearing.1 1 1 could not find any report of this affair from General Kautz on the files of the War Department. 198 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’64 AND ’65. In the course of the day General Beauregard sent all the force he could spare from his intrenchments to Petersburg, and telegraphed to Richmond that, without the troops he had sent to General Lee, he should be obliged to abandon the lines of Bermuda Hundred or those of Petersburg.

## assaults-june-15-18

As soon on the 14tli as any boats were available, General Hancock began crossing his troops from Wilcox’s Landing to Windmill Point, and by four o’clock on the morning of the 15th all his infantry and four batteries of artillery had landed PASSAGE OF JAMES RIVER. 205 on the south bank. The means of crossing were very lim¬ ited, and the landing-places, wharfs, and roads were incom¬ plete. At half-past six in the morning of the 15th three ferry-boats were added to his means of crossing and greatly facilitated the passage of his artillery and wagons. On the evening of the 14th he was directed by General Meade to hold his troops in readiness to move, and was in¬ formed that it was probable he would be instructed to march toward Petersburg, and that rations for his command would be sent him from City Point. At ten o’clock that night the following despatch was sent him by General Meade : ‘ ‘ Gen¬ eral Butler has been ordered to send to you at Windmill Point 60,000 rations.1 So soon as these are received and is¬ sued, you will move your corps by the most direct route to Petersburg, taking up a position where the City Point Rail¬ road crosses Harrison’s Creek, where we now have a work. After Barlow has crossed you will cross as much of your ar¬ tillery and ammunition train as possible up to the moment you are ready to move, and if all is quiet at that time the ferriage of the rest can be continued and they can join you.” But the rations did not arrive, as expected, that night or the next morning, and the corps marched without them at half¬ past ten on the 15th.2 1 Three days’ rations. The Second Corps had 20,000 enlisted men, not 28,000, as has been stated. 2 At 7.30 a.m. o f the 15th, after receiving several despatches from General Hancock concerning the rations, and the readiness of the corps for movement, General Meade sent a despatch to him saying: “ You will not wait for the ra¬ tions, but move immediately to the position assigned you last evening,” etc., etc. Then, continuing, “ Your despatch just received ” [concerning the reported arri¬ val of rations, which turned out to be erroneous]. “ It is important you should move. Exercise your judgment as to which will be best, to issue rations now, or send them as directed in the foregoing.” At nine o’clock, finding that the ra¬ tions had not arrived. General Hancock ordered the corps to move, but the Signal officer by whom the order was sent failed in some way to communicate it ; and the boat in which Colonel Morgan, who carried the same order, crossed the river grounded, so that the column did not begin to move until half-past ten. 206 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’64 AND ’65. General Smith withdrew from the intrenchments of Cold Harbor shortly after dark on the night of the 12th of June, and at daylight had arrived at the White House, when the embarkation began, but delay occurred from the want of transportation. By sunset of the 14th he had reported in person to General Butler at Bermuda Hundred and received orders to move at daylight on Petersburg.1 General Butler had a ponton bridge over the Appomattox near the left of his line, at Point of Bocks or Broadway Landing, about two miles below Port Walthall. Near this landing General Smith’s transports continued to arrive all through the night. General Butler’s cavalry under Briga¬ dier-General Kautz, 2,400 strong, and the available part of the division of colored troops under Brigadier-General Hinks 2 (3,700 officers and enlisted men, infantry and artil¬ lery) were assigned to General Smith, in addition to his own infantry, 10,000 enlisted men. General Kautz was ordered to cross the river at one o’clock in the morning, and threaten the intrenchments near the Norfolk and Petersburg Bailroad, and at the same time protect the left flank of the infantry ; Hinks to follow Kautz, and take a position across the Jor¬ dan’s Point road as near as possible to the enemy’s works ; Brooks to follow Hinks and form on his right, and General Martindale to proceed on the river-road to a point near the City Point Bailroad and await orders. It will be recollected that the Petersburg intrenchments encircled the city at the distance of two miles from it, and consisted of a series of strong redans or batteries connected by infantry parapets with high profiles, all with ditches. General Smith’s in- 1 In the latter part of May, just before embarking to join the Army of the Poto¬ mac, General Smith had proposed to capture Petersburg, as he regarded it to be of great importance to us from its railroad connections and its giving us the line of the Appomattox. 2 The remainder of the division was at Wilson's Landing, Fort Powhatan, City Point, and Bermuda Hundred. ASSAULTS ON PETERSBURG INTRENCHMENTS. 207 fantry would have a march of six or seven miles to come up to them. General Kautz, General Smith says, was unavoida¬ bly delayed in his march, so that the movement from Broad¬ way did not 'take place until after daylight. He soon met the enemy’s skirmishers, and came upon a rifle-pit near the railroad, about two miles in front of the enemy’s intrench- ments, which was held by some dismounted cavalry and a light battery. Some time was required to take this isolated intrenchment, which Hinks’s troops accomplished, capturing one of the guns. General Hinks moved to his assigned po¬ sition by the flank, while General Brooks deployed and moved forward along the City Point Bailroad and wagon- road. A mile-and-a-lialf’s march brought them under the fire of the enemy’s artillery, and General Smith began to re¬ connoitre the position and form the troops for assault. Gen¬ eral Martindale had come up on the right of the railroad. In his front, extending to the Appomattox, was a broad, low valley, cut up by ditches and ravines, completely swept by the fire of the enemy’s artillery, the intrenchments here being withdrawn some six hundred yards from the salient at and about Jordan’s Hill (where the City Point Bailroad en¬ tered), in front of which was Brooks’s division. The line of works in front of Hinks’s division was similarly withdrawn, though not to the same extent. Deep ravines were found all along these fronts also. The enemy had a cross-fire of artil¬ lery upon the front threatened. The reconnoissances were necessarily slow. Very little in¬ fantry could be seen in the works, but, General Smith says, that was not positive proof that it was not there, and it did not seem probable to him that the number of guns at work against him would be there without support. But in fact the whole force in the intrenchments at that time, besides the artillery, consisted of Wise’s brigade, 2,400 strong, the militia, and Dealing’s brigade of cavalry. Heavy artillery 208 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OP ’G4 AND ’65. firing was going on against Kantz. About five o’clock, after completing a careful reconnoissance, General Smith con¬ cluded not to assault in column under such a heavy artillery fire, but to mass his artillery upon the salient hear General Brooks’s centre, and try to carry the works with a very strong skirmish line, which he could do if they were thinly held by infantry. The troops were formed accordingly, but his chief of artillery had, without authority, taken everything to the rear to water the horses, and this caused a further delay of an hour. About seven o’clock the skirmishers advanced, and the artillery opened upon the salient (Bedans 5 and 6), which made no reply. The skirmishers met a sharp in¬ fantry fire, but carried the works, taking between 200 and 300 prisoners and four guns. The lines of battle followed and occupied the intrenchments. General Brooks was formed to resist an attack, while General Martindale on the right, and General Hinks on the left, wTere following up the advantage gained. Five of the redans on the left, from No. 7 to 11, both inclusive, which commanded the position at the centre, were captured by Hinks’s division, the last, No. 11, at the Dunn house, about nine o’clock in the even¬ ing. Artillery was captured in each.1 A mile and a half of the intrenchments, with sixteen guns, were thus captured, and this showed that the infantry force defending Petersburg was very small. The four redans from the river to the City Point Bailroad remained in the hands of the enemy, as did those on our left of No. 11. About four o’clock in the afternoon, General Smith was informed by a staff officer sent by General Grant, that the 1 General Hinks reported the loss of his division to be 507 killed and wounded, among the latter Colonel H. S. Russell, Fifth Massachusetts Cavalry, and Lieu¬ tenant-Colonel Nathan Goff, Jr., Twenty -second Regiment United States Colored Troops. The loss of Brooks and Martindale I do not find mentioned. It is in¬ cluded in the general statement of the loss of the army during this period. ASSAULTS ON PETERSBURG INTRENCHMENTS. 209 Second Corps was marching toward him on the road from Windmill Point. Upon receiving this intelligence General Smith at once sent a despatch to General Hancock, request¬ ing him to come up as rapidly as possible. This despatch General Hancock received at half-past five, about a mile from Old Court House, and about four miles from Smith’s left. A few minutes before, General Hancock had received a despatch from General Grant at City Point, directing all haste to be made in getting up to the assistance of General Smith, who, it stated, had attacked Petersburg, and carried the outer works in front of that city. 1 The head of Birney’s division was just passing a country road that led directly to Petersburg when these despatches were received, and was at once turned in that direction, Gibbon’s division following, and orders were sent to General Barlow to march toward the same point from Old Court House, on the road to which he was moving. As soon as he received General Grant’s despatch, General Hancock sent Colonel Morgan to inform General Smith where his column was, and that he was marching to his sup¬ port with all despatch. This information General Smith probably received shortly after six o’clock. General Beauregard, apprehensive that the Army of the Potomac, in withdrawing from Cold Harbor, would move directly upon Petersburg, had urged General Lee to send him troops sufficient to defend it, while he held his lines in front of Butler. But Lee, not satisfied that Richmond was not the object of the movement of the Army of the Potomac, would not withdraw Hill and Anderson from their position at Riddell’s shop. He directed Hoke’s division, however, to return to Beauregard. It left Drury’s Bluff early in the morning of the 15th, having eighteen miles to march to the 1 This evidently referred to the rifle-pit captured by General 11 inks early in the day. 210 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’64 AND ’65. Petersburg intrencliments where threatened. General Beau¬ regard says that the leading brigade, Hagood’s, arrived by rail about sunset, and was placed on Wise’s left, his, Ha¬ good’s, left extending to the Appomattox. The rest of Hokes’s division, he says, arrived during the night, and was put on Hagood’s right. All the division was probably put in position before nine o’clock, and intrencliments were thrown up in rear of the captured part of the defences dur¬ ing the night. General Smith says that he had heard some hours before the last works were captured, that Lee’s army was rapidly crossing at Drury’s Bluff, and that he deemed it wiser to hold what he had, than, by attempting to reach the bridges, to lose what he had gained, and have the troops meet with a disaster. He knew also, he says, that some portion of the Army of the Potomac was coming to aid him ; and therefore the troops were placed so as to occupy the commanding po¬ sitions and wait for daylight. Upon the arrival of General Hancock he requested him to relieve his troops and allow them to rest, which request General Hancock complied with. It is probable that an immediate advance of the wThole of Smith’s force when the salient was carried, or at nine o’clock, when it would have been supported by two divisions of the Second Corps, would have resulted in the capture of Peters¬ burg and the possession of the north bank of the Appo¬ mattox. 1 It was a march of at least sixteen miles by the direct road from Windmill Point (through Prince George Court House) to the Petersburg intrencliments where intersected by the City Point Railroad. Had General Hancock’s instructions merely directed him to move his corps by the most direct 1 General Hinks says it was about seven o’clock when General Birney's arrival was reported to him by Colonel Livermore of his (Hinks’s) staff (see Paper Massachusetts Military Historical Society). ASSAULTS ON PETERSBURG INTRENCHMENTS. 211 route to the intrenchments of Petersburg, as soon as the rations were issued, it would, in his judgment, notwithstand¬ ing the delay caused by the matter of rations, have arrived there by four o’clock in the afternoon. Certainly it would have been there by six o’clock, and in time to attack with Smith’s force. It would have found no infantry and but little artillery in the intrenchments on Smith’s left, and continuing to advance, would have secured the possession of Petersburg. Why General Hancock was not ordered to march at daylight of the 15th, I have been unable to ascer¬ tain. He could have done so as readily as at half-past ten, and it would have brought him up to Smith at midday. He was to “take up a position where the City Point Rail¬ road crossed Harrison’s Creek, where we now have a work,” and this condition did not admit of his continuing on the most direct road, but obliged him to leave it ; and, turning to the right, take one several miles longer, after much delay in seeking in vain to ascertain from the people of the coun¬ try where Harrison’s Creek was, and what roads led to it, for the maps in use were, for this section of country, so errone¬ ous as to be not only useless but misleading. Harrison’s Creek was, in fact, inside the enemy’s intrenchments, and was such an insignificant rivulet as probably not to be known by any name much beyond the limits of Petersburg. There was a run marked on the map as Harrison’s Creek, but erro¬ neously laid down. This stream, according to the map, was crossed by the railroad about three and a half miles from Petersburg. There was actually a diminutive stream crossed by the City Point Railroad half way between City Point and Petersburg, about five miles from each, and this rivulet emptied into the Appomattox near the ponton bridge of General Butler at Broadway Landing, where there was a bridge-head, as there was at the site of the ponton bridge, a mile and a half above. These works appear to be referred to 212 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’64 AND ’65. in the despatch by the phrase 11 where we now have a work” for we had no work where the railroad crossed the run. 1 Apparently it was designed that the Second Corps should be in position at the railroad crossing of Harrison’s Creek to support General Smith, the erroneous map misleading as to its distance from the Petersburg works. General Hancock states in his report that the messages from Lieutenant-Gen¬ eral Grant and from General Smith were the first and only intimations he had that Petersburg was to be attacked that day, and that up to that hour he had not been notified from any source that he was expected to assist General Smith in assaulting that city. The artillery firing which he had heard he attributed to a raid or a reconnoissance which the people of the country informed him Kautz was making.2 The head of Birney’s division, General Hancock says, ar¬ rived at the Bryant house, about a mile in rear of Hinks’s position, at half-past six o’clock. Leaving instructions for Birney and Gibbon to move forward as soon as they could ascertain where they were needed, General Hancock rode to General Smith and informed him that two of his divisions were close at hand, ready for any movements which in his judgment should be made. General Smith, informing him • that the enemy had been reinforced during the evening, re¬ quested him to relieve his troops in the front line of the captured works. This relief was completed by eleven o’clock, by which time, General Hancock says, it was too late and too dark for an immediate advance. About midnight General Hancock was informed by General Grant that the enemy 1 “ Taking up a position where the City Point Railroad crosses Harrison’s Creek, where ive now have a work." I cannot recall where this information “ where we now have a work ” came from. Evidently the information and instruction had its origin at General Butler’s Headquarters. The order was written and signed by General Meade. I was not at the headquarters at the time. — A. A. H. 2 No such information was sent him through me, nor did General Meade com¬ municate such information to me if he possessed it. ASSAULTS ON PETERSBURG INTRENCHMENTS. 213 were throwing reinforcements into Petersburg, and he was directed, if Petersburg should not be taken in the night, to take up a defensive position, and maintain it until all our forces were up. 1 At six o’clock in the afternoon of the 15th General Burn¬ side wTas informed of what was transpiring at Petersburg, and directed to cross the river at once on the ponton bridge, and move up to Harrison’s Creek and form on Hancock’s leffc. His advance reached the vicinity of Petersburg on the left of the Second Corps at ten a.m. of the 16tli. General Warren at the same time was directed to cross his artillery and trains after Burnside and to begin to cross his troops by ferrying, at daylight of the 16th, and to push forward his corps to Petersburg by divisions as soon as each crossed. By midnight of the 16th the corps halted a few miles from Petersburg. General Beauregard, during the evening of the 15tli, de¬ termined to withdraw Johnson’s division from the Bermuda 1 It appears to me that General Grant’s plan for capturing Petersburg was something like the following, though I am without positive information on the subject. The force holding that town was known to General Butler to be very small, merely the artillery of the works, Wise’s brigade, 2,400, with some local militia, to be called from their daily vocations at need, and Deario^’s cavalry, 2,000. In the Bermuda Hundred lines there was Johnson’s division, which, with¬ out Evans’s or Elliott’s brigade, was 4,500, with it probably 6,800, making a total of 0,000 infantry, or without Evans about 7,000 infantry. With the return of General Smith’s command, General Butler would have 23,000 or 24,000 infantry, and with 3,000 cavalry and 14,000 infantry, with due proportion of artillery, sent with Smith against Petersburg early in the day, and some 10,000 infantry and sufficient artillery at the Bermuda Hundred lines, the capture of Petersburg seemed to be certain. The undertaking might very prop¬ erly be considered to belong to Butler’s command, and apparently it was de¬ signed that the Second Corps and such of the troops of the Army of the Potomac as might need to follow, should not take part in the capture, which was most amply provided for, but go into position as a support, where the City Point road crossed Harrison’s Creek, so called, which even by the erroneous maps was a mile and a half distant from the Petersburg intrencliments. With this support at hand and such other force as might be needed from the Army of the Potomac, which could be got up quicker than Lee’s army, not only the retention of Peters¬ burg seemed to be secured, but more than that. 214 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’64 AND ’65. Hundred lines, leaving at first General Grade’s brigade, about 1, 000 strong, to do what he could to hold them until General Lee could reoccupy or retake them. This he telegraphed to General Lee, who received the notice at two a.m. of the 16tli, Anderson’s corps being then at Malvern Hill, Hill’s at Riddell’s shop. At four a.m. General Lee had arrived at Drury’s Bluff with Pickett’s division on its wTay to the Ber¬ muda Hundred lines, of which he gave notice to Beauregard and to Richmond. Pickett was followed closely by Field, Kershaw remaining at Malvern and Hill at Riddell’s shop. At half-past ten a.m. he telegraphed Beauregard that he did not know the position of Grant’s army and could not strip the north bank. At three p.m. he telegraphed he had not heard of Grant’s crossing James River. At that hour only the Sixth Corps and Wilson’s cavalry remained on the north bank. About ten o’clock in the night of the 15th, Lieutenant- Colonel Greely, Tenth Connecticut, in command of the picket line on the right of Butler’s intrenchments, discovered that the enemy were moving in their works, and crawling forward upon his hands and knees close up to their pickets at different points, ascertained, between two and three o’clock in the morning of the 16tli, that a large number had with- drawn, and that the movement was still going on. This he reported to General Terry about three o’clock in the morn¬ ing, and with his sanction advanced at daylight, captured many of the pickets, and finally, though with some resist¬ ance, the enemy’s main line, taking a large number of pris¬ oners, among them several officers. General Terry at once moved out and took possession of the works. About six p.m. Pickett’s division came upon the ground, driving in our skirmishers, and advanced upon the works, • when (General F. A. Osborn says J) orders were received from 1 Papers, Massachusetts Military Historical Society. ASSAULTS ON PETERSBURG INTRENCHMENTS. 215 headquarters to retire, and the command abandoned the works, and withdrew to the line of rifle-pits formerly occu¬ pied by their advanced pickets. Pickett assaulted this line about dusk, but was repulsed. The despatches of General Lee to Richmond and to General Beauregard, together with the Diary of General Anderson’s Corps, indicate that the whole of the enemy’s Bermuda Hundred intrenchments were not retaken on the 16tli, but General Osborn is positive that they were, and he was on the ground. General Johnson’s division, whose effective strength, with¬ out Gracie’s brigade, was 3,500,* ought, from the preceding account, to have been in position in the Petersburg in¬ trenchments early on the morning of the 16th. Upon arriv¬ ing it was placed on the right of Hoke’s division, Wise being on the extreme right of the Confederate infantry force, his right not reaching the Jerusalem plank-road by half a mile. From his right westwardly, four and a half miles,1 2 to the Appomattox River, the intrenchments, General Beauregard states,3 were entirely unoccupied, except by a few cavalry pickets stationed there to give him timely notice of danger in that direction. General Dearing’s cavalry, he says, were principally occupied outside of the lines on the enemy’s (our) left flank, watching his movements to give timely no¬ tice of his approach from that direction, which would, he thought, have endangered his command, and compelled him to abandon Petersburg with but little resistance. But with this disposition of Dearing’s cavalry he would have had no¬ tice of our approach in time to have transferred troops to the unoccupied intrenchments before we could have got up to them. Our attack made in that manner would, however, 1 This number does not include Colonel Elliott’s South Carolina brigade, which, from the best information I have been able to get, was 2,300 strong. Both Gen¬ erals Walker and Evans were wounded on the 20th of May, and were now absent. 2 Our maps make it five miles. 3 Papers, Massachusetts Military Historical Society. 216 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’64 AND ’65. have been more likely to succeed than attacking connectedly as we did, though our attacks were now directed against in- trenchments thrown up in a night, whereas the works beyond our left were the original, carefully built intrenchments, the character of which has been already stated. From the right of Wise to the left of Hoke was about five miles. Besides the artillery, General Beauregard probably had about 14,000 effective force of infantry in these intrench¬ ments earlv on the 16tli. He received no further reinforce- ments until the morning of the 18th, when Kershaw and Field arrived, and, later in the day, Hill. The Petersburg intrenchments ran from the Appomattox River east, a mile to the City Point Railroad ; then south, three miles to the Norfolk Railroad ; then west, four miles to a point a mile west of the Weldon Railroad ; then north, two miles to the Appomattox River. The length of the in¬ trenchments from the Norfolk Railroad west to the Jerusa¬ lem plank-road was a mile and a half. On the morning of the 16th General Hancock, who was placed in command of all the troops that were up, made reconnoissances in his front, in the course of which, he says, General Egan’s brigade made a spirited attack upon a re¬ doubt on Birney’s left (Redan No. 12), and carried it in his, Egan’s, usual intrepid manner. General Hancock was now ordered to attack in his front at six p.m., General Meade hav¬ ing arrived upon the ground. This programme was carried out, and a spirited assault was made by the Second Corps, supported by two brigades of the Eighteenth on the right, and two of the Ninth on the left, which resulted in the cap¬ ture of Redans No. 4 on the right, and Nos. 13 and 14 on the left, together with their connecting lines, and in driving back the enemy along the whole line. The attacking force suffered severely. The heavy fighting ceased at dark, but several vigorous attempts were made by the enemy during ASSAULTS ON PETERSBURG INTRENCHMENTS. 217 tlie niglit to retake their ground. The gallant commander of the Irish brigade of the Second Corps, Colonel Patrick Kelly, Eighty-eighth New York, was killed, leading his com¬ mand, and Colonel Beaver, One Hundred and Forty-eighth Pennsylvania, severely wounded. At the first dawn of day in the morning of the 17tli, the division of General Potter (Ninth Corps) carried, in the most gallant manner, the redans and lines on the ridge where the Shind or Shand house stood, capturing four guns, five col¬ ors, 600 prisoners, and 1,500 stands of small arms. The troops, Griffin’s and Curtin’s brigades of Potter’s division, were formed in two lines in a deep ravine with precipitous slopes, close up to the works they were to at¬ tack. They were ordered not to fire a shot, but to depend on the bayonet. The command, Forward , was passed along the lines in whispers, and the lines, without firing a shot, at once swept over the enemy’s works, taking them com¬ pletely by surprise, and carrying everything before them. The Confederate troops were asleep, with their arms in their hands.1 1 General Griffin, in a paper contributed to the Massachusetts Historical Soci¬ ety, says that General Potter entrusted him with the charge of the assault, as¬ signing Curtin’s brigade to his support. He says : “ I then spent the entire night moving my troops through the felled timber, getting them in proper position, and preparing for the attack. I placed my brigade on the left of the Second Corps in a ravine immediately in front of the Shand house, which the enemy held, and within one hundred yards of their lines, with Curtin on my left and a little fur¬ ther to the rear on account of the conformation of the ground. We were so near the enemy that all our movements had to be made with the utmost care and cau¬ tion ; canteens were placed in knapsacks to prevent rattling, and all commands were given in whispers. I formed my brigade in two lines . Colonel Curtin formed his in the same way . My orders were not to fire a shot, but to depend wholly on the bayonet in carrying the lines. “Just as the dawn began to light up the east, I gave the command, ‘ Forward.’ It was passed along the lines in whispers, the men sprang to their feet and both brigades moved forward at once in well-formed lines, sweeping directly over the enemy’s works, taking them completely by surprise, and carrying all before us. “One gunner saw us approaching and fired his piece. That was all we heard from them, and almost the only shot fired on either side. The rebels were asleep XII.— 10 218 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’64 AND ’65. The ground in the ravine from which General Potter made his attack was covered thickly with slashed timber, making it difficult to get up Ledlie’s division to follow up Potter’s success. Potter, however, pushed forward until he found the enemy in a new intrenched position on the west slope of Harrison’s Creek, which extended from Redan No. 3, near the Appomattox to the works at and hi the vicinity of the Norfolk Railroad. In the course of the day General Willcox * 1 made an attack on this line, but owing to the musketry fire in front, and artillery fire from the left, without success. General Barlow supported him on the right and pushed forward his line with sharp fighting. Late in the afternoon General Ledlie’s divi¬ sion (commanded by Colonel Gould, Fifty-ninth Massachu¬ setts) was directed to attack at the point where Willcox had failed. This attack after some time succeeded, a portion of with their arms in their hands, and many of them sprang up and ran away as we came over. Others surrendered without resistance. “ We swept their line for a mile from where my right rested, gathering in pris¬ oners and abandoned arms and equipments all the way. Four pieces of artillery, with caissons and horses, a stand of colors, 600 prisoners, fifteen hundred stand of arms, and some ammunition fell into our hands.” 1 On the morning of the 17th, General Meade requested me to pass the day with General Burnside, who was to attack on the left of the Second Corps. The day before I had examined the enemy’s works as far to our left as the Norfolk Rail¬ road, and got the impression that the Ninth Corps would attack there, and the Fifth Corps in the course of the day on its left, that is, about where the Jerusalem plank road passed through the line of works, and where, according to General Beauregard, there were no troops. Not seeing the Ninth Corps anywhere (they were at that time in some of the numerous deep ravines), I rode to the Norfolk Railroad, and remained there some hours, expecting from time to time that the Ninth Corps would arrive. The enemy at the Norfolk Railroad redan seemed uneasy at the presence there of my small party, and kept up a pretty constant fire of shrapnel upon us, but without hurting any one. Seeing neither the Ninth nor the Fifth Corps, I was satisfied at length that I had mistaken the place of attack, and rode back to where I knew the Second Corps to be, and found General Burnside at battery or Redan No. 14, which had been captured on the afternoon of the 16th, and in front of which General Will¬ cox was attacking. This position was a mile north of the Norfolk Railroad redan. The line of intrenchments under attack by the Second and Ninth Corps was about two miles in extent. ASSAULTS ON PETERSBURG INTRENCHMENTS. 219 the intrenchments being carried, but only after many casual¬ ties. A hundred prisoners and a stand of colors were cap¬ tured. The attacking force was under a severe musketry fire in front as well as an artillery fire on the right and left, the opposing batteries keeping up a quick and effective fire throughout. The part of the division that carried the line exhausted its ammunition, and was then driven out of the trenches it had captured, General Beauregard says, by Gracie’s brigade, which took many prisoners. General Bar- low supported the attack of the Ninth Corps on the right, losing heavily ; 1 General Crawford of the Fifth Corps sup¬ ported the last attack on the left ; Gibbon and Birney pushed forward during the day, making lodgments close to the enemy’s intrenchments on the west side of Harrison’s Creek. But at midnight the enemy still held from the Appomattox to Redan No. 3, their intrenchments from that point running south along the high ground west of Harrison’s Creek to the Norfolk Railroad. During the 17th General Beauregard determined to with- draw in the night from the position he was holding, across a ravine five hundred yards in his rear, where his line of battle would be much shortened, and the position would be advan¬ tageous. He sent his Chief Engineer, Colonel D. B. Harris of Virginia, to lay out the line and make all the preliminary arrangements with staff officers of the generals of his com¬ mand. The new line was from five hundred to one thousand yards in rear of the one he was occupying, and intersected 1 It is stated that this capture was made at or before sunset, and the intrench¬ ments held until ten o’clock, but I think it must have been later when the enemy's line was penetrated, as I witnessed the contest from a near point of view, and the attack had not succeeded up to the time of my leaving the Ninth Corps, which was after dark. Nor does it seem probable that it was held so long as stated, for General Burnside was near at hand, and General Warren not far off, and we can¬ not suppose that either would have failed to throw forward more troops at once when they learnt the intrenchment was carried. The line was probably retaken before either knew it had been captured. 220 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OP ’64 AND ’65. the original line of intrenchments in the vicinity of the Jeru¬ salem plank road. He withdrew to it after midnight, and the work of intrenchment at once began. When General Grant learnt on the 16th that General Butler occupied Beauregard’s Bermuda Hundred lines, being anxious that they should be held, and a footing on the rail¬ road secured, he directed General Meade to send General Wright with two of his divisions by boat to General Butler, when they abandoned the crossing-place of the army. Ac¬ cordingly they embarked at midnight, and on the morning of the 17th General Wright reported with them to General Butler, but Beauregard’s lines were then held by Pickett and Field, and General Wright was directed to support Gen¬ eral Terry in an attack upon them. The attack, however, giving no great promise of success, was not made. About two o’clock in the afternoon of the 17th, General Lee telegraphed General Beauregard : “ The Fifth Corps, Warren’s, crossed the Chickahominy at Long Bridge on the 13th — was driven from Riddel’s shop by Hill, leaving many dead and prisoners on our hands. That night it marched to Westover. . . . Have not heard from it since. . . At half past three he telegraphed General W. H. F. Lee, at Malvern Hill, to push after the enemy and endeavor to as¬ certain what had become of Grant’s army, and to inform General Hill. At half -past four he telegraphed General Hill at Riddell’s shop that General Beauregard reported that large numbers of Grant’s troops had crossed James River above Fort Pow¬ hatan the day before, and, if he had nothing contradictory of it to move to Chapin’s Bluff. At five o’clock he telegraphed Mr. Davis at Richmond, that at four o’clock he had assaulted that portion of his Ber¬ muda Hundred front line held by the enemy, and had driven him from it, and that he held the entire line. ASSAULTS ON PETERSBURG INTRENCHMENTS. 221 General Osborn, whom I have already quoted, on the con¬ trary, says that at daybreak of the 17th the enemy again assaulted their line (their original advance picket line, now strengthened and held by them in force), and were repulsed, and that at four p.m. the enemy made another fierce attack, and for a time gained some little advantage, breaking into the line and driving back a part of it. But this was soon regained. Beauregard had made urgent calls upon Lee for troops, and Kershaw having arrived at the Bermuda lines, marched at three o’clock in the morning of the 18tli for Petersburg, followed by Field, leaving Pickett to hold the lines. Both were in position on Beauregard’s right in the morning, Ker¬ shaw relieving J ohnson’s division, Field on his right. Gen¬ eral Lee arrived with them. Hill got up in the course of the day, and was posted on the right of Anderson. Late at night on the 17th General Meade ordered an as¬ sault in strong columns, well supported, upon the enemy’s works at four o’clock in the following morning, by the Fifth, Ninth, and Second Corps. Brigadier-General Neill, temporarily commanding the Sec¬ ond Division of the Sixth Corps, had relieved the Eighteenth Corps on the 17th, except Martindale’s division, and General Smith returned to General Butler at Bermuda Hundred. Martindale and Neill were held ready to support an attack. Upon advancing to the assault on the morning of the 18th, it was found that the enemy had abandoned the intrencli- ments they had so successfully held the day before. The ground in front of the points assaulted was thickly covered with the killed, and the trenches at those points were filled with Confederate dead. Finding the line abandoned, General Meade at once ordered the army to press forward and attack before reinforcements could arrive, for he had learnt from prisoners that Beaure¬ gard’s intrenchments were merely such as he had been able 222 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’C4 AND ’65. to put up after occupying liis new position, and. they must necessarily be imperfect. He had also learnt from the same source what force Beauregard actually had. This in¬ formation was communicated to the corps commanders, but before any assault was made Anderson’s corps, Field’s and Kershaw’s divisions, was in position, and before the assaults in the afternoon Hill’s troops had begun to arrive. General Birney was temporarily in command of the Second Corps, General Hancock being disabled by the opening of his wound in the evening of the 17th. The Second Corps found itself sooner than the other troops close to the enemy’s new intrenchments, being at the Hare house (near which were both the enemy’s new and abandoned lines), only some three hundred yards distant. Its advance was in great part concealed by woods. The Ninth Corps, on the left of the Second, had to advance nearly a mile, when it found itself in contact with a force of the enemy occupying the Norfolk Bailroad cut, and a ravine some four or five hundred yards in advance of and nearly parallel with their main line. The Fifth Corps, on the left of the Ninth, had a still greater distance to advance over, and had similar ob¬ stacles in its front interposed between it and the enemy’s main line as the Ninth Corps, that is, deep ravines and the Norfolk Bailroad cut, which was here very deep and difficult to cross, and was held by the enemy at its northern end. Its direction was such, curving to the north, as to embarrass troops advancing in line of battle. General Meade, finding that serious delays were occurring from the attempt to make a simultaneous attack, without fixing the hour, owing to the different conditions existing on the fronts of the several corps, fixed it himself and ordered all the corps to attack at twelve o’clock, with strong columns of assault. Birney car¬ ried out this order, making two assaults about midday, with Gibbon’s division, on the right of the Prince George Court ASSAULTS ON PETERSBURG INTRENCHMENTS. 223 House road, both of which were repulsed with severe loss, Brigadier-General Pierce and Colonel Ramsey, brigade com¬ manders, being wounded. General Burnside was occupied in endeavoring to drive the enemy out of the railroad cut in his front as a necessary preliminary to getting close enough to the intrenchments to assault. General Warren was similarly engaged. The ground he had to pass over was intricate and difficult to cross, and being chiefly in open ground, was exposed to the enemy’s artil¬ lery fire for a long distance. General Meade again ordered assaults by all the corps, with their whole force at all hazards, as soon as possible, as he found it useless to appoint an hour to effect co-operation. All the corps assaulted late in the afternoon, and at hours not widely apart, General Birney with all his disposable force — Mott from the Hare house, on the left of the Prince George Court House road, supported by one of Gibbon’s brigades, Barlow on Mott’s left — but was repulsed with considerable loss. General Burnside found the task of driving the enemy out of the railroad cut a formidable one, but succeeded, and, assaulting, established his corps within a hundred yards of the enemy’s main line. He praises highly the manner in which Potter’s and Willcox’s divisions, under Major-General Parke’s directions, accomplished this. General Warren’s assault was well made, some of Griffin’s men being killed within twenty feet of the enemy’s works, but it was no more successful than the others. His losses were very severe. Among the desperately wounded was Colonel Chamberlain, of the Twentieth Maine, who led his brigade under a destructive fire. On previous occasions he had been recommended for promotion for gallant conduct and efficient service. On the right, Martindale advanced and gained some rifle- pits, but did not assault the main line. 224 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’64 AND ’65. The positions gained by the several corps close against the enemy were intrenched, and the two opposing lines in this part of the ground remained substantially the same in posi¬ tion to the close of the wTar. Toward evening General Meade had reason to believe that General Beauregard had been reinforced by Lee’s army, and that reinforcements were still arriving. At the close of the day General Grant, expressing himself perfectly satisfied that all had been done that could be done, and that the assaults were called for by all the information that could be obtained, directed that the troops should be put under cover and have some rest, which, indeed, they greatly needed. The Medical Director states that during this attempt to take Petersburg, from the 15th to the 18th of June, the number of wounded brought to the hospitals from the differ¬ ent corps was : from the Second Corps, 2, 212 ; from the Fifth Corps, 1,145 ; from the Ninth Corps, 1,197 ; and, in addition, 1,656, the corps of which he does not note. This makes a total brought to the hospitals of 6,210. Taking the usual pro¬ portion for the killed, we have 1,240, and killed and wounded, 7,450. The number of killed and wounded of the Eighteenth Corps is not included. It was probably not less than 700. 1 This makes the loss in killed and woimded to be 8,150. The Tabular Statement of the ‘ ‘ Medical and Surgical His¬ tory ” has under the head of “ Missing,” 1,814. The total is then 9,964. The figures of the Tabular Statement are : killed, 1,298 ; wounded, 7,474; lulled and wounded, 8,772; missing, 1,814. Total loss, 10,586. The stragglers are probably included in these numbers. 1 The class the Medical Director designates as stragglers wounded, that is, who, slightly wounded, will not report to the hospitals, but try to straggle away, must have numbered five or six hundred ; they are not included in the figures above. ASSAULTS ON PETERSBURG INTRENCHMENTS. 225 I can find no official statement of the losses of Lee’s and Beauregard’s troops during these operations, but notwith¬ standing that they were intrenched, my own observation leads me to believe they were severe. The incessant movements, day and night, for so long a period, the constant close contact with the enemy during all that time, the almost daily assaults upon intrenchments hav¬ ing entanglements in front, and defended by artillery and musketry in front and flank, exhausted officers and men. The larger part of the officers, who literally led their com¬ mands, were killed or wounded, and a large number of those that filled the ranks at the beginning of the campaign were absent. It is unreasonable to suppose that the troops were not, for a time, so exhausted as to need rest, and equally un¬ reasonable to suppose that their opponents were not in a similar condition, though to a less degree, since they had not marched so much at night nor attacked intrenchments.

## weldon-railroad-june-21-23

It was now determined to invest Petersburg partially by a line of intrenchments directed toward the Lynchburg (South Side) Railroad. These intrenchments were to consist of re¬ doubts connected by lines of infantry parapets, with ditches and entanglements of slashing or abatis, which the army might be withdrawn from at any time, leaving a sufficient force to hold them, and move to intercept the railroads and attack Lee’s army in unexpected quarters south, or even north, of the James. The work of intrenching wTent on on both sides, at first with constant picket and artillery firing. The Confederate intrenchments were similar to ours except that their works were not closed in the rear. General Kautz had returned to General Butler in the night of the 16th and 17th, and a small cavalry force watched the left of the army. The two divisions of the Sixth Corps were returned to the Army of the Potomac on the evening of the 19th. On the 21st the Ninth Corps extended its right to the MOVEMENT AGAINST THE RAILROADS. 227 Prince George Court House road at the Hare house, so as to join the troops of the Eighteenth Corps, and relieve the Second and Sixth Corps. The right of the Fifth Corps joined the left of the Ninth ; its left, on the evening of the 21st, rested on the Jerusalem plank-road, where, a short time afterward, Fort Sedgwick was built. The Second Corps, followed by the Sixth, was moved, on the 21st, across the Jerusalem plank-road, with the intention of taking possession of the Weldon Railroad on the next day, and with the expectation of securing the Lynchburg or South Side Railroad. The Second Corps was placed in posi¬ tion on the left of the Fifth, the Sixth Corps at night being in rear of the left of the Second. During the day General Barlow made a reconnoissance toward the Weldon Railroad, and a considerable force of the enemy moved down the road to meet it. General Birney was instructed by General Meade, on the 21st, that he was to take position on the left of the Fifth Corps, and extend as far as practicable to the left, envelop¬ ing and keeping as close as possible to the enemy’s line ; that it was hoped he would be able to get possession of the Weldon Railroad, though it was probable the enemy would attempt to cover and defend it ; that the Sixth Corps would be sent at night to take post on his left, and that it was de¬ sired to stretch to the Appomattox. On the evening of the 21st General Wright was directed by General Meade to take position on the left of Birney, and pressing up against the enemy, drive them into their main works, but not to take the offensive so far as to assault them ; 1 that General Birney was forming on Warren’s left, which rested on the Jerusalem plank-road, and would extend as far as possible, holding his line defensively ; that the ob- 1 The enemy’s intrenchments west of the Jerusalem plank-road were the orig¬ inal works, running here east and west. 228 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’64 AND ’05. ject of the transfer of the two corps to the left was to encir¬ cle Petersburg so far as to hold the two railroads, the Wel¬ don and the Lynchburg ; that he would therefore extend from Birney’s left as far as practicable consistent with its security as a defensive line. In order that the enveloping line should be at a suitable distance from the Confederate works, General Birney, com¬ manding the Second Corps, was further directed, on the 22d, to swing forward its left, the right of Gibbon’s division, which connected with the Fifth Corps, being the pivot, and then intrench ; and General Wright was directed to move to the Weldon Railroad by the Williams house road (the dis¬ tance between the Jerusalem plank-road and the Weldon Railroad being about three miles), get possession of the rail¬ road and intrench, connecting with Birney. At first these corps commanders were directed to keep up connection ; but as that led to misapprehensions between their troops and to delays, they were ordered to move irrespective of each other, taking the requisite precaution to insure the safety of their exposed flanks. The two corps were moving chiefly through densely-wooded thickets, the Second Corps to the edge of the open ground in front of the enemy’s works, the Sixth Corps nearly at light angles to it, toward the Weldon Rail¬ road near the Globe tavern. The enemy’s skirmishers were very active and embarrassing on the front and flank of the Sixth Corps, the main line of which did not advance more than half-way to the railroad. It was late in the afternoon before General Gibbon had intrenched his part of the new line, General Mott was still at work upon his. General Bar- low was only partially in position, but General Birney had not taken the requisite precautions to secure his left in swinging forward. General A. P. Hill had been sent down the Weldon Rail¬ road to meet Meade’s attempt upon it, having Wilcox’s and MOVEMENT AGAINST THE RAILROADS. 229 Mahone’s divisions with him, supported by B. R. Johnson’s. Leaving Wilcox to make head against Wright, he passed through the opening between Birney and Wright, and the first information Birney had of his presence was a fire upon the flank and rear of Barlow’s division, which sent it back in some confusion to the position it had in the morning ; and with the loss of many prisoners. Mott’s division, partly seeing what had occurred, went back precipitately also to the position from which it had advanced, and by doing so lost much fewer prisoners than Barlow’s division, but left Gib¬ bon’s division, without any warning, to receive a fire in the rear of its left brigade, which at once followed the example of the troops on its left, and abandoned a battery of four guns on its right to the enemy, who quickly turned it on them. So sudden and unexpected was this attack on Gib¬ bon’s left, that the greater part of several regiments were captured with their colors. An immediate attempt was made by General Gibbon to recover his line, but without success. He lost about as many prisoners as the First Di¬ vision, the total loss of the corps being about 1,700 pris¬ oners, four guns, and several colors. The loss in killed and wounded was not severe. Hill returned to his intrenchments at dusk, leaving some force on the railroad. The Second Corps was thrown forward that evening, but it was not until early the next morning that it advanced and established itself on the line it had been driven from. The Sixth Corps formed on its left, thrown back facing the Wel¬ don Railroad, and about a mile and a half from it, its picket line close to the road. In this general position the two armies remained for some weeks. Two strong redoubts were built on the line running south on the Jerusalem plank-road, about half a mile apart, the first, Fort Davis, being half a mile from Fort Sedgwick. They were finished and occupied about the 11th of July.

## deep-bottom-july

On the 25th of July General Grant determined to send the Second Corps and two divisions of cavalry secretly to the north bank of the James by the ponton bridges at Deep Bottom (Jones’s Neck, Bermuda Hundred), the cavalry to make a dash upon Richmond if the chances seemed favorable for it, but if not, to destroy the two railroads from the vicin¬ ity of Richmond as far as the Anna rivers (which was indeed the chief object of the crperation). Kautz’s division was to join Sheridan at Deep Bottom. The Second Corps, moving up to Chapin’s Bluff, was to support the cavalry if it got into Richmond, but at any rate to prevent the enemy’s troops from being sent across at that point to interfere with the 1 Noticing the effect upon our troops produced by the single VIH-inch mortar from the Confederate lines of Yorktown, Colonel Abbot had paid great attention to training the gunners in the use of this arm while in the defences of Washing¬ ton, especially in those details upon which the effect of vertical fire depends. The enemy suffered severely for the first few days when the mortars were opened upon them at Petersburg. Having no mortars with which to reply, and no bomb- proofs for cover, and yet being compelled, by the proximity of the main lines, to keep their own fully manned in order to guard against assault, the effect upon their troops was depressing. As soon as the enemy could obtain mortars, they placed them in position ; and from that time to the evacuation the mortar fire was frequent and severe, though Colonel Abbot’s gunners retained their advan¬ tage of greater precision of fire. Mortars were introduced chiefly with a view to preparing for an assault and keeping the enemy’s artillery quiet while it was being made. This purpose they effectually accomplished. They were also used to keep down picket firing and to compel the silence of certain very annoying batteries, which from the left bank of the Appomattox River enfiladed the right of our line. \ I /. f i i .! 1 ■iS-VlJg 248 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’64 AND ’65. cavalry. This movement General Grant thought might cause such a reduction in the strength of the force holding the Petersburg lines as to give fair promise of success in as¬ saulting them, upon springing a mine General Burnside had prepared. This mine was placed under a redan held by El¬ liott’s brigade of Johnson’s division. It was opposite the centre of the Ninth Corps, where the opposing lines were only one hundred yards apart. The success of this movement, as General Hancock says, depended upon the contingency that the enemy’s works would be thinly occupied, and the movement be a surprise. General Hancock and General Sheridan marched in the afternoon of the 26th, and about two o’clock in the morning of the 27th, the Second Corps, followed by the cavalry, be¬ gan crossing the James. There were two ponton bridges at Deep Bottom (the north end of Jones’s Neck is so called), one just above the mouth of Bailey’s Creek, the other just below it ; the creek is about twelve miles from Richmond ; it is four or five miles long, running from north to south, crossing the Central or Darby road (at Fussell’s mill), the Long Bridge road, and the New Market or river-road. It was impassable near its mouth, and probably from its char¬ acter there gave rise to the name of Deep Bottom. General Foster of the Tenth Corps held the two ponton bridges. There was a considerable force of the enemy intrenched op¬ posite the upper bridge, but their line appeared to extend only a short distance beyond. General Hancock determined to cross by the lower bridge, and turn the enemy’s left flank, while General Foster threatened them in front. The Second Corps and cavalry were over the river before daybreak, and as soon as it was light, moved forward, the cavalry on the right. The enemy’s advanced force on the east side of Bailey’s Creek was soon driven out of the way, and a battery of four 20-pounder Parrott guns captured on the New Mar- MOVEMENT TO NORTH BANK OF THE JAMES. 249 ket road by the skirmish line of Barlow’s division. The command, swinging on its left, advanced by the New Market and Long Bridge roads to Bailey’s Creek, the cavalry on the right, on the Long Bridge and Central roads. The enemy was found in strong force intrenched on the west bank of Bailey’s Creek, from the mouth to Fussell’s mill, where their left was refused. Wilcox’s and Kershaw’s divisions had been sent across the river from Petersburg before our movement began, and held this line. Heth’s division joined them on the 27th. It was not desired by General Grant that the enemy’s works should be assaulted, but that their position should be turned by the cavalry on the Central or on the Charles City road, while Foster should make a vigorous demonstration in his front and the Second Corps on theirs. But the enemy having been reinforced, Kershaw advanced against Sheri¬ dan’s cavalry and drove it back over the ridge upon which it was posted. Dismounting his men, General Sheridan formed them just behind the crest, where the fire of their repeating carbines at close quarters drove the attacking force back in confusion, leaving 250 prisoners and two colors in the hands of the cavalry. W. H. F. Lee’s cavalry division now joined the enemy’s infantiy on the north side of the James, and on the 29th Field’s and Fitz Lee’s divisions united with them. On the night of the 28th Mott’s division was sent back to relieve Ord’s corps in our intrenchments on the right of Burnside, and on the night of the 29th Hancock and Sheri¬ dan recrossed the James to take part in the assault on the Petersburg works in front of Burnside. The expedition had accomplished one important result : it had reduced the force holding the Petersburg intrenchments to three infantry divisions, and had likewise drawn two of their three cavalry divisions to the north bank of the James. The casualties of 11* 250 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’64 AND ’65. this movement to the north bank of the James amounted to some 300.

## petersburg-mine

In the latter part of June General Potter proposed to General Burnside to mine a redan of the enemy’s works in his front, the proposition coming from Lieutenant-Colonel Pleasants, Forty-eighth Pennsylvania, a regiment composed chiefly of miners from Schuylkill County, Pennsylvania, Colonel Pleasants himself being an experienced and skilful mining engineer. This work was authorized by General Burnside, and its continuance was subsequently assented to by General Meade. The redan to be mined was known as Elliott’s salient, the intrenchments there being held by his brigade. The ground on our side was favorable to running the gallery of the mine screened from observation, but the position was not in other respects suitable, Elliott’s salient being a re-entrant of the general line of intrenchments, and the salient itself, as well as all the ground between it and Burnside’s advanced line of • intrenchments, being exposed to a flank fire on the right and left. Though the work met with many serious difficulties, it was finished ready for charging by the 23d July.1 In continuance of the operations against the enemy, it was in question whether an attack should be made on his in¬ trenchments, or a movement to destroy the Weldon Railroad effectually should be undertaken. The final result of an assault seemed doubtful, as, apparently, the enemy had a second line running along the crest about five hundred yards in rear of the first line, and commanding it. A careful ex¬ amination of the whole front, including that of Bermuda Hundred, led to the conclusion that the chances of carrying 1 The main gallery was 511 feet long, the two lateral galleries 37 and 38 feet. There were eight magazines, each of which was charged with one thousand pounds of powder. THE PETERSBURG MINE. 251 the enemy’s intrenchments were better on Burnside’s front than on any other, though the existence of a second line in rear of the first made it more than doubtful whether the at¬ tempt would be judicious. Thus matters stood on the 24tli of July. But on the 25th and 26th very careful examinations were made of this second line from a newly erected signal station, and it was found tllat the enemy had detached works, batteries probably, along the ridge in front of Bum- side, but not a connected line. This fact increased greatly the chances of a successful assault, and it was determined to make it in connection with the springing of Burnside’s mine. General Burnside had reason to believe that the enemy had not discovered his mine. His mining work, however, had not escaped detection by them, and General Beauregard at first directed countermining, but abandoned it, and threw up in¬ trenchments at the gorge of the salient against which the mining was apparently directed. Batteries of VIII- and X-incli mortars were also established by him to give a front and cross fire on the points threatened. The siege and field artillery of our forces had been put in position to keep down both the front and flank fire of the enemy wherever we might attack their intrenchments, and on Burnside’s front great care was taken to establish it so as to keep down their fire upon the flanks of our columns of at¬ tack against the Elliott salient, and to keep back their rein¬ forcements. Upon a call from General Meade on the 26fli of July, General Burnside on the same day reported a plan of assault with his corps in connection with the explosion of the mine, by which the two brigades of General Ferrero’s colored division in close column of attack were to lead. Upon pass¬ ing through the openings on the right and left of the mine, the regiments in front were to move down the enemy’s lines, while the others moved directly to the crest near the ceme- 252 THG VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OP ’64 AND ’65. tery, about five hundred yards beyond. These two columns were to be followed by the other divisions of the corps as soon as they could be thrown in. General Burnside’s reason for the selection of Ferrero’s division to lead was, that his three divisions, commanded by Potter, Willcox, and Ledlie, owing to their closeness to the enemy’s line, had been subjected to a musketry and artillery fire, day and night for thirty-six days, with a daily loss of from 30 to 60 killed and wounded (Colonel Loring, Inspector- General, says, more than 30), 1 while Ferrero’s division had not been exposed to the fire of the enemy, and had been drilled to manoeuvre with a special view to their use in the assault. As General Ferrero’s division had never been in contact with the enemy, this selection was not approved, and the assault fell to the lot of the First Division, commanded by General Ledlie, an officer whose total unfitness for such a duty ought to have been known to General Burnside, though it is not possible that it could have been. It was not known to General Meade. General Lee having sent Field’s and Kershaw’s divisions of Longstreet’s corps, and Heth’s and Wilcox’s of Hill’s corps to the north side of the James (together with the cavalry divisions of the two Lees), leaving only Hoke’s, Johnson’s, and Mahone’s divisions in the Petersburg intrencliments, General Meade, with the approval of General Grant, on the 28th of July, fixed upon the morning of the 30th as the time when the mine should be fired and the assault made. Han¬ cock and Sheridan were to be withdrawn from the north side of the James as soon as it was dark on the night of the 29th, so as to take part in the operation, and General Ord, now commanding the Eighteenth Corps, with a division of his 1 According to Colonel Loring, a loss in killed and wounded of 1,300. But this is a very loose way of stating losses. The enemy had also suffered severely from the same cause. THE PETERSBURG MINE. 253 own corps under General Ames, and one of the Tenth under General Turner, was also to take part in it, General Mott, of the Second Corps, relieving, in due time, the Eighteenth Corps, which held the intrenchments on Burnside’s right. The morning of the 30th was fixed upon because it was desired to put more heavy guns and mortars in position for the attack, and the night of the 29th was required to make such preliminary arrangements as the massing of the troops, remov¬ ing the parapets and abatis for the passage of the assaulting columns, and bringing into position the supporting troops. The order for the attack was issued on the 29th. It ex¬ presses concisely what was to be done by each commander.1 General Burnside was to form his troops during the night for assaulting the enemy’s works at daylight of the 30th, pre¬ pare his parapets and abatis for the passages of the columns, have the pioneers equipped to open passages for artillery, to destroy the enemy’s abatis, etc., and the intrenching-tools of the corps (with which all the corps were amply supplied) dis¬ tributed for effecting lodgments, etc. General Warren was to reduce the number of his troops holding the intrenchments to the minimum, and concentrate on his right, prepared to support the assault of General Burnside. He wTas to make the same preparations as to pio¬ neers and intrenching-tools as the Ninth Corps. General Ord was to put Mott’s division in the intrench¬ ments of the Eighteenth Corps, and form his troops in rear of the Ninth Corps, ready to support it in the assault. The field artillery of each corps was to be held ready to move. General Hancock was to move at dark from Deep Bottom, and be in position in rear of Mott’s division (resuming com¬ mand of it) at daylight, ready to follow up the assault. 1 See Appendix K, for a copy of the order. 254 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’64 AND '65. General Sheridan was to proceed at dark to Lee’s mill, and at daylight against the enemy’s troops on our left by roads heading to Petersburg from the southward and west¬ ward. Major Duane was to have the ponton trains close at hand prepared to move (to cross the Appomattox), and suj:>plies of sand-bags, gabions, fascines, etc., near the lines, ready for use. He was to detail engineer officers for each corps. General Burnside was to spring his mine at half-past three in the morning of the 30th. His assaulting columns were to move at once rapidly upon the breach, seize the crest in the rear and effect a lodgment there. He was to be followed by General Ord on the right, and General Warren on the left. Upon the explosion of the mine the artillery of all kinds in battery was to open upon those points of the enemy’s works whose fire covered the ground over which our columns must move. These orders were carried out thoroughly by all the com¬ manders except General Burnside. His parapets and abatis were not prepared for the passage of the columns of attack, his pioneers not effectively prepared for work, nor were his intrenching-tools distributed. In a personal interview with General Burnside and Generals Willcox, Potter, and Ledlie on the 29th, General Meade had endeavored to impress upon them, first, that immediate advantage must be taken of the confusion of the enemy caused by the explosion of the mine, to gain the crest beyoiid ; that holding the crater would be of no possible use ; second, that if the assault was unsuc¬ cessful the troops must be withdrawn at once. The work mined was on General Johnson’s front, at the centre of General Elliott’s brigade. General Wise’s brigade was on Elliott’s right, General Ransom’s on his left, Gen¬ eral Grade’s on Ransom’s left. General Hoke’s division held from Johnson’s left to the Appomattox ; Colquibt’s bri- THE PETERSBURG MINE. 255 gade was sent to Johnson’s on the 28th, and was placed on Wise’s right. General Mahone’s held on Johnson’s right, his own right being about a mile and a half from the mine, excejjt one brigade on the Weldon Railroad four miles off. A defect in the fuse delayed the firing of the mine until twenty minutes to five. At once all the heavy guns and mortars, eighty-one in all, and about the same number of field guns, opened, and kept down the fire of the enemy’s salients and his batteries at all points except two, which, owing to the character of the ground and woods that con¬ cealed them, could not be effectively reached. A few minutes after the explosion, General Ledlie’s divi¬ sion, the Second Brigade leading, filed through Burnside’s advanced intrenchments, and moved up to the crater,1 into which it filed, filling it with a confused mass. General Led- lie did not accompany, much less lead, his division. He remained, according to the testimony before the Court of Inquiry that followed, in a bomb-proof about fifty yards in¬ side our intrenchments, from which he could see nothing that was going on. He could not have given the instruc¬ tions he received to his brigade commanders. Had the division advanced in column of attack, led by a resolute, in¬ telligent commander, it would have gained the crest in fif¬ teen minutes after the explosion, and before any serious op¬ position could have been made to it. It was expected by General Meade that the whole of the Ninth Corps -would have been formed in columns of attack in the hollow ground in the vicinity of our advanced line of trenches, and would have advanced quickly on the right and left of the leading division, and that in half an hour after the explosion of the mine the corps would have had possession of the crest. 1 The crater was about one hundred and fifty feet long, sixty wide and twenty- five deep. It was about one hundred yards from Burnside's advanced line of in¬ trenchments. 256 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’04 AND ’65. The mine overwhelmed the battery in Elliott’s salient, the whole of the Eighteenth and part of the Twenty-third South Carolina Infantry, and for some minutes caused the utmost consternation among the troops there. For some consider¬ able time they abandoned the intrenchments for the space of two or three hundred yards on each side of the mine. But the appearance of General Ledlie’s division going into the crater aroused them, and they began a scattering musketry fire, which by the time the rear of Ledlie’s division got up to the crater, was somewhat effective. General Elliott, in endeavoring to form a line on the higher ground beyond the crater, was severely wounded, and the command devolved upon Colonel McMaster, who formed a part of the brigade in a ravine in rear of the crater (the salient), the fire from which, with the flanking fire of the rest of the brigade and Ran¬ som’s troops in the intrenchments on our right of the crater, together with Wright’s battery, repulsed all the attempts made to advance from the crater. Of these there were several, but only two or three hundred men could be got be¬ yond the crest of the mine to make them. It was half an hour after the explosion before the enemy’s musketry was at all effective, and nearly an hour before their artillery fire from two batteries, in all six guns, was so. Then Wright’s battery of four field guns opened. It was some six hundred yards on our right of the mine, concealed in woods, and well covered by traverses, so that we could not silence it.1 It swept the ground between our intrenchments and the crater, the crater itself, and the ground on our right of it, firing over the heads of Ransom’s troops, who were formed in a covered way running along a ravine. A two-gun battery in 1 Major Coit, who commanded four of the batteries in this part of the Confed¬ erate intrenchments, says this battery was literally battered, and the ground around it and in its rear was honeycombed by the explosion of mortar shells. The battery was well traversed. THE PETERSBURG MINE. 257 a ravine on our left of the mine, equally difficult to reach with our fire, also became effective, and as the contest con¬ tinued, batteries were put in position on the crest so often mentioned, though their fire was in a great degree kept down, as was that of their mortars. General Potter’s division went forward by the flank 1 (filed out) soon after General Ledlie’s commenced advancing. The leading brigade, General Griffin’s, moved toward the right when it reached the vicinity of the mine, and taking possession of the partially abandoned intrenchments, began an attack upon the enemy, whose works at that point were intricate, the ground being cut up with covered-ways and rifle-pits. After a long, sharp contest the intrenchments were taken, and Elliott’s troops driven back upon Ransom’s, holding in the ravine. 2 General Willcox’s division followed General Ledlie’s, his leading brigade going into the crater, his second brigade moving to the left of it, and getting possession of the en¬ emy’s intrenchments there, but not without fighting. His instructions, he says, were to bear to the left and take up a position on the Jerusalem plank-road, and that he endeav¬ ored to form his division so that its right flank would rest on that road, and protect the left flank of Ledlie’s division, but that he was unable to do so ; and when, some time after, he was ordered to advance to Cemetery Hill, the enemy had concentrated such a fire that he could not go forward. An hour after the mine exploded General Meade, receiving a despatch from Colonel Loring, staff officer to General Burnside, stating that Ledlie’s division was in the crater, but 1 General Potter says his division was to have been formed left in front, to move forward by the flank, so that when his troops had passed the line of the enemy's intrenchments they would face to the right, to cover the right of Ledlie. 2 When General Potter first got up there, he says, the intrenchments were par¬ tially abandoned by the enemy for the space of two hundred or three hundred yards on each side of the mine. 258 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’64 AND ’65. could not be got forward, at once ordered Burnside to push with all his troops to the crest, and directed General Ord to move his troops forward at once ; at six o’clock he directed General Ord to push for the crest independently of Burn¬ side’s troops, and make a lodgment there. Just before this direction was given, General Burnside having reported that no enemy was seen in their line of intrencliments, General Warren was informed of it, and ordered to go forward with his troops, independently of the Ninth Corps, and try to carry the works if there was apparently any chance for it. But he reported that so far as they could see none of the enemy had left their front, meaning the part of the enemy’s line within his view. And on Hancock’s front the enemy’s intrencliments were well manned, and opened a heavy and close fire whenever they perceived any indication of an at¬ tack. At six o’clock, prisoners taken having stated that they had no line in their rear, that they were falling back when our troops advanced, and that none of the troops had returned from the north side of the James, General Meade, informing General Burnside of this, ordered him to push forward his men, black and white, at all hazards, and rush for the crest. Ferrero was ordered repeatedly by Burnside to go forward with his division, but instead of having it massed close to the advanced line ready to move, it lay crowded in the cov¬ ered-ways leading down to that line, and it was eight o’clock before it filed out of them. As most of the other troops of the Ninth Corps had done, it passed out of the intrench- ments by twos and threes and fours. It went forward with alacrity, but a large part of it crowded through the crater of the mine, notwithstanding the efforts of the commanders of the two brigades to keep them out of it. This threw them into confusion, but a part of them were led off to the right, and got off into the intrencliments there, when they had THE PETERSBURG MINE. 259 some fighting, capturing 200 prisoners and a color. Its divi¬ sion commander remained in the bomb-proof with General Ledlie. There was now a crowded mass in and in rear of the crater, and for some distance on its right in and about the some¬ what confused intrenchments taken from the enemy. The day was one of intense heat, the thermometer several de¬ grees above 90°, and the sun beating down in the deep hole of the crater caused great suffering. General Ord’s troops were very much delayed in passing through the Ninth Corps intrenchments, owing to the para¬ pets and abatis not having been prepared for it, and the crowds still in them and in the covered-ways. General Turner says that at half-past six the last of Pot¬ ter’s troops had just passed out, and that seeing the confused mass of troops in and about the crater, and the colored troops lying down and trying to cover themselves in a very slier!: line on the right of the mine, he moved his leading brigade to the right of the colored troops, and took possession of about one hundred yards of the enemy’s works. His Second Brigade passed out still further to the right and attacked, but without success. His First Brigade was in the act of charging down the enemy’s line to the right, he says, and his Second Brigade about to advance, when looking to the left, he saw the troops in large numbers rushing back, and immediately the whole of his First Brigade, and then his Second, fell back to our intrenchments. At about six o’clock General Lee was informed of the springing of the mine, and at once ordered two brigades of Mahone’s division to be brought up from the right. In a short time he was at the Gee house, a commanding posi¬ tion five hundred yards in rear of the crater, where he met General Beauregard. Hill had gone to the right to bring up the troops, having first sent batteries to the crest. 260 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’64 AND ’65. Malione arrived with Weisiger’s and Wright’s brigades be¬ tween eight and nine o’clock, and seeing what a large body of our troops were in their intrenchments, sent for Sanders’s brigade of his division. Weisiger’s brigade had just formed a little before nine o’clock in the ravine a short distance in rear of the mined salient, where, it has been stated, Elliott’s men had aided so effectively in repelling every effort of our troops in the crater to advance.1 Wright’s brigade was not yet in position when Colonel Thomas, commanding the Second Brigade of colored troops, having with Colonel Sig- fried, commanding the First Brigade, received an order from General Ferrero to take the crest, attempted to carry out the order by charging with his brigade, but only succeeded in getting two of his regiments and part of a third 2 over the enemy’s intrenchments they had possession of, and advanc¬ ing a short distance, when Weisiger’s brigade, with some of Elliott’s, advanced against them, charged and drove them back in confusion, the whole division rising from the ground and running in wild disorder back to our intrenchments, carrying with them many of Potter’s troops, both of Turner’s brigades, and most of the men lying around and in rear of the crater. Some of the colored division took refuge in the crater, or must have remained there from the beginning, for many were captured there, and according to General Burn¬ side’s report of casualties 801 were missing. Some of Pot¬ ter’s division also were driven into the crater. This attack left the enemy in possession of nearly all their intrenchments on our right of the mine. Satisfied that the time for success had passed, and that any further attempt would only result in useless sacrifice of life, General Meade, with the concurrence of General Grant, 1 This ravine extended some distance to our right of the mine. 2 Colonel Charles S. Russell, commanding one of the regiments, says only 150 or 200 men went forward from the intrenchments. THE PETERSBURG MINE. 261 directed the suspension of further offensive movements, and the withdrawal of the troops to our lines when it could* be done with security, leaving it discretionary with General Burnside and General Ord to withdraw them during the day or at night. Our batteries were held ready to keep down the fire of the enemy’s that they controlled, should they at¬ tempt to open upon the troops in withdrawing. For my own part, I had no expectation of success after reading Colonel Loring’s despatch from the mine, written an hour after the explosion, for, if in that time they had not gained the crest in force, the opportunity we had counted on in the surprise and confusion of the enemy upon the springing of the mine must have been lost. At half -past six a despatch was received from the officer at the signal station on the Jerusalem plank-road, reporting that a column of the enemy’s infantry, at least a strong bri¬ gade, was marching toward our right, and that they came from the vicinity of the Lead Works (Weldon Railroad), where all the camps had been broken up, and the troops moved toward our right. General Warren was notified of this and instructed to make an attack in that direction if practicable. (The point indicated was at least four miles from his right, where the greater part of his corps was con¬ centrated. ) 1 To this General Warren replied that all his troops were on the right except Crawford’s, to whom he had sent directions to do what he could, and asked if he should send Ayres there ; but General Meade preferred that CrawTford should be heard 1 General Wilson was directed to make a lodgment on the Weldon Railroad and move up along it to the enemy’s unoccupied intrenchments, the other cavalry divisions to support him. But the march prescribed for the cavalry was too long to carry out this programme before the operation of the mine was concluded. General Sheridan was then directed to make a reconnoissance instead of an at¬ tack, to feel the enemy’s right flank, and to be governed in anything further by his own judgment. 262 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF '64 AND ’63. from before giving further orders. The report of Crawford, received about eight o’clock, was not favorable to the attempt, owing to the distance of the point of attack. Ayres was di¬ rected to attack on Burnside’s left and to take the 2-gun battery of the enemy on our left of the mine, which had a most destructive fire in that quarter, and was not only very much concealed, owing to its position in a ravine, but was hidden by a group of trees from our 14 -gun battery, where six 4^ -inch guns had been put in position, one of its objects being the silencing of this 2-gun battery. General Burnside had been requested and ordered to have these trees cut down, but they remained standing. Ayres was about to go forward when, as already stated, all our troops on the right of the mine fell back in confusion to our intrenchments, and Gen¬ eral Meade directed all offensive operations to cease. This was at a quarter of ten. At half-past ten Malione made an attack on the crater and on Willcox’s troops in the enemy’s intrenchments on our left of the crater. This was repulsed by the musketry of the troops attacked, and by our artillery, and Mahone’s men were forced to seek cover in one of their trenches near by. Between one and two o’clock another, a third and last attack, was made with Johnson’s and Mahone’s troops, Sanders’s brigade having arrived in the meantime. The order to withdraw from the crater to our own lines was sent by General Burnside at half-past twelve o’clock to the brigade commanders there, leaving them to consult and decide upon the time and manner of withdrawal. This they did* returning the order endorsed with a request that our artillery and infantry should open when they fell back, but before the despatch reached General Burnside the enemy advanced to the last attack, and two of the brigade com¬ manders in the crater, seeing them close at hand, hastily gave the order to retire, when the larger part of the troops fell back to our lines, losing many men by the infantry and THE PETERSBURG MINE. 263 artillery fire of the enemy, though the distance to our in- trenchments was but little more than one hundred yards. A large number of officers and men were captured in the crater, among them the two brigade commanders of Ledlie’s division, Brigadier-General W. F. Bartlett, whom General Burnside mentions as a most brave and efficient officer, who was severely wounded in the Wilderness, and Colonel E. G. Marshall. General Meade reported his casualties at 4,400 killed, wounded, and missing, all except about 100 being the loss of the Ninth Corps. He also stated that 246 prisoners and two colors had been captured. General Burnside’s report does not state what his loss was at the mine, but gives the whole number of his casualties from June 12 to July 30 ; his miss¬ ing during that time was 1,396. As his colored division was in no other engagement than the mine during that time, its casualties there are given and are stated to have been 176 killed, 688 wounded, and 801 missing. The Tabular Statement of the Medical Department puts down the loss at 419 killed, 1,679 wounded and 1,910 miss¬ ing ; total, 4,008. The number of the killed and missing- are, I believe, too great : the total was probably 3, 500. 1 Its Tabular Statement of the Confederate loss is evidently erroneous, 400 killed, 600 wounded, 200 missing. Colonel McMaster states that the loss of Elliott’s brigade was 677, and that that was more than half the Confederate loss that day. Weisiger’s brigade lost heavily also, the com¬ mander being among the wounded. The great mass of the Ninth Corps were so huddled together that they could do no fighting, but those that were disengaged from the mass did good fighting. The propor¬ tion of killed and wounded among the officers of the colored troops was unusually large. 1 General Mahone states that the number of prisoners taken in the crater was 1,101. 264 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’64 AND ’65. At the request of General Meade the President ordered a Court of Inquiry to examine into and report upon the facts and circumstances attending this affair, and also to report their opinion, and what officers, if any, were answerable for the want of success of the assault. The statements of most of the officers commanding troops before this Court were not very clear and precise as to their positions, and those of the enemy where the troops were in contact, and the accounts of the details of the contest, are confused. The opinion of this Court will be found in Appendix K. The Committee on the Conduct of the "War also inquired into the facts in the following winter. The principal facts being known, it was apparent that the assault failed from mismanagement and misbehavior on the part of several of the chief actors, unless,- indeed, which I do not believe, the troops were in such condition that the best management, the best handling, and the best leading would have been lost upon them. This in brief was the opinion of the Court. General Grant, when before the Committee on the Conduct of the War, said that General Meade made his orders most perfectly ; even at the time of giving his testi¬ mony, when all the facts were known, he did not think he could improve upon the order, and that if the troops had been properly commanded, and led in accordance with that order, we would have captured Petersburg, but that the opportun¬ ity was lost in consequence of the division commanders not going in with their men, but allowing them to go into the enemy’s intrenchments and spread themselves there, without going on further, thus giving the enemy time to recover from his surprise, collect his troops, and organize against them. He said further that General Burnside did not prepare his parapets and abatis as he was ordered to do, and that the preparation ordered was essential to success, and could have THE PETERSBURG MINE. 265 been made without its discovery by the enemy ; that had he been a corps commander entrusted with the duty General Burnside was charged with, he would have been upon the ground and seen that the preparations were made as ordered ; and that had he been a division commander, he would have gone in with his division ; and he added that there were a great many officers there (with the army) who would have done the same thing. General Ledlie left the army a short time after the mine affair, and resigned. According to the Return of the Army of the Potomac on the 20th of July, its effective force of infantry (enlisted men present for duty equipped) was 37,984 ; its effective force of cavalry, 10,280. The effective force of infantry of the Army of the James on the 31st of July was 24,009 ; of its cavalry, 1,880. The effective force of infantry of the Army of Northern Virginia on the 10tli of July was 39,295 ; of cavalry, 8,436. The Sixth Corps of the Army of the Potomac and the Sec¬ ond Corps of the Army of Northern Virginia were detached and are not included in the Returns. Johnson’s and Hoke’s divisions are included in the strength of the Army of North¬ ern Virginia.

## deep-bottom-august

Information received from various sources leading General Grant to believe that General Lee had detached three divi¬ sions of infantry and one of cavalry from Petersburg to rein¬ force General Early, he sent General Hancock with his corps and Gregg’s cavalry, together with the Tenth Corps, or part of it, under General Birney, to threaten Richmond from the north side of the James, in order to prevent further detach¬ ments from being made by Lee, and, if possible, to draw back those sent. General Hancock’s instructions were the same as those sent him on the 25th of July for his former movement, except as to the manner of crossing the James. Great care was taken to conceal the movement, and to give the impression that the troops were destined for Washing¬ ton. The Second Corps was marched to City Point,, and embarked on steamers which left City Point for the lower ponton bridge at Deep Bottom at ten o’clock at night of the 13th August. The cavalry and artillery went by land. It was expected that the troops would have disembarked, and the movements have begun by daylight, but the steamers were not adapted to the transportation of troops, and, owing to the shoal water, could not run near enough to the shore, and the tide was ebbing. This caused delay, and it was MOVEMENT TO THREATEN RICHMOND. 269 nine o’clock in the morning of the 14th before the corps had disembarked. The plan of operations was for Mott to move on the river- road (New Market), and drive the enemy into his intrenched line behind Bailey’s Creek, and beyond it, if practicable. General Barlow — General Gibbon being absent — with the First and Second Divisions, to move to Mott’s right and as¬ sault the enemy’s lines near the J ennings house (in the vicin¬ ity of Fussell’s mill), Gregg to cover the right flank. If Barlow carried the lines, he was to move to the left, uncover Mott’s front, and both were then to advance along the river road. As soon as the infantry uncovered the Charles City and Central (Darby) roads, Gregg was to move on the for¬ mer, make a dash on Richmond, if the chance offered, and if not, to destroy the railroads entering it. General Birney was to attack the enemy’s right near the ponton bridge above the mouth of Bailey’s Creek, and if successful, was to move up the Kingsland, Varina, and Mill roads, all of which are near the river bank. If this iflan could have been carried out, the enemy’s in- trenchments would have been turned, and we should have had possession of Chapin’s Bluff, the works of which, with those of Drury’s Bluff, were the chief fortifications guarding the river approach to Richmond. But General Field’s divi¬ sion had remained at the Deep Bottom or Bailey’s Creek in- trenchments, and General Wilcox’s at Chapin’s Bluff, and in fact, only Kershaw’s division of infantry had been sent to Early. Wilcox at once joined Field, and Mahone’s division, with Hampton’s and W. H. F. Lee’s cavalry divisions, were sent across the river to reinforce them, Dealing’s brigade being the only cavalry force left with Beauregard. Mott found the enemy in their strong position on Bailey’s Creek at the river road crossing. It was intended, General Hancock says, that General Barlow should attack near Fus- 270 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OP ’64 AND ’65. sell’s mill with the greater portion of two divisions, when by mere weight of numbers he would have broken through the enemy’s line, which at that point was thinly held ; but that he extended from Mott’s right to the vicinity of Fussell’s (a distance, according to the maps, of nearly a mile and a half), through thick woods, and about four o’clock assaulted with only one brigade (of Gibbon’s division), and made several unsuccessful attempts upon the enemy’s line ; that General Barlow’s personal example to the troops was all that could be expected or desired from his well-known gallantry and devotion to duty, but was of no avail. He adds that Gen¬ eral Barlow’s report reflects but little credit on the troops, and attributes their failure to respond to the leading of their commander, to the large number of new men among them, and the small number of experienced officers left to com¬ mand them.1 To meet General Barlow’s threatening move¬ ment, the enemy weakened their right, opposite Birney, to such an extent that he was able to seize a part of their line with trifling loss, capturing four guns, but could get no further. Gregg advanced well up the Charles City road. During the night the greater part of Birney’s command with Colonel Craig’s brigade of Mott’s division was massed on the right, in the vicinity of Fussell’s, and dispositions were made for him to attack in the morning. Gibbon’s division, Smythe commanding, was massed on Birney’s left,, Barlow’s near the fork of the Darby and Long bridge roads, and Mott’s on the river-road. Birney was to find the enemy’s left the next morning, and turn it, or, failing in that, to at¬ tack. Gregg was to cover the movement on the right. But General Birney took so wide a circuit to his right between the Darby and Charles City roads that it .was near night be- 1 See the remarks of General Gibbon, at the close of the previous chapter, upon the loss of officers and enlisted men in the division. MOVEMENT TO THREATEN RICHMOND. 271 fore lie reported that lie liad found the enemy’s line, but could not attack before morning. Birney was ordered to attack on the 16th, and Gregg, with Miles’s brigade of Barlow’s division, to move up the Charles City road to divert the enemy’s force from Birney. General Gregg advanced at an early hour to the vicinity of White’s tavern (seven miles from Richmond), driving the enemy’s advanced force of cavalry before him, their com¬ mander, General Chambliss, being killed. At ten o’clock General Terry, with his division of Birney’s corps, and Craig’s brigade of Mott’s division, together with a brigade of colored troops commanded by Brigadier-General Birney, advanced against the enemy’s works above Fussell’s mill, and after a severe contest carried them, capturing three colors and between 200 and 300 prisoners from Wilcox’s and Mahone’s divisions. Colonel Craig, who had just returned to the army from an absence on account of wounds received during the campaign, was killed. The enemy soon retook their line, Birney retaining only the advanced line of pits, the picket line. The wooded character of the country pre¬ vented personal examination by General Hancock, and it was some hours before he was fully informed of the state of affairs. Early in the afternoon the enemy’s cavalry, now in large force and supported by infantry, advanced upon Gregg and Miles and forced them back to and across Deep Creek. Miles, with his brigade and Brooke’s, formed on Birney’s right. It was now fully ascertained that the information upon which General Hancock had been sent to the north side of the James was erroneous, but he was retained there during the 17th, 18th, 19th, and 20th, until dark, keeping up a threatening attitude with constant skirmishing, though directed not to assault the enemy’s works. On the night of the 20th his command was withdrawn to their former posi- 272 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’64 AND ’65. tions before Petersburg and at Bermuda Hundred. General Kautz held the left of the army during General Gregg’s ab¬ sence. There was a sharp encounter on the afternoon of the 18th, when the enemy left their works above FusseH’s mill and attacked Birney ; they were repulsed, General Miles on the right aiding by an attack on their left flank. The casualties of the command, according to the statement furnished me from the Adjutant-General’s Office by Mr. J. W. Kirkley, taken by him from the nominal lists of casualties, were 321 killed, 1,840 wounded, 625 missing; total, 2,786.* I have not found a statement of the Confederate casualties. Among the severely wounded of the Second Corps, on the 15tli, was Colonel Macy, Twentieth Massachusetts, who was particularly mentioned by General Barlow for good conduct. He had only returned to his command on the morning of the 15th, having been absent, owing to a wound received during the campaign.1 2 While General Hancock was keeping the enemy occupied on the north bank of the James, General Warren was with¬ drawn from the lines, the Ninth Corps extending its left to occupy the place of the Fifth, and sent at four o’clock on the morning of the 18th, by a route well away from the enemy’s lines, to seize and hold the Weldon Railroad at the Globe tavern, about four miles south of the outskirts of Petersburg. As he would need reinforcements, Mott’s division was sent back on the night of the 18th to relieve a part of the Ninth Corps (now commanded by General Parke) in the intrench- ments, so that it might be sent to reinforce the Fifth Corps. On the night of the 14th and 15th, the Fifth Corps was re- 1 The casualties, according to the Tabular Statement found in Badeau’s volumes, ai-e 1,498 killed and wounded, 515 missing ; total, 2,013. 2 The effective force of infantry of the Army of the Potomac at this time was 33,684 ; of the Army of the James, 18,449.

## globe-tavern

While General Hancock was keeping the enemy occupied on the north bank of the James, General Warren was with¬ drawn from the lines, the Ninth Corps extending its left to occupy the place of the Fifth, and sent at four o’clock on the morning of the 18th, by a route well away from the enemy’s lines, to seize and hold the Weldon Railroad at the Globe tavern, about four miles south of the outskirts of Petersburg. As he would need reinforcements, Mott’s division was sent back on the night of the 18th to relieve a part of the Ninth Corps (now commanded by General Parke) in the intrench- ments, so that it might be sent to reinforce the Fifth Corps. On the night of the 14th and 15th, the Fifth Corps was re- 1 The casualties, according to the Tabular Statement found in Badeau’s volumes, ai-e 1,498 killed and wounded, 515 missing ; total, 2,013. 2 The effective force of infantry of the Army of the Potomac at this time was 33,684 ; of the Army of the James, 18,449. MOVEMENT TO THREATEN RICHMOND. 273 lieved by the Ninth in its intrenchments, and held ready to move. On the 16th, General Meade, satisfied, from the re¬ port of General Hancock, the observation of signal officers, and other sources of information, that Lee had but three infantry divisions in the Petersburg intrenchments, directed General Warren to move by daylight of the 17th to the Weldon Railroad near the intersection of the Vaughan road (about two miles from Petersburg), and if the enemy held their intrenchments weakly in that vicinity to endeavor to carry them and occupy the crest in the rear of their line op¬ posite the line held by the Ninth and Eighteenth Corps. Kautz was to move on his left flank. But General Grant, not being altogether satisfied as to the disposition of the enemy, preferred to wait for further developments, and the order was suspended. On the next day General Grant authorized sending the Fifth Corps and some cavalry to destroy as much of the Weldon Railroad as practicable, but not to as¬ sault fortifications ; the movement to be rather a reconnois- sance in force, during which General Warren might take advantage of any weakness of the enemy he discovered. In certain contingencies he was to remain on the road. Gen¬ eral Grant’s despatch concluded : “I want, if possible, to make such demonstrations as will force Lee to withdraw a portion of his troops from the Valley, so that Sheridan can strike a blow against the balance.” Accordingly General Warren was instructed, on the 17th, to move the next morning at four o’clock, and make a lodg¬ ment upon the Weldon Railroad, near the Gurley house (two miles south of the intersection of the Vaughan road), or as near the enemy’s lines as juacticable, and destroy the road as far south as possible. In addition to the destruction of the road, he was to consider the movement a reconnoissance in force, and take advantage of any weakness the enemy might betray. A brigade of cavalry under Colonel Spear 12* 274 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’64 AND ’05. was attached to his command. In the course of General Warren’s operations on the 18tli, it was determined to with¬ draw General. Mott’s division from Hancock in the night, to take the place of a part of the Ninth Corps, and that General Ord should extend his left, so that the two would enable Willcox’s, White’s, and finally Potter’s divisions to be sent to the left on the 19th to co-operate with General Warren. These three divisions of the Ninth Corps had altogether about 6, 000 men, but all these were not available. General Warren moved as directed, taking possession of the Weldon Railroad at the Globe tavern (some three miles west of our left), finding only Dealing’s cavalry brigade to oppose him. Griffin’s division was formed along the road looking west, and began its destruction. The day was oppressively hot and close, as were those that followed, and a heavy rain fell throughout the day. Ayres’s division moved up the railroad a mile or more from Griffin and to within half a mile of the Vaughan road intersection, having Hayes’s brigade on the right of the railroad, Dusliane’s Maryland brigade on his left moving by a flank. Crawford moved up on Ayres’s right, his right in dense woods with close underbrush. A large field of Indian corn in front of Crawford’s left and Ayres’s right hid everything from their view. Cutler’s division re¬ mained in rear in support. General Dearing had reported to General Beauregard the appearance of some force on the railroad, and General Hetli, with Davis’s and Walker’s brigades, was sent to his support. Moving out by the Vaughan road, about two o’clock General Heth made a sudden attack on Ayres’s left, caught the Maryland brigade unawares, and drove it back. Ayres, to prevent his line of battle being taken in flank, drew it back, but then advancing, drove the enemy from the ground. Crawford’s left, Lyle’s brigade, was partly engaged. War¬ ren’s loss was 544 killed and wounded, 392 missing — total, MOVEMENT TO THREATEN RICHMOND. 275 936. General Warren says the enemy’s loss must have ex¬ ceeded ours ; he left his dead and wounded on the ground. On the morning of the 19tli, General Bragg of Cutler’s division was sent with his brigade to the right of Crawford, to support him and establish connection by a skirmish line with the pickets of the Ninth Corps. There was great diffi¬ culty in doing this, the whole face of the country being covered with dense woods and underbrush, the wood-roads or cart-tracks through which were unknown to any of our troops. The line was probably imperfectly formed, but at best would constitute a very imperfect guard against an active enemy, acquainted in detail with the woods, which, at the distance of twenty paces, effectually screened everything from sight. Upon learning from General Beauregard that the Fifth Corps or a part of it was on the Weldon Railroad, General Lee sent Mahone’s and Lee’s divisions back to Petersburg. In the course of the day Willcox’s division, then White’s, and later in the afternoon. Potter’s, were sent to General Warren. General A. P. Hill, with Davis’s and Walker’s brigades under General Heth, and Weisiger’s, Colquitt’s, and Cling- man’s under General Mahone, with Lee’s cavalry and Peg- ram’s batteries, moved to the Vaughan road intersection. Heth was to attack Ayres, while Mahone, familiar with the woods, was to move concealed by it, some distance beyond Crawford’s right, break through Bragg’s skirmish line, and take Bragg and Crawford in rear. About half-past four in the afternoon General Mahone with his command formed in columns of fours, broke through Bragg’s skirmish line, faced to the right, and swept rapidly down toward General Warren’s right flank, taking all Crawford’s skirmish line and part of his line of battle in rear. His skirmish line fell back in the greatest confusion, and; in doing so, masked the fire of his line of battle, and forced it to fall back, together 276 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’64 AND ’65. with a part of the right of General Ayres’s division. Heth at the same time opened on Ayres’s centre and left ; General "Warren, reforming the parts of Ayres’s and Crawford’s divi¬ sions that were broken, brought them forward again and regained the ground temporarily lost, taking some prisoners and two flags. General Willcox was ordered up to attack ; and "White’s division was formed facing to the right, and engaging Colquitt’s brigade, drove it back and captured some prisoners. Mahone’s command fell back rapidly in great confusion to their intrenchments, carrying with them the parts of Warren’s command disorganized by the attack on their rear in the woods, and a large portion of the pickets. Heth made repeated attempts to drive Ayres back, but failed. General Beauregard, telegraphing General Lee, said Colquitt and Clingman in advancing through thick under¬ growth lost their organization and were ordered to their camps to rally them. Mahone’s brigade was also ordered into the lines. Heth’s two brigades remained. General Warren’s casualties were 382 killed and wounded, 2,518 missing, of which 1,805 were from Crawford’s divi¬ sion. General Hayes, of Ayres’s division, was among the captured. The enemy’s loss, General Warren says, must have been heavy in killed and wounded. General Cling¬ man was among the latter. The necessity of remaining stationary, even a single day, in a dense wood like that in which the greater part of Gen¬ eral Warren’s troops were posted, subjects a command to having some part of it taken suddenly in flank or rear, broken, thrown into confusion, and many of them captured. 1 1 General Warren was directed toward night on the 18th, if his contingent ob¬ jects could not be accomplished that night, to intrench as close up to the enemy's works as he could get; he was informed that he would be reinforced by the Ninth Corps the next day ; on the 19th he was instructed to maintain his hold on the railroad, at all hazards, and, if practicable, extend to connect with the Ninth Corps ; he was also to push the enemy back nearer their own lines. These were MOVEMENT TO THREATEN RICHMOND. 277 Satisfied that the enemy would renew their efforts to drive him from the railroad, General Warren on the 20th selected a position on it a mile or two in rear of his line of battle on the 19th, chiefly in open ground, and favorable for the use of artillery, and intrenched so as to have a considerable in¬ fantry reserve. On the 21st General Lee, finding our forces had been with¬ drawn from the north side of the James, directed Field to send two of his brigades to Petersburg, and General Hamp¬ ton to bring over his cavalry division (now commanded by General Butler). Wilcox’s division, in whole or in part, had already been moved to Petersburg. On the morning of the 21st, General A. P. Hill, with his own corps, part of Hoke’s division with Lee’s cavalry, at¬ tacked Warren, opening with thirty guns on his front and right flank, and at ten o’clock assaulting them, but was everywhere repulsed. Later Malione attempted an assault on the left flank, but the artillery broke his infantry before it came under musketry fire. In the assault, General War- ren says, General Hagood’s brigade being nearly surrounded close in on our works, every one thought they had surren¬ dered, and ceased firing, but when our troops advanced to bring them in their officers commenced firing. In the mixed condition of his men and the enemy s, his line could not fire, and many of the enemy escaped. However he cap¬ tured 517 officers and men and six flags, the larger part from Hagood’s brigade. The enemv’s loss in killed and wounded must have been se- v vere, as General Warren savs 211 of their dead were buried by his troops. General Sanders of Mahone’s division was among their killed. Warren’s own loss was 301 killed, too many conditions to impose upon him on ground of the character he was operat¬ ing in. Informed of the general object he was to accomplish, everything else as far as possible should have been left to his judgment. 278 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF 64 AND ’65. wounded, and missing. Colonel Dusliane, commanding the Maryland brigade, a gallant officer, was killed, General Cut¬ ler wounded. General Warren says the heat of the first day was excessive, and many fell out of the ranks, who were counted among the missing. An oppressive, warm rain fell all the time, making the side roads and fields almost impassable for artillery. The cavalry under General Spear were active in watching the left flank and rear ; Steadman’s brigade took part in the repulse of the enemy on the 21st. No further attempts upon General Warren’s position were made.

## reams-station-august

The extension of our left to the Weldon Railroad at the Globe tavern would not prevent the enemy from using that road as a line of supply up to a point within a day’s hauling by wagon to Petersburg. By destroying the road as far down as Rowanty Creek, about thirteen miles beyond War¬ ren’s left, they would be obliged to haul by wagon from Stony Creek Depot to Dinwiddie Court House, and thence by the Boydton plank-road to Petersburg, a distance of thirty miles at least. It was determined, therefore, to destroy the railroad as far as Rowanty Creek, and on the 22d, General Hancock with his Pirst and Second Divisions and Gregg’s cavalry was charged with this work, 1 and set about it at once, Gregg looking out for the enemy on the roads leading to the railroad from the left and to Hancock’s rear.2 By the night 1 His Third Division, Mott’s, held the intrenchments at and in the vicinity of the Jerusalem plank-road. 2 General Hancock says of his return march from Deep Bottom, that it was one of the most fatiguing and difficult performed by the troops during the campaign, owing to the wretched condition of the roads. The men arrived in camp greatly exhausted early in the morning of the 21st. After a very brief rest they were or¬ dered to the Strong house, and then, in the afternoon, to the Gurley house, in rear of General Warren’s position. * MOVEMENT TO THREATEN RICHMOND. 279 of the 24th they had accomplished the work as far as Ma¬ lone’s cross-road, about three miles south of Reams’s Sta¬ tion, and had still about five miles of the road to destroy. The two divisions were held at Reams’s Station during the night. But the Weldon Railroad was deemed to be too important as a line of supply to the Confederate forces to admit of this destruction without an attempt to prevent it, and General A. P. Hill 1 was assigned to this task, having with him the larger part of his own corps, together with Anderson’s bri¬ gade of Longstreet’s corps, and General Hampton with his two cavalry divisions. About dark of the 24th signal officers reported that there were large bodies of the enemy’s infantry, estimated at 8,000 or 10,000, passing south from their intrenchments by the Hali¬ fax and Vaughan roads. Both General Hancock and General Warren were advised of this, and that these troops were most probably directed against General Hancock. In the morning of the 25tli, General Hancock ascertained that the enemy’s cavalry was in force on his left, supported by infantry. The intrenchments at Re'ams’s Station were slight, and had been hastily thrown up by troops sent to "Wilson’s relief in June. They ran along the railroad about twelve hundred yards, having a return about eight hundred or one thousand yards long at each end, the returns being nearly at right angles with the railroad. This direction of the returns sub¬ jected the troops in them to a reverse artillery fire. The Second Division, commanded by General Gibbon, occupied the left half of these intrenchments ; the First Division, com¬ manded by General Miles, occupied the right half. 1 Hill’s infantry was McGowan’s, Lane’s, and Scales’s brigades of Wilcox’s divi¬ sion, Anderson's brigade of Field’s division, and Cock's and McRae’s brigades of Heth’s division, and two brigades of Mahone’s division. General Wilcox was first on the ground, and made the preliminary attacks with his own brigades and Anderson’s brigade. 280 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’64 AND ’65. About two p.m. General Wilcox made two spirited attacks on Miles’s front, both of which were quickly repulsed. About this time General Hancock received a despatch from General Meade informing him that Mott was directed (about half-past one o’clock) to send him all his available force (about 1,800 men) down the plank-road, taking a battery with it ; and as the railroad could not be further destroyed at pres¬ ent, he might be governed by his own judgment as to with¬ drawing his command to his former position, or remaining where he was. To this General Hancock rejdied that, al¬ though there was no necessity for his remaining there longer, since the presence of the enemy prevented further destruction of the railroad, and although it was more impor¬ tant that he should join Warren than remain there, yet he was then too closely engaged with the enemy to withdraw, but that he would do so at night. At two, or half-past two, General Meade ordered General Willcox’s division to move down the plank-road to General Hancock’s support. Gen¬ eral Meade notified General Hancock of this, saying all he apprehended was that the enemy might be able to interpose between him and Warren, and some more of Warren’s forces were held ready for contingencies. It was this apprehen¬ sion, no doubt, that induced him to send General Willcox by the plank-road instead of by the railroad. But by the plank-road his march was twelve miles long (about the same length as that of Mott’s troops), whereas had he gone by the railroad, which continued open until five o’clock, he would have had not more than five miles to march, would have got to Hancock by half-past four or five, and managing his movement skilfully, might have taken a paid of the enemy’s force in flank or rear. Meanwhile Hill was preparing his forces for attack, -which he began at five o’clock with a heavy artillery-fire that did little actual damage (that is, caused few casualties), but had MOVEMENT TO THREATEN RICHMOND. 281 the effect of shaking a portion of the command exposed to its reverse lire. The shelling continued about fifteen min¬ utes, when General Heth and General Wilcox, with Cook’s and Lane’s, McRae’s and Scales’s brigades, Anderson's and part of McGowan’s brigades supporting, assaulted a part of General Miles’s front, and, just at the time when a few min¬ utes’ longer resistance would have repulsed the enemy (who were thrown into a good deal of disorder by the severity of the lire they received, and the obstacles in the way of their advance), a part of the line, composed of troops recently raised, gave way in confusion. A small reserve brigade of the Second Division wTas ordered forward to fill the gap, but could neither be made to go forward nor to fire. McKnight’s batteiy was turned on the opening with good effect, but the enemy, running along under cover of the rifle-pits, captured the battery. Murphy’s brigade of the Second Division on the left of the break was driven back, and two more batteries fell into the hands of the enemy, after having been served with marked gallantry, and after losing a large proportion of officers, men, and horses. General Hancock ordered Gib¬ bon’s division to retake the position and the guns, but his troops responded feebly to the order, and fell back on re¬ ceiving a slight fire ; being now exposed to attack in reverse and on the flank they were obliged to occupy the reverse side of their breastworks. The moment was a critical one, and General Hancock says, woufd have ended still more disastrously but for the steadiness of a part of the First Division, and the fine conduct of its commander, General Miles,1 who succeeded in rallying a small force of the Sixty- first New York, and forming a line at right angles with the breastworks, swept off the enemy, and retook McKnight’s guns and a considerable portion of his own line. An at- 1 The historian must, in justice, add, — and the bearing of General Hancock him¬ self. 282 T13.E VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’64 AND ’65. tempt v/as made to get some of Gibbon’s troops to assist in tbirs operation, but their commanders reported that they could not be got to advance. Hampton with his dismounted cavalry now made an attack on the left, driving General Gib¬ bon’s division from its breastworks, the division offering very little resistance. Pressing on with loud cheers, Hamp¬ ton’s cavalry was met by a heavy flank fire from Gregg’s dis¬ mounted cavalry, which checked their advance. Then they turned upon Gregg, who was forced to fall back and form on the left of the new line which General Gibbon had estab¬ lished a short distance in rear of the intrenclnnents. General Miles’s troops, with Werner’s New Jersey artil¬ lery, held the road running to the Jerusalem plank-road until dark, checking every attempt of the enemy to advance be¬ yond the portion of the intrencliments they had captured. General Miles and General Gregg offered to retake their breastworks, but General Gibbon stated that his division could not retake theirs. As it was essential either to with¬ draw or to retake the lost works in order to protect the only communication open to the rear, and as no reinforcements had arrived by dark, the troops were then ordered to with¬ draw. Neither General Mott’s detachment nor General Willcox’s division reached the field. The enemy made no attempt to follow up their advantage, but returned to the Petersburg intrencliments, leaving Hampton’s cavalry at the Station. General Hancock says that if his troops had behaved as well as they had done before, he would have been able to defeat the enemy ; or had a force been sent down the rail¬ road to attack the enemy in flank, or had a small reserve been on the field at about six o’clock, it would have accom¬ plished the same end. He attributed the bad conduct of some of his troops to their great fatigue and to their heavy losses during the campaign, especially in officers. Besides, MOVEMENT TO THREATEN RICHMOND. 283 there were several regiments largely made up of recruits and substitutes ; one, General Hancock mentions particularly, being entirely new, and some of its officers unable to speak English. His casualties were 610 officers and enlisted men killed and wounded, the proportion of officers being unusually large ; his missing, 1,762, making a total of 2,372. Nine guns were lost. General A. P. Hill reported his loss to be 720, chiefly, if not almost entirely, killed and wounded. His captures, he stated, were 12 stands of colors, 9 guns, 10 caissons, 2,150 prisoners, 3,100 stands of small arms. The extent of the injurious effect of the large number of raw recruits recently received had not been anticipated, or reinforcements would have been sent to General Hancock early in the morning.

## fort-harrison

The two brigades of Field’s division, Anderson’s and Brat¬ ton’s, sent to Petersburg in the latter part of August, still remained there in the latter part of September, and the only troops in the Confederate intrenchments on the north side of the James besides the heavy artillery, the two brigades of the local defence, and Garey’s cavalry brigade, were Field’s three brigades, commanded by Benning, Law, and Gregg, and Colonel Fulton’s brigade of Johnson’s division. On the 28tli of September General Ord, commanding the Eighteenth, and General Bimey, commanding the Tenth Corps, were directed to cross the James in the night and ad¬ vance upon Richmond, the former by the Varina road, near the river, the latter by the New Market and Darby roads, Kautz with his cavalry on the Darby road. General Ord was to engage the enemy in his works at and near the river at Chapin’s Bluff, and prevent reinforcements being sent from the south side against Birnev’s column. He was to cross the James by a ponton bridge to be established during the early MOVEMENTS AGAINST LEE’S FLANKS. 285 part of the niglit at Aiken’s, two miles below Dutch Gap, where the Yarina road abutted on the river. General Birney was to cross at Deep Bottom by the upper ponton bridge ; General Kautz was to follow him. General Ord selected for the purpose 2,000 men from each of his First and Second divisions, one commanded by Briga¬ dier-General Stannard, the other by Brigadier-General Heck¬ man. His Third Division (colored), commanded by Briga¬ dier-General Paine, reported to Major-General Birney, whose column, composed of his First and Second divisions, under Generals Terry and Ames and, General William Birney ’s bri¬ gade of colored troops, was, with Paine’s addition, about 10,000 strong. General Ord from the Bermuda front, and General Birney from the Petersburg front, each left sufficient force in the intrencliments to maintain them. Both columns were over the river and moving on the routes designated by daylight, driving before them the enemy’s skirmishers and advance troops. Every precaution had been taken to keep the knowledge of the movement from the enemy and make the attack a surprise. By half-past seven General Ord had reached the open ground around Fort Harrison on Chapin’s farm, the strong¬ est work on the main line of intrencliments, about a mile and a quarter from the works on the river at Chapin’s Bluff, with which it was connected by more than one line of in- trencliments. While one line of advanced intrencliments held by the Confederate pickets or skirmishers ran from Fort Harrison in a northeast direction, the main line, soon after leaving the fort ran north about tliree-fourtlis of a mile to Fort Gilmer, which was also connected with the works on the river at Chapin’s Bluff by two intrenched lines. The main advanced line of Richmond intrencliments continued north from Fort Gilmer about tliree-fourths of a mile, then ran northeast to the Chickahominy at New Bridge. The pos- 286 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’64 AND ’65. session of Fort Harrison did not give possession of the de¬ fences at Chapin’s Bluff, but the possession of Fort Gilmer would give it. Ord having arrived upon the ground, the artillery of the fort and adjacent works opened upon him. The disposition for attack was quickly made by him. Stannard’s division, Gen¬ eral Burnham’s brigade leading, was to push forward on the left of the Yarina road, in column of divisions, over the open ground in front of the works, preceded by skirmishers. The distance it had to traverse was about fourteen hundred yards. General Heckman was to move his division, as soon as it came up, along the edge of the wood that skirted the Yarina road on the right, until opposite Fort Harrison, and then to attack it on the front toward the wood — the east front. This would envelop the work on the south and east. Reinforce¬ ments were now seen entering Fort Harrison from the enemy’s left. Stannard’s division advanced in quick time, and when they reached the foot of the hill which the work crowned, Burnham’s brigade ran up it under a severe fire of artillery and musketry, and after a very sharp encounter cap¬ tured the work with sixteen guns and a number of prisoners, including the Lieutenant-Colonel in command of it. Gen¬ eral Burnham was killed in the assault. Colonel Stevens, the officer who succeeded to the command of the brigade, was severely wounded, and his successor also. The division lost 594 killed and wounded during the day. The enemy was next driven from the intrenchments on the right and left of the Fort, including two lunettes six hundred yards apart, which were captured with their artillery, six guns. General Ord now endeavored to sweep down the captured intrenchments to the remaining redan, which was on the river bank, so as to secure the enemy’s ponton bridge, but this redan was covered by the Confederate gunboats, and by a battery in the rear, and the attempt was unsuccessful. In MOVEMENTS AGAINST LEE’S FLANKS. 287 making it General Ord was so severely wounded in the leg as to completely disable him, and the command devolved upon General Heckman. He, General Ord says, in advancing went too far into the woods ; his brigades became scattered, and were not available at the right time. While the fighting for the possession of the intrenchments adjoining Fort Har¬ rison was going on, General Ord says he saw through the smoke what he thought was General Heckman’s division en¬ tering Fort Gilmer, but they soon proved to be reinforce¬ ments of the enemy, and that work and the adjacent fines were now defended by Gregg’s and Benning’s brigades of Field’s division, and Fulton’s brigade of Johnson’s division. Soon after he had succeeded to the command of the corps, General Heckman attacked Fort Gilmer with his division but was repulsed with heavy loss. In the afternoon General Field arrived at the fort with Law’s brigade to aid in its de¬ fence. In the meantime Major-General Birney, driving the ad¬ vance troops of the enemy before him, advanced upon the New Market road, and with sharp encounters captured the skirmish or picket fine of intrenchments of the enemy, which has been mentioned as running from Fort Harrison in a northeast direction, and crossing the New Market and Darby roads. The main fine was from one-half to three- quarters of a mile in rear of this. Communication was es¬ tablished between the two columns, the Varina and New Market roads being about a mile apart here. General Grant, who had arrived at Fort Harrison, now in¬ formed Major-General Birney of Ord’s success, and that the Eighteenth Corps was ready to advance in conjunction with his (Birney’s) and directed him to push forward. Kautz had advanced along the Darby road, abreast of Birney, and Terry’s division was sent to his support. About three o’clock in the afternoon Major-General Bir- 288 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’64 AND ’65. ney with Ames’s division, and Brigadier-General Birney’s colored brigade, made a determined, but unsuccessful attack upon Fort Gilmer, the adjacent works, and the main line of intrenchments as far as the New Market road. The troops advanced half a mile or more under the fire of the enemy’s artillery, the greater part of Ames’s division crossing three ravines filled with fallen trees, but upon emerging from the third ravine, which was close upon the works, the fire of canister and musketry broke the line and forced it to fall back, part of it in some confusion. The leading troops of Birney’s colored brigade went forward to the attack on Fort Gilmer with great gallantry, jumped into the ditch of the fort, and endeavored to climb up on each other’s shoulders to the parapet, but nearly all that reached the ditch were killed. The assaults of to-day were made with great gallantry. As the left and rear of our forces on the north bank of the James were open to the enemy, Birney’s command was drawn into the New Market road, and slight intrenchments (afterward strengthened) were extended around them, and a line was run from Fort Harrison to the river, just above Dutch Gap. General Weitzel was placed in command of the Eighteenth Corps. General Ewell was in command of the Confederate troops on the north side, where he was joined by General Lee during the day. Bratton’s and Anderson’s brigades were brought from the Confederate extreme right by railroad, getting into position on the north side in the evening. Col¬ onel Montague, with four regiments of Pickett’s troops was also brought to the north side, and during the night of the 29th, Hoke, with Kirkland’s, Clingman’s, and Colquitt’s brigades, and Scales’s brigade of Wilcox’s division were brought over. Ten brigades in all were concentrated at and near Fort Gilmer, to assault Fort Harrison and its dependent MOVEMENTS AGAINST LEE’S FLANKS. 289 works on tlie following day. During the night and the next morning large parties were at work to make Fort Harrison an enclosed work. At two o’clock in the afternoon of the 30th General An¬ derson, commanding Longstreet’s corps, assaulted with Law, Anderson, Bratton, Clingman, and Colquitt. General Stan- nard, who held the fort, says of the attack, that twelve guns opened on his centre and left, the enemy’s infantry advanc¬ ing on his right; that he reserved his musketry fire until their lines emerged from the thick underbrush in front, and that he repulsed them with musketry alone. Quickly re¬ forming, they attacked a second, and a third time, but were repulsed each time, and with heavy loss, leaving a large number of killed and wounded on the ground. I can find no report from General Heckman or from Gen¬ eral Weitzel, who now commanded the Eighteenth Corps, of the part taken by General Heckman’s division in repulsing this assault. It undoubtedly took part in it, as did Birney’s colored brigade, the loss of which in the engagements of the 29th and 30th amounted to 434. General Stannard lost his arm in the second assault. He had four staff officers wounded in the two days, and mentions many of the officers of his command who were conspicuous for their gallantry. Tne losses of the enemy in this assault must have been severe. General Bratton says he had 377 killed and wounded out of his brigade of 1,165 enlisted men and 129 officers. The Tabular Statement of the ‘ ‘ Medical and Surgical History of the War ” puts the Confederate loss at 2,000. According to the Tabular Statement prepared in the Adju¬ tant-General’s Office, which I have heretofore referred to, our casualties in the two days were 394 killed, 1,554 wounded, and 324 missing — total, 2,272.

## peebles-farm

In co-operation with the movement against the Bichmond XII.— 13 290 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’64 AND ’65. defences on the north side of the James, just described, General Meade, under instructions from General Grant, made such semi-concealed changes of position of part of his troops on the 28th as to give the enemy the impres¬ sion, when they should discover the absence of much of the Tenth and Eighteenth Corps, on the morning of the 29tli, that we were concentrating on our left, and, in that way, would lead General Lee to delay reinforcing the real point of attack north of the James. In addition, the Army of the Potomac was got under arms at four o’clock in the morning of the 29th, General Warren and General Parke, each with two divisions of his corps ready to move. All the corps commanders made dispositions to withdraw from the intrencliments, leaving garrisons in the redoubts and en¬ closed batteries, and arranged for the further contingency of withdrawing entirely from the intrencliments.1 These dispositions undoubtedly had the effect of delaying the transfer of Confederate troops to meet the attack of Ord and Birney. But there was another object that General Grant had in view, which was, should the enemy draw off such a force from the defences of Petersburg as, in General Meade’s opinion, would justify his moving against the South Side Railroad or Petersburg, he was to do so. If he got posses¬ sion of the road he was to maintain it at all hazards, reinforc¬ ing from the troops left in the intrencliments. It was not deemed advisable by General Grant that Gen¬ eral Meade should move on the 29tli, the reduction of the - 1 Gregg was sent to the crossing of Hatcher's Run, by the Vaughn road, and tip that road and the Squirrel Level road to the vicinity of the Peebles and Peg- ram farms. At the former point the enemy had a redoubt at the termination of the intrenchments they had constructed and were still going on with. This in- trenchment was nearly parallel with the Weldon Railroad, and joined the Peters¬ burg intrenchments. Peebles’s farm was two miles west of our intrenchments on pie Weldon Railroad. The enemy was found in position at all these points, and General Gregg was attacked by General Hampton upon his return march. MOVEMENTS AGAINST LEE’S FLANKS. 291 enemy’s force around Petersburg not seeming to justify it that day, nor until eight o’clock in the morning of the 30th. The object then in view was to secure the junction of two roads coming from the southwest, the Squirrel Level, and the Poplar Spring Church roads. This junction was at the Peebles farm, where a redoubt terminated, the Confederate intrenchment covering the roads. From that point an ad¬ vance was to be made in a northwest direction toward the Boydton plank-road and South Side Railroad, if the condi¬ tions would justify it. General Warren, with Griffin’s and Ayres’s divisions, was directed against the junction of the roads ; General Parke, with Willcox’s and Potter’s divisions, was to follow him, form on his left, and both were then to advance toward the Boyd¬ ton road. General Gregg was to move on the Vaughan and other roads on our left. Griffin’s troops advanced against the Peebles intrench- men ts, passing over six hundred yards of open ground, and carried them, the infantry parapets being held by infantry and Dealing’s dismounted cavalry, and flanked by artillery in the redoubt. Colonel Welch, commanding the Sixteenth Michigan, wras killed on the parapet of the work. The loss otherwise was small. A gun and some prisoners were taken. General Ayres carried the redoubt on the right of Griffin. These two captures gave us the whole of the line of intrencli- ment. General Parke advanced Potter’s division to support Griffin on his left, and as soon as Willcox got up, moved for¬ ward with his two divisions through the Pegram farm in a northwest direction toward the Boydton road, Willcox on Potter’s left in support, as General Parke expected Griffin’s division to support liis right. The force holding the Petersburg intrenchments was Hill’s corps and Johnson’s division, with Hampton’s two cavalry divisions and Hearing’s brigade, all under the command of 292 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’64 AND ’65. General Hill, General Beauregard having been sent south to take charge of affairs in that direction. The main line of Petersburg intrenchments had been extended in a southwest direction to, or nearly to, Hatcher’s Run, covering the Boyd- ton plank road and the South Side Railroad. To meet the advance of Meade, General Hill threw out Heth’s and Wilcox’s divisions as far as the Jones house, on the road leading to the Pegram farm. Potter, passing through a wood, found himself within eight hundred yards of the enemy’s main line of intrenchments, and quite near Heth’s and Wilcox’s troops, which he advanced to attack. He was met by an advance on their part, attacked vigor¬ ously, his right outflanked, and his division driven back in some confusion, as well as one of Willcox’s brigades. But a new line was at once established by General Parke with Willcox’s troops, which, with Griffin’s line on the right, put a stop to the enemy’s advance. General Parke lost 485 killed and wounded, and heavily in prisoners. Hampton, on the Confederate right, shared in the captures. Mott’s division arrived on Parke’s left in the afternoon of the 1st of October, and on the next day General Parke ad¬ vanced, with artillery and musketry firing, and established a line of intrenchments about a mile from the enemy’s. This was connected with the Weldon Railroad works, and was extended to the rear on the left, having its proper number of redoubts and batteries. The casualties in this operation were, according to the Table of the Adjutant-General’s Office, 661 killed and wounded, 1,348 missing ; total, 2,009. 1 1 General Parke, in his report of this affair, remarks: “ The large amount of raw material in the ranks has diminished greatly the efficiency of the corps. All the new material, good as well as bad, requires instruction and disciplining. The drafted and substitute recruits are entirely different from those formerly ob¬ tained. MOVEMENTS AGAINST LEE’S FLANKS. 293 The Table of the Medical Department is evidently errone¬ ous. The Confederate loss I have never seen stated except in that Table, which puts it down at 800 wounded. Appar¬ ently this is as erroneous as the numbers it gives for our loss.

## darbytown-october

Kautz, with 1,700 men and two batteries, looking out from the right of the force on the north side of the James, held the Darby road at the old Confederate line of intrenchments, which had been captured on the 29th of September. There was a swamp on his right, which ran around his rear, cross¬ ing the Darby road. To drive him from this threatening position, Field and Hoke, with the larger part of their divi¬ sions, were brought over to the Darby road on the night of the 6th of October, and at sunrise of the 7th Field ad¬ vanced upon him, with Anderson’s and Bratton’s brigades, while Gary’s cavalry, supported by. Lane, moved by the Charles City road around his right. He could not stand up against the attack of the two infantry brigades in his front, and in falling back on the narrow road, through the swamp in his rear, found Gary’s cavalry, or part of it, there, and thus lost eight of his guns. Kautz succeeded in crossing over to the New Market road and getting under cover of the Tenth Corps, which was moving out to his assistance, but losing, besides the guns, 72 killed and wounded, and 202 missing. Field, following Kautz passed over to the New Market road, through the dense swamps of one of the chief affluents of the White Oak Swamp, and attacked the right of the Tenth Corps, which had moved out to Kautz’s assistance, but was repulsed, and fell back to his intrenchments. In this attack, General Gregg, commanding the Texan brigade, a gallant commander of a gallant brigade, was killed, and General Bratton was wounded. On the 13th of October, General Butler made a re- 294 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’64 AND ’65. connoissance in force of the enemy’s intrenchments on the Darby road, and found them to be of a formidable character, with slashing in front of the greater part. Colonel Pond’s brigade of Ames’s division, Tenth Corps, assaulted them at a point where there was no slashing, but was repulsed.

## boydton-plank-road

On the 24th of October General Grant wrote General Meade : “ Make your preparations to march out at an early hour on the 27th to gain possession of the South Side Railroad, and to hold it, and fortify back to your present left. In commencing your advance, move in three columns, exactly as proposed by yourself in our conversation of last evening, and with the same force you proposed to take. Parke, who starts out nearest to the enemy, should be instructed that, if he finds the enemy intrenched, and their works well manned, he is not to attack, but confront him and be prepared to advance promptly when he finds that by the movement of the other two columns to the right and rear of them they begin to give way,” etc. According to the information we had, the Petersburg in¬ trenchments had been extended to Hatcher’s Run at a point two miles above the Vaughan road crossing of that stream and about a mile above Armstrong’s mill, but were in a very incomplete condition. They did not cross or extend up the run. At Burgess’s mill, where the Boydton plank-road crossed Hatcher’s Run, there were emplacements for artillery and some infantry parapets, but no line of intrenchments, nor were there any further up the run. The Confederate Petersburg lines from the Appomattox to Battery 31 (west of the Jerusalem plank-road) were held by Johnson’s division. General Hill held the remainder of the line, Heth on the right, Wilcox on the left, Malione in reserve. Hampton’s two divisions of cavalry (Lee’s and Butler’s) with Dealing’s brigade were on the right flank. The general plan of the contemplated movement was to leave sufficient force in the redoubts to hold them, and with MOVEMENTS AGAINST LEE'S FLANKS. 295 from 30,000 to 35,000 effective force of infantry, a due pro¬ portion of artillery, and Gregg’s division of cavalry, about 3,000 strong, to move to our left. Hancock, with Gregg on liis left, to cross Hatcher’s Run by the Vaughan road, move to the Boydton plank-road past Dabney’s mill, thence by the White Oak road to its intersection with the Claiborne road, recross Hatcher’s Run, near there (two miles above Bur¬ gess’s mill), and then march to the South Side Railroad, striking it at a point about three miles east of Sutherland Station. General Parke, with the Ninth Corps, was first to endeavor to surprise the incomplete intrenchments near Hatcher’s Run at daylight (it was thought they were thinly held), but failing in that, to remain confronting them while the Second and Fifth Corps moved to turn their right. General Warren, with the Fifth Corps, was to move to the vicinity of Armstrong’s mill, support General Parke, and if his attack was successful, to follow it up, moving on the left of the Ninth Corps. If General Parke did not break the enemy’s line, General Warren was to cross Hatcher’s Run, and endeavor to turn the enemy’s right by recrossing the run above the Boydton plank-road bridge (Burgess’s mill bridge), keeping on the right of Hancock, and, being over the stream, to open the Burgess’s mill bridge.1 On the 25th General Hancock withdrew Mott’s and Gib¬ bon’s divisions from the intrenchments and massed them in a concealed position in rear of the lines (General Egan commanding Gibbon’s division in the absence of that officer). Miles’s division held the Petersburg line from the Appomattox River to Battery 24, half way between the Jerusalem plank-road and the Weldon Railroad. General 1 The troops were to take four days’ rations. The supply and quartermaster’s trains were to be sent to City Point. Pack animals were to be used instead of light wagons. The ammunition and other wagons that were to be taken with the troops were not to accompany them on the morning of the 27th. 296 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’64 AND ’65. Hancock took witli him an effective infantry force of about 10,000. On the 26tli Mott and Egan were moved along the rear line of intrenchments to the vicinity of the "Weldon Railroad. General Parke assigned 1,500 men to hold his intrench¬ ments ; General Warren 2,500 under the command of General Baxter, to hold his. Each had about 11,000 effec¬ tive infantry.1 The columns were to move at half-past three o’clock in the morning of the 27th. It was a dark, rainy morning, and the movement in the wooded ground was necessarily delayed, so that the enemy were not taken by surprise. General Parke and General Warren, driving in their pickets, found their intrenchments to consist of breastworks, with abatis and slashing, and held with such force as not to justify an attempt to carry them. Griffin was in front of the extreme right of the enemy’s intrenchments, his skirmishers extend¬ ing to Hatcher’s Bun. This was about nine o’clock. Being on the ground and satisfied that an assault here should not be made, and having learnt by a despatch from General Hancock that he had crossed Hatcher’s Bun, and consequently that the Dabney mill road was clear for Gen¬ eral Warren’s troops to follow, and considering it important that a portion, at least, of his command should cross, and communicate with Hancock as soon as possible, I directed him at nine o’clock to cross some of them at once at Arm¬ strong’s mill, and communicate with General Hancock. I then rode to meet General Meade and General Grant, who were coming out, and inform them of the condition of affairs, and of the directions I had given General Warren. After some consultation when General Grant and General Meade got upon the ground, General Warren was directed 1 General Warren says that -3,913 of his men had never fired a musket, and that 1,649 of them were ignorant of the manual. MOVEMENTS AGAINST LEE’S FLANKS. 297 to send a division across Hatcher’s Kun, place its right flank on the stream, move up it supporting Hancock (the Dabney mill road was but a mile distant from the run), and upon arriving opposite the right of the enemy’s intrenchments, which Griffin was fronting, to attack it in flank, and endeavor to drive the enemy from the line, and open the way for the rest of the Fifth Corps and for the Ninth Corps. Crawford’s division was assigned to this duty as it was nearest at hand. Griffin, with Ayres supporting, was left on the north side of the run, Ayres sending his Maryland brigade to join Craw¬ ford. General Parke’s corps set about intrenching in their front and back to our works. It was a quarter of twelve o’clock when the head of Craw¬ ford’s division crossed the run, General Warren accom¬ panying it. His line was formed with the right of Bragg’s brigade on the run, Hoffman’s brigade covering the left, and the Maryland brigade in reserve. At half-past twelve Crawford began to advance, but the dense low growth of wood, and the crookedness of the stream caused serious delay. A large tributary was mistaken for the main stream and caused still further embarrassment, the trees in and along it having been slashed by the enemy, making it very difficult to cross. As a guide for the movement General Griffin was ordered at one o’clock to set his skirmish line at ’work, and be ready to take advantage of any effect Craw¬ ford’s oj)erations might have. After getting over the tribu¬ tary stream, General Crawford began skirmishing. At four o’clock he was at the right flank of the enemy’s works that Griffin was fronting, and the firing became sharp. It had taken all that time to move a mile and a half up the stream. The crossing of the run was naturally difficult ; the enemy had dammed it, and had slashed timber in it and on its banks, and were very active in opposing Crawford’s prog¬ ress. It was difficult to communicate with him. The forest 13* 298 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’G4 AND ’65. was dense and of great extent, and the troops were get¬ ting separated and lost, and to enable him to get his divi¬ sion in order General Warren directed General Crawford to halt it and reform, but, at the same time, to press forward with his skirmishers. Between General Crawford and the open ground of the Boydton plank-road there was a thicket forest of more than a mile, and there was no road or path leading to it known to any one, or that had been come across. The Dabney’s mill road was a mile distant on Craw¬ ford’s left. The head of General Hancock’s infantry column was at the Vaughan road crossing of Hatcher’s Run by daylight. The ford had been obstructed by fallen trees. Smyth’s brigade of Egan’s division crossed the stream waist-deep, and carried the rifle-pits on the opposite bank in a gallant manner. Egan, followed by Mott, moved past Dabney’s mill (the road being only a narrow track used for carting lumber), and entered the Boydton road about a mile south of Burgess’s mill. Gregg, in the meantime, crossed Hatcher’s Run below the infantry, moved along the Vaughan, and then the Quaker road, encountering part of Hampton’s troops, and united with the infantry on the Boydton road soon after they entered it. When Hancock emerged from the thicket forest into the open ground of the plank-road he was met' by the enemy’s artillery fire from Burgess’s tavern and from the White Oak road on his left. But Beck’s artillery soon silenced that of the enemy at the tavern. Egan was sent along the Boydton road toward the Burgess’s mill bridge to drive the enemy across the run, and Mott’s division was set in motion for the White Oak road, Egan to follow him as soon as he was re¬ lieved by the cavalry. At this time, about one o’clock, Gen¬ eral Hancock received instructions from General Meade to halt at the plank -road, and in compliance with this instruc- MOVEMENTS AGAINST LEE’S FLANKS. 299 tion General Mott formed De Trobriand’s brigade looking toward tlie Claiborne road bridge, while General Egan with Smyth’s brigade drove the enemy’s troops opposing them here (some of Hampton’s dismounted cavalry) over the run. A despatch to General Hancock now notified him that Craw¬ ford’s division was feeling its way up along the south bank of the run, and cautioned him against the vacant space be¬ tween his right and the Fifth Corps which he was requested to assist in closing by extending his right. General Meade and General Grant now came upon the ground. General Egan, by Hancock’s order, deployed his division across the plank-road at the intersection of the White Oak road, having two of his brigades on the right of it, one on the left, and sent two regiments to his right as far as they could reach to connect with Crawford, whom Major Bingham, of Hancock’s staff, reported to be three-quarters of a mile on the right. In the meantime the enemy placed nine guns in position on the north bank in front of Egan, and five on the White Oak road, from which an annoying fire was opened, but replied to effectively by four guns of Beck’s Battery, Fifth Artillery. Upon the return of Major Bingham from General Craw¬ ford, General Grant and General Meade left the field, direct¬ ing General Hancock to hold his position until morning, and then fall back by the route he had come. The South Side Railroad was still six miles distant from the leading corps. It was essential to the success of the operation that the ob¬ jective points should have been reached during the first day. That had not been done. In view of the character of the country our starting-points were too distant from our points of destination ; we were ignorant of the topography of the country to be passed over. It was evident that we must ex¬ tend our intrenchments more to the left before advancing to the South Side Railroad, so as to give us more and better 300 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’61 AND ’(35. roads to move tlie infantry columns on. In our present movement we had had but a narrow cart track on wThich to pass two corps from the Vaughan to the Boydton road, a distance of three or four miles. Had the Fifth Corps fol¬ lowed Hancock closely over to the Boydton road by the Dab¬ ney saw-mill road, as originally intended, the result might have been more favorable. We could have carried the high ground on the north bank of Hatcher’s Bun at Burgess’s mill easily and thus have turned Lee’s right, and most prob¬ ably have secured a footing on the South Side Bailroad. But the attempted movement up Hatcher’s Bun failed of any favorable result. It kept two-thirds of our force at the right of Lee’s intrenchments substantially doing nothing, when the two-tliirds should have been at the movable end of the column. Only Wilcox’s division was retained in the Confederate intrenchments by the presence of the Ninth and Fifth Corps in front of them. As the character of our movement developed itself the enemy concentrated Hampton’s cavalry and Hetli’s and Ma- lione’s divisions about the Boydton crossing of Hatcher’s Bun ; Hampton was so placed as to attack Hancock’s left flank and rear, while Ketli, whose most distant troops had been but four miles from the bridge, opposed his advance toward Petersburg on the Boydton road, and Mahone was sent to cross Hatcher’s Bun about a mile below Burgess’s mill, and following a narrow wood-road, make a sudden at¬ tack from the edge of the thick wood upon Hancock’s right flank.1 At the time the attack was made reinforcements of infantry were seen moving down the Boydton plank-road to Hetli’s support. General Hancock, knowing the views of General Meade and General Grant, determined to gain possession of the « 1 According to the Return of October 20, 1S64, the effective force of Hill’s three infantry divisions was 13,638; of Hampton's cavalry, 5,453. MOVEMENTS AGAINST LEE’S FLANKS. 301 high ground north of Hatcher’s Run in the vicinity of Bur¬ gess’s mill, with Egan’s division, supported by McAllister’s brigade of Mott’s division. De Trobriand’s brigade was on the left of the plank-road, near the intersection of the Dab¬ ney’s mill road, and looking toward the upper bridge, Ker- win’s brigade of dismounted cavalry on his left. Pierce’s brigade of Mott’s division was supporting Metcalf’s section of Beck’s battery on the east side of the Boydton road, posted on a ridge half way between Egan and De Trobriand ; these two guns and Pierce’s brigade looked north toward the run. Constant firing, General Hancock says, had been heard on his right, which was attributed to Crawford’s advance. Becoming uneasy at this firing, General Hancock sent two regiments of Pierce’s brigade well into the wood to ascertain what was there, and despatched Lieutenant Stacey of his staff to inform General Crawford that he was about to as¬ sault the bridge. In fact at that time his artillery near the bridge had opened, and the advance of the storming party had pushed across it, secured the bridge, and captured a gun. But at that moment, about four o’clock, a volley of musketry immediately on his right, followed by a continuous fire, left no doubt that the enemy was advancing on his right. Pierce’s small force in the woods was soon overrun, and the enemy, Mahone’s division, broke out of the woods just where Metcalf’s section was placed. Changing front, Metcalf fired a few rounds ; Pierce’s brigade endeavored to change front, but was driven back in confusion to the plank-road where it rallied ; the section of artillery (two guns) fell into the hands of the enemy. At the first sound of this attack General Hancock sent Major Mitchell of his staff to General Egan with orders for 1 General Warren says that he must have been with General Crawford when this attack was made on Hancock, but that the wood was so dense that no sound of the musketry reached him. 302 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’64 AND ’65. him to desist from the assault of the bridge, face to the rear, and attack the enemy with his whole command. When Major Mitchell reached General Egan, he found him, “ with the instinct of the true soldier,” General Hancock says, already in motion to attack the force in his rear. Malione pushed rapidly across the ridge on which Metcalfs section and Pierce’s brigade had been posted, rested his right across the Boydton road, faced south and began firing upon De Trobriand and Kerwin. They had been quickly formed across the Boydton road just in front of the Dabney’s mill road, and with Roder’s and Beck’s batteries opened on Ma- lione. General Egan swept down upon his flank with Smyth’s, Willet’s, and McAllister’s brigades, De Trobriand and Kerwin advancing against him at the same time. Ma- lione was swept from the field, and driven into the woods in complete confusion, losing two colors and several hundred prisoners. Metcalf’s two captured guns were retaken. Almost simultaneously with Malione’s attack Hampton commenced pressing Hancock’s left and rear, and Mott’s skirmishers in the direction of the Claiborne bridge, and Gregg’s cavalry were sharply engaged. The enemy in front had scarcely been driven from the ground when the firing in the rear be¬ came so brisk that General Hancock was obliged to send Gregg all his cavalry. The attack on Gregg, General Han¬ cock says, was made by five brigades of Hampton’s cavalry, and was pressed vigorously until after dark, but that Gregg held his own. Upon learning what had occurred, General Meade directed General Warren to send a division to Hancock’s support, but it was dark by the time it (Ayres’s division) reached the Armstrong mill crossing. As reserve ammunition could not be got forward to Hancock by daylight the next morning, together with the troops with which it was deemed desirable to reinforce him, it was concluded that he should withdraw MOVEMENTS AGAINST LEE’S FLANKS. 303 that night, which was done, the infantry marching by the Dabney’s mill road, the cavalry by the Quaker and Vaughan roads. Having an insufficient number of ambulances, 250 wounded were left in charge of surgeons at the Rainey house, and on the field. It rained heavily all night. On the 28th, the troops were withdrawn to their former positions.1 Hancock’s loss, according to his report, was 123 killed, 734 wounded ; total, killed and wounded, 857. His missing were 625. General Hancock mentions in high terms the conduct of General Egan, General Mott, General Gregg, and several other officers.2 General Warren’s loss was 211 killed and wounded, and 48 missing.3 I have not been able to find any Confederate report or ac¬ count of this day’s operations on our left, except two tele¬ graphic despatches of General Lee from Chapin’s Bluff, which are on the files of the War Department. (See foot note 4 for 1 In the course of the afternoon of the 27th, some of the enemy got on the Dab¬ ney’s mill road, and captured some ambulances, but were themselves subsequently captured with the ambulances. Staff officers on that road and in the forest sud¬ denly found themselves prisoners within the enemy’s lines, but most, if not all, escaped. Parties of the enemy became so bewildered in the woods that 200 of them strayed into Crawford’s lines and were captured. 2 By some neglect seventy men of the First Minnesota under Captain Farwell were left on the field, and remained there until nine o’clock on the morning of the 28th, when they withdrew safely, though followed by the enemy’s cavalry. 3 One of Warren’s staff, with a few men, went to the Boydton plank-road at eight o'clock on the morning of the 28th, finding only cavalry pickets there. 4 “ October 27 th. — General Hill reports that the enemy crossed Bowanty Creek below Burgess's mill, and forced back the cavalry. In the afternoon General Heth attacked, and at first drove them, but found them in too strong force. Afterward the enemy attacked and was repulsed. They still hold the plank-road at Burgess’s mill. Heth took colors and some prisoners.” “ October 28 th. — General Hill reports that the attack of General Heth upon the enemy on the Boydton plank-road, mentioned in my despatch last evening, was made by three brigades under General Mahone in front, and by General Hamp¬ ton in rear. Mahone captured 400 prisoners, three stands of colors, and six pieces of artillery. The latter could not be brought off, the enemy having posses¬ sion of the bridge. In the attack subsequently made by the enemy, General Ma- 304 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’64 AND ’65. these despatches.) The Confederate losses must have at least equalled ours.

## fair-oaks

In support of the movement to the left, General Butler, having been directed to make a demonstration on the north side of the James, sent part of the Eighteenth Corps, under General Weitzel, to make a demonstration on the Williams¬ burg road north of the White Oak swamp, and part of the Tenth Corps, under General Terry, to demonstrate on the Charles City and Darby roads. Under cover of General Terry’s demonstration, General Weitzel was to push through the White Oak swamp at Hobson’s crossing, and move up the Williamsburg road to the Confederate line of intrench- ments. The plan vTas carried out successfully, General Weitzel arriving at the road near the Seven Pines battlefield at one o’clock in the afternoon. Moving up the road toward Bicli- mond, at the end of a mile and a half he found himself in front of the Confederate intrencliments, which, upon exam¬ ination, he found to be thinly held by a small body of dis¬ mounted cavalry with three guns, and determined to attack, believing he could easily carry them. At the same time he sent Colonel Holman, commanding the First Brigade, Third Division, colored troops, across the York Biver Bailroad to find the enemy’s left and turn it. In the meantime the enemy were not idle. On the 19th of October General Longstreet returned to his corps and took command on the north side of the James and on the Bermuda Hundred front. North of the James he had the hone broke three lines of battle, and during the night the enemy retreated, leav¬ ing his wounded and more than 250 dead on the field. Later. — The total number of prisoners, according to General Hill’s report, is 700.” According to the Table of the Adjutant- General’s Office, our casualties were 143 killed, 653 wounded, and 488 missing. The errorB of this table, as heretofore ex¬ plained, are in the numbers of the wounded. Its numbers of killed and missing are, undoubtedly correct. MOVEMENTS AGAINST LEE’S FLANKS. 305 troops known as the Local Defences, under General Ewell, Hoke’s division, Field’s division, and Gary’s cavalry brigade. These troops, in the order mentioned, held from the river to the White Oak swamp. Pickett’s division still held the Bermuda Hundred front. Longstreet perceived on the morning of the 27tli that General Butler was moving against his left, and anticipated that the heavy skirmishing from the New Market to the Charles City road was designed, because of its long continu¬ ance, not to precede an assault, but to cover an attempt to turn his left flank by pushing a column through the White Oak swamp, taking possession of the unoccupied works on the Williamsburg and Nine Mile or New Bridge roads, and moving down them. He accordingly directed Field and Hoke to move to the left along the works, leaving only skirmishers in them, and sent General Gary to the Nine Mile road to hold the works there. Moving rapidly, the left of Field had just crossed the Williamsburg road, when Weitzel’s skirmishers, preceding his line of battle, were ad¬ vancing to attack. General Weitzel had for his attacking force, Colonel Cullen’s brigade of his First Division, which was formed in line of battle on the right of the Williamsburg road, sup¬ ported by the First and Third brigades, General Marston commanding the division. On the left of the road the at¬ tacking force was Colonel H. S. Fairchild’s brigade of the Second Division in line of battle, the division commanded by General Heckman. This force, preceded by skirmishers, advanced to the attack over open ground, at half past three o’clock, ] mt instead of the fire of a thin line, were met with a heavy musketry fire, together with that of some guns. They got close to the works, but were repulsed with con¬ siderable loss in killed, wounded, and missing, each brigade losing three colors. 306 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’04 AND ’65. Colonel Holman crossed the railroad and upon the New Bridge road came upon a salient held by some of Gary’s men, dismounted, the last occupied part of the intrencli- ments. This a part of the brigade charged upon and cap¬ tured, taking two guns, but Gary then came upon the field, and charging along the line of works, took Holman’s men in Hank, recaptured the guns, and forced Holman to fall back. As they fell back, Colonel Holman received General Weitzel’s order to return to his command. Colonel Kiddoo was severely wounded in this affair while leading his regiment. Shortly after dark General Weitzel began to withdraw to the Charles City road, the rain, darkness, mud, and narrow road making it very fatiguing for the troops, who were marching all night. At four o’clock in the afternoon, General Terry was ordered to press his demonstration, and, if the chance oc¬ curred, to cany the enemy’s intrencliments. This was at¬ tempted, but the whole attack was repulsed. The loss in the two commands is not given in the reports. By the Table of the Adjutant General’s Office it was 516 killed and wounded, and 587 missing. Being covered by intrencliments, the casualties of General Longstreet’s command must have been much less. On the Williamsburg road he reports his loss (Field’s division and Gary’s brigade) to have been 64 killed, wounded, and missing.

## winter-1864-65

The Army of Northern Virginia now had an effective force of infantry amounting to 50, 000. 1 1 Return of December 20, 1864 : Officers. Enlisted men. Longstreet’s, First Corps (including Hoke’s division). 1,503 20,010 Gordon’s, Second Corps . 505 8,179 Hill’s. Third Corps . 1,097 15,274 Anderson (Johnson’s division only) . 504 6,692 Total . 3,609 50,155 Wise’s brigade is not included in the above numbers. Wise’s brigade in the Re¬ turn of December 20th, and that of November 30th, and in Returns preceding it, is THE WINTER OF 1864-65. 309 In December the Twenty-fourth Corps was organized from the white troops of the Army of the James, and the Twenty- fifth Corps from the colored troops of that army, to which Ferrero’s division of the Ninth Corps was added. General Ord was in command of the Twenty-fonrth Corps ; General Weitzel of the Twenty-fifth. The Tenth and Eighteenth Corps were discontinued. In January General Terry was detached from the Army of the James, having with him General Ames’s division and Col¬ onel J. C. Abbott’s brigade of the Twenty-fourth Corps, and General Chas. J. Paine’s division of the Twenty-fifth Corps, in all a force of 8,000 infantry, to take part with the Navy in the attack on Fort Fisher at the northern entrance to the Cape Fear Biver. When that was accomplished, he was to unite with the Twenty-third Corps under Major-General Scho¬ field. This corps was to be brought from the West, and after taking Wilmington on the Cape Fear Biver, was to join Gen¬ eral Sherman when he should advance northward from Sa¬ vannah. In the same month General Hoke with his division (wliosa effective strength was 5,517) was sent to aid in the defence of Fort Fisher and Wilmington. During the winter General Butler’s cavalry division (for¬ merly Hampton’s) was allowed to return to South Carolina to obtain fresh horses, and fill up the ranks. General Hampton at the same time was placed on duty in the South. not included in Johnson’s division, but is reported separately as the First Military District. November 10th, the effective force of Johnson was 6,494, the effective force of Wise 2,271. November 30th, Johnson 6,504 ; Wise, 2,345. December 20th, Johnson, 6,692 ; Wise, 520. It is not stated where the other three-fourths of Wise's brigade were on December 20th. Evidently they are not included in Johnson’s division.

## hatchers-run

The winter of 1864-65 was one of nnusual severity, mak- */ * ing the picket duty in front of the intrenchments very se¬ vere. It was especially so to the Confederate troops with their threadbare, insufficient clothing, and meagre food, chiefly corn bread made of the coarsest meal. Meat they had but little of, and their Subsistence Department was ac¬ tually importing it from abroad. Of coffee or tea and sugar, they had none except in the hospitals. It is stated that in a secret session of the Confederate Congress the condition of the Confederacy as to subsistence was declared to be : That there was not meat enough in the Southern Confederacy for the armies it had in the field. That there was not in Virginia either meat or bread enough for the armies within her limits, That the supply of bread for those armies to be obtained from other places depended absolutely upon keeping open the railroad connections of the South. That the meat must be obtained from abroad through a seaport. That the transportation was not now adequate, from whatever cause, to meet the necessary demands of the service. Thai the supply of fresh meat to General Lee’s army was precarious, and if the army fell back from Richmond and Petersburg, that there was every probability that it would cease altogether. Tlie condition of the deserters who constantly came into our lines during the winter appeared to prove that there was no exaggeration in this statement. Some time in February the Confederate commissariat was got into better condition, and Lee’s army was better rationed from that time until the fall of Richmond and Petersburg, and reserve depots were maintained at Richmond, Lynch¬ burg, Danville, and Greensboro’, containing three and a half millions rations of meat and two and a half millions rations of bread. But the rolling stock of the railroads was so worn that it could no longer bring the necessary number of rations 312 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OP ’64 AND ’65. to Lee’s army in addition to the other requirements made upon it. Wagon trains were resorted to wherever prac¬ ticable. It was reported that supplies were brought to Petersburg by wagon trains from Hicksford on the Weldon Railroad, the route of the trains being up the Meherrin River to the Boydton plank road, and thence on that road through Din- widdie Court House to Petersburg. To intercept those trains, and break up this route of supply, General Gregg was directed to march at three o’clock in the morning of the fifth of February, by way of Reams’s Station to Dinwiddie Court House, move up and down the Boydton plank road, and endeavor to intercept the trains said to be on it, and do such other injury as he was able to the enemy in that direc¬ tion. General Warren was directed to cross Hatcher’s Run below the Vaughan road, and take position on that road, half way between Hatcher’s Run and Dinwiddie Court House, and support General Gregg. General Humphreys, com¬ manding the Second Corps since the retirement of General Hancock from it, was directed to take his two reserve divi¬ sions to the crossing of the Vaughan road over Hatcher’s Run, and to Armstrong’s mill, hold those two points, keep up communication with General Warren (four miles distant) and support him ; and also keep up communication with our intrencliments, between three and four miles off.1 At the Vaughan road crossing the run was found to be dammed and obstructed by fallen trees and held by a few infantry who were merely on the lookout, and were soon dis¬ persed, and Mott’s division put in position on the south side of the run. General Smyth’s division was established on the north side of the run at Armstrong’s mill. They both in¬ trenched sufficiently. Communication was opened with 1 The Second Corps held the left of these intrenchments. The First Division, General Miles, remained in them. THE WINTER OF 18G4-65. 313 General Warren. Opposite Smyth’s centre tlie enemy’s new intrenchments were in full view, about one thousand yards distant. Opposite his left they were hidden by woods. His right rested on a small, wooded swamp. On the right of this swamp was the open ground of the Thompson house, in front of which was a wood extending to the enemy’s in¬ trenchments. A road led from those intrenchments through this wood to the open ground at Thompson’s. Further to the right was another swamp. To sit down in this way all day close to the enemy’s intrenchments was to invite an at¬ tempt on one’s flanks, and I anticipated that one would be made on Smyth’s right, expecting the enemy to come along the wood road into the open ground at Thompson’s. I therefore brought over McAllister’s brigade of Mott’s divi¬ sion and put it along the edge of the wood, though it did not cover half the space that should have been occupied. Subsequently, with General Meade’s authority, I sent to General Miles for a brigade, which arrived in due time. McAllister intrenched the whole line. A little after five o’clock the enemy’s artillery opened upon Smyth, and his infantry, moving along the edge of the wood in front of Smyth’s right, made a determined attack. At the same time a column of infantry emerged from the woods into the open ground of the Thompson house by the road already mentioned, evidently expecting to find it unoccupied, and that they would take Smyth in flank and rear. But McAllister had been in his intrenchments on the right of this road, and had just drawn his brigade out and formed part of it perpendicular to them. He promptly opened a heavy and unexpected fire upon the enemy’s column, which fell back at once through the woods to their intrenchments. Smyth had by this time repulsed the attack on his front, but the enemy’s artillery kept up a fire upon both Smyth and McAllister for some time after. XII.— 14 314 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’64 AND ’65. General Lee, advised of our appearance on his right flank, and being with good reason sensitive to any movement upon it, had concentrated parts of Hill’s and Gordon’s corps to meet it. It was this force that made the attack just de¬ scribed. General Lee says of it : “In the afternoon, parts of Hill’s and Gordon’s troops demonstrated against the enemy on the left of Hatcher’s Run, near Armstrong’s mill. Finding him intrenched they were withdrawn after dark.” Upon ascertaining what force of the enemy was here, General Meade ordered Hartranft’s division of the Ninth Corps and Wheaton’s of the Sixth to join me, and when they arrived in the night they were placed on my right. General Gregg upon reaching the Boydton road captured some wagons and prisoners, but found that the road was but little used, and returned in the evening to Malone’s bridge on Rowanty Creek. From this place he was ordered up to the Vaughan road crossing, where he arrived early in the morning of the 6th with General WTarren, who had also been ordered to the same point. A reconnoissance on the morning of the 6th showed that the enemy was not outside his intrenchments north of the run. Warren, with Gregg, was in position on the south bank. Wheaton’s division and De Trobriand’s brigade were held ready to support him, Mott’s division having been brought to the north bank of the run. About 1 o’clock in the afternoon General Warren made a reconnoissance with Crawford’s division along the Vaughan and Dabney’s mill roads, Ayres following on his left, Gregg being sent down the Vaughan road to Gravelly Run to watch the left. Griffin remained in reserve and with part of his division supported Gregg, who was heavily attacked by a part of Pegram’s division of Gordon’s corps, which, however, with the support Griffin gave him he pressed back. Craw¬ ford also encountered a part of Pegram’s division, which he THE WINTER OF 1864-65. 315 forced back to Dabney’s mill, where Evans’s division of Gordon’s corps came to his support, and Crawford in turn had his left flank forced back. Two brigades of Ayres were now brought up to Crawford’s support, and one brigade of Griffin’s division, and at the same time Mahone’s division arrived and formed between Evans and Pegram. The enemy’s whole line then advanced to the attack, and spite of the exertions of the leading officers and the good conduct of many of the men, Warren’s line gave way and fell back rapidly, but with little loss. General Wheaton’s leading bri¬ gade came upon the scene of action at this time and got into line ; others reformed with it, and the enemy was checked. A large part of one of General Warren’s divisions was com¬ posed of new troops. General Warren made a reconnoissance on the 7th, meeting the enemy, but not in force. He states that the enemy in his encounters with them met with losses nearly equal to his own. General Pegram was killed when his division was forced back to Dabney’s mill. General Warren’s total loss, including the cavalry, was 1,165 killed and wounded and 154 missing. The loss of the Second Corps was 138 killed and wounded, among them, Colonel Murphy, Sixty-ninth New York, commanding Second Brigade, Second Division, mortally wounded. Wheaton’s division lost 17 killed and wounded.

## fort-stedman

Early in March, it was determined in a conference between Mr. Jefferson Davis and General Lee, that as soon as the roads would admit of movement, the Richmond and Peters- THE WINTER OF 1864-65. 317 burg lines should be abandoned, and the Army of Northern Virginia move to Danville, unite with General Johnston and attack General Sherman. Preparations were made accord¬ ingly. General Lee proposed in the meantime to make a sortie in order to gain some of the works on the right of the line held by the Army of the Potomac near the Appomattox River, and the ridge in their rear, with the expectation that this would oblige General Grant to concentrate there by drawing in his left, and thus postpone the threatened neces¬ sity for abandoning Richmond and Petersburg until the weather was favorable for falling back to Danville. This being assented to, General Gordon wras selected for the ser¬ vice, and his corps was brought to the intrenchments nearest Petersburg, with its left on the Appomattox. The point of attack was Fort Stedman, where the opposing lines were only one hundred and fifty yards apart ; the pickets fifty yards apart. General Gordon was sanguine that this redoubt could be taken by a night assault, and that through the breach thus made a sufficient force could be thrown to disorganize and destroy Grant’s left wing before he could recover and concentrate his forces from the right. General Gordon says General Lee placed at his disposal, in addition to his own corps, a portion of A. P. Hill’s and a por¬ tion of Longstreet’s, and a detachment of cavalry, in all about one-lialf of the Army. The attack was well arranged ; picked men preceded the storming party to cut away the fraise and abatis in front of the intrenchments ; the storming party was followed by three columns, which were to push through the gap made by the capture of Fort Stedman and seize three forts on the high ground that commanded Fort Stedman, and the lines on the right and left of it. These forts were supposed to be open at the gorge. But, in point of fact, there were no such forts. The redoubts that had a commanding fire upon Fort Sted- 318 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’64 AND *65. man and the lines and open batteries on its right and left, were on the main line. In front of them was the line of in- trenchments erected by onr troops on the 18th of June, which probably led to the misapprehension of General Gordon. A division of infantry, moving by its left flank, was to follow the three detachments, and when halted and fronted was to move down our intrenchments to our left, being joined by the other troops as their fronts were cleared. Next were the cavalry, who were to cut our telegraphic lines and destroy the ponton bridges over the Appomattox. Next all the remaining force was to unite in the attack. The Ninth Corps was on our right, holding from the Ap¬ pomattox to Fort Howard, a line about seven miles in length, General Willcox on the right, General Potter on the left, General Hartranft in reserve, his right at the Dunn house, his left near Fort Howard. Taking advantage, General Parke says, of the order allowing deserters to bring their arms with them, the enemy at half-past four in the morning of the 25tli quietly gained possession of several picket posts, the storming party instantly followed, and with a rush over¬ powered the trench guard, broke the main line between Bat¬ teries 9 and 10, turned to the right and left, gained Battery 10, overpowered the garrison of Fort Stedman after a spir¬ ited resistance, capturing the greater part of it, and then turned its artillery, four 12-pounders, and the guns of Bat¬ tery 10 against Willcox’s troops ; but not until they had been used effectively by the garrison. Batteries 11 and 12, open works, were also captured. It was so dark, General Parke says, that friends could not be distinguished from foes, and artillery could not therefore at first be used, but Brigadier- General McLaughlin, whose brigade occupied this part of the line, opened a mortar fire on Battery 11, and recaptured it with the bayonet, but entering Fort Stedman in ignorance of its capture, was himself taken prisoner. THE WINTER OF 1864-65. 319 As soon as General Parke leamt what had occurred he or¬ dered General Willcox to recapture the works, General Hart- ranft to concentrate and support him, and General Tidball to post his artillery on the high ground in rear of the main line, and open at once, together with the artillery in the forts on the right and left of Fort Stedman. General Hartranft promptly concentrated his division, and while doing so, with one of his regiments and some of Willcoz’s troops, attacked the enemy’s skirmishers, who were moving in the direction of City Point and were already at our military railroad and telegraph line, and drove them back to their own troops in our works. 1 The enemy now moved from Fort Stedman and assaulted the forts on the right and left of it, but were re¬ pulsed. By half-past seven General Parke had regained Bat¬ teries 11 and 12, had drawn a cordon of troops around Fort Stedman and Battery 10, had forced the enemy back into them, and had concentrated a fire upon them from all the artillery in the works and on the high ground in rear that bore upon them. General Hartranft was assigned to the re¬ capture of Fort Stedman and Battery 10. At a quarter of eight o’clock he advanced to the attack and carried the fort with comparatively small loss. The cross-fire of artillery and infantry on the space between the lines prevented the enemy who were in our works from escaping, and reinforcements from coming to them. Many were killed and wounded try¬ ing to get back to their own lines ; 1,949 prisoners, including 71 officers and nine stands of colors, fell into General Parke’s hands. His loss was 494 killed and wounded and 523 missing ; a total of 1,017. General Gordon says that guides were sent with the com¬ manders of the detachments that were to seize the forts in rear of Stedman, but that the guides were lost or had de- 1 Those whom General Parte calls skirmishers were probably the three detach¬ ments of Gordon’s troops sent to capture the rear forts. 320 THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN OF ’64 AND ’65. serted, and that the commanders conld not find the forts’ which, as I have already explained, were in fact on the main line. Nearly all of the troops composing these detachments were killed or captured. General Gordon says that “ a large body of the troops sent by General Lee from General Longstreet’s corps were delayed by the breaking down of trains, or by some other cause, and did not arrive at the appointed hour, which caused so great a delay that we did not get in the fort and upon the enemy’s flank at as early an hour as was expected, and daylight found us with the plan only half executed.” General Meade had passed the night of the 24th at City Point, the telegraph to which place was cut by the enemy. At half-past five General Parke telegraphed General Webb, Chief of Staff, what had occurred, and at a quarter-past six learnt in reply that General Meade was at City Point, and that he, General Parke, was in command (being the senior in rank). He then directed General Wright to send him a division, which got to the ground just as our works were re¬ taken, and General Warren, who had the Fifth Corps under arms ready to move toward General Parke’s right, to move up with his corps. By the time the works were retaken tele¬ graphic communication with General Meade at City Point w7as opened. At a quarter before six I received a telegram from General Hunt, Chief of Artillery, informing me that the enemy had broken through our right, captured Fort Stedman and were moving toward City Point. I at once got the Second Corps under arms ready to move, ordered the division commanders to make strong reconnoissances and ascertain the condition of the enemy in my front, and to attack their intrenched picket line with a view to assaulting their main works, if the force holding them had been materially weakened. This was duly communicated to General Parke and General THE WINTER OF 1864-65. 321 Meade, and approved by them. The intrenched picket line of the enemy was captured, and our line was advanced be¬ yond it under the close fire of the artillery and musketry of their main works, which proved to be held by a force suffi¬ cient to maintain them against assault. In fact, General Hill’s force here had not been reduced, probably in expecta¬ tion of a counter-attack. Under cover of the artillery and musketry fire of their works the enemy moved out repeat¬ edly with strong force at several points to recapture their picket intrenchments, but were always driven back. The loss of the Second Corps was 513 killed and wounded and 177 missing ; total, 690. The enemy’s number of killed and wounded was probably about the same as that of the Second Corps ; 358 officers and enlisted men were captured from them. General Wright also attacked and captured the enemy’s intrenched picket line, losing about 400 in the encounters, and capturing 547 prisoners. It was this capture of the intrenched picket line of the enemy that made it practicable for General Wright to carry the enemy’s main line of intrenchments by assault on the morning of the 2d of April. The total loss of the enemy in the operations of the 25th of March must have been nearly 4,000 ; ours, about 2,000.

## spring-1865-strengths

Upon the resumption of active operations in the spring of 1865, the effective force of the two contending armies, ac¬ cording to the latest returns of each, was as follows : The effective force of infantry of the Army of the Potomac was 69,000 ; of field artillery, 6,000, with 243 guns. The effective force of infantry of the Army of the James was 32,000 ; of field artillery, 3,000, with 126 guns ; and of caval¬ ry, 1,700. General Ord took with him, on the 27th of March, about one-half the infantry and all the cavalry of his army. The present for duty of the enlisted men of cavalry under General Sheridan was 13,000. Total of all arms of the three independent commands 124,700. The effective force of Lee’s infantry was not less than 46,000 ; of his field artillery, not less than 5,000; and of his cavalry, 6,000 ; making a total of not less than 57,000.
