# Wiley Britton, The Civil War on the Border, volume I: title page, preface, Cane Hill and Prairie Grove chapters, v1

## transcription-note

Digital OCR of a Brigham Young University (Harold B. Lee Library) scan (Internet Archive civilwaronborder00brit); not verified against print. Whitespace collapsed; all other characters retained, including OCR errors, split words, running headers, page numbers (several misread) and map-caption debris. Local headings are editorial.

## title-page

THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER A NARRATIVE OF OPERATIONS IN MISSOURI, KANSAS, ARKANSAS AND THE INDIAN TERRITORY DURING THE YEARS, 1861-62 BASED UPON THE OFFICIAL REPORTS OF THE FEDERAL COMMANDERS LYON, SIGEL, STURGIS, FREMONT HALLECK, CURTIS, SCHOFIELD, BLUNT, HERRON AND TOTTEN, AND OF THE CONFEDERATE COMMANDERS McCULLOCH, PRICE VAN DORN, HINDMAN, MARMA- DUKE, AND SHELBY BY WILEY BRITTON WAR DEPARTMENT 1861-62 SECOND EDITION, REVISED G.P.PUTNAM'S SONS NEW YORK LONDON 27 WEST TWENTY-THIRD STREET 27 KING WILLIAM STREET, STRAND Ube TKmcfterbocfcer press ]89i COPYRIGHT BY WILEY BRITTON 1890

## preface

PREFACE. In the following pages I have endeavored to give an account of the most important military operations and events in Missouri, Arkansas, Kan- sas, and the Indian Territory during the years 1861 and 1862. I have called the work " The Civil War on the Border," because during the period men- tioned the most important military operations in Missouri and Arkansas were in the western parts of those States, and also because the Federal army operating in that section after the summer of 1862 was known as the Army of the Frontier. This designation of the army was quite appropriate, be- cause until Kansas was admitted into the Union as a State in 1861, Western Missouri and Western Arkansas bordered on Kansas and the Indian Ter- ritories. Having served with the Federal army in that section during the entire war, and having par- ticipated in the operations and witnessed most of the events described, I have been able to write largely from observation. But that the work might in IV PA^FACE. be historically accurate, I have compared my data with the official reports published by the Govern- ment, and eliminated every thing that conflicts with official data. In such of the events described as are not covered by official data, I have drawn my ac- counts of them from the statements of eye-witnesses and participants, or from personal observation. The official reports are very meagre, except as to the larger operations, and give a very incomplete ac- count of the war in that section. As a rule, the officers were so much occupied with the pressing duties of the hour that they gave little thought to the importance of preparing careful reports of their operations. But it has been possible by combining official data with personal observations and state- ments of participants in the operations and events described, to give a tolerably complete account of the conflict in that section during the period cov- ered. In giving numbers engaged in actions and casualties on each side, I have almost invariably taken the official reports as a guide. Any one who has read the accounts of both sides of any given conflict will doubtless have noticed that there is a strong tendency for each side to magnify its own achievements and to belittle the achievements of its adversary. And probably there was scarcely an action in that section that the officers and troops on each side did not magnify their own achievements PREFACE, V and exaggerate the strength and casualties of their opponents. A Confederate officer sometimes, for example, reported that he killed more of the enemy than the Federal commander reported that he had men in action. Instead, therefore, of ac- cepting such exaggerated accounts, the command- ing officers on each side have been permitted to state, as far as practicable, the strength of their respective forces engaged in the different actions and the casualties they sustained. While much has been written on the late war, no one that I am aware of has hitherto undertaken to give an account of the operations extending over that section during the period covered by this volume. WILEY BRITTON. Washington, 1890.

## cane-hill

CHAPTER XXIX. ACTION AT CANE HILL, ARKANSAS. On the 23d of November Lieutenant-Colonel L. R. Jewell, Sixth Kansas Cavalry, who had been sent out by General Blunt with a detachment of six hundred cavalry and two mountain howitzers to make a reconnoissance in the direction of Van Buren, returned and reported that he advanced within fifteen miles of that place and met and drove in the enemy's pickets. He also reported that he obtained information that General Hindman's forces, esti- mated as high as twenty-five thousand men, were encamped around Fort Smith and Van Buren, and that most of them had already crossed the Arkansas River, and were prepar- ing to move northward immediately for the invasion of Missouri. The reconnoissance showed that the Confeder- ate leaders were unquestionably displaying great activity. General Blunt received information on the 24th that General Marmaduke with seven thousand cavalry and some artillery, had moved north from Van Buren, scarcely twenty-four hours in the rear of Colonel Jewell, and had halted at Cane Hill to await the arrival of General Hind- man with the Confederate infantry and main park of artil- lery. It was evident that the contest was to commence at once for the possession of Northwestern Arkansas and the Indian Territory. General Blunt determined to move for- ward with a well equipped force of infantry, cavalry, and artillery and strike Marmaduke a hard blow before he could receive reinforcements. Cane Hill is thirty miles 25 385 386 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. south of Lindsay's Prairie, where the Federal troops were encamped. On the morning of the 27th of November General Blunt, at the head of five thousand men and thirty pieces of artillery, took up the march for Cane Hill. The day was clear and delightful, and a soft haze of the lingering Indian summer pervaded the atmosphere. The troops were well rested, and many of them expressed themselves as eager for a fight. They carried in their haversacks four days' rations of hard bread, coffee, bacon, and salt. They marched that day upwards of twenty miles, and bivouacked that night about ten miles north of Cane Hill. From that point General Blunt sent several spies into the Confederate camp to ascertain their position, and to obtain any other information having a bearing on his future operations. On the return of the spies they reported that General Marmaduke had a strong picket guard occupying a good defensive position about two miles north of Cane Hill on the road upon which the Federal column was marching. The Confederate officers had heard in the early part of the evening of the approach of General Blunt, and were making preparations to fight him the next day. At daybreak the Federal troops were aroused without beat of drums or sound of bugles, and devoting a few moments to satisfying the calls of hunger with rations from their haversacks, and coffee made upon their camp- fires, moved forward again to engage the enemy. Instead of moving forward on the direct road to Cane Hill, Gen- eral Blunt made a detour to the east, advanced on an obscure road and approached within half a mile of the Confederate camp without meeting any resistance. In a few moments, however, a considerable force of Confed- erate cavalry appeared in his front drawn up in line. On looking around he saw that he was not prepared to bring on a general action at once, for in making the detour ACTION AT CANE HILL. 387 some six miles back his main column had been detained in ascending a mountain, and was not yet in sight. His advanced guard, consisting of four companies of the Second Kansas Cavalry, under Major Fisk, and two howitzers under Lieutenant Stover, at once commenced to skirmish with the enemy, and with the assistance of Captain Rabb's Second Indiana Battery, held the Confed- erates in check until the main Federal column came up. With his advance guard General Blunt made a vigorous attack upon the Confederate grand guard, and putting them to flight pursued them until he came in full view of General Marmaduke's main force drawn up in line of battle on the right of the road, on high ground with tim- ber in their rear. The moment General Blunt's advance came in sight and within range of the Confederate battery, which was posted so as to command the road the Federal troops were advancing on, it opened a brisk fire upon them. General Blunt ordered up the two mountain how- itzers of the Second Kansas and Captain Rabb's Indiana Battery, and then an artillery duel commenced, and lasted until nearly eleven o'clock, when, the different regiments and batteries of the Federal column having arrived, they commenced to move to the positions assigned them for a general advance. General Marmaduke's division consisted of Colonels J. O. Shelby's and Emmet McDonald's brigades of Missouri cavalry, Colonel Carroll's brigade of Arkansas cavalry, Captain Bledsoe's six-gun battery, and a company of Quantrill's guerillas from Missouri. While engaging the enemy with his artillery and waiting for his main column to come up, General Blunt recon- noitred Marmaduke's position, and found an approach by which a force could be brought forward to attack his left flank with advantage, and perhaps turn it. He ordered Major Van Antwerp of his staff to hasten back and meet his advance, consisting of Colonel Thomas Ewing's Elev* 388 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. enth Kansas Volunteers, and Captain Hopkins' battery, and to bring them forward on the double-quick. The troops were so far back, that, having moved forward at a quick step, and at a double-quick, they were very much fatigued and nearly exhausted when they came up. A good many of the men were obliged to drop out of ranks by the roadside and rest a little before resuming the march. On the arrival of the Eleventh Kansas to the front, Major P. B. Plumb was directed to take four companies and march down the road to the support of Rabb's battery, and Colonel Ewing took six companies and accompanied General Blunt to the right, followed by Hopkins' four-gun battery. The Federal batteries now opened fire vigorously upon every exposed point of the enemy, and in a short time compelled them to abandon their position and retire nearly a mile south, near the little village of Boonsbor- ough, where they again formed in line. By this time all General Blunt's troops and artillery had arrived, and were being placed in position for making a general attack. Colonel William Weer's Tenth Kansas Infantry, Colo- nel William A. Phillips' Third Indian Regiment, and Colonel Judson's Sixth Kansas Cavalry, formed on the left of the Federal line, and soon commenced to drive the enemy from the village and adjacent hills. General Marmaduke being compelled to fall back again, took up another position behind a low ridge running east and west just south of town. He concentrated his entire force along this ridge, and his line of battle was about half a mile long. There was a deep ravine in his front, which the Federal troops would be obliged to cross before attacking him with small-arms. In moving up his troops, General Blunt saw that the position of the enemy was a strong one, and that it would require careful disposition and great determination of his forces to carry it. He ordered up some twenty pieces of artillery, and opened a ACTION AT CANE HILL. 389 hot fire of shot and shell upon the Confederate line, and soon demoralized it so much that his infantry crossed the deep ravine without serious resistance. Having crossed the ravine, he commenced at once to deploy his infantry to charge the enemy, when General Marmaduke again retreated before the Federal line had advanced within musket range. Captain Tenney, commanding the First Kansas Battery, came up in time with his long-range rifled guns to throw a few percussion shells into the rear of the retreating Confederates. General Blunt ordered immediate pursuit, but owing to the hilly and broken condition of the country it was im- practicable for his troops to move forward very rapidly. His infantry and cavalry, too, were beginning to feel the effects of hard marching. The road on which the Con- federate forces were retreating in the direction of Van Buren runs through a valley for about three miles south of Boonsborough. In the valley on each side of the road there were several farms alternating with low hills and ravines covered with thick woods and brush. As the Federal troops advanced along this road they skirmished with General Marmaduke's rear column until it reached a large mound-shaped hill near the base of the Boston Mountains. Here the Confederate leader determined to make another stand, and quickly put his troops in posi- tion to check the progress of the Federal forces. His artillery commanded the road from the north, but his position was not impregnable. General Blunt, who had kept up with his cavalry, at once commenced to make preparations for an assault. In a few moments his troops and batteries had come up in sufficient force to commence the attack. Lieutenant H. H. Opdyke, commanding two mountain howitzers at- tached to the Ninth Kansas Cavalry, was directed to a position on the right where he could shell the enemy's flank, while Captain Rabb opened upon them in front 390 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER, with his six brass field-pieces. This was an excellent bat- tery, and, after throwing a few rounds of shot and shell, knocked to pieces a gun carriage, and dismantled one of the guns of the Confederate battery and forced the others to retire out of range. The storm of shot and shell from the Federal batteries having crippled one of his guns and forced the others to retire, and seeing the columns of Federal infantry and cavalry advancing steadily over the ridge about three quarters of a mile off, General Marma- duke could not make up his mind to engage the Federal forces at close quarters, and after some skirmishing with small-arms ordered his division to retreat again, and to take up a position in the Boston Mountains four miles south of Cane Hill. He dismounted his men and formed them in line along the side of the mountain and on its summit, and ordered his artillery placed in position to command the approaches. He did not have to wait long for the Federal troops to appear, and he soon saw that General Blunt was not going to depend upon his artillery this time to dislodge him, but upon his small-arms. In his attack on this position of the enemy, General Blunt had with him Colonel Bassett's Second Kansas Cavalry, part of Colonel Judson's Sixth Kansas Cavalry, Colonel Ewing's Eleventh and Colonel Bowen's Thir- teenth Kansas Volunteers, Colonel W. A. Phillips' Third Indian Regiment, part of the First Indian Regiment, under Major Ellithorp, and the four twelve-pounder mountain howitzers attached to the Second and Ninth Regiments Kansas Cavalry. The ascent of the mountain was too steep to move forward his field batteries, except along the main road. They were, however, brought to the front, and placed in position near the base of the moun- tain, and supported by Colonel Weer's infantry. General Blunt dismounted most of the Second and Sixth Regi- ments Kansas Cavalry, and Colonel Phillips' Third Indian Regiment, to co-operate with the Eleventh and Thirteenth ACTION AT CANE HILL. 39 1 Regiments Kansas Infantry in storming the heights of the mountain. With desperate courage and resolution these troops charged up the steep acclivity, and soon came in range of the Confederate small-arms and artillery, when the rattle of musketry and roar of artillery burst forth in great fury along the side of the mountain. On- ward and upward the Federal forces moved, springing from one ledge of rocks to another, and firing as they advanced, until they approached within a hundred yards or so of the Confederate troops in line, when they again broke and fled in the utmost confusion. In a few moments they reached and mounted their horses, which had been held a short distance in the rear, and were soon after beyond the range of the Federal small-arms. The exertion of ascend- ing the mountain had so much fatigued the Federal troops when they reached its summit, that they re- quired a few moments' rest before renewing the pur- suit. When General Blunt saw that his forces had carried the heights he ordered up his four howitzers and Rabb's battery, and on their arrival again moved forward to attack the Confederates. General Marmaduke had in the mean time rallied his troops about three quarters of a mile back, and formed them in line to make another stand. They made a feeble resistance, however, and fled again when General Blunt came up with his howitzers and the troops with which he had driven them from the summit of the mountain, and opened fire upon them. The ground was too rough and broken for the cavalry of either side to be used to advan- tage. General Blunt had prudently kept Colonel Ewing's Eleventh Kansas Volunteers and Colonel W. A. Phillips' Third Indian Regiment, dismounted, to the front, and quickly formed them in line on either side of the road along the sides of the mountain, or across ravines, and routed the Confederates every time their leaders endeav- ored to make a stand. 392 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. From the summit of the mountain, advancing south, the Cane Hill and Van Buren road gradually descends into Cove Creek Valley. This valley is very narrow, and on descending it the mountains on each side gradually rise to great height, perhaps to one thousand feet in some places. In the pursuit and fighting down the narrow val- ley of Cove Creek, General Blunt 's infantry and artillery, except his howitzers and part of his cavalry, had fallen behind out of sight. The sun had sunk behind the mountains, and the day was drawing to a close. In the deep hollow, and within the dark shadows of the mountains, the day appeared to be further spent than it really was. General Marmaduke had taken up another position with his artillery nearly a mile in advance of his rear-guard, and his troops, as they came up, formed on the side of the mountain. Having come up with the Confederate rear-guard, General Blunt determined to make another vigorous assault before dark- ness set in, and endeavor to capture the battery which was being used to cover the Confederate retreat. The Federal commander saw that the Confederate troops were being crowded into the narrow gorge of Cove Creek in such a mass that they were obstructing one another's movements in the retreat. Turning to order his troops forward into action, he found only the Sixth Kansas Cav- alry, his four howitzers, and part of his body-guard in sight. Impatient of waiting for his infantry and the rest of his cavalry and artillery to come up, he called for vol- unteers to charge the enemy. Lieutenant-Colonel L. R. Jewell, who was at hand with about one half of his regi- ment, the Sixth Kansas Cavalry, offered to lead the charge. The bugles sounded the charge, and Colonel Jewell dashed forward at the head of his command, and in a moment more the opposing forces were joined in a fierce struggle. After firing several rounds with their Sharp's carbines and Colt's revolvers into the ranks of the enemy, Colonel Jewell ordered his men to draw sabres and ACTION AT CANE HILL, 393 charge into the midst of the Confederates, which they did, sabring them from right to left for about half a mile, and causing the greatest consternation. Many of the Confed- erate soldiers threw down their arms and fled in the wildest disorder, and spread the report that the Federal cavalry were advancing impetuously, and sabring their comrades in their progress down the valley. Presently Colonel Jewell reached a point where the valley became a narrow defile, to defend which General <±T Marmaduke had formed several dismounted regiments upon a narrow bench on the side of the mountain, pre- pared to open fire upon the Federal column the moment it reached the defile. In the excitement of the charge, Colonel Jewell and his men had not noticed the enemy formed on the left, partly concealed from view by the contour of the ground, until they saw the flashes from their guns only a few yards distant. In this volley, Colonel Jewell, Sergeant Ritchey of Company K, several enlisted men of the Sixth Kansas, fell, mortally wounded. Captains Greeno, Mefford, and John Rodgers, command- ing the Federal companies in the charge, seeing that the defile was defended by a superior force of the enemy, who were preparing to charge them in flank, rallied their men and fell back until they met General Blunt with his howitzers and some detachments of other regiments that had come up. The General, with the assistance of Colo- nels Judson and Phillips and some of his staff, rallied and formed the retreating companies of the Sixth Kansas across the valley, and with the aid of his howitzers checked and drove back the Confederates under Shelby and Mc- Donald, who were rapidly advancing up the hollow with wild yells, confident of turning the tide of battle. The position was a strong one, and to carry it by assault General Blunt needed his whole force of infantry and artillery, instead of four companies of cavalry. Even had Colonel Jewell succeeded in forcing the passage of the defile, he could not have returned without running 394 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. the gauntlet of another heavy fire from the enemy who were posted behind logs and rocks on the narrow bench of the mountain, about fifty feet above the road. Having checked the advance of the rebels, and turned and driven them again some distance down the valley, General Blunt expressed a determination of forcing his way through the gorge at all hazards. In the meantime, Colonel Ewing came up in sight with part of his regiment and a section of Rabb's battery. General Blunt ordered his four how- itzers and the section of Rabb's battery loaded with double canister, and was advancing, with the companies of the Sixth Kansas supporting his guns, to the assault again. He had arrived within less than four hundred yards of the position defended by the Confederates, and was in the act of opening fire, when an officer from Gen- eral Marmaduke came galloping up the road with a white flag. General Blunt sent forward Colonel W. F. Cloud, Second Kansas Cavalry, to receive it. Colonel Emmet McDonald, the bearer of the flag of truce, stated that General Marmaduke requested the privilege of taking his dead and wounded off the ground. In view of the fact that Colonel Jewell, Lieutenant John A. Johnson, of Company A, Lieutenant John G. Harris, of Company K, and several enlisted men of the Sixth Kansas, who were wounded in the charge down the valley, were still lying upon the ground occupied by the enemy, and as darkness was coming on, General Blunt granted the request and hostilities for the day ceased. General Marmaduke continued his retreat toward Van Buren that night, and General Blunt, having gathered up his dead and wounded and placed them in ambulances in charge of his surgeons, returned to Cane Hill, some five miles back, where his infantry, on preparing to go into the fight, had divested themselves of their knapsacks and blankets. The exertions had been so severe during the day by marching and manoeuvring and climbing the hills and mountains and fighting, that toward night the infan- ACTION AT CANE HILL. 395 try regiments could bring into line scarcely one half the number r-f men they started out with in the morning. The men had dropped out of ranks from exhaustion. The cavalry were also much worn, for at one time detachments were sent out to operate on the flanks ; at another time the men were dismounted to fight on foot over the hills and mountains, and then required to return to and re- mount their horses and move forward again in pursuit of the enemy. Colonel Jewell died on the 29th of November, and was sent back to his family, near Fort Scott, for interment. He had distinguished himself all through the campaign, and was known as a bold and intrepid officer. Possessing a kindly and generous nature, he never asked his men to go where he dared not lead them, and they loved him and had unbounded confidence in him. Even if he knew that he was to lead a forlorn hope, he would not hesitate to offer up his life if his country demanded it or the reputa- tion of his regiment was at stake. But when left to act on his own judgment and responsibility, he always mingled a proper caution with boldness, and thus escaped the charge of rashness. General Blunt reported his casualties during the day at four men killed and thirty-six wounded. He also reported that the Confederates left seventy-five men killed and mortally wounded upon the ground fought over. The number of Confederates wounded and taken off the field during the action and under the flag of truce is not known. On his return to Cane Hill that night, General Blunt sent a courier back with orders for his trains and the rest of his troops under General Salomon at Camp Babcock, on Lindsay's Prairie, to move forward and join him at Rhea's Mills, a few miles north of Cane Hill. He kept part of his troops, however, at Cane Hill, that place being a more convenient point from which he could send out detach- ments to guard the passes in the mountains.

## prairie-grove

CHAPTER XXX. BATTLE OF PRAIRIE GROVE, ARKANSAS. On the arrival of the trains and the rest of the troops at Rhea's Mills and Cane Hill, General Blunt at once com- menced collecting subsistence and supplies for his men and forage for his animals. Between Fayetteville and Cane Hill was the finest agriculture section of Northwest- ern Arkansas, and most of the farms had raised on them good crops of corn, oats, wheat, potatoes, and apples. The possession of this fair valley, lying directly north of the Boston Mountains, had been won by the Federal General after a short, sharp contest ; but to hold it, he soon became convinced that he would shortly be obliged to engage in a fierce struggle, for his troops had scarcely pitched their tents in their new camps when his scouts brought him information that General Hindman's army had all crossed the Arkansas River at Van Buren and advanced north fifteen miles, until General Marmaduke's retreating division was met on Lee's Creek. Having made extensive preparations for the campaign, General Hindman, on meeting General Marmaduke, deter- mined to move north rapidly with his entire army, and attack and, if possible, overwhelm General Blunt before his reinforcements could reach him. Finding that General Hindman, with an army upwards of twenty thousand strong, was advancing to attack him, General Blunt ad- vised General Curtis in St. Louis of the situation by telegraph from Elkhorn, and requested him to order the 396 %&£ ' <^ J >i ^ \ •*>' ^ . u^ •> ft m ^° ^» **^ x-V X_s i^a^jM •• • It JB *> vi • If* *- ? BATTLE OF PRAIRIE GROVE. 397 Second and Third Divisions Army of the Frontier, then encamped at Wilson Creek, ten miles southwest of Springfield, Missouri, to move forward by forced marches to reinforce him. On receipt of this despatch, General Curtis, by telegraph, ordered General F. J. Herron, com- manding the two divisions, to push forward with them as rapidly as practicable to the assistance of General Blunt. General Herron received General Curtis' telegraphic order at eight o'clock on the morning of December 3d, and by twelve o'clock that day his troops were in motion and on the march in the direction of Fayetteville. From Wilson Creek, Missouri, to Fayetteville, Arkansas, the point to which he would be obliged to march upon the telegraph road, was one hundred miles, and Rhea's Mills, where General Blunt's troops were encamped, was sixteen miles southwest of Fayetteville. This was a long distance for infantry to be put on forced marches, and would tax their power of endurance to the utmost limit. The Springfield and Fayetteville road, known also as the wire or telegraph road, was the nearest practicable route by which General Blunt could be reached. This road was in splendid condition on the eve of the march, for it had been much used the past year by large armies and their trains passing over it. General Herron at once sent a despatch to General Blunt, stating that he would make the best time possible on the march, and keep him constantly advised of his position en route. His baggage trains followed in the rear of each division, and carried the knapsacks of his men, thus relieving them of a burden that would have been much felt in the long march before them, had they been obliged to carry them on their backs. General Her- ron arrived at Elkhorn with the cavalry of the second division on the evening of December 5th. Here he re- ceived an order from General Blunt to send forward all of the cavalry that he could spare. He ordered forward 398 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER, Colonel Dudley Wickersham with the Tenth Illinois, First Iowa, battalion of the Second Wisconsin, and Colonel Geigers, Eighth Missouri Cavalry, to report to General Blunt. General Herron stayed all night at Elkhorn, waiting for his infantry and artillery to come up. He moved forward the next day to Cross Hollow, fifteen miles, and halted again for his troops to close up. Colo- nel Daniel Huston, commanding the second division, arrived at Cross Hollow at seven o'clock on the evening of December 6th, and rested until midnight, and then re- sumed the march, arriving at Fayetteville the next morn- ing at sunrise. General Herron, who had moved forward at the head of his troops, arrived at Fayetteville about three hours in advance of Colonel Huston's second division. While the second and third divisions were thus moving to his assistance at the rate of thirty-five miles a day, Gen- eral Blunt was busily employed in skirmishing with the Confederate advance and endeavoring to keep General Marmaduke's cavalry from forcing the passes in the Boston Mountains. He determined to hold his position at Rhea's Mills and Cane Hill until his reinforcements under Gen- eral Herron arrived. His information led him to believe that General Hindman was preparing to cross the moun- tains by taking either the telegraph road, which passed about ten miles east of his camp on Cane Hill, or by taking the Cove Creek road, which forked on the moun- tains, the left-hand fork of which led directly to Cane Hill and the right to Fayetteville. From the point where this road forked to General Blunt's position on Cane Hill, was about six miles. The Fayetteville branch of the Cove Creek road was crossed one and two miles north of the point where it united with the Cane Hill branch, by two roads running west and southwest from the telegraph road to the Newburg and Cane Hill road. General Blunt saw the importance of keeping a strong BA TTLE OF PRAIRIE GRO VE. 359 outpost at the junction of the Cane Hill road with t\ye Fayetteville and Cove Creek road, and at the crossings of the other roads described. He saw also that if General Hindman was allowed to advance on the Cove Creek road to the point where it forked, he could, by making a strong feint, threaten a direct attack, while his main army moved north on the Fayetteville road to turn the Federal left flank. On the 4th, General Blunt strengthened his outposts in the mountains, and sent forward a cavalry scout on the Cove Creek road in the direction of Van Buren to ascer- tain if the enemy were advancing in force. The Federal scout met the Confederate advance under Colonel Shelby, and after a slight skirmish fell back to the outpost on the mountain. The next morning Colonel Shelby threw for- ward a regiment and attacked the Federal outpost, but his force was soon repulsed and driven back several miles through the mountains. Anticipating another attack upon this outpost, General Blunt on the night of the 5th directed Colonel Cloud, commanding the third brigade, to strengthen it by daybreak the next morning with one hundred cavalry and two mountain howitzers. In the meantime, Colonel Shelby advanced up the Cove Creek road with a brigade of cavalry, and encamped that night within a mile or so of the Federal outpost, and the next morning at daylight dismounted part of his command, made another attack, and before Colonel Cloud's support arrived, forced the detachment of the Second Kansas at the station to fall back about three miles in the direction of Cane Hill. Colonel Emmet McDonald, who had crossed over the mountains on the telegraph road with a brigade of Missouri Confederate cavalry, joined Colonel Shelby shortly after he had driven in the Federal picket. Immediately after taking possession of the Fayetteville branch of the Cove Creek road, General Marmaduke advanced the brigades of Colonels Shelby, McDonald, 400 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. and Carroll to within three miles of General Blunt's posi- tion on Cane Hill, where they came in sight of part of the Federal cavalry under Colonel Cloud drawn up in line. The opposing forces consumed the day in skirmishing, each side sustaining a few casualties in wounded. While the Confederate cavalry were thus threatening General Blunt with an attack in front, General Hindman was bring- ing forward his infantry and artillery on the Cove Creek Road. As General Marmaduke's cavalry were now in possession of the Fayetteville branch of the Cove Creek road at its junction with the Cane Hill road, General Blunt was apprehensive that an effort would be made by the Confederate generals to turn his left flank, so as to get between him and his reinforcements under General Herron. That he might be advised at once if there were any indications of such a movement in progress, on the morning of the 6th he ordered Colonel John M. Richard- son, Fourteenth Missouri State Militia Cavalry, who had arrived from Cassville the night before, to take a force of one hundred mounted men and proceed east on the Hog Eye road to the crossing of the Cove Creek and Fayette- ville road, and on arriving there to send part of his men south on it to ascertain if the enemy were advancing. On arriving at the intersection of the roads described, Colonel Richardson ordered Captain Julian with his com- pany to take the advance, and proceed south on the road in the direction of Cove Creek. Captain Julian had not advanced more than two miles, perhaps, when he captured three Southern soldiers and sent them back, and advancing again a short distance, came in sight of the camp of the Southern troops, containing, as he thought, at least two thousand men. Colonel Richardson examined the prisoners and obtained from them the information that he was within a mile of the main Confederate army, which was then moving up the mountain on the direct road to Cane Hill. The Colonel BATTLE OF PRAIRIE GROVE. 40 1 immediately fell back a mile or so, and sent messengers to report to General Blunt the presence of this large Confed- erate force within a few miles of his headquarters. The General could not feel certain whether the main Con- federate force was being massed in his front to fight him early the next morning, or whether the Confederate cav- alry, with which his troops had been skirmishing during the day, were concealing the real movements of the main force under General Hindman. In view of the strong probability of a general engage- ment the next day, Colonel Cloud's third brigade were ordered to bivouac on their arms that night in front, just south of Newburg. At two o'clock on the mornings of the 5th, 6th, and 7th the Federal troops at Cane Hill and Rhea's Mills were ordered to strike tents and load up their baggage ; and the teams were harnessed and hitched up, and the wagon trains stood ready until daylight to move at a moment's notice. In the midst of his preparations for the coming struggle, General Blunt was much gratified to have Colonel Wickersham report to him about ten o'clock on the night of the 6th with a brigade of cavalry, which General Herron had sent forward from Cross Hol- low. He also received a despatch from General Herron stating that he would reach Fayetteville by daylight Sun- day morning the 7th. Shortly after midnight on the morning of the 7th, Gen- eral Blunt again directed Colonel Richardson to proceed with his own battalion and Captain Conkey's company, Third Wisconsin Cavalry, east on the Hog Eye road to the crossing of the Fayetteville and Cove Creek road, to ascertain if the Southern forces were moving in the direc- tion of Fayetteville, and if they were, to resist them to the last extremity, and to promptly notify him of their move- ments. The Colonel moved forward with his detach- ment, but before reaching the intersection of the roads met Captain Coleman, of the Ninth Kansas Cavalry, with 26 402 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. thirty men, who had just been driven from the junction of the roads by the enemy, and who reported that the Con- federates were advancing up the Cove Creek road in strong force. Thinking that the Southern forces were advancing on Cane Hill, Colonel Richardson fell back about a mile, and took up a strong position to resist them, and sent a messenger to report to General Blunt. Waiting for a short time, and rinding that the enemy were not advancing, the Colonel sent Captain Julian forward again with a small detachment to ascertain their move- ments. The Captain soon discovered that the Confeder- ate forces were marching in the direction of Fayetteville, and then hastily returned and reported, and General Blunt was promptly notified. Acting on the information that the enemy were advanc- ing on Cane Hill, General Blunt and staff at seven o'clock left his headquarters and rode to the front, expecting soon to open the battle. Although a considerable force of Confederate cavalry were yet on the mountain in his front, he soon received information that the main South- ern army were marching northeast in the direction of Fayetteville, on the Cove Creek road, and had already passed the point where that road was intersected by the Hog Eye road. On the receipt of this information he immediately or- dered all his transportation to Rhea's Mills, guarded by Colonel Phillips' Third Indian Regiment, and directed Colonel Judson to take his regiment, the Sixth Kansas Cavalry, and two howitzers, together with Colonel Rich- ardson's detachment, and proceed as rapidly as practica- ble on the Hog Eye road, and if, on arriving there, the enemy had passed in the direction of Fayetteville, to fol- low them and attack them vigorously. Colonel Wicker- sham was ordered to proceed at once with his brigade of cavalry on the Cane Hill and Fayetteville road in the direction of Fayetteville, to form a junction with General BATTLE OF PRAIRIE GROVE, 403 Herron. General Salomon, commanding the first brigade, was ordered to follow Colonel Wickersham. The second brigade, under Colonel William Weer, and the third brigade, under Colonel W. F. Cloud, were withdrawn from the front south of Newburg about nine o'clock, and directed to follow close in the rear of the first brigade. The moment General Blunt decided to make these move- ments, he sent two mounted messenger parties with de- spatches to notify General Herron ; but failing to take the precaution to send his couriers via Rhea's Mills, they were cut off by General Marmaduke's advance. Colonel Wickersham, who had moved in advance, in- stead of keeping on the direct road toward Fayetteville, about three miles north of Cane Hill, took a left-hand road leading to Rhea's Mills. The infantry and artillery following the cavalry, kept the same road until General Blunt rode forward and overtook Colonel Wickersham and directed him to proceed in the direction of Fayette- ville, and endeavor to open communication with General Herron. General Salomon, with the first brigade, was sent to Rhea's Mills to guard the Federal trains, arriving there about twelve o'clock. General Blunt then took the second and third brigades and marched on an obscure road in a northeast direction, the direction in which artil- lery firing had just been heard. General Hindman had, up to a late hour on the night of the 6th, made all his preparations to fight General Blunt in his position on Cane Hill. His infantry and artillery had moved up, and were in position to make an attack on the Federal troops the next morning. He had heard of the arrival of Colonel Wickersham's cavalry brigade to reinforce General Blunt, but this information did not change his purpose to make the proposed attack. On the night of the 6th, however, after his generals had assembled to receive their final instructions in regard to carrying into effect the movements decided upon, he received informa- 404 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. tion that General Herron would reach Fayetteville that night with large reinforcements of infantry and artillery for General Blunt. After some consideration, he came to the conclusion that, if he attacked General Blunt in front and forced him from his position, he would fall back until he met his reinforcements, after which he would probably assume the offensive. General Hindman, there- fore, decided to abandon the proposed attack on the Fed- eral position at Cane Hill, to withdraw his troops from their several positions, and to push them forward on the Cove Creek and Fayetteville road, and attack the Fed- eral column under General Herron, and if possible crush it before General Blunt could come to its assistance. To deceive General Blunt as completely as possible in regard to this new movement, General Hindman left Colonel Monroe with a brigade of Arkansas cavalry on the crest of the mountain in front of the Federal position, with instructions to dismount his men at daylight and skirmish as infantry with the Federal troops, and detain them as long as possible. In the next place, orders were issued to brigade and division commanders of the South- ern army, to have their troops in their proper positions and in readiness to march at three o'clock on Sunday morning, the 7th. But on account of some unavoidable detentions, the troops were not all in motion until nearly four o'clock. The road was very rough, so that the artil- lery and infantry were obliged to move slowly. General Marmaduke's cavalry division, consisting of Colonels Shelby's and McDonald's brigades, marched in the advance with a battery of light artillery. Moving down the northern slope of the mountain a distance of about eight miles northeast of Cane Hill, General Marma- duke's advance at daylight came in sight of Colonel M. La Rue Harrison's First Arkansas Union Cavalry, and detachments of the Sixth and Seventh Regiments Mis- souri Cavalry, marching southwest on the Cane Hill road BATTLE OF PRAIRIE GROVE. 405 near its junction with the Cove Creek and Fayetteville roads, to reinforce General Blunt. Colonel Harrison had been ordered forward from Elkhorn, and on the night of the 6th encamped on the Fayetteville and Cane Hill road near Illinois Creek. Major Bredett, commanding the de- tachments of the Seventh and Sixth Missouri Cavalry, had marched nearly all night, and having received no in- formation that the enemy had flanked General Blunt, halted a few moments at daylight near the camp of the First Arkansas Cavalry, to feed and rest his tired and much-worn horses. Lieutenant L. Bunner had been marching with his company since two o'clock in the morning about half a mile in advance of the other com- panies of the regiment, to guard against a surprise. Shortly after Major Bredett's command had halted near the entrance to a lane to feed their horses, a company of the Eighth Missouri Cavalry, also en route to Cane Hill, passed them, and entering the lane had got nearly through it, when a volley was fired into them by an unseen foe from the thick woods on their left front. The company instantly retreated, falling back through Major Bredett's column. On hearing the firing, the Major ordered his men to mount their horses and form in line to resist the enemy, who were seen approaching. He had scarcely formed his men in line when Colonel McDonald's Confed- erate Cavalry Brigade rapidly advanced within range and commenced pouring such heavy volleys of musketry into his line from his left, front, and rear, that he was obliged to order the retreat sounded. After retreating a short distance, he rallied and formed his men in line, but being pressed by a vastly superior force from all sides, he was wounded and killed and his men dispersed and pursued. Colonel McDonald, in crossing over from the Cove Creek and Fayetteville road to the Cane Hill road, got between Major Bredett and his advance guard under Lieutenant Bunner. On hearing the firing in his rear, the 406 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. lieutenant turned back with his company to join his com- mand, but had proceeded only a short distance, when he saw advancing directly in his front a full company dressed in the Federal uniform. Supposing the company to belong to the First Arkansas Cavalry, he allowed them to approach within fifty yards, when they opened fire upon him. Still thinking that they were Federal soldiers, he called out to them to cease firing, that " we are friends." In an- other instant he became satisfied that they were rebels, and then withdrew his company with the loss of one man severely wounded and five horses killed and wounded. The rebels who were thus dressed in the Federal uniform proved to be Quantrill's company of bushwhackers and desperadoes, whose hands were reeking with the blood of murdered Union citizens of Missouri. After the fall of Major Bredett, his command dispersed in every direction, but the men of each company kept to- gether, and rallied and fought when not pressed by greatly superior numbers. Captain William McKee, in making a stand with his company, became surrounded, and was killed while trying to cut his way through the rebel line. In their rapid movements, Colonels McDonald's and Shelby's brigades soon came up and attacked and routed the First Arkansas Cavalry, capturing all their wagons and baggage. In pursuing the detachments of the Sixth and Seventh Regiments Missouri and Arkansas Cavalry, the Confederate cavalry also became much dispersed. It was at this time that a company of the Seventh Missouri Cav- alry rallied and captured Colonel Shelby and two pieces of the Confederate artillery. The Federal detachment, how- ever, were unable to hold their prizes very long, for on returning from the pursuit of the main body of the Federal cavalry in the direction of Fayetteville, Colonels Young and Crump, of McDonald's cavalry brigade, recaptured Colonel Shelby and his battery. After resting an hour at Fayetteville, General Herron, BATTLE OF PRAIRIE GROVE, 407 at four o'clock, pushed on with such of his troops as had arrived, sending forward Major Hubbard with two com- panies of the First Missouri Cavalry as an advance guard. When about ten miles southwest of Fayetteville, the Major met the First Arkansas Cavalry and detachments of the Seventh Missouri Cavalry retreating in great dis- order. He succeeded in rallying part of the retreating troops, and ordering the fence thrown down on the left- hand side of the road, threw his two companies into line in a wheat-field to check the enemy. The Confederate cav- alry soon approached in large numbers within two hun- dred yards, and filing off to the right and left of the road, commenced to flank him. Seeing that the Confederate force was too strong to contend with, he was obliged to order a retreat, but having several fences to throw down, his command was much impeded in its movements. The Confederate officers, seeing the situation, ordered a charge, and dashing upon the Federal cavalry, cut off and cap- tured Major Hubbard and several of his men while trying to cross a fence. Captain A. L. Burrows then took command of the two companies and marched them rapidly in the direction of the mountain, a mile or so distant, and on arriving near its base fell in with some two hundred stragglers of the First Arkansas and Sixth and Seventh Regiments Mis- souri Cavalry, and ordered them into line to make a stand to check the enemy who were still pursuing them. On seeing the Federal cavalry forming in line, the Confederate column soon came to a halt, and after some skirmishing commenced to fall back. In the meantime detachments of the First Arkansas and Seventh Missouri Cavalry, which had retreated on the Fayetteville road, met General Herron with his escort, consisting of one company of the First Missouri Cavalry, under Captain J. M. Adams. The General, after some severe threats and decided action, halted his retreating 408 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. troops, and formed them in line. He saw that the situa- tion required energetic action to save his command from possible disaster. He immediately ordered forward two regiments of infantry and Captain Foust's battery, Mis- souri Light Artillery. When his infantry and artillery arrived at the front, General Marmaduke's cavalry had ap- proached in strong force and formed in line of battle. General Herron at once opened fire upon the Confed- erates with Captain Foust's battery, and soon put them to flight, and pursued them four miles to the crossing of Illinois Creek. The course of this creek through the county is from the southeast to the northwest, but at the point where the Fayetteville road crosses it it flows nearly due west, and a short distance below the ford it changes its course and flows nearly due north for about one mile parallel with the road, when it again changes its course to the northwest. On reaching the high ground just north of the creek, General Herron discovered the Confederate army in posi- tion, occupying the high ridge covered with a thick growth of young timber and underbrush, about three quarters of a mile south of the ford. On the left-hand side of the road, for a distance of half a mile south of the creek, the ground was a high plateau covered with timber. South of the timber extending to the foot of the ridge on which the enemy were posted, there were several cultivated fields. On the right of the road from a short distance south of the creek to the foot of the ridge, there were several fields with intervening open ground. Prairie Grove Church was two miles southwest of the crossing of Illinois Creek, near the junction of the Cane Hill with the Cove Creek and Fayetteville roads. The two hostile armies were now confronting each other, and ready to engage in fierce con- flict. After reviewing the situation for a moment, General Herron was satisfied that the Confederate army had passed General Blunt by turning his left flank. Though he was BATTLE OF PRAIRIE GROVE. 409 not fully advised of the strength of the Southern army, he determined to attack it at once, hoping that the artillery firing would bring up the Kansas General with his division. He crossed the creek with one of his staff, and rode for- ward a short distance to examine the ground in his front, on which he wished to place his infantry and artillery in position to open the battle. Inspired by the courage and devotion of their gallant leader, his artillery companies were bringing up his twenty pieces of artillery at a gallop, and his foot-sore infantry were coming forward on the double-quick. After a careful inspection of the ground in front, Gen- eral Herron ordered Lieutenant C. L. Edwards to cross the creek with a section of Foust's battery, First Missouri Light Artillery, advance to the high ground on the left of the road in the edge of the timber, and open fire upon the enemy with shot and shell. Lieutenant-Colonel McNulta, commanding the Ninety-fourth Regiment Illinois Volun- teers, was directed to support Lieutenant Edwards' section of artillery in the movement thus ordered. The Lieutenant soon reached a point with his guns from which the enemy were seen drawn up in line about half a mile off, and at ten o'clock opened fire upon him. In a few moments the Confederate batteries replied with twelve pieces, and with such energy that General Herron withdrew the section of artillery and the Ninety-fourth Illinois from the advanced position thus taken. He saw that it would not be prudent to order his troops to cross the stream at the ford, unless he could draw the attention of the Confederate batteries to some other point, as they were posted so as to com- mand the ford by concentrating the fire of all their guns upon it. His infantry and artillery were rapidly coming up and forming in line, and he determined to cross the creek without unnecessarily exposing his troops to an enfilading fire of the Confederate artillery. After some further examination, he found that the stream could be 4IO THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. crossed about half a mile below the regular ford by cutting a road through the timber. This proposed crossing would enable him to take up a position south of the creek beyond the range of the Confederate batteries. He therefore ordered Colonel Huston, commanding the second division, to have a sufficient number of men detailed to cut out the proposed road with as little delay as possible. The plan of the General was to have one of his batteries cross the creek by the new road, advance to the high open ground on his extreme right, and open fire upon the enemy, hoping to draw the fire of their batteries, so that the infantry and artillery of his third division could cross the creek at the regular ford without having to face a storm of shot and shell. The moment that the new road was open, Colonel Huston moved Captain David Murphy's long-range rifled battery, First Missouri Light Artillery, across to the south side of the creek, and then, dividing it into half batteries, placed the left half of three pieces, under Captain Murphy, in a commanding position north of the Spring branch on the extreme right ; and the right half of three pieces, under Lieutenant James Marr, in a good position four hundred yards to the left on the south side of the Spring branch in front of the Confederate centre. The section of the Peoria Battery Illinois Light Artillery under Lieutenant Borris was posted about three hundred yards to the left of Lieutenant Marr, near the Fayetteville road. Colonel William McE. Dye, commanding the second brigade, second division, was ordered to support the two batteries. He directed Colonel John C. Black, command- ing the Thirty-Seventh Regiment Illinois Volunteers, to move to the right to support the pieces under Captain Murphy. Lieutenant-Colonel J. B. Leake, commanding the Twentieth Regiment Iowa Volunteers, was directed to support the pieces under Lieutenant Marr on the left. Colonel J. G. Clark, commanding the first brigade, BATTLE OF PRAIRIE GROVE. 411 second division, was ordered to occupy with his regiment, the Twenty-sixth Indiana Volunteers, a position one hun- dred yards in the rear of the centre of Colonel Dye's brigade, as a reserve. At twelve o'clock the three regi- ments, following Captain Murphy's battery, waded the creek and marched to the positions assigned to them. While Colonel Huston was thus moving into position on the right with the troops and artillery of the second division, General Herron was preparing to cross the creek at the regular ford with the troops and artillery of the third division under cover of the fire of Captain Murphy's battery. At 12 130 o'clock Captain Murphy fired the signal-gun, and a moment later the other two pieces, the half-battery under Lieutenant Marr and the section under Lieutenant Borris, opened fire upon the Confederates, who replied with twelve pieces with much energy. The moment the signal-gun was fired by Captain Murphy's battery, Colonel W. W. Orme, commanding the second brigade, third division, consisting of the Ninety-fourth Illinois Volun- teers under Lieutenant-Colonel James McNulta, the Nineteenth Iowa Volunteers under Lieutenant-Colonel Samuel McFarland, and Captain Foust's battery, First Missouri Light Artillery, moved forward and crossed the creek at the regular ford, under a heavy fire from the Con- federate artillery, and immediately prepared for action. Colonel Henry Bertram, commanding the first brigade, third division, moved forward with the Twentieth Regi- ment Wisconsin Volunteers, and Captain Frank Backofs battery, First Missouri Light Artillery, following close upon the rear of Colonel Orme's brigade, also received a heavy fire from the Confederate batteries before his com- mand had crossed the creek. The artillery companies of Captains Foust and Backof came to the front on a gallop, and went into battery a short distance in advance of the infantry, on the right and left of the road, and opened fire 412 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. upon the Confederate batteries and position, and in less than fifteen minutes after his signal-gun was fired, General Herron had eighteen pieces of artillery on the south side of the creek playing upon the Confederate position on the ridge with shot and shell. This storm of shot and shell sent by his batteries screeching into the Confederate lines, exploding and tearing the timber into splinters, soon brought out all General Hindman's artillery, consisting of twenty-two pieces. After crossing the creek, Colonels Orme and Bertram formed their brigades in line under cover of the bluff on the left and right of the road. Colonel McNulta, with the Ninety-fourth Illinois, formed on the left of the line ; Colonel McFarland, with the Nineteenth Iowa, formed in the centre ; and Colonel Bertram, with the Twentieth Wis- consin, formed on the right, the right of his line extending nearly to Colonel Huston's left. After the firing of General Herron's signal-gun, the batteries of the opposing armies engaged in a furious contest, and the roar of artil- lery and of exploding shells was continuous for nearly an hour, when the superior handling of the Federal batteries had silenced nearly every gun of the Confederate batteries, and compelled them to seek shelter behind the thick woods. During this artillery combat preparations were rapidly made on both sides for engaging in conflict with small-arms at close quarters. The detachments of the First, Sixth, and Seventh Regiments Missouri Cavalry, which had been dispersed in the morning by General Marmaduke's cavalry division, had now nearly all been collected under their proper officers, and, after reporting to General Herron, were assigned to duty on his flanks and as support to Lieutenant Boms' section of the Peoria battery. Having used a large amount of shot and shell during the day, the Federal batteries replenished their ammunition chests with grape and canister for close work. On the Confederate side, General Hindman had not yet BATTLE OF PRAIRIE GROVE. 413 been able to bring to the front all his forces to hurl against General Herron, as he had intended. His rear- guard, trains, and a force detached to guard the prisoners and wagons captured in the morning had been attacked by Colonel Judson, who had been sent out by General Blunt from Cane Hill with the Sixth Kansas Cavalry, two mountain howitzers, and Colonel Richardson's de- tachment. The booming of artillery in his rear alarmed General Hindman, and he detached General Parsons' division of infantry and sent it back to check the advance of the Federal force under Colonel Judson. Shortly after twelve o'clock he received information that General Blunt had left Cane Hill, was approaching rapidly, and would probably form a junction with General Herron before General Parsons could reach the field with his infantry. He was therefore greatly mortified when he saw that the time had passed for attacking with his combined forces the Federal divisions defiantly drawn up in his front. He was also astonished at the boldness of General Herron in crossing Illinois Creek in the face of the superior force and commencing the attack, instead of waiting behind that stream to be attacked. Having compelled the Confederate batteries to retire out of sight, and having replenished his ammunition chests with grape and canister, General Herron ordered forward his left wing, consisting of the brigades of Colo- nels Orme and Bertram. In this movement Captain Foust's battery was flanked on the left by the Ninety- fourth Illinois Infantry, and on the right by the Nine- teenth Iowa Infantry. And Captain Backofs battery was flanked on the left by the Nineteenth Iowa, and on the right by the Twentieth Wisconsin Infantry. Colonel McNulta, with the Ninety-fourth Illinois Infantry, ad- vanced through the woods and brush on the left to an open field and engaged the Confederate infantry, and after several volleys of musketry compelled them to fall back 4H THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. to a position behind the fence on the south side of the field. To follow up the advantage thus gained, the Colo- nel moved his regiment by the left flank farther to the left through the woods and formed in line within two hundred yards of the Confederate infantry, again opened a hot fire upon them, and after a short conflict forced them to retire over the hill. Colonel McFarland, in compliance with instructions from Colonel Orme, detached three companies of the Nineteenth Iowa Infantry, under Lieutenant Richard Root, and sent them forward under a heavy fire from the enemy as skirmishers to cover his advance, and to protect Captain Foust's battery, which had taken up a position in a wheat field on the left of the road, about one hundred and fifty yards from the foot of the ridge on which the Confederate infantry were formed in line. The Twentieth Wisconsin Infantry, under Major A. H. Starr, advanced on the right of the road across an open field a distance of five hundred yards, when Colonel Bertram ordered the men to lie down under cover of a fence. Captain Backof moved forward his battery close on the right of Major Starr, pouring a destructive fire of grape and canister into the Confederate line below the brow of the ridge as he advanced. In another moment General Shoup's division and Colo- nel Shelby's brigade of Confederates were seen advancing against the Federal left and threatening Captain Foust's battery. To check this movement of the enemy, and to protect his battery, Colonel Orme ordered Colonel McNulta to withdraw the Ninety-fourth Illinois Infantry from their position on the extreme left, and place them in position on the outside of the fence near the battery, and to sup- port it at all hazards. Captain Foust then divided his battery into three sections, placing the first section under Lieutenant C. L. Edwards, the second section under Lieutenant J. B. Atwater, and took charge of the third BATTLE OF PRAIRIE GROVE. 415 section himself. All the pieces now opened upon the Confederate infantry not more than one hundred and fifty yards distant, and drove them back into the woods on the ridge with great slaughter. Colonel McNulta now moved forward again to the posi- tion from which he had been withdrawn near the south- east corner of the wheat field, and opened a heavy fire of musketry on the enemy, causing them to fall back over the hill in much confusion. While Colonel McNulta was thus engaged on the left of the Federal line, Colonel Bertram observed a Confederate battery supported by infantry about two hundred yards in his front near the brow of the hill, preparing to open fire upon him. He therefore ordered the Twentieth Wisconsin Infantry to rise from where they were lying down and charge and take the battery. The regiment under Major A. H. Starr moved forward in gallant style, shot down most of the artillery horses and gunners, captured the battery, and advanced to the crest of the hill, where they received a terrific musketry fire from four or five regiments of Gen- eral Shoup's infantry division, which for a moment caused them to recoil, but rallying again returned the fire with great firmness and resolution. The enemy continuing to press forward in overwhelming numbers, Major Starr was soon obliged to fall back with his regiment much weakened by casualties, leaving the captured battery on the ground after destroying as much as possible of it and rendering it temporarily unfit for further use. In the meantime the Nineteenth Iowa Infantry, led by Colonel McFarland, had been ordered to move forward to support the Twentieth Wisconsin Infantry in their fierce struggle in the woods. Ascending the hill to the left of the white house, near the road, Colonel McFar- land advanced across the orchard back of the house to within a few yards of the fence, when the Confederate infantry, who had been lying down concealed in the brush 4l6 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. behind the fence, arose three regiments deep, and poured a terribly destructive fire of musketry into his regiment from three sides, causing them, after a short, fierce struggle, to fall back to Captain Foust's battery on the left of the road near the foot of the hill. In this furious charge Colo- nel McFarland fell shot through the body, and his regi- ment sustained a heavy loss in killed and wounded. After the death of Colonel McFarland, Major D. Kent took command and rallied the regiment, and in retiring recov- ered and brought off the field the colors of the Twentieth Wisconsin Infantry, which had been dropped by the color- bearer, who had been shot by the -enemy when the regi- ment commenced to fall back. Finding it impossible to hold the position on the ridge with the force engaged, Colonel Orme rode up and or- dered the rallied portions of the Nineteenth Iowa Infantry to fall in and rally with the Ninety-fourth Illinois Infantry on the left. And then leading these troops in person, Colonel Orme opened a heavy fire of musketry into the advancing line of Confederate infantry, and with the as- sistance of Captain Foust's battery, every piece of which was rapidly belching forth a perfect storm of canister into the Confederate line, succeeded in checking and driving it back into the woods on the brow of the hill. While the infantry of the third division were thus engaged in the desperate assault on the ridge, General Herron ordered Colonel Huston to bring up to their support two regi- ments of infantry from the second division on the right. The Colonel, leading his troops in person, brought for- ward at double-quick the Twenty-sixth Indiana Infantry, under Colonel Clark, and the Thirty-seventh Illinois In- fantry, under Colonel John C. Black, and on arriving at the foot of the ridge, near the scene of the conflict, found the infantry of the third division falling back before a superior force of the enemy. That they had suffered se- verely in the conflict, was evident from the number of wounded men moving and being borne to the rear. BATTLE OF PRAIRIE GROVE. 417 In order, therefore, to give the decimated regiments time to rally and re-form near Backof's and Foust's bat- teries, Colonel Huston ordered his two regiments, under Colonels Clark and Black, to charge the Confederate posi- tion on the ridge. In advancing up the hill he took the precaution to throw out a company of skirmishers from each regiment to cover its front and guard against a sur- prise. The two regiments moved steadily forward until they had passed the summit of the hill, when the skir- mishers in advance commenced firing upon the enemy, only few of whom could be seen through the thick brush and leaves. In another moment the Confederate infantry arose from where they were lying down, and advancing to the front three ranks deep, poured a destructive fire of musketry into the Federal line at a distance of less than one hundred yards. Anticipating an assault at any mo- ment, and seeing the skirmish line retiring, the Federal infantry were prepared for hot work, and delivered their fire at almost the same instant as the Confederates, and kept it up with great determination and disastrous effect for some time, but were finally forced by superior numbers of the enemy to fall back to a position just in the rear of the Federal batteries. After repulsing three desperate assaults of the Federal infantry, General Hindman determined to follow up his success by a counter charge, and in a few moments his in- fantry came pouring over the crest of the ridge in heavy masses, when Foust's and Backof's Federal batteries opened upon them such a destructive fire of grape and canister that they were obliged to fall back out of range into the woods and brush. Captain Murphy's battery and the section of Illinois artillery under Lieutenant Borris were also constantly engaged in this last and the preceding conflicts in throwing shot and shell into the Confederate line, and rendered efficient service in defending the right of the Federal line. When Colonel Huston moved with the Twenty-sixth Indiana and Thirty-seventh Illinois In- 27 41 8 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. fantry to the support of the infantry of the third division, he left Colonel Dye, of the second brigade, with the Twentieth Iowa Infantry and Captain Murphy's battery in position on the Federal right. While the conflict was thus raging with great fury on the ridge to the left and back of the white house, Colo- nel Dye moved forward Murphy's battery and the Twen- tieth Iowa Infantry, under Colonel Leake, on the right of it, to a position in the middle of the field, on the right of the main road in front of the white house. From this position his infantry advanced to the timber on the right of the orchard, and attacked and drove back, with the assistance of Murphy's battery, a large Confederate force that were moving against the Federal right. The fine rifled guns of Captain Murphy's battery, in the hands of his well-drilled company, threw percussion shells with the accuracy of sharp-shooters, and after disabling several rebel batteries, kept the others from coming into action in ex- posed positions. After the terrible volleys of small-arms had died away along the front, and General Herron's infantry had fallen back upon his artillery, complete silence reigned over the field for a short time, broken at intervals by a shot or shell from the hoarse-throated artillery. General Hindman declined to advance again from his strong posi- tion under cover of the timber and brush to attack the Federal troops in the open field, and General Herron did not feel strong enough to make another assault single- handed. His troops were already greatly exhausted by long, forced marches and the fatiguing operations of the day. About two o'clock, some of his troops on the extreme right heard distant rumbling sounds toward the west that gradually grew more distinct. A moment later, General Blunt was seen approaching at the head of three thousand cavalry and twenty pieces of artillery, through a small BATTLE OF PRAIRIE GROVE, 419 prairie at a full gallop. His infantry, having stripped for the fight at Rhea's Mills, were coming up at double-quick a short distance in his rear. Arriving on the field, he soon discovered by rapid inspection that the Confederate forces were in position in his front, and, ordering up a battery, opened fire upon them with shell. General Herron was at once advised of the arrival of the first division on the field, and the booming of artillery on his right announced to his nearly exhausted troops that their eagerly looked- for comrades had come to their assistance, inspiring them with new courage. Colonel Wickersham, who had moved with his cavalry brigade in advance of the first division from Rhea's Mills, came upon, attacked, and put to flight a detachment of Confederate cavalry who were posted on the extreme left of the Southern army, at the junction of the Cane Hill and Rhea's Mills roads, watching for the approach of General Blunt's division. Finding that he was in front of the position where the Southern forces were drawn up for battle, the Colonel at once deployed skirmishers in his front, and detailed two companies from the First Iowa Cavalry to strengthen his advance guard, and then moved forward in columns of squadrons. On moving forward and passing open ground for a quarter of a mile, and approaching the timber to the southeast, his advance encountered and drew the fire of the enemy near a house on the left of the Confederate line. The Federal cavalry instantly returned the fire with carbines, and after receiv- ing a reinforcement of another squadron of the First Iowa Cavalry, succeeded in driving them back about one hun- dred and fifty yards. To further strengthen his advance while forming his brigade in line of battle, Colonel Wickersham sent to its support a section of two-pounder steel howitzers attached to the Tenth Illinois Cavalry, under Corporal Levi Cas- sity. The Corporal, proceeding down the road, passed a 420 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. short distance beyond the line of the advance Federal squadrons with his howitzers, when the Confederate force, less than one hundred yards off, fired a volley at him, wounded him in the arm severely, killed one of his horses, and wounded the other. After this mishap, the men in charge of the other gun fell back rapidly with it to the main column, then forming in line and unlimbering, sent several rounds of canister into the Confederate force, causing it to retire into the timber. At the favorable moment, Lieutenant J. M. Simeral, First Iowa Cavalry, took twenty men, rescued and brought the abandoned howitzer and Corporal Cassity, who had remained with it, back into the Federal line. While General Blunt's cavalry were thus engaged on the right, his three field batteries coming up under whip, gal- loped into positions pointed out for them by the General and his aides-de-camp, in an open field about four hundred yards to the left and in front of General Hindman's left wing. Captain J. W. Rabb's Second Indiana Battery being in advance, came into position first, and immediately commenced a heavy cross-fire with shot and shell upon the Confederate position, raking it from left to right, and at some points enfilading the rebel lines. Captain M. D. Tenney's First Kansas Battery of the second brigade coming up, took position on the right of Rabb, and Cap- tain Henry Hopkins' Second Kansas (four-gun) Battery was placed in position a short distance to his left. The three batteries of sixteen pieces, supported by part of Colonel Wickersham's cavalry, now hurled a terrible storm of shot and shell into the Confederate lines, and with the assist- ance of General Herron's eighteen guns, about one half mile to the left, succeeded in driving back the Confederate infantry who were being massed against General Herron's right flank. His infantry coming up, General Blunt directed Colonel Wickersham to move his brigade of cavalry, consisting of BATTLE OF PRAIRIE GROVE. 42 1 the Tenth Illinois, under Lieutenant-Colonel James Stuart; the First Iowa, under Colonel James O. Gower ; the Eighth Missouri, under Colonel W. F. Geiger ; and the battalion of the Second Wisconsin Cavalry, under Major W. H. Miller, to the extreme right of the Federal line, to guard it against the movement of the enemy in that direction, and to keep the road open to Rhea's Mills, where General Salomon, with part of the first brigade, was stationed, guarding the first division trains. Colonel E. Lynde, with part of the Ninth Kansas Cavalry, and Major Calkins, with part of the Third Wisconsin Cavalry, also occupied positions on the Federal right flank. On the arrival of General Blunt's infantry upon the field, the second brigade, commanded by Colonel William Weer, consisting of the Tenth Kansas, under Major H. H. Williams, and the Thirteenth Kansas, under Colonel Thomas Bowen, and forty-four men of the Third Indian Regiment, under Lieutenant William Gallaher, formed in line on the right, in the rear of Captain Tenney's rifle-gun battery. The Tenth Kansas Infantry, with Lieutenant Gallaher's Indians on the right as skirmishers, formed the right wing, a dismounted detachment of Second Kansas Cavalry, under Lieutenant-Colonel Bassett, the centre, and the Thirteenth Kansas Infantry, the left wing of the brigade. The third brigade, commanded by Colonel W. F. Cloud, consisting of the Second Kansas Cavalry, under Lieuten- ant-Colonel Owen A. Bassett, the Eleventh Kansas In- fantry, under Colonel Thomas Ewing, Jr., and the First Indian Regiment, under Lieutenant-Colonel Stephen H. Wattles, formed on the left of Colonel Weer in the rear of Rabb's and Hopkins' batteries. The Eleventh Kansas Infantry formed the right wing, part of the Second Kansas Cavalry the centre, and the First Indian Regiment the left wing of the third brigade. Colonels Bassett and Wattles dismounted their regiments to fight on foot be- side the infantry. 422 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. On the left of Colonel Wattles' First Indian Regiment, Colonel Leake's Twentieth Iowa Infantry of the second division formed in line. Very soon after these disposi- tions were made, the left wing of the Eleventh Kansas Infantry, under Lieutenant-Colonel Thomas Moonlight and Major P. B. Plumb, was detached to support Captain Rabb's battery. Directly after his batteries were silenced, and his in- fantry driven back into the woods by Generals Blunt's and Herron's batteries, General Hindman determined to make a desperate effort to crush General Blunt's division, by hurling against it the division of General Frost and part of General Marmaduke's division. These troops, with two batteries, were at once ordered forward to as- sault the Federal right under General Blunt, while General Shoup's division, consisting of Generals Fagan's and McRae's brigades, and the brigades of McDonald and Shelby, of General Marmaduke's division, were ordered to continue the attack against the Federal left and centre under General Herron. The artillery firing having slack- ened, the captains of the Federal batteries of the first division having put a generous supply of grape and can- ister into their caissons, and preparations having been made on both sides for a desperate struggle, the forces of the Confederate left and centre under Generals Frost, Parsons, Roan, and Marmaduke, and of the Federal right under General Blunt, commenced to advance against each other about the same time. The second and third brigades of General Blunt's first division, in the order described, with skirmish lines thrown out, advanced from the field and prairie, and entering the timber to the south, encountered the Confederate infantry of Generals Parsons' and Roan's brigades. In another moment the opposing forces became engaged in a severe conflict with small-arms, the dreadful roar of which ex- tended along the entire front of the Federal right wing. BATTLE OF PRAIRIE GROVE. 423 The storm of leaden missiles, flying thick as hail, rapidly thinned the ranks of the combatants by death and wounds. In a short time the Confederate line was driven back some distance into the woods, but, receiving reinforcements, advanced again and forced the Federal line to retire almost to the open ground. On seeing his troops falling back before a superior force of the enemy, General Blunt ordered Lieutenant E. L. Stover to move his section of twelve-pounder howitzers attached to the Second Kansas Cavalry into the timber on the right of the Eleventh Kansas Infantry. At the same time Captain Tenney's First Kansas Battery was ordered to a position on the left of that regiment near the edge of the timber. The Fed- eral infantry, having re-formed in line, poured a galling fire of musketry into the advancing line of Confederates, and with the assistance of the howitzers and batteries, which now commenced playing upon the Confederate line with grape and canister, succeeded in checking and driving it back beyond the crest of the hill. But every time the Federal infantry endeavored to pass the summit of the hill they were met with a terrific musketry fire from the enemy, which obliged them to fall back a short distance to a less exposed position. The men were ordered to lie down, and by doing so they not only escaped almost un- harmed the volleys of leaden hail hurled at them, but occupied themselves in keeping up an effective fire into the Confederate line the moment it came within range. Thus the battle with fury raged until the sun, descend- ing behind the mountains, cast a dark shadow over the bloody field. The roar of artillery and small-arms almost died away for a short time. The lingering rays of the sun were growing dim upon the western sides of the high mountain peaks to the eastward, and the leaders of the opposing forces knew that only a short space of time re- mained for continuing the struggle before the veil of darkness would cover all. A little later, as the shades of 424 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER, evening were fading into twilight, General Blunt ordered his infantry to advance again. They moved forward and reached the crest of the hill, when General Frost's infantry poured out of the woods in overwhelming numbers and charged, and, extending his line beyond the Federal right, commenced a rapid flank movement. The roar of small- arms again burst forth with great fury, but after firing several rounds the Federal infantry were ordered by Gen- eral Blunt to fall back so as to draw the enemy within range of his guns, which were double charged with grape and canister. General Hindman ordered two batteries of ten pieces into position on his extreme left to support General Frost's infantry. The Confederate infantry followed close upon the retiring Federal line, and on reaching the summit of the hill, rushed forward with wild shouts in a charge on the Federal batteries. They were permitted to approach near the edge of the timber, within about one hundred yards, when Captain Tenney's battery on the right, Rabb's bat- tery in the centre, Hopkins' battery on the left, hurled a perfect storm of grape and canister into their ranks, and soon sent them in disorder back into the woods. The Federal infantry, by forming on the flanks in the space between the batteries and behind the broken panels of the rail fence near the edge of the timber, also by rapid firing, assisted in repulsing the charge of the enemy. While the conflict was thus raging along the front of the contending forces, the Confederate batteries just referred to as posted on General Hindman's left opened a hot fire upon the Federal position with shot and shell. To neutralize the effect of this artillery fire, General Blunt ordered Captain Tenney to turn his six ten-pounder Par- rott rifle guns upon the rebel batteries. The Captain instantly complied, and wheeling his guns into position, commenced throwing percussion shells at them, and in less than ten minutes dismounted two of the rebel guns, BATTLE OF PRAIRIE GROVE. 425 and forced the others to leave their position and seek shelter behind the hill in the thick wood. In this final struggle, two twelve-pound howitzers of the Third Wisconsin Cavalry, posted on the Federal right, by throwing shell and canister shot, did good work in check- ing and driving back the Confederate force attacking from that quarter. Farther to the Federal left, in the front of Colonel Cloud's brigade, the Confederate infantry com- menced collecting in large force behind a farm-house and a stack of straw near the edge of the timber, with the apparent intention of charging Rabb's battery. A detach- ment of rebel sharp-shooters had also taken shelter in and behind the house and outbuildings, and were endeavoring to pick off mounted Federal officers. Captain Rabb's attention was called to the movements of the enemy behind the straw-pile and buildings, and he at once com- menced throwing shell into them. The shells bursting, ignited the straw, and the house was soon in flames. In a few moments the enemy attempted to charge the bat- tery, but were met by such a terrific discharge of grape and canister and volleys of musketry delivered by Lieu- tenant-Colonel Moonlight's battalion of the Eleventh Kansas Infantry, led by Major Plumb, that they were compelled to fall back into the wood. Darkness having fallen, the firing of small-arms ceased on both sides, but General Blunt's powerful batteries con- tinued to sweep the brush and wood in front with a storm of shot and shell for some time afterward. Though Gen- eral Herron's infantry of the second and third divisions, except Colonel Leake's Twentieth Iowa Infantry, were not engaged at close quarters with the enemy after Gen- eral Blunt came upon the field, his batteries under Murphy, Backof, Foust, and Lieutenant Borris, were constantly engaged from noon until dark in hurling shot and shell and grape and canister into the Confederate lines and position. So effective and destructive was the 426 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. terrible fire of the Federal batteries, that General Hind- man stated " there was no place of shelter upon any por- tion of the field " ; that " wounds were given and death inflicted by the Federal artillery in the ranks of the reserves as well as in the front rank." In the open fields the Federal batteries changed posi- tions as often as desirable, and still kept up a steady fire into the Confederate position along the wooded ridge. In several instances the captains of these batteries, when closely pressed by the Confederate infantry, attached their guns to the limbers with prolonges and retired firing. The officers of the long-range rifled-gun batteries of Murphy in the centre and of Tenney on the Federal right, were constantly on the look-out for Confederate batteries. The moment one was discovered coming into position, or opening fire, the guns of Captain Murphy's or Captain Tenney's battery were turned upon it, and two or three rounds of percussion shells were generally sufficient to silence it and drive it from the field. It was therefore a source of much satisfaction to the Federal officers that they had by their excellent artillery practice prevented the Confederate batteries from inflicting upon the Federal forces any serious loss or damage. Night dropped a veil of darkness between the com- batants, and apparently left the contest undecided. When the firing ceased at dark, the opposing armies occupied the positions they had taken up on going into action. The Confederate forces bivouacked on the wooded ridge upon which they formed in the morning ; and the Federal forces bivouacked in the fields and open ground in front of the ridge. As the fighting was in the timber south of the fields and open ground, some of the Federal dead and wounded fell within the Confederate lines. Although it was a cold, frosty night, neither side ventured to make up fires the early part of the night, so near each other were the combatants resting upon their arms. Assuming that BATTLE OF PRAIRIE GROVE. 427 General Hindman would be in position to renew the con- flict the next morning, General Blunt, commanding the three divisions of the Army of the Frontier, determined, under cover of the darkness of the night, to strengthen his line, and have every thing in readiness to renew the battle at daylight. His division trains, which were at Rhea's Mills, five miles west, and exposed to attack, he ordered to Fayetteville, in the rear of the army. General Salo- mon, commanding the first brigade of the first division, who was guarding the trains with the Ninth Wisconsin Infantry and some detachments of other regiments, was ordered to bring his men to the front immediately. Colo- nel Wickersham, commanding the cavalry brigade, was directed to detail sufficient cavalry for an escort to the trains. On the arrival of the cavalry the trains commenced moving out from Rhea's Mills about eight o'clock, and passing to the rear of the army the advance teams reached Fayetteville early the next morning. In the engagement of the afternoon about three thousand of General Blunt's cavalry were not brought into action. The force sent out under Colonel Judson, Sixth Kansas Cavalry, to attack the rear of the Confederate army, did not reach the field until nearly dark. In the rapid movements of the Federal troops from Cane Hill to the battle-field, quite a number of men of the infantry regiments were obliged to drop out of the ranks from exhaustion. The strength of the infantry regiments of General Herron's divisions was also greatly reduced during the three days' marches by the men who were unable to endure the prolonged exertion dropping out of the ranks. The stragglers and men who had thus fallen out of ranks were collected, as far as practicable, and brought to the front during the night to join their proper regiments. In General Blunt's division not one of the regiments had sustained a heavy loss, and in General Herron's second and third divisions only three regiments 428 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. had suffered severely. By dismounting part of his cavalry to fight on foot, General Blunt could therefore go into battle next morning much stronger than he had gone into the conflict just closed. It would be easier now to prop- erly co-ordinate the movements of the troops than it was in the recent struggle. General Hindman had been per- mitted to throw the weight of his army first against General Herron's two divisions, and then against General Blunt's first division. He would not likely have an opportunity to do this again, for General Blunt deter- mined to have his three divisions next morning make a simultaneous attack upon the Confederate position. To satisfy the pinch of hunger, provisions, consisting of hard bread and bacon, were supplied by the commissariat to the Federal troops to prepare them for battle ; ammu- nition was brought up and also distributed to them. The Federal wounded had also, as far as practicable, been taken up and properly cared for by the surgeons and their corps of assistants. On the Confederate side, General Hindman held a council with his generals, and, after carefully considering the situation, decided to withdraw his army from the field without a further struggle, and to fall back to Van Buren. His troops commenced to withdraw about midnight, and von retiring kindled numerous fires along his front and left them burning for the purpose of deceiving the Federal army. To get his artillery off the field with as little noise as possible, the wheels of the carriages and limbers were muffled with the torn blankets of his soldiers. Having started his infantry and artillery on the retreat to Van Buren, General Hindman remained near the field with two brigades of cavalry, and sent General Marmaduke, accom- panied by several members of his staff, under a flag of truce, with a communication to General Blunt, requesting a personal interview for the purpose of making provisions for burying the dead and caring for the wounded of the Confederate army left upon the field. General Marmaduke BATTLE OF PRAIRIE GROVE, 429 and his party approached the Federal line on the Fayette- ville road, and being halted by the vigilant picket-guards, on whose eyelids sweet sleep sat not, were conducted by the officer of the day to General Herron's headquarters, and held until General Blunt, whose headquarters were about a mile distant, could be communicated with. General Blunt granted the interview, and the next morning, shortly after sunrise, accompanied by General Herron and several officers of their respective staffs and escorts, rode forward to meet Generals Hindman and Marmaduke and members of their staffs. The interview lasted until about ten o'clock, during which time the commanding generals of the opposing forces entered into a mutual agreement in regard to the exchange of prisoners and the disposition of the wounded left on the field. General Hindman was given six hours to bury his dead, but the two regiments of cavalry detailed for the purpose, instead of attending to that duty, commenced gathering up arms from the field. Their conduct was reported to General Herron, who went in person to the Confederate Colonels and informed them that any of their men found doing any thing else than burying the dead would be held as prisoners of war. This firmness of the Federal General had the effect of stopping them from gathering up any more arms, and the Confed- erate cavalry soon afterward retired to overtake General Hindman, leaving the Confederate dead to be buried by the Federal forces. General Blunt reported a loss in his three divisions of 167 men killed, 798 wounded, and 183 missing. On the Confederate side General Hindman reported his casualties at 164 men killed, 817 wounded, and 336 missing. A considerable proportion of the Confederate missing were probably among the wounded, from the fact that the day after the battle General Blunt furnished five thousand rations for one thousand Confederate wounded to keep them from starving.
