# Official Records I, XXVIII Part 1: Quincy A. Gillmore reports (charleston-1863 first pass), v1

## transcription-note

Digital OCR of a University of Illinois scan; not verified against print. Whitespace collapsed; all other characters retained, including OCR errors, split words, running headers, misprinted page numbers and footnote markers. Local headings are editorial. Bounded report passages by one author only; inclosures and indorsements by other authors are excluded unless stated. The title section is the compiler's title page.

## title

THE WAR OF THE REBELLION: A COMPILATION OF THE OFFICIAL RECORDS OF THE UNION AND CONFEDERATE ARMIES. PREPARED, UNDER THE DIRECTION OF THE SECRETARY OF WAR, BY The late Lieut. Col. ROBERT N. SCOTT, Third U. S. Artillery. PURSUANT TO ACTS OF CONGRESS. SERIES I— VOLUME XXVIII— IN TWO PARTS. PART I— REPORTS. ft WASHINGTON: Historical Society GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE. 1890.

## gillmore-1864-02-28-plan-and-forces

20. Headquarters Department of the South, Hilton Head , S. C., February 28, 1864. General : I have the honor to submit the following report of operations conducted by the forces under my command against the defenses of Charleston City during the summer and autumn of the past year : These operations comprise, principally — 21. First. The descent upon and capture of the enemy’s fortified positions on the south end of Morris Island, July 10, 1863. 22. Second. Two unsuccessful assaults upon Fort Wagner, on July 11 and 18, respectively. 23. Third. The demolition of Fort Sumter by two bombardments, viz, from the 17th to the 23d of August, and from the 27th of Octo- ber to the 9th of November. 24. Fourth. The siege and reduction of Forts Wagner and Gregg, terminating September 7. 25. Toward the close of last May, I received orders to repair to Washington. I there learned that it was the wish of the Navy De- partment to make another trial of the iron-clad gunboats against the defenses of Charleston Harbor. My views in regard to "the part which could be efficiently taken in such an operation by the small land force available for the purpose were requested. 26. I had entertained the opinion, which I freely expressed in my interviews with the Secretary of War, the Assistant Secretary of the Navy, and the General-in-Chief, during which the subject was fully discussed, that Fort Sumter could be reached and reduced, or its offensive power practically destroyed, without any material augmen- tation of the land and naval forces then serving in the Department of the South ; that a cordial and energetic co-operation between the two branches of service was essential to a full and entire success, and that the naval commander should be an officer who had confidence 6 S. C. AND GA. COASTS, AND IN MID. AND E. FLA. [Chap. XL. in the efficiency of the turret iron-clads (monitors) and their adapta- tion to such work, and who was willing to risk his reputation in the development of their new and comparatively untried powers. The operation was regarded as one in which audacity could with pro- priety enter as an important element. 27. I also expressed the opinion that beyond the demolition of Fort Sumter, the land forces, numbering scarcely 11,000 men of all arms available for offensive operations, could not, unless largely re-en- forced, take the lead in any operations against the interior defenses of Charleston that would involve their leaving their hold upon the narrow sea islands, where on the one hand they had the co-operation of the navy against the iron-clad rams and gunboats of the enemy, and on the other practically impassable marshes, against which the well-known superior numbers of the enemy and their facilities for concentrating troops by railroad, could be of little avail and confer no special advantage. 28. A land attack upon Charleston was not even discussed at any of the interviews to which I was invited, and was certainly never contemplated by me. 29. The principal question was, to what extent the fall of Sumter or the destruction of its offensive power would exert an influence in the capture of Charleston, that, of course, being the ultimate object in view. 30. A consideration which possessed much weight in the delibera- tion was the great practical advantage to be derived from a blockade of Charleston Harbor in all respects thorough and complete. The capture of Morris Island, thereby allowing a portion of all the blockading fleet to lie inside the bar, even should they fail to finally occupy the waters of the inner harbor, would secure this end. 31. The naval authorities then at the seat of Government regarded Fort Sumter as the key of the position. That stronghold once de- molished, or its offensive power practically destroyed, the mon- itors and iron-clads, they affirmed, could remove the channel ob- structions, secure control of the entire harbor, and reach the city. 32* The barbette fire of Sumter was specially dreaded on account of the comparative vulnerability of the monitors’ decks to a plung- ing fire. 33. It was, therefore, determined to attempt the destruction of Fort Sumter, unless it should become necessary, before the com- mencement of active operations, to detach troops from the Atlantic coast to re-enforce General Banks, then operating before Port Hud- son on the Mississippi, and who could not expect assistance from General Grant, who was at that time vigorously pushing the siege of Vicksburg. 34. The following is a brief synopsis of the plan of attack agreed upon. Of the four distinct operations which it comprises, the army was to take the lead in executing the first, second, and third. PLAN OF ATTACK. 35. First. To make a descent upon and obtain possession of the south end of Morris Island, known to be occupied by the enemy, and in progress of being strongly fortified, offensively and defensively. 36. Second. To lay siege to and reduce Fort Wagner, a heavily armed earthwork of strong plan and relief, situated near the north end of Morris Island, and distant about 2,600 yards from Fort Sumter. With Fort Wagner, the work on Cumming's Point would also fall. Chap. XL.] GENERAL REPORTS. 7 37. Third. From the position thus secured, to demolish Fort Sum- ter, and afterward co-operate with the fleet by a heavy artillery fire when it was ready to move in. 38. Fourth. The monitors and iromclads to enter, remove the channel obstructions, run by the batteries on James and Sullivan’s Islands, and reach the city. 39. No written instructions whatever were given by the War De- partment, everything connected with the operations of the land forces in general and in detail being left to the judgment and dis- cretion of the officer intrusted with the execution of the project. It was presumed that as soon as the fleet should reach the city, the outer line of defenses thus broken through would be abandoned by the enemy, for the control of Cooper and Wando Rivers by our gunboats, and the operations of the land forces which they could then aid and cover, would compel the evacuation of Sullivan’s Island, after which the possession of James Island would be of but little value to the enemy. 40. Other plans of joint operations to be executed after the navy should enter the inner harbor and reach the city, were from time to time discussed by Rear-Admiral Dahlgren and myself, but it is un- necessary to mention them here. 41. I assumed command of the Department of the South on the 12th of June. Our forces had then control of the coast from Light- House Inlet to Saint Augustine, a distance of nearly 250 miles. The positions actually occupied by our troops were : Folly Island, Sea- brook Island on the North Edisto, Saint Helena Island, Port Royal Island, Hilton Head Island, Tybee Island, Fort Pulaski, Ossabaw Island, Fort Clinch, Amelia Island, and the city of Saint Augustine. An efficient blockading squadron lay off or inside the principal inlets. 42. Folly Island, the most northerly position of the coast in our possession, was occupied by a brigade under Brig. Gen. I. Yogdes, who had intrenched the position strongly, and had mounted several heavy guns on the south end of the island, to control the waters of Stono Inlet and the water approaches from James Island. A road had also been opened, practicable for infantry and artillery, by means of which a concealed communication with all points of the island was secured. 43. A naval force under Commander [George B.] Balch, compris- ing two gunboats and a mortar schooner, was also stationed in the Stono and Folly Rivers. 44. The greater portion of Folly Island was very thickly wooded, the undergrowth being dense and almost impassable. Near the north end, for the distance of nearly 2,000 yards, it was extremely narrow, perfectly barren, and so low that the spring tides frequently sweep entirely over it. At the extreme north end, however, the sand ridges, formed by the gradual action of the wind and tide, were, when our operations commenced, covered with a thick undergrowth favorable for concealment and the masking of batteries. In this thicket General Yogdes had his pickets, those of the enemy being on the opposite side of Light-House Inlet, within musket-range. Cole’s Island and all the hummocks and patches of firm ground be- tween Folly and James Islands were kept under our surveillance by means of frequent and constant reconnaissances. 45. It was determined to withdraw the forces from Ossabaw Sound and the North Edisto, as positions of no importance to us and of no 8 S. C. AND GA. COASTS, AND IN MID. AND E. FLA. [Chap. XL. advantage to tlie enemy, in consequeqce of the efficient blockade of those inlets by the navy. 46. By the changes above indicated, it was found that the aggre- gate means for carrying on offensive operations within the depart- ment, leaving the depot at Hilton Head perfectly secure and the other important points reasonably so, comprised the forces enumer- ated below, viz : Effective volunteer infantry 10, 000 Volunteer artillerists for serving heavy guns and guns of position ’ 350 Engineer troops 600 Pieces of field artillery completely equipped and mounted 28 Pieces of field artillery without horses and but partially manned 8 Parrott rifled guns of 8 inches diameter of bore, known as 200-pounders. . . 5 Parrott rifled guns of 6.4 inches diameter of bore, known as 100-pounders. 9 30-pounder Parrott siege guns of 4.2 inches diameter of bore 12 20-pounder Parrott siege guns of 3.67 inches diameter of bore 4 13-inch seacoast mortars 12 10-inch siege mortars 10 8-inch siege mortars 5 Coehorn mortars 3 There was a liberal supply of ammunition and engineering tools and materials. The entire effective force in the department, includ- ing men on extra and daily duty, was 17,463.

## gillmore-1864-02-28-morris-island-and-james-island

PLAN OF PRELIMINARY ATTACK. 48. The project for obtaining a lodgment on Morris Island com- prised three distinct operations. First. The real attack from Folly Island to partake of the nature of a surprise. Second. A demonstration in force on James Island, by way of the Stono River, designed to prevent re-enforcements to the enemy on Morris Island from that quarter, and, if possible, draw a portion of the Morris Island garrison in that direction. Third. The cutting of the Charleston and Savannah Railroad at Jacksborough by ascending the South Edisto River, in order to delay re-enforcements from Savannah, should the real attack be tempora- rily checked or prematurely divulged. 49. The demonstration up the Stono was commanded by Brig. Gen. A. H. Terry, and was eminently successful. A large part of the Morris Island garrison was drawn to James Island by it. The attempt to cut the railroad was intrusted to Colonel [Thomas W.] Higginson, First South Carolina Volunteers, who was sent from Brig. Gen. R. Saxton’s command, at Beaufort, for that pur- pose. It signally failed, with a loss to us of two pieces of field artillery and a small steamer, which was burned to prevent its falling into the hands of the enemy. THE DESCENT ON MORRIS ISLAND, JULY 10, 1863. 50. The storming of a fortified position, excepting when preceded by the slow operations of a regular siege, which, besides partially or entirely silencing the fire of the enemy’s work, will also enable the attacking column to get very- near the enemy under cover before the Chap. XL.] GENERAL REPORTS. 9 final assault is made, is always an operation attended with imminent peril in its execution and great uncertainty in its results. The best troops can seldom be made to advance under the fire of even a few well-served pieces of artillery. The hazard of such an undertaking, great as it is under ordinary circumstances, when both parties operate on firm ground, becomes immeasurably augmented when the assault- ing column has to approach in small boats from a distant point, exposed to full view and constant artillery fire, disembark and form upon an open beach in the presence of the enemy, and finally advance to the attack under the combined fire of artillery and small-arms. 51. Yet these were the difficult conditions of the problem so suc- cessfully solved in the descent upon Morris Island on the 10th of July. 52. It was known from deserters and fugitives that the enemy had there in position from ten to twelve guns of various calibers, and that these were so arranged in batteries of single pieces that they each covered with their fire not only the north end of Folly Island, held by our advanced pickets, and the main ship-channel abreast of Mor- ris Island, but could be so traversed as to sweep the entire length of Light-House Inlet, which separates the two islands. 53. Three methods of conducting the assault suggested themselves. First. To place the men in small boats in Stono River, tow them out to sea, and land them in the surf at daybreak on the sea point of Morris Island. Second. To accumulate on the north end of Folly Island the boats required for the assaulting column, keep them concealed there until the moment of attack, and then launch them under fire, embark the men, and cross over. Third. To embark the men in Folly River, and pass in the night- time during high tide through the shallow creeks into Light-House Inlet, and make the assault from that direction. This last-named method of attack was adopted. 54. In the meantime, between the middle of June and the 6th of July, ordnance and ordnance stores were quietly accumulated on Folly Island. 55. The following armament, designed to operate against, and, if possible, dismount the enemy’s guns nearest the landing place, and therefore the most to be dreaded, and also to cover the debarkation of our troops on Morris Island, but more particularly their re-em- barkation in case of repulse, was secretly placed in position on the north end of Folly Island, completely masked from the enemy’s view by the sand ridges and undergrowth. Kind of guns. No. of guns. Battery A. Rifled 3-inch field 2 B. 20-pounder siege Parrott 4 C. 30-pounder Parrott 4 D. 10-inch mortar siege 6 E. 3-inch rifled field 2 F. 10-pounder Parrott field 6 G. 30-pounder Parrott 8 H. 10-inch mortar siege 4 I. 3-inch Wiard rifled field 6 K. 8-inch mortar siege 5 (See Plate II.*) * Reference is to “ Map of siege operations against the defenses of Charleston Harbor. 1863, showing batteries covering the descent upon Morris Island, July 10,” &c. It is to appear in Atlas. 10 S. C. AND GA. COASTS, AND IN MID. AND E. FLA. [Chap. XL. 56. The duty of constructing these batteries was assigned to Brig. Gen. I. Yogdes. The task was by no means easy, and to its success- ful execution our subsequent triumphs were due in no small degree. 57. It was necessary that the attack on Morris Island should be a surprise in order to insure success. Secrecy was, therefore, an essen- tial element in the preparations. Most of the work on the batteries and all the transportation to them was accomplished at night and in silence. Moreover, all signs of work had to be carefully concealed by day. One fortunate circumstance favored these operations. A blockade runner was chased ashore just south of the entrance to Light- House Inlet, within point-blank range of our batteries, and while the enemy on Morris Island were industriously engaged in wrecking this vessel, night and day (an operation which we could easily have pre- vented), our batteries were quietly and rapidly pushed forward to completion. They were ready to open fire on the 6th of July. 58. The fact that forty-seven pieces of artillery, with 200 rounds of ammunition per gun, and provided with suitable epaulements, splinter- proof shelters, and magazines, were secretly placed in battery in a position within speaking distance of the enemy’s pickets, exposed to a flank and reverse view from their tall observatories on James Island, and to a flank view at pistol-range from the wreck, furnishes by no means the least interesting and instructive item of this cam- paign. (See report of Brigadier-General Yogdes, Appendix A.*) 59. Meanwhile, during the week ending July 8, additional troops, comprising Brigadier-General Terry’s division, about 4,000 strong, and Brigadier-General Strong’s brigade, about 2,500 strong, were quietly accumulated on Folly Island, under cover of darkness. 60. The buoys at the entrance to Stono Biver, where the channel was narrow and crooked, with but 5 feet of water at low tide, were lighted at night, and all transports carrying troops were ordered to enter after dark, land their men, and depart before daylight in the morning. Sutlers’ schooners were ordered away, and all appearance of preparations for offensive operations was carefully suppressed. On General Yogdes’ defensive works, a semblance of great activity was conspicuously displayed. Everything being in readiness, the following order was issued : 61. Headquarters Department of the South, Folly Island, July 8, 1868. CONFIDENTIAL INSTRUCTIONS. I. An attack upon Morris Island will be made, at the rising of the moon to-night, by Brigadier-General Strong’s brigade, of Brigadier- General Seymour’s division. This force will be embarked in small boats, immediately after sunset, and will pass through Folly Island Creek to and across Light-House Inlet. A small detachment from this force will enter the creek to the west of Morris Island, and will land just north of the old light-house, seize the batteries there, and, if possible, turn them upon the enemy’s encampment north of them. The main column will land from Light-House Inlet, carry the batteries on the south end of Morris Island, and advance to the support of the detachment above mentioned. Two regiments and some field artillery will be held in readiness on the extreme north end of Folly Island, to be pushed over as re-enforcements. To this end. General Strong will send his boats over as soon as he has disembarked his command. II. At the same time, General Terry, with all his division, excepting the One hundredth New York Volunteers, will ascend the Stono River under convoy of the navy, and make a strong demonstration on James Island, but will not unnecessarily * Printed as No. 11, under Operations on Morris Island, p. 350. Chap. XL.] GENERAL REPORTS. 11 hazard any portion of his command. Perhaps one or two regiments only need be disembarked. These should be pushed forward as skirmishers, under cover of the navy. III. A naval force is expected to enter the main channel abreast of Morris Island by or before sunrise to-morrow morning, to co-operate with the land forces. IV. Should the night attack fail from any cause, the assaulting column will with- draw to Folly Island, sending their boats into Folly Island Creek. In that event, the batteries on the north end of Folly Island will open at daybreak, or as soon there- after as practicable. Brigadier-General Seymour will arrange the details. By order of Brig. Gen. Q. A. Gillmore: W. L. M. BURGER, Assistant Adjutant-General. 62. Colonel Serrell, of the New York Volunteer Engineers, was ordered to remove, before daybreak on the 9th, the piles which the enemy had previously placed across the creek which connects Light- House Inlet with Folly Island Creek, to allow the boats to pass through. 63. The batteries on the north end of Folly Island were also ordered to be unmasked, by opening out the embrasures and cutting away the brush-wood in front of them. (See Plate II.*) 64. About midnight of the 8th, it was determined for various rea- sons, the principal of which was the unseaworthy condition of our boats, to defer the attack until the next night. A sufficient num- ber of the piles had been removed to afford a passage for the boats, but the work of unmasking the batteries had not progressed far enough to expose them to the view or attract the attention of the enemy. 65. In the meantime, Brigadier-General Terry’s command, of about 3,800 men, had proceeded up the Stono on the afternoon of the 8th, and was confronting the enemy on James Island. The immediate effect of this demonstration, as subsequently ascertained, was to draw off a portion of the enemy’s force on Morris Island. The following order was then issued on the afternoon of the 9th, and full detailed instructions for the assault given verbally to Generals Seymour and Strong : 66. Headquarters Department of the South, Folly Island, S. C., July 9, 1863. CONFIDENTIAL INSTRUCTIONS. I. The attack on Morris Island, ordered for this morning but postponed in con- sequence of the inclemency of the weather and other unfavoral le circumstances, will take place to-morrow morning at break of day by opening our batteries at the north end of Folly Island. General Strong’s brigade, or so much of it as the small boats can accommodate, will embark to-night, and hold itself in Folly Island Creek, ready to move forward, and at the proper time occupy the south end of Morris Island. II. Lieut. Commander Francis W. Bunce, U. S. Navy, with four navy howitzer launches, will approach Light-House Inlet at daybreak, by way of Folly Island Creek, and engage the enemy’s rifle-pits and batteries on Morris Island in flank and reverse, choosing his own position. He will cover General Strong’s landing. III. Two regiments of infantry, a battery of light artillery, and five Requa rifle batteries will be held in readiness to re-enforce General Strong promptly. Brigadier- General Seymour will arrange and order all details. By order of Brig. Gen. Q. A. Gillmore : ED. W. SMITH, Assistant Adjutant-General. * See foot-note, p. 9. 12 S. C. AND GA. COASTS, AND IN MID. AND E. FLA. [Chap. XL. 67. In pursuance of the above order, nearly 2,000 men of General Strong’s brigade were embarked in small boats in Folly River on the evening of the 9th, and at daybreak on the following morning the head of the column had reached Light-House Inlet, where it was halted. The boats kept close to the east side of the creek, and were screened by the marsh grass from the enemy on Morris Island. 68. Our batteries opened shortly after daybreak, and were served rapidly for about two hours, when I sent an order to General Strong, by signals, to land and make the assault by jjutting two regiments ashore at Oyster Point and the balance of his command on the firm land lower down. This he accomplished at once, and all the enemy’s batteries on the south end of Morris Island were gallantly and suc- cessively taken by him. By 9 o’clock we occupied three-fourths of the island, and our skirmishers were within musket-range of Fort Wagner. The heat being intense and thetroox-)S exhausted, offensive operations were suspended for the day. 69. Brigadier-General Seymour was ordered to carry Fort Wagner by assault at daybreak on the following morning. The attempt failed. The following report of these operations was made to the General- in-Chief : 70. Headquarters Department of the South, In the Field, Morris Island, July 12, 1863. Maj. Gen. H. W. Halleck, General-in-Chief, U. S. Army, Washington, D. C. : Sir : I have the honor to report that at 5 o’clock on the morning of the 10th instant, I made an attack upon the enemy’s fortified positions on the south end of Morris Island, and, after an engagement lasting three hours and a quarter, captured all his strongholds on that part of the island, and pushed forward my infantry to within 600 yards of Fort Wagner. We now hold all the island, excepting about 1 mile on the north end, which includes Fort Wagner and a battery on Cumming’s Point, mount- ing at the present time fourteen or fifteen heavy guns in the aggregate. The as- saulting column was gallantly led by Brigadier-General Strong. It landed from small boats under cover of our batteries on Folly Island and four monitors led by Rear-Admiral Dahlgren, which entered the main channel abreast of Morris Island, soon after our batteries opened. The rfionitors continued their fire through the day, mostly against Fort Wagner. On the morning of the 11th, at daybreak, an attempt was made to carry Fort Wagner by assault. The parapet was gained, but the support recoiled under the fire to which they were exposed, and could not be gotten up. Our loss in both actions will not vary much from 150 killed, wounded, and missing. We have taken eleven pieces of heavy ordnance and a large quantity of camp equipage. The enemy’s loss in killed, wounded, and missing will not fall short of 200. Very respectfully, your obedient servant, Q. A. GILLMORE, Brigadier-General, Commanding. 71. It was subsequently ascertained from deserters and prisoners that the enemy’s loss was very considerably underestimated in the above report. General Beauregard, in his official dispatch, admits a loss of 300, including 16 commissioned officers killed, wounded, and missing. 72. The kind and caliber of the guns captured in this assault are given in the following table, and their several positions are indicated on plate by the capital letters, as follows : A. One 8-incli navy shell gun, pintle in center transom. B. One 8-inch sea-coast howitzer, pintle on rear transom. C. One 3-inch Whitworth siege-carriage. D. Three 10-incli sea-coast mortars. Chap. XL.] GENERAL REPORTS. 13 E. One 30-pounder Parrott (navy) siege-carriage. F. One Brooks rifle (siege). G. One 8-inch navy gun. H. One 8-inch navy gun. I. One 8-inch sea-coast howitzer. (See report of Brigadier-General Seymour, Appendix B; also re- port of Brigadier-General Strong, Appendices E and F.*) 73. Brigadier-General Terry was attacked on James Island by a largely superior force, including infantry, cavalry, and artillery, on the 16th of July. With the aid of the gunboat Pawnee, Captain Balch, and two "army transports, each carrying a small armament, the enemy was repulsed. The demonstration in that quarter having accomplished its object, General Terry’s command was withdrawn on the 17th.

## gillmore-1864-02-28-assault-july-18

74. The failure of the assault on Fort Wagner of July 11, taken in connection with apparently reliable statements by prisoners and deserters from the enemy, giving sundry details of the trace and profile of that work, and* the strength of its garrison and armament, induced me, upon conferring with Rear-Admiral Dahlgren, to estab- lish counter-batteries against it. 75. It was determined to attempt, with the combined fire of the land batteries and gunboats, to dismount the principal guns of the work, and either drive the enemy from it or open the way to a suc- cessful assault. Batteries were accordingly established, and were ready to open fire on the morning of July 18. 76. Up to this period, our actual knowledge of the strength of the enemy’s defenses on the north end of Morris Island was quite meager. It was known that Fort Wagner was an inclosed work, reaching from high-water line on the east side to Vincent’s Creek on the west side of the island. It was thought that it mounted ten or twelve guns; that four or five of them were on the south front, to protect the land approach, and that two, or perhaps three, heavy guns covered the main channel abreast of the island. Battery Gregg, on Cumming’s Point, was supposed to mount two or three guns for channel defense only. 77. The truly formidable character of Fort Wagner and the great strength and capacity of its bomb-proof shelter were very much under- estimated. Moreover, it was not known until subsequently that the island at its narrowest point, near and just south of the fort, had been reduced by the encroachments of the sea to about one-fourth or one- third of the width shown on the latest Coast Survey charts, and that during spring tides and heavy weather the waves frequently swept entirely over it, practically isolating that position defended by Fort Wagner and Battery Gregg, thus greatly augmenting the difficulty to be overcome in capturing the position, whether by assault or grad- ual approaches. 78. Special Orders, ) Headquarters Department of the South, No. 9. f In the Field , Morris Island, July 17, 1863. The several batteries against the enemy’s positions on the north end of Morris Island are named as follows : I. Battery Reynolds, in advance, comprising five 8-inch mortars (siege), two 30- pounders, and six 10-pounder Parrotts, four 3-inch rifles, and two Wiard rifles. 2. Battery Weed, in rear of right of Battery Reynolds, comprising four 10-inch mortars, * Printed as Nos. 9 and 12, under Operations on Morris Island, pp. 343 and 354. [Chap. XL. 14 ' S. C. AND GA. COASTS, AND IN MID. AND E. FLA. 3. Battery Hays, in rear and on the left of Battery Reynolds, comprising nine 30 and four 20 pounder Parrott rifles. 4. Battery O’Rorke, in rear of the right of Battery Hays, comprising five 10- ijich siege mortars. Captain Langdon, First U. S. Artillery, is assigned to the command of Batteries Reynolds and Weed. Lieutenant-Colonel Jackson, assistant inspector-general, with Major Bailey, Third Rhode Island Artillery, as assistant, is assigned to the command of Batteries Hays and O’Rorke. These batteries will be opened upon Fort Wagner immediately after break of day to-morrow. The firing must be executed with great care and deliberation, the object of the rifled guns being principally to dismount the enemy’s guns. They will not expend ammunition when their view of the en- emy’s works is obstructed by smoke. Both time-fuse and percussion shell will be used, preferably the former. Each mortar will fire once every five minutes, alter- nating from the right in each battery. The shells should be exploded in or directly over Fort Wagner. By order of Brig. Gen. Q. A. Gillmore : ED. W. SMITH, Assistant Adjutant-General. 79. The distances of these batteries from Fort Wagner were as follows : Battery Reynolds, 1,330 yards; Battery Weed, 1,460 yards; Battery Hays, 1,830 yards, and Battery O’Rorke, 1,920 yards. Subsequently to this period and through all the most important operations of the season, the commanding general performed the duties of chief engineer. Col. J. W. Turner was made chief of ar- tillery iii addition to his duties as chief of staff. Surg. H. R. Wirtz became medical director; and Capt. Alfred Mordecai, chief of ord- nance. Col. E. W. Serrell, First New York Volunteer Engineers; Capt. (now Major) T. B. Brooks, aide-de-camp ; and Lieutenants Suter and Michie, U. S. Engineers, were appointed assistant engi- neers. Captain [Chauncey B.] Reese joined the command a few days before the fall of Fort Wagner, and was appointed assistant and consulting engineer. Characteristic physical features of Morris Island. 80. Morris Island is about 3f miles long. Its width above high- water mark varies between very wide limits (25 to 1,000 yards), while its area is 400 acres, approximately. 81. The center of the island lies in a southeasterly direction from Charleston City, and is 5-f miles distant from it. 82. Cumming’s Point, the northern extremity, is exactly 6,616 yards distant from the nearest point of the city, and 2, 700 yards dis- tant by the shortest line from Fort Moultrie, on Sullivan’s Island. Fort Sumter is 1,390 yards distant from Cumming’s Point. 83. Morris Island is widest at its southern extremity, where it is made up of a succession of irregular sand hills and ridges, the high- est of which rise to a uniform height of 36 feet above ordinary high-water level, while just south of Wagner the width is reduced to 25 yards and the depth to 2 feet. At this point the sea frequently breaks entirely over the island during the spring tides. On the east side it is gradually yielding to the encroachments of the sea. 84. During the first fifty days of our occupation, the loss in many places was 1 foot per day, while between Fort Wagner and the Beacon House 75 yards in width have been lost since the last charts by the U. S. Coast Survey were prepared. 85. The stratum of mud, of which the salt-marsh which separates James and Morris Islands is composed, passes under the latter and Chap. XL.] GENERAL REPORTS. 15 crops out on the beach between high and low water mark. The island, in fact, is simply an irregular mass of sand, which, by the continued action of wind and sea (particularly the former), has been accumulated upon the bosom of the marsh. 86. The material of which Morris Island is formed, and of which the batteries, trenches, and other siege works were constructed, is a fine and almost white quartz sand, weighing, when dry, 86 pounds to the cubic foot. Twenty-four pounds (about 3 gallons) of water will saturate 1 cubic foot of this sand, which is thereby decreased in volume about 5 per cent. Its power of resisting the penetration of shot is also decreased by wetting, while a steady and gradual accu- mulation of pressure, like the moving of heavy wheels over it, pro- duces a greater effect, by at least three- fold, upon the dry than upon the wet sand. 87. During the first week of our occupation of Morris Island, a succession or heavy rain-storms very materially interfered with the progress of our works. Nearly all the batteries were submerged and much of the powder spoiled, so that the combined attack on Fort Wagner, fixed to take place on the 16th of July, was delayed until the 18th, and, finally, instead of commencing at break of day, as had been .intended, was necessarily postponed until noon. Advantage was taken of this unavoidable delay tp obtain the range of our mor- tars. Soon after midday all our batteries opened, and the navy, which had been waiting their completion, closed in opposite the fort, and took a very active and effective part in the engagement. 88. In a short time the fort was entirely silent on the face fronting the land batteries, and practically so on the sea front, from which, at the commencement of the action, a sharp and severe fire had been delivered against the fleet. ASSAULT ON FORT WAGNER, JULY 18, 1863. 89. Late in the afternoon, I sent word to Rear-Admiral Dahlgren that I intended to storm the work about sunset. The time of twi- light was selected for the storming party to move to the attack, in order that it might not be distinctly seen from the James and Sulli- van’s Island batteries and from Fort Sumter. Brig. Gen. T. Seymour commanded the attacking column. 90. Brigadier-General Strong’s brigade led the assault. It was composed of the Fifty-fourth Massachusetts (colored), Colonel Shaw ; the Sixth Connecticut, Colonel Chatfield ; a battalion of the Seventh Connecticut; the Forty-eighth New York, Colonel Barton; Third New Hampshire, Colonel Jackson; the Ninth Maine, Colonel Emery ; the Seventy-sixth Pennsylvania, Colonel Strawbridge ; and was supported by Colonel Putnam’s brigade, comprising his own regiment, the Seventh New Hampshire, Lieutenant-Colonel Abbott ; the One hundredth New York, Colonel Dandy; the Sixty-second Ohio, Colonel Pond, and the Sixty-seventh Ohio, Colonel Yoris. The regiments were all small. As the head of the column debouched from the first parallel, the guns in Wagner, Gregg, Sumter, and also those on James and Sulli- van’s Islands opened upon it rapidly and simultaneously, and when it approached so near the work that the firing from the navy and that of our own mortars and the gun batteries on the extreme left had to be suspended, a compact and most destructive musketry fire was instantly delivered from the parapet by the garrison, which, up 16 S. C. AND GA. COASTS, AND IN MID. AND E. FLA. [Chap. XL. to that moment, had remained safely ensconced in the bomb-proof shelter. 91. The troops went gallantly on, however, and although the lead- ing regiment was soon thrown into a state of disorder, which reacted disadvantageous^ upon those which followed, and rendered it neces- sary to send in the supporting brigade, the southeast bastion was gained, and held by us for nearly three hours. The advantage which the darkness and the perfect knowledge of the interior arrangements of the work gave the enemy rendered it necessary to relinquish it. 92. Our loss was very severe, especially in valuable officers of rank. Among the latter who were either killed upon the spot or died subsequently of their wounds, were Brig. Gen. George C. Strong and Cols. John L. Cliatfield, Haldimand S. Putnam, and R. G. Shaw.

## gillmore-1864-02-28-siege-plan

SIEGE OF FORT WAGNER AND FIRST BOMBARDMENT OF FORT SUMTER. 93. The formidable strength of Fort Wagner, considered with re- gard to its position, trace, and interior arrangements, as developed in the unsuccessful assault of the 18th of July, induced a modification of the plan of operations, or rather a change in the order previously determined upon. 94. The demolition of Fort Sumter was the object in view as pre- liminary to the entrance of the iron-clads. Neither Fort Wagner nor Battery Gregg possessed any special importance as a defense against the passage of the iron-clad fleet. They were simple out- posts of Fort Sumter. Fort Wagner was specially designed to pre- vent the erection of breaching batteries against that work, and was valueless to the enemy if it failed to accomplish that end. To save valuable time, it was determined to attempt the demolition of Sumter from ground already in our possession, so that the iron-clads could enter upon the execution of their part of the programme. 95. Should the fleet fail of success in the inner harbor, the posses- sion of all of Morris Island would then be of value to us, as a means of securing a more perfect blockade of the port. Arrangements to press the siege of Fort Wagner by regular approaches were, there- fore, also made, although the obstacles to be removed and the diffi- culties to overcome appeared most formidable. The work was in- closed, and occupied the entire breadth of the island, extending from high-water mark on the east to Vincent’s Creek and the impassable marshes on the west, presenting to us a front of over three times the average development that could, by taking advantage of all the firm ground, be given to the head of our approaches, while as we neared the work this ratio reached as high as ten to one. Its faces were mutually defensive, and were completely and thoroughly flanked. It had an excellent command, a bold relief, and was provided with a sluice-gate for retaining the high tides in the ditch. It was con- structed of compact sand, upon which the heaviest projectiles pro- duced but little effect, and in which damages can be easily and speedily repaired. It was known to contain a secure and capacious bomb-proof shelter for its entire garrison, and to be armed with be- tween fifteen and twenty guns of various calibers, all bearing upon and completely covering the only approach to it, which was' over a shallow and shifting beach of scarcely half a company front in width in many places, subject to frequent overflow by the tides, and swept by the guns of not only Fort Wagner itself but of Battery Gregg, Chap. XL.] GENERAL REPORTS. 17 Fort Sumter, and several heavily armed batteries on James and Sullivan’s Islands. It was seen in flank and reverse by the enemy’s artillery. Its communication with Charleston being in the hands of the enemy, and entirely practicable to him during the^ night, its armament and garrison could be easily maintained at the maximum standard of strength and efficiency. 96. Against the formidable direct and flank fire to which the ap- proaches would be exposed from the batteries which covered and protected Fort Wagner, we could expect to effect nothing, excepting, possibly, the demolition of Fort Sumter, which from its barbette guns could deliver, and had delivered, over both Wagner and Gregg, an accurate and destructive fire. 97. The early elimination of Fort Sumter from the contest, consid- ered simply as auxiliary to the reduction of Fort Wagner, was, therefore, greatly to be desired, and arrangements were at once com- menced and the necessary orders given to place the breaching guns in position.

## gillmore-1864-02-28-first-bombardment

128. My comtnunication to the General-in-Chief, of August 10, is as follows : Headquarters Department of the South, Morris Island, S. C. , August 10, 1863. Maj. Gen. H. W. Halleck, General-in-Chief, U. S. Army, Washington, D. C. : Sir : I have to acknowledge the receipt of your communication of the 28tli ultimo, in answer to my request for re-enforcements. The unexpected reduction of my effective force by sickness was, at the time I wrote, quite alarming. I admit that I had not taken into consideration the probable effect of the resumption of active )Chap. XL.] GENERAL REPORTS. 21 operations upon men who had been idle for an entire year. It has, in truth, acted like a process of reacclimation. All but two regiments of the forces ordered from Major-General Foster’s department are here. If my command continues to improve in health, I shall require no more men than I now have, to accomplish the reduction of Fort Sumter. After that is done, the monitors must take the lead, in accordance with the project which was discussed and informally adopted when I left Washington. General Beauregard has, for the defense of Charleston, twice as many men and more than five times as much artillery as I have. I therefore beg the Department not to lose sight of the fact that after the gate is opened to the monitors and iron- clads, by the reduction of Fort Sumter, the army here, so long as it remains greatly inferior in numbers to that of the enemy, must remain defensively upon these sea islands. My operations are progressing satisfactorily. I expect to open a heavy fire on Fort Sumter on the 14th instant. Very respectfully, your obedient servant, Q. A. GILLMORE, Brigadier- General , Commanding. On the 16th of August, I wrote to the General-in-Chief as follows : Headquarters Department of the South, Morris Island, S. C., August 16, 1863. Maj. Gen. H. W. Halleck, General-in-Cliief, U. S. Army, Washington, D. C. : Sir : I have to report a steady progress in our operations here. In consequence of the inferior and irregular quality of the only powder in this department suitable for heavy guns, a fact which was not suspected by my ordnance officer until de- veloped by our preliminary practice after the magazines had been filled, I was un- able to open my batteries on the 14th, agreeably to my expectations, as stated in my letter of the 10th instant. I have borrowed some powder from the navy, which (with some recently arrived from the north) will enable me to open to-morrow, the 17th instant. Two moni- tors, with one rifled gun each, are expected to co-operate with me against Sumter, at a distance of about 2,000 yards. The others will remain abreast of Fort Wagner, to keep down its fire. Very respectfully, your obedient servant, Q. A. GILLMORE, Brigadier- General, Commanding. 129. A sufficient number of breacliing guns being in readiness on the 16th of August to warrant our opening upon Fort Sumter, and arrangements having been made with Admiral Dahlgren to assist in subduing the fire of Battery Gregg and Fort Wagner, particularly that of the sharpshooters in the latter, from which we apprehended considerable annoyance to our breaching batteries in the second parallel, the following order was issued : 130. Special Orders, ) Headquarters Department of the South, No. 481. f In the Field, Morris Island, S. C., August 16, 1863. I. All the breaching batteries established against Fort Sumter that are completed and in condition for efficient service, and the other batteries herein below named, will be opened at break of day to-morrow. Those in process of construction will commence firing as soon as the several pieces in succession are ready to open effect- ively. The firing will continue from day to day. under the immediate supervision of the chief of artillery, commencing at daybreak and ending at dusk in the even- ing, with such intermission during the heat of the day as may from time to time be ordered, as follows : First. Battery Brown, Capt. C. G. Strahan, Third Rhode Island Volunteer Artil- lery, commanding, comprising two 8-inch Parrott rifles, against the gorge wall of Fort Sumter, one piece firing shot, and the other percussion shell, exclusively. Second. Battery Rosecrans, Capt. J. J. Comstock, jr., Third Rhode Island Volun- teer Artillery, commanding, comprising three 100-pounder Parrott rifles, against the gorge wall of Fort Sumter, one piece to fire percussion shell, and two pieces to fire shot, exclusively. 22 [Chap. XL. S. C. AND GA. COASTS, AND IN MID. AND E. FLA. Third. Battery Meade, First Lieut. Henry Holbrook, Third Rhode Island Volun- teer Artillery, commanding, comprising two 100-pounder Parrott rifles, against the gorge wall of Fort Sumter, both pieces firing percussion shell exclusively. Fourth. Battery Kearny, First Lieut. S. S. Atwell, Seventh Connecticut Volunteer Infantry, commanding, comprising three 30-pounder Parrott rifles and three Coe- horn mortars. The guns will operate against Battery Gregg with shot and shell, unless otherwise directed, and the mortars against Fort Wagner, exploding the shell just over the fort. Fifth. The Naval Battery, Commander F. A. Parker, U. S. Navy, commanding, comprising two 8-inch Parrott rifles and two 80-pounder Whitworth rifles, against the gorge wall and barbette fire of Fort Sumter, at the discretion of the battery commander. Sixth. Battery Reynolds, Capt. A. E. Greene, Third Rhode Island Volunteer Artil- lery, commanding, comprising five 10-inch siege mortars, against Fort Wagner, exploding the shells just before striking. Seventh. Battery Weed, Capt. B. F. Skinner, Seventh Connecticut Volunteer Infantry, commanding, comprising five 10-inch siege mortars, to fire the same as Battery Reynolds. Eighth. Battery Hays, Capt. R. G. Shaw, Third Rhode Island Volunteer Artillery, commanding, comprising one 8-inch Parrott rifle, against the gorge wall of Fort Sumter, with shot exclusively ; and seven 30-pounder Parrott rifles against Fort Wagner or Battery Gregg, as may from time to time be ordered. Ninth. Battery Reno, Capt. A. W. Colwell, Third Rhode Island Volunteer Artil- lery, commanding, comprising one 8-inch and two 100-pounder Parrott rifles, against the gorge wall of Fort Sumter ; one 100-pounder to fire shot, and the other pieces to fire percussion shell, exclusively. Tenth. Battery Stevens, Lieut. J. E. Wilson, Fifth U. S. Artillery, commanding, comprising two 100-pounder Parrott rifles, against the gorge wall of Fort Sumter, one piece firing shot, and the other percussion shell, exclusively. Eleventh. Battery Strong, Capt. S. H. Gray Seventh Connecticut Volunteer In- fantry, commanding, containing one 10-inch Parrott rifle, against the gorge wall of Fort Sumter, firing shot and percussion shell, commencing with the former. Twelfth. Battery Kirby, Lieut. Charles Sellmer, Eleventh Maine Volunteer In- fantry, commanding, comprising two 10-inch seacoast mortars, against Fort Sum- ter, the shells to be exploded within the fort just before striking. II. The brigadier-general commanding takes this occasion to remind the officers and men under his command, and especially those to whom he has this day as- signed the posts of honor and of danger, that the eyes of a beneficent country are fixed upon them, with not only the ardent hope, but the confident expectation, of success. The nation is indeed* waiting to crown you the victors of Sumter. We need not, and must not, fail. Let us fearlessly do our whole duty to our beloved country, and in the language of our late companion in arms, the gallant and lamented Strong, “ Put our trust in God.” * By order of Brig. Gen. Q. A. Gillmore : ED. W. SMITH, Assistant Adjutant-General. 131. Exact distance of breaching guns from the center of gorge wall of Fort Sumter : Battery Brown, two 8-inch Parrott rifles, 3,516 yards ; Battery Rosecrans, three 100-pounder Parrott rifles, 3,447 yards ; Battery Meade, two 100-pounder Parrott rifles, 3,428 yards ; Naval Battery, two 80-pounder Whitworth rifles and two 8-inch Par- rott rifles, 3,938 yards ; Battery Hays, one 8-inch Parrott rifle, 4,172 yards ; Battery Reno, one 8-inch and two 100-pounder Parrott rifles, 4,272 yards; Battery Stevens, two 100-pounder Parrott rifles, 4,278 yards ; Battery Strong, one 10-inch Parrott rifle, 4,290 yards. 132. The breaching guns were served from day to day with great care and deliberation. The firing from the batteries in the second parallel was seriously interfered with, and, at times, partially sus- pended, by the galling fire from Fort Wagner to which the cannon- eers were exposed. The combined fire of our mortars and light pieces, aided by gunboats and iron-clads, failed to subdue this an- noyance entirely, and we were obliged to turn some of our breach - * Paragraph II was omitted from Gillmore’s report. Chap. XL.] GENERAL REPORTS. 23 ing guns upon the work. There was imminent danger, indeed, that our most efficient, because most advanced, batteries would be hope- lessly disabled before the work should be accomplished. Nothing of the kind, however, happened. A heavy northeasterly storm set in on the 18th, and raged for two days, very materially diminishing the accuracy and effect of our fire. 133. Soon after midnight on the night of August 21, the Marsh Battery opened on the city of Charleston, firing only a few shots. Firing was resumed the second night thereafter, but the piece (an 8-inch Parrott rifle) burst at the 36th discharge, blowing out the entire breach in rear of the vent. Copies of the correspondence with General Beauregard upon the subject of this firing on the city are given in Appendix I. * 134. On the 24th of August, I reported to the General-in-Chief— The practical demolition of Fort Sumter as the result of our seven days’ bombard- ment of that work.f Firing from the breaching batteries ceased, for the time, on the evening of the 23d. Tabular statement of firing at Fort Sumter during the seven days' bombardment , from the Ylth to the 23d of August, 1863. Parrott rifles. Distance from battery to center of gorge wall. Whole number of pro- jectiles thrown. 3 £ Xfl 0) o a; & m m 'a! 2 . Name of battery. Number. Caliber. Total weight of i thrown. £<2 g* O w <x> o a £ 3 Number which S' gorge wall and h to form breach. Weight of metal \ formed bread Strong 1 30-pounder. . . Yards. 4,290 76 Pounds. 19,142 46 22 Pounds. 5,500 Brown 2 200-pounder. . . 3,510 542 82,070 299 198 32, 670 Hays 1 200- pounder. . . 4,172 531 86, 129 225 196 33,320 Reno Rosecrans j 1 200-pounder. . . 4,272 333 115,171 480 316 38,940 1 2 3 100-pounder. . . 100-pounder. . . 4,272 3,447 784 1,173 105,807 587 392 37,240 Meade 2 100-pounder. . . 3,428 1,004 98,282 502 336 98, 392 Stevens 2 100-pounder. . . 4,278 566 46,082 340 208 43, 924 Total 5,009 552,683 2,479 1,668 289,986 The barbette tier of the work was entirely destroyed. A few un- serviceable pieces, still remaining on their carriages, were dismounted a week later. The casemates of the channel fronts were more or less thoroughly searched by our fire. We -had reliable information that but one serviceable gun remained in them, and that pointed up the harbor toward the city. The fort was reduced to the condition of a mere infantry outpost, alike incapable of annoying our ap- proaches to Fort Wagner or of inflicting injury upon the iron-clads. The enemy soon after commenced removing the dismounted guns by night, and not many weeks elapsed before several of them were mounted in other parts of the harbor. The period during which the weakness of the enemy’s interior defenses was most palpably appar- ent was during the ten days subsequent to the 23d of August.

## gillmore-1864-02-28-capture-of-wagner-and-sumter-assault

138. The dark and gloomy days of the siege were now upon us. Our daily hopes were on the increase, while our progress became dis- couragingly slow and even fearfully uncertain. The converging fire Chap. XL.] GENERAL REPORTS. 25 26 S. C. AND GA. COASTS, AND IN MID. AND E. FLA. [Chap. XL. from Wagner alone almost enveloped the head of onr sap, subtend- ing, as it did, an angle of nearly 90 degrees, while the flank fire from the James Island batteries increased in power and accuracy. To push forward the sap, in the narrow strip of shallow, shifting sand by day, was impossible, while the brightness of the prevailing harvest moon rendered the operation almost as hazardous by night. Matters, indeed, seemed at a stand-still, and a feeling of despondency began to pervade the rank and file of the command. FINAL BOMBARDMENT AND CAPTURE OF FORT WAGNER. 139. In this emergency it was determined to commence simultane- ously and vigorously two distinct methods of attack, viz : First. To keep Wagner perfectly silent with an overpowering curved fire, so that our engineers would have only the more distant batteries of the enemy to annoy them ; and, Second. To breach the bomb-proof with rifled guns, and thus de- prive the enemy of their only shelter in the work. Accordingly all the light mortars were moved to the front, and placed in battery ; the capacity of the fifth parallel and the advanced trenches for sharpshooters was enlarged and improved ; the rifled guns in the left breaching batteries were trained upon the fort and prepared for prolonged action, and powerful calcium lights, to aid the night work of our cannoneers and sharpshooters, and blind those of the enemy, were got in readiness. The co-operation of the pow- erful battery of the New Ironsides, Captain [Stephen C.J Rowan, during the daytime, was secured. 140. These final operations against Fort Wagner were actively in- augurated at break of day on the morning of September 5. For forty-two consecutive hours the spectacle presented was of surpassing sublimity and grandeur. Seventeen siege and Coehorn mortars un- ceasingly dropped their shells into the work over the heads of our sappers and the guards of the advanced trenches ; nine rifled guns, in the left batteries, pounded away at the southwest angle of the bomb-proof, while during the daytime the New Ironsides, with as- tonishing regularity and precision, kept a constant stream of shells from her eight-gun broadside ricochetting over the water against the parapet of Wagner, whence, rebounding upward, they dropped nearly vertically, exploding in or over the work and searching every part of it. The calcium lights turned night into day, throwing our own men into impenetrable obscurity, while they brilliantly illumi- nated every object in front and brought the minutest detail of the fort in sharp relief. In a short time the fort became silent, exhibit- ing but little sign of life. Our sappers rapidly pushed forward their works, suffering from the James Island batteries principally, which, night and day, kept up a galling fire upon the head of the sap, following its progress to- ward the work, until so near that friends as well as foes would be endangered by it. From this moment the men in the advanced trenches enjoyed entire immunity from danger. Indeed, the sense of security was so great that they fearlessly exposed themselves to view, and the reliefs off duty defiantly mounted the parapets of their works to while away their leisure time, or groping their way forward among the torpedoes with a skill which the most bitter ex- perience only could have conferred, approached the ditch, and took a deliberate survey of the fort and its surroundings. Chap. XL.] GENERAL REPORTS. 27 141. On the night of September 6, the sapper crowned the crest of the counterscarp on the east front, masking all the guns of the work. The following order, to carry the place by assault at the hour of low tide on the following morning, was issued late in the evening: 142. Special Orders, > Headquarters Department op the South, No. 513. ) In the Field , Morris Island , September 6, 1863. I. Fort Wagner will be assaulted at 9 a. m. to-morrow, the 7th instant, by troops to be designated by Brigadier-General Terry, who will command in person.* The artillery fire on the work will be kept up until the troops mount the parapet, and will then cease at a given signal. The assault will be in three columns, as follows : First. A column of two small regiments of picked troops will debouch from the advanced trenches, mount the parapet of the sea front and the bomb-proof and trav- erses, spike the guns, and seize and hold the sally-port. Second. A column of one brigade drawn up right in front in the trenches, in rear of the first column, will debouch upon the beach by regiments, pass the sea front of the fort, file sharp to the left, and mount the parapet of the north and west faces, regiment after regiment, as they gain the requisite distances. Third. A column of one brigade, left in front, will follow behind the second column, and deploy across the island in rear of Fort Wagner, facing Cumming’s Point, with skirmishers well out in front. II. The guards of the trenches will be held in reserve at their appropriate sta- tions. The balance of the infantry force of General Terry’s command will be kept under arms from and after 8 o’clock in the morning near the Beacon House. The batteries of field artillery will be held ready for action near the lookout. By order of Brig. Gen. Q. A. Gillmore : ED. W. SMITH, Assistant Adjutant-General. 143. About midnight on the 6th, it was reported to me that the enemy was evacuating the island, and such was the celerity of his flight, that nearly the whole of his force made its escape. Seventy men were intercepted on the water and taken. Our forces at once occupied the north end of the island. Eighteen pieces of ordnance of various calibers were captured in Fort W agner and seven in Battery Gregg. 144. Fort Wagner was found to be a work of the most formidable character ; far more so, indeed, than the most exaggerated statements of prisoners and deserters had led us to expect. Its bomb-proof shelter, capable of containing from 1,500 to 1,600 men, remained prac- tically intact after the most severe bombardment to which any earth- work was ever exposed. (See Plate III. f) The history of sieges fur- nishes no parallel case. 145. The attempt to form an opening in the bomb-proof by breach- ing failed for want of time. The heavy projectiles were slowly eat- ing their way into it, although their effect was astonishingly slight. Indeed, the penetration of rifle projectiles into a sand parapet, stand- ing at the natural slope, or approximately so, is but trifling. They are almost invariably deflected along the line of least resistance, or departing but slightly from it, scooping out in their progress a small hollow, the contents of which are scattered but a short distance. Under such circumstances, the general effect produced by firing a large number of successive shots within a small area of, say, from * For General Terry’s detailed instructions, see addenda to Gillmore’s reports of operations on Morris Island. f Reference is to the “ Plan of a portion of the siege operations against the defenses of Charleston Harbor prior to the capture of Fort Wagner,” &c., which is to appear in Atlas. 28 S. C. AND GA. COASTS, AND IN MID. AND E. FLA. [Chap. XL. 15 to 20 feet square, is by no means commensurate with the expend- iture of ammunition involved. [146. ] The section, Plate V,* is taken along the line where this two days’ firing upon the bomb-proof produced the greatest effect ; in other words, along the axis of the breach produced. Tabular statement of firing at Fort Wagner from the breaching guns during the two days' bombardment, September 5 and 6, 1863. Parrott rifles. Fort 6 £ 13 <D ctiles the g £ •3* i§ Name of battery. Number. Caliber. Distance from Wagner. Whole number oi jectiles throw Total wreight of i thrown. Number of proje* which struck fort. Number which st thebomb-proo 'S’3 ++,* .a o u? '33+3 * c" Strong . . 1 300-pounder . . 200-pounder . . 200-pounder . . 100-pounder . . 100-pounder . . 100-pounder . . 100-pounder . . Yards. 1,900 885 88 Pounds. 22,000 19,575 J- 51,615 11,139 20,580 25, 596 78 78 Pounds. 19,500 12,615 38,688 9,875 18, 326 23,226 Brown 2 135 104 87 Reno \ l 1,850 1,850 830 168 345 141 5 126 105? Rosecrans I 2 3 \ 306 132 2975 125 Meade 2 820 1,875 210 196 187 Stevens 2 324 305 294 Total 13 1,411 150, 505 1,247 1,173 122,230 The total quantity of sand removed to such a distance that it no longer afforded the bomb-proof shelter any protection against the projectiles from the breaching guns, is estimated, from a close per- sonal examination, at 165 cubic yards. It requires, as will be seen from the above tables, 54-J gross tons of metal to effect it. 147. Meanwhile, at the request of Admiral Dahlgren, three days’ firing, commencing August 30, from a portion of our breaching guns, had been expended on Port Sumter, and it was known that all the barbette guns of that work had been dismounted. Deserters and prisoners reported that but one casemate gun remained serviceable, and that was located on the northwest face, near its junction with the gorge, and consequently looked up the harbor. 148. Early on the morning of September 7, Rear-Admiral Dahlgren sent a flag of truce to Fort Sumter, demanding its surrender, notify- ing me, at the same time, by signals, that if the summons was not complied with, he should “move up with all the iron-clads and en- gage it.” The demand was refused. 149. During the night of the 8th of September a naval force at- tempted to carry Sumter by assault, and was repulsed with consid- erable loss. Before I was informed by the admiral of his intentions to storm the work, I had made arrangements to do the same thing, but the force assembled for that purpose was detained by low tide at its rendezvous in the creek west of Morris Island, until after the naval attack had failed. The project was then abandoned. The only arrangements for concert of action between the two par- ties that were finally made, were intended simply to prevent accident or collision between them. Each party was deemed in itself suffi- ciently strong for the object in view.

## gillmore-1864-02-28-second-bombardment

SECOND BOMBARDMENT OF FORT SUMTER. 152. In consequence of the reports of prisoners and deserters, from time to time, that the enemy were at work mounting some guns on the southeast face of Sumter, and also with the intention to cut down that face so as to enable us, with the fire from our guns, to take more completely in reverse the casemates on the channel fronts, the heavy rifled guns in Wagner and Gregg were opened on the work on the 26th of October. 153. In a few days the southeast face was more completely a ruin than the gorge wall. The debris formed a continuous and practica- ble ramp reaching from the summit of the breach to the level of the water. (See the supplementary report of Brigadier-General Turner, chief of artillery.*) 154. With the second bombardment of Fort Sumter ended all ag- gressive operations for the season against the defenses of Charleston. A slow and irregular fire upon the fort was kept up for some time to prevent the mounting of guns on the ruins pending the completion of the naval preparations for entering the harbor, which, for various reasons, had been delayed greatly beyond the expectations of the admiral. On the 20th of October, I learned from Admiral Dahlgren that there would probably be no attempt made to remove the obstructions and enter the inner harbor until more turret iron-clads arrived. Several were expected.
