# Samuel Jones, The Siege of Charleston: charleston-1863 passages, v1

## transcription-note

Digital OCR of a Cornell University Library scan of Samuel Jones, The Siege of Charleston (Neale, 1911); not verified against print. Whitespace collapsed; all other characters retained, including OCR errors, split words, running headers, page numbers and footnotes interleaved with the text. Local headings are editorial. Bounded passages on the named engagements; the title section is the title page.

## title

THE SIEGE OF CHARLESTON £11 mi THE SIEGE OF C HARLESTON AND THE OPERATIONS ON THE SOUTH ATLANTIC COAST IN THE WAR AMONG THE STATES BY SAMUEL JpNES Formerly Major-General C. S. A. NEW YORK THE NEALE PUBLISHING COMPANY 1911 Copyright, 1911, by The Neale Publishing Company

## morris-island-july-10-11

The city of Charleston is at the extremity of the narrow peninsula between the Cooper and Ashley rivers. James Island, to the south and east, is sepa- rated from the city by Ashley River, and from St. John's Island, to the south and west, by the Stono River, In greatest extent from north to south it is about 9 miles and from east to west about 7 miles. On its sea front it is bordered by a narrow sandbank extending from the entrance to Charleston harbor to Stono Inlet, about 1 1 miles in length. About 3 % miles from the northern extremity this bank has been cut through by the waters of the ocean, thus dividing it into two islands. The northern part is Morris Island, the southern Folly Island. The channel be- tween them is called Lighthouse Inlet. These islands are separated from the firm land of James Island by Folly River and Creek, Vincent's Creek, and im- passable marshes which are subject to overflow by very high tides and are intersected by numerous, tor- tuous, narrow, but deep, streams. The northern extremity of Morris Island, which is called Cumming's Point, and Sullivan's Island to the northeast, border the entrance to Charleston harbor. Fort Moultrie is near the western end of Sullivan's Island and distant 2700 yards from Cum- ming's Point, on which the Confederates had con- structed a work called Battery Gregg. Fort Sumter was a brick work of three tiers of guns, built on an artificial island or foundation south of the channel, nearly midway between Sullivan's and James' islands, about 1760 yards from Fort Moultrie on the former, THE SIEGE OF CHARLESTON 199 1980 yards from Fort Johnson on the latter, 1390 yards from Cumming's Point and 334 miles from the city of Charleston. About 1300 yards from Cumming's Point, at a very narrow part of Morris Island, was an earth- work of considerable development and strength called Battery Wagner, which extended from the beach on the east to Vincent Creek on the west, pre- senting to the southwest a front of about 275 yards. The island is wider in its southern than in its northern part, the southern extremity on Lighthouse Inlet being about 1000 yards in width. Its surface is irregular and broken by sand ridges, forming at many points secure shelter for troops. It has an area of about 400 acres, its middle point is 5 ^ of a mile from the nearest point of Charleston, and the main channel into the harbor is parallel to and at about an average distance of 1200 yards from it. This small sand island has been thus minutely and tediously described because it was destined to be the camp home for nearly two years of many thousands of men; it was to become famous as the scene of a siege which will be memorable in military history and one of the most formidable bombardments of which there is any record, the scene of great labor and exposure, much desperate fighting, of sickness and death in all the frightful forms incident to war and to wasting fevers. General Gillmore assumed command of the depart- ment on June 12, 1863, with his headquarters at Hilton Head. His troops held the coast from Light- 200 THE SIEGE OF CHARLESTON house Inlet to St. Augustine, a distance of about 250 miles, but the great mass of the force was in South Carolina and near Charleston. He had ample steam- boat transportation at his command and could read- ily and rapidly concentrate his forces whenever and wherever on the coast he desired to have them. He entered on the duty assigned him untrammeled by instructions, free to carry out his own plans, assured of the liberal support of his government in supply- ing him with all requisite material for the successful accomplishment of the plan he had proposed, and which had been approved after full and free discus- sion by a mixed board of officers of the army and navy. Of the several plans of operation against Charles- ton which naturally suggest themselves, that by way of James Island, which it was generally believed offered the surest and speediest avenue to success, had been attempted and abandoned after the unsuc- cessful assault on Secessionville in June, 1862. So, too, the plan of a forcible entrance of the fleet into the harbor had been attempted and failed on April 7. Of all the plans that by way of Morris Island was regarded as the easiest of accomplishment in its first steps. The land force was already in posses- sion of Folly Island. To cross over the narrow channel of Lighthouse Inlet and secure a foothold on Morris Island with the aid of the navy would be very easily accomplished, and in the succeeding operations on that island the navy could render ready and efficient aid, having always close at hand in North Edisto Inlet a secure harbor of refuge in the THE SIEGE OF CHARLESTON 201 event of stormy weather; an important considera- tion, because the monitors were not suitable to ride in safety in stormy waters. But possession of Morris Island would be very far from decisive of the fate of Charleston. Secure possession of James Island, the forces remaining relatively the same, would, it was believed, lead inevitably to the reduction of Charleston, whereas possession of Morris Island would be only a means to the probable but remote accomplishment of the same end. Fort Sumter was regarded as the chief obstacle in the way of the navy in any attempt which it might make to enter the harbor. If that fort could be re- duced, or its defensive power destroyed, the fleet, it was argued, could readily remove the obstructions, force an entrance into the harbor, and compel the surrender of the city, when the evacuation of the harbor defenses would necessarily follow. It was admitted that the navy alone could not capture Sumter, or even so cripple it as to render it harm- less. That must be done by the combined land and naval forces, and General Gillmore had been selected to command the Department of the South and Ad- miral Dahlgren the South Atlantic squadron, for the express purpose of carrying into execution the plan of operations which the former had proposed for the reduction of Fort Sumter and then the capture of Charleston. General Gillmore's plan of operations briefly stated was: 202 THE SIEGE OF CHARLESTON First. Make a descent upon and take possession of the south end of Morris Island. Second. To lay siege to and reduce Battery Wag- ner, a strong earthwork near the north end of the island and about twenty-six hundred yards from Fort Sumter. The reduction of Battery Wagner would necessitate the fall of Battery Gregg on Cumming's Point. Third. From the positions thus secured to demol- ish Fort Sumter and co-operate with the navy in a heavy artillery fire when it should be ready to move forward. Fourth. The ironclad fleet to remove the chan- nel obstructions, run by the batteries on Sullivan's and James islands, reach the city and compel its sur- render. The army was to take the lead in all but the fourth of these distinct operations. Admiral Dahlgren says there had been no understanding between him and General Gillmore as to the fourth of these distinct operations. When General Gillmore assumed command of the department preparations for entering on the execu- tion of his plan of operations were already well advanced. Early in the preceding April General Vogdes had been assigned to the command of the troops on Folly Island. His aggregate force for the three months of April, May, and June varied from about 4700 to 6000, or an average of about 5350. It was actively employed in preparing the island as a THE SIEGE OF CHARLESTON 203 land base of operations against Charleston, for which it possessed many advantages. The woods and dense undergrowth, chiefly of pal- metto, together with the sand hills, screened the General's operations from view and shielded his troops from fire. It had, besides this, further ad- vantage in that it served as a base of operations either by way of James or Morris Island. By the 3d of July, under the immediate direction of the accomplished officers. Lieutenants Suter and Michie, of the United States Engineers, not only had the necessary defensive batteries been constructed for the security of the islands, but others for the special purpose of covering the descent on Morris Island. These last mentioned batteries were constructed on the northern end of the island called Little Folly Island. The thick growth and sand hills of that locality thoroughly screened the workmen from view. The movements of troops were made and the labor performed mainly in the night and every pre- caution was taken to conceal the operations from the Confederates. So important was secrecy in the matter regarded, that a blockade-runner, the Dart, which to escape pursuit had been run ashore a little south of Lighthouse Inlet, was permitted to be wrecked by the Confederates and the cargo carried off, when it could easily have been prevented by guns already in position. The troops did not even return the brisk Confederate fire which was kept on that end of the island while the wrecking of the Dart was in prog- ress, though several men who were at work on the batteries were killed and wounded. 204 THE SIEGE OF CHARLESTON In this way batteries were carefully constructed, renetted, and embrasured, magazines and splinter- proofs made, thirty-two rifled guns, varying from lo- to 30-pounders, twelve lo-inch and four 8-inch mortars were mounted, and under the energetic man- agement of the ordnance officer, Captain Mordecai, each gun was supplied with two hundred rounds of ammunition. All this was done within from six hun- dred to eight hundred yards of the Confederate pickets on the south end of Morris Island. General Vogdes claims, as does General Gillmore, that the existence of the batteries was not known to the Confederates until they were unmasked and had opened fire. General Beauregard says "the attack was not a surprise, neither was the erection of the enemy's works on Little Folly Island unknown to the local commanders or these headquarters." That the enemy was in large force and very busily at work on the island was unquestionably known to the local commanders, and to General Beauregard, but they could scarcely have known the positions and extent of the works constructed against them. General Ripley, in whose district Morris Island was, says in his official report to General Beauregard: "On the morning of the loth the enemy opened a heavy fire upon our positions from Little Folly with from twenty to thirty long-range guns, which he had placed in position during the night," whereas the fire had been from forty-seven guns in batteries, which had been in course of construction nearly a month, and had been ready for action a week before they were unmasked and opened. THE SIEGE OF CHARLESTON 205 On the other side of Lighthouse Inlet, on the south end of Morris Island, the Confederates had partially constructed eight one-gun batteries and two mortar batteries, one for two, the other for one mortar. All were detached and stretched along the sand ridge, designed to protect the beach, and they were very incomplete. Rifle-pits or infantry epaulments were also made, extending westward toward Oyster Point. While General Beauregard knew perfectly well that Folly Island was occupied in large force and was in course of preparation for both defensive and offensive operations, and was confident that a blow from it was impending, he could not know with cer- tainty where it would be directed. Regarding James Island as unquestionably the vital point in the land defenses of Charleston, and not having sufficient force, labor, and heavy guns for the thorough defense of both James and Morris islands, he had employed his inadequate force and means chiefly in putting the former (James Island) in a secure de- fensive state. Hence the comparatively defenseless state of the south end of Morris Island. On July 6 Admiral Dahlgren assumed command of the South Atlantic squadron at Port Royal. A day or two later, after a conference between the commanders of the land and naval forces. General GlUmore transferred his headquarters from Hilton Head to Folly Island, and about the same time Brigadier General Truman Seymour was assigned to the command of a division embracing the troops serving on that island. 2o6 THE SIEGE OF CHARLESTON On entering upon the execution of his plan of operations, General Gillmore assumed erroneously that his adversary greatly outnumbered him. His tri-monthly report for July lo shows his aggregate force present in the department, exclusive of the sick, to have been 20,837. I" his official report he states his effective force to have been at that time 17,463. He was untrammeled with instructions, and it was therefore left to his own discretion to employ such part of his force as he thought proper in the execution of the plans on which he was about to enter. At that time General Beauregard's force had been reduced by detachments sent to other armies. The battle of Gettysburg had been fought and lost by the Confederates, and General Lee was calmly and defi- antly confronting his victorious enemy, with his back to the flooded Potomac, waiting for it to fall suffi- ciently for him to cross and continue his march into Virginia; Vicksburg and Port Hudson had fallen, and General Rosecrans, by skillful maneuvering, had pressed General Bragg's army across the Tennessee. General Beauregard therefore, like other depart- ment commanders, had been called on to detach troops and send them to Virginia and the West. On July 10 the "grand total" of his force of all arms in South Carolina and Georgia was 15,318, being 28,000 less than he had estimated as necessary when he assumed command. Of that force 5841 were in the First Military Di- vision, which embraced James, Morris, and Sulli- van's islands and the city of Charleston, Brigadier THE SIEGE OF CHARLESTON 207 General Ripley commanding. There were but 2906 men on James Island and 927 on Morris Island, in- cluding the garrisons of Batteries Wagner and Gregg.^ No plan of operations by land against Charleston seems to have been regarded as complete which did not embrace an expedition to cut the Charleston & Savannah Railroad. On this occasion the execution of that part of the plan was entrusted to Colonel Higginson, who on the 9th started from Beaufort with a regiment in two armed steamboats, accom- panied by a small gunboat, the object being to go up the Edisto River to Jacksborough, and destroy the railroad bridge and as much of the road as practi- cable. Under cover of a dense fog the party reached Willstown Bluff unperceived and moved up toward the village. The line of railroad had been nearly stripped of troops for the defense of Charleston. A section of the Chestnut field artillery. Lieutenant T. G. White, and a few cavalrymen, under Colonel Aiken, near Willstown, not being in condition to offer effective resistance, fell back after some skirmishing. The Federal troops delayed there long enough to plunder the place, burn Mr. Morris' mill and barns, and carry off about one hundred and thirty negroes, chiefly women and children. The expedition then proceeded up the river, but ^General Beauregard's report shows that on July lo he had in South Carolina 3461 infantry, 3664 artillery, and 2651 cav- alry. Total, 9776. In Georgia, 1745 infantry, 2130 artillery, and 1667 cavalry. Total, 5542. 2o8 THE SIEGE OF CHARLESTON the delay at Willstown had given time for a section of the Washington Artillery, of Charleston, Lieu- tenant L R. Horsey commanding, supported by a platoon of cavalry, under Lieutenant John Banskett, to reach the river; when the steamers were within three miles of Jacksborough, opposite Dr. Glov- er's plantation, the field guns opened upon them ; the boats stopped, hesitated, and turned back, followed by the section of the Washington Artillery and also a section of the Marion Artillery, Lieutenant Robert Murdoch commanding, which kept up the fire until one steamer was so crippled as to become unmanage- able and ran aground, when it was set on fire and burned. The other two steamed out of range and returned to Beaufort. The two field guns of the steamer were taken un- injured from the burned vessel and were soon in Confederate service. General Gillmore in his official report dismisses this expedition with the brief re- mark: "It signally failed, with a loss to us of two pieces of field artillery and a small steamer, which was burned to prevent its falling Into the hands of the enemy." Colonel H. K. Aiken, commanding the Confeder- ates, claims that it was burned by the fire of the Con- federate field guns of the Macon Artillery. But for the delay at Willstown Colonel Higginson might have destroyed the bridge and damaged the road, or at least have retarded the reinforcements which soon passed over from Savannah. To draw attention, and perhaps troops, from Mor- ris to James Island and produce the Impression that the THE SIEGE OF CHARLESTON 209 latter was to be the point of attack, General Gillmore sent General A. H. Terry, with 3800 men in armed transports, up the Stono, conveyed by the gunboats Pawnee, Marblehead, and McDonough, Captain Balch commanding. Under cover of the naval guns from the steamers in the Stono and Little Folly rivers, which thoroughly swept the ground in front, the troops landed on Battery Island and Grimble's place, moved forward in a threatening manner and brisk skirmishing commenced between the pickets. General Terry's force outnumbered by several hun- dred men all the infantry General Beauregard had in South Carolina and by more than a thousand all the infantry and artillery combined on James Island. General Gillmore believed that his feint on James Island had produced at least one of the effects de- sired, in drawing troops from Morris Island; but he was mistaken. In truth, there were no troops that could have been drawn from that island with- out abandoning at least the south end and leaving the whole island in great jeopardy. It had been General Gillmore's intention to make the descent on Morris Island about midnight be- tween the 8th and 9th. He had given detailed in- structions to that effect, which were so far carried out that obstructions in Little Folly Creek were re- moved by a party of the First New York Engineer Regiment and the batteries were so far unmasked as to disclose their presence to the Confederates. That same night Captain Charles T. Haskell, of the First South Carolina Infantry, visited Little Folly Island with a scouting party, and discovered the 210 THE SIEGE OF CHARLESTON company's barges or launches collected In the creeks approaching the inlet. During the whole of the 9th, therefore, there were abundant indications that an attack was immediately impending. General George C. Strong was selected to lead in the attack with his brigade. He was a young officer of the Ordnance Corps, who had graduated with high honors at West Point in the class of 1858 and had distinguished himself in the war both in Virginia and Louisiana. His brigade was com- posed of the Sixth Connecticut Regiment, Colonel John L. Chatfield; Forty-eighth New York, Colonel Barton; Third New Hampshire, Colonel Jackson; Ninth Maine, Colonel Emory; Seventy-sixth Penn- sylvania, Colonel Strawbrldge; battalion of four companies Seventh Connecticut, Lieutenant Colonel Rodman; Company C, Third Rhode Island Artillery; detachment Third United States Artillery; detachment First New York Engineers. A battalion of the Forty-eighth New York, the colonel commanding, and the detachments of artillery were left on the Island with General Vogdes. The brigade was embarked on launches near the south end of Folly Island early in the night of the 9th, and, conveyed four naval howitzer launches, Lieutenant Bunce commanding, moved up Folly River and Creek and halted near the entrance to Lighthouse Inlet, where they were screened from view by tall marsh grass, and there awaited the signal to advance. The remaining force on Folly Island was held in reserve under General Vogdes. The Sixty- THE SIEGE OF CHARLESTON 211 second Ohio, Colonel Pond; Sixty-seventh Ohio, Colonel Voorhees, and Eighty-fifth Pennsylvania, Colonel Howell, were near the signal station. The Seventh New Hampshire, Colonel H. S. Putnam; One Hundredth New York, Colonel Dandy; a bat- talion of six companies of the Forty-eighth New York, Colonel Barker, and Battery B, First United States Artillery, Captain G. V. Henry commanding, were at the northern end of Little Folly Island, in readiness to follow General Strong's Brigade. The formidable batteries which were to perform so im- portant a part were commanded by Lieutenant Colonel Jackson and Major L. L. Langton, First United States Artillery. Just across Lighthouse Inlet and within easy range were the detached Confederate battery of eight guns and three mortars, manned by two com- panies of the First South Carolina Artillery, Cap- tains J. C. Mitchell and J. R. Macbeth commanding, supported by the Twenty-first South Carolina In- fantry, about four hundred men. Major Mclver commanding, and a detachment of the First South Carolina Infantry, under Captain Charles T. Has- kell (in all about seven hundred). The garrison of Battery Wagner, about three miles distant on the island, was two companies of artillery. Captains C; E. Chichester and J. R. Mathews commanding, and of Battery Gregg, Captain Henry R. Lesesne's com- pany of artillery. All of the artillery on the island was commanded by Lieutenant Colonel J. A. Yates, First South Carolina Artillery. The whole force 212 THE SIEGE OF CHARLESTON was commanded by Colonel R. F. Graham, Twenty- first South Carolina Infantry. As the sun rose on the morning of July lO the Federal batteries were unmasked and thirty-two guns and fifteen mortars opened fire, to which the Confederates promptly replied. A few minutes later four monitors, the Weehawken, Commander E. R. Calhoun, the Nahant, Commander John Downs, the Kaatskill, Commander George H. Rodgers, and the Montauk, Commander D. McN. Fairfax, which had crossed the bar and taken posi- tions from which some of the Confiederate batteries could be enfiladed and others taken in reverse, opened fire with fifteen- and eleven-inch guns on the Confederate left; the four howitzer launches pulled into position and opened on the right, and for nearly three hours about sixty guns, some of them of the heaviest caliber, concentrated a rapid and accurate fire on the Confederate position, to which the Confederates as rapidly replied. A little after seven o'clock the signal was given to General Strong to cross the inlet, land, and assail the batteries, and he pulled with the greater part of his brigade directly and rapidly for Oyster Point, the extreme left of the Confederate position. As soon as the launches came into view some of the Confederate guns were turned on them with effect, destroying one of them, while the infantry hastened to the Point to dispute the landing. Colonel Chatfield, with his regiment, the Sixth Connecticut, had pulled rapidly to the right, or THE SIEGE OF CHARLESTON 213 southeastern, extremity of the Island, and the tide being low the bank sheltered him from the fire of the guns on the sand hills, which were about thirty feet high — so high that the guns could not be trained on the boats. Both parties landed successfully and with little loss. The battalion of four companies of the Seventh Connecticut, Lieutenant Colonel Rodman, was the first to land at Oyster Point, quickly fol- lowed by the battalions of the Forty-eighth New York, Ninth Maine, Third New Hampshire, and Seventy-sixth Pennsylvania. The launches immediately crossed to Little Folly Island, and in twenty minutes from the time they touched the beach the Seventh New Hampshire, One Hundredth New York, the battalion of the Forty- eighth New York, and Captain Henry's battery of the First Artillery were transported to and landed on the south end of Morris Island. In the meantime the main column at Oyster Point had formed in line and advanced against the Twenty- first South Carolina, while Colonel Chatfield ad- vanced directly against the batteries, throwing out strong skirmishing parties on the right and left, which soon flanked the batteries, taking them in re- verse. After an obstinate resistance, what was left of the artillery had to abandon their guns and retire. In truth, the batteries had been for nearly three hours enveloped in fire and overwhelmed by the weight of metal thrown on them. Colonel Graham, finding his little band of in- fantry, which had lost heavily, in danger of being 214 THE SIEGE OF CHARLESTON cut off by Colonel Chatfield's column and captured by General Strong's, ordered it to fall back to Bat- tery Wagner. The two Federal columns, converging upon the batteries, captured them all, one after the other, and pursued the retreating Confederates, while the monitors, steaming slowly parallel to the beach, con- tinued their fire upon the shattered Confederates. The Seventh Battalion South Carolina Infantry, Lieutenant Colonel Nelson, had been ordered to reinforce Morris Island, but did not arrive in time to take part in the battle. Two companies of it, which arrived first, had been ordered forward to support the batteries, but met the retreating Con- federates and were warmly engaged in endeavoring to cover the retreat. The Federals continued the pursuit until they came within range of the guns of Battery Wagner, which opened rapidly and the pursuit ceased. The weather was excessively hot, so, too, was the fire from Wagner, say the Federal reports, "rid- dling" the colors of the Sixth Connecticut. The men were too much exhausted to storm Battery Wagner. They were therefore halted a few hun- dred yards from it, where the sand hills sheltered them from its fire, and threw up breastworks for better protection. The monitors took position abreast of Wagner and kept up a brisk fire on it for the remainder of the day, except (and this appears to have been a custom in the navy which seems strange to soldiers) that "at noon we hauled out of fire to give the men THE SIEGE OF CHARLESTON 215 dinner and about two o'clock went back and resumed work," says the Admiral. Wagner returned the fire with spirit from a ten-inch columbiad, her only effective gun against the monitors. The Kaatskill, against which the fire was mainly directed, was struck sixty times, her deck crashed through and pierced in several places, letting in water very freely. By nine o'clock in the morning the affair on land was over and two-thirds of Morris Island was in pos- session of the Federal troops. The descent had been made with complete success and little loss (General Strong reports fifteen killed and ninety-two wounded). Among the killed was Captain Lent, of the Forty-eighth New York. They had captured three 8-inch navy shell guns, two 8-inch seacoast howitzers, one rifled 24-pounder, one 30-pounder, one i2-pounder Whitworth and three lo-inch sea- coast mortars — in all eleven pieces — the camp equipage, and 127 prisoners. The little band of Confederates had made a gallant stand for three hours against great odds, and had not retreated until it was absolutely necessary to escape capture and until, out of a total force not exceeding 700, they had lost 294 killed, wounded, and missing, "among whom," says Gen- eral Ripley, "I mention with especial regret the fol- lowing officers : Captains John R. Chevers and Has- kell and Lieutenant J. S. Bee, who had rendered im- portant service previous to and behaved with dis- tinguished gallantry in the engagement." General Seymour commended very highly the con- duct of his troops on the occasion : 2i6 THE SIEGE OF CHARLESTON "For the brilliant vigor," he says, "with which the movements of his brigade were conducted the great- est credit is due to Brigadier General Strong, whose personal example was heroism itself. His report justly praises his subordinate commanders, and to those I must refer, but I must mention particularly the excellent conduct of Colonel Chatfield, Sixth Connecticut, who led his regiment in the advance up Morris Island until its colors were riddled by the close fire from Battery Wagner. But to the hearty devotion and the cheerful courage of the soldiers of this division, in the patient labors in preparing for the battle and the ready courage with which they fought it, must, after all, be given the highest honors, and their gallant conduct in this brilliant action will always be to their commanders and their country the source of just pride." The assault of Battery Wagner, which the troops were too much exhausted to attempt on the loth, was made about day dawn the next morning by General Strong. The garrison of Wagner at that time consisted of the shattered remainder of the troops which had contested the landing the previous morning, namely, the Twenty-first South Carolina Regiment, about two hundred men, under Major J. G. W. Mclver; twenty men of Company D, First South Carolina Infantry, Lieutenant Horlbeck. commanding, and seventy men of Companies E, H, and I, First South Carolina Artillery, under Captain John C. Mitchell ; also the Gist Guard, Captain C. E. Chichester; Mathews' Artillery, Captain J.^ R. Mathews, which THE SIEGE OF CHARLESTON 217 had occupied the battery on the loth; the Seventh South Carolina Battalion, about three hundred men, Major J. H. Rion commanding; four companies each of the First Georgia Regiment, Colonel C. H. Olmstead; the Twelfth Georgia Battalion, Lieu- tenant Colonel H. D. Capers, and three companies of the Eighteenth Georgia Battalion, Major W. S. Basinger; in all about five hundred men, Colonel Olmstead commanding. The aggregate force was about twelve hundred men. The South Carolinians manned the guns and the right and right center of the ramparts. The Georgians, who arrived in the night of the loth, guarded the left and left center of the work. The Eighteenth Battalion occupied the southeast bastion, the First Georgia along the sea front to the left, the Twelfth Georgia Battalion to the right, connecting with the Carolinians. Lieutenant Colonel Yates commanded the artillery and Colonel R. F. Graham (Twenty-first South Carolina) the whole. General Strong formed his brigade before day- dawn. The assaulting column consisted of the bat- talion of the Seventh Connecticut, the Seventy-sixth Pennsylvania, and the Ninth Maine. As on the previous morning, the Seventh Connecticut led the advance. Lieutenant Colonel Rodman commanding. The Third and Seventh New Hampshire were held in reserve. The battalion of the Seventh Con- necticut was deployed in line in front, followed closely in the order named by the Seventy-sixth Pennsylvania and Ninth Maine, each formed in close divisions. They were ordered to carefully 2i8 THE SIEGE OF CHARLESTON preserve their intervals and when the Confederates should open fire to rush forward with a cheer, mount the parapet and carry the battery by storm. General Strong commanded in person. His in- structions were most faithfully carried out by Lieu- tenant Colonel Rodman, who led his Seventh Con- necticut men under a brisk fire of cannon and musketry to the ditch and some of them to the top of the parapet, where, it is reported, they bayoneted two Confederate gunners. "But unfortunately," says General Strong in his report, "when the enemy opened fire simultaneously along the whole line, and with a range of two hun- dred yards, the Seventy-sixth Pennsylvania halted and lay down upon the ground. Though they re- mained in this position but a few moments and after- wards moved gallantly forward, some of them even to the ditch, that halt lost the battle, for the interval was lost and the Seventh Connecticut, unsupported, were driven from the parapet. The whole column, including the Ninth Maine, which had reached the ditch on the left, gave way and retreated from the field." The garrison of Wagner had of course expected an attack and was on the alert all night. When the column was seen advancing in the dim light of early dawn Colonel Graham deliberately held his fire until his enemy was within close range, then opened simultaneously along his whole line, firing rapidly and continuously until the last man of the fast retreating column was under cover of the sand hills. THE SIEGE OF CHARLESTON 219 The Seventh Connecticut was particularly dis- tinguished on this occasion. Unsupported and when there seemed no hope of success, some of the men persisted with great daring in their efforts to force an entrance into the work. One brave man sprang to the parapet in front of a thirty-two- pounder, double-charged with grape shot. Lieu- tenant Gilchrist, of South Carolina, in command of the gun, struck by the man's fearless bearing, called to him to come in before the gun was fired. As quick as thought the man's rifle was leveled and a ball whizzed by Gilchrist's head. The discharge of the gun followed and the man was hurled across the ditch a mangled corpse. This regiment had been the first to enter Fort Pulaski when it was captured the year before and the officers and men had behaved with much kindness toward Colonel Olmstead and his men who were captured on that occasion. Among the prisoners captured at this time were many of this regiment, who recognized their former prisoners, calling them by name, and were received by them with as much kind considera- tion as the circumstances permitted. General Strong in his official report to General Gillmore, made on the day of the assault, states that his loss that morning was 8 officers and 322 non- commissioned officers and privates. Among the severely wounded was Lieutenant Colonel Rodman of the Seventh Connecticut. Captain Gray, who succeeded to the command of the battalion of the Seventh Connecticut, reports that 191 men of the battalion went to the assault and that 103 of them 220 THE SIEGE OF CHARLESTON were killed, wounJed, and missing, and he adds that their mess contained 1 1 officers that morning before the assault and but 4 after it. The Confederate loss in the assault was i officer and 5 enlisted men killed and i officer and 5 enlisted men wounded. Captain Werner, First Georgia, and Edward Postelle, of the Eighteenth Georgia, were killed, Lieutenant Frederick Tupper, Eighteenth Georgia Battalion, severely wounded. Colonel Graham reports that he captured 130 and buried over 100 of the Federal troops. The Federal losses on the mornings of the loth and nth, as officially reported by General Strong, who commanded in person on both occasions, aggre- gated 436. In an official letter from General Gill- more to General Halleck reporting the success of his descent on Morris Island, he says, speaking of the assault on the morning of the nth: "The parapet was gained, but the support recoiled under the fire to which they were exposed and could not be got up. Our loss in both actions (the mornings of the loth and nth) will not vary much from 150." A more substantial and obvious reason for the failure of the assault will naturally suggest itself to the most causal reader than that assigned by Gen- eral Strong, namely, the brief halt of the Seventy- sixth Pennsylvania. The probable cause of the fail- ure was that the assaulting column was too weak numerically. It scarcely outnumbered the garrison, which had all the advantages of position within a strong field work. There seems to have been some difference of THE SIEGE OF CHARLESTON 221 opinion between Generals Gillmore and Seymour as to this point — on which of them did the responsibil- ity of the assault, as it was made, rest. The former commanded the department, the latter a division of the troops on the island, and the assault was made by a part only of one of his brigades. General Gill- more, in an elaborate report of his operations, makes but brief mention of the assault, saying merely: "General Seymour was ordered to carry Fort Wagner by assault by daybreak on the following morning. The attempt failed." General Seymour says: "Before daylight on the I ith an assault had been made by Brigadier General Strong, with his brigade, in accordance with instruc- tions given to him directly by Brigadier General Gill- more, which attack failed from the complete prepa- ration of the enemy, due to his pickets having been driven in an hour before the attempted surprise." General Strong reports officially that the assault was made "pursuant to instructions from department headquarters." Immediately after the assault, in a conference be- tween General Gillmore and Admiral Dahlgren, it was decided that the parapets of Wagner should be battered down and its guns silenced by a combined fire from land and naval batteries before making the next assault.

## grimballs-landing-july-16

The arrival of these reinforcements naturally sug- gested the question whether or not it was practicable to drive the Federal force from Morris Island. In a consultation with his general officers, Ripley, Taliaferro, Hagood, and Jordan (chief of staff), and Colonel E. B. Harris, chief of engineers, Gen- eral Beauregard presented that question for con- sideration. The number of troops deemed neces- sary to attack the enemy on Morris Island with reasonable prospect of success was estimated at four thousand, the area and the general shape of the island making it impracticable to employ a larger force to advantage. To carry out this plan it would be necessary to throw the four thousand troops on the island during the night and attack and defeat the enemy before daylight. To make the movement and attack in daylight would expose the Confederates to the flank fire of the naval guns. Seeing that the Federal force was about seven thou- sand, covered by defensive works, to attack it in front and in the light of day, with the ironclads pouring in a destructive fire on the flank, could THE SIEGE OF CHx^RLESTON 225 scarcely be hoped to prove successful. With the very insufficient means of transportation at General Beauregard's command, it was deemed impracticable to throw a sufficient force on the island, move upon the enemy, and make the attack during a single night. The idea was therefore abandoned and a purely defensive plan of operations was then deter- mined on. The presence of General Terry at Legare's and Grimble's, on James Island, with a larger force than the Confederates had on the same island was a standing menace to the latter, which it was im- portant to suppress. General Johnson Hagood commanded the Confederates on that island, and General Colquitt, having arrived on the 14th with two regiments o his Georgia brigade, was sent to reinforce him. Early on the morning of the i6th a reconnoissance in force was made on the enemy, Generals Hagood and Colquitt commanding in per- son. The enemy occupied Battery Island and parts of Legare's and Grimble's plantations. The naval gunboats were in the Stono and other armed steamers were in Folly River, giving a cross fire which could sweep the ground in front as far as the Confederate pickets. The object of the movement was limited to driving in the pickets on the left, making a reconnoissance of that part of their posi- tion, capturing or destroying the part of the force nearest Grimble's, and driving off and, if possible, crippling the gunboats Pawnee and Marblehead, which were anchored highest up the Stono. General Colquitt, with the Twenty-fifth South 226 THE SIEGE OF CHARLESTON Carolina, Lieutenant Colonel J. G. Presley com- manding; Sixth Georgia, Colonel J. T. Lofton com- manding; Nineteenth Georgia, Colonel A. J. Hutchins; four companies of the Thirty-second Georgia, Lieutenant Colonel W. H. Pruden com- manding, and Captain E. L. Parker's Battery of Artillery, in all about fourteen hundred men, were ordered to cross the marsh dividing Legare's from Grimble's plantation at the crossing nearest Seces- sionville, driving the enemy as far as the lower crossing near the Stono, recross the marsh by a flank movement and cut off and capture the force at Grimble's. Colonel C. H. Way, of the Fifty- fourth Georgia, with about eight hundred infantry of his own and the Thirty-first North Carolina Regi- ment, followed in echelon on the Grimble side of the marsh to co-operate with Colquitt. A reserve of a section of artillery, supported by a company of infantry and a squadron of cavalry, under Lieu- tenant Colonel R. J. Jeffords, Fifth South Carolina Cavalry, was held in hand near Rivers' house. On the right Lieutenant Colonel Del. Kemper, with four rifled 12-pounders and four Napoleon guns, supported by Colonel James D. Radcliffe, of the Sixty-first North Carolina, with about four hun- dred men of his own regiment, was ordered to at- tack the gunboats in the Stono. The movement was made at day dawn. Six com- panies of the Twenty-fifth South Carolina deployed as skirmishers on the right and left of the road leading from Secessionville to Legare's house, pressed forward, rapidly crossed Rivers' causeway, THE SIEGE OF CHARLESTON 227 where the Federal picket line ( Fifty- fourth Massa- chusetts) was encountered and driven back hastily on the main line, which retired to Battery Island, "leaving their camp strewn with muskets, accouter- ments, blankets, overcoats, prisoners," etc., says Colonel Way. As soon as the picket firing com- menced the party at Grimble's, which was smaller than had been supposed, fled to Battery Island and so escaped capture. There was some brisk firing of field guns on both sides. A company of the Nine- teenth Georgia pursued a party of the Fifty-fourth Massachusetts, which had been cut off by the left of the advancing skirmish line, killing and wounding a number of them, the others escaping through the marsh. Colonel Radcliffe and Lieutenant Colonel Kem- per surprised the Pawnee, (Captain Balch com- manding), and Marblehead at early dawn by a rapid and accurate fire, striking the Pawnee forty- two times with considerable effect. From the na- ture of their position in the Stono the gunboats could not bring their guns to bear with effect on the troops, but fell down the river out of range of the field guns and in positions where their own batteries could be used, and in response to a signal from General Terry the gunboats swept the ground in the Federal front, rendering valuable service, for which General Terry was quick to acknowledge his in- debtedness to the naval commander. The object of the reconnoissance having been ac- complished, the Confederates retired, and that night General Terry abandoned the island, carrying his 228 THE SIEGE OF CHARLESTON force to Folly Island, and the Confederates occupied the positions from which the Federals had retired. The loss in the affair had been slight — about fifty on the Federal and eighteen on the Confederate side. The desired result was accomplished when the Federal force withdrew from the island.

## wagner-july-18

Service in Battery Wagner was necessarily one of ceaseless vigilance, entailing on officers and men such continued mental and physical strain that it was necessary to relieve the garrison by fresh troops at short intervals. It was General Beauregard's wish that it should be relieved every forty-eight hours, but the change had to be made in boats during the night and soon became so difficult that the tour of duty was extended. Brigadier General William B. Taliaferro, who was on duty at Savannah when the descent was made on Morris Island, hastened to Charleston on leave of absence for a few hours and solicited service in the defense of the city. His offer was accepted and he was assigned to the com- mand of Battery Wagner on the 13th. To guard against surprise a line of rifle-pits was made across the island, about two hundred yards in front of the work. The Federal advance picket line was about three-quarters of a mile distant and could be seen from the parapet of Wagner. Beyond that point the enemy was concealed by sand hills and neither their numbers nor the extent of the prepara- tions they were making were known. To gain information on those points, cover the men who were digging the rifle-pits, and inspirit the garrison by an aggressive movement, General Talia- THE SIEGE OF CHARLESTON 229 ferro ordered a sortie to be made on the night of the 14th, with one hundred and fifty men detailed from the infantry of the garrison, namely, the Fifty- first North Carolina, Twelfth and Eighteenth Georgia Battalions, Twentieth Regiment and Seventh Battalion South Carolina, Major James H. Rion commanding. The sortie was made about midnight, driving in the advance picket to the first trench, from which the enemy was drawn; but a heavy fire from a much larger force a hundred or two hundreds yards further on arrested the advance of the assailants, and it was believed killed and wounded a number of the Federal soldiers who were retreating. From prisoners taken it was as- certained that batteries were in course of construc- tion and many guns already mounted. The Con- federates lost eleven wounded, one mortally, and three missing. Major Rion estimated the Federal loss at not less than forty. Battery Wagner was a field work made of sand and riveted with turf and palmetto logs. It extended across the islands from the beach on the east to Vincent's Creek on the west, and presented toward the south a bastioned front of about 275 yards. The parapets were very thick and the ditch of mod- erate depth. The space within the work was from east to west about 200 yards and from north to south varied from 20 to 75 yards. On this space to the west were quarters for officers and men, built of wood, a bomb-proof (capable of sheltering from eight hundred to a thousand men), bomb-proof magazines and heavy traverses. 230 THE SIEGE OF CHARLESTON On July 1 8 the armament was one lo-inch colum- biad, one 32-pounder rifle, one 42-pounder, and two 32-pounder carronades, two naval shell guns and one 8-inch seacoast howitzer, four smooth-bore 32- pounders and one lo-inch sea-coast mortar — in all thirteen — and one light battery. Of those guns only the single lo-inch columbiad was of much effect against the monitors. The Federal land batteries were beyond the range of nearly all of the other guns in Wagner. On the morning of the i8th the infantry of the garrison consisted of the Thirty-first North Caro- lina, Lieutenant Colonel C. W. Knight command- ing; Fifty-first North Carolina, Colonel McKethen; and the Charleston Battalion, Lieutenant Colonel P. C. Gaillard. The artillery was Captains W. T. Tatam's and Warren Adams' companies of the First South Carolina regular infantry, acting as artillery; Captains J. T. Buckner's and W. J. Dixon's companies of the Sixty-third Georgia Heavy Artillery, and Captain De Pass' Light Battery — in all an aggregate of about seventeen hundred men. The Charleston Battalion and Fifty-first North Carolina were assigned to the defense of the parapet in the order named from the right along the south front to the gun chamber opposite the door of the bomb-proof, which was on the left or sea front. The Thirty-first North Carolina extended along the sea face from the left of the Fifty-first to the sallyport toward Battery Gregg. A part of this regiment (the Thirty-first) was held in reserve on the parade. Two companies of the Charleston Battalion, Cap- THE SIEGE OF CHARLESTON 231 tain Julius A. Blake commanding, were outside of the work guarding the left gorge and sallyport. Two of Captain De Pass' field pieces were also outside of the work on the traverse near the sallyport. Colonel E. B. Harris, chief of engineers, had that day placed a howitzer on the right of the sallyport, outside of the beach, to co-operate with the guns on the left. To avoid the delay, which in a sudden as- sault might prove fatal, of assembling the men and marching them in military order to their respective posts, every man was instructed individually as to the exact point, which he should occupy, and which, on an order to man the parapets, he would be required to gain and hold. All of the artillery was under the general command of Lieutenant Colonel J. C. Sim- kins, Chief of Artillery. On the 1 6th General Gillmore had completed his preparations and was in readiness for the bombard- ment and assault, but heavy rains deluged his bat- teries, damaging the ammunition, and obliged him to defer it until the 1 8th. He had constructed four batteries, and the long list of officers killed in the then recent battle of Gettysburg furnished names for three of them — Reynolds, Weed, and O'Rorke; the other was Battery Hays. They were at dis- tances from Wagner ranging from 1330 to 1920 yards, and mounted thirty-one rifled guns, varying in caliber from lo-pounders to 30-pounders, nine 10- inch and four 8-inch mortars, in all forty-four pieces. Lieutenant Colonel R. W. Jackson, First United States Artillery, commanded Batteries Hays and 232 THE SIEGE OF CHARLESTON O'Rorke; Captain L. L. Langon, of the same regi- ment, commanded Batteries Reynolds and Weed. The naval vessels in readiness to take part in the bombardment were the New Ironsides, Cap- tain Rowan, and five monitors, namely the Kaats- kill, Captain G. W. Rodgers; Montauk, Captain D. McN. Fairfax; Nantucket, Captain Beaumont; Weehawken, Captain Colhoun, and Patapsco, Cap- tain Badger. The Ironsides carried fourteen and the monitors two guns each, all of 15-inch and 11- inch caliber — the heaviest guns in use. There were besides five gunboats, the Paul Jones, Commander Rhind; Ottawa, Commander Whiting; Seneca, Com- mander Gibson; Chippewa, Commander Harris, and Wissahickon, Commander Davis. General Gillmore had ordered the firing to com- mence at day dawn on the i8th, but another heavy rain on the night of the 17th delayed it a few hours. About 8 130 A. M. fire was opened, which, until mid- day, Gillmore says, was merely to obtain the proper range, but the Confederate generals represent it as rapid and heavy from the commencement. About mid-day the land and naval batteries, about ninety guns, were in rapid action and were replied to from batteries on Morris, James, and Sullivan's island and Fort Sumter. The bombardment — rarely, if ever, exceeded in the history of war for the number and caliber of the guns and the rapidity and accuracy of fire — continued until nearly eight o'clock. Words fail to convey an adequate idea of that bombardment when "the whole island smoked like THE SIEGE OF CHARLESTON 233 a furnace and trembled as from an earthquake." None but those who witnessed can appreciate it. To those who directed the storm "the spectacle pre- sented was of surpassing sublimity and grandeur," as described by General Gillmore. But only the men who were in Wagner on that memorable day can form an idea of its diabolical power as it ap- peared to them, which seemed capable of blasting and destroying everything before it save the in- domitable will and resolution of those who defended the work. For eleven hours the air seemed filled with every description of shot and shell that the magazines of war could supply. Huge clouds of sand were blown into the air from the craters formed by the bursting shells; the water of the bay was lashed into foam and thrown high in jets of spray by the ricocheting shots from the ironclads bounding from the water over the parapets and bursting within the work, while a dense cloud of sulphurous smoke hung like a pall over the scene. Of the garrison only the gun detachments and a few sentinels were at their posts. The troops generally were ordered to shelter them- selves in the bomb-proofs and behind the para- pets, traverses, and sand hills. The Charleston battalion preferred the open air to the stifling heat and vitiated atmosphere of the bomb-proof, and during the whole of that terrible day sheltered them- selves as they best could outside. It was necessary to husband their strength to repel the expected as- sault. In the meantime their strength was to sit still. 234 THE SIEGE OF CHARLESTON The lo-inch columbiad, the only gun which could reach the ironclads with effect, and several other guns were soon dismounted and the 32-pounder rifle was rendered useless by bursting. In truth, the armament of Wagner was so inferior to those which opposed it that it was inappreciable. The field and shell guns were dismounted and protected by sand- bags until they should be needed to repel the assault. Comparatively passive endurance alone remained for the garrison while the storm continued. Since the assault of the nth Wagner had been much strengthened under the skillful direction of the Chief Engineer, Colonel D. B. Harris, and his able as- sistant, Captain Barnwell, and had stood the severe test of the heavy fire to which it had been subjected so well as to inspire the troops with confidence in the efficacy of sand batteries. Charleston was wild with excitement. From church steeples, house-tops, and the wharves, from boats in the harbor and the parapets of the sur- rounding forts and batteries, thousands of eager spectators gazed anxiously on the work which held its gallant defenders, whom they were powerless to assist. Wagner itself exhibited scarcely any sign of life. The Confederate flag floated defiantly over it, and when the halyards were cut by a shot and the flag was blown into the fort Captain Barnwell, of the Engineers, instantly sprang to the ramparts with a battle-flag and drove the staff into the sand, while others of the garrison leaped forward in a race through the storm of shot and shell for the garrison THE SIEGE OF CHARLESTON 235 flag — Major Ramsey, Sergeant Shelton, and Pro- vost Fllnn, of the Charleston Battalion, and Lieu- tenant Riddic, of the Sixty-third Georgia, dividing the honor of flying it again from its staff. It was again shot away and again restored to its place, this time by Private Gaillard, of the Charleston Bat- talion. "These intrepid actions," says General Taliaferro, "emulating in a higher degree the con- duct of Sergeant Jasper at Moultrie, during the Revolution, were loudly cheered by the command and inspired them with renewed courage." While the bombardment was at its height the Chief of Engineers, Colonel D. B. Harris, a grad- uate of West Point, of the class of 1833, landed at Cumming's Point, passed through the tempest of shot to Wagner to inspect its condition and to give his personal attention to whatever might be done to repair the ravages of the bombardment. The per- fectly cool courage which characterized him and was the admiration of all who saw him under the heaviest fire inspirited the garrison and gave con- fidence in its capacity to withstand the terrible fire it was undergoing. A little more than a year later General Harris died at Summerville of yellow fever, contracted while inspecting the defenses of Charleston, leaving an enviable reputation for skill, patriotism, and in- trepid bravery, tempered by a kindly, gentle, and modest bearing. The long midsummer day seemed endless and the storm of fire increased as the hours wore on. The fierce July sun seemed to stand still. Would 236 THE SIEGE OF CHARLESTON it never set? Water was scarce and men slaked their thirst from the temporary wells opened by ex- ploding shells into which water oozed. Men were found dead without wounds from the concussion of bursting shells. A staff officer, Captain Tuiggs, in the execution of an order was knocked down by an exploding shell and found apparently lifeless, with no wound. He was with difficulty restored. Men were half buried in sand thrown up by bursting shells; the commanding general himself was buried knee deep and dug out with spades. Much anxiety was felt for the safety of the mag- azine. The works might be battered out of shape, the parapet, traverses, scarp, and counterscarp might be cut down, but the sand could not be wholly removed and would still afford some shelter ; but if the covering of the magazine were swept away, a shell bursting would blow the whole garri- son skyward. The closest watch was kept upon it and its condition reported at short intervals during the day. Later in the day General Gillmore signaled Ad- miral Dahlgren to redouble his fire and cease a little after sunset, when the assault would be made. Colonel Olmstead, of the First Georgia, who had been relieved from duty in Wagner in the night of the 17th and witnessed the bombardment from Fort Johnson, says the General's signal to the Admiral was intercepted by a Confederate signal officer, who knew the Federal signals, and that the dispatch was known by General Beauregard almost as soon as by the Admiral ; but General Taliaferro has no recollec- THE SIEGE OF CHARLESTON 237 tion that it was communicated to him. No signal was needed to warn him of the approaching as- sault. When the storm of fire culminated about sunset and gradually subsided, it was evident that the supreme hour of the day had come and that the assault was at hand. Orders were given to man the ramparts; the field guns and howitzers were un- earthed and mounted, and all preparations made to meet and repel the assault. General Gillmore had selected the time between sunset and dark to make the assault, in order that there might be light enough for his troops to see their way, but not enough to enable the gunners in the distant Confederate batteries to see distinctly the advancing column. General Seymour commanded in person the division of troops available for the assault. It had been suggested to him — he does not say by whom — ^that one brigade would be sufficient for the work in hand, but Seymour thought dif- ferently. On close personal observation of Wagner he could not discover that it had been materially damaged by the unprecedentedly heavy bombard- ment to which it had been subjected, but he pre- sumed that so heavy a fire must have in a great measure demoralized the garrison. The First Brigade — General G. C. Strong's — was selected to lead the assault. It was composed of the Fifty-fourth Massachusetts Regiment, Colonel Shaw; the Sixth Connecticut, Colonel Chat- field; a battalion of the Seventh Connecticut, Cap- tain Gray; the Forty-eighth New York, Colonel Barton; the Third New Hampshire, Colonel Jack- 238 THE SIEGE OF CHARLESTON son; Ninth Maine, Colonel Emery, and Seventy- sixth Pennsylvania, Captain J. S. Little command- ing. It was supported by Colonel H. S. Putnam's Brigade, composed of his own regiment, the Seventh New Hampshire, Lieutenant Colonel Abbott; One Hundredth New York, Colonel Dandy; Sixty- second Ohio, Colonel Pond, and Sixty-seventh Ohio, Colonel Voris. General Stevenson's Brigade of four excellent regiments was held in reserve. The First Brigade was formed in column by regiments, except the Fifty-fourth Massachusetts, which being much larger than the others, number- ing nearly a thousand men, was in column by bat- talion. It was a negro regiment, recruited in Massachusetts, and was regarded as an admirable and reliable body of men. Half the ground to be traversed before reaching Wagner was undulating with sand hills, which afforded some shelter, but not so much as to prevent free and easy movement; the other half smooth and unobstructed up to the ditch. Within easy range of Wagner the marsh encroached so much on the firm sand of the island as to leave but a narrow way between it and the water. A few stirring words were addressed by the officers to their troops and the men responded with cheers. About half-past seven the assaulting column was hurled against Wagner, with orders to use the bayonet only, the Federal artillery continuing their fire over their heads as long as it could be done without risk to their own men. The Confederates at their posts were straining their eyes to catch THE SIEGE OF CHARLESTON 239 through the deepening twilight the first glimpse of the enemy. When the head of the column came in view a rapid fire of grape and canister was opened, and the fire from James' Island batteries was poured in on the flank. Sumter and Gregg, firing over Wagner, plunged their shot into the advancing column and the parapets of Wagner were lit up by a line of infantry fire. The advancing column pressed defiantly forward, breasting the storm of iron and lead which was rapidly thinning their ranks. The leading regi- ment, the Fifty-fourth Massachusetts, was soon thrown into a state of disorder, which reacted in- juriously on those which followed. The wounded "and many unhurt" were hastening in crowds from the front along the beach. So heavy was the fire and so great the disorder that General Seymour saw the necessity of immediate support, and accordingly dispatched his Assistant Inspector General, Major Plympton, of the Third New Hampshire, to order up Colonel Putnam with his supporting brigade. To his amazement Colonel Putnam positively refused to advance, because, as he explained, he had been ordered by General Gillmore to remain where he was. In the meantime the First Brigade was urged on with admirable spirit and gallantry by General Strong, who had been assured of prompt support. But the destructive fire from Wagner was more than his men could stand. The Fifty-fourth Massa- chusetts broke and fled, large bodies of it falling upon and with violence forcing their way through 240 THE SIEGE OF CHARLESTON the ranks of the advancing column, greatly heighten- ing the general confusion. The First Brigade had, indeed, ceased for the time to be an organized body and came surging back to the rear in confusion. General Strong had urged his command on with great spirit and gallantry, but his losses had been so severe that his regiments were much shaken, and the consequent confusion was much heightened by the yielding of the leading regiment, portions of which fell harshly upon those in the rear. Frag- ments of each regiment, however, brave men bravely led, went eagerly over the ditch, mounted the para- pet, and struggled with the foe inside. But their efforts were too feeble to affect the contest ma- terially. The storm of fire from Wagner had strewn the ditch and glacis with killed and wounded. A few of the bravest of the different regiments, notably the Forty-eighth New York and Sixth Connecticut, continued to press forward, bearing their colors and striving to reach the ditch and mount the parapet; but the brigade had been hopelessly repulsed, its gal- lant commander, General Strong, was mortally wounded, as was Colonel Chatfield. Colonel Shaw, of the Fifty-fourth Massachusettes, was killed, and many other officers killed and wounded. The mass of the brigade was hastening in disorder to the shelter of the sand hills and trenches. What were Colonel Putnam's feelings in the meantime perhaps will never be known, but may with much certainty be conjectured. He was a gal- lant young officer and could not stand idly by at the THE SIEGE OF CHARLESTON 241 head of a fine brigade and see the command of his classmates and intimate friends cut to pieces. "After a disastrous delay and without orders," says General Seymour, "he led his brigade forward and pressed on to the assault of the southeast angle through a destructive fire, for, the first brigade hav- ing been repulsed, the fire from the center and both flanks of Wagner were crossed in front of that angle, sweeping the glacis and ditch with fatal effect." It seems that the terrible bombardment of eleven hours had demoralized the Thirty-first North Caro- lina Regiment. It did not respond to the call to man the ramparts. The southeast bastion and sea front, to the defense of which it had been assigned, was therefore unguarded. Colonel Putnam and a part of his brigade crossed the ditch, which had been nearly filled with sand by the long bombardment, mounted the parapet, and a hundred or more men gained possession of the southeast bastion. Seeing the advantage gained by Colonel Putnam, General Seymour had just dispatched an order by Major Plympton to General Stevenson to advance with his brigade to Colonel Putnam's support, when he, too, was severely wounded. Before he was carried from the field he repeated the order to Gen- eral Stevenson to advance, but the order was not obeyed. Why does not appear. Colonel Putnam, surrounded by his chief officers — Colonel Dandy, One Hundredth New York; Major Butler, Sixty-seventh Ohio; Major Coan, Forty-eighth New York; Captain Klein, Sixth Con- 242 THE SIEGE OF CHARLESTON necticut, and others — ^was encouraging his men to hold the ground they had gained, assuring them that they would soon be reinforced, when he was shot dead, "as brave a soldier, as courteous a gentleman, as true a man as ever walked beneath the Stars and Stripes," says his division commander. An officer of his staff — Lieutenant Cate, Seventh New Hamp- shire — seeing the Colonel fall, sprang to his side to aid him, when he, too, was struck by a shot and fell dead across the body of his chief. The Federal loss had been heavy, especially in officers of rank. When General Seymour was taken from the field wounded. General Gillmore sent for- ward his chief of staff. General Turner, to assume command and draw off the troops. Those not al- ready within the work, despairing of support, re- treated as rapidly as they could through a destruc- tive fire until they gained the shelter of the sand hills and trenches. Those who had effected an entrance could not escape through the cross fire in their rear and would not surrender. The assailants had become the as- sailed. Volunteers were called for from the gar- rison to overcome and capture them. Major Mc- Donald, of the Fifty-first North Carolina, and Captain Ryan, of the Charleston Battalion, quickly sprang forward for the service. The latter with his company was selected; the captain was shot dead at the moment of the charge, his men faltered and the opportunity was lost. The desperate men inside seemed resolved to sell their lives dearly rather than surrender. General THE SIEGE OF CHARLESTON 243 Hagood had arrived with Colonel Harrison's regi- ment, the Thirty-second Georgia, to reinforce the garrison. That regiment was sent along the para- pet to the left and on the top of the magazine and approached the rear of the imprisoned Federals, who, seeing themselves so greatly outnumbered and with no hope of escape, laid down their arms.^ The repulse was complete and disastrous. Gen- eral Seymour attributes the failure of the assault "solely to the unfortunate delay that hindered Colonel Putnam from moving promptly in obedience to my orders, and to his not being supported after he had essentially succeeded in the assault." The heavy losses of the assailants attest their daring and determined resolution, and their division commander awards them the highest praise for the gallantry with which they "did their full duty that night." The light of the next morning disclosed a ghastly scene of slaughter. The ditch and ground in front of Wagner were thickly strewn with killed and wounded. The Confederate loss was only 174; surprisingly ^Major Lewis Butler, of the Sixty-seventh Ohio, who was by the side of Colonel Putman when the latter was killed, says: "It is but just that I notice a special order of General Beaure- gard, under date of July 27, 1863 (if I am correct as to date), directing that special care be taken of the wounded captured at Wagner, as men who were brave enough to go in there de- served the respect of their enemies. Another act of courtesy: The effects, money, and papers belonging to members of the Sixty-seventh Ohio Volunteer Infantry who died in Charleston Hospital were sent through the lines by flag of truce." 244 THE SIEGE OF CHARLESTON small, thanks to the sheltering capacity of sand works. The loss on both sides had been unusually heavy in commissioned officers. Among the Con- federate killed were Lieutenant Colonel J. C. Sim- kins, First South Carolina Infantry; Captain W. H. Ryan, of the Charleston Battalion; Captain W. T. Tatam, First South Carolina Infantry, and Lieu- tenant G. W. Thompson, commanding company, Fifty-first North Carolina. Major David Ramsay, of the Charleston Battalion, was severely wounded. Lieutenant Colonel Simkins, as Chief of Artillery, had directed the operations of that arm with ad- mirable skill and daring, and when the assault com- menced mounted the parapet to aid and encourage the infantry. "There on the ramparts in the front this admirable soldier and accomplished gentleman sealed his devotion to our cause by an early but most heroic death." The Federal loss has never been officially ascer- tained. General Taliaferro estimated it at not less than 2000, perhaps much more. General Beaure- gard in his official report says their loss must have been 3000, as 800 bodies were interred in front of Battery Wagner on the following morning. In a letter of the 20th to Admiral Dahlgren Gen- eral Gillmore tells that during the ten days from the beginning of his operations he had lost thirty- three per cent, of his troops in killed, wounded, missing, and sick. He had commenced with somewhat more than 13,000 on Morris and Folly Islands, and his tri-monthly report for the 20th of THE SIEGE OF CHARLESTON 245 July shows an aggregate sick on those two islands of 1 241. It would seem therefore that General Beauregard's estimate was not excessive. General Hagood relieved General Taliaferro in command of Wagner on the morring of the 19th. The latter had been in command since the 13th, and he and the officers and men of his command received the highest encomiums from Generals Beauregard and Ripley for skill and gallantry in the defense of this important post. The Fifty-first North Caro- lina had brilliantly sustained the honor of their State, and was highly commended, especially the field officers, Colonel McKethen, Lieutenant Colonel C. B. Hobson, and Major McDonald. The next year in the operations around Petersburg the Thirty-first North Carolina wiped out the reproach it had in- curred in a terrible moment of weakness. Sunday, July 19, passed quietly and was devoted under a flag of truce to burying the dead and caring for the wounded. The next day the bombardment was renewed from both land and naval batteries. The Admiral sug- gested to the General to advance his batteries and renew the assault by columns advancing simultane- ously on the southern and northern fronts. Gen- eral Gillmore demurred, because the attempt would involve too heavy a loss of life for his already greatly reduced force. He agreed, however, to make another assault, provided the Admiral would furnish from his fleet the column to assail the work from the north, a proposal which the Admiral 246 THE SIEGE OF CHARLESTON promptly declined. The policy of carrying Wagner by assault was therefore abandoned and the science of engineering resorted to. The object which the assaulting columns had failed to effect it was de- cided to attain by the slower process of a regular siege.

## sumter-first-bombardment

Referring to Battery Wagner, Major General Gillmore says in the official report of his operations on Morris Island: "The nature of its construction demanded and enticed an actual attempt upon the works to make manifest its real and concealed ele- ments of strength." He had on two occasions yielded to its enticements to attack first on the morning of the nth and again on the evening of the i8th of July, 1863, and the results had been disastrous on both occasions, especially on the evening of July 18, when the assault had signally failed with a loss in his command variously estimated at from 1600 to 3000 men, among their killed being General G. C. Strong and Colonel H. S. Putnam, commanding the two brigades which made the assault, and Colonels J. L. Chatfield and R. G. Shaw, commanding regi- ments. Battery Wagner had exhibited such formidable strength in itself, and its gallant commanders on both occasions. General William B. Taliaferro and Colonel Graham, and the officers and men under 247 248 THE SIEGE OF CHARLESTON their command such skill and resolution in utilizing that strength to its utmost, as convinced General Gill- more that the work could not be carried by assault, even with the aid of the most powerful land and naval batteries ever brought to bear upon so small an object without a greater sacrifice of men than he was disposed to make. He did indeed assent to a suggestion made by Admiral Dahlgren to renew the assault with columns advancing simultaneously on the north and south fronts of the battery, but only on the condition that the Admiral should fur- nish from his fleet the column to assault the northern front. He had, he said, lost one-third of his com- mand in killed, wounded, captured and sick during the ten days' operations on Morris Island. Another assault would involve a heavier loss of life than his already greatly reduced force alone could bear. The Admiral declined to furnish an assaulting column from his fleet, which had also a fearfully large sick list. The plan, therefore, of carrying Battery Wagner by assault was abandoned and the longer and more tedious process of reducing it scientifically by regular approaches was adopted. The contest for the pos- session of Morris Island lapsed therefore into one of engineering skill and steady endurance. With sufficient labor, long-range guns, and other necessary material the prospect of a successful defense would have been encouraging — without them it was hope- less. The wealth of material and all manner of necessary appliances for siege operations on the Federal so greatly exceeded that of the Confederate TH:fe\ SIEGE OF CHARLESTON 249 side that the ultimate result was never for a moment doubtful. From the moment that General Gillmore secured so firm a foothold on Morris Island that General Beauregard felt and acknowledged his in- ability to dislodge him, the ultimate occupation of the whole island was only a question of time. Charleston was General Gillmore's objective point, which he proposed to gain by way of Morris Island and the subsequent action of the fleet. For the complete success of his plan it was exceedingly important that he should, with the least possible delay, demolish Fort Sumter and silence Fort Moul- trie and other batteries on the west of Sullivan's Island, the accomplishment of which formed a part of his plan, and thus open the gate to Charleston for the entrance of the fleet before his adversary could prepare other works to bar his approach to the city. Every hour's delay was important to the Confeder- ates, which gave them time to prepare interior works of defense. In that view of the case it would seem that in an affair of so much moment, instead of relying upon two brigades, or one, as General Seymour intimates that General Gillmore did, to carry Battery Wagner by assault on the evening of July 18, it would have been better in a humane, as well as a military point of view, if General Gillmore had on that occasion hurled his whole available force against it, or even to have renewed the assault as soon as his shattered columns could have been re-formed and brought up to the work and before reinforcements could arrive. That course might, perhaps, have resulted in the 250 THE SIEGE OF CHARLESTON capture of Wagner. The loss would probably not have been greater than that which resulted from the daily tale of killed and wounded in the trenches and the heavier loss by disease attending the fifty days' siege which followed, and the physical suffering would have been less. It had been deemed essential to the success of General Gillmore's plan of operations that his force should occupy the whole of Morris Island before proceeding to demolish Fort Sumter and silence the Sullivan's Island works. To gain possession of the island involved the necessity of capturing Batteries Wagner and Gregg. Ten days' experience on the island had demonstrated that the reduction of the two batteries would require a much longer time than had been supposed. General Gillmore was amply supplied with means, and though untrammeled by instructions from his government he was under a strong pressure of public opinion and expectation to hasten forward his opera- tions. He had been selected by President Lincoln for this important service, on which he had entered on the urgent recommendation of the most distin- guished and influential journalist of that day In this country, and had staked his professional reputation on the accomplishment of the task he had under- taken. There were, besides, newspaper correspond- ents with his command to prick him on to action, if necessary, and to keep the public informed of the progress of the operations for the capture of Charleston. To gain time, therefore, he somewhat modified his original plan of operations and decided THE SIEGE OF CHARLESTON 251 to attempt the demolition of Fort Sumter with bat- teries, to be established on ground already in his possession, firing over Wagner and Gregg. The conception and execution of this plan of operations strikingly illustrates the marvelous pro- gress that had been made in a year or so in the manufacture of heavy ordnance. About fifteen months earUer it had been thought wonderful that breaching batteries at the distance of a mile had reduced Fort Pulaski at the mouth of the Savannah River. Now at more than double the distance it was proposed to reduce Fort Sumter. Nothing in siege operations approaching it had ever been known. Immediately after the repulse of the assaulting columns on the evening of July 18, and while hun- dreds of his killed and wounded were lying on the ground where they had fallen in front of Wagner, General Gillmore gave orders for converting the positions occupied by his most advanced batteries into a strong defensive line capable of withstanding the most formidable attack his adversary could prob- ably make against it, and for the erection of breach- ing batteries against Fort Sumter. Probably no besieging army was ever better equipped for the work to be done than was that which General Gillmore commanded. In addition to a corps of skillful engineer and artillery officers, there was in his command an admirable and most useful engineer regiment — the First New York En- gineers. The Colonel, E. W. Serrell, and many of the oflicers were practical engineers. The enlisted men were picked and many of them skilled mechan- 252 THE SIEGE OF CHARLESTON ics, who were of incalculable service, not only for the actual labor they performed, but for their ca- pacity to instruct and direct others in all the mechani- cal work incident to a siege. And although the ground was in many respects exceedingly unfavor- able for offensive engineering operations, presenting as it did much too narrow a front, and being in some places subject to overflow in stormy weather, these drawbacks were more than counterbalanced by the presence of a powerful fleet immediately on the right flank, within easy and effective range, and always ready to aid and sustain the operations on land by its heavy and accurate fire. Unquestionably Admiral Dahlgren's fleet contributed greatly to the success of the operations on land. Indeed, it is not probable that the plan of operations by way of Morris Island would ever have been undertaken without the cer- tainty of the naval co-operation, or if undertaken without such co-operation they would probably have failed. General Gillmore's opinion to the contrary notwithstanding. Anticipating the damaging effect on Fort Sumter of the enemy's heavy rifled guns firing from station- ary batteries on Morris Island, General Beauregard had early commenced and continued nightly a partial disarmament of that fort, removing all long-range guns that could be spared to be mounted elsewhere on interior lines. He instructed General Ripley, who commanded the military district embracing the scene of operations, to strengthen the gorge wall south face of Sumter on the interior by bales of cotton kept damp, the space between them to be filled in THE SIEGE OF CHARLESTON 253 with sand-bags, and also to place a covering of sand-bags on the scarp wall of the same face from bottom to top, if possible, and to protect the guns remaining in the fort by traverse and merlons. The armament of Battery Wagner was slightly increased; so was that of Fort Johnson. Fort Moultrie and Battery Bee were to be connected by a covered way, and orders were given to press rapidly to completion the new works on Shell Point (called Battery Simkins in honor of the gallant Colonel of that name who fell on the parapet of Wagner during the assault of July 18), and Batteries Chevers and Haskel in close proximity to it. General Beaure- gard's plan, briefly stated, was to establish a circle of batteries from Legare's Point on Schooner Creek, James Island, to Battery Beauregard, on Sullivan's Island, so as to concentrate their fire, including that of Sumter and Moultrie, on the northern half of Morris Island, to retard the siege operations and to overwhelm or harass the enemy so soon as he should gain full possession of that island. The attack and defense were both conducted with admirable and determined courage. It was a species of warfare most trying to the patience and endurance of the troops engaged, and for which it might have been supposed new troops were least adapted. Many consecutive days and nights the monotonous work went on, exposing the men to the perils without the excitement of battle. While the heavy guns on each side were actively employed to retard and demolish the works of the other, skillful marksmen, armed with the longest range rifles, were 254 THE SIEGE OF CHARLESTON employed in efforts to pick off the gunners, and the daily reports of the progress of the works were as regularly accompanied by the reports of the killed and wounded in accomplishing it. Whenever the Confederate fire became so galling — as it often did — that work on the trenches and batteries could not be continued without too heavy a sacrifice of life and limb, a signal from the General to the Admiral would send a monitor or so abreast of Wagner, and a storm of iron and lead would be thrown into the work, which generally ended in driving the garrison, with the exception of the necessary gunners and sentinels, to the cover of the bomb-proof until the fire from the ironclads should cease. But the heaviest fire could not wholly suppress the fire of the sharpshooters, who had become exceedingly ex- pert in covering themselves in the sand hills and with sand-bags. The greater part of the work was done under cover of the darkness of night, interrupted oc- casionally when the bright harvest moon would light up the scene. A most unpleasant and revolting part of the work in the trenches was the removal of the dead bodies — sometimes as many as ten in a night — of those who had been killed by the sharpshooters, which the sappers, while prosecuting their work, dis- turbed in their graves. At first these bodies were moved and reburied out of the way, as was sup- posed, but the exigencies of the engineering opera- tions demanded all the space not covered by marsh, and it soon became necessary to disturb again and again their dead comrades, until the attempt to re- THE SIEGE OF CHARLESTON 255 bury them beyond reach was abandoned, and in future when the graves were encountered the bodies were built with mother earth into the parapets and there left. By the evening of August 16 the third parallel had been completed and twelve batteries erected and made ready for action. Those especially intended for the bombardment of Sumter were at an average distance from that fort of 3917 yards — the nearest being 3428 and the most remote 4290 yards. The twelve batteries mounted twenty-eight heavy rifles of calibers from 32- to 300-pounders, and twelve 10- inch mortars; in all forty pieces. One of them, called the "Naval Battery," mounting two 8-inch Parrott rifles and two 80-pounder Whitworth rifles, was manned by sailors from the United States frigate Wabash and commanded by Captain Foxhall A. Parker, United States Navy. The others were manned by the Third Rhode Island Heavy Artillery and detachments from the One Hundredth and One Hundred and Seventy-eighth New York, the Seventh Connecticut, and Eleventh Maine Infantry, and Company C, First United States Artillery. The positions occupied by the Federal troops were thoroughly protected by defensive works and covered by inclined palisading and wire entanglements stretching entirely across the island. Provision was made for sweeping the fronts of the defensive works by the fire of eight field guns and several Requa batteries. The latter were novelties in warfare, and consisted each of twenty-five rifle barrels, so ad- justed on a frame as to deliver a diffused fan-shaped iS^ THE SIEGE OF CHARLESTON fire of 175 shots a minute, and it was claimed were effective at the distance of a mile or more. The Federal position on Morris Island was thus made as secure against an assault as was Battery Wagner itself. Fort Sumter, against which these powerful breach- ing and mortar batteries were to be directed, was at that time commanded by the same officer, Colonel Alfred Rhett, of the First South Carolina Artillery, aided by Major Ormsby Blanding, of the same regiment, who had so gallantly and successfully de- fended it on April 7 against the ironclad attack and the fort was garrisoned as then by men of his own regiment. About day dawn on the morning of August 17 the land batteries opened on Sumter, directing the fire of the rifles or breaching guns against the gorge wall, the mortars dropping shells into the fort. The ironclads and gunboats soon took up their prescribed positions and joined in the general fire. Batteries Wagner and Gregg replied with spirit, but for several hours Sumter gave no sign of life, the only object visible about it being the flag which floate4 over it in the summer breeze. Wagner and Gregg continued the fire, while the fifteen- and eleven- inch shells from the ironclads hurled the sand in cartloads from their parapets. About midday these two batteries ceased firing, and Fort Sumter opened, and so the thunder of heavy guns went on, gradually ceasing as if from exhaustion as the long summer day passed, and the first day's bombardment ended. Nine hundred and forty-eight shots had been fired at THE SIEGE OF CHARLESTON 257 Sumter, and, the fire being surprisingly accurate for the great distance at which it was delivered, the fort was much damaged. The gorge wall had been deeply cut into and other walls badly shaken. One man of the garrison had been killed and Lieutenants John Johnson, of the Engineers, and John Middle- ton and Julius Rhett, of the First South Carolina Artillery, and ten men wounded. Usually the monitors performed their part in the bombardments with immunity to life and limb, the officers and men being shielded by an eleven-inch thickness of iron. On this day, however, soon after they had gone into action, the Kaatskill was seen steaming away, going southward, a signal from her announcing that her commander. Captain G. W. Rodgers, had been kilkd. He was the Admiral's chief of staff, and usually accompanied him into action, but on this occasion he had asked to be al- lowed to command his monitor, the Kaatskill. The action had scarcely commenced when a shot struck the pilot house, forcing off a large piece of iron on the inside, which struck and killed Captain Rodgers and Paymaster John G. Woodbury, who was stand- ing by him, and wounding the pilot and quarter- master. The Admiral speaks in the most compli- mentary terms of Captains Rodgers' great merit. Battery Wagner had suffered but little except in the death of its engineer, Captain Wampler. In the midst of the heaviest fire, which had driven the garrison, with the exception of the gunners, sentries, and sharpshooters to the shelter of the bomb-proof, it was discovered that the heavy bombardment had 258 THE SIEGE OF CHARLESTON slipped the covering of sand from the principal magazine to such an extent as greatly to endanger the whole garrison. Captain Wampler, with a party of men, hastened to repair the injury, under the destructive fire. In the evening, when it was supposed the firing had ceased for the night, he was sitting with the commanding officer. Colonel Keitt, and Lieutenant Charles S. Hill, ordnance officer, when a shell from the Ironsides fell in the midst of them and, bursting, crushed the gallant young officer. The fire from the breaching batteries continued for seven consecutive days and was incessant from daylight until dark. At the close of the seventh day of the bombardment, the twenty-third day, the destruction of the offensive powers of Fort Sumter seemed complete. The heavy firing ceased, and though a slow fire was maintained, the bombardment was regarded as having successfully accomplished its purpose. Sumter seemed a shapeless mass of ruins. There was but one gun in the fort that could be fired, and that was a thirty-two pounder smooth-bore, whose only use was to fire the usual evening gun. Within the fort the debris of masonry, broken guns and carriages, cotton bales and sand-bags, ripped and torn to pieces, were mingled in inextricable confusion. General Gillmore reported officially that Fort Sumter was demolished, its offensive powers de- stroyed, and that it was reduced to the condition of a mere infantry outpost, incapable of retarding the approaches to Battery Wagner or of inflicting injury upon the ironclads. Nevertheless the Confederate THE SIEGE OF CHARLESTON 259 flag still floated over the ruins, and the usual evening gun announced that the fort was still occupied. Now that its batteries were effectually silenced, it had ceased to be an artillery post, and the gar- rison which had so long and gallantly defended it was withdrawn on the night of September 4, and as- signed to other duty, the Charleston Battalion of in- fantry, Major Julius A. Blake, succeeding the artillery as the garrison of the ruined fort. Major Stephen Elliott succeeded Colonel Rhett in command of Fort Sumter. The latter gentleman had com- manded longer than any other officer, and his name, together with that of his regiment, the First South Carolina Regular Artillery, is indissolubly linked with the famous fort they had so long defended with admirable skill and comspicuous gallantry. General Gillmore regarded his part in the general plan for the capture of Charleston as virtually ac- complished when he had succeeded in destroying the offensive power of Fort Sumter, and thus opened the gate to Charleston for the entrance of the ironclad fleet. But during the month of August his com- mand had been reinforced by General George H. Gordon's Division of two brigades (Schimmel- fennig's and Ames') and three other brigades. Wild's Foster's, and Alford's, and with the force and material at his command something more than the silencing of Sumter was expected of him. The possession "of the whole of Morris Island, includ- ing Batteries Wagner and Gregg, he did not re- gard as essential to the entrance of the fleet into the harbor. Wagner and Gregg were mere out- 26o THE SIEGE OF CHARLESTON works auxiliary to the defense of Sumter; the latter having been silenced, the possession of the former was important only as facilitating a stricter blockade of the port. It only remained, so General GlUmore thought and said, for Admiral Dahlgren to perform his part of the general plan, to enter the harbor with his fleet and take possession of the city of Charleston. The Admiral, however, did not so regard it; in- deed, he did not admit that he was a consenting party to any such general plan. He was ready and anxious to enter the harbor when the obstructions in the way should have been removed; but they were not yet removed. There stood Sumter, an obstacle in itself, and protecting other obstacles which the Confederates had placed In the way. While approaching Wagner and preparing to demolish Sumter, General Glllmore had made other preparations, by which he seems to have supposed that he might gain possession not only of Sumter, but of the whole of Morris Island, without striking another blow. He had with great difficulty and at much cost constructed a battery known as the "Swamp Angel," in the marsh between Morris Island and the Confederate works on James Island, from which Charleston could be bombarded. On August 21 he addressed a letter to General Beaure- gard demanding the surrender of Fort Sumter and the whole of Morris Island. There was some de- lay in the delivery of this letter, and when opened It was found to be without signature, and was re- turned to General Gillmore's headquarters. Of THE SIEGE OF CHARLESTON 261 course General Beauregard declined to comply with the extraordinary demand, and a little after mid- night the bombardment of Charleston commenced and, it may be added, was continued with varying violence for nearly eighteen months. Fifteen in- cendiary shells were fired into the city that night from an eight-inch Parrott rifle, destroying some medical stores, but doing little damage to the city. The indignant refusal of General Beauregard to surrender Fort Sumter and Morris Island, coupled with a reminder that "after two years of trial you have failed to capture this city or its defenses," prompted General Gillmore to attempt at once to seize Sumter by assault. The assaulting party was to consist of six hundred men to be selected by colonels of regiments, and General Ames, command- ing a brigade of General Gordon's Division, was selected to command it. He did not purpose to hold Sumter after seizing it, but to blow it up. He was dissuaded, however, from making the assault, the more readily because he had received informa- tion which he regarded as reliable, that the Con- federates themselves intended to blow up the fort when it should be rendered untenable.

## wagner-siege-and-evacuation

Operations against Wagner, which had been somewhat delayed by the bombardment of Sum- ter, were resumed with redoubled vigor when the latter work was apparently demolished. Between two and three hundred yards in front of Wagner was a sand ridge occupied by Confederate sharp- shooters, who greatly annoyed the sappers engaged in pushing forward the trenches. In conjunction with the fire from James Island, Wagner, and Gregg they occasionally interrupted entirely the work in the trenches. On the evening of August 21 the One Hundredth New York, Colonel Dandy, made a dash to drive them off, but was repulsed. All of the lighter mortars were then moved up to the front to dislodge them by a vertical fire, but that attempt also failed. The Union engineer officers in charge reported that while the efficiency of the Con- federate sharpshooters was daily increasing, their own was falling off, and that for the further prose- cution of the work it was absolutely essential that 262 THE SIEGE OF CHARLESTON 263 the Confederates should be driven off or captured and the ridge occupied by Union troops. On the 26th General Gillmore placed the re- sources of the command at the disposal of General Terry, who was in immediate command, with orders to dislodge those sharpshooters at the point of the bayonet and hold the ridge. Between six and seven that evening the Twenty-fourth Massachusetts, Lieu- tenant Colonel F. A. Osborne, supported by the Third New Hampshire, Captain L F. Randlett, were thrown upon the ridge and readily occupied it, capturing seventy-six of the eighty-nine men of the Sixty-first North Carolina Regiment, which con- stituted the whole picket line. The fourth parallel was immediately marked out and constructed on that ridge within two hundred and fifty yards of Wagner. The darkest and gloomiest days of the siege were now at hand. The exceedingly narrow front of ap- proach, in one place scarcely more than twenty-five yards at high tide, gave great effect to the direct and flank fire on the head of the sap. The way was over ground defended by torpedoes, which were designed to explode by the tread of persons passing over them, or by the chance strokes of the picks and shovels in the hands of the sappers. "Here is a log in my way," said a sapper to the officer who was directing the work.. "Never mind, dig around it," was the reply, and the next instant the supposed log exploded, blowing the sapper to pieces. The losses in the trenches were increasing from day to day and the progress was discouragingly slow and uncertain. The sick list was fearfully large ; so 264 THE SIEGE OF CHARLESTON large that it is said the chief surgeon had advised that the work be again assaulted and the siege ended at the point of the bayonet, as involving a probable less loss of life than the slow process of regular ap- proaches was inflicting on the command. The re- turns of the Union forces for August show a sick list of 4661 in an aggregate force present of 29,405, and for September of 5269 in an aggregate of 28,981. About the middle of August the sick list was nearly one-fourth of the aggregate force present. "Matters indeed seemed at a standstill," says General Gillmore, "and a feeling of despondency began to pervade the rank and file of the command. There seemed, indeed, no adequate return to ac- complished results for the daily losses which we suffered and no means of relief cheering and en- couraging to the soldiers appeared near at hand." No wonder that there was gloom and despon- dency among the rank and file, when it had long since begun to dawn upon officers high in rank, and had strengthened into conviction, that possession of the whole of the little sandbank would be but a lamentably inadequate return for the expenditure of so much labor, treasure, health, and life. Public sentiment at the North clamored for the destruction of Sumter and the capture of Charleston. The sentiment which demanded the destruction of Sumter had been gratified when General Gillmore reported that the fort had been demolished and reduced to a mere infantry outpost, but the Union forces were practically no nearer to Charleston than when the campaign opened. The question naturally sug- THE SIEGE OF CHARLESTON 265 gested itself, Would the possession of Wagner really bring them any nearer to the objective point? And with many the answer was emphatically No ! It seemed that the siege must be abandoned or new life and vigor thrown into it. General Gillmore determined to pursue the latter course. Wagner should be overwhelmed by the heaviest fire from land and naval batteries, driving the men to the shelter of the bomb-proofs and keep- ing them there, while the heaviest rifle guns should pound and demolish the bomb-proofs and so un- cover and expose the garrison to the heaviest fire that had yet been thrown against it. In the mean- time the sap should be pressed forward to the ditch and the fort stormed and carried at the point of the bayonet, if the stubborn garrison would not surrender before that last resort became necessary. As preliminary to the complete success of these final operations, General Gillmore proposed to sur- prise and seize Battery Gregg, thus at once cutting off reinforcements for Wagner and the escape of the garrison. The attempt was made on the night of the 4th by troops in barges, supported by naval boats, armed with howitzers. All was in readiness soon after dark except one boat, which, having pulled out further toward Sumter than the others, discovered a small Confederate boat, which happened just at that time to be carrying to Charleston Major W. F. Waley, of the Second South Carolina Artillery, who had been badly wounded that day. The officer in charge of the Union boat could not resist the temp- 266 THE SIEGE OF CHARLESTON tation to capture the Confederate, gave chase, and fired upon it. He succeeded in capturing the boat and the wounded officer, but the firing had aroused the garrison of Gregg, disclosed the surprise party, and defeated the expedition. It was attempted again the next night, but it could scarcely have been expected that a garrison which had so nar- rowly escaped a formidable surprise attack on the preceding night would not be on the alert. If there was any such expectation General Gillmore effec- tually defeated it himself. In the afternoon of the 5th he signaled Admiral Dahlgren: "I shall try Cummings' Point to-night and want the sailors again early. Will you please send in two or three moni- tors just by dark to open fire on Moultrie as a diver- sion? The last time they were in they stopped rein- forcements and may do it to-night. Don't want any fire in the rear from reinforcements. The signal for assault will be the hauling down of the red light on the Ironsides. I shall display skirmishers be- hind Wagner and Gregg. Don't fire into them; let the Ironsides engage — ^by nine o'clock." This dispatch was intercepted by a Confederate signal officer and forwarded to General Ripley, who communicated it to Colonel Keitt, commanding Wagner, with instructions to him to prepare to repel the attack. Major James Gardner, commanding the Twenty seventh Georgia Infantry, already supporting Gregg, was warned of the impending attack and re- inforced after dark by seventy men of the Twenty- fifth South Carolina Infantry and two field how- THE SIEGE OF CHARLESTON 267 itzers, manned from Kanapaux's Light Artillery, Lieutenant Macbeth commanding, and directed to prepare to repel the attack. The beach between Wagner and Gregg was picketed by 50 men of the Twenty-eighth Georgia. At ten o'clock Ma^or Gardner reported that his whole force numbered only 234 men — too small for the work required of it, but added: "I shall hold the place if it is pos- sible." The monitors were promptly in position and swept with their fire the ground between the two forts; but there was confusion in assembling the barges in position and so much delay that it was past midnight before the assault was attempted, when Captain Lesesne, commanding Battery Gregg, discovered fifteen or twenty barges approaching from the junction of Vincent and Schooner creeks with mufHed oars. He waited until they approached to within about one hundred and seventy yards, when he opened upon them with ten-inch canister. Fort Moultrie also opened fire, sweeping the water on both sides of Cummings' Point. The fire produced a panic among the assaliants, who had expected to surprise the post. Some of the boats were turned back and pulled rapidly away; others were pulled toward the beach, some men in them crying out not to fire, that they were friends, but they were answered by a fire from the infantry and the field howitzers. All these turned and were pulled rapidly back through the creeks and marshes with serious loss in killed and wounded, the troops generally dispirited by the failure of the expedition. 268 THE SIEGE OF CHARLESTON In this affair Captain J. R. Haines, of the Twenty- eighth Georgia, and Lieutenant R. A. Blum, of the Twenty-fifth South Carolina, were killed by a shell from a monitor. At dawn on the 5th the final bombardment of Wagner commenced, and for forty-two consecutive hours seventeen mortars and twenty-four rifled guns — one hundred-, two hundred-, and three hundred- pounders — and the guns of the New Ironsides poured an incessant fire of shot and shell night and day on the battery. The heavy rifle fire was directed against the southeast angle of the bomb-proof for the purpose of demolishing it and exposing the gar- rison to the vertical fire of the mortars and the Iron- sides. The ricochet fire of the ironclads was especially effective. Long practice had given the gunners great accuracy of aim and their eleven-inch shells, bounding gracefully from the water, leaped over the parapet and, bursting within, searched the doomed work in every part. At Wagner night was turned into day. Calcium lights thrown on the fort brilliantly lighted it, bringing out every object in vivid and sharp relief, while the besiegers were shrouded in impenetrable darkness. Under this overpowering fire the trenches were pressed forward rapidly and almost with impu- nity, for the sappers were so near Wagner that the distant batteries on James and Sullivan's islands could not fire upon them without risk of dropping their shot into the fort. With the exception of an oc- casional telling fire from the sharpshooters, Wagner itself was almost as silent as the grave. At the THE SIEGE OF CHARLESTON 269 first shot from the Ironsides nearly all of the in- fantry not already in the sandhills between Wagner and Gregg were ordered into the bomb-proof, leav- ing a few sentinels and sharpshooters at the parapet. Full detachments of artillerymen were kept at the guns on the land front. It would have been a use- less waste of life to keep men exposed to that storm of shot and shell. The best that could be done was to husband all resources to repel the as- sault which was anticipated. Life in the bomb-proof during the forty-two hours of the bombardment had become almost unen- durable. The men were crowded together in the dark place, where the surgeons were occasionally obliged to operate on the wounded by the dim light of a candle. Some men fainted and others were exhausted by breathing the hot, vitiated atmosphere ; if a man stepped out for an instant to catch a breath of fresh air he did so at the peril of his life. The men who had been killed in the two assaults had been buried, the Federals in front and the Confederates in rear of Wagner. The graves were necessarily shallow and in shifting sand. The besiegers had been burrowing through the graves, removing the bodies. The ground had been torn up in every direction by nearly two months' firing and the wind had blown off the sand, exposing corpses to the fierce summer sun, tainting and poisoning the air. Even the water in the shallow wells within the fort was so tainted as to be unfit for use, and the gar- rison had to rely upon the precarious supply that could be brought from Charleston. 270 THE SIEGE OF CHARLESTON The effect of the heavy rifle fire was exceedingly destructive to the southeast angle and bomb-proof, scattering the covering of sand and blocking up the passageways. The engineer officer, Captain T. B. Lee, was powerless to arrest the destruction or repair the damages. Early in the afternoon of the second day of the bombardment the chief engineer, Colonel D. B. Harris, made his way through the terrific fire to Wagner to inspect the work and directed some alterations and repairs, leaving Cap- tain F. D. Lee to relieve Captain T. B. Lee. But so destructive was the fire that it was found imprac- ticable to work under it. Heroic endurance was all that remained for the besieged. Soon after dark the sappers had pushed beyond and to the right of the south front, following the direction of the east or sea front and crowning the crest of the counterscarp near the flank of that front, completely masking the guns of the fort. A row of long pikes, which were planted at the foot of the counterscarp as an obstacle to an assault, were removed by the sappers early in the night. The long and heavy bombardment had so torn and cut down both scarp and counterscarp as to render the mounting of the parapets by a storming party com- paratively easy. The sappers by spade and shovel had facilitated the ascent and only the light of another day was awaited for making the final as- sault of the work. General Gillmore gave minute orders for the as- sault to be made at nine o'clock the next morning, that being the time of low tide, when the beach THE SIEGE OF CHARLESTON 271 could be used for the movements of troops. Brigadier General A. H. Terry was ordered to com- mand the assault in person. On the 4th General Beauregard had called about him his general officers and chief engineer in con- sultation to determine how much longer it would be advisable to hold Wagner. The questions pre- sented for consideration were, How long could it be held with regard to the safety of the garrison? How long without regard to the safety of the gar- rison? How long with reasonable prospect of ultimately withdrawing the troops? How long after the fall of Wagner could Battery Gregg be held? Could the heavy guns (two in Wagner and three in Gregg) be withdrawn without endangering the safety of the works and garrison, and, lastly, could the offensive be taken with fair prospect of success by throwing three thousand men on the north end of Morris Island in the night, which, with the garrisons of Wagner and Gregg, would make an effective force of about four thousand men, with the certainty that no more reinforcements could be sent them until the next night and probably not then? The result of the deliberations was that the heavy guns were necessary for the defense of the posts to the last extremity; that there were, besides, insur- mountable obstacles in the way of removing them, and that they should be ultimately disabled and left when it became necessary, as it was evident it soon 272 THE SIEGE OF CHARLESTON would be, to abandon the batteries, which, how- ever, should be held as long as communication with them by rowboats by night could be maintained. Colonel Keitt kept the general commanding fully informed of the progress of the enemy's sap and the destructive effects of the fire. During the 6th he wrote : "The enemy will to-night advance their parallel to the moat of this battery (Wagner) . The garrison must be taken away immediately after dark, as it will be destroyed or captured. It is idle to deny that the heavy Parrott shells have breached the walls and are knocking away the bomb-proofs. Pray have boats immediately after dark at Cummings' Point to take away the men. I say, deliberately, that this must be done or the garrison will be sacri- ficed. I am sending the wounded and sick now to Cumming's Point, and will continue to do so, if pos- sible, until all are gone. I have not in the garrison four hundred effective men, excluding artillery. The engineers agree in opinion with me, or rather shape my opinion." And again later : "The enemy's sap has reached the moat and his bombardment has shattered large parts of the parapet. The retention of the post after to-night involves the sacrifice of the garrison. If the necessities of the service make this advisable the men will cheerfully make it, and I will cheer- fully lead them. I prefer to assault the enemy to await the assault and I will at four o'clock in the morning assail his works." General Beauregard, accepting the situation, gave THE SIEGE OF CHARLESTON 273 minute instructions for the evacuation of Morris Island. Between 4 and 5 p. M. General Ripley signaled the information to Colonel Keitt, and at dark Captain McCabe, of General Ripley's staff, delivered to the Colonel the General's instructions for the evacuation. On the morning of the 6th there were about nine hundred Confederates on the island, only about two- thirds of them effective, the others being wounded or sick. There were about nine thousand Union soldiers on the island exclusive of the sick, and the most advanced of them were abreast of Wag- ner, only across the street, as it were, from the Confederates. The space — about three-quarters of a mile — between Wagner and Cummlng's Point where the garrison was to embark was swept by the fire of the monitors, and there were armed guard boats on the other side, in Vincent's Creek, to give warning of any attempt to escape. Anticipating pursuit, Lieutenant Robert M. Stiles, engineering oiEcer at Gregg, had constructed after dark a rifle-pit across the island at a narrow point a quarter of a mile in front of Gregg, from which to cover the embarkation. Two Confederate ironclads, the Charleston and Palmetto State, under Captain John R. Tucker, had taken position near Fort Sumter, their guns bearing on Cumming's Point and to the eastward of it, and the land batteries were in readiness to sweep the water face of Battery Gregg. Transport steamers were as near Cum- ming's Point as prudence would permit, to receive 274 THE SIEGE OF CHARLESTON the men from the small boats in which they were to leave the island. During the two days' bombardment the sick and wounded had been sent to Cumming's Point as promptly as transportation between that point and Wagner could be provided, and they were first cared for and left the island in the first boats. Im- mediately after dark the movement from Wagner commenced; four companies (one hundred men) of the Twenty-fifth South Carolina Regiment, and a field piece taken from Wagner, moved first and embarked. Half an hour later Captain W. P. Crawford, with the Twenty-eighth Georgia Regi- ment and a howitzer, moved out, occupied the rifle- pits in front of Gregg and embarked by company as transportation could be in readiness. Major James Gardner, with the Twenty-seventh Georgia, suc- ceeded the Twenty-eighth Georgia in the rifle-pits, and in turn was followed by the remainder of the Twenty-fifth South Carolina, Lieutenant Colonel J. G. Pressly commanding, and artillery. The movement was made quietly and in admirable order, the majority of the men being under the im- pression that they were about to be relieved as usual, having served their tour of duty in Wagner. At eleven o'clock Colonel Keitt proceeded to Cum- ming's Point, leaving Captain Thomas A. Huguenin in Wagner commanding the rear guard, consisting of a few gunners and twenty-five men of the First and ten of the Twenty-fifth South Carolina, under Lieutenants F. B. Brown and B. M. Taft. As soon THE SIEGE OF CHARLESTON 275 as the infantry had left Cumming's Point Captain H. R. Lesesne, who had for a long time commanded Battery Gregg, and Captain Kanapaux, commanding the three remaining howitzers, which he had just brought up from Wagner, spiked their guns and embarked their men. Left in Wagner with about thirty-five men, Cap- tain Huguenin kept up a slow fire, chiefly of sharp- shooters, with an occasional mortar fire to deceive, if possible, his enemy as to his real purpose, and was busy with his final preparations. About midnight the rear guard was sent off, leaving Captain Hu- guenin, with Captain C. C. Pinckney and Lieutenant Mazyek, of the Ordnance; Lieutenant James A. Ross, of the Twenty-fifth South Carolina Volunteers, and Ordnance Sergeant Leath in Wagner to spike guns, destroy such property as they could, and lay the train to burst the only useful ten-inch gun in the work and to blow up the magazine. In the meantime the Federal guard boats in Vin- cent Creek had discovered the passage of boats carrying away troops and opened fire upon them. Colonel Keitt dispatched a messenger to Captain Huguenin to say that boats were in readiness and that he must at once abandon the battery, which he did, reaching Cumming's Point about half-past one o'clock, under a rapid fire from the Union guard barges. The safety fuse for blowing up the magazine of Battery Gregg was laid by the commissary of the post. Captain Holcumb, and was burning brightly when the last officer stepped into the boat, but from 276 THE SIEGE OF CHARLESTON some cause, probably defective fuse, neither mag- azine was blown up. The steam transportation was under the manage- ment of Major Matt. A. Pringle, the embarkation of the troops was superintended by Colonel Daut- zler. Twentieth South Carolina Infantry, and the small boats employed in moving the troops were under the control of Captain W. H. Webb, of the ironclad Palmetto State. The whole was conducted systematically and with great success, only two boats' crews of nineteen men and twenty-seven soldiers falling into the hands of the enemy. Under the circimistances of difficulty and peril which at- tended the movement in the face of an overwhelming nxmierical force, it was marked by a degree of cool- ness and discipline worthy of the best tried veterans. The different organizations in the military district served there by turn, and were commanded succes- sively by Brigadier Generals Taliaferro, Johnson Hagood, A. H. Colquitt, and T. L. Clingman, and Colonels George P. Harrison and Lawrence iVL Keitt. The Confederate loss on the island during the whole fifty-eight days' operations was but 641 killed and wounded, and it is illustrative of the sheltering capacity of sand that, deducting the loss due to the descent on the island on July 10 and the assaults of the i ith and 1 8th, the loss in kiUed and wounded during the whole of the terrible bombard- ment was but 296 men. It is stiU more remarkable that during the same period in the fire which de- molished Sumter only 3 men were killed and 49 wounded. Before dawn on the 7th the Union THE SIEGE OF CHARLESTON 277 troops occupied both Wagner and Gregg, and were thus at last in possession of the little sand island of four hundred acres for which they had so persever- ingly contended for nearly two months. General Gillmore was rewarded by his govern- ment with a major general's commission, and there was naturally great exultation in the Union camp over the success of the operations on Morris Island. Salutes were fired and patriotic speeches delivered, but it was all too plain to intelligent men that they had at best achieved but a barren victory. The blow which had been aimed and delivered against Charleston with so much care had, as it were, glanced and exhausted its force on the end of a barren sandbank nearly four miles distant from the objective point of the campaign. From Cummings' Point the Union troops, still under Confederate fire, looked over a wide sheet of water bordered with heavy batteries and defended by torpedoes and other obstructions over which they must pass to reach Charleston.

## sumter-assault-and-second-bombardment

Having silenced Fort Sumter, reduced Battery Wagner, and occupied the whole of Morris Island, General Gillmore conceived that the land force had accomplished all that could be reasonably expected of it in the prosecution of the general plan of opera- tions. To make the campaign a complete success it only remained, in his opinion, for the naval force to perform its part, — namely, to remove, if necessary, any obstructions that might be in its way, proceed to within easy range of Charleston and compel its surrender. That he thought could and should have been done at any time from August 23, when Sumter was apparently demolished, to September 7, when Battery Wagner was evacuated by the Confederate force and the island occupied by the Union troops; and he was exceedingly impatient at what he re- garded as the culpable delay of the Admiral. Admiral Dahlgren, however, did not think the time had yet arrived for making the attempt to enter the harbor with his ironclads. The Union flag THE SIEGE OF CHARLESTON 279 should float over Sumter before, in his opinion, he could, with due consideration for the safety of his monitors, venture to carry them into the inner har- bor. Early on September 7, when he learned that the Confederate troops had evacuated Morris Island, he sent, under flag of truce, to Major Stephen El- liott, commanding Fort Sumter, a demand for the surrender of that fort. Major Elliott refused to surrender his post, and forwarded the demand to General Beauregard, who replied that the Admiral could have Fort Sumter only when he could take and hold it. Preparatory to enforcing his demand, the New Ironsides and five monitors steamed up, and at about 6 p. m. took position between Cumming's Point and Fort Moultrie and opened fire on that fort, throwing an occasional shot into Sumter. The Sullivan's Island batteries replied, and until after dark a fierce cannonade was maintained, the Iron- sides continuing the fire until nine o'clock. During the night one of the monitors, the Wee- hawken, ran aground on Morris Island beach within range of Fort Moultrie. When it was discovered the next morning. Colonel William Butler, com- manding Moultrie, opened fire on it, which was promptly returned, both firing with accuracy and effect. About nine o'clock five other monitors and the Ironsides came up and, taking positions varying from nine hundred to fifteen hundred yards from Moultrie, opened fire, and a furious cannonade was maintained for about five hours, when the fleet with- drew, leaving the Weehawken aground, and one monitor badly crippled. Usually in affairs between 28o THE SIEGE OF CHARLESTON the forts and monitors the former had the advantage of being able to fire more rapidly than the latter. On this occasion a scant supply of ammunition in the land batteries made their fire slower than that of the ironclads. Early in the action a shell from the Weehawken struck the muzzle of a columbiad in Moultrie, and, glancing and bursting among some ammunition, caused an explosion which instantly killed sixteen and wounded twelve men of Captain R. P. Smith's company of the First South Carolina Infantry (Third Artillery). Captain B. S. Burnet's company of the same regiment was quickly brought up from Battery Beauregard to supply the place of Captain Smith's. The fire had been mainly directed against Moultrie, in which, in addition to the loss by the explosion, three men were killed and two officers (Captain G. A. Wardlaw and Lieutenant D. B. De- Saussure) and fourteen men were wounded. Lieu- tenant Edward W. Macbeth was wounded in Bat- tery Beauregard and one officer and one man in Bat- tery Bee. While the affair between the ironclads and forts was in progress, both the Admiral and General were preparing to carry Fort Sumter by assault. Strangely enough, both commanders were without concert pre- paring to assault the same work on the same night. Whatever cordiality of feeling there may have been between them seems to have ceased. Each was con- fident of his ability to seize the work without the aid of the other, and each ambitious of the honor of capturing the fort which had so long resisted and defied them. Needing some additional boats for the THE SIEGE OF CHARLESTON 281 expedition, the Admiral sent to borrow them from the General. The latter replied that he could not spare them because he proposed to storm Sumter himself that night. Learning the General's inten- tion, the Admiral seems to have desired co-operation, but declined the former's suggestion that the army officer commanding his storming party should also control the naval party. Each therefore proceeded independently of the other, the only agreement be- tween them being that, to prevent accident of colli- sion, of the two storming parties the first which entered the fort should display a red light from the battered walls. The naval storming party consisted of 450 picked men, sailors and marines. Captain Thomas H. Stephens was selected to command it. The several divisions of boats were commanded by Lieutenants E. P. Williams, G. C. Raney, S. W. Preston, F. J. Higginson, T. M. Bunce, E. T. Brewer, and En- signs James, Wallace, Porter, and Crane of the navy, and Captain C. G. McCawley, First Lieuten- ants Charles H. Bradford and John C. Harris, and Second Lieutenants R. L. Meade, Lyman P. Wal- lace, and L. E. Fagan, of the Marine Corps. Lieu- tenant Morean Forest was adjutant of the expedi- tion. The party assembled at the flagship Philadelphia, and left it in tow of the steam tug Daffodil about ten o'clock at night. When within about eight hundred yards of Sumter the tug stopped, the final instruc- tions were given to the officers commanding the dif- 282 THE SIEGE OF CHARLESTON ferent divisions, the boats were cast off and pulled toward Sumter. Lieutenant Higginson had been ordered to pull up to the northwestern front, for the purpose of draw- ing the attention of the garrison from the real point of attack. The remaining divisions were ordered to close up and await orders to advance upon the south front, where it was intended to make the assault. Captain Stephens' purpose for delaying the advance of the main body was to profit by all the advantage he hoped to derive from Lieutenant Higginson's diversion. The latter's movement, however, seems to have been mistaken by some of the boat com- manders, for a general advance, "and, in that spirit of gallantry and emulation which characterize the service," says Captain Stephens, "they pulled for the fort." It was too late to stop the movement, and Stephens gave the signal for all to advance. The demand for the surrender of Sumter had given significant warning that an assault was im- pending. Two Confederate ironclads were in posi- tion to sweep with their fire the exposed faces of Sumter. Forts Moultrie and Johnson were in readi- ness on a signal from Sumter to open fire. Major Stephen Elliott, Jr., commanded the fort, which was garrisoned by the First South Carolina Battalion of Infantry, 205 men, under Major Julius A. Blake. A boat attack had been expected for sev- eral nights past, and one-third of the garrison was kept constantly under arms on the parapet, the re- mainder close at hand. THE SIEGE OF CHARLESTON 283 At one o'clock Major Elliott saw the fleet of barges approaching from the east. He immediately ordered up three companies, and reserved his fire until the boats had deployed and the men began to land, then opened fire. The outer boats returned the fire rapidly for a few minutes. The crews of those that had effected a landing rushed to the south wall, where they expected to find a practicable ramp formed by the debris of the wall, up which they might charge into the fort. They found indeed a ramp, but at the top of it a wall from fifteen to twenty feet high, and the storming party was not provided with scaling ladders. Unable to get in or away, they sought shelter under the projecting masses of the wall. Immediately on the signal of fire from Sumter, the ironclad Chicora, lying a short distance to the north, the Sullivan's Island batteries to the northeast, and Fort Johnson to the westward opened and encircled Sumter with their fire, effec- tually assisting to prevent the more distant boats from coming up. Some that had come nearest were disabled by hand grenades and masses of loose masonry hurled from the parapet. The men who had landed and sought shelter from fire under pro- jecting masses of masonry were dislodged by hand grenades and fire balls. Cut off from reinforcements and escape, they called for quarter, and were ordered to make their way, by detachments, to the gorge of the fort, where they were taken within. The boats which had, on a signal from Captain Stephens, not landed, turned and fled. "All who had landed," says Captain Stephens, "were killed or 284 THE SIEGE OF CHARLESTON taken prisoners, and serious casualties occurred in the boats nearest the fort." Only eleven officers and ii6 men had landed, of whom 6 were killed, 15 wounded, and 106 made prisoners. Five barges and as many colors were also captured. The affair ended in complete failure in about twenty minutes. Admiral Dahlgren, who was on a monitor about a quarter of a mile off, says: "Moultrie fired like a devil, the shells breaking around me and screaming in chorus. It did not look like a vigorous assault. Some of the boats' crews jumped overboard at the first fire, and I fell in with two boats a mile from Sumter. I came away without being able to see how the matter ended, and after a weary pull got on board the Lodona." He adds later in his journal: "Thus this attack on a fort which General Gillmore assumes he had demolished, necessarily failed." General Gillmore's storming party consisted of six or seven hundred infantry. It was delayed some- what by the state of the tide, but presently proceeded in barges, toward Sumter. When the firing of the naval party commenced, the barges halted, and when it was apparent that the naval attack had failed, they pulled back to Morris Island. Why the failure of the naval assaulting party should have induced the larger land force to abandon the assault which it had started, it is not easy to conceive. It would seem that the chances of success would have been enhanced if the two parties had assaulted simulta- neously. And if made separately, the troops had a better prospect of success than the naval party, because the latter attempted the assault on a front THE SIEGE OF CHARLESTON 285 where the breach was not practicable, whereas on the gorge front which troops would have assaulted there was and had been for some weeks a practicable breach. "The result," says General Gordon, "did not dis- sipate the growing feeling of ill humor that had been for some time manifest between the land and naval forces. With no single head to devise and execute operations looking to the same end, there must needs be clashing and inefficiency and bad blood. In the meantime Sumter grew daily in strength." For several weeks after gaining possession of Morris Island the Federal force was diligently at work altering and enlarging Batteries Wagner and Gregg to adapt them to the changed purposes for which they were designed, and in constructing new and formidable batteries between the two. A rather slow fire was maintained on the working parties by the batteries on James' and Sullivan's islands, enough to retard but not to prevent the construction of the work. If it had been possible under the most favor- able circumstances, with the Confederate guns in po- sition at so great a distance, to have prevented the construction of the Federal works, there was not ammunition enough in the Confederate batteries to have maintained an effective fire; nor was it practi- cable to procure a sufficient supply. Twenty tons of shot and shell per day would not have sufficed, and that could not be supplied. Late in September a slow fire was maintained from day to day on Sum- ter, enough as it was supposed, but erroneously, to prevent repairs and the remounting of guns. 286 THE SIEGE OF CHARLESTON The most favorable time for the Ironclad fleet to attempt to force an entrance Into the Inner harbor was passing rapidly away; for while the Federals were busily at work on Morris Island the Confed- erates were not idle. They were strengthening the inner line of defensive works, arming them with guns taken from Sumter, and five or six were remounted in Sumter Itself. Still the Ironclad fleet made no attempt to enter, and to General Gillmore it seemed that the fruits of his success on Morris Island were passing away in consequence of the Admiral's delay. Newspaper correspondents near the General's head- quarters sent to New York papers the most glowing accounts of the achievements of the army, giving little notice and no commendation to the part per- formed by the navy. On the contrary, the general tenor of the letters from the special correspondents at the seat of war in the Department of the South produced the impression that the delay of the naval commander alone prevented the complete fruition of all the hopes and expectations based on the cam- paign for the capture of Charleston. Admiral Dahlgren was keenly alive to the deli- cacy and responsibility of his high position In the government service. He knew and shared the in- tensely hostile feeling pervading the North which demanded the reduction and occupation of Charles- ton, which was looked upon as the hotbed of seces- sion and the initial point of the war. At the same time he fully appreciated the injury that would result to the cause he served with great zeal if any serious disaster should befall the ironclad fleet he com- THE SIEGE OF CHARLESTON 287 manded and which he deemed essential to the mainte- nance of the blockade of the port, a measure he regarded as even more important than the occupa- tion of the city itself. One of his officers, Captain Daniel Ammen, recon- noitered and examined the obstructions stretching from near Sumter across toward the northwestern extremity of Sullivan's Island, and reported that they could be removed, and that he, with volunteers from the fleet, would make the attempt to remove them. The Admiral seems to have entertained the offer and given it serious thought. It is a significant manifestation of the estimate he placed on the zeal for the naval service of the men under his command, that he suggested as a suitable and tempting reward for gallant service to announce that those who sur- vived the attempt should be honorably discharged from the service. But the attempt was not made. It was recognized that within the harbor were more formidable obstacles to encounter than the rope and timber and torpedo obstructions at its entrance. Before leaving Washington to enter on the cam- paign. General Gillmore had expressed to the Sec- retary of the Navy his conviction that when he had gained possession of Morris Island and had demol- ished Fort Sumter he could, with batteries erected on Cumming's Point, silence the batteries on Sulli- van's Island, thus completely opening the gate to Charleston. His experience before Wagner had long since demonstrated the utter hopelessness of attempting to silence the Sullivan's Island batteries. 288 THE SIEGE OF CHARLESTON a mile and a half distant, across the channel. Those batteries were still intact. The Admiral perhaps had that fact in mind when at this time he addressed a formal letter to Gen- eral Gillmore, reminding him that the obstacles which barred the entrance to Charleston harbor had not yet been removed or destroyed. Sumter he re- garded as still a serious obstacle in itself, and as guarding other obstructions. "The only fort you have attempted — Sumter^ — ^you have not reduced," and he asked that it be occupied by the Union troops. The General replied sharply, that from the concur- rent testimony of the Confederates themselves, and the Admiral's own admission, Sumter was no longer regarded as capable of any harm to anyone. If, however, the Admiral thought, after only one abor- tive attempt on the part of the navy to capture the fort, that the few infantry soldiers who held it could offer any serious impediment to the removal of the obstructions between the fort and Sullivan's Island, he, the General, would remove them with his own troops. The Admiral replied, if the obstructions were to be removed, it was properly his province to remove them, and he did not need the services of the troops for that purpose. All he desired was that the Union troops should occupy the fort. If the removal of the obstructions was regarded as an important preliminary to the entrance of the fleet, it was surely an excess of punctilio to stand on the order of their removal, whether by the land or naval force. THE SIEGE OF CHARLESTON 289 But in truth the obstructions were by no means so formidable as was supposed. There was no doubt risk to be encountered from submerged torpedoes, as was subsequently discovered by the explosion of one under the monitor Patapsco while covering an attempt to remove obstructions, instantly sinking the monitor and more than half of her crew, and like experiences elsewhere. But risks are inevitable, and these were such as the officers and men of the navy expected and were perfectly ready to encounter for the accomplishment of commensurate results. The difficulty was not so much to get into, as to get out of the inner harbor; and it was a question for grave consideration whether the results which might reasonably be expected to follow a successful en- trance into the inner harbor would be at all com- mensurate with the risk to the ironclads. A glance at the map of the harbor will show that, leaving out of consideration Sumter and the formidable batteries on Sullivan's Island, there were seventeen batteries mounting fifty-eight guns covering the waters of the inner harbor. Long experience in the bombardment of Wagner and Moultrie had most clearly demon- strated that the combined land and naval batteries, throwing a weight of metal such as had never before been thrown on any work, could not permanently silence these land forts, or silence them any longer than they were immediately under fire. It would have been idle to suppose that the naval batteries alone could accomplish on the works within the har- bor what the combined land and naval batteries had failed, under much more favorable circumstances, to 290 THE SIEGE OF CHARLESTON effect on those without. There were, besides, two new and formidable Confederate ironclads within the harbor, which would have played a conspicuous part in any engagement in those waters. "The truth is," says Admiral Dahlgren, "that the entrance of ironclads could only make sure of the destruction of the city, — and not this without undue risk, if these were only monitors. The act itself could not be ob- jected to by the Rebels, for it was understood to be their intent to destroy the place themselves rather than that we should occupy it. If so, it was quite as logical that we should destroy it rather than they should occupy it." All arguments in favor of the entrance of the iron- clads proceeded on the assumption that they were in good condition for action, which was far from being the case. They had all been under steam for six or seven months; their bottoms were so foul as mate- rially to impair their speed ; they had been repeatedly in action and were much damaged by the battering they had received, and two of the twenty-six guns they carried had been disabled and needed repairs before going again into action. But public sentiment in the North clamored for the reduction of Charleston, and the "special cor- respondents at the seat of war" continued to lay the blame of the failure to accomplish that so eagerly desired consummation, to the navy. At the instance of the Secretary of the Navy, Ad- miral Dahlgren, on October 24 convened a council of the ironclad captains, and in a session of six hours' duration the whole subject was discussed fully and THE SIEGE OF CHARLESTON 291 without restraint. It was decided by a vote of six to four, the senior officers being in the majority, that an attempt to enter the harbor and proceed to the city would be attended with extreme risk without adequate results. To the question. Should the Iron- sides enter with the monitors? there was no decision, — four for, four against, and two undecided; there was but one dissenting voice to the question. Would it be advisable to co-operate with the army in an attack on Sullivan's Island? and to the question. Can Forts Johnson and Moultrie be reduced by the pres- ent force of ironclads, unsupported by the army? the answer was unanimously No. The matter was briefly and forcibly stated by Commodore Rodgers in reply to an inquiry by a committee of the United States Senate, as follows : "Ordinarily and popularly, to take a place means to take its defenses. General Gillmore was forty- eight^ days on Morris Island, acting against Fort Wagner, with some ten or twelve thousand men against a garrison of about 1500 men or less, assisted by the monitors and by artillery which excited the wonder of Europe. After forty-eight days he took the place, not by his artillery nor by monitors, but by making military approaches and threatening to cut off their means of escape and take the place by assault; and when he took it, it was not so greatly damaged as to be untenable. Now, if General Gill- more, on the same island, assisted by his artillery and the whole force of the monitors, in forty-eight 'He was so engaged from July lo to September 7. 292 THE SIEGE OF CHARLESTON days could not capture Fort Wagner alone by them, it is perfectly certain that the monitors alone never can take the much stronger defenses which line James Island and Sullivan's Island. In going up to Charleston, therefore, he would have to run by the defenses, and leave the harbor, so far as they con- stitute the command of it, in the power of the enemy; and when he got up to the city he could not spare a single man from his monitors, even if they should consent to receive him; and if he burned the town he would burn it over the heads of non-combatant women and children, while the men who defend it are away in the forts. I should be reluctant to burn a house over a woman's and child's head because her husband defied me. Dahlgren, if he burns Charles- ton, will be called a savage by all Europe, and after the heat of combat is over he will be called a savage by our own people. But there are obstructions in the way which render it doubtful whether he can get there. And if he goes up under the guns of those fortifications, sticks upon the obstructions, and is finally driven off by any cause, leaving one or two of his monitors there within their power, they will get them off, repair them, and send them out to what part of the coast they please and give a new character to the war. The wooden blockade will be mainly at an end, unlimited cotton going out and unlimited supplies coming in. I see no good to compensate for that risk, except it be in satisfying the national mind that retributive justice has been done against the city of Charleston, the nursery of the Rebellion. He might possibly go up there and burn the town, THE SIEGE OF CHARLESTON 293 in which there are no combatants, and a place which, in a purely military point of view, as far as I know, possesses no value. To do that he risks losing vessels upon the obstructions, and if they should be so lost, and fall into the enemy's hands, a new phase will be given to the war. In a word, I do not think the game is worth the candle. Whether these reasons operate with him, I do not know; they would with me." Admiral Dahlgren decided to make no attempt to enter the inner harbor until the monitors should be repaired, cleaned, and put in fighting trim, which would not be sooner than about the middle of No- vember. He was, however, ready to co-operate with the land force in any operation it might undertake against Sullivan's Island or elsewhere. But General Gillmore, believing that he had accomplished his part of the general plan, was not disposed to enter on any new operations without reinforcements. His batteries at and near Cumming's Point being ready for action on October 26, he commenced what he calls the second bombardment of Sumter, in which the ironclads as usual bore a conspicuous part, their II- and 15-inch guns being especially effective. This bombardment was maintained with great violence for about ten days, until many of the guns in the land batteries were worn out. The second bombardment had resulted in rendering the southeast face a more complete ruin than the gorge wall, and other faces were greatly shaken. What further to do to bring the compaign to a successful end was a most per- plexing problem. Various projects were suggested 294 THE SIEGE OF CHARLESTON and discussed in frequent conferences between the commanders of the land and naval forces. One was to attempt to capture Fort Johnson, but General Gillmore was unwilling to attempt to hold the ground west of Johnson or co-operate with the navy within the harbor, without an addition to his force of 15,000 men, and that he could not get. Another plan was to operate against Sullivan's Island by way of Bull's Bay. Since it seemed that Charleston could not then be taken, it was suggested that the combined force be turned upon Savannah and cap- ture that city, and this project was discussed until it became known in Savannah, when preparations were in progress to meet it. Pending the consideration of these projects it was deemed advisable to divert public attention and let it be understood that further operations against Charleston were abandoned. General Gillmore undertook to have that report spread abroad by the special newspaper correspon- dents. Meanwhile no explicit instructions came from Washington, and it was understood that the Secre- tary of War and the General-in-Chief of the army were averse to any further active operations at that time by the army against Charleston, the occupation of which they would have regarded as an "elephant on their hands." Indeed, the purpose of the Administration in Washington in regard to Charleston is shrouded in some doubt, not withstanding the efforts made to cap- ture that city. In a letter from Colonel A, B. Ely, who had been THE SIEGE OF CHARLESTON 295 General Benham's chief of staff, to Major General G. W. CuUum, he says, referring to the failure of the assault on Secessionville June 16, 1862 : "I could give you the reason of the want of success, but 1 need not now disparage anybody in that regard, nor is it needful that I should speak of the weak and wicked considerations which interfered to prevent any further action of General Benham in that direc- tion, particularly when I was assured by the Presi- dent himself that he did not want we should take Charleston."^ Eighteen months after the assault on Secession- ville, in December, 1863, General Gillmore, in con- ference with Admiral Dahlgren in regard to their future operations, said that the War Department had "never entertained an idea beyond the occupation of the exterior islands." The exterior islands — Morris and Folly — were securely held, and a slow fire was maintained on the city and Forts Sumter and Moultrie; but whatever may have been the wishes of the Administration, General Gillmore's campaign of four months' dura- tion virtually ended with the second bombardment of Fort Sumter.
