THE  UNIVERSITY 
OF  ILLINOIS 
LIBRARY 


From  the  collection  of 
Julius  Doerner,  Chicago 
Purchased,  1918. 

973.T4 


The  person  charging  this  material  is  re- 
sponsible for  its  return  on  or  before  the 
Latest  Date  stamped  below. 

Theft,  mutilation,  and  underlining  of  books 
are  reasons  for  disciplinary  action  and  may 
result  in  dismissal  from  the  University. 

UNIVERSITY  OF  ILLINOIS  LIBRARY  AT  URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


L161— 0-1096 


THE 


WAR  OF  THE  REBELLION: 

A COMPILATION  OF  THE 

OFFICIAL  RECORDS 

OF  THE 

UNION  AND  CONFEDERATE  ARMIES. 


PREPARED,  UNDER  THE  DIRECTION  OF  THE  SECRETARY  OF  WAR,  BY 

The  late  Lieut.  Col.  ROBERT  N.  SCOTT,  Third  U.  S.  Artillery. 

PURSUANT  TO  ACTS  OF  CONGRESS. 


SERIES  I— VOLUME  XXVIII— IN  TWO  PARTS. 

PART  I— REPORTS. 

ft 


WASHINGTON: 


Historical  Society 


GOVERNMENT  PRINTING  OFFICE. 

1890. 


f 73'7‘t4 

2 

✓.  sls1 

c^.p- 


PREFACE. 


By  an  act  approved  June  23,  1874,  Congress  made  an  appropriation 
“ to  enable  tlie  Secretary  of  War  to  begin  the  publication  of  the  Offi- 
cial Records  of  the  War  of  the  Rebellion,  both  of  the  Union  and  Con- 
federate Armies, ” and  directed  him  “to  have  copied  for  the  Public 
Printer  all  reports,  letters,  telegrams,  and  general  orders  not  hereto- 
fore copied  or  printed,  and  properly  arranged  in  chronological  order.” 

Appropriations  for  continuing  such  preparation  have  been  made 
from  time  to  time,  and  the  act  approved  June  16,  1880,  has  provided 
“ for  the  printing  and  binding,  under  direction  of  the  Secretary  of 
War,  of  10,000  copies  of  a compilation  of  the  Official  Records  (Union 
and  Confederate)  of  the  War  of  the  Rebellion,  so  far  as  the  same 
may  be  ready  for  publication,  during  the  fiscal  year” ; and  that  “of 
said  number  7,000  copies  shall  be  for  the  use  of  the  House  of  Repre- 
sentatives, 2,000  copies  for  the  use  of  the  Senate,  and  1,000  copies  for 
the  use  of  the  Executive  Departments.”* 

* Volumes  I to  V distributed  under  act  approved  June  16, 1880.  The  act  approved 
August  7,  1882,  provides  that — 

“ The  volumes  of  the  Official  Records  of  the  War  of  the  Rebellion  shall  be  distri- 
buted as  follows  : One  thousand  copies  to  the  Executive  Departments,  as  now  pro- 
vided by  law.  One  thousand  copies  for  distribution  by  the  Secretary  of  War 
among  officers  of  the  Army  and  contributors  to  the  work.  Eight  thousand  three 
hundred  copies  shall  be  sent  by  the  Secretary  of  War  to  such  libraries,  organiza- 
tions, and  individuals  as  may  be  designated  by  the  Senators,  Representatives,  and 
Delegates  of  the  Forty-seventh  Congress.  Each  Senator  shall  designate  not  exceed- 
ing twenty-six,  and  each  Representative  and  Delegate  not  exceeding  twenty-one  of 
such  addresses,  and  the  volumes  shall  be  sent  thereto  from  time  to  time  as  they  are 
published,  until  the  publication  is  completed.  Senators,  Representatives,  and  Dele- 
gates shall  inform  the  Secretary  of  War  in  each  case  how  many  volumes  of  those 
heretofore  published  they  have  forwarded  to  such  addresses.  The  remaining  copies 
of  the  eleven  thousand  to  be  published,  and  all  sets  that  may  not  be  ordered  to  be 
distributed  as  provided  herein,  shall  be  sold  by  the  Secretary  of  War  for  cost  of 
publication  with  ten  per  cent,  added  thereto,  and  the  proceeds  of  such  sale  shall  be 
covered  into  the  Treasury.  If  two  or  more  sets  of  said  volumes  are  ordered  to  the 
same  address  the  Secretary  of  War  shall  inform  the  Senators,  Representatives,  or 
Delegates,  who  have  designated  the  same,  who  thereupon  may  designate  other 
libraries,  organizations,  or  individuals.  The  Secretary  of  War  shall  report  to  the 
first  session  of  the  Forty-eighth  Congress  what  volumes  of  the  series  heretofore 
published  have  not  been  furnished  to  such  libraries,  organizations,  and  individuals. 
He  shall  also  inform  distributees  at  whose  instance  the  volumes  are  sent.” 


ill 


IV 


PREFACE. 


This  compilation  will  be  the  first  general  publication  of  the  military 
records  of  the  war,  and  will  embrace  all  official  documents  that  can  be 
obtained  by  the  compiler,  and  that  appear  to  be  of  any  historical 
value. 

The  publication  will  present  the  records  in  the  following  order  of 
arrangement: 

The  1st  Series  will  embrace  the  formal  reports,  both  Union  and  Con- 
federate, of  the  first  seizures  of  United  States  property  in  the  South- 
ern States,  and  of  all  military  operations  in  the  field,  with  the  corre- 
spondence, orders,  and  returns  relating  specially  thereto,  and,  as 
proposed,  is  to  be  accompanied  by  an  Atlas. 

In  this  series  the  reports  will  be  arranged  according  to  the  cam- 
paigns and  several  theaters  of  operations  (in  the  chronological  order 
of  the  events),  and  the  Union  reports  of  any  event  will,  as  a rule,  be 
immediately  followed  by  the  Confederate  accounts.  The  correspond- 
ence, &c.,  not  embraced  in  the  “ reports”  proper  will  follow  (first 
Union  and  next  Confederate)  in  chronological  order. 

The  2d  Series  will  contain  the  correspondence,  orders,  reports,  and 
returns,  Union  and  Confederate,  Mating  to  prisoners  of  war,  and 
(so  far  as  the  military  authorities  were  concerned)  to  State  or  political 
prisoners. 

The  3d  Series  will  contain  the  correspondence,  orders,  reports,  and 
returns  of  the  Union  authorities  (embracing  their  correspondence 
with  the  Confederate  officials)  not  relating  specially  to  the  subjects 
of  the  first  and  second  series.  It  will  set  forth  the  annual  and  special 
reports  of  the  Secretary  of  War,  of  the  General-in-Chief,  and  of  the 
chiefs  of  the  several  staff  corps  and  departments;  the  calls  for  troops, 
and  the  correspondence  between  the  national  and  the  several  State 
authorities. 

The  4th  Series  will  exhibit  the  correspondence,  orders,  reports,  and 
returns  of  the  Confederate  authorities,  similar  to  that  indicated  for 
the  Union  officials,  as  of  the  third  series,  but  excluding  the  corre- 
spondence between  the  Union  and  Confederate  authorities  given  in 
that  series. 

ROBERT  1ST.  SCOTT, 

Major  Third  Art.,  and  Bvt.  Lieut.  Col. 

War  Department,  August  23,  1880. 


Approved: 


ALEX.  RAMSEY, 

Secretary  of  War 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER  XL. 


PH£0. 

Operations  on  the  coasts  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia,  and  in  Middle  and 
East  Florida.  June  12-December  31,  1863 1-755 


(v) 


CONTENTS  OF  PRECEDING  VOLUMES. 


VOLUME  I. 


CHAPTER  I.  Page. 

Operations  in  Charleston  Harbor,  South 
Cai’olina.  December  20,  1860-April  14, 

1861 1-317 

CHAPTER  H. 

The  secession  of  Georgia.  January  3-26, 

1861 318-325 

CHAPTER  III. 

The  secession  of  Alabama  and  Mississippi. 

January  4-20, 1861  326-330 

CHAPTER  IV. 

Operations  in  Florida.  January  6- August 
31,1861 331-473 


CHAPTER  V.  Page. 

The  secession  of  North  Carolina.  Janu- 
ary 9-May  20,  1861  474-488 

CHAPTER  VI. 

The  secession  of  Louisiana.  January  10- 

February  19, 1861  489-501 

CHAPTER  VII. 

Operations  in  Texas  and  New  Mexico. 

February  1-June  11, 1861 502-636 

CHAPTER  VIII. 

Operations  in  Arkansas,  the  Indian  Terri- 
tory, and  Missouri.  February  7-May  9, 

1861 637-691 


VOLUME  II. 

CHAPTER  IX.  Page. 

Operations  in  Maryland,  Pennsylvania,  Virginia,  and  West  Virginia.  April  16-July  31, 1861 1-1012 

VOLUME  III. 

CHAPTER  X.  Page. 

Operations  in  Missouri,  Arkansas,  Kansas,  and  Indian  Territory.  May  10-November  19, 1861 1-749 


VOLUME  IV. 


CHAPTER  XI.  Page. 

Operations  in  Texas,  New  Mexico,  and 
Arizona.  June  11, 1861-February  1, 1862.  1-174 

CHAPTER  XII. 

Operations  in  Kentucky  and  Tennessee. 

July  1-November  19,  1861 175-565 


CHAPTER  XIII.  Page. 

Operations  in  North  Carolina  and  South- 
eastern Virginia.  August  1, 1861-Janu 
ary  11, 1862 566-721 


VOLUME  V. 


CHAPTER  XIV.  Page. 

Operations  in  Maryland,  Northern  Virginia,  and  West  Virginia.  August  1, 1861-March  17, 1862. . 1-1106 


VOLUME  VI. 


CHAPTER  XV.  Page. 

Operations  on  the  coasts  of  South  Carolina, 
Georgia,  and  Middle  and  East  Florida. 

August  21, 1861-April  11, 1862 1-435 


CHAPTER  XVI.  Page. 

Operations  in  West  Florida,  Southern  Al- 
abama, Southern  Mississippi,  and  Lou- 
isiana. September  1,1861-May  12, 1862  . 436-894 


VOLUME  VII. 


CHAPTER  XVn. 

Operations  in  Kentucky,  Tennessee,  N.  Alabama,  and  S.  W.  Virginia. 


Page. 

Nov.  19, 1861-Mar.  4, 1862..  1-946 
(VII) 


VIII 


CONTENTS  OF  PRECE  DI  NO  VOLUMES. 


VOLUME  VIII. 


CHAPTER  XVIII.  Page. 

Operations  in  Missouri,  Arkansas,  Kansas,  and  Indian  Territory.  Nov.  19,  1861-April  10, 1862.  1-834 


VOLUME  IX. 


CHAPTER  XIX.  Page. 

Operations  in  Southeastern  Virginia.  Jan- 
uary 11-March  17,  1862  1-71 

CHAPTER  XX. 

Operations  in  North  Carolina.  January 
11 -August  20, 1862  72-480 


CHAPTER  XXI.  Page. 

Operations  in  Texas,  New  Mexico,  and 
Arizona.  February  1 -September  20, 

1862 481-730 


VOLUME  X-  IN  TWO  PARTS. 

CHAPTER  XXII. 


Operations  in  Kentucky,  Tennessee,  North  Mississippi,  North  Alabama,  and  Southwest  Virginia. 

March  4-June  10,  1862. 


Page. 


Part  I -Reports 1-927 

Part  II— Correspondence,  etc 1-642 


VOLUME  XI— IN  THREE  PARTS. 


CHAPTER  XXIII. 

The  Peninsular  Campaign,  Virginia.  March  17-September  2,  1862. 

Page. 


Part  I— Reports,  March  17- June  24  — 1-1077 

Part  II— Reports,  June  25-September  2 . 1-994 

Part  III— Correspondence,  etc  1-691 


VOLUME  XII— IN  THREE  PARTS. 


CHAPTER  XXIV. 


Operations  in  Northern  Virginia,  West  Virginia,  and  Maryland.  March  17-September  2, 1862. 


¥l n March  IT— .Tllllfi  25  

Page. 

1-818 

Po«>#  || Ppnovtc  Tnnp  9fi_fipntPTn her  2 

1-820 

Part  III— Correspondence,  etc 

1-966 

VOLUME  XIII. 

CHAPTER  XXV. 

Page. 

Operations  in  Missouri,  Arkansas,  Kansas,  the  Indian  Territory,  and  the  Department  of  the 
Northwest.  April  10-November  20,  1862 

VOLUME  XIV. 

CHAPTER  XXVI. 

Page. 

Operations  on  the  coasts  of  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Middle  and  East  Florida.  April  12, 

1862- June  11,  1863  i'1025 


VOETJME  XV. 

CHAPTER  XXVH. 

Page. 

Operations  in  West  Florida,  Southern  Alabama,  Southern  Mississippi  (embracing  all  operations 
against  Vicksburg,  May  18-July  27, 1862),  and  Louisiana,  May  12, 1862-May  14,  1863;  and  oper- 
ations in  Texas,  New  Mexico,  and  Arizona.  September  20,  1862-May  14,  1863 1-1135 


CONTENTS  OF  PRECEDING  VOLUMES. 


IX 


VOLUME  XVI— IN  TWO  PARTS. 


CHAPTER  XXVIII. 


Operations  in  Kentucky,  Middle  and  East  Tennessee,  North  Alabama,  and  Southwest  Virginia. 

10-October  31,  1862. 


Part  I— Reports 

Part  II— Correspondence,  etc 


June 

Page. 

1-1168 

1-1017 


VOLUME  XVII— IN  TWO  PARTS. 

CHAPTER  XXIX. 

Operations  in  West  Tennessee  and  Northern  Mississippi.  June  10,  1862-January  20, 1863. 

Page. 


Part  I— Reports 1-807 

Part  II— Correspondence,  etc 1-916 


VOLUME  XVIII. 

CHAPTER  XXX. 

Operations  in  North  Carolina  and  Southeastern  Virginia.  August  20, 1862-June  3, 1863. 


Page. 

1-1104 


VOLUME  XIX— IN  TWO  PARTS. 


CHAPTER  XXXI. 


Operations  in  Northern  Virginia,  West  Virginia,  Maryland,  and  Pennsylvania.  September  3-Novem- 

ber  14,  .862. 


Page. 


Part  I— Reports,  September  3-20 1-1108 

Part  II— Reports,  September  20-November  14;  Correspondence,  etc.,  September  3-Novem- 

ber  14 1-739 


VOLUME  XX— IN  TWO  PARTS. 


CHAPTER  XXXII. 


Operations  in  Kentucky,  Middle  and  East  Tennessee,  North  Alabama,  and  Southwest  Virginia.  No- 
vember 1, 1862-January  20,  1863. 


Page. 


Part  I -Reports  1-997 

Part  II— Correspondence,  etc 1-516 


VOLUME  XXI. 

CHAPTER  XXXIH. 

Page. 

Operations  in  Northern  Virginia,  West  Virginia,  Maryland,  and  Pennsylvania.  November  15, 
1862-January  25, 1863 ' 1-1152 


VOLUME  XXII — IN  TWO  PARTS. 


CHAPTER  XXXIV. 


Operations  in  Missouri,  Arkansas,  Kansas,  the  Indian  Territory,  and  the  Department  of  the  Northwest. 
November  20, 1862-December  31, 1863. 


Page. 


Part  I— Reports 1-926 

Part  II— Correspondence,  etc 1-1163 


X 


CONTENTS  OF  PRECEDING  VOLUMES. 


VOLUME  XXIII— IN  TWO  PARTS. 


CHAPTER  XXXV. 


Operations  in  Kentucky,  Middle  and  East  Tennessee,  North  Alabama,  and  Southwest  Virginia.  Jan- 
uary 21-August  10,  1803. 


Page. 


Part  I —Reports 1-858 

Part  II— Correspondence,  etc 1-986 


VOLUME  XXIV— IN  THREE  PARTS. 


CHAPTER  XXXVI. 


Operations  in  Mississippi  and  West  Tennessee,  including  those  in  Arkansas  and  Louisiana  connected 
with  the  Siege  of  Vicksburg.  January  20-August  10,  1863. 


Page. 


Part  I— Reports,  January  20-May  15,  including  the  “ General  Reports”  for  whole  period, 


January  20-August  10 -787 

Part  II— Reports,  May  16- August  10 1-699 

Part  III— Correspondence,  etc 1-1070 


VOLUME  XXV— IN  TWO  PARTS. 

CHAPTER  XXXVII. 


Operations  in  Northern  Virginia,  West  Virginia,  Maryland,  and  Pennsylvania. 

1863. 

Part  I —Reports 

Part  II— Correspondence,  etc 


January  26-June  3, 
Page. 

1-1119 

1-862 


VOLUME  XXVI— IN  TWO  PARTS. 


CHAPTER  XXXVIII. 


Operations  in  West  Florida,  Southern  Alabama,  Southern  Mississippi,  Louisiana,  Texas,  and  New 
Mexico.  May  14-December  31,  1863. 


Page. 


Part  I— Reports,  Union  Correspondence,  etc U920 

Part  II— Confederate  Correspondence,  etc 1-581 


VOLUME  XXVII— IN  THREE  PARTS. 


CHAPTER  XXXIX. 


Operations  in  North  Carolina,  Virginia,  West  Virginia,  Maryland,  Pennsylvania,  and  Department  of 
the  East.  June  3- August  3,  1863. 


Page. 


Part  I— Reports 1-1059 

Part  II— Reports  1-1005 

Part  III— Correspondence,  etc 1-1092 


XI 


CHAPTER  X Li. 


OPERATIONS  ON  THE  COASTS  OF  SOUTH  CAROLINA 
AND  GEORGIA,  AND  IN  MIDDLE  AND  EAST 
FLORIDA. 


June  12-December  31,  1863. 


SUMMARY  OF  THE  PRINCIPAL  EVENTS.* 

June  12,  1863. — Brig.  Gen.  Quincy  A.  Gillmore,  U.  S.  Army,  supersedes  Maj. 

Gen.  David  Hunter  in  command  of  the  Department  of  the 
South. 

17,  1863. — Capture  of  the  C.  S.  steamer  Atlanta  (Fingal),  in  Warsaw  Sound, 

Ga. 

18,  1863. — Skirmish  on  Edisto  Island,  S.  C. 

21,  1863. — Affair  on  Dixon’s  Island,  S.  C. 

July  3,  1863. — Expedition  to  Ossabaw  Island,  Ga. 

10,  1863. — Engagement  at  Willstown  Bluff,  Pon  Pon  River,  S.  C. 

10-Sept.  7,  1863. — Operations  on  Morris  Island,  S.  C. 

16,  1863. — Engagement  near  Grimball’s  Landing,  James  Island,  S.  C. 

20,  1863. — Bombardment  of  Legare’s  Point,  James  Island,  S.  C. 

30,  1863. — Expedition  to  Barnwell’s  Island,  S.  C. 

Aug.  4,  1863. — Affair  at  the  mouth  of  Vincent’s  Creek,  S.  C. 

17-Dec.  31,  1863. — Bombardment  of  Fort  Sumter,  S.  C. 

19,  1863. — Capture  of  signal  station  at  Saint  John’s  Mill,  Fla. 

20-21,  1863. — Attempt  to  destroy  tlieU.  S.  steamer  New  Ironsides,  off  Charles- 
ton Harbor,  S.  C. 

21-Dec.  31,  1863. — Bombardment  of  Charleston,  S.  C. 

31,  1863. — Sinking  of  the  Confederate  transport  Sumter  by  batteries  on  Sul- 

livan’s Island,  S.  C. 

Sept.  7,  1863. — Affair  on  Battery  Island,  S.  C. 

7-  8,  1863. — Engagement  in  Charleston  Harbor,  S.  C. 

8-  9,  1863. — Boat  attack  on  Fort  Sumter,  S.  C. 

13-14,  1863.— Capture  of  Union  telegraph  party  near  Lowndes’  Mill,  Cornba- 
hee  River,  S.  C. 

15,  1863.— Explosion  at  Battery  Cheves,  James  Island,  S.  C. 

22,  1863. — Destruction  of  the  Hudson  Place  Salt-Works,  near  Darien,  Ga. 
Oct.  5,  1863. — Attempt  to  blow  up  the  U.  S.  steamer  New  Ironsides,  off  Charles- 
ton Harbor,  S.  C. 

16,  1863. — Engagement  at  Fort  Brooke,  Fla. 

19,  1863.— Affair  at  Murrell’s  Inlet,  S.  C. 

*0f  some  °f  the  minor  conflicts  noted  in  this  “ Summary,”  no  circumstantial 
reports  arc  on  file. 

1 R R— VOL  XXVIII,  PT  I 


(i) 


2 S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

Nov.  15,  1863. — Demonstration  on  John’s  Island,  S.  C. 

16,  1863.— Engagement  between  the  U.  S.  monitors  and  the  Sullivan’s 
Island  batteries. 

19-20,  1863. — Boat  demonstration  upon  Fort  Sumter,  S.  C. 

24,  1863. — Skirmish  near  Cunningham’s  Bluff,  S.  C. 

Dec.  5,  1863. — Affair  at  Murrell’s  Inlet,  S.  C. 

25,  1863. — Attack  on  the  U.  S.  steamer  Marblehead,  in  Stono  River,  S.  C. 

Engagement  at  Fort  Brooke,  Fla. 

28,  1863. — Affair  on  John’s  Island,  S.  C. 

30,  1863. — Skirmish  near  Saint  Augustine,  Fla. 

GENERAL  REPORTS. 

No.  1. — Extract  from  annual  report  of  Maj.  Gen.  Henry  W.  Halleck,  General-in- 
Chief,  U.  S.  Army. 

No.  2.— Maj.  Gen.  Quincy  A.  Gillmore,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Department  of 
the  South,  with  congratulatory  orders. 

No.  3. — Lieut.  Franklin  E.  Town,  Forty-second  New  York  Infantry,  Chief  Signal 
Officer. 

No.  4. — General  G.  T.  Beauregard,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  Department  of  South 
Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida,  with  thanks  of  Confederate  Congress. 
No.  5. — Extracts  from  Journal  of  Operations  in  Charleston  Harbor,  Sept.  1-Dec. 
31,  1863. 

No.  1. 

Extract  f rom  annual  report  of  Maj.  Gen.  Henry  W.  Halleck,  Gen- 
eral-in-Chief, U.  S.  Army. 

Headquarters  of  the  Army, 
Washington,  D.  C.,  November  15,  1863. 
Sir  : In  compliance  with  yonr  orders,  I submit  the  following  sum- 
mary of  military  operations  since  my  last  annual  report  : 

* * * * * * * 

DEPARTMENT  OF  THE  SOUTH. 

The  withdrawal  last  year  of  most  of  our  troops  in  South  Carolina 
to  re-enforce  General  McClellan  on  the  Peninsula,  compelled  the 
commanding  general  of  that  department  to  coniine  himself  mainly 
to  the  defense  of  the  points  which  he  then  occupied. 

An  attack  upon  Fort  Sumter  and  Charleston  had  long  been  in  con- 
templation by  the  Navy  Department,  and  in  March  last  it  was  repre- 
sented that  the  operations  of  the  iron-clads  and  monitors  would  he 
greatly  facilitated  by  a land  force  prepared  to  assist  the  attack  and 
to  occupy  any  work  reduced  by  the  navy.  Accordingly,  General  F os- 
ter,  with  a considerable  force  and  a large  siege  equipage,  which  had 
been  prepared  for  another  purpose,  was  sent  to  assist  in  this  naval 
attack.  It  was  thought  that  his  talents  and  experience  as  an  engineer 
officer,  and  his  personal  knowledge  of  the  localities  and  defensive 
works  of  Charleston  Harbor,  rendered  him  peculiarly  suited  for  this 
duty;  but  not  proving  acceptable  to  the  commanding  general  of  the 
department,  he  was  permitted  to  return  to  his  command  in  North 
Carolina,  leaving  his  troops  and  siege  preparations  in  the  Department 
of  the  South. 

The  naval  attack  on  Fort  Sumter  took  place  on  the  7th  of  April, 
but  being  unsuccessful,  nothing  apparently  remained  to  be  done  by 


cJnAr.  XL.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


3 


the  land  forces.  A siege  of  Charleston  and  its  defenses  by  land  had 
never  been  contemplated,  and  therefore  was  no  part  of  the  plan. 

It  is  now  represented  by  the  Navy  Department  that  a second  attack 
upon  Fort  Sumter  and  Charleston  was  preparing,  and  that  its  success 
required  the  military  occupation  of  Morris  Island,  and  the  establish- 
ment of  land  batteries  on  that  island  to  assist  in  the  reduction  of 
Fort  Sumter.  The  establishment  of  these  batteries  and  the  reduction 
of  the  enemy’s  works — Fort  Wagner  and  Battery  Gregg — being  a 
matter  of  engineering  skill,  Brig.  Gen.  (now  Maj.  Gen.)  Q.  A!  Gill- 
more  was  selected  to  command  the  land  forces  engaged  in  these 
operations.  In  addition  to  being  an  educated  and  skillful  military 
engineer,  he  had  had  considerable  experience  in  the  special  duties 
required  in  these  operations. 

General  Gillmore,  despite  the  enemy’s  defensive  works,  landed  his 
force  on  Morris  Island  on  the  10th  of  July,  and  immediately  com- 
menced the  slow  and  difficult  operations  of  conducting  the  siege  of 
Fort  Wagner  and  establishing  batteries  against  Fort  Sumter.  With- 
out, however,  waiting  for  the  reduction  of  the  former,  he  opened, 
on  the  17th  of  August,  his  fire  on  the  latter,  and  on  the  23d,  after 
seven  days’ bombardment,  Fort  Sumter  was  reported  “a  shapeless 
and  harmless  mass  of  ruins.”  Being  under  the  fire  of  other  forts  of 
the  enemy  and  inaccessible  by  land,  our  troops  could  not  occupy  it, 
and  a few  guns  have  since  been  temporarily  remounted,  but  they 
have  been  as  often  silenced. 

General  Gillmore  now  vigorously  pushed  forward  his  saps  against 
Fort  Wagner,  and,  on  the  morning  of  September  7,  took  possession 
of  that  place,  and  also  of  Battery  Gregg,  most  of  the  garrison  having 
made  their  escape  in  boats  during  the  night.  He  captured  in  all 
thirty-six  pieces  of  artillery  and  a large  amount  of  ammunition. 

General  Gillmore’s  operations  have  been  characterized  by  great 
professional  skill  and  boldness.  He  has  overcome  difficulties  almost 
unknown  in  modern  sieges.  Indeed,  his  operations  on  Morris  Island 
constitute  a new  era  in  the  science  of  engineering  and  gunnery. 

Since  the  capture  of  Forts  Wagner  and  Gregg,  he  has  enlarged 
these  works,  and  established  powerful  batteries,  which  effectually 
command  Fort  Sumter,  and  can  render  efficient  aid  to  any  naval  at- 
tack upon  Charleston.  They  also  control  the  entrance  to  the  harbor. 

* * * * Sfc  * * 


Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

General-in- Chief. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War. 


No.  2. 

Report  of  Maj.  Gen.  Quincy  A.  Gillmore , U.  S.  Army,  command- 
ing Department  of  the  South,  with  congratulatory  orders. 

INTRODUCTION. 

1.  The  city  of  Charleston,  S.  C.,  is  situated  at  the  head  of  Charles- 
ton Harbor,  on  the  point  of  a narrow  peninsula  formed  by  Ashley 
and  Cooper  Rivers.  It  is  distant  7 miles  from  the  outer  edge  of 


4 


S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 


[Chap.  XL. 


the  bar  which  stretches  across  the  entrance  to  the  harbor.  This  en- 
trance is-  formed  by  Sullivan’s  Island  on  the  north  and  Morris  Island 
on  the  south  side,  each  about  3J  miles  in  length,  low,  narrow,  and 
sandy,  and  separated  from  the  main  land  adjacent  to  it  toward  the 
interior  by  soft  and  impracticable  marshes,  varying  in  width  from 
to  3 miles.  These  marshes  are  submerged  by  spring  tides,  and  are 
traversed  by  numerous  streams,  that  are  generally  very  narrow, 
deep,  and  crooked.  The  inner  ends  of  these  islands  reach  to  within 
3^  to  4 miles  from  the  city.  The  harbor  inside  is  bounded  by  the 
main  land  on  the  north  and  by  James  Island  on  the  south  side.  The 
shortest  distance  between  Sullivan’s  and  Morris  Islands  is  2,700 
yards. 


FORTIFICATIONS  IN  CHARLESTON  HARBOR. 

2.  The  defenses  provided  for  the  city  of  Charleston  by  the  United 
States  before  the  war  comprised  the  following  works,  viz  : 

3.  First.  Fort  Sumter,  a strong  casemated  brick  work  of  five  faces, 
designed  to  mount  two  tiers  of  guns  in  embrasure  and  one  en  bar- 
bette. It  is  built  on  a shoal,  its  foundations  being  formed  by  stones 
a perdue.  It  is  situated  on  the  south  side  of  the  channel,  nearly 
equidistant  from  Sullivan’s  and  Morris  Islands,  and  is  3^  miles  from 
the  city.  Its  full  armament  would  comprise  about  one  hundred  and 
thirty-five  guns.  None  of  the  embrasures  of  the  second  tier  had 
been  finished  at  the  commencement  of  the  present  war,  and  the  open- 
ings left  for  them  were  walled  up  with  brick  during  the  occupancy 
of  the  work  by  Major  Anderson’s  command,  in  the  spring  of  1861, 
in  which  condition  the  enemy  allowed  them  to  remain. 

4.  Second.  Fort  Moultrie,  located  on  Sullivan’s  Island,  at  1,700  yards 
distance  from  Fort  Sumter.  It  is  a brick  work,  mounting  one  tier 
of  guns  en  barbette. 

5.  Third.  Fort  Johnson,  located  on  James  Island,  due  west  from 
Fort  Sumter,  and  miles  distant  from  the  lower  end  of  the  city. 
It  is  an  earthwork,  with  its  guns  en  barbette.  Its  armament  was  not 
large  at  the  opening  of  the  war. 

6.  Fourth.  Castle  Pinckney,  an  old-fashioned  brick  work,  on 
Shute’s  Folly  Island,  1 mile  east  of  the  lower  end  of  the  city.  Its 
armament  was  not  heavy  at  the  opening  of  the  war. 

7.  To  the  works  above  named,  intended  solely  to  resist  a naval 
attack,  the  enemy  commenced  adding  largely  when  the  war  broke 
out. 

8.  Strong  earthworks  were  erected  on  both  the  upper  and  the 
lower  ends,  as  well  as  at  intermediate  points,  of  Morris  and  Sulli- 
van’s Islands. 

9.  The  gorge  wall  of  Fort  Sumter  was  re-enforced  adjacent  to  the 
magazines,  and  its  armament  increased. 

10.  Additional  guns  were  mounted  on  Forts  Moultrie  and  J ohnson, 
and  they  were  otherwise  materially  strengthened. 

11.  Several  batteries  were  also  established  on  the  shell  beach  run- 
ning in  a southeasterly  direction  from  Fort  Johnson. 

12.  Heavy  guns  were  mounted  upon  the  wharves  of  the  city,  and  a 
number  of  iron-clad  rams  were  constructed. 

13.  A work  called  Fort  Ripley,  mounting  a heavy  armament,  was 
also  improvised  in  the  middle  ground  north  of  Fort  Johnson. 

14.  Against  a land  attack,  formidable  preparations  were  likewise 
made.  On  James  Island  a line  of  detached  works,  armed  with  heavy 


Chip.  XL.J 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


5 


artillery,  was  constructed,  fronting  the  Stono  River,  with  its  left  rest- 
ing on  the  village  of  Secessionville,  and  its  right  on  James  Island 
Creek,  while  Fort  Pemberton,  a strong  and  heavily  armed  earth- 
work, located  at  the  junction  of  Wappoo  Cut  and  Stono  River,  con- 
trolled the  approach  in  that  direction. 

* * # * * Hs 

16.  In  rear  of  the  city  of  Charleston,  formidable  defenses  were 
also  erected,  covering  the  approach  down  the  Peninsula,  but  no  very 
reliable  information  as  to  their  extent  and  strength  had  been  ob- 
tained by  us  prior  to  the  siege  of  Fort  Sumter,  which  commenced 
early  in  July,  1863. 

17.  A line  of  heavily  armed  intrenchments  was  also  constructed 
northeast  of  the  city,  on  the  main  land,  extending  from  Wando 
River  to  Copahee  Sound,  to  guard  the  approach  from  Bull’s  Bay. 

18.  The  strength  of  the  James  Island  works  was  tested  by  a bold 
but  unsuccessful  attack  upon  them  by  our  forces,  under  Brigadier- 
General  Benham,  on  the  16th  day  of  June,  1862. 

19.  A gallant  attack  upon  Fort  Sumter,  by  our  iron-clad  fleet,  under 
Admiral  DuPont,  on  the  7th  of  April,  1863,  was  likewise  unsuccessful. 
One  of  the  iron-clads,  the  Keokuk,  was  so  much  injured  on  that  oc- 
casion that  she  sank  some  hours  after  the  attack,  and  her  armament 
fell  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy,  while  the  others  withdrew,  after 
an  engagement  of  forty  minutes,  most  of  them  being  considerably 
disabled 

20.  Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

Hilton  Head , S.  C.,  February  28,  1864. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of 
operations  conducted  by  the  forces  under  my  command  against  the 
defenses  of  Charleston  City  during  the  summer  and  autumn  of  the 
past  year : 

These  operations  comprise,  principally — 

21.  First.  The  descent  upon  and  capture  of  the  enemy’s  fortified 
positions  on  the  south  end  of  Morris  Island,  July  10,  1863. 

22.  Second.  Two  unsuccessful  assaults  upon  Fort  Wagner,  on  July 
11  and  18,  respectively. 

23.  Third.  The  demolition  of  Fort  Sumter  by  two  bombardments, 
viz,  from  the  17th  to  the  23d  of  August,  and  from  the  27th  of  Octo- 
ber to  the  9th  of  November. 

24.  Fourth.  The  siege  and  reduction  of  Forts  Wagner  and  Gregg, 
terminating  September  7. 

25.  Toward  the  close  of  last  May,  I received  orders  to  repair  to 
Washington.  I there  learned  that  it  was  the  wish  of  the  Navy  De- 
partment to  make  another  trial  of  the  iron-clad  gunboats  against 
the  defenses  of  Charleston  Harbor.  My  views  in  regard  to  "the  part 
which  could  be  efficiently  taken  in  such  an  operation  by  the  small 
land  force  available  for  the  purpose  were  requested. 

26.  I had  entertained  the  opinion,  which  I freely  expressed  in  my 
interviews  with  the  Secretary  of  War,  the  Assistant  Secretary  of  the 
Navy,  and  the  General-in-Chief,  during  which  the  subject  was  fully 
discussed,  that  Fort  Sumter  could  be  reached  and  reduced,  or  its 
offensive  power  practically  destroyed,  without  any  material  augmen- 
tation of  the  land  and  naval  forces  then  serving  in  the  Department 
of  the  South ; that  a cordial  and  energetic  co-operation  between  the 
two  branches  of  service  was  essential  to  a full  and  entire  success,  and 
that  the  naval  commander  should  be  an  officer  who  had  confidence 


6 S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

in  the  efficiency  of  the  turret  iron-clads  (monitors)  and  their  adapta- 
tion to  such  work,  and  who  was  willing  to  risk  his  reputation  in  the 
development  of  their  new  and  comparatively  untried  powers.  The 
operation  was  regarded  as  one  in  which  audacity  could  with  pro- 
priety enter  as  an  important  element. 

27.  I also  expressed  the  opinion  that  beyond  the  demolition  of  Fort 
Sumter,  the  land  forces,  numbering  scarcely  11,000  men  of  all  arms 
available  for  offensive  operations,  could  not,  unless  largely  re-en- 
forced,  take  the  lead  in  any  operations  against  the  interior  defenses 
of  Charleston  that  would  involve  their  leaving  their  hold  upon  the 
narrow  sea  islands,  where  on  the  one  hand  they  had  the  co-operation 
of  the  navy  against  the  iron-clad  rams  and  gunboats  of  the  enemy, 
and  on  the  other  practically  impassable  marshes,  against  which  the 
well-known  superior  numbers  of  the  enemy  and  their  facilities  for 
concentrating  troops  by  railroad,  could  be  of  little  avail  and  confer 
no  special  advantage. 

28.  A land  attack  upon  Charleston  was  not  even  discussed  at  any 
of  the  interviews  to  which  I was  invited,  and  was  certainly  never 
contemplated  by  me. 

29.  The  principal  question  was,  to  what  extent  the  fall  of  Sumter 
or  the  destruction  of  its  offensive  power  would  exert  an  influence  in 
the  capture  of  Charleston,  that,  of  course,  being  the  ultimate  object 
in  view. 

30.  A consideration  which  possessed  much  weight  in  the  delibera- 
tion was  the  great  practical  advantage  to  be  derived  from  a blockade 
of  Charleston  Harbor  in  all  respects  thorough  and  complete.  The 
capture  of  Morris  Island,  thereby  allowing  a portion  of  all  the 
blockading  fleet  to  lie  inside  the  bar,  even  should  they  fail  to  finally 
occupy  the  waters  of  the  inner  harbor,  would  secure  this  end. 

31.  The  naval  authorities  then  at  the  seat  of  Government  regarded 
Fort  Sumter  as  the  key  of  the  position.  That  stronghold  once  de- 
molished, or  its  offensive  power  practically  destroyed,  the  mon- 
itors and  iron-clads,  they  affirmed,  could  remove  the  channel  ob- 
structions, secure  control  of  the  entire  harbor,  and  reach  the  city. 

32*  The  barbette  fire  of  Sumter  was  specially  dreaded  on  account 
of  the  comparative  vulnerability  of  the  monitors’  decks  to  a plung- 
ing fire. 

33.  It  was,  therefore,  determined  to  attempt  the  destruction  of 
Fort  Sumter,  unless  it  should  become  necessary,  before  the  com- 
mencement of  active  operations,  to  detach  troops  from  the  Atlantic 
coast  to  re-enforce  General  Banks,  then  operating  before  Port  Hud- 
son on  the  Mississippi,  and  who  could  not  expect  assistance  from 
General  Grant,  who  was  at  that  time  vigorously  pushing  the  siege  of 
Vicksburg. 

34.  The  following  is  a brief  synopsis  of  the  plan  of  attack  agreed 
upon.  Of  the  four  distinct  operations  which  it  comprises,  the  army 
was  to  take  the  lead  in  executing  the  first,  second,  and  third. 

PLAN  OF  ATTACK. 

35.  First.  To  make  a descent  upon  and  obtain  possession  of  the 
south  end  of  Morris  Island,  known  to  be  occupied  by  the  enemy,  and 
in  progress  of  being  strongly  fortified,  offensively  and  defensively. 

36.  Second.  To  lay  siege  to  and  reduce  Fort  Wagner,  a heavily 
armed  earthwork  of  strong  plan  and  relief,  situated  near  the  north 
end  of  Morris  Island,  and  distant  about  2,600  yards  from  Fort  Sumter. 
With  Fort  Wagner,  the  work  on  Cumming's  Point  would  also  fall. 


Chap.  XL.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


7 


37.  Third.  From  the  position  thus  secured,  to  demolish  Fort  Sum- 
ter, and  afterward  co-operate  with  the  fleet  by  a heavy  artillery  fire 
when  it  was  ready  to  move  in. 

38.  Fourth.  The  monitors  and  iromclads  to  enter,  remove  the 
channel  obstructions,  run  by  the  batteries  on  James  and  Sullivan’s 
Islands,  and  reach  the  city. 

39.  No  written  instructions  whatever  were  given  by  the  War  De- 
partment, everything  connected  with  the  operations  of  the  land 
forces  in  general  and  in  detail  being  left  to  the  judgment  and  dis- 
cretion of  the  officer  intrusted  with  the  execution  of  the  project. 
It  was  presumed  that  as  soon  as  the  fleet  should  reach  the  city,  the 
outer  line  of  defenses  thus  broken  through  would  be  abandoned  by 
the  enemy,  for  the  control  of  Cooper  and  Wando  Rivers  by  our 
gunboats,  and  the  operations  of  the  land  forces  which  they  could 
then  aid  and  cover,  would  compel  the  evacuation  of  Sullivan’s 
Island,  after  which  the  possession  of  James  Island  would  be  of  but 
little  value  to  the  enemy. 

40.  Other  plans  of  joint  operations  to  be  executed  after  the  navy 
should  enter  the  inner  harbor  and  reach  the  city,  were  from  time  to 
time  discussed  by  Rear-Admiral  Dahlgren  and  myself,  but  it  is  un- 
necessary to  mention  them  here. 

41.  I assumed  command  of  the  Department  of  the  South  on  the 
12th  of  June.  Our  forces  had  then  control  of  the  coast  from  Light- 
House  Inlet  to  Saint  Augustine,  a distance  of  nearly  250  miles.  The 
positions  actually  occupied  by  our  troops  were : Folly  Island,  Sea- 
brook  Island  on  the  North  Edisto,  Saint  Helena  Island,  Port  Royal 
Island,  Hilton  Head  Island,  Tybee  Island,  Fort  Pulaski,  Ossabaw 
Island,  Fort  Clinch,  Amelia  Island,  and  the  city  of  Saint  Augustine. 
An  efficient  blockading  squadron  lay  off  or  inside  the  principal 
inlets. 

42.  Folly  Island,  the  most  northerly  position  of  the  coast  in  our 
possession,  was  occupied  by  a brigade  under  Brig.  Gen.  I.  Yogdes, 
who  had  intrenched  the  position  strongly,  and  had  mounted  several 
heavy  guns  on  the  south  end  of  the  island,  to  control  the  waters  of 
Stono  Inlet  and  the  water  approaches  from  James  Island.  A road 
had  also  been  opened,  practicable  for  infantry  and  artillery,  by  means 
of  which  a concealed  communication  with  all  points  of  the  island 
was  secured. 

43.  A naval  force  under  Commander  [George  B.]  Balch,  compris- 
ing two  gunboats  and  a mortar  schooner,  was  also  stationed  in  the 
Stono  and  Folly  Rivers. 

44.  The  greater  portion  of  Folly  Island  was  very  thickly  wooded, 
the  undergrowth  being  dense  and  almost  impassable.  Near  the 
north  end,  for  the  distance  of  nearly  2,000  yards,  it  was  extremely 
narrow,  perfectly  barren,  and  so  low  that  the  spring  tides  frequently 
sweep  entirely  over  it.  At  the  extreme  north  end,  however,  the 
sand  ridges,  formed  by  the  gradual  action  of  the  wind  and  tide,  were, 
when  our  operations  commenced,  covered  with  a thick  undergrowth 
favorable  for  concealment  and  the  masking  of  batteries.  In  this 
thicket  General  Yogdes  had  his  pickets,  those  of  the  enemy  being 
on  the  opposite  side  of  Light-House  Inlet,  within  musket-range. 
Cole’s  Island  and  all  the  hummocks  and  patches  of  firm  ground  be- 
tween Folly  and  James  Islands  were  kept  under  our  surveillance  by 
means  of  frequent  and  constant  reconnaissances. 

45.  It  was  determined  to  withdraw  the  forces  from  Ossabaw  Sound 
and  the  North  Edisto,  as  positions  of  no  importance  to  us  and  of  no 


8 


S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 


[Chap.  XL. 


advantage  to  tlie  enemy,  in  consequeqce  of  the  efficient  blockade  of 
those  inlets  by  the  navy. 

46.  By  the  changes  above  indicated,  it  was  found  that  the  aggre- 
gate means  for  carrying  on  offensive  operations  within  the  depart- 
ment, leaving  the  depot  at  Hilton  Head  perfectly  secure  and  the 
other  important  points  reasonably  so,  comprised  the  forces  enumer- 
ated below,  viz : 


Effective  volunteer  infantry 10, 000 

Volunteer  artillerists  for  serving  heavy  guns  and  guns  of  position ’ 350 

Engineer  troops 600 

Pieces  of  field  artillery  completely  equipped  and  mounted 28 

Pieces  of  field  artillery  without  horses  and  but  partially  manned 8 

Parrott  rifled  guns  of  8 inches  diameter  of  bore,  known  as  200-pounders.  . . 5 

Parrott  rifled  guns  of  6.4  inches  diameter  of  bore,  known  as  100-pounders.  9 

30-pounder  Parrott  siege  guns  of  4.2  inches  diameter  of  bore 12 

20-pounder  Parrott  siege  guns  of  3.67  inches  diameter  of  bore 4 

13-inch  seacoast  mortars 12 

10-inch  siege  mortars 10 

8-inch  siege  mortars 5 

Coehorn  mortars 3 


There  was  a liberal  supply  of  ammunition  and  engineering  tools 
and  materials.  The  entire  effective  force  in  the  department,  includ- 
ing men  on  extra  and  daily  duty,  was  17,463. 

47.  As  the  endurance  of  the  Parrott  guns  of  heavy  caliber  was  at 
that  time  a matter  of  some  uncertainty,  requisitions  were  sent  for- 
ward for  several  more  of  them,  which  were  promptly  filled  by  the 
Ordnance  Department. 

PLAN  OF  PRELIMINARY  ATTACK. 

48.  The  project  for  obtaining  a lodgment  on  Morris  Island  com- 
prised three  distinct  operations. 

First.  The  real  attack  from  Folly  Island  to  partake  of  the  nature 
of  a surprise. 

Second.  A demonstration  in  force  on  James  Island,  by  way  of  the 
Stono  River,  designed  to  prevent  re-enforcements  to  the  enemy  on 
Morris  Island  from  that  quarter,  and,  if  possible,  draw  a portion  of 
the  Morris  Island  garrison  in  that  direction. 

Third.  The  cutting  of  the  Charleston  and  Savannah  Railroad  at 
Jacksborough  by  ascending  the  South  Edisto  River,  in  order  to  delay 
re-enforcements  from  Savannah,  should  the  real  attack  be  tempora- 
rily checked  or  prematurely  divulged. 

49.  The  demonstration  up  the  Stono  was  commanded  by  Brig.  Gen. 
A.  H.  Terry,  and  was  eminently  successful.  A large  part  of  the 
Morris  Island  garrison  was  drawn  to  James  Island  by  it. 

The  attempt  to  cut  the  railroad  was  intrusted  to  Colonel  [Thomas 
W.]  Higginson,  First  South  Carolina  Volunteers,  who  was  sent 
from  Brig.  Gen.  R.  Saxton’s  command,  at  Beaufort,  for  that  pur- 
pose. It  signally  failed,  with  a loss  to  us  of  two  pieces  of  field 
artillery  and  a small  steamer,  which  was  burned  to  prevent  its 
falling  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy. 

THE  DESCENT  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  JULY  10,  1863. 

50.  The  storming  of  a fortified  position,  excepting  when  preceded 
by  the  slow  operations  of  a regular  siege,  which,  besides  partially  or 
entirely  silencing  the  fire  of  the  enemy’s  work,  will  also  enable  the 
attacking  column  to  get  very- near  the  enemy  under  cover  before  the 


Chap.  XL.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


9 


final  assault  is  made,  is  always  an  operation  attended  with  imminent 
peril  in  its  execution  and  great  uncertainty  in  its  results.  The  best 
troops  can  seldom  be  made  to  advance  under  the  fire  of  even  a few 
well-served  pieces  of  artillery.  The  hazard  of  such  an  undertaking, 
great  as  it  is  under  ordinary  circumstances,  when  both  parties  operate 
on  firm  ground,  becomes  immeasurably  augmented  when  the  assault- 
ing column  has  to  approach  in  small  boats  from  a distant  point, 
exposed  to  full  view  and  constant  artillery  fire,  disembark  and  form 
upon  an  open  beach  in  the  presence  of  the  enemy,  and  finally  advance 
to  the  attack  under  the  combined  fire  of  artillery  and  small-arms. 

51.  Yet  these  were  the  difficult  conditions  of  the  problem  so  suc- 
cessfully solved  in  the  descent  upon  Morris  Island  on  the  10th  of  July. 

52.  It  was  known  from  deserters  and  fugitives  that  the  enemy  had 
there  in  position  from  ten  to  twelve  guns  of  various  calibers,  and  that 
these  were  so  arranged  in  batteries  of  single  pieces  that  they  each 
covered  with  their  fire  not  only  the  north  end  of  Folly  Island,  held 
by  our  advanced  pickets,  and  the  main  ship-channel  abreast  of  Mor- 
ris Island,  but  could  be  so  traversed  as  to  sweep  the  entire  length 
of  Light-House  Inlet,  which  separates  the  two  islands. 

53.  Three  methods  of  conducting  the  assault  suggested  themselves. 

First.  To  place  the  men  in  small  boats  in  Stono  River,  tow  them 

out  to  sea,  and  land  them  in  the  surf  at  daybreak  on  the  sea  point  of 
Morris  Island. 

Second.  To  accumulate  on  the  north  end  of  Folly  Island  the  boats 
required  for  the  assaulting  column,  keep  them  concealed  there  until 
the  moment  of  attack,  and  then  launch  them  under  fire,  embark  the 
men,  and  cross  over. 

Third.  To  embark  the  men  in  Folly  River,  and  pass  in  the  night- 
time during  high  tide  through  the  shallow  creeks  into  Light-House 
Inlet,  and  make  the  assault  from  that  direction.  This  last-named 
method  of  attack  was  adopted. 

54.  In  the  meantime,  between  the  middle  of  June  and  the  6th  of 
July,  ordnance  and  ordnance  stores  were  quietly  accumulated  on 
Folly  Island. 

55.  The  following  armament,  designed  to  operate  against,  and,  if 
possible,  dismount  the  enemy’s  guns  nearest  the  landing  place,  and 
therefore  the  most  to  be  dreaded,  and  also  to  cover  the  debarkation 
of  our  troops  on  Morris  Island,  but  more  particularly  their  re-em- 
barkation  in  case  of  repulse,  was  secretly  placed  in  position  on  the 
north  end  of  Folly  Island,  completely  masked  from  the  enemy’s  view 
by  the  sand  ridges  and  undergrowth. 


Kind  of  guns.  No.  of  guns. 

Battery  A.  Rifled  3-inch  field 2 

B.  20-pounder  siege  Parrott 4 

C.  30-pounder  Parrott 4 

D.  10-inch  mortar  siege 6 

E.  3-inch  rifled  field 2 

F.  10-pounder  Parrott  field 6 

G.  30-pounder  Parrott 8 

H.  10-inch  mortar  siege 4 

I.  3-inch  Wiard  rifled  field 6 

K.  8-inch  mortar  siege 5 


(See  Plate  II.*) 


* Reference  is  to  “ Map  of  siege  operations  against  the  defenses  of  Charleston 
Harbor.  1863,  showing  batteries  covering  the  descent  upon  Morris  Island,  July  10,” 
&c.  It  is  to  appear  in  Atlas. 


10  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

56.  The  duty  of  constructing  these  batteries  was  assigned  to  Brig. 
Gen.  I.  Yogdes.  The  task  was  by  no  means  easy,  and  to  its  success- 
ful execution  our  subsequent  triumphs  were  due  in  no  small  degree. 

57.  It  was  necessary  that  the  attack  on  Morris  Island  should  be  a 
surprise  in  order  to  insure  success.  Secrecy  was,  therefore,  an  essen- 
tial element  in  the  preparations.  Most  of  the  work  on  the  batteries 
and  all  the  transportation  to  them  was  accomplished  at  night  and  in 
silence.  Moreover,  all  signs  of  work  had  to  be  carefully  concealed 
by  day.  One  fortunate  circumstance  favored  these  operations.  A 
blockade  runner  was  chased  ashore  just  south  of  the  entrance  to  Light- 
House  Inlet,  within  point-blank  range  of  our  batteries,  and  while  the 
enemy  on  Morris  Island  were  industriously  engaged  in  wrecking  this 
vessel,  night  and  day  (an  operation  which  we  could  easily  have  pre- 
vented), our  batteries  were  quietly  and  rapidly  pushed  forward  to 
completion.  They  were  ready  to  open  fire  on  the  6th  of  July. 

58.  The  fact  that  forty-seven  pieces  of  artillery,  with  200  rounds  of 
ammunition  per  gun,  and  provided  with  suitable  epaulements,  splinter- 
proof  shelters,  and  magazines,  were  secretly  placed  in  battery  in  a 
position  within  speaking  distance  of  the  enemy’s  pickets,  exposed  to 
a flank  and  reverse  view  from  their  tall  observatories  on  James 
Island,  and  to  a flank  view  at  pistol-range  from  the  wreck,  furnishes 
by  no  means  the  least  interesting  and  instructive  item  of  this  cam- 
paign. (See  report  of  Brigadier-General  Yogdes,  Appendix  A.*) 

59.  Meanwhile,  during  the  week  ending  July  8,  additional  troops, 
comprising  Brigadier-General  Terry’s  division,  about  4,000  strong, 
and  Brigadier-General  Strong’s  brigade,  about  2,500  strong,  were 
quietly  accumulated  on  Folly  Island,  under  cover  of  darkness. 

60.  The  buoys  at  the  entrance  to  Stono  Biver,  where  the  channel 
was  narrow  and  crooked,  with  but  5 feet  of  water  at  low  tide,  were 
lighted  at  night,  and  all  transports  carrying  troops  were  ordered  to 
enter  after  dark,  land  their  men,  and  depart  before  daylight  in  the 
morning.  Sutlers’  schooners  were  ordered  away,  and  all  appearance 
of  preparations  for  offensive  operations  was  carefully  suppressed. 
On  General  Yogdes’  defensive  works,  a semblance  of  great  activity 
was  conspicuously  displayed.  Everything  being  in  readiness,  the 
following  order  was  issued : 

61.  Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

Folly  Island,  July  8,  1868. 

CONFIDENTIAL  INSTRUCTIONS. 

I.  An  attack  upon  Morris  Island  will  be  made,  at  the  rising  of  the  moon  to-night, 
by  Brigadier-General  Strong’s  brigade,  of  Brigadier- General  Seymour’s  division. 
This  force  will  be  embarked  in  small  boats,  immediately  after  sunset,  and  will  pass 
through  Folly  Island  Creek  to  and  across  Light-House  Inlet. 

A small  detachment  from  this  force  will  enter  the  creek  to  the  west  of  Morris 
Island,  and  will  land  just  north  of  the  old  light-house,  seize  the  batteries  there,  and, 
if  possible,  turn  them  upon  the  enemy’s  encampment  north  of  them.  The  main 
column  will  land  from  Light-House  Inlet,  carry  the  batteries  on  the  south  end  of 
Morris  Island,  and  advance  to  the  support  of  the  detachment  above  mentioned. 
Two  regiments  and  some  field  artillery  will  be  held  in  readiness  on  the  extreme 
north  end  of  Folly  Island,  to  be  pushed  over  as  re-enforcements.  To  this  end.  General 
Strong  will  send  his  boats  over  as  soon  as  he  has  disembarked  his  command. 

II.  At  the  same  time,  General  Terry,  with  all  his  division,  excepting  the  One 
hundredth  New  York  Volunteers,  will  ascend  the  Stono  River  under  convoy  of  the 
navy,  and  make  a strong  demonstration  on  James  Island,  but  will  not  unnecessarily 


* Printed  as  No.  11,  under  Operations  on  Morris  Island,  p.  350. 


Chap.  XL.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


11 


hazard  any  portion  of  his  command.  Perhaps  one  or  two  regiments  only  need  be 
disembarked.  These  should  be  pushed  forward  as  skirmishers,  under  cover  of  the 
navy. 

III.  A naval  force  is  expected  to  enter  the  main  channel  abreast  of  Morris  Island 
by  or  before  sunrise  to-morrow  morning,  to  co-operate  with  the  land  forces. 

IV.  Should  the  night  attack  fail  from  any  cause,  the  assaulting  column  will  with- 
draw to  Folly  Island,  sending  their  boats  into  Folly  Island  Creek.  In  that  event, 
the  batteries  on  the  north  end  of  Folly  Island  will  open  at  daybreak,  or  as  soon  there- 
after as  practicable. 

Brigadier-General  Seymour  will  arrange  the  details. 

By  order  of  Brig.  Gen.  Q.  A.  Gillmore: 

W.  L.  M.  BURGER, 
Assistant  Adjutant-General. 

62.  Colonel  Serrell,  of  the  New  York  Volunteer  Engineers,  was 
ordered  to  remove,  before  daybreak  on  the  9th,  the  piles  which  the 
enemy  had  previously  placed  across  the  creek  which  connects  Light- 
House  Inlet  with  Folly  Island  Creek,  to  allow  the  boats  to  pass 
through. 

63.  The  batteries  on  the  north  end  of  Folly  Island  were  also  ordered 
to  be  unmasked,  by  opening  out  the  embrasures  and  cutting  away  the 
brush-wood  in  front  of  them.  (See  Plate  II.*) 

64.  About  midnight  of  the  8th,  it  was  determined  for  various  rea- 
sons, the  principal  of  which  was  the  unseaworthy  condition  of  our 
boats,  to  defer  the  attack  until  the  next  night.  A sufficient  num- 
ber of  the  piles  had  been  removed  to  afford  a passage  for  the  boats, 
but  the  work  of  unmasking  the  batteries  had  not  progressed  far 
enough  to  expose  them  to  the  view  or  attract  the  attention  of  the 
enemy. 

65.  In  the  meantime,  Brigadier-General  Terry’s  command,  of  about 
3,800  men,  had  proceeded  up  the  Stono  on  the  afternoon  of  the  8th, 
and  was  confronting  the  enemy  on  James  Island.  The  immediate 
effect  of  this  demonstration,  as  subsequently  ascertained,  was  to  draw 
off  a portion  of  the  enemy’s  force  on  Morris  Island.  The  following 
order  was  then  issued  on  the  afternoon  of  the  9th,  and  full  detailed 
instructions  for  the  assault  given  verbally  to  Generals  Seymour  and 
Strong  : 

66.  Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

Folly  Island,  S.  C.,  July  9,  1863. 

CONFIDENTIAL  INSTRUCTIONS. 

I.  The  attack  on  Morris  Island,  ordered  for  this  morning  but  postponed  in  con- 
sequence of  the  inclemency  of  the  weather  and  other  unfavoral  le  circumstances, 
will  take  place  to-morrow  morning  at  break  of  day  by  opening  our  batteries  at  the 
north  end  of  Folly  Island.  General  Strong’s  brigade,  or  so  much  of  it  as  the  small 
boats  can  accommodate,  will  embark  to-night,  and  hold  itself  in  Folly  Island  Creek, 
ready  to  move  forward,  and  at  the  proper  time  occupy  the  south  end  of  Morris 
Island. 

II.  Lieut.  Commander  Francis  W.  Bunce,  U.  S.  Navy,  with  four  navy  howitzer 
launches,  will  approach  Light-House  Inlet  at  daybreak,  by  way  of  Folly  Island 
Creek,  and  engage  the  enemy’s  rifle-pits  and  batteries  on  Morris  Island  in  flank 
and  reverse,  choosing  his  own  position.  He  will  cover  General  Strong’s  landing. 

III.  Two  regiments  of  infantry,  a battery  of  light  artillery,  and  five  Requa  rifle 
batteries  will  be  held  in  readiness  to  re-enforce  General  Strong  promptly.  Brigadier- 
General  Seymour  will  arrange  and  order  all  details. 

By  order  of  Brig.  Gen.  Q.  A.  Gillmore  : 

ED.  W.  SMITH, 
Assistant  Adjutant-General. 


* See  foot-note,  p.  9. 


12 


S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 


[Chap.  XL. 


67.  In  pursuance  of  the  above  order,  nearly  2,000  men  of  General 
Strong’s  brigade  were  embarked  in  small  boats  in  Folly  River  on  the 
evening  of  the  9th,  and  at  daybreak  on  the  following  morning  the 
head  of  the  column  had  reached  Light-House  Inlet,  where  it  was 
halted.  The  boats  kept  close  to  the  east  side  of  the  creek,  and  were 
screened  by  the  marsh  grass  from  the  enemy  on  Morris  Island. 

68.  Our  batteries  opened  shortly  after  daybreak,  and  were  served 
rapidly  for  about  two  hours,  when  I sent  an  order  to  General  Strong, 
by  signals,  to  land  and  make  the  assault  by  jjutting  two  regiments 
ashore  at  Oyster  Point  and  the  balance  of  his  command  on  the  firm 
land  lower  down.  This  he  accomplished  at  once,  and  all  the  enemy’s 
batteries  on  the  south  end  of  Morris  Island  were  gallantly  and  suc- 
cessively taken  by  him.  By  9 o’clock  we  occupied  three-fourths  of 
the  island,  and  our  skirmishers  were  within  musket-range  of  Fort 
Wagner.  The  heat  being  intense  and  thetroox-)S  exhausted,  offensive 
operations  were  suspended  for  the  day. 

69.  Brigadier-General  Seymour  was  ordered  to  carry  Fort  Wagner 
by  assault  at  daybreak  on  the  following  morning.  The  attempt  failed. 

The  following  report  of  these  operations  was  made  to  the  General- 
in-Chief  : 

70.  Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

In  the  Field,  Morris  Island,  July  12,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-Chief,  U.  S.  Army,  Washington,  D.  C. : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  at  5 o’clock  on  the  morning  of  the  10th  instant, 
I made  an  attack  upon  the  enemy’s  fortified  positions  on  the  south  end  of  Morris 
Island,  and,  after  an  engagement  lasting  three  hours  and  a quarter,  captured  all  his 
strongholds  on  that  part  of  the  island,  and  pushed  forward  my  infantry  to  within 
600  yards  of  Fort  Wagner.  We  now  hold  all  the  island,  excepting  about  1 mile  on  the 
north  end,  which  includes  Fort  Wagner  and  a battery  on  Cumming’s  Point,  mount- 
ing at  the  present  time  fourteen  or  fifteen  heavy  guns  in  the  aggregate.  The  as- 
saulting column  was  gallantly  led  by  Brigadier-General  Strong.  It  landed  from 
small  boats  under  cover  of  our  batteries  on  Folly  Island  and  four  monitors  led  by 
Rear-Admiral  Dahlgren,  which  entered  the  main  channel  abreast  of  Morris  Island, 
soon  after  our  batteries  opened.  The  rfionitors  continued  their  fire  through  the  day, 
mostly  against  Fort  Wagner. 

On  the  morning  of  the  11th,  at  daybreak,  an  attempt  was  made  to  carry  Fort 
Wagner  by  assault.  The  parapet  was  gained,  but  the  support  recoiled  under  the  fire 
to  which  they  were  exposed,  and  could  not  be  gotten  up.  Our  loss  in  both  actions 
will  not  vary  much  from  150  killed,  wounded,  and  missing. 

We  have  taken  eleven  pieces  of  heavy  ordnance  and  a large  quantity  of  camp 
equipage.  The  enemy’s  loss  in  killed,  wounded,  and  missing  will  not  fall  short  of 
200. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

Q.  A.  GILLMORE, 
Brigadier-General,  Commanding. 

71.  It  was  subsequently  ascertained  from  deserters  and  prisoners 
that  the  enemy’s  loss  was  very  considerably  underestimated  in  the 
above  report.  General  Beauregard,  in  his  official  dispatch,  admits  a 
loss  of  300,  including  16  commissioned  officers  killed,  wounded,  and 
missing. 

72.  The  kind  and  caliber  of  the  guns  captured  in  this  assault  are 
given  in  the  following  table,  and  their  several  positions  are  indicated 
on  plate  by  the  capital  letters,  as  follows  : 

A.  One  8-incli  navy  shell  gun,  pintle  in  center  transom. 

B.  One  8-inch  sea-coast  howitzer,  pintle  on  rear  transom. 

C.  One  3-inch  Whitworth  siege-carriage. 

D.  Three  10-incli  sea-coast  mortars. 


Chap.  XL.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


13 


E.  One  30-pounder  Parrott  (navy)  siege-carriage. 

F.  One  Brooks  rifle  (siege). 

G.  One  8-inch  navy  gun. 

H.  One  8-inch  navy  gun. 

I.  One  8-inch  sea-coast  howitzer. 

(See  report  of  Brigadier-General  Seymour,  Appendix  B;  also  re- 
port of  Brigadier-General  Strong,  Appendices  E and  F.*) 

73.  Brigadier-General  Terry  was  attacked  on  James  Island  by  a 
largely  superior  force,  including  infantry,  cavalry,  and  artillery,  on 
the  16th  of  July.  With  the  aid  of  the  gunboat  Pawnee,  Captain 
Balch,  and  two  "army  transports,  each  carrying  a small  armament, 
the  enemy  was  repulsed.  The  demonstration  in  that  quarter  having 
accomplished  its  object,  General  Terry’s  command  was  withdrawn 
on  the  17th. 

74.  The  failure  of  the  assault  on  Fort  Wagner  of  July  11,  taken 
in  connection  with  apparently  reliable  statements  by  prisoners  and 
deserters  from  the  enemy,  giving  sundry  details  of  the  trace  and 
profile  of  that  work,  and* the  strength  of  its  garrison  and  armament, 
induced  me,  upon  conferring  with  Rear-Admiral  Dahlgren,  to  estab- 
lish counter-batteries  against  it. 

75.  It  was  determined  to  attempt,  with  the  combined  fire  of  the 
land  batteries  and  gunboats,  to  dismount  the  principal  guns  of  the 
work,  and  either  drive  the  enemy  from  it  or  open  the  way  to  a suc- 
cessful assault.  Batteries  were  accordingly  established,  and  were 
ready  to  open  fire  on  the  morning  of  July  18. 

76.  Up  to  this  period,  our  actual  knowledge  of  the  strength  of  the 
enemy’s  defenses  on  the  north  end  of  Morris  Island  was  quite  meager. 
It  was  known  that  Fort  Wagner  was  an  inclosed  work,  reaching  from 
high-water  line  on  the  east  side  to  Vincent’s  Creek  on  the  west  side 
of  the  island.  It  was  thought  that  it  mounted  ten  or  twelve  guns; 
that  four  or  five  of  them  were  on  the  south  front,  to  protect  the  land 
approach,  and  that  two,  or  perhaps  three,  heavy  guns  covered  the  main 
channel  abreast  of  the  island.  Battery  Gregg,  on  Cumming’s  Point, 
was  supposed  to  mount  two  or  three  guns  for  channel  defense  only. 

77.  The  truly  formidable  character  of  Fort  Wagner  and  the  great 
strength  and  capacity  of  its  bomb-proof  shelter  were  very  much  under- 
estimated. Moreover,  it  was  not  known  until  subsequently  that  the 
island  at  its  narrowest  point,  near  and  just  south  of  the  fort,  had  been 
reduced  by  the  encroachments  of  the  sea  to  about  one-fourth  or  one- 
third  of  the  width  shown  on  the  latest  Coast  Survey  charts,  and  that 
during  spring  tides  and  heavy  weather  the  waves  frequently  swept 
entirely  over  it,  practically  isolating  that  position  defended  by  Fort 
Wagner  and  Battery  Gregg,  thus  greatly  augmenting  the  difficulty 
to  be  overcome  in  capturing  the  position,  whether  by  assault  or  grad- 
ual approaches. 

78. 

Special  Orders,  ) Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

No.  9.  f In  the  Field , Morris  Island,  July  17,  1863. 

The  several  batteries  against  the  enemy’s  positions  on  the  north  end  of  Morris 
Island  are  named  as  follows  : 

I.  Battery  Reynolds,  in  advance,  comprising  five  8-inch  mortars  (siege),  two  30- 
pounders,  and  six  10-pounder  Parrotts,  four  3-inch  rifles,  and  two  Wiard  rifles. 

2.  Battery  Weed,  in  rear  of  right  of  Battery  Reynolds,  comprising  four  10-inch 
mortars, 

* Printed  as  Nos.  9 and  12,  under  Operations  on  Morris  Island,  pp.  343  and  354. 


[Chap.  XL. 


14  ' S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

3.  Battery  Hays,  in  rear  and  on  the  left  of  Battery  Reynolds,  comprising  nine  30 
and  four  20  pounder  Parrott  rifles. 

4.  Battery  O’Rorke,  in  rear  of  the  right  of  Battery  Hays,  comprising  five  10- 
ijich  siege  mortars. 

Captain  Langdon,  First  U.  S.  Artillery,  is  assigned  to  the  command  of  Batteries 
Reynolds  and  Weed.  Lieutenant-Colonel  Jackson,  assistant  inspector-general,  with 
Major  Bailey,  Third  Rhode  Island  Artillery,  as  assistant,  is  assigned  to  the  command 
of  Batteries  Hays  and  O’Rorke.  These  batteries  will  be  opened  upon  Fort  Wagner 
immediately  after  break  of  day  to-morrow.  The  firing  must  be  executed  with  great 
care  and  deliberation,  the  object  of  the  rifled  guns  being  principally  to  dismount 
the  enemy’s  guns.  They  will  not  expend  ammunition  when  their  view  of  the  en- 
emy’s works  is  obstructed  by  smoke.  Both  time-fuse  and  percussion  shell  will  be 
used,  preferably  the  former.  Each  mortar  will  fire  once  every  five  minutes,  alter- 
nating from  the  right  in  each  battery.  The  shells  should  be  exploded  in  or  directly 
over  Fort  Wagner. 

By  order  of  Brig.  Gen.  Q.  A.  Gillmore : 

ED.  W.  SMITH, 
Assistant  Adjutant-General. 

79.  The  distances  of  these  batteries  from  Fort  Wagner  were  as 
follows  : Battery  Reynolds,  1,330  yards;  Battery  Weed,  1,460  yards; 
Battery  Hays,  1,830  yards,  and  Battery  O’Rorke,  1,920  yards. 

Subsequently  to  this  period  and  through  all  the  most  important 
operations  of  the  season,  the  commanding  general  performed  the 
duties  of  chief  engineer.  Col.  J.  W.  Turner  was  made  chief  of  ar- 
tillery iii  addition  to  his  duties  as  chief  of  staff.  Surg.  H.  R.  Wirtz 
became  medical  director;  and  Capt.  Alfred  Mordecai,  chief  of  ord- 
nance. Col.  E.  W.  Serrell,  First  New  York  Volunteer  Engineers; 
Capt.  (now  Major)  T.  B.  Brooks,  aide-de-camp ; and  Lieutenants 
Suter  and  Michie,  U.  S.  Engineers,  were  appointed  assistant  engi- 
neers. 

Captain  [Chauncey  B.]  Reese  joined  the  command  a few  days 
before  the  fall  of  Fort  Wagner,  and  was  appointed  assistant  and 
consulting  engineer. 

Characteristic  physical  features  of  Morris  Island. 

80.  Morris  Island  is  about  3f  miles  long.  Its  width  above  high- 
water  mark  varies  between  very  wide  limits  (25  to  1,000  yards),  while 
its  area  is  400  acres,  approximately. 

81.  The  center  of  the  island  lies  in  a southeasterly  direction  from 
Charleston  City,  and  is  5-f  miles  distant  from  it. 

82.  Cumming’s  Point,  the  northern  extremity,  is  exactly  6,616 
yards  distant  from  the  nearest  point  of  the  city,  and  2, 700  yards  dis- 
tant by  the  shortest  line  from  Fort  Moultrie,  on  Sullivan’s  Island. 
Fort  Sumter  is  1,390  yards  distant  from  Cumming’s  Point. 

83.  Morris  Island  is  widest  at  its  southern  extremity,  where  it  is 
made  up  of  a succession  of  irregular  sand  hills  and  ridges,  the  high- 
est of  which  rise  to  a uniform  height  of  36  feet  above  ordinary 
high-water  level,  while  just  south  of  Wagner  the  width  is  reduced 
to  25  yards  and  the  depth  to  2 feet.  At  this  point  the  sea  frequently 
breaks  entirely  over  the  island  during  the  spring  tides.  On  the  east 
side  it  is  gradually  yielding  to  the  encroachments  of  the  sea. 

84.  During  the  first  fifty  days  of  our  occupation,  the  loss  in  many 
places  was  1 foot  per  day,  while  between  Fort  Wagner  and  the 
Beacon  House  75  yards  in  width  have  been  lost  since  the  last  charts 
by  the  U.  S.  Coast  Survey  were  prepared. 

85.  The  stratum  of  mud,  of  which  the  salt-marsh  which  separates 
James  and  Morris  Islands  is  composed,  passes  under  the  latter  and 


Chap.  XL.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


15 


crops  out  on  the  beach  between  high  and  low  water  mark.  The 
island,  in  fact,  is  simply  an  irregular  mass  of  sand,  which,  by  the 
continued  action  of  wind  and  sea  (particularly  the  former),  has  been 
accumulated  upon  the  bosom  of  the  marsh. 

86.  The  material  of  which  Morris  Island  is  formed,  and  of  which 
the  batteries,  trenches,  and  other  siege  works  were  constructed,  is  a 
fine  and  almost  white  quartz  sand,  weighing,  when  dry,  86  pounds 
to  the  cubic  foot.  Twenty-four  pounds  (about  3 gallons)  of  water 
will  saturate  1 cubic  foot  of  this  sand,  which  is  thereby  decreased  in 
volume  about  5 per  cent.  Its  power  of  resisting  the  penetration  of 
shot  is  also  decreased  by  wetting,  while  a steady  and  gradual  accu- 
mulation of  pressure,  like  the  moving  of  heavy  wheels  over  it,  pro- 
duces a greater  effect,  by  at  least  three- fold,  upon  the  dry  than  upon 
the  wet  sand. 

87.  During  the  first  week  of  our  occupation  of  Morris  Island,  a 
succession  or  heavy  rain-storms  very  materially  interfered  with  the 
progress  of  our  works.  Nearly  all  the  batteries  were  submerged  and 
much  of  the  powder  spoiled,  so  that  the  combined  attack  on  Fort 
Wagner,  fixed  to  take  place  on  the  16th  of  July,  was  delayed  until 
the  18th,  and,  finally,  instead  of  commencing  at  break  of  day,  as  had 
been  .intended,  was  necessarily  postponed  until  noon.  Advantage 
was  taken  of  this  unavoidable  delay  tp  obtain  the  range  of  our  mor- 
tars. Soon  after  midday  all  our  batteries  opened,  and  the  navy, 
which  had  been  waiting  their  completion,  closed  in  opposite  the  fort, 
and  took  a very  active  and  effective  part  in  the  engagement. 

88.  In  a short  time  the  fort  was  entirely  silent  on  the  face  fronting 
the  land  batteries,  and  practically  so  on  the  sea  front,  from  which, 
at  the  commencement  of  the  action,  a sharp  and  severe  fire  had  been 
delivered  against  the  fleet. 

ASSAULT  ON  FORT  WAGNER,  JULY  18,  1863. 

89.  Late  in  the  afternoon,  I sent  word  to  Rear-Admiral  Dahlgren 
that  I intended  to  storm  the  work  about  sunset.  The  time  of  twi- 
light was  selected  for  the  storming  party  to  move  to  the  attack,  in 
order  that  it  might  not  be  distinctly  seen  from  the  James  and  Sulli- 
van’s Island  batteries  and  from  Fort  Sumter.  Brig.  Gen.  T.  Seymour 
commanded  the  attacking  column. 

90.  Brigadier-General  Strong’s  brigade  led  the  assault.  It  was 
composed  of  the  Fifty-fourth  Massachusetts  (colored),  Colonel 
Shaw ; the  Sixth  Connecticut,  Colonel  Chatfield ; a battalion  of  the 
Seventh  Connecticut;  the  Forty-eighth  New  York,  Colonel  Barton; 
Third  New  Hampshire,  Colonel  Jackson;  the  Ninth  Maine,  Colonel 
Emery ; the  Seventy-sixth  Pennsylvania,  Colonel  Strawbridge ; and 
was  supported  by  Colonel  Putnam’s  brigade,  comprising  his  own 
regiment,  the  Seventh  New  Hampshire,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Abbott ; 
the  One  hundredth  New  York,  Colonel  Dandy;  the  Sixty-second 
Ohio,  Colonel  Pond,  and  the  Sixty-seventh  Ohio,  Colonel  Yoris. 
The  regiments  were  all  small. 

As  the  head  of  the  column  debouched  from  the  first  parallel,  the 
guns  in  Wagner,  Gregg,  Sumter,  and  also  those  on  James  and  Sulli- 
van’s Islands  opened  upon  it  rapidly  and  simultaneously,  and  when 
it  approached  so  near  the  work  that  the  firing  from  the  navy  and 
that  of  our  own  mortars  and  the  gun  batteries  on  the  extreme  left 
had  to  be  suspended,  a compact  and  most  destructive  musketry  fire 
was  instantly  delivered  from  the  parapet  by  the  garrison,  which,  up 


16 


S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 


[Chap.  XL. 


to  that  moment,  had  remained  safely  ensconced  in  the  bomb-proof 
shelter. 

91.  The  troops  went  gallantly  on,  however,  and  although  the  lead- 
ing regiment  was  soon  thrown  into  a state  of  disorder,  which  reacted 
disadvantageous^  upon  those  which  followed,  and  rendered  it  neces- 
sary to  send  in  the  supporting  brigade,  the  southeast  bastion  was 
gained,  and  held  by  us  for  nearly  three  hours.  The  advantage  which 
the  darkness  and  the  perfect  knowledge  of  the  interior  arrangements 
of  the  work  gave  the  enemy  rendered  it  necessary  to  relinquish  it. 

92.  Our  loss  was  very  severe,  especially  in  valuable  officers  of 
rank.  Among  the  latter  who  were  either  killed  upon  the  spot  or 
died  subsequently  of  their  wounds,  were  Brig.  Gen.  George  C. 
Strong  and  Cols.  John  L.  Cliatfield,  Haldimand  S.  Putnam,  and  R. 
G.  Shaw. 


SIEGE  OF  FORT  WAGNER  AND  FIRST  BOMBARDMENT  OF  FORT  SUMTER. 


93.  The  formidable  strength  of  Fort  Wagner,  considered  with  re- 
gard to  its  position,  trace,  and  interior  arrangements,  as  developed  in 
the  unsuccessful  assault  of  the  18th  of  July,  induced  a modification  of 
the  plan  of  operations,  or  rather  a change  in  the  order  previously 
determined  upon. 

94.  The  demolition  of  Fort  Sumter  was  the  object  in  view  as  pre- 
liminary to  the  entrance  of  the  iron-clads.  Neither  Fort  Wagner 
nor  Battery  Gregg  possessed  any  special  importance  as  a defense 
against  the  passage  of  the  iron-clad  fleet.  They  were  simple  out- 
posts of  Fort  Sumter.  Fort  Wagner  was  specially  designed  to  pre- 
vent the  erection  of  breaching  batteries  against  that  work,  and  was 
valueless  to  the  enemy  if  it  failed  to  accomplish  that  end.  To  save 
valuable  time,  it  was  determined  to  attempt  the  demolition  of  Sumter 
from  ground  already  in  our  possession,  so  that  the  iron-clads  could 
enter  upon  the  execution  of  their  part  of  the  programme. 

95.  Should  the  fleet  fail  of  success  in  the  inner  harbor,  the  posses- 
sion of  all  of  Morris  Island  would  then  be  of  value  to  us,  as  a means 
of  securing  a more  perfect  blockade  of  the  port.  Arrangements  to 
press  the  siege  of  Fort  Wagner  by  regular  approaches  were,  there- 
fore, also  made,  although  the  obstacles  to  be  removed  and  the  diffi- 
culties to  overcome  appeared  most  formidable.  The  work  was  in- 
closed, and  occupied  the  entire  breadth  of  the  island,  extending  from 
high-water  mark  on  the  east  to  Vincent’s  Creek  and  the  impassable 
marshes  on  the  west,  presenting  to  us  a front  of  over  three  times  the 
average  development  that  could,  by  taking  advantage  of  all  the  firm 
ground,  be  given  to  the  head  of  our  approaches,  while  as  we  neared 
the  work  this  ratio  reached  as  high  as  ten  to  one.  Its  faces  were 
mutually  defensive,  and  were  completely  and  thoroughly  flanked. 
It  had  an  excellent  command,  a bold  relief,  and  was  provided  with 
a sluice-gate  for  retaining  the  high  tides  in  the  ditch.  It  was  con- 
structed of  compact  sand,  upon  which  the  heaviest  projectiles  pro- 
duced but  little  effect,  and  in  which  damages  can  be  easily  and 
speedily  repaired.  It  was  known  to  contain  a secure  and  capacious 
bomb-proof  shelter  for  its  entire  garrison,  and  to  be  armed  with  be- 
tween fifteen  and  twenty  guns  of  various  calibers,  all  bearing  upon 
and  completely  covering  the  only  approach  to  it,  which  was'  over  a 
shallow  and  shifting  beach  of  scarcely  half  a company  front  in  width 
in  many  places,  subject  to  frequent  overflow  by  the  tides,  and  swept 
by  the  guns  of  not  only  Fort  Wagner  itself  but  of  Battery  Gregg, 


Chap.  XL.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


17 


Fort  Sumter,  and  several  heavily  armed  batteries  on  James  and 
Sullivan’s  Islands.  It  was  seen  in  flank  and  reverse  by  the  enemy’s 
artillery.  Its  communication  with  Charleston  being  in  the  hands 
of  the  enemy,  and  entirely  practicable  to  him  during  the^  night,  its 
armament  and  garrison  could  be  easily  maintained  at  the  maximum 
standard  of  strength  and  efficiency. 

96.  Against  the  formidable  direct  and  flank  fire  to  which  the  ap- 
proaches would  be  exposed  from  the  batteries  which  covered  and 
protected  Fort  Wagner,  we  could  expect  to  effect  nothing,  excepting, 
possibly,  the  demolition  of  Fort  Sumter,  which  from  its  barbette 
guns  could  deliver,  and  had  delivered,  over  both  Wagner  and  Gregg, 
an  accurate  and  destructive  fire. 

97.  The  early  elimination  of  Fort  Sumter  from  the  contest,  consid- 
ered simply  as  auxiliary  to  the  reduction  of  Fort  Wagner,  was, 
therefore,  greatly  to  be  desired,  and  arrangements  were  at  once  com- 
menced and  the  necessary  orders  given  to  place  the  breaching  guns 
in  position. 

98.  At  this  stage  of  the  operations  it  became  necessasy  to  subdivide 
the  engineering  operations,  civil  and  military,  and  assign  to  each 
assistant  engineer  a definite  and  specified  field  of  labor. 

99.  Col.  E.  W.  Serrell,  First  New  York  Volunteer  Engineers,  in 
addition  to  his  duties  as  regimental  commander,  was  charged  with 
the  construction  of  wharves  in  Light-House  Inlet  on  Morris  and  Folly 
Islands,  with  certain  projected  fortifications  on  Black  Island,  and 
with  the  erection  of  a battery  in  the  marsh  between  Morris  and  James 
Islands,  to  be  used  against  Charleston  City.  To  Maj.  T.  B.  Brooks, 
aide-de-camp,  was  intrusted  the  direction  of  the  engineering  opera- 
tions on  the  right,  comprising  the  approaches  to  Fort  W agner,  and 
the  construction  of  such  batteries,  magazines,  defensive  arrange- 
ments, &c. , as  might  be  required  in  that  quarter. 

First  Lieut.  Charles  R.  Suter,  Corps  of  Engineers,  was  charged 
with  the  construction  of  a depot  powder  magazine,  and  other  duties. 
Lieutenant  [Peter  S.]  Michie  had  charge  on  the  left. 

First  Parallel. 

100.  On  July  18,  immediately  after  our  second  repulse  at  Fort 
Wagner,  orders  were  given  to  convert  the  position  occupied  by  our 
right  batteries  on  the  18th  of  July,  and  named  Battery  Reynolds, 
into  a strong  defensive  line,  capable  of  resisting  a formidable  sortie. 
From  that  time  this  line  took  the  name  of  the  “first  parallel.” 

101.  A row  of  inclined  palisading,  reaching  entirely  across  the 
island,  was  planted  about  200  yards  in  advance  of  the  line,  with  a re- 
turn of  50  yards  on  the  right.  This  return  was  well  flanked  by  two 
guns  on  the  right  of  the  parallel.  The  parapet  between  the  guns 
was  arranged  for  infantry  defense,  a bomb-proof  magazine  was  con- 
structed, and  the  armament  of  the  line  modified  and  increased,  so 
that  the  parallel  contained  eight  siege  and  field  guns,  ten  siege  mor- 
tars, and  three  Requa’s  rifle  batteries.  * These  works  were  all  com- 
pleted by  the  23d  of  July. 

102.  July  21,  I directed  an  emplacement  for  one  8-incli  Parrott 
rifle  to  be  prepared  next  the  marsh,  on  our  left  and  to  the  rear  of  the 
first  parallel.  It  was  to  be  used  against  Fort  Sumter,  and  its  dis- 

* See  Major  Brooks’  report,  p.  264. 

2 R R— VOL  XXVIII,  PT  I 


18  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  |Chap.  XL. 

tance  from  that  work  was  4,200  yards.  Major  Brooks  was  charged 
with  this  work. 

Second  Parallel. 

103.  July  23.  On  the  night  of  the  23d  the  “second  parallel”  was 
established  by  the  flying  sap,  about  600  yards  in  advance  of  the  first, 
upon  a line  running  diagonally  across  the  island,  in  a direction  ap- 
proximately northwest  and  southeast,  by  taking  advantage  of  a nar- 
row ridge  which  stretched  across  the  island  at  that  point  and  ex- 
tended some  distance  into  the  marsh.  The  end  of  this  ridge  on  the 
left  rested  boldly  on  Vincent’s  Creek. 

104.  It  being  the  intention  to  place,  directly  in  the  rear  of  the  sec- 
ond parallel,  as  many  breaching  guns  against  Fort  Sumter  as  the 
place  would  accommodate,  provided  it  should  be  found  practicable 
to  establish  them  there,  under  the  concentrated  fire  to  which  the 
position  was  exposed,  orders  were  issued  to  give  to  its  defensive  ar- 
rangements the  most  formidable  character. 

105.  The  creek  on  the  left  was  spanned  by  two  booms  of  floating 
timber,  to  keep  off  sorties  from  boats.  An  obstacle,  consisting  of 
abatis,  inclined  palisading,  and  wire  entanglements,  was  placed  sev- 
eral yards  in  advance,  with  its  left  resting  on  the  creek,  and  with  a 
return  on  the  right  perfectly  flanked  by  six  light  guns  in  the  parallel. 
On  the  right  the  parallel  itself  was  extended  by  a defensive  barricade 
to  low- water  mark,  terminating  at  that  point  in  a strong  crib  work 
on  which  was  placed  three  Requa  batteries  and  two  field  howitzers  to 
sweep  the  beach.  This  was  called  the  Surf  Battery,  and  was  a novel 
and  not  unimportant  feature  of  that  portion  of  our  approaches. 

106.  July  26,  directed  breaching  batteries  against  Fort  Sumter  to 
be  established  in  the  second  parallel. 

107.  Major  Brooks,  assistant  engineer,  upon  whom  this  duty  de- 
volved, although  entertaining  and  expressing  pretty  decided  views 
of  the  impracticability  of  such  an  undertaking,  under  the  heavy, 
direct,  and  flank  fire  to  which  the  fatigue  parties  would  be  exposed, 
nevertheless  entered  zealously  upon  the  work. 

108.  No  serious  difficulty  in  executing  the  appropriate  work  of  the 
engineers  was  apprehended,  but  in  the  slow  and  tedious  labor  of 
moving  into  position  and  mounting  the  heavy  guns  and  carriages 
under  a constant  and  severe  fire  from  the  front  and  one  flank,  it  was 
greatly  feared  that  we  would  not  only  lose  many  valuable  lives,  but 
that  the  gun  carriages  as  well  as  the  sling-carts,  gins,  and  other  ap- 
pliances necessary  for  such  work  would  be  destroyed  by  the  enemy’s 
fire. 

109.  The  work  was  successfully  accoimplished,  however,  with  un- 
usual rapidity  and  without  serious  loss.  The  transportation  to  these 
batteries,  and  the  labor  of  mounting  the  carriages  and  guns,  could 
be  performed  during  the  night  time  only. 

110.  The  defensive  arrangements  of  the  second,  parallel  were,  for 
all  practical  purposes,  complete  by  the  26th  of  July,  and  comprised, 
besides  the  formidable  obstacle  in  front  of  it  already  referred  to,  290 
linear  yards  of  parapet  arranged  for  infantry  fire,  and  twenty-one 
pieces  of  light  artillery.  It  also  contained  three  30-pounder  Parrott 
rifles  and  one  Wiard  field  gun,  to  be  used  against  Fort  Wagner  and 
Battery  Gregg. 

111.  The  breaching  batteries  against  Fort  Sumter  located  in  this 
parallel  contained  two  8-incli  Parrott  rifles,  and  five  100-pounder  Par- 
rott rifles. 


Chap.  XL.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


19 


They  were  located  at  a mean  distance  of  3,525  yards  from  Fort 
Sumter,  and  were  in  readiness  to  open  fire  on  the  15th  of  August. 

112.  In  the  meantime  Colonel  Serrell  had  been  ordered,  on  the 
25th  of  July,  to  establish  a breaching  battery  in  the  first  parallel,  to 
be  armed  with  two  200-pounder  Parrott  rifles  and  two  80-pounder 
Whitworth  rifles.  The  use  of  these  guns  and  the  service  of  a detach- 
ment of  men  to  man  them  had  been  kindly  offered  by  Admiral  Dalil- 
gren.  The  battery  was  called  the  Naval  Battery,  and  was  under 
the  efficient  command  of  Capt.  Foxhall  A.  Parker  throughout  the 
bombardment,  which  commenced  on  the  17th  day  of  August. 

113.  July  27,  directed  Lieutenant  Michie  to  commence  the  con- 
struction of  breaching  batteries  against  Fort  Sumter  on  the  land 
ridges  to  the  left  and  rear  of  the  Beacon  House,  near  the  marsh. 
These  batteries  were  pushed  forward  rapidly  under  the  fire  of  the 
James  Island  batteries. 

114.  A 10-inch  Parrott  rifle  having  arrived  from  the  north  (the 
only  one  used  by  us  in  our  operations  prior  to  the  capture  of  Fort 
Wagner),  it  was  decided  to  locate  it  on  the  left,  with  a view  to  its 
security  from  the  enemy’s  fire.  The  duty  of  preparing  a position  for 
it  was  assigned  to  Lieutenant  Michie. 

115.  The  breaching  batteries  established  in  this  locality  were  at  a 
mean  distance  of  4,300  yards  from  Fort  Sumter,  and  comprised  one 
10-inch  Parrott  rifle,  two  8-inch  Parrott  rifles,  and  four  100-pounder 
Parrott  rifles. 

All  these  pieces  took  an  effective  part  in  the  first  bombardment  of 
Fort  Sumter,  from  the  17th  to  the  23d  of  August,  although  some  of 
them  did  not  open  until  the  third  day. 

116.  August  2.  Between  the  15th  and  20th  of  July,  Colonel  Serrell 
and  Lieutenant  Michie  had  made  several  examinations  of  the  marsh 
to  the  westward  of  Morris  Island,  in  order  to  determine  the  practi- 
cability of  placing  a battery  there,  within  effective  range  of  the  city 
of  Charleston  and  the  shipping  at  the  wharves. 

117.  This  marsh,  like  other  salt-marshes  on  this  coast,  consists 
of  a bed  of  soft  black  mud,  from  16  to  18  feet  in  depth,  overgrown 
with  reeds  and  grass,  traversed  by  numerous  deep  and  tortuous 
bayous,  and  subject  to  daily  overflow  by  the  tides. 

118.  The  difficulties  which  presented  themselves,  viewing  the  un- 
dertaking as  simply  an  attempt  to  solve  a complicated  problem  in 
practical  engineering,  appeared  very  great,  leaving  out  of  the  ques- 
tion the  severe  artillery  fire  to  which  the  working  parties  would  be 
exposed,  without  the  possibility  of  securing  any  protection  until  the 
battery  should  be  nearly  completed. 

119.  The  experience  in  the  marshes  on  the  Savannah  River,  above 
Fort  Pulaski,  in  1862,  came  to  our  aid,  and  contributed  largely  to 
the  speedy  and  successful  completion  of  the  work. 

120.  A number  of  experiments  to  ascertain  the  sustaining  power 
of  the  marsh  mud  were  made,  and  from  the  data  thus  obtained  a 
plan  of  a battery  for  one  8-inch  Parrott  rifle,  submitted  by  Colonel 
Serrell,  was  approved,  with  but  slight  modifications,  and  he  was 
charged  with  its  construction. 

121.  It  was  located  at  a point  nearly  midway  between  Morris  and 
James  Islands,  7,000  yards  from  the  lower  end  of  Charleston  City, 
and  was  named  the  Marsh  Battery,  although  it  is  generally  known  as 
the  “Swamp  Angel,”  a name  conferred  upon  it  by  the  soldiers.  A 
deep  creek  directly  in  front  of  the  battery,  across  which  a strong 
boom  was  constructed  a few  yards  lower  down,  rendered  the  posi- 
tion secure  against  attack  from  infantry  or  boat  parties. 


20 


S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 


[Chap.  XL. 


122.  The  Marsh  Battery  consisted  of  a sand-bag  epaulement,  sup- 
ported by  a grillage  composed  of  round  timbers  crossing  each  other 
at  right  angles,  in  two  layers,  and  resting  on  the  surface  of  the  marsh. 
In  this  grillage,  in  rear  of  the  epaulement,  there  was  a rectangular 
opening  large  enough  to  receive  the  platform  of  the  gun,  and  sur- 
rounded by  sheathing  piles  which  reached  through  the  mud  into  the 
solid  substratum  of  sand.  Within  this  rectangular  space  layers  of 
marsh  grass,  canvas,  and  sand  were  placed,  on  which  rested  a closely 
fitting  sub-platform  of  planks.  On  these  planks  the  gun  platform 
was  placed.  The  epaulement  and  gun  were  therefore  so  far  independ- 
ent of  each  other  that  the  subsidence  or  displacement  of  the  one 
would  not  necessarily  involve  that  of  the  other.  This  battery  was 
completed  and  in  readiness  to  open  fire  on  the  21st  of  August. 

123.  August  9.  On  the  9th  of  August  Major  Brooks  was  directed 
to  establish  the  third  parallel  with  the  flying  sap,  about  330  yards 
in  advance  of  the  right  of  the  second  parallel,  and  to  commence  the 
approaches  between  the  two  parallels  by  the  same  method. 

124.  From  this  period  forward  the  fire  from  James  Island,  Wag- 
ner, Gregg,  and  Sumter,  and  from  the  enemy’s  sharpshooters  in  Fort 
Wagner,  was  severe  and  almost  unceasing.  Indeed,  on  the  10th,  our 
advance  was  stopped  entirely  from  this  cause,  and  it  became  a ques- 
tion of  grave  doubt  whether  we  could  push  forward  our  trenches 
much  farther  with  the  advantages  so  entirely  on  the  side  of  the  en- 
emy. Meanwhile  the  garrison  of  Fort  Sumter  was  industriously 
engaged  in  strengthening  its  passive  means  of  defense.  Sand-bags 
were  piled  up  against  the  gorge  walls  from  its  junction  with  the  north- 
west face  to  the  sally-port  so  as  to  protect  the  magazine  near  that 
angle.  The  sand-bag  filling  of  the  gorge  casemates  was  greatly 
added  to,  and  the  traverses  on  the  terre-plein  were  enlarged. 

125.  At  this  period  of  the  siege  it  was  not  supposed  that  it  would 
be  necessary  to  sap  entirely  up  to  Fort  W agner,  in  order  to  insure  its 
capture,  for  on  the  presumption  that  Fort  Sumter  would  be  demol- 
ished from  positions  which  we  then  held,  it  was  considered  probable 
that  a complete  investment  of  Morris  Island  at  night  could  be  estab- 
lished and  maintained  by  picket-boats.  Our  batteries  stopped  the 
communication  by  day. 

126.  An  attempt  to  illuminate  the  waters  near  Cumming’s  Point 
with  calcium  lights  placed  in  the  left  batteries,  was  but  partially 
successful,  as  the  distance — over  3,000  yards — was  too  great  for  the 
apparatus  which  we  had.  The  idea  was  to  throw  a cone  of  light  upon 
the  water  approach,  and  station  the  guard-boats  in  the  obscurity  just 
outside  the  lateral  limits  of  the  cone.  The  plan,  I am  convinced, 
was  entirely  practicable,  and  with  powerful  reflectors  and  an  efficient 
picket- boat  organization  would  have  given  decisive  results. 

127.  It  was  decided  not  to  push  the  sap  toward  Fort  Wagner  be- 
yond the  third  parallel  until  the  fire  upon  Fort  Sumter  had  been 
opened. 

128.  My  comtnunication  to  the  General-in-Chief,  of  August  10,  is 
as  follows : 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

Morris  Island,  S.  C. , August  10,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-Chief,  U.  S.  Army,  Washington,  D.  C. : 

Sir  : I have  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  communication  of  the  28tli  ultimo, 
in  answer  to  my  request  for  re-enforcements.  The  unexpected  reduction  of  my 
effective  force  by  sickness  was,  at  the  time  I wrote,  quite  alarming.  I admit  that 
I had  not  taken  into  consideration  the  probable  effect  of  the  resumption  of  active 


)Chap.  XL.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


21 


operations  upon  men  who  had  been  idle  for  an  entire  year.  It  has,  in  truth,  acted 
like  a process  of  reacclimation.  All  but  two  regiments  of  the  forces  ordered  from 
Major-General  Foster’s  department  are  here. 

If  my  command  continues  to  improve  in  health,  I shall  require  no  more  men  than 
I now  have,  to  accomplish  the  reduction  of  Fort  Sumter.  After  that  is  done,  the 
monitors  must  take  the  lead,  in  accordance  with  the  project  which  was  discussed 
and  informally  adopted  when  I left  Washington. 

General  Beauregard  has,  for  the  defense  of  Charleston,  twice  as  many  men  and 
more  than  five  times  as  much  artillery  as  I have.  I therefore  beg  the  Department 
not  to  lose  sight  of  the  fact  that  after  the  gate  is  opened  to  the  monitors  and  iron- 
clads, by  the  reduction  of  Fort  Sumter,  the  army  here,  so  long  as  it  remains  greatly 
inferior  in  numbers  to  that  of  the  enemy,  must  remain  defensively  upon  these  sea 
islands. 

My  operations  are  progressing  satisfactorily.  I expect  to  open  a heavy  fire  on 
Fort  Sumter  on  the  14th  instant. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

Q.  A.  GILLMORE, 
Brigadier-  General , Commanding. 

On  the  16th  of  August,  I wrote  to  the  General-in-Chief  as  follows  : 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

Morris  Island,  S.  C.,  August  16,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-Cliief,  U.  S.  Army,  Washington,  D.  C. : 

Sir  : I have  to  report  a steady  progress  in  our  operations  here.  In  consequence 
of  the  inferior  and  irregular  quality  of  the  only  powder  in  this  department  suitable 
for  heavy  guns,  a fact  which  was  not  suspected  by  my  ordnance  officer  until  de- 
veloped by  our  preliminary  practice  after  the  magazines  had  been  filled,  I was  un- 
able to  open  my  batteries  on  the  14th,  agreeably  to  my  expectations,  as  stated  in  my 
letter  of  the  10th  instant. 

I have  borrowed  some  powder  from  the  navy,  which  (with  some  recently  arrived 
from  the  north)  will  enable  me  to  open  to-morrow,  the  17th  instant.  Two  moni- 
tors, with  one  rifled  gun  each,  are  expected  to  co-operate  with  me  against  Sumter, 
at  a distance  of  about  2,000  yards.  The  others  will  remain  abreast  of  Fort  Wagner, 
to  keep  down  its  fire. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

Q.  A.  GILLMORE, 
Brigadier-  General,  Commanding. 

129.  A sufficient  number  of  breacliing  guns  being  in  readiness  on 
the  16th  of  August  to  warrant  our  opening  upon  Fort  Sumter,  and 
arrangements  having  been  made  with  Admiral  Dahlgren  to  assist  in 
subduing  the  fire  of  Battery  Gregg  and  Fort  Wagner,  particularly 
that  of  the  sharpshooters  in  the  latter,  from  which  we  apprehended 
considerable  annoyance  to  our  breaching  batteries  in  the  second 
parallel,  the  following  order  was  issued  : 

130. 


Special  Orders,  ) Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

No.  481.  f In  the  Field,  Morris  Island,  S.  C.,  August  16,  1863. 

I.  All  the  breaching  batteries  established  against  Fort  Sumter  that  are  completed 
and  in  condition  for  efficient  service,  and  the  other  batteries  herein  below  named, 
will  be  opened  at  break  of  day  to-morrow.  Those  in  process  of  construction  will 
commence  firing  as  soon  as  the  several  pieces  in  succession  are  ready  to  open  effect- 
ively. The  firing  will  continue  from  day  to  day.  under  the  immediate  supervision 
of  the  chief  of  artillery,  commencing  at  daybreak  and  ending  at  dusk  in  the  even- 
ing,  with  such  intermission  during  the  heat  of  the  day  as  may  from  time  to  time  be 
ordered,  as  follows : 

First.  Battery  Brown,  Capt.  C.  G.  Strahan,  Third  Rhode  Island  Volunteer  Artil- 
lery, commanding,  comprising  two  8-inch  Parrott  rifles,  against  the  gorge  wall  of 
Fort  Sumter,  one  piece  firing  shot,  and  the  other  percussion  shell,  exclusively. 

Second.  Battery  Rosecrans,  Capt.  J.  J.  Comstock,  jr.,  Third  Rhode  Island  Volun- 
teer Artillery,  commanding,  comprising  three  100-pounder  Parrott  rifles,  against  the 
gorge  wall  of  Fort  Sumter,  one  piece  to  fire  percussion  shell,  and  two  pieces  to  fire 
shot,  exclusively. 


22 


[Chap.  XL. 


S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

Third.  Battery  Meade,  First  Lieut.  Henry  Holbrook,  Third  Rhode  Island  Volun- 
teer Artillery,  commanding,  comprising  two  100-pounder  Parrott  rifles,  against  the 
gorge  wall  of  Fort  Sumter,  both  pieces  firing  percussion  shell  exclusively. 

Fourth.  Battery  Kearny,  First  Lieut.  S.  S.  Atwell,  Seventh  Connecticut  Volunteer 
Infantry,  commanding,  comprising  three  30-pounder  Parrott  rifles  and  three  Coe- 
horn  mortars.  The  guns  will  operate  against  Battery  Gregg  with  shot  and  shell, 
unless  otherwise  directed,  and  the  mortars  against  Fort  Wagner,  exploding  the  shell 
just  over  the  fort. 

Fifth.  The  Naval  Battery,  Commander  F.  A.  Parker,  U.  S.  Navy,  commanding, 
comprising  two  8-inch  Parrott  rifles  and  two  80-pounder  Whitworth  rifles,  against 
the  gorge  wall  and  barbette  fire  of  Fort  Sumter,  at  the  discretion  of  the  battery 
commander. 

Sixth.  Battery  Reynolds,  Capt.  A.  E.  Greene,  Third  Rhode  Island  Volunteer  Artil- 
lery, commanding,  comprising  five  10-inch  siege  mortars,  against  Fort  Wagner, 
exploding  the  shells  just  before  striking. 

Seventh.  Battery  Weed,  Capt.  B.  F.  Skinner,  Seventh  Connecticut  Volunteer 
Infantry,  commanding,  comprising  five  10-inch  siege  mortars,  to  fire  the  same  as 
Battery  Reynolds. 

Eighth.  Battery  Hays,  Capt.  R.  G.  Shaw,  Third  Rhode  Island  Volunteer  Artillery, 
commanding,  comprising  one  8-inch  Parrott  rifle,  against  the  gorge  wall  of  Fort 
Sumter,  with  shot  exclusively ; and  seven  30-pounder  Parrott  rifles  against  Fort 
Wagner  or  Battery  Gregg,  as  may  from  time  to  time  be  ordered. 

Ninth.  Battery  Reno,  Capt.  A.  W.  Colwell,  Third  Rhode  Island  Volunteer  Artil- 
lery, commanding,  comprising  one  8-inch  and  two  100-pounder  Parrott  rifles,  against 
the  gorge  wall  of  Fort  Sumter  ; one  100-pounder  to  fire  shot,  and  the  other  pieces  to 
fire  percussion  shell,  exclusively. 

Tenth.  Battery  Stevens,  Lieut.  J.  E.  Wilson,  Fifth  U.  S.  Artillery,  commanding, 
comprising  two  100-pounder  Parrott  rifles,  against  the  gorge  wall  of  Fort  Sumter, 
one  piece  firing  shot,  and  the  other  percussion  shell,  exclusively. 

Eleventh.  Battery  Strong,  Capt.  S.  H.  Gray  Seventh  Connecticut  Volunteer  In- 
fantry, commanding,  containing  one  10-inch  Parrott  rifle,  against  the  gorge  wall 
of  Fort  Sumter,  firing  shot  and  percussion  shell,  commencing  with  the  former. 

Twelfth.  Battery  Kirby,  Lieut.  Charles  Sellmer,  Eleventh  Maine  Volunteer  In- 
fantry, commanding,  comprising  two  10-inch  seacoast  mortars,  against  Fort  Sum- 
ter, the  shells  to  be  exploded  within  the  fort  just  before  striking. 

II.  The  brigadier-general  commanding  takes  this  occasion  to  remind  the  officers 
and  men  under  his  command,  and  especially  those  to  whom  he  has  this  day  as- 
signed the  posts  of  honor  and  of  danger,  that  the  eyes  of  a beneficent  country  are 
fixed  upon  them,  with  not  only  the  ardent  hope,  but  the  confident  expectation,  of 
success.  The  nation  is  indeed*  waiting  to  crown  you  the  victors  of  Sumter.  We 
need  not,  and  must  not,  fail.  Let  us  fearlessly  do  our  whole  duty  to  our  beloved 
country,  and  in  the  language  of  our  late  companion  in  arms,  the  gallant  and 
lamented  Strong,  “ Put  our  trust  in  God.”  * 

By  order  of  Brig.  Gen.  Q.  A.  Gillmore  : 

ED.  W.  SMITH, 

Assistant  Adjutant-General. 

131.  Exact  distance  of  breaching  guns  from  the  center  of  gorge  wall 
of  Fort  Sumter  : Battery  Brown,  two  8-inch  Parrott  rifles,  3,516 
yards ; Battery  Rosecrans,  three  100-pounder  Parrott  rifles,  3,447 
yards ; Battery  Meade,  two  100-pounder  Parrott  rifles,  3,428  yards  ; 
Naval  Battery,  two  80-pounder  Whitworth  rifles  and  two  8-inch  Par- 
rott rifles,  3,938  yards  ; Battery  Hays,  one  8-inch  Parrott  rifle,  4,172 
yards  ; Battery  Reno,  one  8-inch  and  two  100-pounder  Parrott  rifles, 
4,272  yards;  Battery  Stevens,  two  100-pounder  Parrott  rifles,  4,278 
yards ; Battery  Strong,  one  10-inch  Parrott  rifle,  4,290  yards. 

132.  The  breaching  guns  were  served  from  day  to  day  with  great 
care  and  deliberation.  The  firing  from  the  batteries  in  the  second 
parallel  was  seriously  interfered  with,  and,  at  times,  partially  sus- 
pended, by  the  galling  fire  from  Fort  Wagner  to  which  the  cannon- 
eers were  exposed.  The  combined  fire  of  our  mortars  and  light 
pieces,  aided  by  gunboats  and  iron-clads,  failed  to  subdue  this  an- 
noyance entirely,  and  we  were  obliged  to  turn  some  of  our  breach  - 

* Paragraph  II  was  omitted  from  Gillmore’s  report. 


Chap.  XL.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


23 


ing  guns  upon  the  work.  There  was  imminent  danger,  indeed,  that 
our  most  efficient,  because  most  advanced,  batteries  would  be  hope- 
lessly disabled  before  the  work  should  be  accomplished.  Nothing 
of  the  kind,  however,  happened.  A heavy  northeasterly  storm  set 
in  on  the  18th,  and  raged  for  two  days,  very  materially  diminishing 
the  accuracy  and  effect  of  our  fire. 

133.  Soon  after  midnight  on  the  night  of  August  21,  the  Marsh 
Battery  opened  on  the  city  of  Charleston,  firing  only  a few  shots. 
Firing  was  resumed  the  second  night  thereafter,  but  the  piece  (an 
8-inch  Parrott  rifle)  burst  at  the  36th  discharge,  blowing  out  the 
entire  breach  in  rear  of  the  vent.  Copies  of  the  correspondence 
with  General  Beauregard  upon  the  subject  of  this  firing  on  the  city 
are  given  in  Appendix  I.  * 

134.  On  the  24th  of  August,  I reported  to  the  General-in-Chief— 

The  practical  demolition  of  Fort  Sumter  as  the  result  of  our  seven  days’  bombard- 
ment of  that  work.f 

Firing  from  the  breaching  batteries  ceased,  for  the  time,  on  the 
evening  of  the  23d. 


Tabular  statement  of  firing  at  Fort  Sumter  during  the  seven  days'  bombardment , 
from  the  Ylth  to  the  23d  of  August,  1863. 


Parrott  rifles. 

Distance  from  battery 
to  center  of  gorge 
wall. 

Whole  number  of  pro- 
jectiles thrown. 

3 

£ 

Xfl 

0) 

o a; 

& m 

m 'a! 

2 . 

Name  of  battery. 

Number. 

Caliber. 

Total  weight  of  i 
thrown. 

£<2 

g* 

O w 

<x>  o 

a £ 

3 

Number  which  S' 
gorge  wall  and  h 
to  form  breach. 

Weight  of  metal  \ 
formed  bread 

Strong 

1 

30-pounder. . . 

Yards. 

4,290 

76 

Pounds. 

19,142 

46 

22 

Pounds. 

5,500 

Brown 

2 

200-pounder. . . 

3,510 

542 

82,070 

299 

198 

32, 670 

Hays 

1 

200- pounder. . . 

4,172 

531 

86, 129 

225 

196 

33,320 

Reno 

Rosecrans 

j 1 

200-pounder. . . 

4,272 

333 

115,171 

480 

316 

38,940 

1 2 

3 

100-pounder. . . 
100-pounder. . . 

4,272 

3,447 

784 

1,173 

105,807 

587 

392 

37,240 

Meade 

2 

100-pounder. . . 

3,428 

1,004 

98,282 

502 

336 

98, 392 

Stevens  

2 

100-pounder. . . 

4,278 

566 

46,082 

340 

208 

43, 924 

Total 

5,009 

552,683 

2,479 

1,668 

289,986 

The  barbette  tier  of  the  work  was  entirely  destroyed.  A few  un- 
serviceable pieces,  still  remaining  on  their  carriages,  were  dismounted 
a week  later.  The  casemates  of  the  channel  fronts  were  more  or 
less  thoroughly  searched  by  our  fire.  We -had  reliable  information 
that  but  one  serviceable  gun  remained  in  them,  and  that  pointed  up 
the  harbor  toward  the  city.  The  fort  was  reduced  to  the  condition 
of  a mere  infantry  outpost,  alike  incapable  of  annoying  our  ap- 
proaches to  Fort  Wagner  or  of  inflicting  injury  upon  the  iron-clads. 
The  enemy  soon  after  commenced  removing  the  dismounted  guns  by 
night,  and  not  many  weeks  elapsed  before  several  of  them  were 
mounted  in  other  parts  of  the  harbor.  The  period  during  which  the 
weakness  of  the  enemy’s  interior  defenses  was  most  palpably  appar- 
ent was  during  the  ten  days  subsequent  to  the  23d  of  August. 

135.  Meanwhile,  on  the  night  of  August  18,  active  operations  were 


* Printed  in  “ Correspondence,  etc.,”  post. 
f See  Bombardment  of  Fort  Sumter,  post . 


24  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

resumed  on  the  approaches  to  Fort  Wagner,  by  debouching  with 
the  full  sap  from  the  left  of  the  third  parallel.  The  spring  tides, 
aided  by  a powerful  northeast  storm,  had  submerged  the  trenches  to 
a depth  of  2 feet  in  many  places,  and  washed  down  the  parapets. 
At  the  second  parallel  the  Surf  Battery  had  barely  escaped  entire 
destruction,  about  one-third  of  it  having  been  carried  away  by  the 
sea.  Its  armanent  had  been  temporarily  removed  to  await  the  issue 
of  the  storm.  The  progress  of  the  sap  was  hotly  opposed  by  the 
enemy. 

At  one  point  in  particular,  about  200  yards  in  front  of  Wagner, 
there  was  a ridge  affording  good  cover,  from  which  we  received  an 
unceasing  fire  of  small-arms,  while  the  guns  and  sharpshooters  in 
Wagner  opened  vigorously  at  every  lull  in  the  fire  directed  upon  it 
from  our  batteries  and  the  gunboats.  The  firing  from  the  distant 
James  Island  batteries  was  steady  and  accurate. 

One  attempt  on  the  21st  to  obtain  possession  of  the  ridge  with  in- 
fantry having  failed,  it  was  determined  to  establish  another  parallel. 

Fourth  Parallel. 

136.  On  the  night  of  August  21,  the  fourth  parallel  was  opened 
about  100  yards  from  the  ridge  above  mentioned,  partly  with  the 
flying  and  partly  with  the  full  sap.  At  the  place  selected  for  it  the 
island  is  about  160  yards  in  width  above  high  water. 

It  was  now  determined  to  try  and  dislodge  the  enemy  from  the 
ridge  with  light  mortars  and  navy  howitzers  in  the  fourth  parallel 
and  other  mortars  in  rear  firing  over  those  in  front.  The  attempt 
was  made  on  the  afternoon  of  August  25,  but  did  not  succeed. 

Fifth  Parallel. 

137.  Brigadier-General  Terry  was  ordered,  on  the  26th  of  August, 
to  carry  the  ridge  at  the  point  of  the  bayonet,  and  hold  it.  This  was 
accomplished,  and  the  fifth  parallel  established  there  on  the  evening 
of  the  same  day.  This  brought  us  to  within  240  yards  of  Fort  W ag- 
ner.  The  intervening  space  comprised  the  narrowest  and  shallowest 
part  of  Morris  Island.  It  was  simply  a flat  ridge  of  sand,  scarcely 

25  yards  in  width,  over  which  the  sea,  in  rough  weather,  swept  en- 
tirely across  to  the  marsh  on  our  left. 

Approaches  by  the  flying  sap  were  at  once  commenced  from  the 
right  of  the  fifth  parallel,  and  certain  means  of  defense  in  the  par- 
allel itself  were  ordered.  It  was  soon  ascertained  that  we  had  now 
reached  the  point  where  the  really  formidable  defensive  arrange- 
ments of  the  enemy  commenced.  An  elaborate  and  ingenious  sys- 
tem of  torpedo  mines,  to  be  exploded  by  the  tread  of  persons  walk- 
ing over  them,  was  encountered,  and  we  were  informed  by  the 
prisoners  taken  on  the  ridge  that  the  entire  area  of  firm  ground  be- 
tween us  and  the  fort,  as  well  as  the  glacis  of  the  latter  on  its  south 
and  east  fronts,  was  thickly  filled  with  these  torpedoes.  This  knowl- 
edge brought  to  us  a sense  of  security  from  sorties,  for  the  mines 
were  a defense  to  us  as  well  as  to  the  enemy. 

By  daybreak  on  the  27th,  our  sappers  had  reached  with  an  unfin- 
ished trench  to  within  100  yards  of  Fort  Wagner. 

138.  The  dark  and  gloomy  days  of  the  siege  were  now  upon  us. 
Our  daily  hopes  were  on  the  increase,  while  our  progress  became  dis- 
couragingly  slow  and  even  fearfully  uncertain.  The  converging  fire 


Chap.  XL.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


25 


26  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

from  Wagner  alone  almost  enveloped  the  head  of  onr  sap,  subtend- 
ing, as  it  did,  an  angle  of  nearly  90  degrees,  while  the  flank  fire  from 
the  James  Island  batteries  increased  in  power  and  accuracy. 

To  push  forward  the  sap,  in  the  narrow  strip  of  shallow,  shifting 
sand  by  day,  was  impossible,  while  the  brightness  of  the  prevailing 
harvest  moon  rendered  the  operation  almost  as  hazardous  by  night. 
Matters,  indeed,  seemed  at  a stand-still,  and  a feeling  of  despondency 
began  to  pervade  the  rank  and  file  of  the  command. 

FINAL  BOMBARDMENT  AND  CAPTURE  OF  FORT  WAGNER. 

139.  In  this  emergency  it  was  determined  to  commence  simultane- 
ously and  vigorously  two  distinct  methods  of  attack,  viz : 

First.  To  keep  Wagner  perfectly  silent  with  an  overpowering 
curved  fire,  so  that  our  engineers  would  have  only  the  more  distant 
batteries  of  the  enemy  to  annoy  them  ; and, 

Second.  To  breach  the  bomb-proof  with  rifled  guns,  and  thus  de- 
prive the  enemy  of  their  only  shelter  in  the  work. 

Accordingly  all  the  light  mortars  were  moved  to  the  front,  and 
placed  in  battery ; the  capacity  of  the  fifth  parallel  and  the  advanced 
trenches  for  sharpshooters  was  enlarged  and  improved ; the  rifled 
guns  in  the  left  breaching  batteries  were  trained  upon  the  fort  and 
prepared  for  prolonged  action,  and  powerful  calcium  lights,  to  aid 
the  night  work  of  our  cannoneers  and  sharpshooters,  and  blind  those 
of  the  enemy,  were  got  in  readiness.  The  co-operation  of  the  pow- 
erful battery  of  the  New  Ironsides,  Captain  [Stephen  C.J  Rowan, 
during  the  daytime,  was  secured. 

140.  These  final  operations  against  Fort  Wagner  were  actively  in- 
augurated at  break  of  day  on  the  morning  of  September  5.  For 
forty-two  consecutive  hours  the  spectacle  presented  was  of  surpassing 
sublimity  and  grandeur.  Seventeen  siege  and  Coehorn  mortars  un- 
ceasingly dropped  their  shells  into  the  work  over  the  heads  of  our 
sappers  and  the  guards  of  the  advanced  trenches ; nine  rifled  guns, 
in  the  left  batteries,  pounded  away  at  the  southwest  angle  of  the 
bomb-proof,  while  during  the  daytime  the  New  Ironsides,  with  as- 
tonishing regularity  and  precision,  kept  a constant  stream  of  shells 
from  her  eight-gun  broadside  ricochetting  over  the  water  against  the 
parapet  of  Wagner,  whence,  rebounding  upward,  they  dropped 
nearly  vertically,  exploding  in  or  over  the  work  and  searching  every 
part  of  it.  The  calcium  lights  turned  night  into  day,  throwing  our 
own  men  into  impenetrable  obscurity,  while  they  brilliantly  illumi- 
nated every  object  in  front  and  brought  the  minutest  detail  of  the 
fort  in  sharp  relief.  In  a short  time  the  fort  became  silent,  exhibit- 
ing but  little  sign  of  life. 

Our  sappers  rapidly  pushed  forward  their  works,  suffering  from 
the  James  Island  batteries  principally,  which,  night  and  day,  kept 
up  a galling  fire  upon  the  head  of  the  sap,  following  its  progress  to- 
ward the  work,  until  so  near  that  friends  as  well  as  foes  would  be 
endangered  by  it.  From  this  moment  the  men  in  the  advanced 
trenches  enjoyed  entire  immunity  from  danger.  Indeed,  the  sense 
of  security  was  so  great  that  they  fearlessly  exposed  themselves  to 
view,  and  the  reliefs  off  duty  defiantly  mounted  the  parapets  of 
their  works  to  while  away  their  leisure  time,  or  groping  their  way 
forward  among  the  torpedoes  with  a skill  which  the  most  bitter  ex- 
perience only  could  have  conferred,  approached  the  ditch,  and  took  a 
deliberate  survey  of  the  fort  and  its  surroundings. 


Chap.  XL.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


27 


141.  On  the  night  of  September  6,  the  sapper  crowned  the  crest 
of  the  counterscarp  on  the  east  front,  masking  all  the  guns  of  the 
work.  The  following  order,  to  carry  the  place  by  assault  at  the  hour 
of  low  tide  on  the  following  morning,  was  issued  late  in  the  evening: 

142. 

Special  Orders,  > Headquarters  Department  op  the  South, 

No.  513.  ) In  the  Field , Morris  Island , September  6,  1863. 

I.  Fort  Wagner  will  be  assaulted  at  9 a.  m.  to-morrow,  the  7th  instant,  by  troops 
to  be  designated  by  Brigadier-General  Terry,  who  will  command  in  person.* 

The  artillery  fire  on  the  work  will  be  kept  up  until  the  troops  mount  the  parapet, 
and  will  then  cease  at  a given  signal. 

The  assault  will  be  in  three  columns,  as  follows  : 

First.  A column  of  two  small  regiments  of  picked  troops  will  debouch  from  the 
advanced  trenches,  mount  the  parapet  of  the  sea  front  and  the  bomb-proof  and  trav- 
erses, spike  the  guns,  and  seize  and  hold  the  sally-port. 

Second.  A column  of  one  brigade  drawn  up  right  in  front  in  the  trenches,  in  rear 
of  the  first  column,  will  debouch  upon  the  beach  by  regiments,  pass  the  sea  front  of 
the  fort,  file  sharp  to  the  left,  and  mount  the  parapet  of  the  north  and  west  faces, 
regiment  after  regiment,  as  they  gain  the  requisite  distances. 

Third.  A column  of  one  brigade,  left  in  front,  will  follow  behind  the  second 
column,  and  deploy  across  the  island  in  rear  of  Fort  Wagner,  facing  Cumming’s 
Point,  with  skirmishers  well  out  in  front. 

II.  The  guards  of  the  trenches  will  be  held  in  reserve  at  their  appropriate  sta- 
tions. The  balance  of  the  infantry  force  of  General  Terry’s  command  will  be  kept 
under  arms  from  and  after  8 o’clock  in  the  morning  near  the  Beacon  House.  The 
batteries  of  field  artillery  will  be  held  ready  for  action  near  the  lookout. 

By  order  of  Brig.  Gen.  Q.  A.  Gillmore  : 

ED.  W.  SMITH, 
Assistant  Adjutant-General. 

143.  About  midnight  on  the  6th,  it  was  reported  to  me  that  the 
enemy  was  evacuating  the  island,  and  such  was  the  celerity  of  his 
flight,  that  nearly  the  whole  of  his  force  made  its  escape.  Seventy 
men  were  intercepted  on  the  water  and  taken. 

Our  forces  at  once  occupied  the  north  end  of  the  island.  Eighteen 
pieces  of  ordnance  of  various  calibers  were  captured  in  Fort  W agner 
and  seven  in  Battery  Gregg. 

144.  Fort  Wagner  was  found  to  be  a work  of  the  most  formidable 
character ; far  more  so,  indeed,  than  the  most  exaggerated  statements 
of  prisoners  and  deserters  had  led  us  to  expect.  Its  bomb-proof 
shelter,  capable  of  containing  from  1,500  to  1,600  men,  remained  prac- 
tically intact  after  the  most  severe  bombardment  to  which  any  earth- 
work was  ever  exposed.  (See  Plate  III.  f)  The  history  of  sieges  fur- 
nishes no  parallel  case. 

145.  The  attempt  to  form  an  opening  in  the  bomb-proof  by  breach- 
ing failed  for  want  of  time.  The  heavy  projectiles  were  slowly  eat- 
ing their  way  into  it,  although  their  effect  was  astonishingly  slight. 
Indeed,  the  penetration  of  rifle  projectiles  into  a sand  parapet,  stand- 
ing at  the  natural  slope,  or  approximately  so,  is  but  trifling.  They 
are  almost  invariably  deflected  along  the  line  of  least  resistance,  or 
departing  but  slightly  from  it,  scooping  out  in  their  progress  a small 
hollow,  the  contents  of  which  are  scattered  but  a short  distance. 

Under  such  circumstances,  the  general  effect  produced  by  firing  a 
large  number  of  successive  shots  within  a small  area  of,  say,  from 

* For  General  Terry’s  detailed  instructions,  see  addenda  to  Gillmore’s  reports  of 
operations  on  Morris  Island. 

f Reference  is  to  the  “ Plan  of  a portion  of  the  siege  operations  against  the  defenses 
of  Charleston  Harbor  prior  to  the  capture  of  Fort  Wagner,”  &c.,  which  is  to  appear 

in  Atlas. 


28  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

15  to  20  feet  square,  is  by  no  means  commensurate  with  the  expend- 
iture of  ammunition  involved. 

[146.  ] The  section,  Plate  V,*  is  taken  along  the  line  where  this  two 
days’  firing  upon  the  bomb-proof  produced  the  greatest  effect ; in 
other  words,  along  the  axis  of  the  breach  produced. 


Tabular  statement  of  firing  at  Fort  Wagner  from  the  breaching  guns  during 
the  two  days'  bombardment,  September  5 and  6,  1863. 


Parrott  rifles. 

Fort 

6 

£ 

13 

<D 

ctiles 

the 

g 

£ 

•3* 

i§ 

Name  of  battery. 

Number. 

Caliber. 

Distance  from 

Wagner. 

Whole  number  oi 

jectiles  throw 

Total  wreight  of  i 

thrown. 

Number  of  proje* 

which  struck 

fort. 

Number  which  st 

thebomb-proo 

'S’3 

++,* 

.a  o 
u? 

'33+3 

* 

c" 

Strong  . . 

1 

300-pounder  . . 
200-pounder  . . 
200-pounder  . . 
100-pounder  . . 
100-pounder  . . 
100-pounder  . . 
100-pounder  . . 

Yards. 

1,900 

885 

88 

Pounds. 

22,000 

19,575 

J-  51,615 

11,139 
20,580 
25, 596 

78 

78 

Pounds. 

19,500 

12,615 

38,688 

9,875 
18, 326 
23,226 

Brown 

2 

135 

104 

87 

Reno 

\ l 

1,850 

1,850 

830 

168 

345 

141 

5 126 

105? 

Rosecrans 

I 2 

3 

\ 306 

132 

2975 

125 

Meade 

2 

820 

1,875 

210 

196 

187 

Stevens 

2 

324 

305 

294 

Total 

13 

1,411 

150, 505 

1,247 

1,173 

122,230 

The  total  quantity  of  sand  removed  to  such  a distance  that  it  no 
longer  afforded  the  bomb-proof  shelter  any  protection  against  the 
projectiles  from  the  breaching  guns,  is  estimated,  from  a close  per- 
sonal examination,  at  165  cubic  yards.  It  requires,  as  will  be  seen 
from  the  above  tables,  54-J  gross  tons  of  metal  to  effect  it. 

147.  Meanwhile,  at  the  request  of  Admiral  Dahlgren,  three  days’ 
firing,  commencing  August  30,  from  a portion  of  our  breaching  guns, 
had  been  expended  on  Port  Sumter,  and  it  was  known  that  all  the 
barbette  guns  of  that  work  had  been  dismounted.  Deserters  and 
prisoners  reported  that  but  one  casemate  gun  remained  serviceable, 
and  that  was  located  on  the  northwest  face,  near  its  junction  with  the 
gorge,  and  consequently  looked  up  the  harbor. 

148.  Early  on  the  morning  of  September  7,  Rear-Admiral  Dahlgren 
sent  a flag  of  truce  to  Fort  Sumter,  demanding  its  surrender,  notify- 
ing me,  at  the  same  time,  by  signals,  that  if  the  summons  was  not 
complied  with,  he  should  “move  up  with  all  the  iron-clads  and  en- 
gage it.”  The  demand  was  refused. 

149.  During  the  night  of  the  8th  of  September  a naval  force  at- 
tempted to  carry  Sumter  by  assault,  and  was  repulsed  with  consid- 
erable loss.  Before  I was  informed  by  the  admiral  of  his  intentions 
to  storm  the  work,  I had  made  arrangements  to  do  the  same  thing, 
but  the  force  assembled  for  that  purpose  was  detained  by  low  tide  at 
its  rendezvous  in  the  creek  west  of  Morris  Island,  until  after  the 
naval  attack  had  failed.  The  project  was  then  abandoned. 

The  only  arrangements  for  concert  of  action  between  the  two  par- 
ties that  were  finally  made,  were  intended  simply  to  prevent  accident 
or  collision  between  them.  Each  party  was  deemed  in  itself  suffi- 
ciently strong  for  the  object  in  view. 

150.  The  capture  of  all  of  Morris  Island  and  the  demolition  of  Fort 
Sumter  completed  those  portions  of  the  plan  of  joint  operations 
against  the  defenses  of  Charleston  in  which  the  land  forces  were  to 
take  the  lead. 


See  plate,  opposite. 


Ohap.  XL.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


29 


30  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  EL  A.  [Chap.  XL. 

Fort  Wagner  and  Battery  Gregg  were  at  once  strengthened,  and 
additional  defensive  works  on  the  island  constructed.  A powerful 
armament  of  mortars  and  rifled  guns  was  placed  in  position  on  the 
north  end  of  the  island,  to  be  held  in  readiness  to  co-operate  with  the 
iron-clads  whenever  they  should  be  prepared  to  move  in,  and  also  to 
be  used  as  occasion  might  require,  to  prevent  the  mounting  of  guns 
on  the  ruins  of  Sumter. 

151.  The  three  days’  firing  on  Fort  Sumter  with  a portion  of  the 
breaching  guns  in  the  'left  batteries  and  second  parallel,  ending  Sep- 
tember 1,  did  not  materially  change  the  appearance  of  the  work,  as 
shown  at  the  close  of  the  first  bombardment,  August  23.  Only  the 
gorge  wall  was  breached.  The  southeast  face,  the  only  one  seen  from 
our  position,  excepting  the  gorge,  remained  standing,  although  badly 
shattered  in  many  places.  All  the  barbette  guns  of  the  fort  had 
been  either  dismounted  by  our  fire  or  removed  by  the  enemy,  and 
most  of  the  parapet  had  been  knocked  away. 

SECOND  BOMBARDMENT  OF  FORT  SUMTER. 

152.  In  consequence  of  the  reports  of  prisoners  and  deserters,  from 
time  to  time,  that  the  enemy  were  at  work  mounting  some  guns  on  the 
southeast  face  of  Sumter,  and  also  with  the  intention  to  cut  down 
that  face  so  as  to  enable  us,  with  the  fire  from  our  guns,  to  take  more 
completely  in  reverse  the  casemates  on  the  channel  fronts,  the  heavy 
rifled  guns  in  Wagner  and  Gregg  were  opened  on  the  work  on  the 
26th  of  October. 

153.  In  a few  days  the  southeast  face  was  more  completely  a ruin 
than  the  gorge  wall.  The  debris  formed  a continuous  and  practica- 
ble ramp  reaching  from  the  summit  of  the  breach  to  the  level  of  the 
water.  (See  the  supplementary  report  of  Brigadier-General  Turner, 
chief  of  artillery.*) 

154.  With  the  second  bombardment  of  Fort  Sumter  ended  all  ag- 
gressive operations  for  the  season  against  the  defenses  of  Charleston. 

A slow  and  irregular  fire  upon  the  fort  was  kept  up  for  some  time 
to  prevent  the  mounting  of  guns  on  the  ruins  pending  the  completion 
of  the  naval  preparations  for  entering  the  harbor,  which,  for  various 
reasons,  had  been  delayed  greatly  beyond  the  expectations  of  the 
admiral. 

On  the  20th  of  October,  I learned  from  Admiral  Dahlgren  that 
there  would  probably  be  no  attempt  made  to  remove  the  obstructions 
and  enter  the  inner  harbor  until  more  turret  iron-clads  arrived. 
Several  were  expected. 

155.  The  bombardment  of  the  city  of  Charleston,  which  began 
from  the  Marsh  Battery  on  the  night  of  the  21st  of  August,  was  not 
resumed  after  the  bursting,  at  the  36th  round,  of  the  8-inch  Parrott 
rifle,  which  formed  the  entire  armament  of  that  battery,  until  we 
were  able  to  establish  guns  on  Cumming’s  Point.  No  military  results 
of  great  value  were  ever  expected  from  this  firing.  As  an  experiment 
with  heavy  guns  to  test  their  endurance  under  the  severest  trial  to 
which  they  could  possibly  be  subjected  in  service,  the  results  were 
not  only  highly  interesting  and  novel,  but  very  instructive. 

None  but  Parrott  rifles  and  shells  were  used  for  this  purpose. 
Some  of  them  were  incendiary  shells  prepared  at  the  West  Point 
Foundry ; others  contained  pieces  of  port-fire  in  addition  to  the  ex- 
plosive charge,  while  others  contained  powder  only. 


* Printed  as  No.  3,  Operations  on  Morris  Island. 


Chap.  XL.] 


GENERA L I IEPG  RTS. 


31 


GENERAL  OBSERVATIONS,  NOTES,  AND  QUERIES. 

156.  Parrott  rifled  guns. 

There  is,  perhaps,  no  better  system  of  rifled  cannon  than  Parrotts  ; 
certainly  none  more  simple  in  construction,  more  easily  understood, 
or  that  can  with  more  safety  be  placed  in  the  hands  of  inexperienced 
men  for  use. 

The  enormous  and  constant  demand  under  which  it  has  been  rap- 
idly developed,  particularly  among  the  larger  calibers,  to  its  pres- 
ent state  of  efficiency  and  excellence,  gives  promise  of  a degree  of 
perfection  that  will  leave  little  to  be  desired  at  no  distant  future. 

157.  Particulars  of  Parrott  rifles. 


Gun. 

Diameter  of 
bore. 

Length  of 
bore. 

Weight  of 
gun. 

Caliber. 

10-pounder 

Inches. 

2.90 

Inches. 

70 

Pounds. 

890 

3-pounder  smooth-bore. 

20-pounder 

3.67 

79 

1,750 

6-pounder  smooth-bore. 

30-pounder,  Army 

4.20 

120 

4,200 

9-pounder  smooth-bore. 

30-pounder,  Navy 

4.20 

96.8 

3, 550 

9-pounder  smooth-bore. 

100-pounder 

6.40 

130 

9,700 

32-pounder  smooth-bore. 

200-pounder 

8.00 

136 

16,500 

8-inch  smooth-bore. 

300-pounder 

10.00 

26,000 

10-inch  smooth-bore. 

Charges  and  weights  of  projectiles. 


Gun. 

Charge. 

Weight  of  projectiles. 

10-pounder  

Pounds. 

1 

2 

31 

31 

10 

16 

25 

9f  to  101  pounds. 

18J-  to  194  pounds. 

About  29  pounds. 

Do. 

80  pounds  generally. 

150  pounds  generally. 

250  pounds  generally. 

20-pounder 

30-pounder,  Army 

30-pounder.  Navy 

100-pounder 

200- pounder 

300-pounder 

Ranges. 


Gun. 

Elevation. 

Projectiles. 

Range. 

Time  of 
flight. 

10-pounder 

Degrees, 

1 

Case  shot,  101  pounds 

Yards. 

600 

2,000 

3,200 

5,000 

620 

2,100 

3,350 

4,400 

1,500 

4,800 

6,700 

1,450 

4,790 

6,820 

7,180 

8,453 

Seconds. 

Do 

5 

Shell,  9i  pounds 

61 

101 

21 

Do 

10 

do 

Do 

20 

do 

20-pounder.  . . . 

1 

Case  shot,  19.!  pounds 

n 

6.1 

llj 

Hi 

41 

Do 

5 

Shell,  181  pounds 

Do 

10 

do 

Do 

15 

31 

do 

30-pounder 

Shell,  29  pounds 

Do 

15 

do 

17f 

27 

Do 

25 

do 

100-pounder 

31 

15 

Long  shell,  101  pounds 

18' 

28 

29* 

361 

Do 

do 

Do 

25 

do 

Do 

25 

Hollow  shot,  80  pounds 

Do 

35 

do 

32 


S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 


[Chap.  XL. 


Average  range  obtained  with  guns  on  Morris  Island. 


Gun. 

Elevation. 

Charge. 

Range. 

Degrees. 

Minutes. 

Pounds. 

Yards. 

300-pounder 

13 

30 

26 

4,290 

200-pounder 

11 

47 

16 

4,272 

100-pounder 

13 

30 

10 

4, 272 

300-pounder 

5 

12 

251 

1,950 

200-pounder 

4 

12 

16 

1,750 

100-pounder 

4 

15 

10 

1,750 

158.  The  Parrott  guns  are  not  without  defects,  the  most  serious  of 
which  we  found  to  be  their  very  unequal  endurance.  Some  of  our 
most  valuable  batteries  were  disabled  at  a very  early  stage  in  the 
operations.  The  8-inch  rifle  in  the  Marsh  Battery  burst  at  the  36th 
discharge,  at  a constant  elevation  of  31°  30'  and  a constant  charge 
of  16  pounds.  The  projectile  weighed  150  pounds. 

For  the  purpose  of  comparison,  take  two  100-pounders  which  burst 
as  follows : One  of  them  at  the  122d  round  at  3°  15'  elevation,  the 
greatest  elevation  having  been  3°  20',  and  the  average  3°  18',  while  the 
other  burst  at  the  1,151st  round  at  12°  30'  elevation,  the  greatest  eleva- 
tion having  13°  55',  and  the  average  13°.  Ten  pounds  of  powder  was 
the  charge  for  both  pieces. 

159.  By  far  the  most  remarkable  example  of  endurance  furnished 
by  any  of  our  guns,  and  perhaps  the  most  remarkable  on  record,  was 
that  of  a 30-pounder  Parrott  rifle.  The  following  history  of  the 
piece  is  furnished  by  Captain  Mordecai,  chief  of  ordnance  of  this 
department : The  gun  was  cast  at  the  West  Point  Foundry  in  1863 ; 
its  ordnance  number  is  193  ; it  was  mounted  on  Cumming’s  Point  in 
December,  1863,  for  the  purpose  of  throwing  shells  into  the  city  of 
Charleston  ; it  was  placed  on  a plain  wooden  carriage  manufactured 
on  Morris  Island.  Sixty-nine  days  elapsed  between  the  first  and  last 
discharge  of  the  gun.  It  was  being  fired  the  4,606th  round  when  it 
burst.  There  were  fired  4,594  rounds  with  3f  pounds  of  powder, 
and  percussion  shells  of  29  pounds  charged  with  1-^  pounds  of  pow- 
der, with  an  elevation  of  40°.  One  round  with  the  same  as  above 
excepting  the  elevation,  which  was  49°  45' ; 7 rounds  with  the  same 
as  above,  excepting  that  time  fuses  were  used  with  40°  elevation ; 4 
rounds  with  3i  pounds  of  powder,  time  fuse,  4^-inch  shells,  weighing 
29  pounds  and  charged  with  1-J  pounds  of  powder ; elevation,  2°  50'. 

Of  these  rounds,  4,253  shells  reached  the  city  ; 259  tripped  and  fell 
short ; 10  took  the  rifling  and  fell  short ; 80  exploded  prematurely, 
but  none  in  the  gun ; and  4 were  fired  at  Fort  Sumter,  and  reached 
it,  the  distance  being  1,390  yards. 

The  first  2,164  rounds  were  fired  at  intervals  of  five  minutes,  but 
the  firing  was  not  continuous,  237  rounds  being  the  greatest  number 
fired  in  any  one  twenty-four  hours,  and  2 rounds  the  least.  The 
average  per  day  was  127  rounds. 

The  last  2,442  rounds  were  fired  at  intervals  of  fifteen  minutes, 
not  continuously,  157  rounds  being  the  greatest  number  fired  in  any 
one  day,  and  7 the  least ; the  daily  average  being  97  rounds. 

All  the  shells  were  swedged  and  greased.  The  gun  was  cleaned 
after  each  discharge,  first  with  a dry  sponge  and  then  with  an  oiled 
one ; it  was  washed  out  with  water  and  cooled  after  every  ten  fires. 
After  the  guu  was  loaded,  and  while  waiting  to  be  fired,  a canvas 
cap  was  placed  over  the  muzzle  to  keep  out  drifting  sand,  and  every 


Chap.  XL.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


33 


care  was  taken  that  the  gun  should  he  clear  from  sand  and  dirt  when 
fired.  The  vent  of  the  gun  was  bushed  twice  during  the  time  it  was 
used ; the  bushing  in  use  when  the  gun  gave  out  was  somewhat 
eaten,  but  very  regularly  and  not  badly,  the  diameter  of  vent  at  the 
exterior  being  .25  of  an  inch,  and  at  the  interior  .375. 

The  gun  when  it  burst  went  into  seven  pieces,  the  muzzle  and 
chase  back  to  the  axis  of  trunnions  being  one  piece,  that  part  of  the 
cast-iron  re-enforce  from  6 inches  in  rear  of  the  front  of  the  wrought- 
iron  band,  with  the  band,  breach,  and  cascabel,  being  a second  piece. 
The  metal  between  these  two  pieces  went  into  five  fragments,  two 
below  the  axis  of  the  gun  and  three  above,  one  of  the  latter  being 
quite  small,  and  located  in  front  of  the  trunnions.  The  fracture  within 
the  band  took  place  nearly  in  two  planes,  each  being  perpendicular 
to  the  axis  of  the  gun.  Three  cracks  extended  back  to  the  bottom 
of  the  bore,  each  along  the  junction  of  a band  and  groove,  one  im- 
mediately to  the  left  of  the  vent,  but  not  through  it,  one  l-J-  inches 
to  the  right,  and  the  third  3i  inches  to  the  left  of  the  vent.  The 
locality  of  the  above  fracture  is  at  the  point  where  the  ring  of  the 
projectile  rested  when  the  gun  was  discharged. 

The  upper  side  of  the  bore,  over  and  in  front  of  the  projectile  when 
at  rest,  is  much  eaten  by  the  gas.  In  some  places  along  the  junction 
of  a band  and  groove,  these  gutters  are  one-half  inch  in  depth  and 
12  inches  long.  The  surfaces  of  both  bands  and  grooves  are  much 
guttered,  though  not  deeply.  On  the  lower  side,  9 inches  from  the 
bottom  of  the  bore,  the  edge  of  the  lower  band  is  entirely  worn 
away,  and  this  extends  forward  12  inches.  From  12  inches  in  rear  of 
the  trunnions  to  within  4 inches  of  muzzle,  the  grooves  are  apparently 
unworn.  At  the  muzzle,  on  the  lower  side,  the  band  is  entirely  worn 
away,  down  even  below  the  bottom  of  the  grooves.  This  wearing 
took  place  mostly  to  the  right  of  a vertical  plane  through  the  axis 
of  the  piece. 

The  diameter  of  the  wrought-iron  band  at  the  front  is  increased 
about  .375  of  an  inch,  caused  by  the  fragments  in  escaping  from 
within  it.  It  is  presumed  that  mortar  powder  was  used  in  this  gun, 
as  that  was  the  order.  The  records  are  not  explicit  on  this  point. 
Plates  — to  — , inclusive,  each  exhibit  drawings  and  a brief  history 
of  a bursted  gun.  They  were  prepared  by  Captain  Mordecai. 

Greek  fire. 

160.  The  composition  of  Short’s  solidified  Greek  fire,  the  only  in- 
cendiary material  called  Greek  fire  which  we  attempted  to  use,  I am 
unable  to  give. 

Captain  Mordecai  reports  as  follows  upon  it : 

It  was  furnished  in  tin  tubes,  closed  at  one  end,  about  3 inches  long  and  31  inches 
in  diameter.  These  tubes  were  covered  with  one  layer  of  paper,  such  as  is  commonly 
used  for  cartridges.  The  paper  was  folded  down  over  the  ends  of  the  tube,  that  part 
covering  the  open  end  having  upon  it  a priming  of  powder  and  coal-tar. 

The  directions  for  using  this  fire  were  furnished  from  the  manufactory,  and  were 
as  follows:  “As  many  of  the  cases  containing  the  composition  must  be  dropped 
into  the  shell,  with  as  much  powder  as  can  possibly  be  shaken  among  them.”  After 
the  failure  of  shell  filled  in  this  manner  to  give  satisfactory  results,  Mr.  Short 
visited  Morris  Island.  He  altered  the  manner  of  filling  the  shell,  putting  several 
inches  of  powder  in  the  shell  before  inserting  the  cases.  He  also  covered  some  cases 
with  several  thicknesses  of  thick  cartridge  paper,  and  others  with  several  layers  of 
muslin. 

Into  all  the  shell  filled  by  him,  powder  was  first  placed. 

3 R R — VOL  XXVIII,  PT  I 


34 


S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 


[Chap.  XL. 


To  the  best  of  my  knowledge,  the  only  cases  in  which  shell  were 
fired  containing  the  solidified  Greek,  fire  are  enumerated  below  : 


| No.  of  shots.  | 

Projectile 

shell. 

Manner  in  which  filled. 

Charge. 

Fuse. 

Elevation.  J 

Remarks. 

10 

200-pounder . . . 

20  pieces  in  each  and  3 pounds  powder . 

18 

Per. 

32° 

Well. 

5 

do 

30  pieces  in  each  and  3 pounds  powder . 

18 

Per. 

32° 

Burst  in  gun. 

1 

100-pounder . . . 

24  pieces  in  each  and  2 pounds  powder . 

10 

Per. 

35° 

Do. 

1 

do 

do 

10 

Per. 

35° 

1 

30-pounder . . . 

12  pieces  in  each  and  l£  pounds  powder 

3± 

Per. 

30° 

Well. 

7 

200-pounder . . . 

Full,  and  powder  shaken  in 

16 

Per. 

12" 

All  burst  in  gun,  or 

1 

10-inch  mortar. 

Filled  by  Mr.  Short  

1 

10’ 

45° 

shortly  after  leaving  it. 
Struck  before  the  fuse 

burned  out. 

do 

do 

1 

10" 

45° 

Well. 

1 

30-pounder 

Filled  by  Mr.  Short;  cases  covered 

3 

5' 

3*° 

Did  not  burst. 

with  one  thickness  of  paper. 

1 

do 

3 

5’ 

5° 

Burst  150  yards  from 

1 

do 

do 

3 

5* 

5° 

gun. 

Burst  5* 

1 

. . do 

Filled  by  Mr.  Short  and  covered  with 

3 

5’ 

5° 

Do. 

several  thicknesses  of  paper. 

1 

....do 

do : 

3 

12" 

12° 

Burst  12". 

1 

....  do 

do 

3 

12’ 

12° 

Did  not  burst. 

1 

— do 

Filled  by  Mr.  Short  and  covered  with 

3 

12" 

12° 

Burst  12’ 

layers  of  muslin. 

1 

....  do 

do 

3 

5* 

5° 

Burst  5*. 

1 

....  do 

do 

3 

5" 

5° 

Burst  5"  * tumbled. 

4 

do 

3 

Per. 

12° 

Burst  in  gun. 

1 

do 

do 

3 

Per! 

12° 

Do. 

This  solidified  Greek  fire  in  intensity  of  heat  is  surpassed  by  the 
common  port  fire  used  in  artillery. 

Fortifications. 

161.  The  rapid  breaching  of  Fort  Pulaski,  in  April,  1862,  at  the 
distance  of  1,650  yards,  and  the  more  recent  demolition  of  Fort  Sum- 
ter with  batteries,  the  nearest,  and,  moreover,  not  the  heaviest,  of 
which  was  3,475  yards  distant  from  that  work,  have  very  naturally 
led  to  inquiries  into  the  merits  of  masonry  forts  with  exposed  scarps, 
and  with  their  armament  arranged  tier  above  tier,  which  forms  a 
most  prominent  feature  in  the  system  of  works  adopted  and  now 
being  constructed  for  the  defense  of  our  important  harbors,  arsenals, 
and  depots.  It  is  believed  that  the  modifications  in  the  character 
of  such  works  called  for  by  the  newly  developed  powers  of  mod- 
ern artillery  are  mostly  those  of  detail  and  not  of  principle.  It  is 
not  impossible,  but,  in  fact,  probable,  that  some  of  our  works,  most 
judiciously  located,  doubtless,  to  meet  all  the  essential  requirements 
of  defense  at  the  time  their  construction  was  commenced,  and  before 
the  invention  of  rifled  ordnance,  may  not  be  on  the  sites  where  the 
present  conditions  of  the  modified  problem  would  place  them,  and 
consequently  the  construction  of  additional  works  or  outworks  may 
have  become  necessary  at  points  which  formerly  we  might  with  im- 
punity have  allowed  an  enemy  to  occupy. 

It  may,  and  probably  will,  be  necessary  to  construct  earthworks 
or  use  iron  plating  to  cover  the  masonry  of  some  of  our  permanent 
fortifications  that  might  without  much  hazard  have  been  left  ex- 
posed to  the  smooth-bore  guns  of  the  former  calibers. 

162.  Military  critics  should  keep  in  view  the  principle  which  has 
controlled  the  location  and  general  character  of  our  works  for  har- 
bor defense,  the  office  which  those  works  are  designed  to  fill,  and  the 


Chap.  XL.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


35 


results  which,  they  are  intended  to  secure.  They  are  to  forbid  the 
passage  of  hostile  naval  force  into  our  harbors  and  up  to  our  arse- 
nals, cities,  and  depots,  but  are  not  expected  to  prevent  the  landing 
and  moving  of  troops  beyond  the  reach  of  their  guns. 

Our  defense  against  an  attack  or  invasion  by  the  land  forces  of  an 
enemy  is  to  be  found  in  the  patriotism  and  valor  of  our  volunteer 
soldiery.  But  our  best  and  most  numerous  army  could  make  no  ad- 
equate defense  against  a single  well-armed  vessel.  Permanent  shore 
batteries,  armed  with  heavy  artillery,  supply  this  defense. 

163.  The  old  maxim  that  ‘ ‘forts  cannot  withstand  a competent  land 
attack,  but  are  able  to  resist  and  repel  vessels,”  is  a maxim  still.  It 
has  been  amply  illustrated  during  the  present  war.  Fort  Pulaski 
fell  before  an  attack  from  land  batteries,  breaching  in  the  line  of  its 
principal  magazine,  while  the  probabilities  of  reducing  it  by  the  fire 
of  the  fleet  were  not  even  discussed  among  military  and  naval  men. 

Fort  Sumter,  in  April,  1863,  repulsed  in  forty  minutes  Admiral 
DuPont’s  gallant  attack  with  nine  iron-clads,  eight  of  which  were  of 
the  most  formidable  class,  and  yet  that  work  was  easily  demolished 
by  shore  batteries.  It  reflects  no  discredit  upon  our  navy  to  say  that 
Fort  Wagner,  with  its  garrison  covered  as  it  was  by  a secure  bomb- 
proof and  with  facilities  for  keeping  its  supplies  of  men,  ammuni- 
tion, and  guns  unimpaired,  could  never  have  been  captured  by  a 
naval  force,  or  by  any  other  means  than  those  adopted,  viz,  by  sap- 
ping jup  to  the  ditch  of  the  work,  and  then  assaulting  or  threatening 
an  assault  from  the  advanced  trenches. 

On  the  3d  day  of  March,  1863,  three  turret  iron-clads  of  the  best 
class  engaged  Fort  McAllister,  mounting  seven  guns,  on  the  Great 
Ogeechee,  Georgia,  for  eight  hours,  inflicting  but  little  injury  on  the 
work.  Capt.  P.  Drayton,  commanding  the  naval  force,  says  in  his 
report : 

Immense  holes  were  cut  into  the  earth,  the  traverses  and  faces  much  cut  away, 
but  still  no  injury  was  done  which  a good  night’s  work  would  not  repair,  and  I do 
not  believe  that  it  can  be  made  untenable  by  any  number  of  iron-clads  which  the 
shallow  water  and  narrow  channel  will  permit  to  be  brought  into  position  against  it. 

Other  examples  might  be  cited.  In  those  above  given,  two  of  the 
works  were  open  sand  batteries,  in  which  the  cannoneers  were  ex- 
posed to  fire,  and  the  guns  were,  therefore,  liable  to  be  temporarily 
silenced,  as  was  frequently  the  case  with  Fort  Wagner.  For  this 
reason  the  accumulation  of  guns  in  open  works  exposed  to  the  con- 
centrated fire  of  a fleet  very  materially  impairs  the  defense.  They 
should  be  distributed,  due  regard  being  had  to  their  security  against 
assault. 

164.  A comparison  of  the  two  sieges  of  Fort  Pulaski  and  Fort 
Wagner,  the  former  a casemated  brickwork,  and  the  latter  a sand 
fort  improvised  for  the  occasion,  leads  to  the  query  whether  all  our 
batteries  should  not  be  constructed  of  a material  like  sand,  in  which 
repairs  are  easily  made,  or  clad  with  invulnerable  iron  plates. 

165.  The  invention  of  rifle  cannon,  the  astonishing  increase  within 
the  last  few  years  in  the  calibers  of  both  rifled  and  smooth-bores,  and 
the  use  of  iron  armor  for  batteries,  afloat  and  ashore,  have  relatively 
increased  the  efficiency  of  shore  batteries  as  defenses  against  those 
afloat,  for  the  following  reasons  : 

First.  There  is  no  limit,  excepting  in  the  cost,  to  the  thickness  of 
the  armor  that  can  be  put  upon  our  forts. 

Second.  There  appears  to  be  no  limit  to  the  size  of  guns  that  cai^ 
be  made  and  handled  with  facility  on  shore ; while 


36  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

Third.  There  is  both  a theoretical  and  a practical  limit,  already- 
reached,  to  the  thickness  of  the  armor  that  can  be  used  upon  vessels 
of  war.  There  is  doubtless  also  a limit  to  the  weight  of  the  guns 
that  those  vessels  can  carry.  Already  guns  have  been  manufactured 
and  tested  capable  of  throwing  projectiles  three  or  four  times  heavier 
than  has  been  found  sufficient  to  destroy  the  thickest  armor  afloat. 

166.  Errors  in  the  enemy's  defense. 

Fort  Wagner  affords  a striking  example  of  the  injudicious  location 
of  an  outwork.  Its  office  was  to  hold  and  control  possession  of  all 
that  portion  of  Morris  Island  upon  which  effective  breaching  bat- 
teries against  Fort  Sumter  could  be  established. 

W e have  seen  how  signally  it  failed  to  do  so.  The  instructive  and 
suggestivelessonof  Fort  Pulaski,  which  fell  because  Big  Tybee  Island, 
the  proper  position  for  a heavily  armed  outwork,  was  abandoned  to 
us  without  an  attempt  being  made  to  hold  it,  was  lost  upon  the 
enemy. 

167.  The  great  mistake  of  the  enemy,  therefore,  on  that  part  of 
his  line  of  defenses  which  we  attacked,  was  made  by  his  engineer, 
and  consisted  in  locating  Fort  Wagner  near  the  north  end  of  Morris 
Island  instead  of  on  the  sand-hills,  2 miles  farther  south,  near 
Light-House  Inlet.  He  would  not  have  been  forced  to  witness  the 
humiliating  spectacle  of  the  destruction  of  his  principal  work  on  an 
interior  line  over  the  heads  of  the  defenders  of  an  exterior  one,  had 
Fort  Wagner  been  even  1 mile  farther  to  the  southward.  With  only 
one  inclosed  work  for  the  defense  of  the  island,  the  proper  location 
for  it  was  near  the  south  end.  Its  armament  should  have  been  de- 
fensive principally,  and  its  strength  of  profile  such  as  to  enable  it  to 
resist  a coup  de  main  beyond  peradventure.  The  heavy  ordnance 
for  channel  defense  on  the  north  end  of  the  island  ought  to  have 
been  in  single  or  two-gun  batteries,  as  they  were  on  the  south  end. 
Too  much  dependence,  however,  was  placed  on  these  guns.  Their 
resistance  to  our  attack  on  the  10th  of  July  was  by  no  means  for- 
midable. A few  light  field  pieces,  judiciously  posted  and  secured 
against  capture  by  assault,  would  have  been  far  more  efficient. 

168.  A proper  and  perfect  defense  of  Morris  Island  would  have  been 
two  small  inclosed  works,  each  heavily  stockaded  to  resist  escalade, 
and  each  armed  with  a few  field  and  siege  pieces  and  several  siege 
mortars.  With  one  such  work  located  on  the  site  of  Fort  Wagner, 
and  another  on  the  high  sand  bluffs  about  2 miles  farther  south,  no 
enemy  could  have  maintained  a lodgment  on  the  island  for  an  hour. 
The  long-range  guns  for  channel  defense  should  have  been  placed  in 
one  or  two  gun  batteries,  located  so  as  to  be  seen  in  flank  or  reverse 
by  the  inclosed  works. 

169.  On  the  hypothesis  that  the  enemy  did  not  deem  it  necessary 
to  hold  all  of  Morris  Island,  and  considered  Fort  Sumter  safe  so 
long  as  he  kept  us  away  from  Fort  Wagner,  the  latter  work  was  as 
judicious  in  its  location  as  it  was  formidable  in  its  construction. 
But  in  that  view  of  the  case,  which  our  subsequent  operations  proved 
to  be  short-sighted  and  faulty,  the  batteries  of  heavy  guns  for  channel 
defense  ought  to  have  been  kept  within  reach  of  Wagner’s  protect- 
ing fire,  and  not  placed  over  2 miles  distant,  as  were  many  of  those 
we  captured  on  the  10th  of  July.  A wise  defense  would  have  kept 
us  off  Morris  Island  entirely,  as  the  simplest  and  least  expensive 
method  of  solving  the  problem. 


Chap.  XL.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


37 


170.  A striking  example  of  the  fatal  consequences  that  may  issue 
from  an  undue  accumulation  of  artillery  in  small  earthworks  is 
to  be  found  in  the  attempted  defense  of  Port  Royal  Harbor  by  the 
enemy  in  November,  1861.  All  his  artillery  on  that  occasion  was 
collected  in  two  small  forts,  one  on  each  side  of  the  harbor.  Into 
these  our  fleet  in  its  circuits  within  the  harbor  poured  successively 
an  overwhelming  and  concentric  fire,  and  drove  the  enemy  from  them 
by  sheer  weight  of  metal,  before  the  works  themselves  had  sustained 
any  material  injury.  There  were  no  bomb-proof  shelters  for  the 
men  in  either  work.  Had  the  enemy’s  artillery  been  distributed 
along  the  opposite  shores  for  a distance  of  400  or  500  yards,  in  bat- 
teries of  one  or  two  pieces  each,  the  result,  viewing  the  action  as 
one  between  land  and  naval  batteries  simply,  might  have  been  quite 
different. 

As  security  against  attack  in  rear  by  troops,  the  infantry  supports 
should  have  been  placed  in  inclosed  works  in  rear  of  the  batteries. 

171.  The  special  defense  of  Fort  Wagner  was  faulty  in  two  par- 
ticulars, viz  : 

First.  It  was  too  passive.  All  the  advantage  that  might  have  been 
derived  from  vigorous  night  sorties,  against  which  the  fire  of  the 
fleet  could  have  taken  no  part,  was  voluntarily  relinquished  when 
the  system  of  defense  by  torpedo  mines  placed  on  and  in  advance  of 
the  glacis  was  resorted  to. 

Second.  Curved  fire  was  not  used  enough.  The  armament  of  the 
work  contained  but  two  mortars  (one  8-inch  and  one  10-inch).  These, 
when  earnestly  served,  caused  the  most  serious  delay  in  the  progress 
of  our  works,  and  on  one  occasion  suspended  it  entirely. 

172.  The  Coehorn  mortar  is  a most  valuable  weapon  in  siege  opera- 
tions. From  its  lightness  and  portability  it  is  peculiarly  adapted  to 
the  attack,  and  should  follow  close  on  the  heels  of  the  sappers.  This 
leads  to  an  inquiry  into  the  military  principles  which  controlled  the 
issue  of  the  contest  for  the  possession  of  Morris  Island,  under  the 
peculiar  circumstances  of  the  case,  after  we  made  our  lodgment  there 
on  the  10th  of  July,  viz  : Our  forces  occupying  one  end  of  the  island 
without  batteries  or  defenses  of  any  kind  excepting  what  were  impro- 
vised from  day  to  day,  the  enemy  being  upon  the  other  end  strongly 
fortified  (the  narrowest  part  of  the  island,  a mere  strip  of  shallow 
sand  frequently  overflowed  by  the  sea,  being  between  the  contending 
forces,  and  within  half  musket  range  of  the  enemy’s  batteries),  and 
both  parties  having  their  communications  to  the  rear  open,  why  did 
not  the  enemy  drive  us  from  the  island,  as  their  commander  as- 
serted should  be  done,  instead  of  being  driven  from  it  themselves  ? 

Two  conditions,  steadily  maintained,  achieved  success  for  us,  viz  : 

First.  An  overpowering  mortar  fire  from  our  batteries,  particu- 
larly toward  the  end  of  the  siege  of  Fort  Wagner,  opposed  by  a 
weak  one  from  the  enemy. 

Second.  The  difference,  always  in  our  favor,  excepting  in  rough 
weather,  between  the  flank  fire  upon  us  from  the  James  Island 
batteries,  and  the  fire  upon  the  enemy  from  our  fleet,  which  could 
establish  comparatively  short  ranges,  and  had  considerable  latitude 
in  selecting  positions.  These  considerations  induced  the  enemy  to 
adopt  an  injudicious,  because  passive,  defense.  They  depended  mainly 
on  torpedo  mines  for  the  security  of  their  position.  These  would 
have  been  useful  against  open  assaults,  but  should  have  been  removed 
to  facilitate  night  sorties,  as  soon  as  we  resorted  to  the  attack  by 
regular  approaches. 


38  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

173.  While  it  would  have  been  entirely  practicable  for  us  to  have 
pushed  forward  our  approaches  to  Fort  Wagner  without  the  fire 
from  our  gunboats  (with  greater  loss  of  men  and  materiel , of  course), 
their  presence  abreast  of  Morris  Island  kept  the  gunboats  of  the 
enemy  beyond  range  in  the  harbor,  and  saved  us  the  time  and  labor 
of  establishing  batteries  for  that  special  purpose. 

This  is  simply  a deliberate  expression  of  an  opinion  entertained, 
it  is  believed,  by  all  unbiased  men  of  intelligence  and  experience 
who  witnessed  the  operations  before  Charleston.  No  disparagement 
of  the  navy  is  here  intended  ; on  the  contrary,  the  gunboats  rendered 
most  valuable  assistance.  The  New  Ironsides,  in  particular,  under 
the  energetic  command  of  Captain  Rowan,  was  very  efficient. 

174.  Throughout  the  period  occupied  by  the  land  forces  in  accom- 
plishing their  portion  of  the  joint  programme  of  attack  (see  para- 
graphs 35,  36,  and  37),  which,  in  fact,  ended  with  the  demolition  of 
Fort  Sumter  on  the  23d  of  August,  and  subsequent  to  this  until 
Forts  Wagner  and  Gregg  were  captured  on  the  7th  of  September, 
the  navy  rendered  all  the  co-operation  that  was  necessary,  or  that 
was  desired  of  it. 

175.  Of  the  cause  which  prevented  any  attempt  by  the  navy  to 
remove  or  pass  the  channel  obstructions  and  enter  the  inner  harbor, 
I am  perhaps  not  expected  to  speak  at  any  length.  I will,  however, 
refer  to  one  or  two  events. 

176.  As  soon  as  the  labors  of  the  siege  of  Fort  Wagner  were  over, 
on  the  very  day,  indeed — September  7 — Colonel  Serrell,  assistant  en- 
gineer on  my  staff,  had  an  interview  with  Admiral  Dahlgren  upon 
the  subject  of  the  channel  obstructions.  He  was  instructed  to  make 
an  offer  to  the  admiral  of  such  men  and  means  from  the  army  as 
might  be  required  in  removing  them.  Colonel  Serrell’s  experience 
as  an  engineer,  and  his  firm  belief  that  the  channel  could  be  cleared 
of  all  obstructions  with  no  great  difficulty,  and  without  serious  loss 
of  life,  were  the  reasons  why  he  was  selected  for  this  mission.  I 
learned  from  Colonel  Serrell,  and  subsequently  from  the  admiral 
himself,  that  the  musketry  fire  that  might  be  delivered  from  the 
ruins  of  Fort  Sumter  was  considered  a serious  obstacle  in  the  way  of 
removing  the  channel  obstructions. 

177.  On  the  26th  of  September,  I received  a letter  from  the  admiral, 
asking  me  when  my  batteries  would  “be  able  to  operate  on  Sum- 
ter,” and  whether  he  “could  depend”  on  my  “driving  the  enemy 
out  of  it,”  and  stating  also  that  “with  Sumter  in  our  possession,  the 
obstructions  ranging  from  that  work  to  Moultrie,  whatever  they  are, 
would  be  removable  with  no  great  trouble  and  little  risk.” 

I replied  on  the  27th  of  September  that  I would  open  on  Sumter 
whenever  the  admiral  was  ready  to  move  in — the  next  morning,  if  it 
was  desired. 

178.  As  an  open  assault  would  be  necessary  to  get  “Sumter  in  our 
possession,”  and  as  we  could  not  expect  to  hold  it,  if  we  got  it,  until 
after  the  navy  achieved  success  inside  the  harbor,  occupying,  as  the 
work  did,  the  center  of  a circle,  with  the  enemy’s  batteries  on  three- 
fifths  of  the  circumference  thereof,  unapproachable  by  land,  and 
having  not  only  a direct  but  a reverse  fire  upon  each  of  its  five  faces, 
and  as  the  only  object  to  be  gained  in  “possessing  it”  was  to  relieve 
parties  operating  against  the  obstructions  from  the  annoyance  of  its 
musketry  fire,  I made  an  offer  to  the  admiral  in  my  letter  of  Sep- 
tember 27  to  undertake  the  removal  of  the  obstructions  myself. 
This  offer  the  admiral  with  great  candor  declined,  saying  that  that 


Chap.  XL.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


39 


was  his  “proper  work,”  and  that  all  he  desired  was  to  have  Sumter 
rendered  incapable  of  its  musketry  fire  by.  the  fire  of  Cumming’s 
Point,  when  he  was  ready  to  move  in,  which  might  not  he  for  a 
couple  of  weeks.  There  were  no  guns  in  the  fort  to  fear,  and  the 
practicability  of  keeping  its  musketry  fire  entirely  silent  with  the 
powerful  armament  we  had  ready  on  the  north  end  of  Morris  Island 
was  not  doubted  for  a moment.  The  occasion  to  use  the  guns  for 
that  purpose  never  presented  itself. 

All  of  which  is  respectfully  submitted. 

Q.  A.  GILLMORE, 

Major-General  of  Volunteers. 

Brig.  Gen.  G.  W.  Cullum, 

Chief  of  Staff , Hdqrs.  of  the  Army , Washington,  D.  C. 


Orders.]  Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

Morris  Island,  S.  C.,  July  13,  1863. 

The  brigadier-general  commanding  presents  his  congratulations 
and  thanks  to  the  army  which  he  has  the  honor  to  command,  for 
the  brilliant  victory  on  the  10th  instant,  which  places  them  3 miles 
nearer  the  rebel  stronghold,  Sumter,  the  first,  among  all  our  country’s 
defenses  against  foreign  foes,  that  felt  the  polluting  tread  of  traitors. 

Our  labors,  however,  are  not  over ; they  are  just  begun  ; and  while 
the  spires  of  the  rebel  city  still  loom  up  in  the  dim  distance,  hard- 
ships and  privations  must  be  endured  before  our  hopes  and  expec- 
tations can  find  their  full  fruition  in  victory. 

Let  us  emulate  the  heroic  deeds  of  our  brothers  in  arms  at  Gettys- 
burg and  Vicksburg,  and  add  to  that  roll  of  fame  which  will  be  trans- 
mitted to  a grateful  posterity. 

Special  thanks  are  due  to  Brig.  Gen.  I.  Vogdes  and  his  command, 
for  the  untiring  energy  and  patient  endurance  displayed  by  them  in 
erecting  the  batteries  on  Folly  Island,  under  almost  every  conceiv- 
able disadvantage  ; and  to  Brig.  Gen.  George  C.  Strong  and  his  com- 
mand for  the  heroic  gallantry  with  which  they  carried  the  enemy’s 
batteries  on  Morris  Island,  this  being  the  first  instance  during  the 
war  in  which  powerful  batteries  have  been  successfully  assaulted  by 
a column  disembarked  under  a heavy  artillery  fire. 

Q.  A.  GILLMORE, 
Brigadier-General,  Commanding. 


General  Orders.]  Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  South, 

In  the  Field,  Morris  Island,  S.  C.,  September  15,  1863. 

It  is  with  no  ordinary  feeling  of  gratification  and  pride  that  the 
brigadier-general  commanding  is  enabled  to  congratulate  this  army 
upon  the  signal  success  which  has  crowned  the  enterprise  in  which 
it  has  been  engaged.  Fort  Sumter  is  destroyed.  The  scene  where 
our  country’s  flag  suffered  its  first  dishonor  you  have  made  the  theater 
of  one  of  its  proudest  triumphs. 

The  fort  has  been  in  the  possession  of  the  enemy  for  more  than  two 
years,  has  been  his  pride  and  boast,  has  been  strengthened  by  every 
appliance  known  to  military  science,  and  has  defied  the  assaults  of 
the  most  powerful  and  gallant  fleet  the  world  ever  saw.  But  it  has 


40  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

yielded  to  your  courage  and  patient  labor.  Its  walls  are  now  crum- 
bled to  ruins,  its  formidable  batteries  are  silenced,  and,  though  a 
hostile  flag  still  floats  over  it,  the  fort  is  a harmless  and  helpless 
wreck. 

Forts  Wagner  and  Gregg — works  rendered  memorable  by  their 
protracted  resistance,  and  the  sacrifice  of  life  they  have  cost — have 
also  been  wrested  from  the  enemy  by  your  persevering  courage  and 
skill,  and  the  graves  of  your  fallen  comrades  rescued  from  desecra- 
tion and  contumely. 

You  now  hold  in  undisputed  possession  the  whole  of  Morris  Island, 
and  the  city  and  harbor  of  Charleston  lie  at  the  mercy  of  your  artil- 
lery from  the  very  spot  where  the  first  shot  was  fired  at  your  coun- 
try’s flag,  and  the  rebellion  itself  was  inaugurated. 

To  you — the  officers  and  soldiers  of  this  command — and  to  the  gal- 
lant navy  which  has  co-operated  with  you,  are  due  the  thanks  of  your 
commander  and  your  country.  You  were  called  upon  to  encounter 
untold  privations  and  dangers  ; to  undergo  unremitting  and  exhaust- 
ing labors ; to  sustain  severe  and  disheartening  reverses.  How  nobly 
your  patriotism  and  zeal  have  responded  to  the  call,  the  results  of 
the  campaign  will  show  and  your  commanding  general  gratefully 
bears  witness. 

Q.  A.  GILLMORE, 

Brigadier-General,  Commanding. 


N o.  3. 

Reports  of  Lieut.  Franklin  E.  Town,  Forty -second  New  York  In- 
fantry, Chief  Signal  Officer. 

Hilton  Head,  S.  C., 

June  30,  1863. 

Colonel  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  oper 
ations  of  this  signal  party,  during  the  month  ending  this  day,  which 
report  will  also  include  the  time  from  the  29th  of  May,  upon  which 
day  I was  announced  as  chief  signal  officer,  Department  of  the  South. 

Since  I took  charge  of  it,  this  party  has  been  reduced  in  numerical 
efficiency  by  the  following  changes  : 

Since  the  last  semi-monthly  return  made  by  Captain  [Henry  S.] 
Tafft,  6 officers  and  8 flagmen  have  been  transferred  to  the  Depart- 
ment of  North  Carolina.  Four  officers  and  7 flagmen  have  been 
ordered  to  the  Department  of  North  Carolina,  to  be  mustered  out  of 
service  with  their  regiments. 

Lieutenant  [Thomas  P.]  Rushby  has  been  permitted  to  repair  to 
New  York  and  await  orders. 

Lieutenant  Hamner  has  been  commissioned  and  mustered  a cap- 
tain in  the  Third  Rhode  Island  Artillery,  and  applied  to  be  relieved 
from  signal  duty,  and  upon  my  request  has  been  by  the  general  com- 
manding temporarily  suspended  from  signal  duty  pending  action 
upon  his  application. 

Two  officers,  Lieutenants  [Milton  M.]  Fenner  and  [William]  Rey- 
nolds, have  returned  from  leave  of  absence,  and  2 flagmen  have  re- 
turned at  expiration  of  their  furloughs.  Lieutenant  Fenner  has 
received  an  appointment  in  the  navy  as  assistant  surgeon,  and  has 
tendered  his  resignation  in  consequence.  Lieutenant  Reynolds  is 
sick,  and  will  not  be  able  to  do  duty  for  some  time. 


Chap.  XL.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


41 


The  following  changes  of  officers’  stations  have  been  made : 

Lieutenant  [Wilson]  Bruyn  from  Pope’s  to  Fort  Pulaski,  and  thence 
to  Edisto.  Lieutenant  Fenner  stationed  at  Folly  Island.  Lieutenant 
[Gustavus  S.]  Dana  from  staff  of  Colonel  Chatfield  to  signal  station, 
Hilton  Head.  Lieutenant  [Charles  F.]  Cross,  from  Beaufort  to  Cane 
Island,  and  thence  to  Hilton  Head.  Lieutenant  [George]  Stroop 
from  Folly  Island  to  Hilton  Head,  and  thence  to  guard-ship  Mohawk. 
Lieutenant  [Edwin  H.]  Hickok  from  Edisto  to  Saint  Helena  Island. 
Lieutenant  [Paul]  Brodie  from  Hilton  Head  to  Pope’s,  and  thence 
to  Hilton  Head.  Lieutenant  [Thomas  E.]  Weber  from  Cane  Island 
to  Folly.  Lieutenant  [John  M.]  Head  from  Fort  Pulaski  to  Folly 
Island.  Lieutenant  [Marshall  P.]  Hawkins  from  Braddock’s  Point 
to  Edisto.  Lieutenant  [N.  Saxton]  Cooley  from  Spanish  Wells  to 
Folly  Island. 

On  the  3d  instant,  I received  an  order  from  Major-General  Hunter 
to  send  4 officers  immediately  to  report  to  Colonel  Barton,  command- 
ing at  Fort  Pulaski,  for  duty  in  the  field.  I sent  Lieutenants  [Town- 
send L.]  Hatfield,  Hammer,  Weber,  and  [Jonathan  W.]  Davis.  They 
returned  on  the  afternoon  of  the  4th,  having  accompanied  Colonel 
Barton  on  an  expedition  which  accomplished  the  destruction  of  Bluff- 
ton.  The  signals  were  made  use  of,  and  Colonel  Barton  thanked  the 
officers  for  their  services,  but  the  affair  was  so  small  a one  that  I did 
not  deem  it  worthy  to  be  made  the  subject  of  a special  report. 

On  the  the  8th  instant,  I was  directed  to  open  signal  communication 
with  Land’s  End,  a new  post  established  on  Saint  Helena  Island.  I 
have  accordingly  had  a station  erected  there,  at  a point  from  which 
communication  can  be  had  with  Hilton  Head  and  with  Beaufort  (via 
Cane  Island),  if  it  should  be  desired  at  any  future  time. 

The  enemy  having  opened  fire  upon  Folly  Island,  and  two  of  our 
stations  being  in  range  of  their  shells,  I deemed  it  prudent  to  place 
two  more  officers  at  General  Yogdes’  headquarters,  and  having  also  to 
relieve  the  non-commissioned  officers  there  and  at  Edisto  who  were 
ordered  away  to  be  mustered  out,  I could  only  supply  them  by  the 
abandonment  of  one  of  our  permanent  lines  where  communication  by 
magnetic  telegraph  has  been  established,  and  upon  my  request  on  the 
18th  the  general  commanding  directed  signal  communication  between 
Hilton  Head  and  Fort  Pulaski  to  be  suspended,  and  I sent  Lieu- 
tenants Fenner  and  Head  to  Folly  Island  as  spare  officers.  Since 
then,  signal  communication  has  been  established  between  General 
Vogdes’  headquarters  and  Cole’s  Island,  and  Lieutenant  Cooley  has 
been  compelled  to  go  into  the  hospital,  and  thus  they  are  both  occu- 
pied. On  the  26th,  the  general  commanding  directed  the  line  to  be 
discontinued  to  Beaufort,  and  directed  me  to  call  the  officers  from 
Beaufort  and  Cane  Island  here,  and  hold  them  ready  for  any  service. 

On  the  27th,  he  directed  me  to  station  an  officer  on  the  guard-ship 
Mohawk,  lying  at  the  bar,  in  order  to  communicate  anything  relative 
to  ships  arriving  and  passing,  and  to  keep  the  health  officer  who  is 
stationed  there  in  communication  with  headquarters.  On  the  1st  in- 
stant, I received  a communication  from  Lieutenant-Colonel  Halpine, 
assistant  adjutant-general  of  the  department,  which  he  had  referred 
to  me, . being  from  Colonel  Barton,  Forty-eighth  New  York  Volun- 
teers, informing  Colonel  Halpine  that  he  had  placed  in  arrest  Lieu- 
tenant Head,  acting  signal  officer  at  Fort  Pulaski,  for  alleged  disre- 
spectful language.  Learning  the  facts,  I deemed  the  action  of  Colonel 
Barton  hasty  and  ill-advised,  and  returned  the  communication  with 
a report  of  Lieutenant  Head’s  statement,  and  a request  that  Colonel 


42 


S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 


[Chap.  XL. 


Barton  might  be  directed  to  release  Lieutenant  Head  from  arrest. 
I saw  Colonel  Halpine  personally  in  regard  to  it,  and  while  he  said 
my  request  was  a very  proper  one,  he  deemed  it  only  justice  to  Lieu- 
tenant Head  as  well  as  to  the  service  that  it  should  be  brought  to 
court-martial,  “as,”  he  said,  “he  considered  any  charges  which  could 
be  preferred  would  be  frivolous  and  vexatious.”  He  directed  me  to 
send  another  officer  there,  and  I sent  Lieutenant  Bruyn.  On  the  8th, 
no  action  having  been  had  in  the  matter,  I addressed  a second  com- 
munication to  Colonel  Halpine,  asking  that  Colonel  Barton  might  be 
directed  to  release  him  from  arrest  or  prefer  charges  at  once.  On 
the  10th,  he  was  released  by  Colonel  Barton  without  any  charges 
being  preferred.  I consider  it  a gratuitous  indignity  to  the  signal 
service,  that  the  commandant  of  a remote  post  should  interfere  with 
the  working  of  lines,  on  a pretext  which  he  himself  tacitly  admitted 
was  untenable,  and  I know  no  redress  which  lies  in  my  power  nor 
of  any  means  to  prevent  a repetition  of  the  indignity  should  a signal 
officer  be  placed  at  a post  commanded  by  another  such  officer,  and  I 
would  respectfully  ask  for  instructions  as  to  how  to  prevent  such  un- 
warrantable interference  by  subordinate  commanders  with  signal 
officers  and  lines.  I received  a letter,  dated  June  2,  from  Lieutenant 
[Thomas  H.]  Carrique,  acting  signal  officer,  stationed  on  the  U.  S. 
8.  Pawnee,  inclosing  copy  of  communication  from  Rear-Admiral 
DuPont,  authorizing  the  commander  of  the  Pawnee  to  have  his  ex- 
ecutive officer,  Lieutenant  [Francis  M.]  Bunce,  instructed  in  the 
army  code  of  signals.  I inclosed  the  communication  to  Major- 
General  Hunter,  with  a communication  of  my  own,  stating  that  act- 
ing signal  officers  were  pledged  to  divulge  no  part  of  the  system  or 
code  to  any  person,  excepting  those  properly  authorized  to  be  in- 
structed. 

My  communication  was  returned  with  indorsement  signed  by  com- 
mand of  Major-General  Hunter,  to  the  effect  that  the  desire  of  the  ad- 
miral, as  expressed,  could  not  be  disregarded,  and  directing  me  to  cause 
the  officer  on  the  Pawnee  to  instruct  Lieutenant  Bunce  after  he  had 
signed  the  usual  pledge  of  acting  signal  officers,  and  I gave  such  di- 
rections to  Lieutenant  Carrique.  He  reports  that  Lieutenant  Bunce 
is  progressing  favorably  in  knowledge  of  the  code,  and  he  thinks  he 
will  make  a fair  signal  officer.  If  it  is  not  presumptuous  on  my  part 
to  do  so,  I would  respectfully  suggest  that,  in  my  opinion,  very  little 
credit  will  accrue  to  the  signal  service  in  this  department  from  the 
instruction  of  officers  of  the  navy,  who  will  not  make  it  a specialty, 
and  acquire  only  a superficial  knowledge  of  the  system,  not  enough 
to  be  of  practical  value  in  most  instances,  and  they  do  not  hesitate 
to  speak  publicly  of  the  numbers  used  in  the  presence  of  persons 
unauthorized  to  know  them ; and  it  must  detract,  at  least,  from  the 
dignity  of  the  code  to  have  it  made  a subject  of  common  chat  among 
boys,  and  while  using  our  signals  in  service  any  inefficiency  of 
theirs  must  work  discredit  to  the  army  signal  corps,  as  commanders 
cannot  know  that  a good  signal  officer  can  only  be  made  by  diligent 
study  and  practice,  which  we  have  not  the  power  to  compel  a naval 
officer  to  give  to  the  code.  I have  received  a communication  from 
your  office  directing  me  to  instruct  officers  in  the  cipher  signals,  and 
have  them  used  exclusively  in  transmitting  official  messages.  I am 
teaching  it  as  rapidly  as  possible  to  the  officers  of  the  corps,  but  have 
not  given  any  information,  even  of  its  existence,  to  any  naval  offi- 
cers, as  your  orders  do  not  include  them,  and,  in  my  opinion,  to  in- 
struct them  in  it  would  defeat  its  object.  As  some  of  our  officers 


Chap.  XL.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


43 


seem  to  be  thoughtless  of  their  pledge,  because  they  know  that  en- 
listed men  understand  the  code  as  at  present  used,  I have  required 
each  officer  to  sign  an  additional  pledge  referring  to  the  cipher  code, 
and  have  instructed  every  officer  and  man  that  any  enlisted  man 
who  may  be  found  to  have  in  his  possession  any  papers  relating  to 
the  system  of  signaling,  or  may  be  found  taking  down  numbers  or 
endeavoring  to  gain  any  information  of  the  code,  will  be  court-mar- 
tialed for  “ conduct  prejudicial  to  good  order  and  military  discipline, ” 
and  punished  to  the  extent  permitted  by  regulations. 

On  the  12th  instant,  Brig.  Gen.  Q.  A.  Gillmore  assumed  command 
of  this  department,  relieving  Major-General  Hunter.  I have  as  yet 
had  no  official  intercourse  with  him  in  person,  but  I doubt  not  he 
will  make  use  of  the  signals  in  such  manner  as  to  afford  opportunity 
to  gain  credit  for  the  corps. 

In  the  event  of  active  operations  by  our  forces  (which  appearances 
would  indicate  are  imminent),  I feel  assured  that  our  party  can 
render  good  service  and  gain  creditable  notice  alike  to  ourselves  and 
the  corps,  and  I am  persuaded  that  every  officer  of  the  party  will  use 
his  best  efforts  to  this  end. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

FKANKLIN  E.  TOWN, 

First  Lieut  42 d New  York  Vols.,  Chf . Actg.  Sig.  Off.,  D.  S. 

Col.  Albert  J.  Myer, 

Chief  Signal  Officer. 


Headquarters  U.  S.  Forces, 

Folly  Island,  S.  C.,  July  13,  1863. 

Colonel  : I have  the  honor  to  inform  you  that  the  forces  of  this 
department  under  General  Gillmore  have  commenced  active  opera- 
tions in  the  field,  with  a view,  apparently,  to  the  capture  of  Charles- 
ton. 

The  signal  party  in  the  field  comprises  13  officers  and  42  men,  all 
of  whom  are  constantly  and  profitably  occupied.  The  general  com- 
manding and  his  subordinate  generals  speak  in  the  highest  terms  of 
the  efficiency  and  good  conduct  of  the  party. 

By  means  of  a high  lookout  tower  on  Folly  Island,  the  general 
commanding  is  kept  in  perfect  communication  by  signals  with  his 
entire  command,  though  operating  on  James,  Folly,  and  Morris 
Islands,  and  with  all  points  with  which  he  desires  to  communicate. 

During  the  bombardment  of  Morris  Island  batteries  by  our  bat- 
teries on  Folly  Island,  on  the  9th  instant,  the  general  commanding 
(at  the  tower)  was  advised  by  signals  of  every  movement,  and  de- 
tachments in  boats,  waiting  to  storm  the  batteries,  were  kept  in  com- 
munication, and  immediately  on  their  landing  communication  was 
opened  with  Morris  Island,  up  to  the  advanced  line  of  rifle-pits, 
under  the  guns  of  Fort  Wagner.  Several  of  our  officers  and  men 
have  distinguished  themselves  by  the  coolness  and  efficiency  with 
which  they  signaled  under  fire. 

Our  forces  occupy  a part  of  Morris  Island,  and  are  operating  for 
the  reduction  of  Fort  Wagner  and  other  batteries  on  Morris  Island 
and  Fort  Sumter.  Some  time  must  necessarily  elapse  before  these 
objects,  and  the  capture  of  Charleston,  to  which  they  lead,  can  be  ac- 
complished, and  until  then  I shall  keep  your  office  advised  of  our 


44  S.  C.  AND  DA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chat.  XL. 

movements,  and  immediately  upon  the  conclusion  of  our  operations 
will  make  a detailed  report,  with  maps,  &c. 

I have  the  honor  to  he,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

FRANKLIN  E.  TOWN, 

First  Lieut . 42 d New  York  Vols.,  and  Chf.  A.  S.  O.,  D.  S. 
Col.  Albert  J.  Myer, 

Chief  Signal  Officer , U.  S.  Army. 


Hdqrs.  Signal  Detachment,  Dept,  of  the  South, 

Morris  Island , September  11,  1863. 

Colonel:  I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of 
operations  of  this  signal  detachment  in  the  field  during  the  opera- 
tions of  Brig.  Gen.  Q.  A.  Gillmore  against  the  defenses  of  Charleston 
up  to  the  present  time  : 

It  seemed  to  me  to  be  proper  to  divide  it  under  two  heads,  viz, 
(1)  the  capture  of  Morris  Island,  up  to  Wagner;  and  (2)  the  reduc- 
tion of  Forts  Sumter,  Wagner,  and  Gregg. 

L — CAPTURE  OF  MORRIS  ISLAND,  UP  TO  FORT  WAGNER. 

During  the  occupation  of  Folly  Island  by  our'  forces  since  April 
last,  until  July  9,  there  had  been  signal  officers  there  for  the  purpose 
of  communication  between  headquarters  and  the  various  outposts 
and  detached  commands,  and  also  with  the  naval  forces  in  Stono 
River,  which  officers,  varying  in  number  as  the  exigencies  of  the 
service  demanded,  had  had  opportunities  to  render  service  more  or 
less  valuable  during  the  construction  of  the  works  on  Folly  Island, 
designed  for  the  capture  of  the  lower Jbortion  of  Morris  Island. 

On  the  8th  of  July  I accompanied  Colonel  Turner,  chief  of  staff 
to  the  general  commanding,  to  Stono  River,  where  I landed  on 
Folly  Island  early  on  the  morning  of  the  9th,  and  proceeded  to  make 
an  inspection  of  the  lines  of  communication,  &c.  I had  directed 
Lieutenant  Hatfield  to  proceed  from  Saint  Helena  Island,  where  he 
was  then  stationed,  and  took  Lieutenant  Dana  with  me  from  Hilton 
Head,  and  upon  arrival  at  Stono  had  the  following  disposable  force 
in  the  field:  Lieutenants  Fenner,  [Theodore  C.]  Vidal,  Hatfield, 
Dana,  Cross,  Hickok,  Brodie,  Weber,  Head,  Carrique,  Hawkins, 
and  Cooley,  and  42  men.  Lieutenant  Hickok  had  been  on  the  6th 
ordered  to  accompany  Brigadier-General  Strong  from  Saint  Helena 
Island,  at  the  request  of  General  Strong,  made  through  department 
headquarters. 

Brigadier-General  Terry  sailed  from  Hilton  Head  on  the  7th,  as 
commander  of  a division,  and  had  requested  that  Lieutenant  Cross 
and  another  officer  might  accompany  him.  Accordingly  I directed 
Lieutenants  Cross  and  Brodie  to  proceed  with  him. 

In  compliance  with  an  order  to  have  1 signal  officer  accompany 
General  Stevenson  from  Edisto,  I directed  Lieutenant  Hawkins  to 
proceed  with  him,  leaving  Lieutenant  Bruyn  at  Edisto  to  communi- 
cate with  the  fleet  remaining  there. 

Upon  the  arrival  of  all  our  forces  at  Folly  Island,  General  Terry 
desired  an  additional  officer  to  accompany  him  upon  an  expedition 
which  he  was  ordered  to  make,  but  the  forces  of  General  Stevenson 
being  placed  under  his  command,  Lieutenant  Hawkins  remained  with 
him,  and  thus  completed  his  requisition.  General  Terry  sailed  up 


Chap.  XL.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


45 


the  Stono  River  on  the  evening  of  the  9th.  Communication  was  kept 
up  with  him  from  the  wharf  until  he  passed  around  Cole’s  Island, 
where  it  was  suspended  until  he  had  landed. 

On  the  9th,  Colonel  Turner  directed  me  to  open  communication 
with  the  wharf,  and  also  with  the  signal  tower  from  the  headquar- 
ters, which  were  at  the  White  house  on  Folly  Island.  The  most  con- 
venient course  of  communication  with  the  wharf  was  through  Cole’s 
Island,  and  Lieutenant  Cooley  was  stationed  at  the  wharf  and  Lieu- 
tenant Fenner  at  Cole’s  Island.  The  line  of  communication  to  the 
tower  was,  as  before,  through  Palmetto  Station.  On  the  evening  of 
the  9th,  General  Strong  being  in  command  of  an  expedition  intend- 
ing to  effect  a landing  on  Morris  Island,  required  2 signal  officers. 
Lieutenant  Hickok  being  with  him,  I directed  Lieutenant  Hatfield 
to  report  to  him  in  addition.  During  the  night  of  the  10th,  General 
Strong’s  forces  were  disposed  in  boats  in  Folly  Creek,  awaiting  the 
proper  time  of  landing.  Lieutenant  Carrique  was  kept  in  reserve  at 
headquarters,  to  go  on  board  the  flag-ship  of  Rear-Admiral  Dahlgren, 
if  needed  there.  This  arrangement  was  subsequently  found  to  be 
unnecessary,  as  the  admiral  had  with  him  Ensign  Adams,  a naval 
officer  who  is  well  instructed  in  our  code  of  signals. 

I provided  each  expeditionary  party  with  two  plain  and  two  para- 
chute rockets,  to  be  used  to  designate  as  follows  : 

Plain  : We  are  successful. 

Parachute  : We  are  repulsed. 

I directed  the  officers  in  boats  with  General  Strong  to  take  a position 
immediately  upon  landing  on  Morris  Island  from  which  they  could, 
if  necessary,  direct  the  fire  of  our  batteries  on  Folly  Island,  and  pre- 
vent its  injuring  our  own  troops.  At  3.30  a.  m.  of  the  10th,  accom- 
panied by  Lieutenant  Dana,  I started  for  the  signal  tower,  which  was 
to  be  headquarters  for  General  Gillmore  during  the  action.  Arriv- 
ing there  at  daybreak,  I opened  communication  with  the  Palmetto 
station,  from  whence,  after  the  fire  was  opened,  a line  of  couriers 
was  established  to  the  batteries. 

Fire  was  opened  from  all  our  batteries  at  4.40  a.  m.  I stationed 
Lieutenant  W eber  on  the  tower,  and  Dana  on  foot  of  tower,  and  com- 
munication was  opened  with  General  Strong  in  Folly  Creek,  and  with 
Generals  Seymour  and  Vogdes,  the  latter  at  Palmetto  station,  and 
the  former  at  the  batteries.  At  8.40  the  batteries  on  Morris  Island 
having  been  nearly  silenced,  our  batteries  ceased  firing,  and  General 
Strong  pushed  forward  to  land  (having  been  four  hours  with  his 
command  in  boats,  under  fire  of  shrapnel  and  shell),  and  General 
Gillmore  immediately  proceeded  to  the  head  of  Folly  Island.  With 
the  others  of  his  staff,  I accompanied  him,  and  upon  arrival  at  Light- 
House  Inlet,  seeing  that  General  Strong  had  effected  a landing,  I 
opened  communication  with  Lieutenant  Hatfield,  who  was  on  the 
north  side  of  Light-House  Inlet.  Proceeding  to  the  beach,  Lieutenant 
Hatfield  called  the  attention  of  the  signal  officer  of  the  fleet,  and  by 
so  doing  prevented  the  monitor  from  throwing  shells  into  our  troops, 
who  were  supposed  by  those  on  board,  when  first  seen  crossing  the 
sand-hills,  to  be  re-enforcements  for  the  enemy,  and  the  monitor's 
guns  were  trained  to  bear  upon  them,  as  we  were  subsequently  in- 
formed by  the  signal  officer  of  the  fleet.  General  Gillmore  imme- 
diately crossed  over,  and  I remained  to  keep  open  this  communication 
until  the  arrival  of  Lieutenant  Dana,  whom  I then  left  at  Light- 
House  Inlet,  on  Folly  Island,  and  crossed  to  Morris.  That  afternoon 
communication  was  opened  from  Gregg’s  Hill  on  Morris  Island  with 


46  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

Light-House  Inlet,  where  troops  were  crossing,  and  with  the  tower  on 
Folly  Island,  whence  we  communicated  with  headquarters  through 
Palmetto  station.  Lieutenant  Vidal  accompanied  General  Seymour, 
who  crossed  that  day  to  Morris  Island.  An  attempt  to  take  Fort 
Wagner  immediately  upon  landing  having  failed,  our  forces  with- 
drew below  the  Beacon  House,  and  pickets  were  stationed  in  advance 
of  that  point.  That  evening  Lieutenant  Hickok  was  sent  to  the 
picket  line  to  keep  open  communication  with  General  Seymour, 
whose  headquarters  were  at  Gregg’s  Hill.  This  station,  as  well  as  the 
picket  line,  was  under  fire  from  some  guns  of  long  range  on  Sumter. 

During  the  night  of  the  10th,  an  unsuccessful  effort  was  made  to 
carry  Fort  Wagner  by  assault.  The  column  was  accompanied  by 
Lieutenants  Hatfield  and  Hickok,  Lieutenant  Vidal  remaining  at 
Gregg’s  Hill. 

On  the  morning  of  the  11th,  General  Terry  having  landed  on  James 
Island,  opposite  Legareville,  communication  was  opened  from  the 
signal  tower  on  Folly  Island  with  his  headquarters,  where  Lieuten- 
ant Cross  was  stationed.  At  this  time  General  Gillmore  made  his 
headquarters  on  board  the  steamer  Mary  Benton,  and  was  partly  in 
Light-House  Inlet  and  partly  in  Folly  River,  but  both  places  were  in 
communication  with  the  signal  tower  on  Folly  Island. 

This  brings  this  report  down  to  the  time  that  our  footing  was  es- 
tablished on  Morris  Island,  and  preparations  made  for  the  capture 
of  the  entire  island  and  the  reduction  of  Fort  Sumter. 

II. — REDUCTION  OF  FORTS  SUMTER,  WAGNER,  AND  GREGG. 

Our  troops  on  Morris  Island  were  at  this  time  engaged  in  erecting 
works  for  the  bombardment  of  Fort  Wagner.  The  headquarters  of 
the  commanding  officer  of  the  trenches  was  at  the  right  battery,  near 
the  Beacon  House,  and  a signal  officer  was  stationed  there.  Being 
under  a heavy  fire,  the  officer  and  men  had  no  sleep,  and  it  was  nec- 
essary to  relieve  them  every  twenty-four  hours.  This  duty  requiring 
an  additional  officer  on  Morris  Island,  I sent  Lieutenant  Fenner 
there.  This  station  communicated  with  Gregg’s  Hill,  and  thence 
with  headquarters  of  the  general  commanding. 

Our  communication  continued  uninterrupted  with  General  Terry 
on  James  Island  until  the  night  of  the  16th,  when  he  was  ordered  by 
signals  to  evacuate  James  Island.  Lieutenant  Cross,  at  General 
Terry’s  headquarters,  had  opened  communication  with  the  Pawnee, 
on  which  was  stationed  Lieutenant  Brodie. 

On  the  morning  of  the  16th,  the  enemy,  in  strong  force  of  artillery 
and  infantry,  attacked  General  Terry’s  line  and  the  Pawnee.  After 
a well-contested  fight,  the  enemy  was  driven  back.  The  Pawnee  was 
under  a very  severe  fire  of  artillery,  and  received  a large  number  of 
shots  before  she  could  get  into  position  to  reply,  owing  to  want  of 
water.  Upon  this  occasion  the  signals  were  successfully  and  very 
advantageously  used.  The  signal  station  was  at  one  time  almost  cut 
off  by  the  enemy,  and  the  party  then  there  in  danger  of  capture. 
This  was  the  second  time  within  a week  that  our  signals  prevented 
the  navy  from  firing  into  our  own  troops,  the  Pawnee  having  trained 
her  guns  upon  a body  of  our  own  men,  who  were  mistaken  for  the 
enemy,  but  the  accident  was  avoided  by  the  signal  officer  communi- 
cating to  the  Pawnee.  The  fire  of  the  naval  force  in  Stono  was  di- 
rected during  the  affair  by  our  signals,  through  Lieutenants  Cross, 
Brodie,  and  Hawkins. 


Chap.  XL.J  GENERAL  REPORTS.  47 

The  duty  upon  Morris  Island  continued  in  the  same  routine  until 
the  completion  of  our  batteries. 

During  the  night  of  the  14th,  the  enemy  twice  attacked  our  lines 
on  Morris  Island,  but  were  driven  back.  The  officer  at  the  front 
having  been  supplied  with  Coston  lights  and  a code  of  preconcerted 
signals,  used  them  to  communicate  intelligence  of  the  attack  to  Gen- 
eral Seymour’s  headquarters. 

Upon  the  morning  of  the  18-th,  preparations  being  completed  for 
opening  fire  upon  Wagner,  headquarters  were  established  on  Morris 
Island.  Fire  was  opened  at  noon.  General  Gillmore  made  his  head- 
quarters at  a signal  tower  built  upon  Gregg’s  Hill.  Lieutenant  Vidal 
was  stationed  at  the  right  battery,  Lieutenant  Hatfield  at  center, 
and  Lieutenant  Fenner  at  left  battery,  during  the  day.  During  the 
afternoon,  two  and  sometimes  three  flags  at  a time  were  at  work  on 
Gregg’s  Hill  station.  Fire  was  from  our  batteries  and  the  iron-clad 
fleet.  Shortly  before  dark,  Lieutenant  Carrique  went  to  left  battery 
to  relieve  Lieutenant  Fenner,  whom  I directed  to  relieve  Lieutenant 
Vidal,  he  being  unable  to  do  duty  from  exhaustion  and  loss  of  sleep. 
At  dusk  a terrific  fire  was  opened  upon  Wagner  from  all  our  artil- 
lery, aided  by  the  fleet,  and  a column  was  formed  for  an  assault. 
The  column  moved  at  dark,  and,  after  a desperate  and  long  fight,  our 
troops  were  repulsed.  Lieutenant  Hickok,  who  had  been  unwell  and 
not  seen  during  the  day,  appeared  in  the  fight  as  an  aide  to  General 
Strong.  Lieutenant  Hatfield  was  also  with  General  Strong,  prepared 
to  signal.  Both  these  officers  were  wounded  slightly  during  the 
fight. 

At  about  10  o’clock  that  evening,  I returned  to  headquarters  on 
Morris  Island,  and  opened  communication  from  there  with  all  other 
stations. 

Lieutenants  Cross,  Brodie,  and  Hawkins  were  relieved  from  duty 
with  General  Terry  upon  his  arrival  at  Morris  Island,  and  Lieutenant 
Bruyn  arrived  from  Edisto,  in  compliance  with  orders.  I sent  Lieu- 
tenant Brodie  to  Hilton  Head  (being  unwell),  to  relieve  Lieutenant 
Stroop,  whom  I ordered  to  report  here  for  duty. 

On  the  20th,  our  batteries  reopened  on  W agner,  and  continued  a fire 
more  or  less  heavy,  and  sometimes  aided  by  the  fleet,  until  the  17th 
of  August.  Our  troops  were  employed  in  building  works  and  mount- 
ing guns  to  breach  Fort  Sumter.  During  this  time  we  had  stations 
at  the  right  battery  and  left  battery,  which  were  both  under  fire, 
and  at  which  officers  and  men  were  relieved  every  twenty-four  hours. 
During  this  time  these  stations  were  occupied  by  nearly  all  of  the 
officers  and  men  in  turn,  and  all  rendered  good  service. 

On  the  23d  of  July,  orders  reached  me  for  Lieutenant  Reynolds  to 
proceed  to  W ashington,  and  I relieved  him  by  Lieutenant  Carrique. 

On  the  23d  of  July,  the  station,  which  had  been  kept  at  the  south 
side  of  Light-House  Inlet  to  communicate  with  General  Vogdes,  was 
discontinued,  General  Vogdes  having  removed  his  headquarters. 

On  the  27th  of  July,  Lieutenant  [Peter  H.]  Niles  arrived  at  Hilton 
Head  with  two  signal  telegraph  trains,  which  arrived  at  Folly  Island 
on  the  30th.  By  direction  of  the  general  commanding,  I left  one 
train  on  Folly  Island  and  brought  one  to  Morris  Island.  I immedi- 
ately proceeded  to  have  officers  and  men  instructed  in  their  use,  to 
get  them  into  the  field  as  speedily  as  possible. 

On  the  2d  of  August,  I considered  them  sufficiently  instructed  to 
warrant  opening  a line.  Accordingly,  in  compliance  with  directions 
pf  the  general  commanding,  I run  a line  from  his  headquarters  to 


48  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

our  second  parallel  near  Wagner.  We  started  from  headquarters  at 
6 p.  m.,  and  at  11  o’clock  the  line  was  opened  and  worked  satisfac- 
torily. 

We  were  compelled  to  leave  our  wagons  at  the  Beacon  House,  and 
proceeded  the  rest  of  the  distance  by  land.  This  line  worked  with 
perfect  success  during  the  whole  of  our  operations,  the  only  inter- 
ruptions occurring  being  occasionally  when  the  line  was  cut  by  the 
enemy’s  fire.  That  portion  of  it  above  the  Beacon  House  being  ex- 
posed to  fire  from  Forts  Wagner,  Gregg,  Sumter,  Johnson,  and  bat- 
teries on  James  Island,  was  cut  a number  of  times,  but  repaired  with 
no  interruption  exceeding  ten  minutes  in  duration,  excepting  on  the 
night  of  the  16th  of  August,  when  a shell  exploded  in  the  splinter- 
proof  where  the  instrument  was,  wounding  Private  Emerson  severely, 
and  so  injuring  the  instrument  that  it  had  to  be  taken  to  the  head- 
quarters to  be  repaired. 

On  the  6th,  at  12  o’clock  midnight,  I commenced  running  a line  of 
signal  telegraph  on  Folly  Island,  to  connect  the  wharf  at  Stono  with 
the  south  side  of  Light-House  Inlet,  whence  we  communicated  by 
signal  with  headquarters.  This  line  was  completed  at  6 p.  m.  of  the 
7th,  having  taken  eighteen  hours  to  put  it  up,  which  was  in  conse- 
quence of  delays  occasioned  by  the  inexperience  of  the  men  in  this 
duty.  This  line  was  laid  a large  portion  of  the  way  on  the  marsh 
in  the  rear  of  Folly  Island,  but  after  a few  days’  trial,  finding  that 
at  high  tide  when  the  wire  was  submerged  it  did  not  work  well,  in- 
dicating some  defective  place  in  the  insulation,  I had  it  taken  up  and 
put  on  poles,  since  which  time  it  has  worked  perfectly  well  without 
interruption. 

On  the  3d  of  August,  Lieutenant  [William  S.]  Andrews  reported  to 
me,  in  obedience  to  orders  from  office  of  signal  officer,  Washington, 
approved  by  the  War  Department,  with  instructions  to  introduce  a 
system  of  signaling  adapted  to  use  on  the  iron-clad  navy  under  very 
heavy  fire.  Having  in  furtherance  of  his  order  exhibited  his  instruc- 
tions and  plans  to  Rear-Admiral  Dahlgren,  he  obtained  permission 
from  him  to  have  any  necessary  apparatus  constructed  at  the  naval 
machine  shop  at  Port  Royal,  and  on  the  5th  started  for  that  purpose. 
He  returned  with  some  apparatus  on  the  14th,  but  so  near  the  time  of 
the  intended  attack  on  Sumter,  that  the  admiral  had  arranged  his  plans 
of  signals,  and  his  fleet  captain,  the  late  Capt.  George  W.  Rodgers, 
declined  to  accord  it  even  a trial.  The  attack,  however,  being  post- 
poned, it  was,  in  the  meantime,  by  permission  put  upon  the  monitor 
Passaic,  and  worked,  demonstrating  its  practicability,  but  no  occa- 
sion has  yet  arisen  calling  for  its  use,  nor  has  the  iron-clad  fleet  been 
in  any  position  where  signals  could  not  be  made  from  the  deck,  with 
a comparative  degree  of  safety.  Since  that  time,  15th  of  August, 
Lieutenant  Andrews  has  done  duty  on  shore.  At  daylight  on  the 
17th  of  August,  the  breaching  batteries  having  been  completed,  fire 
was  opened  upon  Fort  Sumter,  the  navy  assisting  by  firing  on 
Wagner. 

Colonel  Turner  made  his  headquarters  daily  at  the  Beacon  House, 
a position  exposed  to  considerable  fire,  and  a signal  officer  was  sta- 
tioned there  every  day  to  communicate  with  headquarters,  via  Gregg’s 
Hill  and  the  left  batteries.  Lieutenant  Fenner  had  charge  of  this 
station  most  of  the  time,  although  it  was  worked  at  times  by  several 
other  officers. 

The  fire  of  the  breaching  batteries  continued  to  be  directed  upon 
Fort  Sumter  until  the  23d,  when,  it  being  considered  practically  ruined, 


£hap.  XL.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


49 


the  fire  was  reduced  to  an  occasional  shot,  to  prevent  repairs  being 
made.  The  same  arrangement  of  signal  stations  on  Morris  Island 
was  continued  until  the  6th  of  September. 

On  the  20th  of  August,  I was  directed  to  open  communication  with 
Black  Island,  where  some  troops  were  stationed.  Accordingly,  I sent 
Lieutenant  Stroop  there.  Black  Island  is  in  direct  communication 
with  headquarters. 

Our  troops,  under  charge  of  the  engineers,  were  sapping  toward 
Fort  Wagner,  and  on  the  evening  of  the  25th  of  August,  having  ap- 
proached near  to  the  enemy’s  rifle-pits,  a charge  was  made  upon  them, 
which  was  unsuccessful. 

On  the  26th,  at  dark,  the  attempt  was  renewed,  and  was  successful, 
the  enemy’s  rifle-pits  being  taken  by  the  Twenty-fourth  Massachu- 
setts Volunteers. 

On  the  latter  occasion,  a signal  flag,  under  charge  of  Lieutenant 
Carrique,  was  posted  at  headquarters  grand  guard,  second  parallel, 
and  when  the  troops  were  formed  and  all  was  ready,  the  signal  to 
charge  was  made  under  orders  of  the  general  officer  of  the  trenches 
by  this  flag,  and  the  regiment  charged.  That  night  our  advance 
being  so  near  the  fort  and  no  obstacles  intervening,  General  Terry 
anticipated  a sortie,  and  to  give  timely  notice  of  it,  if  made,  I ar- 
ranged the  following  code  for  the  use  of  countersign  signal  cartridges, 
and  sent  cartridges  and  equipments  to  the  advance  and  to  the  second 
parallel,  viz : 

White  : Preparatory  and  advancing. 

White-red  : Enemy  has  attacked  our  advance. 

White-green  : Enemy  has  been  driven  back. 

Bed  : Enemy  has  driven  our  advance  in. 

Red -white  : Enemy  is  advancing  in  force  on  our  works. 

Green : Send  re-enforcements. 

Green- white : All  is  well  again. 

I also  sent  the  equipments  and  cartridges  to  the  left  battery  and  to 
Black  Island. 

On  the  night  of  the  6th  of  September,  preparations  were  complete 
for  an  assault  upon  W agner  the  following  day,  but  during  the  night 
the  general  commanding  having  learned  of  the  evacuation  of  the 
fort,  our  forces  were  pushed  forward  to  Fort  Gregg,  and  possession 
taken  of  it  and  Fort  Wagner  and  some  prisoners.  Lieutenant  Hat- 
field accompanied  this  column,  but  no  signals  were  made,  the  general 
in  command  not  wishing  to  show  lights  unless  compelled  by  urgent 
necessity.  Our  signal  telegraph  line  was  immediately  extended  to 
Fort  Wagner,  and  communication  opened  by  it  at  5.30  a.  m.  of  the 
7th  of  September.  Lieutenant  Dana  had  charge  of  extending  this 
line,  and,  on  the  10th,  the  line  was  extended  under  his  charge  to  Fort 
Gregg. 

On  the  night  of  the  8th  of  September,  an  expedition  in  boats  was 
sent  to  assault  Fort  Sumter.  Lieutenant  Vidal  accompanied  the 
force,  and  he  was  directed  to  open  signal  communication  from  the 
fort,  and  remain  there  if  the  expedition  was  successful.  It  returned, 
however,  without  having  been  able  to  accomplish  its  object. 

On  the  9th  of  September,  the  station  on  the  left  battery  was  dis- 
continued by  direction  of  Colonel  Turner. 

In  addition  to  the  duties  performed  in  the  field,  a board  for  the 
examination  of  officers  of  the  acting  corps  met  at  this  office  on  the 
11th  of  August,  and  adjourned  sine  die  on  the  15th,  having  examined 
4 R R— VOL  XXVIII,  PT  I 


50  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

all  the  officers  of  the  department  who  were  disposed  to  compete  for 
appointment  in  the  corps. 

A board  of  officers  for  the  examination  of  the  enlisted  men  of  this 
detachment,  with  a view  to  their  transfer  into  the  corps,  has  also  been 
in  session,  having  met  on  the  3d  of  August,  and  continued  its  ses- 
sions from  time  to  time,  and  now  stands  adjourned  subject  to  the  call 
of  the  president.  It  has  examined  48  men,  and  recommended  the 
transfer  of  42  to  the  corps.  N 

I take  pleasure  in  mentioning  the  following  names  of  officers  and 
men  for  gallant  and  meritorious  conduct : 

Lieutenant  Hatfield  was  very  much  exposed,  and  performed  his 
duty  coolly  and  well  under  fire,  in  boats,  with  General  Strong,  and 
at  every  assault  upon  Fort  Wagner  and  at  the  batteries  on  the  right 
and  left  of  our  works.  He  was  wounded  slightly  before  Fort  Wag- 
ner July  18. 

Lieutenant  Yidal,  for  efficiency  under  fire  before  Wagner  and  in 
the  batteries  on  the  18th  of  July,  and  upon  several  other  days.  He 
also  accompanied  the  expedition  under  Colonel  Osborn  to  assault 
Sumter. 

Lieutenants  Cross,  Brodie,  and  Hawkins,  for  efficiency  during  the 
expedition  to  James  Island  under  General  Terry,  and  for  good  con- 
duct under  fire  on  the  16th  of  July,  when  attacked  by  the  enemy, 
their  efficiency  contributing  on  that  occasion  to  the  repulse  of  the 
enemy  by  directing  the  fire  of  our  fleet,  and  preventing  disaster  to 
our  troops  from  the  gunboats  firing  into  them.  Lieutenant  Brodie 
is  highly  spoken  of  by  Captain  Balch,  of  the  Pawnee,  for  his  conduct 
on  this  occasion.  * 

Lieutenant  Cross  has  exhibited  great  bravery  and  energy  in  the 
trenches  during  the  siege  of  Wagner. 

Lieutenants  Fenner,  Bruyn,  Carrique,  Head,  Weber,  Stroop,  and 
Dana  have  been  under  fire  more  or  less  at  the  batteries  and  Colonel 
Turner’s  headquarters  at  Beacon  House,  and  have  all  conducted 
themselves  well. 

Lieutenants  Dana  and  Weber  deserve  praise  for  their  energy  in 
working  difficult  stations  for  a long  time  without  relief,  and  their 
readiness  to  perform  all  duty  required. 

Lieutenant  Hickok  exhibited  bravery  in  the  boats  with  General 
Strong  on  the  10th  of  July,  and  the  assault  on  Wagner  on  the  18th  of 
July,  when  he  was  slightly  wounded. 

Sergt.  J.  C.  Wolverton,  Corpls.  O.  R.  Bender,  George  Maag,  G. 
D.  Rhinehart,  C.  F.  Oestricher,  Robert  Bechtel,  and  W.  H.  George, 
and  Privates  W.  H.  Ramsay,  J.  Tilley,  W.  S.  Marston,  J.  D.  Proud- 
man,  W.  Eddy,  C.  Abraham,  A.  J.  Fowler,  J.  Vanderrault,  S.  M. 
Riely,  T.  Tracy,  C.  Cotter,  C.  H.  Smedes,  J.  D.  Emerson,  J.  G.  Ford, 
A.  E.  C.  Miller,  H.  W.  Mason,  G.  Hawksworth,  and  C.  P.  Brig- 
ham, have  all  displayed  bravery  in  the  discharge  of  their  duty  under 
fire. 

Sergeant  Wolverton  and  Private  Emerson  have  elicited  the  praise 
of  the  general  officers  of  the  trenches  on  many  occasions  by  their 
fearlessness.  Corporal  Bender  had  the  flag  shot  from  his  hands 
while  signaling  at  the  advance  batteries. 

Corporal  Bender  and  Private  Cotter  were  in  the  assault  on  Wag- 
ner on  the  18th  of  July. 

I forward  herewith  reports  of  the  officers  of  their  duty  performed. 


*See  Balch  to  Myer,  Lieutenant  Brodie’s  report,  p.  583, 


Chap.  XL.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


51 


&c.,  and  also  maps  showing  lines  of  communication  established  by 
signals  and  signal  telegraph  lines  during  our  operations. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient 
servant, 

FRANKLIN  E.  TOWN, 

First  Lieut.  42d  New  York  Vols.,  and  Chief  Sig.  Off.,  D.  S. 

Lieut.  Col.  E.  W.  Smith, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Hdqrs.  Signal  Detachment,  Dept,  of  the  South, 

Folly  Island,  S.  C.,  January  10,  1864. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of 
duty  performed  in  opening  signal  communication  between  head- 
quarters on  Folly  Island  and  Hilton  Head  : 

During  the  latter  part  of  September,  I suggested  to  the  major-gen- 
eral commanding  the  practicability  of  a line  through,  and,  after  some 
consideration  of  the  subject,  he  authorized  me  to  construct  it.  The 
plan  I had  submitted  contemplated  the  erection  of  three  towers, 
respectively,  at  Botany  Bay,  Otter,  and  Saint  Helena  Islands,  he 
directing  Colonel  Serrell,  commanding  New  York  Volunteer  Engi- 
neers, to  build  three  towers  at  the  points  designated  by  myself.  This 
order  was  issued  on  the  6th  of  October,  and  on  the  following  day  I 
went,  accompanied  by  Colonel  Serrell,  on  board  the  steamer  Ella 
Morse,  to  visit  the  points  selected  for  towers,  and  determine  the  exact 
location. 

That  afternoon  we  located  the  tower  on  Botany  Bay,  and  it  being 
too  late  to  go  into  Saint  Helena  Sound  that  night,  we  proceeded  di- 
rectly to  Beaufort,  via  Hilton  Head,  arriving  there  at  midnight.  I 
immediately  crossed  to  Lady’s  Island,  and  procured  transportation, 
and  at  daylight  we  started  and  visited  several  points  on  Saint 
Helena  Island,  and  determined  the  location  of  that  tower ; returning 
to  Beaufort,  at  noon  we  started  for  Otter  Island,  but,  getting  aground, 
were  compelled  to  wait  all  night,  and  arrived  at  Otter  Island  in 
the  morning,  and  thence,  having  decided  on  the  location  of  the 
tower  at  that  point,  returned  to  Folly  Island  on  the  afternoon  of  the 
9th.  Colonel  Serrell  detailed  three  parties  of  men  to  build  the  tow- 
ers, each  building  party  consisting  of  a sergeant  and  two  men,  the 
whole  under  the  charge  of  Lieutenant'  Hartmann,  of  that  regiment. 
A fatigue  detail  of  125  men  was  also  ordered  from  the  Fifty-fifth 
Massachusetts  Volunteers,  of  which  90  were  left  with  the  Botany 
Bay  party.  Lieutenant  Hartmann  was  provided  with  orders  ad- 
dressed to  Brig.  Gen.  R.  Saxton,  directing  him  to  detail  25  men  from 
a colored  regiment  as  a fatigue  party  on  Saint  Helena  Island,  which 
he  did. 

The  quartermaster,  having  been  directed  to  place  a steamer  at  the 
disposal  of  Lieutenant  Hartmann  for  this  duty,  designated  the  Pe- 
conic. 

In  the  night  of  the  11th,  all  material  having  been  gotten  on  board, 
I went  on  board  the  Peconic,  and  at  daylight  of  the  12th  she  got  un- 
der way.  We  landed  the  working  parties  at  Botany  Bay,  and  visited 
Otter  Island,  and  landed  the  Otter  Island  working  party  at  Saint 
Helena  Village  that  night,  near  which  place  they  were  to  get  timber 
for  the  tower,  there  being  none  on  Otter  Island.  The  party  for  Saint 


52  ‘ S.  C.  AND  GA„  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

Helena  Island  were  also  landed  there,  and  on  the  morning  of  the 
13th,  having  been  out  during  the  night  to  find  timber  and  see  the 
spot  for  the  Saint  Helena  tower,  I took  the  parties  to  their  places, 
and  they  commenced  getting  out  timber.  The  next  two  days  were 
consumed  in  getting  parties  rationed  and  at  work,  and  then  all 
was  going  on  well.  On  the  3d  of  November  it  was  thought  the  towers 
were  far  enough  advanced  to  commence  practicing  from  them.  I 
opened  communication  that  day  between  Otter  and  Saint  Helena 
Islands. 

I could  not  see  Hilton  Head  from  Saint  Helena  tower,  so  I arranged 
a plan  of  rocket  signals  to  get  the  line.  I went  to  Hilton  Head  and 
tried  it,  saw  the  rockets,  and  marked  the  line.  I also  tried  the  same 
plan  between  Botany  Bay  and  Otter  Islands,  and  found  and  marked 
the  lines,  but  could  not  see  the  tower,  they  not  having  reached  the 
necessary  height. 

On  the  7th,  I sent  for  and  stationed  officers  and  flagmen  as  follows: 
At  Botany  Bay  Island,  Lieutenants  Bruyn  and  Morrill ; at  Otter 
Island,  Lieutenant  W eber ; at  Saint  Helena  Island,  Lieutenants  Hat- 
field and  Stroop.  I went  to  Hilton  Head  on  the  7th,  and  remained 
until  the  9th,  endeavoring  to  open  communication  with  Saint  Helena 
tower,  but  unsuccessfully.  It  having  been  there  reported  that  the 
Botany  Bay  tower  was  seen  from  Otter  Island,  I directed  the  en- 
gineers to  build  no  higher,  but  finish  those  two  towers  the  height 
they  were.  I then  went  to  Saint  Helena  tower,  and  finding  it  126 
feet  high,  and  that  from  the  top  of  it  only  the  tops  of  the  highest 
masts  at  Hilton  Head  could  be  seen,  I decided  to  have  that  no  higher, 
as  it  could  not  be  carried  high  enough,  to  see  without  a tower  at  Hil- 
ton Head,  but  to  select  a point  from  which  communication  with 
Hilton  Head  could  be  had,  and  connect  that  with  the  tower  by  a line 
of  signal  telegraph  wire.  So,  on  the  13th,  having  been  delayed  until 
then  by  bad  weather,  I visited  a plantation  called  Sea  Side,  about  4 
miles  from  the  tower,  and  opened  communication  with  Hilton  Head. 
I found  that  there  was  much  difficulty  often  in  communicating  over 
this  stretch,  as  both  stations  were  so  low  as  to  bring  the  line  through 
all  the  smoke  of  the  river  and  the  vapors  arising  from  the  marsh, 
though  the  station  could  be  'seen  from  the  tower  and  obviate  the 
necessity  of  any  wire.  The  14th  and  15th,  I tried  all  day  and  night 
to  communicate,  but  got  nothing  through,  nor  any^  satisfactory  re- 
plies, it  being  so  smoky  as  to  make  reading  almost  impossible. 

On  the  16th,  I tried  and  got  answer  that  Otter  Island  could  not  see 
Botany  Bay,  as  the  tower,  he  thought,  was  not  high  enough.  I vis- 
ited Otter  Island,  and  could  see  nothing  of  the  tower.  I gave  direc- 
tion to  have  the  tower  on  Otter  Island  raised  20  feet,  and  on  Botany 
Bay  14  feet,  making  each  140  feet  high.  I sent  orders  to  Lieutenant 
Hawkins  to  go  to  Kiawah  Island,  to  have  a temporary  station  built 
there,  the  smoke  of  camp  preventing  communication  from  Botany 
Bay. 

Finding  it  so  difficult  to  communicate  with  Sea  Side  from  Hilton 
Head,  I decided  to  make  a new  station,  and  accordingly  made  one 
at  Dr.  Lawrence’s  place,  called  “ Luccaneaugh,”  3 miles  nearer  Hilton 
Head.  This  not  being  visible  from  the  tower  on  Saint  Helena  Island, 
I ran  a line  of  wire  over  7 miles  to  connect  the  two  stations,  and  thus 
secured  perfect  communication  as  far  as  Otter  Island.  I then  thought 
the  only  difficulty  lay  between  Otter  Island  and  Botany  Bay,  and  on 
the  20th,  the  tower  having  been  completed  to  the  height  directed,  and 
not  being  in  communication,  I decided  to  make  an  intermediate 


Chap.  XL.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


53 


station  to  open  communication,  and  afterward  find  out  tlie  cause  of 
the  difficulty. 

On  the  21st,  at  daylight,  I started  with  a party  from  Otter  Island 
to  visit  Edingsville  and  locate  a station.  When  we  got  outside  the 
bar,  it  was  blowing  almost  a gale,  and,  as  our  landing  would  have  to 
be  made  through  the  surf  on  the  beach,  it  was  considered  impossible 
to  land  with  the  means  we  had,  and  we  returned.  Sergeant  Otis 
went  in  a small  boat  inland,  to  see  if  a place  could  be  found  from 
which  both  towers  could  be  seen.  Captain  Dutch,  of  the  U.  S.  bark 
Kingfisher,  volunteered  to  go  with  him  as  pilot,  being  well  acquainted 
with  the  country  from  frequent  scouts  he  had  made  there  and  above 
there.  Meanwhile  I went  to  examine  into  and  remove  some  difficulty 
in  working  the  wire  at  Saint  Helena  Island.  Returned  to  Otter  Island 
on  the  22d,  and  learned  from  Sergeant  Otis  that  he  had  found  a place 
on  Big  Bay  Island  from  which  he  could  see  both  towers,  so  I again 
made  arrangements  to  start  at  daylight  to  build  a station  there. 
During  the  night  a heavy  gale  commenced,  and  continued  so  as  to 
prevent  our  going  outside  Saint  Helena  Bar  until  the  night  of  the 
24th,  when  it  abated. 

On  the  25th,  at  daylight,  I got  the  party,  consisting  of  6 engineers 
and  15  infantry,  for  fatigue  duty  on  board,  and  started,  reaching  Big 
Bay  Island,  in  South  Edisto  Inlet,  at  noon,  when  we  disembarked. 
I examined  the  spot  selected  by  Sergeant  Otis,  but  did  not  like  its 
location.  The  island  was  entirely  unoccupied,  and  we  could  find  no 
tracks  of  man  or  horse  upon  it.  It  is  covered  with  a dense  and  al- 
most impenetrable  undergrowth.  There  is  a long  and  high  range  of 
sand-hills  near  the  beach.  The  rear  of  the  island  is  marshy,  and  is 
divided  from  Edisto  by  a creek.  A causeway,  which  once  connected 
it  with  Edisto,  had  been  destroyed,  and  it  had  not  probably  been 
visited  for  months.  I selected  a sand-hill  over  20  feet  high  at  Bay 
Point,  and  estimated  that  a tower  upon  it  35  feet  high  would  com- 
municate with  both  stations ; so  I directed  the  engineers  to  build  such 
a one.  There  was  a great  quantity  of  lumber  obtainable  from  a 
small  fort  (never  finished)  built  by  the  rebels  before  our  capture  of 
Port  Royal.  The  fort  was  lined  throughout  with  planks,  even  the 
traverses  faced  with  plank,  and  a quantity  unused  lay  outside.  The 
frame  was  made  that  afternoon,  and  at  night  the  party  was  taken 
on  board  the  steamer,  as  we  had  no  force  for  pickets.  W e again 
disembarked  at  daylight  on  the  26th,  and  I sent  the  steamer  to 
Botany  Bay  to  bring  down  Lieutenant  Morrill  to  take  charge  of  the 
new  station.  The  steamer  returned  at  3 p.  m. , and  at  that  time  the 
station  was  finished — a perfect  little  tower,  made  in  two  working 
hours — and  from  it  I could  see  all  of  Otter  Island  and  about  40  feet 
of  Botany  Bay  tower.  Lieutenant  Morrill  having  no  signal  appara- 
tus or  supplies,  I let  him  go  to  Hilton  Head  to  obtain  them,  and  on 
the  29th  he  started  back  from  there,  I having  made  arrangements 
with  Captain  Dutch,  of  the  Kingfisher,  to  send  a boat  to  Saint  He- 
lena Village  to  take  him  to  Big  Bay  Island.  Meantime  the  Peconic 
went  to  Stono  to  get  rations  for  the  parties,  and  I remained  at  Hilton 
Head  to  communicate  through.  The  Peconic  returned  November 
30,  and  I went  with  her  to  Saint  Helena  Village,  where  I found  Lieu- 
tenant Morrill,  it  having  been  too  rough  for  a boat  to  cross  Saint 
Helena  Sound.  I took  him  on  board,  and  stopped  at  Otter  Island, 
and  took  a detachment  from  Lieutenant  Jones’. party  of  the  Fifty- 
fifth  Massachusetts  Volunteers,  and  landed  them  at  Big  Bay  Island 
on  the  1st  of  December,  and  left  Lieutenant  Morrill  calling  Botany 


54 


S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  F.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 


Bay,  and  returned  to  Hilton  Head  to  open  communication  through, 
if  possible.  On  arriving  at  Hilton  Head  on  the  2d,  I found  that  my 
orders  for  having  a station  built  on  Kiawah  had  not  been  executed. 

1 then  sent  an  order  to  Lieutenant  Hawkins  to  go  to  Kiawah  and 
have  a platform  made  sufficient  to  work  from,  and  remain  there.  I 
went  to  Saint  Helena  tower,  and  tested  him  thoroughly  to  Hilton 
Head  and  to  Botany  Bay,  and  found  it  was  all  working  well. 

On  the  3d,  I left  Saint  Helena  Village  on  the  Peconic,  and  stopped 
at  all  stations,  and  on  the  4th  landed  at  Kiawah,  and  found  the  sta- 
tion there  not  what  was  wanted,  but  so  it  would  work  part  of  the 
time.  As  headquarters  could  not  be  seen  from  Kiawah,  for  want  of 
sufficient  elevation,  I put  an  officer  at  the  lower  end  of  Folly  Island. 
From  this  date  until  the  8th  I tried  constantly  to  work  through,  but 
found  great  difficulty  on  account  of  the  Kiawah  station  being  too  far 
from  Botany  Bay  for  so  low  a station.  I did  get  some  messages 
through,  but  not  satisfactorily,  so  I went  over,  and  selected  a place 

2 miles  nearer  Botany  Bay.  I had  a new  station  built  there  30 
feet  high.  This  station  was  finished  on  the  12th,  and  communica- 
tion was  opened  through,  and  I reported  to  the  major-general  com- 
manding that  the  line  was  ready  for  duty.  He  sent  a message  to 
General  Seymour  at  Hilton  Head,  and  as  General  Seymour  did  not 
reply  for  some  hours,  the  reply  started  just  at  night,  and  a fog  pre- 
vented its  getting  through  until  next  day.  The  line  continued  to 
work  well  with  the  exception  that  during  cold  weather  it  is  a gen- 
eral occurrence  that  after  sundown  the  condensation  of  atmosphere 
makes  a fog  so  thick  as  to  prevent  communication  over  a mile. 
This  difficulty  becomes  less  as  the  cold  weather  passes  away,  and 
will  entirely  disappear  very  soon.  My  plan  was  to  work  from  Hil- 
ton head  to  Otter  Island  with  only  one  intermediate  station,  and 
from  Otter  Island  to  Botany  Bay  with  none.  It  will  be  necessary  to 
keep  a station  on  Kiawah,  as  so  much  smoke  arises  from  camps  there 
and  on  Folly  Island  as  to  render  it  impossible  to  see  a station  on 
Folly  Island  from  there.  I think  a station  between  Otter  Island 
and  Botany  Bay  will  not  be  necessary  after  the  winter  is  passed. 
We  now  communicate  often  from  Botany  Bay  to  Otter  Island  direct, 
but  only  in  clear  weather.  When  smoky  they  cannot  communicate, 
but  I think  in  the  spring  there  will  be  few  days  when  we  cannot 
communicate  well.  My  experience  has  suggested  the  following  im- 
provements, which,  with  the  consent  of  the  major-general  command- 
ing, I shall  carry  into  execution  : First,  to  build  the  station  at 
headquarters  about  70  feet  higher,  which  will  make  direct  communi- 
cation with  Kiawah,  and  save  repetition  of  messages  ; secondly,  to 
move  station  at  Big  Bay  to  near  Edingsville,  which  will  divide  the 
distance  more  equally  between  Botany  Bay  and  Otter  Islands,  and 
enable  them  to  use  smaller  flags  and  work  more  rapidly. 

The  station  on  Saint  Helena  Island  is  built  badly,  and  proves  to 
be  in  the  wrong  place.  By  Colonel  Serrell’s  advice  I took  that  place, 
he  considering  it  to  be  in  the  best  location  and  right  for  distance, 
and  as  it  had  three  large  trees  so  growing  as  to  make  three  corners  of 
the  tower,  which  he  thought  would  save  much  time  in  building. 
The  result  shows  that  it  took  longer  to  build,  is  insecure  after  com- 
pletion, and  is  about  3 miles  out  of  the  way.  I think  a tower  at 
Hilton  Head  would  enable  us  to  communicate  with  the  present  one 
on  Saint  Helena  most  of  the  time,  but  with  a tower  at  Hilton  Head 
and  on  Saint  Helena,  much  smaller  than  the  present  one,  located  3 
miles  nearly  due  south  (say  10  degrees  west  of  south)  of  it  would 


Chap.  XL.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


55 


make  communication  easjr  and  certain.  It  now  takes  about  thirty- 
minutes,  under  ordinary  circumstances,  to  transmit  a message  of  ten 
words  from  headquarters  to  Hilton  Head,  but  with  these  improve- 
ments the  time  would  be  reduced  to  twenty  or  perhaps  fifteen  min- 
utes, and  it  would  relieve,  for  other  duty,  2 officers  and  12  men,  and 
dispense  with  the  use  of  8 miles  of  wire,  with  the  operators  and  men 
to  keep  it  in  repair. 

There  were  many  unforeseen  and  unavoidable  delays  and  difficul- 
ties to  overcome,  which  were  entirely  new,  but  I think  the  success 
of  the  communication  is  no  longer  doubtful.  There  appears  to  be 
a wide  discrepancy  between  the  distance  marked  on  the  chart  by 
which  I arranged  my  plans  and  the  actual  distances. 

Lieut.  F.  L.  Morrill,  Third  New  Hampshire  Volunteers,  and  act- 
ing signal  officer,  deserves  mention  for  the  efficiency  displayed  by 
him  in  working  the  station  at  Big  Bay  Island.  He  remained  there, 
alone,  six  weeks,  his  men  imperfectly  armed  and  without  a boat,  de- 
pending solely  on  fighting  if  attacked,  no  matter  by  what  numbers, 
and  picketed  by  a force  from  the  Fifty-fifth  Massachusetts,  whom  he 
frequently  found  asleep  on  post,  and  passed  in  the  night  repeatedly 
without  being  challenged  by  the  pickets.  Certainly  he  has  not  been 
molested,  but  it  requires  some  nerve  to  take  a station  so  undefended, 
and  practically  in  the  enemy’s  country,  and  make  it  conspicuous  by 
signals  so  as  to  tempt  the  enemy  to  attack  it.  Captain  [John  C.] 
Dutch,  of  the  U.  S.  bark  Kingfisher,  lying  at  Otter  Island,  and  his 
executive  officer,  Mr.  [Stephen  W.]  Rhoades,  rendered  much  service 
in  the  construction  of  the  tower  on  Otter  Island  by  sending  men  on 
shore  to  assist,  and  furnishing  means  and  appliances  when  needed. 
Mr.  Rhoades  several  times  went  on  shore  with  a party  of  sailors  to 
assist  in  hoisting  and  securing  timbers,  and  getting  material  ashore. 
Captain  Dutch  also  furnished  us  a pilot  for  the  inland  waters. 
******* 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

FRANKLIN  E.  TOWN, 

First  Lieut.  42 d New  York  Vols. , and  Chief  Sig.  Officer , D.  S. 

Brig.  Gen.  J.  W.  Turner, 

Chief  of  Staff. 


No.  4. 

Reports  of  General  G.  T.  Beauregard , C.  S.  Army,  commanding 
Department  of  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida,  with  thanks 
of  Confederate  Congress .* 

Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  S.  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , S.  C.,  June  15,  1863. 

_ General  : Your  letter  of  the  10th  was  duly  received,  and  par- 
tially answered  by  my  telegram  of  the  13th  instant,  f It  is  now  my 
place  to  reply  by  mail  at  some  length. 

I am  advised  in  the  letter  in  question,  that  “ Northern  papers  re- 
port the  reduction  of  Hunter’s  forces  by  sending  troops  to  the  Gulf,” 
in  which  event  I am  instructed  to  proceed  to  Mobile  “with  such  force 

* See  also  Beauregard’s  correspondence  with  the  Richmond  authorities,  p.  57. 

fSee  “ Confederate  Correspondence,  etc.,”  Part  II. 


56  S.  C.  AND  <4  A.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

as  I can  properly  withdraw  from  my  defensive  line,”  to  resist  an 
attack,  if  one  should  he  designed  on  that  place  ; hut  if  the  purpose 
of  the  enemy  he  to  send  his  re-enforcements  to  the  Mississippi,  I am 
to  “go  on  and  co-operate  with  General  Johnston  in  that  quarter.” 

While  I shall  he  glad  to  contribute  my  mite  to  the  defense  of  any 
part  of  the  Confederate  States,  and  assuredly  must  be  solicitous  for 
the  defense  of  Mobile  and  the  Mississippi  Valley,  yet,  with  my  view 
of  the  situation  in  this  quarter,  repeatedly  expressed,  I cannot  now 
properly  withdraw,  without  a direct  order,  more  than  a regiment  of 
cavalry  from  this  department. 

The  troops  left  in  this  department  at  this  time  (see  field  return  of 
the  13th  instant),*  are  19,863  ; that  is,  6,488  nominal  infantry,  7,329 
heavy  and  light  artillery,  and  6,046  cavalry.  This  force  is  stationed 
as  follows  : For  the  garrisons  of  the  works  in  Charleston  Harbor  and 
the  defensive  lines  commanding  the  immediate  approaches  to  the 
city,  2,606  infantry,  of  which  some  four  or  six  companies  are  actually 
and  necessarily  doing  heavy  artillery  service  in  batteries  on  Sulli- 
van’s Island  and  elsewhere  ; 3,767  heavy  and  light  artillery,  and  1,171 
cavalry.  In  the  works  and  lines  around  Savannah  are  1,888  nominal 
infantry,  2,295  heavy  and  light  artillery,  and  1,738  cavalry,  leaving 
984  infantry,  847  light  artillery,  and  2,244  cavalry  to  hold  the  line  of 
the  Charleston  and  Savannah  Railroad,  and  1,010  infantry,  420  light 
artillery,  and  893  cavalry  in  Florida,  now  so  important  for  its  sup- 
plies of  subsistence. 

Thus  it  will  be  seen  the  force  in  the  department  is  already  at  the 
minimum  necessary  to  hold  the  works  around  Charleston  and  Savan- 
nah, constantly  menaced  by  the  proximity  of  the  enemy’s  iron-clads. 
The  garrison  of  no  work  in  the  harbor  can  be  withdrawn  or  dimin- 
ished, as  they  are  all  necessary  links  in  the  chain  of  defense.  Re- 
duce the  command  on  James  Island,  and  the  enemy  may  readily  pen- 
etrate, by  such  a coup  de  main  as  was  attempted  last  year,  at  the 
weakened  point.  James  Island  would  then  fall,  and,  despite  our  har- 
bor defenses,  the  city  of  Charleston  would  be  thrown  open  to  bom- 
bardment. It  is  not  safe  to  leave  less  than  a regiment  of  infantry 
on  Morris  Island,  which,  if  once  carried  by  the  enemy,  would  expose 
Fort  Sumter  to  be  taken  in  reverse  and  demolished. 

The  defective  lines  of  defense  adopted  and  constructed  on  James 
Island,  after  the  unfortunate  abandonment  last  year  of  Cole’s  Island, 
have  made  a force  of  about  11,000  men  essential  to  guard  and  hold 
that  island  against  a serious  land  attack,  whereas  had  Cole’s  Island 
(at  the  mouth  of  the  Stono)  been  held,  2, 500  men  would  not  only  have 
defended  James  Island,  but  the  enemy  would  have  been  excluded 
from  the  Stono,  and  unable  to  occupy  and  fortify  Folly  Island  and 
threaten  Morris  Island,  as  is  now  the  case. 

Late  Northern  papers  say  Admiral  DuPont  has  been  relieved  in 
command  of  the  fleet  on  this  coast  by  Admiral  Foote,  an  officer  whose 
operations  in  the  west  evinced  much  activity  and  an  enterprising 
spirit.  And  even  were  considerable  reductions  made  in  the  enemy’s 
forces,  the  valuable  coast  districts  would  still  be  left  a prey  to  such 
destructive  raids  as  devastated  the  Combahee  some  days  ago.  Thus 
far,  however,  I can  see  no  evidences  of  reduction.  General  Hunter 
was  at  Hilton  Head  on  the  8th  instant.  His  troops  hold  the  same  posi- 
tions as  heretofore,  and  apparently  in  the  same  force — a brigade  on 
Folly,  one  on  Seabrook’s  Island,  and  the  balance  on  the  islands  about 


See  “ Confederate  Correspondence,  etc.,”  Part  II. 


Chap.  XL.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


57 


Port  Royal.  One  of  the  monitors  is  at  Hilton  Head,  and  five  are  still 
in  the  North  Edisto.  Nor  has  the  number  of  their  gunboats  or  trans- 
ports diminished,  or  at  any  time  recently  been  increased,  as  must 
have  been  the  case  had  a material  removal  of  troops  taken  place. 

While,  therefore,  I could  not  on  my  own  responsibility  further  de- 
plete the  force  in  this  department,  of  course  I shall  promptly  carry 
out  any  orders  which  the  War  Department  may  deem  it  proper  to 
give.  As  for  myself,  my  earnest  desire  is  to  be  useful  to  the  utmost 
extent  of  my  capacities,  in  any  position  or  command  to  which  it  may 
please  the  President  to  assign  me,  but  if  left  to  my  own  personal 
preferences,  I would  desire  service  in  the  field,  for  which  I consider 
myself  best  fitted  by  my  taste  and  studies. 

I shall  observe  closely  the  movements  of  the  enemy  at  Hilton 
Head,  with  a view  to  ascertaining  whether  any  material  reduction 
of  his  force  has  taken  or  is  taking  place,  which  will  be  promptly 
reported  for  the  information  of  the  War  Department. 

I shall  also  ask  Major-General  Maury  to  keep  me  advised  of  the 
movements  of  the  enemy  in  his  front,  and  of  the  means  of  defense 
at  his  disposition,  and  shall  communicate  with  General  Johnston. 

I beg  to  inquire  whether,  if  I go  to  Mobile,  it  will  form  a part  of 
my  present  department,  or  will  I be  relieved  from  this  command  and 
fall  under  the  orders  of  General  Johnston  ? 

I repeat,  my  chief  desire  is  to  be  useful,  and,  if  desired  by  the 
War  Department,  I will  cheerfully  repair  at  once,  temporarily,  to 
Mobile,  examine  the  works  and  means  of  defense  there,  and  advise 
with  General  Maury  touching  them. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General , Commanding . 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General , Richmond,  Va. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  S.  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston,  8.  C.,July  20,  1863. 

Sir  : Your  letter  of  the  12th  instant*  was  handed  me  some  days 
ago,  but  my  incessant  occupation  with  the  current  duties  of  my 
position  at  such  a juncture  has  not  allowed  me  time  for  the  prepara- 
tion of  such  an  answer  as  would  give  the  Department  any  very  clear 
knowledge  of  the  details  of  the  occurrences  on  Morris  Island.  A 
full  report  will  be  made  as  soon  as  subordinate  officers  shall  have 
placed  these  headquarters  in  official  possession  of  the  facts  connected 
with  their  operations,  and  until  then  I must  ask  the  patience  of  the 
Department,  especially  since  the  service  and  thoughts  of  all  here  are 
really  necessary  for  the  efficient  discharge  of  the  momentous  duties 
intrusted  to  us.  Preliminary  to  that  report  it  may  be  of  interest, 
however,  to  write  somewhat  less  formally  and  generally  of  affairs 
here  than  in  a battle  report. 

The  enemy  having  gained  a lodgment  on  Morris  Island,  it  was  at 
once  considered  whether  he  could  be  dislodged  when  re-enforcements 
had  been  received,  and  decided  to  be  impracticable,  for  reasons  that 
will  be  exhibited  in  a special  paper  hereafter,  f It  next  became  the 
question  to  determine  what  modifications  in  the  system  of  defense 


See  Addenda  No.  1,  p.  59. 


f See  Addenda  No.  2,  p.  CO. 


58  S.  C.  AND  a A.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

must  necessarily  be  introduced,  first,  by  the  lodgment  already  gained 
on  Morris  Island,  and,  secondly,  in  case  the  whole  island  fell  into  the 
enemy’s  hands.  It  was  decided  to  prepare  to  make  the  stoutest  pos- 
sible defense  of  the  works,  one  after  the  other,  and  in  every  possible 
way  prolong  our  possession,  to  gain  time  to  surround  the  enemy  with 
such  a fire  as  to  make  the  island  of  little  use  to  him  as  a place  of 
offense  against  Fort  Sumter^  and  to  make  other  modifications  of  our 
defensive  works  to  meet  new  conditions  of  attack.  The  contest, 
therefore,  is  now  purely  one  of  military  engineering  (especially  since 
the  uncommon  slaughter  which  resulted  from  the  two  efforts — so 
signally  foiled — to  carry  Battery  Wagner),  involving  three  elements 
essential  to  success  : time,  labor,  and  long-range  guns,  with  suffi- 
cient and  proper  ammunition. 

Well  aware  of  the  pressure  on  the  limited  resources  of  the  War 
Department,  both  of  men  and  materiel , I endeavored  to  employ  and 
handle  my  own  to  the  best  advantage  to  meet  and  repel  the  attempt 
by  way  of  Morris  Island  as  soon  as  the  point  of  attack  was  clearly 
revealed ; for  only  when  that  discovery  was  made  could  I venture 
to  concentrate  here  the  small,  widely  scattered  infantry  force  at  my 
disposition.  This  I did  ; but  meantime,  as  reported,  the  enemy  had 
assailed  and  carried  our  positions  south  of  Battery  Wagner — for  the 
want  of  troops  to  effectually  oppose  them  ; for  the  lack  of  works  of 
proper  size  and  strength  and  suitable  armament,  as  I had  always 
feared  must  be  the  result  if  that  method  of  attack  were  seriously  re- 
sorted to  by  an  officer  of  capacity,  with  the  immense  resources  of 
the  United  States  at  his  disposition. 

Charleston,  it  is  proper  to  say,  was  assailable  from  three  quarters: 
First,  through  James  Island,  via  the  Stono,  left  open  by  the  aban- 
donment of  Cole’s  Island ; secondly,  by  Morris  Island,  via  Folly 
Island,  also  left  exposed  by  yielding  Cole’s  Island ; thirdly,  by  Sulli- 
van’s, via  Long  Island. 

The  first  point,  being  regarded  as  clearly  vital  to  the  defense  of 
the  harbor  and  city,  was  guarded  by  1,184  infantry,  1,569  artillery, 
and  153  cavalry,  or  2,906  men  of  all  arms,  instead  of  the  force  esti- 
mated heretofore,  to  wit,  11,500.  The  second  point  was  occupied  by 
612  infantry,  289  artillerists,  and  26  cavalry,  or  927  men,  in  lieu  of 
about  3,000  men  of  all  arms  ; and  the  third  point  by  204  infantry, 
726  artillerists,  and  228  cavalry,  or  1,158  men,  instead  of  at  least 
3,500  men  of  all  arms,  while  in  the  city  of  Charleston  a small  re- 
serve of  870  cavalry,  artillery,  and  infantry  was  maintained  as  a 
guard,  and  ready  to  be  thrown,  in  an  emergency,  wheresoever  the 
enemy  might  develop  his  point  of  attack,  but  principally  to  re-enforce 
James  Island. 

Leaving  a force  on  Folly  Island  after  the  attack  in  April,  the  en- 
emy gave  only  occasional  evidence  of  any  intention  to  resort  to  the 
Morris  Island  way  of  attack  until  a day  or  two  before  the  south  end 
of  the  island  was  carried,  and  at  which  time  the  defenses  on  Morris 
Island  consisted  of  Battery  Wagner — an  excellent  work,  located  by 
General  Pemberton  to  play  the  important  part  it  is  now  doing  so 
well ; that  is,  as  a defense  against  an  approach  by  land — and  Battery 
Gregg,  built  as  an  additional  defense  to  the  mouth  of  the  harbor  and 
to  command  the  gorgeof  Battery  Wagner,  located  by  my  orders  and 
erected  by  the  lamented  Captain  [Langdon]  Cheves.  These  batteries 
were  nearly  completed,  lacking,  however,  certain  heavy  guns,  most 
material  to  the  perfection  of  their  armaments.  In  addition,  certain 
batteries  and  infantry  epaulements,  projected,  but  delayed  from  want 


Chap.  XL.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


59 


of  labor,  were  under  construction  at  the  southern  extremity  and  at 
other  points  near  Morris  Island  as  counter-dispositions  to  the  demon- 
strations of  the  enemy  on  Folly  Island. 

The  force  of  the  enemy  may  be  set  down  as  at  least  four  brigades,  of 
2,500  men  each,  or  a total  of  some  10,000  men,  with  ample  means  of 
transportation  and  every  appliance  of  war,  supported  by  the  guns  of 
a powerful  and  numerous  fleet. 

Making  a strong  demonstration  against  James  Island,  filling  the 
Stono  with  gunboats  and  troops,  and  occupying  Battery  Island  in 
force,  the  enemy  at  the  same  time  vigorously  attacked  the  small 
force  available  for  the  defense  of  the  south  end  of  Morris  Island  with 
his  main  force,  under  cover  of  a powerful  battery  of  long-range 
guns  placed  in  a battery  thrown  up  on  the  north  end  of  Little  Folly 
Island.  He  soon  overpowered  the  small  force  and  weak  batteries, 
which  alone  could  be  opposed  to  his  offensive  movements  at  the  time, 
and  drove  our  troops  out  of  their  works  back  to  the  shelter  of  Bat- 
tery Wagner.  Nor  could  any  effort  be  made  to  dislodge  him  before 
the  arrival  of  re-enforcements,  by  which  time  he  had  so  firmly 
established  his  naturally  strong  position  as  to  make  any  offensive 
attempt  desperate  and  impracticable ; that  is,  without  the  support 
of  a strong  naval  force. 

It  may  be  asked,  why  was  not  this  catastrophe  guarded  against  ? 
To  which  I have  to  say,  generally,  that  stronger  works  could  not  be 
erected  for  lack  of  labor,  though  every  effort  was  exhausted  to  secure 
negroes  from  the  day  I took  command  of  the  department  up  to  July 
1,  1863.  Further,  I had  not  been  able  to  get  the  armament  essential 
for  such  works,  and,  besides,  as  before  said,  I did  not  have  a garrison 
sufficiently  strong  for  Morris,  James,  and  Sullivan’s  Islands  at  the 
same  time.  The  holding  of  the  position  is  secondary  to  that  of  James 
Island,  which  must  first  be  secured  beyond  peril,  if  possible,  of  sur- 
prise and  capture.  But  my  reports  to  the  War  Department  are  full 
of  these  details,  showing  the  relative  positions  and  value  of  these 
approaches  to  and  defenses  of  Charleston  ; in  fact,  all  the  informa- 
tion necessary  for  a correct  appreciation  and  comprehension  of  the 
state  of  affairs  here. 

I shall;  of  course,  allow  no  opportunity  to  pass  for  annoying  the 
enemy,  and  shall  make  every  effort  to  anticipate  and  foil  my  adver- 
sary, and,  if  practicable,  dislodge  him  from  his  present  position. 
Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General , Commanding. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  War  Richmond , Va . 


[Indorsement.] 

Read  and  returned.  I hope  some  clear  comprehension  of  the 
causes  which  enabled  the  enemy  to  approach  Morris  Island  with  bat- 
teries before  being  observed  will  be  given  in  the  promised  report. 

J.  D.  [DAVIS.] 

ADDENDA  NO.  1. 


War  Department,  C.  S.  A., 
Richmond,  Va.,  July  12,  1863. 
General  G.  T.  Beauregard,  Commanding,  &c. : 

General  : Serious  solicitude  is  felt  by  the  Department  at  the  re- 
newed attack  on  Charleston,  and  we  hear  with  regret  that  the  enemy 


60  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

have  effected  a lodgment  on  Morris  Island.  That  mode  of  approach 
is  realized  as  formidable,  and,  if  persisted  in,  must  entail  a protracted 
struggle.  All  confidence  is  felt,  however,  in  your  zeal,  ability,  and 
engineering  skill  to  use  to  the  best  advantage  the  resources  of  your 
department ; and  I cannot  doubt  the  result  will  be  to  add  another 
triumph  to  those  which  already  give  in  this  contest  such  historic  re- 
nown to  Charleston. 

On  the  first  intelligence  of  the  attack,  General  Whiting  was  tele- 
graphed to  send  to  your  aid  Clingman’s  brigade,  and  I was  gratified 
to  learn  that  he  had  even  anticipated  the  order  as  to  one  regiment. 

It  is  a matter  of  regret  that  the  limited  resources  of  the  Depart- 
ment will  not  allow  at  this  time,  when  the  pressure  of  the  enemy  is 
felt  on  almost  every  field  of  action,  to  dispatch  more  troops  to  your 
aid  ; but  as  you  probably  have  in  your  department  more  force  than, 
according  to  most  accredited  advices,  the  enemy  have  retained  there, 
it  is  hoped  the  re-enforcement  will  prove  fully  adequate. 

I need  not  add  the  assurance  that  every  disposition  is  felt  to  aid 
and  sustain  your  defense,  and  that  I shall  be  prompt  when  informed 
of  any  needs  in  my  power  to  supply  to  furnish  them  to  the  extent 
of  our  available  resources. 

With  high  esteem,  very  respectfully,  yours, 

J.  A.  SEDDON, 

Secretary  of  War. 


ADDENDA  N O.  2. 

Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  S.  Carolina,  Georgia  and  Florida, 

Charleston,  S.  C.,  July  12,  1863. 

This  day  General  R.  S.  Ripley,  commanding  First  Military  Dis- 
trict, and  Brigadier-Generals  Taliaferro  and  Clingman,  also  by  spe- 
cial invitation  His  Excellency  the  Governor  of  the  State,  and  Hon. 
William  Porcher  Miles,  Representative  from  Charleston  in  Con- 
gress, were  present  in  conference  with  the  commanding  general,  the 
subject-matter  for  discussion  being  the  policy  of  attempting  to  re- 
capture and  to  hold  the  ground  on  Morris  Island,  seized  by  the 
enemy  on  the  10th  instant. 

The  first  question  submitted  for  decision  was  the  maximum  of 
force  necessary  to  be  employed,  accompanied  by  the  statement  that 
the  superior  officers  in  command  at  Battery  Wagner  regarded  5,000 
men  as  essential  for  the  attempt. 

Generals  Ripley  and  Taliaferro,  who  had  just  returned  from  an  ex- 
amination of  the  ground,  estimated  the  force  necessary  at  4,000  men. 
After  some  discussion,  in  which  it  was  assumed  that  the  attack  could 
not  be  made  with  less  than  3,000  men  (General  Clingman  expressing 
the  opinion,  however,  that,  from  the  nature  of  the  ground  and  the 
character  of  the  service,  2,000  men  would  be  as  efficient  as  a larger 
number),  it  was  finally  resolved  to  estimate  the  necessary  force  at 
4,000. 

It  was  unanimously  agreed  that  only  a crushing  blow  to  the  enemy 
would  be  of  any  military  use  or  advantage  whatsoever. 

This  was  only  to  be  achieved  by  a sustained  and  spirited  movement 
of  our  troops,  and  the  attempt  called  for  the  best  fighting  qualities  of 
the  soldier.  Irresolution  and  want  of  alacrity  at  the  outset  would  in- 
evitably result  in  the  gravest  disaster.  It  was  also  said  by  Generals 
Ripley  and  Taliaferro  that  the  officers  on  Morris  Island  were  of 


Chap.  XL.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


61 


opinion  that  if,  by  a coup  de  main , we  recovered  the  whole  ground 
lost,  we  could  not  maintain  the  position  lost  on  the  first  day. 

The  number  of  men  to  be  employed  having  been  determined,  the 
next  questioji  was  the  necessary  arrangements  for  the  attack. 

It  was  stated  that  the  present  infantry  force  on  Morris  Island 
consisted  of  1,210  ; leaving  to  be  added  2,790  ; total,  4,000. 

Any  additional  force  must  necessarily  be  drawn  from  Charles- 
ton and  James  Island ; consequently  the  time  necessary  for  the  move- 
ment of  the  men,  thence  via  Cumming’s  Point,  Morris  Island,  and 
thence  into  position  in  advance  of  Battery  Wagner,  was  to  be  con- 
sidered and  determined. 

It  being  assumed  that  the  troops  must  be  transported  under  cover 
of  darkness,  8 o’clock  was  fixed  as  the  earliest  hour  troops  could 
begin  to  embark.  One  hour  of  time  was  assigned  to  the  embarka- 
tion on  five  steamboats.  These  would  reach  landing  at  Cumming’s 
Point  at  10.30  p.  m.,  debarkation  completed  by  12  m.  Formation 
on  beach,  1 a.  m.  To  advance,  organize  in  proper  order  in  front  of 
Battery  Wagner  to  attempt  assault,  3 a.  m. 

Previous  to  this  calculation  of  the  time  by  Generals  Ripley  and 
Taliaferro,  it  was  asserted  by  them  both,  as  essential  to  any  prospect 
of  success,  that  the  assaulting  columns  should  all  be  in  position  in 
front  of  Battery  Wagner  by  la.  m.,  so  as  to  give  the  front  time  to 
reach  and  brush  away  the  enemy’s  pickets,  outposts,  and  advanced 
lines,  to  carry  the  first  or  Craig’s  Hill  battery,  and  to  give  time, 
also,  for  the  whole  column,  before  daylight,  to  push  beyond  the  level, 
open,  and  exposed  space  between  Battery  Wagner  and  the  sand-hills, 
a distance  of  over  a mile,  in  which  they  would  in  daylight  be  ex- 
posed to  a sweeping  fire  from  the  enemy’s  fleet,  within  easy  range. 

These  calculations  were  re-examined  by  both  Generals  Ripley  and 
Taliaferro ; could  promise  no  reduction  of  the  time  to  embark,  dis- 
embark, or  organize  on  the  ground  for  the  assault.  It  therefore 
followed  that  beginning  to  advance  from  the  front  of  Battery  Wag- 
ner as  late  as  at  the  hour  of  3 a.  m.  must  leave  exposed  a large  por- 
tion of  the  column  in  mass,  on  the  open  level,  under  a deadly  fire  of 
the  enemy’s  monitors  and  gunboats ; and,  further,  that  it  must  be 
broad  daylight  before  any  part  of  the  enemy’s  lines  could  be  reached 
and  assaulted.  Under  these  circumstances  (and  in  view  of  the  na- 
ture of  the  ground  and  other  military  conditions),  General  Ripley 
pronounced  any  attempt  on  our  part  to  recapture  the  ground  at 
present  held  by  the  enemy  on  Morris  Island  as  desperate,  and,  as  he 
believed,  impracticable. 

Brigadier-General  Taliaferro  regarded  the  attempt  altogether  im- 
practicable. 

Brigadier-General  Clingman,  not  having  examined  the  ground, 
said  that  he  felt  bound  to  surrender  his  views,  both  as  to  the  time  it 
would  take  to  embark  at  Charleston  and  organize  before  Battery 
Wagner  for  the  attack,  and  as  to  the  number  of  men  which  would 
be  required.  He,  therefore,  must  agree  that  the  projected  attack 
should  be  pronounced  impracticable. 

The  commanding  general  said  that,  to  insure  the  least  chance  of 
success,  the  operation  must  be  executed  under  cover  of  night ; hence 
the  men  could  not  embark  sooner  than  8 p.m.,  or  disembark  at  Cum- 
ming’s Point,  take  position,  and  form  for  the  attack  before  Battery 
Wagner  possibly  before  3 a.  m.  on  the  following  morning,  and  that 
the  attack  must  then  be  made,  as  it  were,  through  a narrow  defile, 


62 


S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 


[Chap.  XL. 


swept  by  the  enemy’s  fortified  positions  on  land,  and  with  one  side 
open  to  the  sea  under  the  guns  of  a numerous  fleet ; therefore  the 
operation  could  but  result  in  disaster,  and  ought  not  to  l?e  attempted ; 
that  we  must  now  defend  the  north  of  the  island  as  long  as  practi- 
cable, to  gain  time  for  resort  to  additional  defenses,  calculated  to 
neutralize  the  advantage  gained  by  the  enemy  and  repair  our  loss 
of  the  position. 

In  the  course  of  the  conference,  His  Excellency  the  Governor  in- 
quired whether,  if  the  expedition  were  successful  and  we  drove  the 
enemy  from  their  positions  and  seized  them,  we  could  maintain 
possession,  to  which  Generals  Ripley  and  Taliaferro  replied,  not 
unless  the  blow  were  struck  with  such  vigor  as  to  result  in  killing, 
wounding,  and  capturing  the  chief  part  of  the  enemy’s  force  on 
the  island,  and  in  the  consequent  paralysis  of  the  expedition  until 
additional  force  could  be  procured,  thus  giving  us  time  to  throw  up 
the  works  contemplated  before  the  enemy  took  possession  of  that 
part  of  the  island. 

In  this  connection,  it  was  agreed  that  there  could  be  no  material 
gain  from  any  attempt  to  dislodge  the  enemy  which  did  not  result 
in  the  destruction  and  capture  of  his  force  on  the  island,  and  thereby 
lead  to  at  least  a temporary  suspension  of  vigorous  hostile  operations 
on  his  part. 

The  consequences  of  a check  or  failure  of  the  attempt  were  also 
considered,  to  wit : That  the  men  would  necessarily  be  forced  back 
between  Batteries  W agner  and  Gregg,  in  a space  incapable  of  afford- 
ing shelter  for  more  than  2,000  men  at  most,  and  that  in  this  crowded 
and  exposed  state  they  would  be  left  throughout  the  day  (having 
no  mode  of  retreat  from  the  island),  exposed  to  the  shells  and  shot  of 
the  enemy’s  vessels  and  to  inevitable  slaughter ; that  is,  a failure 
in  all  probability  would  end  in  a grave  disaster,  loss  of  life,  and  an 
irreparable  loss  of  strength. 

It  having  been  stated  by  Generals  Ripley  and  Taliaferro  that  the 
officers  and  men  now  on  Morris  Island  (already  much»exhausted  and 
well  acquainted  with  the  ground)  regarded  the  success  of  the  expe- 
dition as  of  great  doubt,  and  that  the  gain  would  be  but  transient, 
it  was  decided  that  those  troops  could  not  be  placed  at  the  head  of 
the  column  of  attack.  It  remains  to  add  the  following  facts,  which 
were  carefully  weighed,  to  wit : 

1.  That  the  ground  was  most  unfavorable  for  offensive  operations  ; 
that  is,  the  troops  must  form  an  advance  to  the  assault  for  at  least  a 
mile  over  a narrow,  level  space,  nowhere  wider  than  200  yards,  and 
frequently  narrower;  that  they  would  reach  the  sand-hills,  occupied 
by  the  enemy,  very  much  blown,  and  that  the  ground  was  the  whole 
way  under  the  guns  of  the  enemy’s  vessels. 

2.  The  means  of  transportation  were  necessarily  precarious,  being 
old,  patched-up,  overworked  steamboats. 

The  undersigned  was  present  at  the  conference  and  discussion. 

THOMAS  JORDAN, 
Brigadier- General,  and  Chief  of  Staff. 

ADDENDA  NO.  3. 

General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  S.  C.,  Ga.,  and  Fla., 

No.  87.  j Charleston,  S.  C.,  July  18,  1863. 

While  the  commanding  general  regrets  that  the  enemy  has  suc- 
ceeded in  effecting  a landing  upon  Morris  Island,  he  acknowledges 


Chap.  XL.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


63 


with  satisfaction  the  conduct  of  the  troops  in  their  brave  and  pro- 
longed resistance  against  a force  largely  their  superior  in  numbers, 
and  he  is  specially  gratified  by  the  spirit  and  success  with  which  the 
garrison  of  Battery  Wagner  and  the  troops  under  Colonel  [Robert 
F.  ] Graham  repelled  the  assault  on  that  fortification,  as  it  gives  the 
assurance  that  he  can  rely  upon  the  conduct  and  courage  of  both 
officers  and  men  to  check  the  progress  of  the  enemy. 

By  command  of  General  Beauregard  : 

THOMAS  JORDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  N.  Carolina  and  Southern  Virginia, 

In  the  Field , near  Petersburg , Va .,  September  18,  1864. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  inclose  herewith  my  report  of  oper- 
ations on  Morris  Island,  S.  C.,  during  the  months  of  July,  August, 
and  September,  1863,  which  was  commenced  soon  after  the  events 
referred  to,  but  could  not  be  finished,  revised,  and  corrected,  owing 
to  the  exigencies  of  the  public  service,  until  the  present  moment. 
The  report  has  been  made  more  in  detail  than  otherwise  would  have 
been  done,  in  order  to  refute  certain  charges  contained  in  a letter  of 
the  Hon.  James  A.  Seddon,  Secretary  of  War,  of  August  [21*],  1863, 
to  the  Hon.  William  Porcher  Miles,  member  of  Congress  from  South 
Carolina,  and  volunteer  aide  on  my  staff.  I doubt  not  that  after  the 
perusal  of  this  report  the  honorable  Secretary  of  War  will  admit 
that  he  did  me  unintentional  injustice  in  the  following  paragraph  of 
his  letter  containing  the  charges  alluded  to,  to  wit : 

I have  no  disposition  to  criticise  military  operations,  or  point  out  errors  or  omis- 
sions which  can  no  longer  be  avoided  or  remedied,  but  you  compel  me  in  self- 
defense  to  advert  to  the  true  cause  of  the  lodgment  made  by  the  enemy  on  Morris 
Island.  According  to  my  conception,  it  was  not  the  want  of  infantry  force  at  the 
command  of  that  department,  but,  as  I had  before  supposed  was  universally  ad- 
mitted, the  want  of  adequate  work  of  defense  at  the  lower  end  of  the  island,  known 
long  to  be  the  external  gate  of  the  city,  and  the  establishment  by  the  enemy  (without 
the  knowledge  of  the  military  authorities)  of  powerful  land  batteries  on  Folly  Island, 
screened  and  concealed,  until  fully  prepared  to  open  upon  us  with  all  the  effect  of 
a surprise,  by  the  woods  which  had  been  allowed  to  remain  unfelled  on  that  island. 
That  these,  and  not  the  want  of  men,  were  the  true  causes  of  the  possession  effected 
by  the  enemy  is  shown  by  their  inability  to  improve  their  success  by  the  capture  of 
Forts  Wagner  and  Gregg.  It  is  no  pleasure  to  me  to  refer  to  these  causes  of  dis- 
aster, but  under  the  implications  of  your  letter  I could  not  say  less. 

* * * * * * * 


I remain,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General. 


General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjt.  and  Insp.  Gen.,  C.  S.  Army,  Richmond,  Va. 


[Inclosure.] 

Report  of  operations  on  Morris  Island,  S.  C.,  during  the  months 
of  July,  August,  and  September,  1863. 

I arrived  in  Charleston  on  September  13,  1862,  and  assumed  com- 
mand on  the  24th.  In  the  interval  I was  engaged  in  ascertaining  the 
plans  and  measures  taken  by  Major-General  Pemberton  (my  prede- 


*§ee  Confederate  Correspondence,  Part  II, 


64  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

cessor)  for  the  defense,  particularly  of  Charleston  and  Savannah, 
and  in  rapid  inspections  of  the  condition  and  defensive  resources 
of  the  department,  the  results  of  which  were  communicated  to  the 
War  Department  in  two  papers,  dated,  the  one  relative  to  Charleston 
on  the  3d,  and  the  other,  chiefly  concerning  Savannah,  on  October 
10,  1862. 

At  the  time  the  troops  in  this  department  (as  then  organized)  con- 
sisted of — 


In  South  Carolina. 


Infantry 6,564 

Artillery  in  position 1 , 787 

Field  artillery 1,879 

Cavalry 2,817 

12,547 

In  Georgia. 

Infantry 3,834 

Artillery  in  position ' 1, 330 

Field  artillery 445 

Cavalry 1,580 

7, 189 

Total  of  all  arms  in  department 19,736 


Of  this  force  1,787  artillery  in  position,  727  light  artillerists,  4,139 
infantry,  and  410  cavalry  were  assembled  in  the  First  Military  District 
for  the  defense  of  Charleston,  and  1,330  artillery  in  position,  445 
light  artillerists,  3,834  infantry,  and  1,580  cavalry  for  defense  of 
Savannah. 

My  predecessor  before  being  relieved  furnished  me  with  his  esti- 
mate of  the  smallest  number  of  troops  which  he  regarded  as  essential 
for  the  defense  of  Charleston  and  Savannah,  to  wit : 

For  defense  of  Charleston. 


Infantry 15,600 

Artillery  in  position 2,850 

Cavalry 1,000 

19, 450 

And  9 light  batteries. 

Total  of  all  arms  required  for  defense  of  Charleston  and  Savannah  Rail- 
road and  land  approaches. 11,000 

For  defense  of  Savannah. 

Infantry 10,000 

Artillery  in  position 1, 200 

Cavalry 2,000 

13,200 

And  8 light  batteries. 

Total  of  all  arms  in  South  Carolina  and  Georgia 43,650 

Exclusive  of  17  light  batteries. 


Hence  the  following  additional  troops  were  needed  at  the  follow* 
ing  points,  respectively,  to  meet  the  requirements  of  this  estimate  : 

For  defense  of  Charleston. 


Infantry 

Artillery  in  position 
Cavalry 


11,461 

1,063 

590 

13,114 


And  — light  batteries. 


Chap.  XL.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


65 


For  defense  of  Savannah. 

Infantry 6, 166 

Cavalry 420 


And  — light  batteries. 

For  defense  of  Charleston  and  Savannah  Railroad  and  land  approaches, 
all  arms 


6,586 

5,516 


Total  deficiencies 25, 216 

On  April  7,  1863,  the  day  of  the  attack  by  the  iron-clad  fleet,  the 
troops  at  my  disposal  in  South  Carolina  and  Georgia  gave  an  effect- 
ive total  of  30,040,  distributed  as  follows  : 


Troops. 

First  Military 

District. 

I Second  Mili- 

j tary  District. 

| Third  Military 

District. 

District  of 

Georgia. 

Tnfjmtrv  

6,807 

1,067 

2,238 

1,117 

1,819 

288 

3,655 

496 

5,661 

546 

2,038 

1,880 

Light  artillery  

Hpflvv  artillerv  . 

Cavalry  

742 

1,686 



11,229 

2,849 

5,837 

10,125 

But  the  withdrawal  of  Cooke’s  brigade  to  Worth  Carolina  immedi- 
ately after  the  repulse  of  the  iron-clad  fleet  on  April  7,  of  Briga- 
dier-Generals S.  R.  Gist  and  W.  H.  T.  Walker’s  brigades  and  light 
batteries  about  May  4,  reduced  my  force  materially. 

The  department  is  aware  of  the  circumstances  under  which  this 
reduction  of  the  troops  took  place,  and  in  this  connection  I beg  to 
refer  to  my  letters  to  the  honorable  Secretary  of  War  of  May  10, 
and  to  General  Cooper,  Adjutant  and  Inspector  General,  of  June  15 
and  July  20,  1863. 

The  forces  in  the  First  Military  District  on  July  10,  1863,  were  as 
follows  : 


« 

Locality. 

Infantry. 

Heavy  and  light 
artillery. 

Cavalry. 

James  Island 

1,184 

1,569 

153 

Morris  Island 

612 

289 

26 

Sullivan’s  Island 

204 

726 

228 

City  of  Charleston 

462 

285 

153 

Total 

2,462 

2,819 

560 

Infantry 2,462 

Heavy  and  light  artillery 2, 819 

Cavalry 560 


Total  of  all  arms  First  Military  District 5, 841 

Second  Military  District. 

Infantry 441 

Heavy  and  light  artillery 281 

Cavalry , 67Q 


Total  of  all  arms  [Second  Military  District]. 1, 398 

5 R R— VOL  XXVIII,  PT  I 


66 


S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 
Third  Military  District. 


[Ch^p.  XL, 


Infantry 558 

Heavy  and  light  artillery 544 

Cavalry 1,415 


Total  of  all  arms  Third  Military  District 2, 517 


District  of  Georgia. 


Infantry 1,745 

Heavy  and  light  artillery 2, 130 

Cavalry 1,  667 


Total  of  all  arms  District  of  Georgia 5,  543 

RECAPITULATION. 

Infantry  First  Military  District 2, 462 

Infantry  Second  Military  District ’ 441 

Infantry  Third  Military  District 558 

Infantry  District  of  Georgia 1, 745 


Total  infantry 5,  206 


Artillery  First  Military  District 2, 819 

Artillery  Second  Military  District 281 

Artillery  Third  Military  District 544 

Artillery  District  of  Georgia 2, 130 


Total  artillery 5,  774 


Cavalry  First  Military  District 560 

Cavalry  Second  Military  District 676 

Cavalry  Third  Military  District 1,415 

Cavalry  District  of  Georgia  . , 1,  667 


Total  cavalry 4, 318 


Grand  total 15, 298 


being  28,000  less  than  the  estimate  of  troops  required  in  September, 
1862. 

Meanwhile,  as  in  duty  bound,  by  numerous  telegrams  and  letters 
during  the  months  of  April,  May,  June,  and  July,  I kept  the  War 
Department  advised,  both  through  yourself  and  directly,  of  the 
threatening  nature  of  the  enemy’s  preparations  upon  the  coasts  of 
my  department,  and  of  my  own  fears  concerning  the  imminence  of 
an  attack.  On  April  25,  however,  in  answer  to  my  telegrams  of 
the  preceding  day,  asking  for  heavy  guns  for  Morris  Island  and  other 
points,  the  Secretary  of  W ar  telegraphs : 

I regret  to  be  unable  to  spare  the  guns  even  for  the  objects  mentioned.  The 
claims  of  Wilmington  and  the  Mississippi  are  now  regarded  as  paramount. 

On  May  1,  I was  directed  to  send  a full  brigade  to  North  Carolina, 
to  report  to  General  Hill,  and,  in  compliance,  General  Clingman’s 
brigade  was  dispatched. 

The  following  day  the  Secretary  of  War  telegraphs  : 

Advices  show  the  enemy  abandoning  their  attack  on  the  eastern  coast ; are  con- 
centrating great  forces  on  the  Mississippi  River.  Send  with  the  utmost  dispatch 
8,000  or  10,000  men,  including  those  ordered  heretofore  to  Tullahoma,  to  General 
Pemberton’s  relief. 

My  answer  was : 

No  orders  sending  troops  to  Tullahoma  have  reached  here.  Cooke’s  and  Cling- 
man’s brigades  have  been  returned  to  North  Carolina,  Have  ordered  5,000  infantry 


Chap.  XL.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


67 


and  two  batteries  to  report  forthwith  to  General  Pemberton,  leaving  only  10,000 
infantry  available  for  the  whole  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia.  Cannot  send  more 
without  abandoning  the  Savannah  Railroad.  Shall  await  further  orders.  Enemy 
still  occupies  in  force  Folly  and  Seabrook’s  Islands,  also  Port  Royal.  To  reduce  this 
command  further  might  become  disastrous. 

On  May  4, 1 sent  this  dispatch  to  the  honorable  Secretary  of  War ; 

Enemy’s  fleet,  reported  at  Hilton  Head  and  Port  Royal  yesterday,  is  4 steam  fri- 
gates, 5 wooden  gunboats,  6 ships,  4 barks,  3 brigs,  87  transports,  and  58  schooners — 
183  [167]  in  all ; a very  remarkable  increase  since  last  report. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon,  Secretary  of  War,  telegraphs  on  May  9, 
1863: 

Foster,  with  his  own  and  part  of  Hunter’s  forces,  is  believed  to  have  returned  to 
North  Carolina.  More  re-enforcements  to  General  Pemberton  are  indispensable. 
If  General  Evans’  brigade  has  returned  to  you,  send  5,000  men  ; if  not  with  you,  a 
number  which  with  that  would  make  5,000  men. 

On  the  following  day,  I telegraphed  in  reply  to  the  Secretary  of 
War: 

The  order  sending  additional  troops  to  General  Pemberton  will  be  executed,  Evans’ 
brigade  included,  leaving  but  1,000  infantry  to  support  extensive  lines  and  batteries 
at  Savannah ; but  750  infantry  to  hold  line  of  railroad  to  Savannah,  virtually  yield- 
ing up  that  country  and  large  stores  of  rice  to  enemy,  as  well  as  opening  even 
Charleston  and  Augusta  and  Columbia  Railroads  to  attack  af  Branchville,  leaving 
here  1,500  infantry  at  most,  all  of  which  will  be  known  to  enemy  in  a few  days. 
Meantime  General  W.  S.  Walker  reports  increased  strength  yesterday  of  enemy’s 
outposts  in  his  vicinity.  Hagood  reports  2,500  infantry  on  Seabrook’s  Island,  forti- 
fying ; five  monitors  still  there.  Enemy  in  force  on  Folly  Island,  actively  erecting 
batteries  yesterday.  Season  favorable  for  enemy’s  operations  for  quite  a month. 

On  the  12th,  I telegraphed  as  follows  to  the  honorable  Secretary  of 
War : 

Have  ordered  to  General  Pemberton  (contrary  to  my  opinion)  Evans’  brigade  and 
one  regiment,  amounting  to  2,700  men,  leaving  only  6,000  infantry  available  in 
the  whole  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia.  The  other  1,000  will  await  further 
orders  of  Department.  General  Evans  reports  two  brigades  of  enemy  on  Folly 
Island  yesterday.  Please  answer. 

A letter  to  the  same  address  on  May  il  exhibited  certain  condi- 
tions and  explained  more  fully  my  views  on  the  subject  of  an  attack, 
with  the  object  of  showing  to  the  War  Department  the  actual  men- 
acing aspect  of  the  enemy  on  the  coast  of  my  department.  I tran- 
scribe an  extract  from  that  letter : 

A week  ago,  under  your  orders,  I put  in  motion  for  Jackson,  Miss.,  two  brigades, 
under  Brigadier-Generals  Gist  and  W.  H.  T.  Walker,  the  former  commanding 
South  Carolina  and  the  latter  Georgia  regiments  (somewhat  over  5,000  infantry  in 
all),  and  two  light  batteries  of  the  best  class  in  the  department.  Your  orders  have 
been  based,  apparently,  on  the  conviction  that  the  troops  of  the  enemy  assembled  in 
this  department  for  operations  against  Charleston  have  been  mainly  withdrawn  and 
diverted  to  other  expeditions  in  North  Carolina  and  the  Valley  of  the  Mississippi. 
This  conviction  I regret  that  I cannot  share,  as  I am  satisfied  from  the  reports  of 
district  commanders,  and  from  other  reasons,  that  there  has  been  really  but  little 
reduction  of  the  command  of  Major-General  Hunter. 

General  Walker,  commanding  at  Pocotaligo,  reports  that  on  yesterday  the  out- 
posts of  the  enemy  in  his  front  had  been  much  increased  in  strength.  General 
Hagood  reports  them  to  be  occupying  Seabrook’s  Island  with  at  least  2,500  infantry. 
They  are  erecting  fortifications  at  that  point,  as  also  on  Folly  Island,  which  is  like- 
wise still  occupied  in  force. 

Five  of  the  monitors  remain  in  the  North  Edisto,  with  some  twenty  gunboats  and 
transports.  With  these  and  the  transports  still  in  the  waters  of  Port  Royal,  and  the 
forces  which  I am  unable  to  doubt  are  still  at  the  disposition  of  the  enemy,  he  may 
renew  the  attack  by  land  and  water  on  Charleston  at  any  moment.  Acting  on  the 
offensive  and  commanding  the  fine  of  attack,  he  could  simultaneously  caff  troops 


68 


S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 


[Chap.  XL. 


here  from  North  Carolina,  and  sooner  than  my  command  could  possibly  be  re- 
enforced from  any  quarter  out  of  the  department. 

* * * * * * * 

A letter  to  you  of  May  20  further  calls  attention  to  the  fact  that 
important  changes  are  reported  to  be  on  foot  in  the  armament  of  the 
monitors,  and  urges  strenuously  that  Fort  Sumter  he  armed,  con- 
formably to  the  original  plan,  with  the  heaviest  guns,  rifled  or 
smooth-bore,  which  could  be  obtained,  in  anticipation  of  a renewal 
of  the  attack  of  April  7.  I was  informed,  however,  through  your 
letter  of  June  10,  that — 

Northern  papers  report  the  reduction  of  Hunter’s  forces  by  sending  troops  to  the 
Gulf.  If  this  be  true,  you  will,  with  such  force  as  you  can  properly  withdraw  from 
your  defensive  line,  proceed  to  Mobile,  to  resist  an  attack,  if  one  should  be  designed 
at  that  place  ; but  if  the  purpose  of  the  enemy  be  to  send  his  re-enforcements  to  the 
Mississippi,  you  will  go  on  and  co-operate  with  General  Johnston  in  that  quarter. 

This  I answered  by  a telegram  on  the  13th  of  same  month,  as 
follows  : 

Enemy’s  iron-clads  and  forces  still  as  heretofore  reported  to  Department,  except- 
ing a gunboat  expedition  reported  in  Altamaha  and  one  preparing  for  Saint  John’s 
River,  Florida.  I will  prepare  as  far  as  practicable  for  contingencies  referred  to  in 
Department  letter  of  the  loth  instant.  Please  send  me  any  positive  information 
relative  to  movements  or  intentions  of  enemy. 

But  in  order  that  the  War  Department  should  be  thoroughly  cog- 
nizant of  the  state  of  affairs  in  my  department,  I further  addressed 
to  you  a letter  on  June  15,  in  which  I pointed  out  how  utterly  in- 
sufficient were  the  forces  at  my  command  to  resist  those  of  the  enemy, 
and  that  on  my  own  responsibility  I could  not  further  deplete  the 
force  in  the  department.  I drew  your  attention  in  this  same  letter 
to  the  danger  of  an  attack  by  the  way  of  Morris  Island — indeed,  to 
the  very  route  on  which  General  Gillmore  has  since  operated.  I 
take  the  following  extract  from  that  letter : 

Thus  it  will  be  seen  that  the  force  in  the  department  is  already  at  the  minimum 
necessary  to  hold  the  works  around  Charleston  and  Savannah,  constantly  menaced 
by  the  proximity  of  the  enemy’s  iron-clads.  The  garrison  of  no  work  in  the  harbor 
can  be  withdrawn  or  diminished,  as  they  are  all  necessary  links  in  the  chain  of  de- 
fense. Reduce  the  command  on  James  Island,  and  the  enemy  may  readily  pene- 
trate by  such  a coup  de  main  as  was  attempted  last  year  at  the  weakened  point. 
James  Island  would  then  fall,  and,  despite  our  harbor  defenses,  the  city  of  Charles- 
ton would  be  thrown  open  to  bombardment.  It  is  not  safe  to  have  less  than  a regi- 
ment of  infantry  on  Morris  Island,  which,  if  once  carried  by  the  enemy,  would 
expose  Fort  Sumter  to  be  taken  in  reverse  and  demolished. 

^ ^ ^ *1* 

Late  Northern  papers  say  Admiral  DuPont  has  been  relieved  in  command  of  the 
fleet  on  this  coast  by  Admiral  Foote,  an  officer  whose  operations  in  the  west  evinced 
much  activity  and  an  enterprising  spirit;  and  even  were  considerable  reductions  made 
in  the  enemy’s  forces,  the  valuable  coast  districts  would  still  be  left  a prey  to  such 
destructive  raids  as  devastated  the  Combahee  some  days  ago.  Thus  far,  however, 
I can  see  no  evidence  of  reduction.  General  Hunter  was  at  Hilton  Head  on  the  8th 
instant.  His  troops  hold  the  same  positions  as  heretofore,  and  apparently  in  the 
same  force — a brigade  on  Folly  [Island],  one  on  Seabrook’s  Island,  and  the  balance 
on  the  islands  about  Port  Royal.  One  of  the  monitors  is  at  Hilton  Head,  and  five 
are  still  in  the  North  Edisto.  Nor  has  the  number  of  their  gunboats  or  transports 
diminished,  or  at  any  time  recently  been  increased,  as  must  have  been  the  case  had 
a material  removal  of  troops  taken  place. 

******* 

On  June  25,  His  Excellency  President  Davis  telegraphed  the  fol- 
lowing : 

From  causes  into  which  it  is  needless  to  enter,  the  control  of  the  Mississippi  con- 
nection between  the  States  east  and  west  of  it  will  be  lost  unless  Johnston  is  strongly 


Chap.  XL.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


69 


and  promptly  re-enforced  within  the  next  sixty  days.  Can  you  give  him  further 
aid  without  the  probable  loss  of  Charleston  and  Savannah  ? I need  not  state  to  you 
that  the  issue  is  vital  to  the  Confederacy. 

My  answer  was  : 

Telegram  is  received.  No  more  troops  can  be  sent  away  from  this  department 
without  losing  railroad  and  country  between  here  and  Savannah.  Georgetown 
District  would  have  also  to  be  abandoned.  See  my  letter  of  15th  instant  to  General 
Cooper. 

Thus,  on  July  10,  1863,  I had  but  5,861  men  of  all  arms  in  the  First 
Military  District,  guarding  the  fortifications  around  Charleston,  or 
more  than  one-third  of  the  troops  in  my  department,  with  an  enemy 
in  my  front  whose  base  of  operations  threatened  Savannah,  the  line 
of  coast,  and  the  important  railroad  connecting  the  former  city  and 
Charleston,  and  the  latter  city  as  well,  with  such  immense  transpor- 
tation resources  as  to  be  able  to  concentrate  and  strike  at  will  at  any 
selected  point  before  I could  gather  my  troops  to  oppose. 

In  attacking  Charleston  itself,  five  different  routes  of  approach  pre- 
sent themselves  to  an  enemy : First,  by  landing  a large  force  to  the 
northward,  say  at  Bull’s  Bay,  marching  across  the  country,  and  seiz- 
int  Mount  Pleasant  and  the  northern  shores  of  the  inner  harbor. 
Secondly,  by  landing  a large  force  to  the  southward,  cutting  the  line 
of  the  Charleston  and  Savannah  Railroad,  and  taking  the  city  of 
Charleston  in  the  rear.  Neither  of  these  routes  did  I consider  prac- 
ticable, or  likely  to  be  adopted  by  the  enemy,  as  his  numerical  force 
would  not  have  allowed  him  to  cope  with  us  unless  under  the  shelter 
of  his  iron-clads  and  gunboats,  a fact  which  General  Gillmore  has 
always  carefully  recognized.  Before  he  adopts  the  overland  ap- 
proaches, he  will  require  large  addition  to  his  land  forces.  The  third, 
fourth,  and  fifth  approaches,  by  James,  Sullivan’s,  and  Morris  Isl- 
ands, respectively,  permitted,  however,  the  co-operation  of  the  navy, 
and  I always  believed — as  experience  has  demonstrated — that  of  the 
three  immediate  routes  to  Charleston,  the  one  by  James  Island  was 
most  dangerous  to  us,  and  the  one  which  should  be  defended  at  all 
hazards;  that  by  Sullivan’s  Island  ranking  next,  and  the  one  by 
Morris  Island  last,  in  point  of  importance,  for  the  following  reasons  : 
An  enemy  who  could  gain  a firm  foothold  on  James  Island  and  over- 
power its  garrison  (at  that  time  having  to  defend  a long,  defective, 
and  irregular  line  of  works)  could  have  erected  batteries  command- 
ing the  inner  harbor  at  once,  taking  in  rear  our  outer  line  of  de- 
fenses, and  by  a direct  fire  on  the  city  compelled  its  evacuation  in  a 
short  period,  because  in  such  a case  it  would  become  of  no  value  as  a 
strategic  position,  and  prudence  and  humanity  would  alike  revolt  at 
the  sacrifice  of  life  necessary  to  enable  us  to  retain  possession  of  its 
ruins. 

The  route  by  Sullivan’s  Island  was  also  of  great  importance,  for 
its  occupation  would  not  only  have  enabled  the  enemy  to  reduce 
Fort  Sumter  as  an  artillery  fortress,  but  would  also  have  given  en- 
tire control  of  the  entrance  to  the  inner  harbor  to  his  iron-clad  fleet. 
At  that  time,  owing  to  the  want  of  labor  and  heavy  guns,  the  impor- 
tant works  which  now  line  the  shores  of  the  inner  harbor  had  not 
been  erected  and  armed,  and  the  enemy’s  fleet  would  have  been  able 
to  shell  the  city  comparatively  unmolested,  and,  by  controlling  and 
cutting  off  our  communications  with  Fort  Sumter  and  Morris  Island, 
would  soon  have  necessitated  their  surrender  or  evacuation. 

The  remaining  route  by  Morris  Island  was  certainly  the  least  in- 
jurious to  us,  for  the  occupation  of  the  island  by  the  enemy  neither 


70  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

involved  the  evacuation  of  Fort  Sumter,  the  destruction  of  the  city 
by  a direct  fire  as  from  James  Island,  nor  the  command  of  move- 
ments in  our  inner  harbor  by  the  iron-clad  fleet.  The  Morris  Island 
route  I had  long  thought  most  likely  to  be  attempted  by  the  enemy, 
as  its  proximity  to  Folly  Island,  for  many  months  back  in  their  pos- 
session, gave  them  facilities  for  the  execution  of  a coup  de  main , 
while  the  neighboring  harbor  of  the  Edisto  gave  their  fleet  conven- 
ient shelter  from  bad  weather,  which  they  could  not  have  enjoyed 
on  the  Long  Island  coast  had  their  attack  been  via  Sullivan’s  Island. 
Moreover,  the  seizure  of  the  island  would  afford  the  Federal  Govern- 
ment opportunity  for  making  capital  with  its  people  and  with  foreign 
powers.  To  counteract  those  very  apparent  advantages  of  the  en- 
emy, as  soon  as  suitable  guns  could  be  procured,  I had  ordered  to  be 
erected  on  the  south  end  of  Morris  Island  proper  batteries. 

On  Block  Island,  which  lies  between  James  and  Morris  Islands, 
and  from  its  position  enfilades  Light-House  Inlet  between  Folly  and 
Morris  Islands,  I had  ordered  to  be  built  several  months  previously 
two  batteries  for  two  guns  each.  This  island  was,  further,  to  have 
been  connected  with  the  mainland  by  a branch  from  the  bridge 
planned  to  connect  James  and  Morris  Islands,  and  nearly  completed 
when  the  enemy  made  their  attack  in  July. 

At  Vincent’s  Creek  a battery  was  commenced,  and,  had  it  been 
completed,  would  have  played  effectively  upon  the  sand-hills  on  the 
south  end  of  Morris  Island. 

Battery  Wagner  was  substantially  strengthened  and  arranged  for 
four  heavy  guns  in  the  sea  face,  but  owing  to  the  scarcity  of  labor 
and  the  want  of  the  necessary  ordnance  to  put  into  the  works  at  the 
south  end  of  the  island  when  completed,  they  were  not,  on  July  10, 
1863,  in  that  condition  which  would  have  characterized  them  had  I 
had  sufficient  labor,  transportation,  and  ordnance  at  my  disposal. 
Labor  and  transportation  have  always  been  serious  drawbacks  not 
only  to  the  defense  of  Charleston,  but  of  the  whole  department. 

In  reference  to  labor,  I may  here  state  that  no  subject  connected 
with  the  defense  of  this  department  has  engrossed  more  of  my  atten- 
tion. Constant  appeals  were  made  to  the  Governors  and  Legislature 
of  South  Carolina,  and  to  eminent  citizens  since  my  first  arrival. 
Few  seemed  to  appreciate  the  vital  necessity  of  securing  a proper 
amount  of  slave  labor  for  the  fortifications  around  Charleston,  and 
instead  of  the  State  providing  2,500  negroes  monthly,  as  desired  by 
me,  for  Charleston,  I received  for  the  first  six  months  of  1863  the  fol- 
lowing number  of  negroes  from  the  State  authorities : 


January 196 

February 261 

March 864 

April 491 

May 107 

June 60 


Total 1,979 


Or  an  average  of  330  monthly,  when  I ought  to  have  received  2,500. 
Hence  it  became  a necessity  that  I should  detain  these  hands  longer 
than  the  thirty  days,  which  was  the  original  term  of  service  required 
from  each  negro.  This  step  caused  considerable  discontent  among 
the  owners  of  slaves,  and  in  the  month  of  July,  1863,  the  number  of 
negro  hands  in  the  employ  of  the  engineer  department,  provided 
under  my  call  on  the  State,  amounted  to  only  299,  including  a num- 
ber of  hired  negroes. 


Chap.  XL.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


71 


In  the  meantime  the  troops  of  the  command,  in  addition  to  their 
regular  duties,  were  employed  in  erecting  fortifications,  the  whole  of 
the  works  in  the  south  end  of  Morris  Island  having  been  thrown  up 
by  its  garrison.  The  engineer  department  used  every  exertion  to 
hire  labor,  but  its  efforts  were  not  crowned  with  any  appreciable 
success. 

In  the  middle  of  June  the  batteries  on  the  south  end  of  Morris 
Island  were  engaged  with  the  enemy  on  Little  Folly  Island,  and  un- 
doubtedly retarded  considerably  the  progress  of  their  operations,  as 
the  following  extracts  of  the  reports  from  Brigadier-General  Ripley 
will  show : 

June  12,  1868. 

******* 

The  enemy  having  advanced  light  guns  to  Little  Folly  Island  yesterday  to  shell 
the  wreck  of  the  steamer  Ruby,  now  ashore  at  Light-House  Inlet,  in  accordance 
with  directions,  Captain  [John  C.]  Mitchel,  commanding  the  batteries  on  the  south 
of  Morris  Island,  opened  fire,  silencing  them  at  the  second  shot. 

This  morning  I gave  directions  for  him  to  open  fire  in  case  he  observed  any  in- 
dications for  work  on  Little  Folly  on  the  part  of  the  enemy,  and  this  afternoon 
about  5 o’clock,  seeing  parties  apparently  at  work,  he  commenced  shelling.  About 
50  men  left  Little  Folly  for  the  main  island.  The  enemy  replied  from  his  batteries 
on  Big  Folly  and  his  light  guns. 

Again,  on  June  14,  the  same  officer  reports : 

The  enemy  having  appeared  to  be  at  work  on  Little  Folly  Island,  Lieutenant- 
Colonel  [Joseph  A.]  Yates  opened  fire  upon  them,  shelling  them  for  about  three- 
quarters  of  an  hour,  putting  a stop  to  their  operations,  which  appeared  to  be  erect- 
ing a shelter  or  batteries  near  the  inlet.  A close  watch  has  been  directed  to  be  kept 
up,  and  their  work  to  be  stopped  whenever  attempted. 

* * * * * * * 

At  the  time  of  the  attack  on  Charleston  in  the  beginning  of  April, 
the  enemy  occupied  Big  Folly  and  Seabrook’s  Islands  in  force,  esti- 
mated at  one  or  two  brigades.  This  force  was  increased  to  about 
four  brigades  before  July  11,  a considerable  number  of  troops  land- 
ing on  Cole’s  and  James  Islands. 

During  the  latter  part  of  June,  and  up  to  the  first  week  in  July, 
1863,  no  extraordinary  activity  was  manifested  by  the  enemy.  On 
Big  Folly  Island  they  were  occupied  as  usual  in  fortifying  the  neck, 
strongly  picketing  Little  Folly  Island,  and  interfering  with  the 
wrecking  practice  on  the  steamer  Ruby. 

On  the  morning  of  July  7,  four  monitors  appeared  off  the  bar,  but 
no  other  increase  of  the  fleet  in  that  direction  was  discernible. 

On  the  night  of  July  8,  a scouting  party,  under  the  command  of  Cap- 
tain Charles  [T.]  Haskell,  [jr.,]  visited  Little  Folly  Island,  and  dis- 
covered the  enemy’s  barges  collected  in  the  creeks  approaching  the 
island.  Commencing  on  July  7,  and  for  the  three  succeeding  days, 
working  parties  of  the  enemy  were  seen  engaged  at  labor  on  Little 
Folly  Island,  supposed  to  be  light  works  for  guns.  The  wood  on  the 
island  (but  more  especially  the  peculiar  configuration  of  the  ground, 
which  consists  of  sand-hills)  gave  the  enemy  every  facility  for  the 
concealment  of  his  designs. 

On  the  night  of  July  8,  considerable  noise  from  chopping  with 
axes  was  heard,  and  in  the  morning  some  works  were  discernible, 
the  wood  and  brush  having  been  cleared  away  from  their  front. 

On  the  night  of  July  9,  an  immediate  attack  being  anticipated, 
the  whole  infantry  force  on  the  island  was  kept  under  arms  at  the 
south  end. 


72  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

At  5 o’clock  in  the  morning  of  July  10,  the  enemy’s  attack  com- 
menced by  a heavy  fire  on  our  position  from  a great  number  of  light 
guns,  apparently  placed  during  the  preceding  forty-eight  hours  in 
the  works  lately  thrown  up  on  Little  Folly  Island.  Three  monitors 
about  the  same  time  crossed  the  bar,  and  brought  their  formidable 
armaments  to  bear  on  the  left  flank  of  our  position,  while  several 
barges  with  howitzers  in  Light-House  Inlet  flanked  our  right.  For 
two  hours  the  enemy  kept  up  the  fire  from  these  three  different 
points,  our  batteries  replying  vigorously.  The  barges  of  the  enemy 
filled  with  troops  having  been  seen  in  Light-House  Inlet  in  the  di- 
rection of  Black  Island,  and  Oyster  Point  being  the  nearest  and  most 
accessible  spot  for  debarkation  from  them,  it  was  justly  considered 
the  one  most  necessary  to  protect,  and,  therefore,  the  infantry,  con- 
sisting of  the  Twenty-first  South  Carolina  Volunteers,  about  350 
effective  men,  were  stationed  by  Col.  R.  F.  Graham,  the  imme- 
diate commander  of  the  island,  on  the  peninsula  leading  to  that 
point.  In  this  position  the  infantry  were  unavoidably  exposed  to 
the  fire  of  the  boat  howitzers,  but  sheltered  by  the  nature  of  the 
ground  from  that  of  the  guns  on  Little  Folly  Island. 

About  7 o’clock  the  enemy  advanced  on  Oyster  Point  in  a flotilla 
of  boats,  containing  between  2,000  and  3,000  men,  a considerable  por- 
tion of  whom  endeavored  to  effect  and  hold  a landing,  in  which  they 
were  opposed  by  the  infantry  until  about  8 o’clock,  when  another 
force  of  two  or  three  regiments  made  good  a landing  in  front  of  our 
batteries  on  the  south  end  of  Morris  Island  proper.  These  formed 
in  .line  of  battle  on  the  beach,  and  advanced  directly  upon  our  works, 
throwing  out  on  each  flank  numerous  skirmishers,  who  very  soon 
succeeded  in  flanking  and  taking  the  batteries  in  reverse.  After  an 
obstinate  resistance,  our  artillery  had  to  abandon  their  pieces  (three 
8-inch  navy  shell  guns,  two  8-inch  seacoast  howitzers,  one  rifled  24- 
pounder,  one  30-pounder  Parrott,  one  12-pounder  Whitworth,  and 
three  10-inch  seacoast  mortars)  and  fall  back.  Two  companies  of  the 
Seventh  South  Carolina  Battalion,  which  arrived  about  this  time, 
were  ordered  to  the  support  of  the  batteries ; but  they  could  not  make 
head  against  the  overwhelming  numbers  of  the  enemy.  This  suc- 
cess of  the  enemy  threatened  to  cut  off  our  infantry  engaged  at  Oys- 
ter Point  from  their  line  of  retreat,  and  consequently  about  9 o’clock 
Colonel  Graham  gave  the  order  to  fall  back  to  Battery  W agner, 
which  was  accomplished  under  a severe  flanking  fire  from  the  moni- 
tors. The  enemy  thus  gained  possession  of  the  south  end  of  Morris 
Island  by  rapidly  throwing  a large  number  of  troops  across  the  inlet, 
which  it  was  impossible  for  the  available  infantry  on  the  spot  (about 
400  effective  men)  to  resist.  It  was  not  the  erection  of  works  on 
Little  Folly  Island  that  caused  the  abandonment  of  our  position.  It 
was  clearly  the  want  on  our  side  of  infantry  support,  and  the  enemy’s 
superior  weight  and  number  of  guns,  and  the  heavy  supporting 
brigade  of  infantry  that  swept  away  our  feeble,  stinted  means  of 
resistance.  The  woods  that  remained  unfelled  on  Little  Folly  Island 
were  of  no  material  advantage  to  the  enemy,  for  even  had  there  been 
labor  to  remove  them  (which  I never  had),  the  formation  of  the  isl- 
and, covered  with  ridges  of  sand-hills,  formed  a screen  which  hid 
the  enemy’s  movements  completely  from  us,  and  afforded  all  the 
concealment  he  could  desire.  The  attack  was  not  a surprise ; neither 
was  the  erection  of  the  enemy’s  works  on  Little  Folly  Island  unknown 
to  the  local  commanders  or  to  these  headquarters.  The  enemy,  in- 
deed, made  little  effort  to  conceal  them.  With  a sufficient  infantry 


Chap.  XL.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


73 


force  on  Morris  Island,  the  result  of  the  attack  of  J uly  10,  I am  con- 
fident, would  have  been  different ; but,  as  I have  already  explained, 
the  threatening  position  of  the  enemy  on  James  Island  entirely  pre- 
cluded the  withdrawal  of  a single  soldier  from  its  defense  until  the 
point  of  attack  had  been  fully  developed,  and  the  only  re-enforce- 
ments that  could  be  sent  to  Morris  Island  (some  300  men  of  the 
Seventh  South  Carolina  Battalion)  arrived  too  late  to  render  mate- 
rial assistance  on  the  morning  of  July  10.  The  long-protracted 
defense  of  Battery  Wagner  must  not  be  compared  with  the  evacua- 
tion of  the  south  end  of  Morris  Island  by  way  of  throwing  discredit 
on  the  latter  movement.  The  two  defenses  are  not  analogous.  In 
the  one,  a large  extent  of  exposed  ground  had  to  be  guarded  with  an 
entirely  inadequate  force ; in  the  other,  a strong  earthwork  with  a 
narrow  line  of  approach  could  be  held  successfully  against  any  attack 
by  a body  of  men  numerically  quite  insufficient  to  have  opposed  the 
landing  of  an  enemy  on  the  south  end  of  Morris  Island. 

While  the  enemy  on  July  9 was  threatening  Morris  Island,  he  also 
made  a strong  demonstration  against  James  Island  by  the  Stono 
River.  At  12  m.  on  that  day,  Colonel  [Charles  H.]  Simonton,  com- 
manding at  Secession ville,  telegraphed  : 

The  enemy  are  landing  on  Battery  Island  ; their  advance  pickets  and  ours  are 
firing.  Pickets  from  Grimball’s  (on  the  Stono)  report  the  enemy  landing  at  that 
place. 

Three  gunboats  and  a monitor  proceeded  up  the  Stono  as  far  as 
the  obstructions. 

On  the  morning  of  July  10,  while  the  attack  was  progressing  on 
Morris  Island,  Colonel  Simonton  telegraphed  that  the  main  body  of 
the  enemy  were  moving  in  force  from  Battery  Island  to  Legare’s 
house,  having  a line  of  pickets  extending  from  a point  at  Legare’s  in 
an  oblique  line  up  the  Stono,  cutting  the  Grimball  causeway  about 
midway.  Later  in  the  day,  however,  the  same  officer  telegraphed 
that  the  reported  advance  of  the  enemy  was  premature.  “They  are 
in  force  on  Battery  Island.” 

Though  the  demonstration  of  the  enemy  in  the  Stono  and  on  James 
Island  was  instituted  to  distract  our  attention  from  Morris  Island, 
yet  it  was  made  in  such  strength  that  at  any  moment  it  could  have 
been  converted  into  a real  attack  of  the  most  disastrous  kind  to  us 
had  the  garrison  been  weakened  to  support  Morris  Island. 

On  the  afternoon  of  J uly  10,  detachments  of  First,  Twelfth,  Eight- 
eenth, and  Sixty-tliird  Georgia  (534  effective)  arrived  from  the  Dis- 
trict of  Georgia,  under  the  command  of  Colonel  [C.  H.]  Olmstead, 
with  the  Twenty-first  South  Carolina  Volunteers  and  [P.  H.]  Nel- 
son’s battalion,  and  became  the  garrison  of  Battery  Wagner. 

At  daylight  on  the  morning  of  July  11,  the  enemy  assaulted  Bat- 
tery Wagner,  and  was  repulsed  with  much  loss ; 2 officers  and  95  rank 
and  file  being  left  dead  in  front  of  our  works,  and  6 officers  and  113 
rank  and  file  taken  prisoners,  about  40  of  the  latter  being  wounded. 

Our  loss  was  1 officer  and  5 privates  killed,  and  1 officer  and  5 
privates  wounded. 

During  the  day,  three  monitors  and  three  wooden  gunboats  shelled 
Battery  W agner,  and  in  the  evening  a fifth  monitor  crossed  the  bar. 

Colonel  Simonton,  on  James  Island,  at  7 a.  m.  reported  no  forward 
movement  in  his  front ; two  gunboats  and  several  transports  off 
Battery  Island.  At  9 p.  m.  he  telegraphed  that  the  enemy  were 
advancing  in  force  from  Legard’s  house  to  Grimball’s,  our  pickets 
falling  back  on  the  reserves. 


74 


S.  C.  AND  DA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 


[Chap.  XL. 


On  July  12,  the  Marion  Artillery  (four  guns  and  39  effective)  ar- 
rived from  the  Second  Military  District,  and  was  placed  on  James 
Island,  as  well  as  the  Eleventh  South  Carolina  Regiment  from  the 
Third  Military  District  (400  effective),  hut  these  last  soon  had  to  he 
returned,  to  guard  our  communication  with  Savannah.  A portion  of 
Brigadier-General  Clingman’s  brigade  (550  men  of  the  Fifty-first 
North  Carolina  Volunteers  and  50  men  of  the  Thirty-first  North 
Carolina  Volunteers)  arrived  from  Wilmington  about  the  same  time, 
in  consequence  of  my  urgent  call  for  re-enforcements. 

The  enemy  was  occupied  during  the  day  in  erecting  works  on  the 
middle  of  Morris  Island,  while  five  monitors  and  three  wooden  gun- 
boats shelled  Batteries  Wagner  and  Gregg. 

The  armament  of  Battery  Wagner  was  increased  by  four  12- 
pounder  howitzers  and  two  32-pounder  carronades  on  siege  carriages. 

On  July  13,  the  enemy  was  actively  engaged  in  throwing  up  works 
on  the  middle  of  Morris  Island,  but  were  interrupted  by  our  fire  from 
Battery  Gregg  and  Fort  Sumter.  During  the  day,  four  monitors, 
three  gunboats,  and  two  mortar  vessels  shelled  Batteries  Wagner 
and  Gregg,  but  with  little  effect  and  slight  casualties.  Four  moni- 
tors only  were  with  the  fleet ; the  fifth  was  seen  going  to  the  south 
without  a smoke-stack  on  the  evening  of  the  12th. 

Orders  were  issued  on  this  day  for  the  construction  at  once  of  a 
new  battery  on  Shell  Point  (Battery  Simkins),  in  advance  of  Fort 
Johnson,  for  one  10-inch  columbiad,  one  6.40-inch  Brooke  gun,  and 
three  10-inch  mortars.  The  armament  of  Fort  Moultrie  was  ordered 
to  be  increased  by  guns  taken  from  Fort  Sumter.  An  appeal  was 
made  to  His  Excellency  Governor  Bonham  for  slave  labor  for  work 
on  the  fortifications. 

The  arrival  of  Clingman’s  brigade  and  re-enforcements  from  other 
quarters  having  increased  to  some  extent  my  available  force,  the 
consideration  arose  whether  or  not  the  expulsion  of  the  enemy  from 
Morris  Island  was  yet  feasible.  The  number  of  men  required  for 
such  an  attempt  would  have  been  4,000,  the  surface  of  Morris  Island 
not  permitting  the  maneuvering  of  a large  number.  The  only  hope 
of  the  attempt  being  successful  lay  in  the  possibility  of  our  troops 
carrying  the  enemy’s  works  and  position  before  daylight,  otherwise 
the  advance  and  attack  would  necessarily  have  been  made  under  the 
fire  of  the  enemy’s  fleet,  in  which  case  it  must  have  ended  disas- 
trously for  us.  After  a consultation  with  my  general  officers,  the 
idea  of  this  attack  was  abandoned  when  it  became  apparent  that  our 
means  of  transportation  were  so  limited  as  to  render  it  impossible  to 
throw  sufficient  re-enforcements  on  Morris  Island  in  one  night,  and 
in  time  to  allow  the  advance  of  our  troops  to  the  south  end  before 
daylight. 

Two  regiments  under  Brigadier-General  Colquitt  arrived  on  the 
14th,  and  were  sent  to  James  Island.  During  the  day  the  enemy’s 
wooden  gunboats  and  mortar  vessels  shelled  Battery  Wagner  at  long 
range,  doing,  however,  little  damage.  The  enemy  worked  hard  on 
his  Morris  Island  batteries,  making  considerable  progress.  The  fire, 
however,  from  Fort  Sumter  and  Batteries  Wagner  and  Gregg  ap- 
peared to  harass  him  considerably. 

The  impossibility  of  expelling  the  enemy  from  Morris  Isfgnd 
being  fully  recognized,  I was  obliged  reluctantly  to  adopt  the  defeh- 
sive.  Orders  were  issued  for  closing  the  gateway  in  the  gorge  of 
Fort  Sumter,  and  removing  a portion  of  the  guns ; also  for  the 
construction  of  a covered  way  from  Fort  Moultrie  to  Battery  Bee. 


Chap.  XL.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


75 


During  the  night,  Brigadier-General  Taliaferro,  commanding  at 
Morris  Island,  sent  out  a party  of  150  men,  under  Major  [J.  H.] 
Rion,  of  the  Seventh  South  Carolina  Battalion,  who  drove  the 
enemy’s  pickets  from  his  rifle-pits  across  the  island,  some  three- 
quarters  of  a mile  from  Battery  Wagner. 

On  the  15th,  the  enemy  on  Morris  Island  appeared  to  be  largely 
re-enforced,  and  during  the  night  of  the  14th  the  frigate  Ironsides 
recrossed  the  bar.  The  enemy  was  busy  on  his  works ; our  men  em- 
ployed in  repairing  damages  in  Battery  Wagner  and  answering  the 
fire  of  the  monitors  and  gunboats. 

The  following  instructions  were  given  to  the  engineer  department : 
To  have  Shell  Point  Battery  constructed  for  three  instead  of  two 
guns ; the  mortar  batteries  at  Fort  Johnson  to  be  converted  into  gun 
batteries  for  one  heavy  rifled  gun  or  10-inch  columbiad  each;  to 
strengthen  the  gorge  wall  of  Fort  Sumter  by  means  of  wet  cotton 
bales,  filled  in  between  with  sand,  and  kept  moist  by  means  of  tubes 
or  hose  from  upper  terre-plein.  General  Ripley  was  also  instructed 
to  reduce  the  forces  on  Morris  Island  to  a command  simply  compe- 
tent to  hold  the  works  against  a coup  de  main ; also  to  furnish  the 
troops  on  that  island  with  several  hundred  rice  casks  for  the  con- 
struction of  “rat  holes”  in  the  sand-hills  in  rear  of  Battery  Wagner. 

Instructions  were  given  to  the  chief  of  subsistence  to  keep  rations 
on  Morris  Island  for  5,000  men  for  thirty  days,  and  on  James  Island 
rations  for  5,000  men  for  fifteen  days,  with  a reserve  supply  in  the 
city.  On  the  same  day  the  enemy’s  pickets  along  the  Stono  on  John’s 
Island  were  observed  to  be  increased  by  the  addition  of  negro  troops. 
Brigadier-General  Hagood  made  a reconnaissance  of  the  enemy  in 
his  front  on  James  Island. 

At  daybreak  on  the  morning  of  July  16,  Brigadier-General  Hagood, 
in  accordance  with  instructions,  attacked  the  enemy  on  James  Island, 
driving  them  to  the  shelter  of  their  gunboats  and  to  Battery  Island. 
The  loss  was  small  on  both  sides — 3 men  killed,  12  wounded,  and  3 
missing  on  our  side.  The  enemy  lost  40  negroes  killed  and  14  pris- 
oners left  in  our  hands. 

This  retreat  of  the  enemy  was  followed  by  the  advance  of  our 
troops,  who  have  occupied  the  ground  ever  since.  In  the  engagement, 
the  gunboat  Pawnee  was  forced  to  retire  down  the  Stono  River 
under  fire  from  our  light  artillery.  During  the  day,  the  monitors, 
gunboats,  and  mortar  vessels  shelled  Battery  Wagner.  The  enemy 
worked  diligently  on  their  batteries.  In  the  evening,  large  bodies 
of  infantry  were  landed  on  the  south  end  of  Morris  Island.  Colonel 
[D.  B.  ] Harris,  chief  engineer,  was  directed  to  increase  the  batteries 
on  James  Island  bearing  on  Morris  Island  by  at  least  twenty  guns 
on  siege  carriages,  so  as  to  envelop  the  enemy  with  a circular  fire 
whenever  he  might  gain  possession  of  the  northeast  end  of  Morris 
Island,  all  works  to  be  pushed  on  day  and  night. 

On  the  morning  of  the  17th,  the  enemy’s  fleet  left  the  Stono  River, 
after  embarking  his  forces  at  Battery  Island,  and  appeared  to  con- 
centrate them  on  Little  Folly  and  Morris  Islands.  Both  the  fleet 
and  land  batteries  of  the  enemy  shelled  Wagner  throughout  the  day, 
answered  vigorously  by  our  guns.  The  construction  of  batteries  on 
Morris  Island  by  the  enemy  proceeded  rapidly. 

In  a telegraphic  dispatch  forwarded  on  this  date,  I pointed  out  that 
the  contest  had  lapsed  into  one  of  engineering  skill,  where,  with 
sufficient  time,  labor,  and  long-range  guns,  our  success  was  very 
probable,  owing  to  the  plan  of  defense  adopted;  otherwise  it  was 


76  8..  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

doubtful  in  proportion  to  the  lack  of  these  three  elements  of  success. 
The  fire  from  the  enemy’s  batteries  from  this  date  prevented  com- 
munication with  Cumming’s  Point  during  daylight,  find  henceforth 
it  had  to  be  effected  at  night.  The  very  limited  transportation  at 
my  command  added  considerably  to  the  difficulties  of  relieving  the 
garrisons  on  Morris  Island  as  frequently  as  I could  have  wished. 
The  time  of  service  was  at  first  limited  to  forty-eight  hours,  but 
owing  to  the  difficulties  in  the  way  of  transportation,  I had  to  lengthen 
the  period  of  duty  on  Morris  Island  to  three  days. 

On  the  morning  of  July  18,  it  became  evident  that  the  enemy  was 
about  to  attempt  serious  operations  against  Wagner.  The  south  end 
of  Morris  Island  was  crowded  with  troops,  and  in  their  batteries  and 
advanced  works  great  activity  was  apparent,  large  bodies  of  men 
being  engaged  in  pushing  them  rajfidly  to  completion.  Troops  were 
continually  being  landed  on  Morris  from  Folly  Island;  these  advanced, 
and  took  up  position  in  line  of  battle  behind  their  breastworks.  At 
8.10  a.  m.  Battery  Wagner  opened ; five  minutes  afterwards  Battery 
Gregg  joined.  At  10  a.  m.  four  of  the  enemy’s  vessels  were  in  action. 
At  11.30  a.  m.  Fort  Sumter  opened  on  the  enemy’s  rifle-pits  on  Morris 
Island.  The  guns  of  Battery  Wagner  about  this  time  got  the  range 
of  the  enemy’s  working  parties,  and  seemed  to  harass  them  extremely. 
At  12.10  p.  m.  the  frigate  Ironsides  and  one  monitor  moved  up 
abreast  of  Battery  Wagner,  and  at  12.30  were  joined  by  two  other 
monitors,  when  they  opened  fire  on  the  work.  At  1 p.  m.  the  Iron- 
sides, five  monitors,  a large  wooden  frigate,  six  mortar-boats  (these 
latter  could  get  the  range  without  exposing  themselves),  and  the  land 
batteries  (mounting  five  guns),  concentrated  their  fire  on  Battery 
Wagner,  and  continued  it  until  dark.  The  enemy’s  firing  throughout 
the  day  was  very  rapid,  averaging  14  shots  per  minute,  and  unpar- 
alleled, until  this  epoch  of  the  siege,  in  the  weight  of  projectiles 
thrown. 

Brigadier-General  Taliaferro,  commanding  at  Battery  Wagner, 
estimated  that  9,000  shot  and  shell  were  thrown  in  and  against  the 
battery  during  the  eleven  and  a half  hours  that  the  bombardment 
lasted.  During  that  time  our  casualties  in  the  work  were  4 killed  and 
14  wounded.  Throughout  the  day  the  garrison  replied  slowly  to  the 
terrific  fire  to  which  it  was  exposed,  while  Fort  Sumter  and  Battery 
Gregg  fired  rapidly.  The  garrison  of  Battery  Wagner  consisted 
of  the  Charleston  Battalion,  the  Fifty-first  and  Thirty-first  North 
Carolina,  two  companies  of  the  Sixty-third  Georgia  Heavy  Artillery, 
and  two  companies  of  the  First  South  Carolina  [Regular]  Infantry, 
acting  as  artillery.  During  the  bombardment,  the  garrison  was 
kept  under  the  shelter  of  the  bomb-proofs,  with  the  exception  of  the 
Charleston  Battalion,  which  was  stationed  along  the  parapet  of  the 
work — a position  which  they  gallantly  maintained  throughout  the 
day,  exposed  to  a feu  d’enfer . Providentially  the  casualties  did  not 
exceed  8 killed  and  20  wounded. 

At  7. 45  in  the  evening,  the  assaulting  lines  of  the  enemy  were  seen 
advancing  from  their  works,  and  the  bombardment  from  the  fleet 
and  land  batteries  subsided.  The  garrison  were  quietly  called  to 
their  allotted  positions,  and,  with  the  exception  of  one  regiment,  re- 
sponded manfully  to  the  summons.  The  Charleston  Battalion  guarded 
the  right  of  the  work,  and  the  Fifty-first  North  Carolina  Yoluhteerg^ 
the  center.  These  two  regiments  drove  back  the  enemy  opposed  to 
them  with  terrible  slaughter,  while  our  guns,  discharging  grape  and 
canister  into  their  shattered  ranks,  completed  their  discomfiture.  On 


Chap.  XL.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


77 


the  left  of  the  work,  however,  the  Thirty-first  North  Carolina  dis- 
gracefully abandoned  their  position,  and  no  resistance  being  offered 
at  this  point,  a portion  of  the  enemy  succeeded  in  crossing  the  ditch, 
and  in  gaining  a foothold  upon  the  rampart.  The  main  body  of  the 
enemy,  after  vainly  endeavoring  to  gain  a position  upon  the  parapet, 
retreated  in  disorder,  under  a destructive  fire  from  our  guns,  includ- 
ing those  of  Fort  Sumter.  The  ditch  and  slope  of  the  southeastern 
angle  of  the  battery  was  then  swept  by  a fire  of  grape  and  musketry, 
in  order  to  prevent  the  escape  of  the  enemy  lodged  there,  who,  after 
a brief  resistance,  surrendered  themselves  prisoners. 

Brigadier-General  Hagood,  who,  in  anticipation  of  an  assault,  was 
relieved  from  the  command  of  James  Island,  and  with  Colonel  [George 
P.]  Harrison’s  regiment  (the  Thirty-second  Georgia  Volunteers)  was 
ordered  to  the  re-enforcement  of  Morris  Island,  arrived  in  time  to 
assist  in  the  dislodgment  of  that  portion  of  the  enemy  who  had  gained 
a footing  in  the  southeastern  salient,  but  not  before  the  attack  was 
made  and  the  enemy  repulsed.  The  assault  was  terribly  disastrous 
to  the  enemy.  His  loss  in  killed,  wounded,  and  prisoners  must  have 
been  3,000,  as  800  bodies  were  interred  in  front  of  Battery  Wagner 
on  the  following  morning.  The  enemy’s  forces  on  this  occasion  con- 
sisted of  troops  from  Connecticut,  Pennsylvania,  New  Hampshire, 
and  New  York,  and  the  Fifty-fourth  Massachusetts  negro  regiment, 
the  whole  said  to  be  under  the  command  of  Brigadier-General  Strong, 
who  died  afterward  from  the  effects  of  wounds  received  on  this 
occasion.  Brigadier-General  Taliaferro  reported  that  the  garrison, 
with  the  exception  of  the  Thirty-first  North  Carolina  Volunteers, 
behaved  throughout  with  the  utmost  gallantry.  The  heroic  conduct 
of  the  Fifty -first  North  Carolina  Volunteers  counterbalanced  the 
unworthy  behavior  of  the  Thirty-first,  and  retrieved  the  honor  of 
the  State. 

Our  own  loss  during  the  bombardment  and  assault  was  174  killed 
and  wounded. 

At  1 a.  m.  on  the  morning  of  July  19,  during  the  engagement,  I 
telegraphed  to  Brigadier-General  Ripley  that  Morris  Island  must  be 
held  at  all  costs  for  the  present,  and  re-enforcements  thrown  there  to 
push  any  advantage  possible  before  daylight.  The  day  passed  in  com- 
parative quiet.  The  enemy  sent  in  a flag  of  truce  in  the  morning  to 
arrange  for  the  burial  of  the  dead.  Brigadier-General  Hagood  re- 
ported that  600  of  the  enemy’s  dead  in  and  around  our  works  were 
buried  by  our  troops,  and  at  least  200  more  by  the  enemy.  The 
strengthening  of  the  gorge  wall  of  Sumter  by  cotton  bales  and  sand 
proceeded  rapidly. 

On  the  20th,  the  enemy  opened  fire  from  two  new  batteries.  Through- 
out the  day  the  fleet  joined  in  the  bombardment,  and  were  answered 
by  Fort  Sumter  and  Batteries  Gregg  and  Wagner.  At  3 p.  m.  in- 
formation was  received  that  the  10-inch  gun  at  Battery  Wagner  was 
dismounted.  I impressed  upon  General  Hagood,  commanding  the 
work,  that  I did  not  consider  10-inch  columbiads  essential  to  the  de- 
fense of  the  position  for  which  siege  guns,  musketry,  stout  arms 
and  hearts,  and  the  strength  of  sand  parapets  must  be  relied  on. 
Orders  were  issued,  however,  for  the  remounting  of  the  10-inch  gun, 
if  practicable. 

The  enemy’s  fleet  this  morning  consisted  of  four  monitors,  the 
Ironsides,  and  seventeen  vessels  inside  the  bar  ; fourteen  vessels 
outside : thirty  vessels  in  Folly  River;  one  gunboat  and  four  vessels 
in  North  Edisto,  and  one  steam  frigate,  one  sloop  of  war,  one  gun- 


78  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

boat,  and  thirty-four  transports  at  Hilton  Head.  Brigadier-General 
Ripley  was  instructed  this  day  to  have  the  guns  intended  for  the 
Legare  Point  Battery  mounted  immediately,  and  to  open  fire  with 
them  as  soon  as  possible.  Brigadier-General  Mercer  was  telegraphed 
to  send  on,  if  practicable,  another  10-inch  columbiad  from  the  Savan- 
nah works.  At  2 p.  m.  a shell  from  the  enemy’s  battery  struck  Fort 
Sumter,  and  some  eight  or  ten  30-pounder  Parrott  shots  were  fired  at 
the  fort  from  a distance  of  3,500  yards. 

Five  casualties  occurred  in  Battery  Wagner  on  this  date  and  1 in 
Fort  Sumter. 

On  the  21st,  the  enemy  sent  in  a flag  of  truce,  with  a communica- 
tion from  General  Gillmore,  requesting  an  interview  between  Gen- 
eral Yogdes  and  the  officer  commanding  Battery  Wagner.  The  pro- 
posal was  agreed  to,  and  the  flag  of  truce  was  met  by  an  officer  from 
that  work.  While  the  conference  was  proceeding,  the  fleet  opened 
a bombardment  on  Wagner.  This  gross  violation  of  the  usages  of 
war  was  responded  to  on  the  part  of  General  Hagood  by  an  abrupt 
termination  of  the  interview.  During  the  day,  the  enemy’s  gunboats 
and  land  batteries  shelled  Battery  Wagner.  The  enemy  had  appar- 
ently mounted  eight  new  guns  in  their  batteries.  Colonel  [Alfred] 
Rhett  reported  that  from  the  want  of  proper  appliances  he  had  been 
unable  to  dismount  the  guns  in  Fort  Sumter  which  I had  ordered  to 
be  removed. 

The  bombardment  continued  throughout  the  22d  from  fleet  and 
land  batteries,  with  an  interval  when  General  Vogdes,  U.  S.  Army, 
requested,  under  a flag  of  truce,  another  interview  with  Brigadier- 
General  Hagood.  This  was  refused  until  an  apology  should  be  made 
for  the  breach  of  truce  the  day  before.  This  having  been  given  and 
deemed  satisfactory,  General  V ogdes  verbally  proposed  an  exchange 
of  prisoners,  mentioning  that  they  had  but  few  of  ours,  all  excepting 
those  recently  captured  having  been  sent  north ; that  as  we  had  the 
excess,  of  course  we  could  select  whom  to  exchange.  He  abstained 
from  any  reference  to  negroes,  while  intimating  that  a mutual  pa- 
role of  prisoners,  without  regard  to  excess,  would  be  agreeable. 

The  following  instructions  were  given  to  Brigadier-General  Rip- 
ley : Hot  to  open  fire  from  the  new  James  Island  batteries  until  their 
completion;  then  to  carry  on  a vigorous  fire  with  guns  and  mortars 
on  the  enemy’s  works.  Sorties  to  be  made  at  night  whenever  prac- 
ticable. 

In  my  telegram  to  you  of  this  date,  I mentioned  the  continual  re- 
enforcement of  the  enemy  ; that  I had  to  guard  three  important  lines 
of  approach  (James,  Morris,  and  Sullivan’s  Islands),  and  requested 
the  balance  of  General  Colquitt’s  brigade,  with  more  troops  as  soon 
as  possible. 

Ho  gun  was  fired  on  either  side  during  the  23d.  Our  men  were 
engaged  in  repairing  damages.  The  enemy  were  busy  erecting  bat- 
teries and  throwing  up  traverses  to  protect  them  from  the  fire  of  the 
James  Island  batteries. 

On  the  morning  of  the  24th,  a heavy  bombardment  was  opened 
upon  Battery  Wagner  from  five  monitors,  two  gunboats,  two  mortar 
vessels,  the  Ironsides,  and  land  batteries,  which  continued  until 
9.30  a.  m.,  when  the  steamer  with  the  prisoners  on  board  proceeded 
to  the  fleet,  and  the  exchange  was  effected,  as  previously  agreed  on. 

Colonel  Harris,  chief  engineer,  having  inspected  Battery  Wagner, 
reported  no  material  damage  to  the  work.  The  guns  on  the  sea  face 
unserviceable ; on  the  land  front  in  good  order,  The  enemy’s  stock- 
ade within  700  yards  of  the  fort. 


Chap.  XL.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


79 


Brigadier-General  Taliaferro,  wlio  liad  relieved  Brigadier-General 
Hagood  in  the  command  of  Battery  Wagner,  on  the  night  of  the  22d 
came  to  the  city  to  confer  personally  with  me  regarding  the  condi- 
tion of  the  garrison  of  Battery  Wagner,  the  officers  having  reported 
their  men  as  considerably  dispirited.  After  a conference  with  him,  I 
communicated  my  views,  as  follows : The  position  must  be  held,  if 
possible,  until  the  guns  en  route  from  Richmond  shall  be  received 
and  placed  in  position.  No  idea  of  evacuation  must  be  entertained, 
if  there  is  a chance  at  night  to  repair  the  damages  of  the  day.  Every 
night  preparations  will  be  on  hand  for  removing  troops  from  Morris 
Island  in  case  of  need.  Battery  Wagner  must  be  held  and  fought 
to  the  last  extremity.  The  garrison  might  rest  assured  that  every 
preparation  will  be  made  for  their  withdrawal  in  case  the  work 
should  become  untenable. 

My  telegram  to  you  of  this  date  was  : 

The  enemy’s  fleet  and  land  batteries  shelled  Battery  Wagner  heavily  this  morn- 
ing. Garrison  lost  only  1 killed  and  7 wounded.  Hope  to  repair  damages  during 
the  night.  Am  anxiously  waiting  for  heavy  guns  promised  from  Richmond. 

On  the  25th,  the  enemy’s  fleet  remained  quiet,  owing  to  the  high 
sea,  and  his  land  batteries  fired  but  little,  Fort  Sumter,  Battery  Gregg, 
and  the  James  Island  batteries  answering.  A 30-pounder  Parrott 
was  again  brought  to  bear  on  Fort  Sumter  from  the  same  battery  as 
on  the  20th.  During  the  day,  I informed  you  by  telegraph  that  sev- 
eral of  my  new  batteries  were  ready  for  their  armament.  The 
strengthening  of  Fort  Sumter  proceeded  day  and  night,  and  in  an- 
ticipation of  the  damaging  effect  which  the  enemy’s  heavy  rifled 
guns  from  stationary  batteries  would  have  on  this  work,  a partial 
disarmament  was  carried  on  nightly. 

On  Sunday,  the  26th,  the  bombardment  of  the  enemy  slackened. 
During  the  night,  shelling  of  the  enemy’s  works  was  carried  on  from 
Fort  Sumter.  Re-enforcements  were  seen  throughout  the  day  dis- 
embarking on  Morris  Island. 

I telegraphed  on  that  day : 

Have  nine  positions  ready.  Not  one  gun  promised  from  Richmond  has  yet 
arrived.  Cannot  their  transportation  be  expedited? 

The  weather  on  the  27th  was  too  windy  for  the  co-operation  of  the 
fleet,  which  had  been  increased  by  the  addition  of  another  monitor. 
During  the  day  the  bombardment  from  the  land  batteries  slackened. 
Our  defenses  were  pushed  on  vigorously,  while  the  strengthening  of 
Fort  Sumter  and  the  withdrawal  of  guns  from  that  work  proceeded. 
The  enemy  showed  great  activity  in  advancing  their  work,  though 
harassed  by  the  fire  of  our  batteries. 

On  the  28th,  Battery  Wagner  sustained  another  very  severe  bom- 
bardment from  the  enemy’s  land  and  naval  batteries,  but  no  great 
damage  was  done.  Two  men  were  killed  and  5 wounded. 

My  telegraphic  dispatch  on  the  evening  of  the  28th  was  : 

Many  transports  of  the  enemy  are  arriving  with  troops.  At  least  2,500  more 
men  are  required  at  present  for  James  Island.  Cannot  they  be  ordered  here  im- 
mediately ? Enemy’s  land  and  naval  batteries  are  now  playing  on  Wagner,  which 
replies  bravely  with  Gregg  and  Sumter. 

On  the  29th,  Battery  Wagner  was  heavily  bombarded  throughout 
the  day  by  the  fleet  and  land  batteries.  In  a telegram  to  you  of  this 
date,  I notified  you  of  the  arrival  of  some  of  the  promised  guns  from 
Richmond. 

Have  received  four  10-inch  columbiads  and  ffiur  10-inch  mortars,  Regret  to  say, 


80 


S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  ELA. 


[Chap.  XL. 


by  order  of  Secretary  of  the  Navy,  two  Brooke  guns  have  been  taken  from  me,  to 
be  shut  up  in  a new  gunboat  so  pierced  as  only  to  give  a range  of  a mile  and  a half 
at  most. 

Throughout  the  30th,  Batteries  Wagner  and  Gregg  were  subjected 
to  a furious  fire  from  both  land  batteries  and  fleet.  As  an  example 
of  the  rapid  fire  of  the  enemy,  I may  mention  that  between  the  hours 
of  10.30  a.  m.  and  1 p.  m.  599  shots  were  fired  at  our  different  bat- 
teries, principally  Gregg  and  Wagner.  During  the  same  time,  110 
shots  were  fired  from  our  works. 

Our  loss  to-day  was  2 killed  and  7 wounded  in  Battery  Wagner. 
No  damage  of  consequence  done  to  the  works. 

Brigadier-General  Ripley  was  instructed  to  transport  as  early  as 
possible  one  of  the  10-inch  columbiads  lately  arrived  from  Richmond 
to  Battery  Wagner,  which  was  accomplished  on  the  night  of  the 
30th. 

The  enemy  fired  heavily  on  Battery  Wagner  throughout  the  31st. 
Our  loss  was  7 wounded.  Our  new  works  progressed  very  satisfac- 
torily, and  the  strengthening  of  Fort  Sumter  and  removal  of  its 
guns  went  on  rapidly. 

The  enemy’s  fire  on  August  1 was  slack,  and  did  but  little  execu- 
tion, save  a slight  injury  to  the  front  traverse  of  the  8-inch  shell  gun 
in  Battery  Wagner,  which  did  not,  however,  disable  it.  The  casual- 
ties to-day  were  only  2 wounded.  The  enemy  was  industriously 
engaged  in  throwing  up  new  batteries  and  advancing  his  trenches. 
Every  endeavor  was  made,  by  firing  from  Sumter,  Gregg,  Wagner, 
and  the  James  Island  batteries,  to  annoy  and  delay  his  approach. 

Throughout  the  morning  of  August  2,  the  enemy  did  not  answer 
our  fire;  but  about  2 o’clock  they  opened  with  vigor  on  Wagner. 
The  damage  done  to  the  work,  however,  was  comparatively  small. 
In  my  telegram  of  that  date  I mentioned  that — 

Transports  filled  with  troops  are  reported  going  south  from  Stono,  probably  in- 
tended to  operate  against  Savannah.  Cannot  some  of  my  troops  sent  to  General 
Johnston  be  ordered  back  immediately  for  defense  of  this  city  ? 

Orders  were  given  to  the  chief  quartermaster  to  have  trains  in 
waiting  sufficient  to  transport  two  regiments  of  infantry  to  Savan- 
nah. The  difficulties  attending  the  defense  of  Charleston  were 
greatly  increased  by  the  celerity  with  which  the  enemy  could  remove 
his  operations  from  one  point  to  another,  and  from  the  paucity  of 
troops  in  my  command.  Savannah  and  the  coast  line  were  nearly 
denuded.  Instructions  were  given  for  increasing  the  armament  of 
Fort  Johnson  by  two  6.40-inch  Brooke  guns  turned  over  by  the  Navy 
Department,  and  to  place  floating  torpedoes  in  certain  localities. 
Brigadier-General  Mercer  was  directed  to  forward  a detachment  of 
artillerists  to  relieve  those  of  the  Sixty-third  Georgia  Volunteers, 
who  had  become  reduced  by  casualties  and  sickness,  and  had  been 
ordered  to  return  to  Savannah.  The  Ordnance  Department  in  Rich- 
mond was  applied  to  for  Coehorn  mortars. 

The  fire  of  the  enemy  of  the  3d  was  not  heavy,  but  his  sharp- 
shooters annoyed  the  garrison  of  Wagner  considerably.  No  casual- 
ties occurred  during  the  day.  Brigadier-General  Mercer,  at  Savan- 
nah, was  informed  that  transports  were  reported  moving  south  from 
here,  and  that  two  regiments  were  held  in  readiness  to  move  at  a 
moment’s  notice.  I was  informed  that  Evans’  brigade  was  ordered 
to  Savannah  from  Mississippi.  In  a personal  visit  paid  to  Morris 
Island  that  evening,  I found  Battery  Wagner  in  very  serviceable 


Chap.  XL.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


81 


condition.  The  work  was  more  solidly  constructed  than  when  the 
first  attack  took  place.  The  garrison  appeared  to  he  in  fine  spirits, 
and  ready  to  defend  the  work  to  the  last.  At  Fort  Sumter  the  fill- 
ing of  the  officers’  quarters  and  the  casemates  was  rapidly  approach- 
ing completion.  An  exterior  sand-bag  revetment  to  the  gorge  wall 
was  ordered,  as  well  as  a series  of  traverses,  en  barbette , on  the  east, 
south,  and  northeast  faces,  and  many  changes  and  removals  in  the 
armament. 

During  August  4 but  little  firing  occurred  on  either  side.  Orders 
were  given  to  rearrange  certain  guns  in  the  batteries  and  lines 
on  Janies  Island.  Major  [J.  T.]  Trezevant,  commandant  of  the 
Charleston  Arsenal,  was  requested  to  collect  all  the  old  iron  in  the 
burned  districts  of  the  city,  to  be  cast  into  projectiles.  Orders  were 
given  to  Brigadier-General  Ripley  to  arrange  with  Captain  [J.  R.] 
Tucker,  of  the  navy,  for  an  attempt  to  capture  the  enemy’s  pickets 
in  the  Marsh  Battery,  near  Vincent’s  Creek. 

On  the  5th,  the  guns  in  Battery  Wagner  were  all  in  fighting  order. 
Our  sharpshooters,  armed  with  Whitworth  rifles,  seemed  to  annoy 
the  enemy  greatly,  who  endeavored  to  silence  their  fire  with  Coehorn 
mortars.  About  9 o’clock  on  that  night,  a picket  of  the  enemy  which 
had  taken  possession  of  our  unfinished  battery  in  Vincent’s  Creek, 
and  by  signaling  the  arrival  of  our  steamers  at  Cumming’s  Point 
interfered  materially  with  our  operations,  was  attacked  by  a party 
from  the  navy  and  from  the  Twenty-fifth  South  Carolina  Volun- 
teers. The  result  was  satisfactory.  One  captain  and  10  enlisted 
men  of  the  enemy  were  captured.  Our  loss  was  1 man  killed. 
Our  defensive  works  at  Fort  Sumter  and  other  points  progressed 
rapidly.  The  telegram  of  this  day’s  date  was  : 

Enemy  still  being  largely  re-enforced  from  northward.  Cannot  General  Colquitt’s 
other  regiment  be  ordered  here  at  once  ? More  troops  are  absolutely  required. 

Throughout  the  6th,  the  enemy  fired  occasional  shots  from  his 
land  batteries  and  fleet,  but  without  material  result.  One  casualty 
occurred.  Our  batteries  fired  at  intervals  throughout  the  day.  Brig- 
adier-General Cobb  was  ordered  by  telegraph  to  send  500  infantry 
and  one  light  battery  to  report  to  Brigadier-General  Mercer,  in 
Savannah.  The  enemy  on  Morris  Island  worked  laboriously  on  his 
batteries  and  trenches,  while  strong  re-enforcements  of  troops  were 
daily  seen  arriving. 

On  the  7th,  I received  a telegram  from  you,  informing  me  that  the 
balance  of  Colquitt’s  brigade  was  ordered  to  Charleston.  There  was 
little  firing  throughout  the  day.  Only  2 casualties  occurred  on  Mor- 
ris Island. 

On  the  8th,  Brigadier-General  Evans  reported  his  arrival  in  Sa- 
vannah. A large  increase  was  visible  in  the  enemy’s  fleet  in  the  Stono. 
During  the  day  firing  at  intervals  was  carried  on  from  our  batteries, 
but  the  enemy  remained  quiet  till  the  evening,  when  he  opened  on 
Battery  Wagner,  and  continued  the  fire  throughout  the  night.  In- 
structions were  given  to  the  chief  engineer  to  expedite  the  putting 
up  in  Fort  Sumter  of  the  sand-bag  chemise  to  the  gorge  wall,  the  in- 
terior traverses,  merlons,  embrasures,  and  a covered  way  to  be  erected 
between  Batteries  Wagner  and  Gregg. 

The  fire  of  the  enemy  during  the  morning  of  the  9th  was  heavy 
and  rapid  from  his  land  batteries.  The  officer  in  command  of  the 
advance  pickets  reported  that  the  enemy  worked  industriously  in 
his  trenches  until  2 a.  m.  The  fire  of  our  sharpshooters  evidently 
§ R R— VOL  XXVIII,  PT  I 


82  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

seemed  to  annoy  the  enemy,  as  he  occasionally  fired  with  great  spirit 
to  dislodge  them,  bnt  ineffectually.  One  casualty  in  Battery  Wag- 
ner during  the  day. 

The  effective  force  on  Morris  Island  was  663  infantry,  248  artillery, 
and  11  cavalry ; total,  922. 

During  the  day,  I received  the  following  telegram  from  Brig.  Gen. 
M.  Jenkins,  dated  Petersburg,  Ya.  : 

My  scouts  report  shipment  of  troops  (both  infantry  and  cavalry)  from  Norfolk, 
supposed  for  Charleston.  Large  quantities  of  forage  shipped.  Cavalry  left  6th 
instant. 

The  chief  engineer  was  instructed  to  lay  out  and  erect  a line  of 
works  on  James  Island,  from  Spcessionville  to  Dill’s  house,  in  lieu  of 
the  present  defensive  lines,  to  consist  of  lunettes  with  closed  gorges, 
disposed  at  one-half  to  three-quarters  of  a mile  apart,  and  connected 
with  cremaillere  lines. 

Captain  Tucker,  C.  S.  Navy,  was  informed  of  the  practice  on  the 
part  of  the  enemy  of  putting  out  boat  pickets  at  night  to  observe  the 
movements  of  our  transportation  to  Morris  Island,  and  it  was  sug- 
gested to  Captain  Tucker  that  steps  should  be  taken  by  the  navy  to 
break  up  these  pickets. 

Upon  the  approach  of  one  of  our  transportation  steamers,  signals 
would  be  exchanged  between  the  enemy’s  boats  and  their  land  bat- 
teries, and  these  latter  opening  immediately  a heavy  fire  uponCum- 
ming’s  Point,  rendered  our  communications  extremely  difficult  and 
hazardous.  At  times,  also,  the  enemy  illuminated  the  landing  with 
a powerful  calcium  light,  so  as  to  prevent  the  approach  of  our  steam- 
ers, forcing  us  to  transport  our  supplies  of  men  and  munitions  by 
means  of  small  boats. 

During  the  10th,  the  enemy  remained  comparatively  quiet  until 
about  8 p.  m.,  when  he  opened  briskly  on  Battery  Wagner.  On  our 
side,  firing  was  kept  up  from  Battery  Simkins  with  columbiads  from 
11  a.  m.  to  11  p.  m.,  when  mortar  firing  was  resumed  and  continued 
until  morning. 

The  enemy  on  Morris  Island  was  busy  during  the  past  night,  and 
his  advance  works  were  then  about  600  yards  from  Battery  Wagner, 
though  no  guns  were  yet  in  that  position. 

My  telegram  to  you  of  that  date  was  : 

Nothing  of  importance  has  occurred  since  yesterday.  Evans’  brigade  is  arriving 
in  Savannah,  and  Colquitt’s  regiments  arriving  here. 

About  7 o’clock  on  the  morning  of  the  11th,  the  fleet  and  land  bat- 
teries opened  heavily  on  Battery  Wagner,  and  were  replied  to  by 
Fort  Sumter  and  Batteries  Simkins  and  Gregg.  One  casualty  oc- 
curred during  the  day,  the  enemy,  as  well  as  ourselves,  working 
persistently  in  spite  of  the  excessive  heat. 

Our  garrison  on  Morris  Island  consisted  of  1,245  of  all  arms. 

At  5.45  o’clock  on  the  morning  of  the  12th,  the  enemy  opened 
on  Fort  Sumter  with  an  8-inch  Parrott  gun,  firing  from  battery  to 
north  and  west  of  Craig’s  Hill,  Morris  Island  ; distance  estimated  to 
be  at  least  4,400  yards.  Eleven  shots  in  all  were  fired  at  the  fort ; 
4 missed,  3 struck  outside,  and  4 within  the  fort.  Again,  at  5.30 
p.  m.,  the  enemy  opened  on  Fort  Sumter  from  the  same  battery, 
firing  at  intervals  of  ten  minutes  till  dark.  Eleven  8-inch  rifled 
shot  struck  the  fort. 

Heavy  firing  was  carried  on  throughout  the  day  against  Battery 
Wagner.  Fort  Sumter,  Batteries  Gregg  and  Simkins  directed  tfieir 


Chap.  XL.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


83 


fire  against  the  enemy’s  working  parties  on  the  left  of  his  approach, 
and  dispersed  them,  stopping  the  work  they  were  throwing  up.  At 
dark,  Battery  Wagner  opened  with  eight  guns  on  the  enemy’s  ad- 
vanced trenches,  and,  in  conjunction  with  Fort  Sumter  and  Battery 
Simkins,  prevented  any  progress  on  the  part  of  the  enemy.  His 
batteries  in  rear  replied  to  the  fire  of  Wagner,  and  interrupted  our 
communications  with  Cumming’s  Point. 

On  the  13th,  the  enemy  endeavored  several  times  to  repair  the  dam- 
age done  to  his  advanced  works  during  the  preceding  night,  but  well- 
directed  shots  from  Battery  Wagner  as  often  drove  him  back.  The 
batteries  in  rear  and  the  fleet  then  opened  fire  on  Wagner  and  Gregg, 
and  were  answered  by  Fort  Sumter  and  Battery  Simkins.  At  5. 30 
a.  m.  the  enemy  opened  with  8-inch  Parrotts  from  the  same  battery 
as  the  day  before,  firing  two  or  three  times  only.  At  11  a.  m.  three  or 
four  wooden  gunboats,  armed  with  heavy  rifled  guns,  approached 
within  4,000  and  5,000  yards  of  Fort  Sumter,  and  opened  a slow  fire. 
Some  fifteen  shots  were  fired  with  great  range  ; three  only  struck  the 
fort.  One  shot  passed  over  the  fort  at  great  elevation,  and  dropped 
a mile  to  the  westward.  At  5 p.  m.  the  enemy  opened  again  on  the 
fort  with  the  8-inch  Parrotts.  No  great  damage  was  done.  The 
farthest  penetration  into  the  brick  work  was  about  4 feet. 

On  the  14th,  the  land  batteries  opened  on  Fort  Sumter,  firing  three 
shots ; two  struck.  About  11a.  m.  the  wooden  gunboats  shelled  the 
fort  at  long  range,  and  at  5.15  p.  m.  the  land  batteries  again  opened 
on  the  fort. 

Throughout  the  day  the  enemy  remained  quiet,  firing  occasionally, 
and  replied  to  by  our  batteries.  The  sharpshooters  on  both  sides 
kept  up  a constant  fire.  During  the  night  the  fire  from  Battery 
Wagner  put  a stop  to  the  enemy’s  operations  in  its  front.  The 
strengthening  of  Fort  Sumter  advanced  rapidly  day  and  night. 

Brigadier-General  Ripley  was  instructed  as  to  the  armament  of 
certain  portions  of  the  new  lines  on  James  Island,  and  of  a new  bat- 
tery thrown  up  near  Fort  Johnson. 

During  the  greater  part  of  the  15th,  the  enemy,  both  on  land  and 
sea,  were  unusually  quiet,  occasionally  firing  at  Battery  Wagner. 
Later  in  the  day  they  opened  with  some  vigor  on  Battery  Gregg. 

The  enemy’s  fleet  consisted  this  morning  of  the  Ironsides,  six  moni- 
tors, eight  gunboats,  three  mortar  hulks,  and  thirteen  vessels  inside 
the  bar ; outside,  seven ; at  Hilton  Head,  fifty-two  vessels,  including 
gunboats  and  iron-clads. 

My  telegram  of  this  date  was  : 

No  change  worth  recording  since  yesterday.  Sand-bag  revetment  of  gorge  wall 
of  Sumter  and  traverses  inside  of  fort  progressing  as  rapidly  as  means  of  transpor- 
tation will  permit. 

On  the  16th,  the  enemy’s  batteries  fired  but  little  on  Batteries 
Wagner  and  Gregg;  but  during  the  afternoon  the  two  8-inch  Par- 
rotts opened  on  Fort  Sumter,  throwing  48  shells.  Four  passed 
over,  4 fell  short,  2 struck  inside  the  parade,  and  30  hit  in  various 
places,  exterior  and  interior.  At  this  date  the  armament  of  the 
fort  consisted  of  thirty-eight  guns  and  two  mortars,  at  least  twenty 
guns  having  been  withdrawn  since  the  landing  of  the  enemy  on 
Morris  Island.  Orders  were  given  to  Brigadier-General  Ripley 
to  remove  to  Battery  Gregg  the  two  mortars  in  Fort  Sumter  as 
soon  as  it  should  become  impossible  to  use  them  with  advantage 
iu  the  latter  work?  and  to  transport  to  other  points  every  gun  in 


84  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

Sumter  not  actually  required  for  its  defense  and  by  the  new  rela- 
tions of  that  work  to  the  defense  of  the  harbor.  The  chief  engineer 
was  instructed  to  strengthen  Castle  Pinckney  with  sand-bags ; Fort 
Johnson  to  be  arranged  for  two  additional  10-inch  guns,  and  posi- 
tions to  be  prepared  for  the  10-inch  guns  to  be  placed  on  the  James 
Island  shore  of  the  harbor. 

Battery  W agner  was  bombarded  heavily  by  the  enemy  about  day- 
light on  the  17th.  About  9 a.  m.  the  Ironsides  and  six  monitors 
joined  in  the  action.  Their  guns  were  turned  also  on  Battery  Gregg 
and  Fort  Sumter,  a heavy  cannonade  being  directed  against  those 
three  works,  but  principally  against  Wagner,  which,  having  only 
two  10-inch  columbiads  and  one  32-pounder  rifle  to  reply  to  the 
enemy’s  fleet,  maintained  the  unequal  contest  more  than  one  hour, 
when  Colonel  Keitt,  commanding  on  Morris  Island,  ordered  the  brave 
artillerists  and  their  gallant  officers  to  the  cover  of  the  bomb-proofs. 
During  this  terrible  fire,  the  engineer  department  lost  the  valuable 
services  of  a most  promising  officer,  Capt.  J.  M.  Wampler,  of  Vir- 
ginia, who  was  killed  by  the  explosion  of  a 15-inch  shell.  During  the 
engagement,  Captain  [C.  R.  P.]  Rodgers,  commanding  the  monitor 
Weehawken,  was  killed*  in  the  pilot-house  of  his  ship.  In  the 
twenty-four  hours,  948  [951]  shots  were  fired  against  Fort  Sumter ; 
448  struck  outside,  233  inside,  and  270  passed  over.  The  casualties 
in  the  fort  amounted  to  14. 

On  August  18,  19,  20,  21,  22,  and  23,  the  fierce  bombardment  of 
Fort  Sumter  was  continued  by  the  enemy,  both  from  his  land  bat- 
teries and  at  intervals  from  his  fleet.  From  the  17th  to  the  23d,  in- 
clusive, he  fired  against  the  fort  a total  of  5,643  shots,  of  which 
number  2,643  struck  inside,  1,699  outside,  and  1,301  missed.  These 
projectiles  varied  in  weight  from  30  pounds  to  300  pounds,  and  were 
fired  from  Parrott  and  15-inch  smooth-bore  guns.  An  average  of 
150  pounds  per  shot  would  give  a weight  of  nearly  385  tons  dis- 
charged against  the  walls  of  Fort  Sumter  during  this  period  of  seven 
days.  At  the  end  of  this  time  nearly  all  the  guns  remaining  in  the 
fort  were  unserviceable,  and  the  damage  to  the  gorge  wall  and  the 
northwest  face  by  the  reverse  fire  was  great ; but  the  sand  that  had 
been  placed  on  the  outside  of  the  gorge  wall,  in  conjunction  with  the 
filling  up  of  the  barracks  and  casemates  with  cotton  bales,  and,  above 
all,  the  crumbling  of  the  masonry  under  the  enemy’s  fire,  converted 
this  portion  of  Fort  Sumter  into  a mass  of  debris  and  rubbish  on 
which  the  enemy’s  powerful  artillery  could  make  but  little  impres- 
sion. Throughout  the  siege  the  unremitting  exertions  of  the  engi- 
neer corps  hourly  increased  the  defensive  power  of  the  work. 

The  following  extract  from  the  journal  of  the  engineer  officer  at 
Fort  Sumter  from  August  23  will  show  the  condition  of  the  work  on 
that  date : 

The  northwest  front  has  now  five  arches  with  ramparts  fallen  in  ; northeast  bar- 
bette battery  unserviceable  ; east  front  scarp  much  scaled  by  slant  fire,  with  large 
craters  under  traverses,  principal  injury  at  level  of  arches  and  terre-plein ; two- 
thirds  of  southern  wall  of  east  magazine  damaged;  stone  revetment  unhurt  and  pro- 
tected by  rubbish;  gorge  not  damaged  since  yesterday ; another  shot  penetrated 
above  sand  filling  of  second-story  rooms,  making  three  since  the  attack  began;  east 
barbette  battery  parapet  much  loosened  and  undermined,  though  not  displaced  ; one 
10-inch  and  one  11-inch  gun  untouched ; Brooke  gun-carriage  shattered,  but  can 
easily  be  mounted  on  10 -inch  columbiad  carriage. 

During  the  seven  days  that  the  enemy  so  vigorously  bombarded 


* A mistake, 


Chap.  XL.] 


GEKERAL  REPORTS. 


85 


Fort  Sumter,  his  approaches  to  Battery  Wagner  were  slowly  pushed 
forward  under  the  fire  of  our  guns  and  sharpshooters.  On  the  21st, 
he  made  an  unsuccessful  attack  on  our  rifle-pits  directly  in  front  of 
Battery  Wagner.  The  same  day  at  12  m.,  under  flag  of  truce,  Gen- 
eral Gillmore  sent  a demand  for  the  surrender  of  Fort  Sumter  and 
Morris  Island,  with  the  threat  that  in  case  of  non-compliance  he 
would  open  fire  on  the  city.  Four  hours  were  allowed  for  a reply. 
This  dispatch  was  received  at  the  headquarters  of  the  department  at 
10.45  p.  m.  The  enemy  carried  his  threat  into  execution  by  throwing 
several  shells  into  the  city  about  1.30  o’clock  on  the  morning  of  the 
22d. 

On  the  24th,  the  fire  on  Fort  Sumter  lessened  considerably;  not 
more  than  150  shots  were  thrown  against  it  in  the  course  of  the  day. 
Every  endeavor  was  made  to  retard  the  approach  of  the  besiegers  to 
Battery  Wagner.  His  working  parties  were  fired  on  from  the  bat- 
tery ; but  this  had  to  be  discontinued  and  the  embrasures  closed  in 
order  to  prevent  our  pieces  from  being  dismounted. 

Until  3 o’clock  in  the  afternoon  of  the  25th,  the  enemy’s  fire  was 
principally  directed  against  Fort  Sumter.  After  that  time  Battery 
Wagner  was  fiercely  bombarded,  as  well  as  the  space  between  our 
rifle-pits  and  the  work.  At  dusk,  the  enemy  endeavored  to  carry  the 
position  held  by  our  pickets,  but  were  repulsed.  Our  loss  was  5 killed 
and  19  wounded.  A very  large  amount  of  ammunition  and  ord- 
nance stores  were  removed  from  Fort  Sumter  during  the  night. 

On  the  26th,  130  shots  were  fired  at  Sumter,  Batteries  Wagner  and 
Gregg  receiving  the  bulk  of  the  fire.  At  5 o’clock  in  the  evening, 
the  enemy  concentrated  his  fire  on  our  rifle-pits  in  front  of  Battery 
Wagner.  Between  7 and  8 p.  m.  the  rifle-pits  were  carried  by  an 
overwhelming  force,  who  also  succeeded  in  capturing  76  out  of  89 
men  of  the  Sixty-first  North  Carolina  Volunteers,  who  formed  the 
picket. 

The  fire  against  Fort  Sumter  was  limited  on  the  27th  to  4 shots. 

In  front  of  Battery  Wagner  the  enemy  had  advanced  his  trenches 
to  within  300  yards  of  the  work,  while  the  number  of  the  enemy’s 
guns  and  the  accuracy  of  his  fire  prevented  the  opening  of  the  em- 
brasures in  Battery  Wagner  excepting  at  night. 

The  honorable  Secretary  of  War  informed  me  by  telegraph,  in  an- 
swer to  a request  that  I had  made  for  the  services  as  boatmen  of  some 
of  the  sailors  stationed  in  Savannah,  that  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy 
declined  sending  them,  and  urged  detail  of  men.  I replied  by  letter, 
setting  forth  the  fact  that  the  army  in  this  department  was  already 
depleted  by  details  for  the  navy,  and  that  no  more  men  could  be 
spared.  The  importance  of  keeping  our  water  transportation  to 
Morris  Island  in  an  effective  condition  was  represented,  and  that 
without  an  additional  force  of  boatmen  it  could  not  be  preserved  ; 
further,  that  the  iron-clads  at  Savannah  are  safely  sheltered  behind 
obstructions,  and,  were  a portion  of  their  crews  sent  to  Charleston, 
they  could  be  returned  in  the  event  of  an  emergency  there. 

On  the  28th,  the  enemy  was  extremely  quiet,  firing  only  6 shots 
at  Sumter;  but  his  approaches  toward  Battery  Wagner  advanced 
rapidly,  notwithstanding  the  fire  directed  upon  him  from  Gregg,  the 
James  Island  batteries,  and  the  sharpshooters  in  Battery  Wagner. 

The  enemy  did  not  fire  at  Fort  Sumter  during  the  29th,  but  worked 
industriously  at  his  fortifications  on  Morris  Island.  His  advanced 
works  were  shelled  throughout  the  day  by  Battery  Wagner,  Fort 
Moultrie,  and  the  James  Island  batteries. 


86  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

During  the  night,  the  enemy’s  guns  were  silent  in  front  of  Bat- 
tery Wagner,  hut  they  renewed  the  bombardment  of  Fort  Sumter 
before  daylight  on  the  morning  of  the  30th,  and  during  the  day  threw 
634  shots  against  it.  They  were  also  busily  engaged  in  completing 
their  advanced  works,  though  greatly  disturbed  by  the  fire  from 
Wagner  and  our  James  Island  batteries,  which  compelled  them 
to  desist  from  the  work  of  advancing  a sap  on  the  left  of  Battery 
Wagner. 

In  the  evening,  the  enemy  opened  a brisk  fire  on  Wagner  with 
both  mortars  and  Parrott  guns.  1ST o serious  damage  was  done  to  the 
work,  but  several  casualties  occurred.  During  the  night,  Battery 
Wagner  kept  up  a steady  and  effective  fire  on  the  enemy’s  advanced 
works. 

Early  on  the  morning  of  the  31st,  as  the  steamer  Sumter  was  re- 
turning from  Morris  Island  with  troops  on  board,  she  was  unfor- 
tunately fired  into  from  the  Sullivan’s  Island  batteries  and  sunk. 
Four  men  were  killed  or  drowned,  and  the  greater  portion  of  the 
arms  were  lost. 

Between  11  a.  m.  and  12  m.  one  of  the  monitors  approached  Fort 
Moultrie,  and  when  within  range  was  opened  on  by  the  fort.  The 
enemy  replied  with  shrapnel,  all  of  which  fell  short.  After  about  an 
hour’s  engagement,  the  monitor  withdrew.  About  2 p.  m.  the  enemy 
again  approached  with  four  monitors,  and  engaged  the  fort  for  four 
hours.  A steady  fire  was  kept  up  on  them  from  Fort  Moultrie  and 
other  Sullivan’s  Island  batteries.  During  the  engagement,  the  enemy 
fired  about  60  shots,  striking  Fort  Moultrie  fifteen  times,  but  doing 
no  damage.  The  fort  fired  132  shots. 

The  enemy’s  fire  on  Fort  Sumter  was  slack  throughout  the  day. 
Captain  [Samuel]  Le  Roy  Hammond,  Twenty -fifth  South  Carolina 
Volunteers,  reported  during  the  day  that,  in  obedience  to  instruc- 
tions, he  had  made  a reconnaissance  of  Light-House  Inlet  and  the 
south  side  of  Black  Island.  On  the  island  he  saw  pickets  and  biv- 
ouac fires,  but  discovered  no  earthworks. 

During  the  night,  the  enemy  succeeded  in  advancing  their  sap  a 
short  distance  toward  Battery  Wagner,  notwithstanding  the  lfeavy 
fire  that  was  kept  up  on  them  from  that  work. 

At  daylight  on  September  1,  the  enemy  opened  on  Wagner  with 
mortars,  and  continued  at  intervals  during  the  entire  day.  The  two 
8-inch  howitzers  on  the  salient  and  curtains  of  the  works  were  dis- 
abled, and  the  two  8-inch  shell  guns  on  the  land  face  were  also  par- 
tially disabled. 

From  early  morning  the  Morris  Island  batteries  kept  up  a heavy  fire 
on  Fort  Sumter,  firing  throughout  the  day  382  shots — 166  striking 
outside,  95  inside,  and  121  missing.  The  fire  was  very  destructive, 
disabling  the  remaining  guns  en  barbette  and  damaging  the  fort  con- 
siderably. An  extract  from  the  report  of  the  engineer  in  charge 
gives  the  following  account  of  its  condition : 

Toward  noon  the  effects  of  the  fire  was  to  carry  away  at  one  fall  four  rampart 
arches  on  the  northeast  front,  with  terre-plein  platforms  and  guns,  thus  leaving  on 
this  front  only  one  arch  and  a half,  which  are  adjacent  to  the  east  spiral  stair.  Some 
of  the  lower  casemate  piers  of  same  front  have  been  seriously  damaged,  rendering 
unsafe  the  service  of  two  guns  hitherto  available  in  that  quarter.  On  the  exterior 
the  chief  injury  done  is  to  be  noticed  at  southeast  pan  coupe  and  two  next  upper 
casemates  on  east  front.  From  these  localities  the  scarp  has  fallen  away  completely, 
and  left  the  arches  exposed,  as  well  as  the  sand  filling  half  down  to  the  floor  of 
second  tier. 

At  11.40  p.  m.  six  monitors  opened  on  Fort  Sumter  from  distances 


Chap.  XL.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


87 


of  800  to  1,000  yards.  They  were  joined  at  1 a.  m.  of  the  2d  by  the 
Ironsides,  and  together  fired  185  shots,  of  which  116  struck  outside, 
35  inside,  and  34  passed  over.  The  projectiles  used  were  8-inch  Par- 
rott rifle  shell,  and  11  and  15  inch  smooth-bore  shot  and  shell.  Fort 
Sumter  was  unable  to  answer,  not  having  a gun  in  working  order ; 
but  a heavy  fire  was  kept  up  on  the  fleet  from  Fort  Moultrie  with 
good  effect,  two  of  the  monitors  being  apparently  injured  and  requir- 
ing assistance  when  they  retired.  The  effect  of  this  fire  on  Fort 
Sumter  was  thus  described  by  the  engineer  officer  : 

The  chief  external  injury  has  been  done  upon  the  east  scarp,  which  now  has  lost 
its  integrity,  and  hangs  upon  the  arches  apparently  in  blocks  and  detached  masses. 

The  remainder  of  the  day  passed  in  comparative  quiet.  The  fleet 
was  occupied  in  placing  sand-bags  on  the  decks  of  the  monitors,  the 
enemy’s  land  batteries  firing  but  148  shots ; 38  of  these  were  directed 
against  Sumter.  In  the  same  period,  our  batteries  fired  sixty-six 
times. 

During  the  night,  the  enemy  in  front  of  Wagner  was  engaged  in 
strengthening  his  advanced  position,  which  was  then  within  80  or 
100  yards  of  the  salient.  Owing  to  the  difficulty  of  transporting 
ammunition  to  Battery  Wagner,  the  fire  from  that  work  was  slack. 

Early  on  the  morning  of  the  3d,  the  enemy  opened  on  Battery 
Wagner  with  mortars*  and  continued  it  throughout  the  day.  Fort 
Sumter  was  not  fired  at.  In  that  work  all  hands  were  busily  en- 
gaged in  repairing  damages.  During  the  past  night,  as  usual,  large 
quantities  of  ordnance  stores  and  several  guns  were  removed  by  that 
gallant  and  zealous  acting  engineer  officer,  Mr.  J.  Fraser  Mathewes, 
of  Charleston,  who  persistently  worked  at  this  dangerous  and  labori- 
ous undertaking  until  every  disabled  gun  which  could  be  recovered 
from  the  debris  had  been  transferred  to  its  new  position.  The  con- 
dition of  the  fort  at  this  date  was  as  follows : The  northeast  and 
northwest  terre-pleins  had  fallen  in,  and  the  western  wall  had  a crack 
entirely  through,  from  parapet  to  berme.  The  greater  portion  of 
the  southern  wall  was  down,  the  upper  east  magazine  penetrated, 
and  the  lower  east  magazine  wall  cracked.  The  eastern  wall  itself 
nearly  shot  away,  and  large  portions  down,  ramparts  gone,  and 
nearly  every  casemate  breached.  The  casemates  on  the  eastern  face 
were  still  filled  with  sand,  and  gave  some  protection  to  the  garrison 
from  shells.  Not  a single  gun  remained  en  barbette , and  but  a single 
smooth-bore  32-pounder  in  the  west  face  that  could  be  fired. 

During  the  night  of  the  3d,  Battery  Wagner  fired  steadily,  and 
the  James  Island  batteries  occasionally. 

Throughout  the  4th,  the  enemy  did  not  fire  on  Fort  Sumter,  but 
confined  themselves  to  shelling  Battery  Wagner,  and  were  answered 
by  the  J ames  Island  guns.  During  the  night  of  the  4th,  the  enemy’s 
approach  was  pushed  close  to  Battery  Wagner. 

At  12  m.  on  the  5th,  the  Federal  flag,  which  had  been  100  yards 
south  of  Wagner,  was  abreast  of  the  south  angle  of  the  work. 
Throughout  the  day  a very  heavy  fire  was  concentrated  on  Battery 
Wagner  from  the  Ironsides,  monitors,  and  land  batteries,  which 
severely  injured  the  work.  Our  casualties  were  also  greatly  in- 
creased, some  40  occurring  during  the  day. 

Large  bodies  of  troops  were  transferred  from  Folly  to  Morris 
Island,  and  other  indications  pointed  to  an  early  assault.  There  is 
good  reason  to  believe  that  the  enemy’s  plan  was  to  carry  Battery 
Gregg  by  a boat  attack  on  the  night  of  the  5th,  or  early  on  the  morn- 


88  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL 

ing  of  the  6th ; that  the  fleet  should  prevent  the  landing  of  re- 
enforcements  at  Cumming’s  Point;  that  Battery  Wagner  should  he 
shelled  fiercely  by  the  iron-clads,  and  on  the  morning  of  the  6th,  on 
a given  signal,  the  assault  on  Battery  Wagner  was  to  take  place. 
This  plan  was  frustrated,  however,  by  the  repulse  of  the  attacking 
party  on  Battery  Gregg. 

About  1.30  o’clock  on  the  morning  of  the  6th,  they  were  seen  ap- 
proaching in  from  fifteen  to  twenty  barges  by  the  passages  leading 
from  Vincent’s  and  Schooner  Creeks,  that  lie  between  James  and  Mor- 
ris Islands.  The  garrison  at  Cumming’s  Point  was  on  the  alert,  and 
received  them  with  a brisk  fire  of  grape  and  musketry.  The  enemy 
was  evidently  greatly  disconcerted,  and,  after  discharging  their  boat 
howitzers,  retired. 

On  September  4,  1863,  I had  convened  a meeting  of  general  offi- 
cers and  the  chief  engineer  of  the  department,  to  assist  me  in  deter- 
mining how  much  longer  the  Confederate  forces  should  attempt  to 
hold  Batteries  Wagner  and  Gregg  and  the  north  end  of  Morris  Island. 
The  rapid  advance  of  the  enemy’s  trenches  to  Battery  Wagner  hav- 
ing made  it  evident  that  before  many  days  that  work  must  become 
untenable,  the  following  questions  were  propounded  at  the  council : 

1.  How  long  do  you  think  Fort  Wagner  can  be  held  without  re- 
gard to  safety  of  garrison  ? 

2.  How  long  can  the  fort  be  held  with  a fair  prospect  of  saving 
its  garrison  with  the  means  of  transportation  at  our  command  and 
circumstances  relative  thereto,  as  heretofore  indicated  by  actual  ex- 
perience ? 

3.  How  long  after  the  loss  or  evacuation  of  Wagner  could  Fort 
Gregg  be  held  ? 

4.  Can  the  heavy  guns  (two  in  Wagner  and  three  in  Gregg)  in 
those  two  works  be  removed  before  their  evacuation  without  endan- 
gering the  safety  of  the  works  and  their  garrisons  ? 

5.  Can  we  take  the  offensive  suddenly,  with  a fair  prospect  of 
success,  by  throwing  during  the  night  3,000  men  on  north  end  of  Mor- 
ris Island,  making  in  all  4,000  men  available,  bearing  in  mind  that 
no  re-enforcements  could  be  sent  there  until  night,  and  perhaps  none 
for  several  nights,  according  to  the  movements  of  the  enemy’s  iron- 
clads and  the  fire  of  the  land  batteries  ? 

These  questions  were  thoroughly  discussed,  as  well  as  the  probable 
plan  of  attack  by  the  enemy,  our  means  of  defense,  of  transporta- 
tion, and  reasons  for  prolonging  our  possession  of  the  north  end  of 
Morris  Island.  It  was  agreed  that  the  holding  of  Morris  Island  as 
long  as  possible  was  most  important  to  the  safety  and  free  use  of  the 
harbor  of  Charleston  and  our  ability  to  keep  up  easy  communication 
with  the  works  on  Sullivan’s  and  James  Islands,*  in  view  of  which  I 
deemed  it  proper  to  renew  application  by  telegraph  to  the  Secreta- 
ries of  War  and  Navy  Departments  for  some  200  sailors  for  oarsmen. 
It  was  further  decided  that  the  five  heavy  guns  on  Morris  Island 
were  necessary,  morally  and  physically,  for  the  defense  of  the  posi- 
tions to  the  last  extremity,  and  such  being  the  difficulties — if  not, 
indeed,  the  insurmountable  obstacles  in  the  way  of  their  removal  at 
this  time — that  no  effort  should  be  made  to  save  them,  and  conse- 
quently that  they  should  be  ultimately  destroyed,  with  as  much  of 
the  works  as  practicable,  when  further  defense  was  abandoned.  The 
result  was,  my  determination  to  hold  Morris  Island  as  long  as  com- 


See  Addenda  No.  3,  to  this  report,  p.  100. 


Chap.  XL.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


89 


munication  with  it  could  be  maintained  at  night  by  means  of  row- 
boats, but  for  which  purpose  sailors  or  men  able  to  handle  boats  and 
oars  with  efficiency  were  essential. 

On  the  5th  instant,  Brigadier-General  Ripley,  commanding  the  First 
Military  District,  prepared  by  my  order  a confidential  letter,  which 
was  forwarded  to  the  officer  commanding  Battery  Wagner,  pointing 
out  that  it  might  be  necessary  to  evacuate  Morris  Island.  In  the 
letter  the  brigadier-general  gave  full  instructions  for  destroying  the 
magazine  and  rendering  the  guns  useless  in  the  event  of  abandoning 
the  island. 

Early  on  the  morning  of  September  6,  a dispatch  was  received 
from  Col.  L.  M.  Keitt,  commanding  Battery  Wagner,  to  the  follow- 
ing effect : 

******* 

The  parapet  of  salient  is  badly  breached.  The  whole  fort  is  much  weakened.  A 
repetition  to-morrow  of  to-day’s  tire  (alluding  to  the  5th  instant)  will  make  the  work 
almost  a ruin.  The  mortar  fire  is  still  very  heavy  and  fatal,  and  no  important  work 
can  be  done.  Is  it  desirable  to  sacrifice  the  garrison  ? To  continue  to  hold  it  is  to 
do  so.  Captain  [F.  D.]  Lee,  the  engineer,  has  read  this,  and  agrees. 

The  casualties  in  Battery  Wagner  on  September  5 were  about  100 
out  of  900. 

Another  dispatch  was  received  from  Colonel  Keitt,  dated  8.45  a.  m. : 

Incessant  fire  from  Yankee  mortars  and  Parrott  battery.  Can’t  work  negroes. 
Better  look  after  them  promptly.  Had  30  or  40  soldiers  wounded  in  an  attempt  to 
work.  Will  do  all  I can,  but  fear  the  garrison  will  be  destroyed  without  injuring 
the  enemy.  The  fleet  is  opening,  but  I hope  that  we  may  stand  till  to-night. 

Again  at  10. 30  a.  m.  Colonel  Keitt  signaled  : 

Boats  must  be  at  Cumming’s  Point  early  to-night  without  fail. 

During  the  day  a letter  was  received  from  the  same  officer,  as  fol- 
lows : 

The  enemy  will  to-night  advance  their  parallel  to  the  moat  of  this  battery  (Wag- 
ner). The  garrison  must  be  taken  away  immediately  after  dark,  or  it  will  be  de- 
stroyed or  captured.  It  is  idle  to  deny  that  the  heavy  Parrott  shells  have  breached 
the  walls  and  are  knocking  away  the  bomb-proofs.  Pray  have  boats  immediately 
after  dark  at  Cumming’s  Point,  to  take  away  the  men.  I say  deliberately  that  this 
must  be  done  or  the  garrison  will  be  sacrificed.  I am  sending  the  wounded  and 
sick  now  to  Cumming’s  Point,  and  will  continue  to  do  so,  if  possible,  until  all  are 
gone.  I have  not  in  the  garrison  400  effective  men,  excluding  artillery.  The  en- 
gineers agree  in  opinion  with  me,  or,  rather,  shape  my  opinion.  I shall  say  no 
more. 

Colonel  Keitt’s  last  telegram  was  as  follows  : 

******* 

The  enemy’s  sap  has  reached  the  moat,  and  his  bombardment  has  shattered  large 
parts  of  the  parapet.  The  retention  of  the  post  after  to-night  involves  the  sacrifice 
of  the  garrison.  If  the  necessities  of  the  service  make  this  advisable,  the  men  will 
cheerfully  make  it,  and  I will  cheerfully  lead  them.  I prefer  to  assault  the  enemy 
to  awaiting  an  assault,  and  I will  at  4 o’clock  in  the  morning  assail  his  works. 

Things  being  in  this  condition,  it  became  evident  that  an  attempt 
still  to  retain  possession  of  Batteries  Wagner  and  Gregg  must  of 
necessity  involve  the  loss  of  their  garrisons.  But  before  giving  the 
final  orders  for  the  evacuation,  I directed  Col.  D.  B.  Harris,  my 
chief  engineer,  to  proceed  to  Morris  Island,  and  examine  into 'and  re- 
port on  the  condition  of  affairs.  His  opinion  was  as  follows  : 
******* 

I visited  our  works  on  Morris  Island  to-day,  and  in  consideration  of  their  condi- 
tion; of  our  inability  to  repair  damages  at  Battery  Wagner  as  heretofore;  of  the 
dispirited  state  of  the  garrison,  and  of  the  progress  of  the  enemy’s  sap,  am  reluctantly 


90  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

constrained  to  recommend  an  immediate  evacuation  of  both  Batteries  Wagner  and 
Gregg. 

******* 

In  consequence  of  the  accuracy  of  fire  from  his  (enemy’s)  land  batteries,  which 
are  now  in  close  proximity  to  Battery  Wagner  (say  from  500  to  800  yards),  aided  by 
a reverse  fire  from  his  fleet,  it  is  impossible,  in  the  opinion  of  the  officer  of  the  fort, 
to  keep  up  a fire  of  either  artillery  or  small-arms,  and  the  enemy  is  thus  left  free  to 
work  in  the  trenches,  which  he  is  pushing  rapidly  forward,  the  head  of  the  sap 
being  within  40  yards  of  the  salient,  which  is  so  severely  damaged  by  a battery  of 
Parrott  guns  kept  constantly  playing  upon  it  as  to  render  it  untenable.  * * * 
The  covering  to  the  bomb-proof  and  magazine  also  need  repair.  We  have  been 
thus  far  able  not  only  to  repair  damages  at  night,  but  to  add  from  day  to  day  to 
the  strength  of  the  battery  ; but  now  that  the  enemy’s  sap  is  in  such  close  proximity 
to  the  battery,  and  he  has  contrived  to  throw  a calcium  light  upon  the  parapets  at 
night,  it  is  impossible  to  do  so  without  a heavy  loss  of  men.  In  the  efforts  last 
night  to  repair  damages,  the  commanding  officer  of  the  fort  reports  a loss  in  killed 
and  wounded  of  60  to  80  men  of  the  working  party  alone.  Without  our  ability  to 
repair  damages  at  night,  the  battery  would  become,  under  the  incessant  fire  of  the 
enemy’s  land  batteries  and  fleet,  untenable,  say,  in  two  days.  It  is  in  view  of  these 
facts  that  I have  thought  it  my  duty  to  make  the  recommendation  at  the  com- 
mencement of  this  report. 

‘ “ The  gradual  approaches  of  the  enemy  ” (I  quote  now  from  Colonel  Keitt’s  report) 
‘ ‘ had  passed  the  front  of  the  battery,  and  the  termination  of  their  sap  was  not  over 
50  yards  from  the  parapet  of  the  sea  face,  enabling  them  to  throw  a mass  of  troops 
upon  this  flank  when  our  men  were  mostly  in  the  bomb-proofs,  where  I was  forced 
to  keep  them  by  the  unceasing  fire  of  mortars  and  rifled  guns  on  land,  with  an 
enfilading  fire  from  the  fleet  during  most  of  the  day.  The  salient  on  the  left  of  the 
battery  had  been  swept  by  such  a terrible  cross-fire  as  to  breach  the  parapet  and 
throw  it  into  irregular  shapes,  rendering  the  ascent  from  the  moat  easy,  and,  more- 
over, men  could  not  be  kept  there  during  this  cross-fire  without  the  certainty  of 
most  of  them  being  wounded  or  stunned.” 

Under  these  circumstances,  I concluded  that  the  period  had  arrived 
when  it  would  he  judicious  to  evacuate  Morris  Island,  and  in  the 
following  special  order*  detailed  the  manner  in  which  I desired  the 
movement  to  he  accomplished. 

The  evacuation  began  at  9 o’clock  on  the  night  of  September  6.  Ac- 
cording to  instructions,  a guard  of  35  men,  under  command  of  Cap- 
tain T.  A.  Huguenin,  had  been  left  to  bring  up  the  extreme  rear,  and 
to  fire  the  only  magazine  which  contained  powder.  The  necessary 
arrangements  being  completed,  and  Colonel  Keitt  having  been  in- 
formed that  the  transportation  was  ready,  the  embarkation  com- 
menced, and  was  continued  with  the  utmost  quietness  and  dispatch. 
The  wounded  were  first  embarked,  and  were  followed  by  the  rem- 
nants of  the  infantry  garrison.  Captain  [C.  E.]  Kanapaux,  com- 
manding light  artillery,  was  then  ordered  to  spike  his  three  howitzers 
and  embark  his  command.  Captain  [H.  R.]  Lesesne,  commanding 
at  Battery  Gregg,  spiked  the  guns  of  that  battery,  and  followed  with 
his  command,  and  the  rear  guard  from  Wagner  coming  up  at  this 
time,  in  pursuance  of  orders  from  Colonel  Keitt,  the  safety  fuses 
communicating  with  the  magazines  were  lighted — that  at  Wagner 
by  Captain  Huguenin  and  that  at  Greggby  Major  [E.  L.]  Holcombe, 
commissary  of  subsistence — and  the  remainder  of  the  command  was 
safely  and  expeditiously  embarked.  Owing  to  defects  in  the  fuses 
themselves,  they  failed  of  accomplishing  the  purpose  designed,  though 
their  lighting  was  superintended  by  careful  and  reliable  officers.  The 
magazines,  therefore,  were  not  destroyed.  The  guns  in  the  bat- 
teries were  spiked  as  far  as  their  condition  allowed,  and  the  imple- 
ments generally  destroyed  and  equipments  carried  off. 

The  evacuation  was  concluded  at  about  1.30  a.  m.  of  the  7th  in- 


* See  Inclosure  D,  to  Addenda  No.  3,  p.  104. 


Chap.  XL.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


91 


stant.  The  boats  containing  the  portion  of  the  garrison  last  em- 
barked were  fired  npon  by  the  enemy’s  barges,  but  without  effect. 
Only  two  of  our  boats,  containing  crews  of  about  19  men  and  27 
soldiers  (or  some  46  in  all),  were  captured  by  the  enemy’s  armed 
barges  between  Cumming’s  Point  and  Fort  Sumter. 

Thus  Morris  Island  was  abandoned  to  the  enemy  on  the  morning 
of  September  7,  1863,  with  but  little  loss  on  the  part  of  its  garrison, 
either  in  men  or  materiel.  The  total  loss  in  killed  and  wounded  on 
Morris  Island  from  July  10  to  September  7 was  only  641  men;  and, 
deducting  the  killed  and  wounded  due  to  the  landing  on  July  10, 
and  to  the  assaults  of  July  11  and  18,  the  killed  and  wounded  by  the 
terrible  bombardment,  which  lasted  almost  uninterruptedly  night 
and  day  during  fifty-eight  days,  only  amounted  to  296  men,  many  of 
whom  were  only  slightly  wounded.  It  is  still  more  remarkable  that 
during  the  same  period  of  time,  when  the  enemy  fired  6,202  shots 
and  shells  at  Fort  Sumter,  varying  in  weight  from  30  to  300  pounds, 
only  3 men  were  killed  and  49  wounded.  It  is  difficult  to  arrive  at 
the  loss  of  the  enemy  during  these  operations,  but  judging  from  the 
slaughter  made  in  their  ranks  on  July  11  and  18,  it  will  be  within 
the  mark  to  say  that  his,  casualties  were  in  a ratio  of  ten  to  one  of 
ours. 

It  may  be  well  to  remark  that  the  capture  of  Morris  Island  re- 
sulted in  but  a barren  victory  to  the  enemy f if  his  only  object  was  to 
gain  a position  from  which  he  might  hurl  his  missiles  and  Greek- 
fire  into  the  city  of  Charleston.  A reference  to  the  map  will  show 
that  the  possession  of  Cumming’s  Point  placed  him  no  nearer  the 
city  than  when  he  held  part  of  James  Island,  prior  to  the  battle  of 
Secessionville,  in  June,  1862,  and  again  in  July,  1863,  from  whence 
he  was  driven  on  the  morning  of  the  16th  of  the  same  month. 

In  conclusion,  I cannot  express  in  too  strong  terms  my  admira- 
tion of  the  bravery,  endurance,  and  patriotism  displayed  by  the  offi- 
cers and  men  engaged  in  these  operations,  who,  during  so  many  days 
and  nights,  withstood  unflinchingly  the  extraordinary  fire  from  the 
enemy’s  land  and  naval  batteries,  and  repulsed  with  heroic  gallantry 
every  attempt  to  surprise  or  carry  the  works  by  storm. 

I have  particularly  to  commend  the  gallantry,  coolness,  and  zeal 
of  Brig.  Gen.  W.  B.  Taliaferro,  Brig.  Gen.  Johnson  Hagood,  Brig. 
Gen.  A.  H.  Colquitt,  Col.  L.  M.  Keitt,  and  Col.  G.  P.  Harrison  [jr.  ], 
who  at  different  periods  had  immediate  command  of  the  defense  of 
Morris  Island.  To  particularize  would  be  invidious.  They,  one  and 
all,  on  every  occasion,  did  their  duty  nobly. 

I have  to  express  my  acknowledgments  of  the  valuable  services 
rendered  by  Brig.  Gen.  R.  S.  Ripley,  in  command  of  the  First  Mil- 
itary District,  which  included  the  city  of  Charleston  and  its  out- 
works. He  was  invariably  active,  industrious,  and  intelligent,  and 
carried  out  his  important  duties  to  my  entire  satisfaction. 

Although  Maj.  Gen.  J.  F.  Gilmer  arrived  at  Charleston  only  a 
few  days  before  the  evacuation  of  Morris  Island,  he  was,  neverthe- 
less, active,  zealous,  and  of  assistance  to  me  in  holding  the  island  to 
the  last  moment. 

To  Col.  D.  B.  Harris,  chief  engineer  of  the  department,  I have  to 
return  my  most  sincere  thanks.  He  was  ever  cool,  gallant,  and  in- 
defatigable in  the  performance  of  his  arduous  duties  during  the  whole 
period  of  the  operations  on  Morris  Island.  Always  present  in  the 
hour  of  need,  he  exposed  himself  when  necessary  to  the  hottest  fire 
and  to  the  greatest  dangers  in  the  most  reckless  manner. 


92 


S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 


[Chap.  XL. 


I also  take  pleasure  in  recording  the  services  of  Col.  Alfred  Rhett, 
who,  during  the  siege  of  Battery  Wagner,  had  command  of  Fort  Sum- 
ter, and  with  his  brave  garrison  endured  a long  and  terrific  bom- 
bardment from  the  enemy’s  batteries  by  land  and  sea.  His  conduct 
throughout  gained  my  approval  and  satisfaction. 

I commend,  also,  to  the  attention  of  the  War  Department  the  in- 
defatigable zeal  of  my  personal  and  general  staff,  who  on  all  occa- 
sions were  found  equal  to  the  calls  made  on  their  energy,  activity, 
and  devotion  to  the  service. 

Respectfully  submitted. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General. 


General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant- General,  Richmond,  Va. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  S.  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston,  S.  C.,  September  30,  1863. 

General:  The  published  report  of  Brigadier-General  Gillmore,* 
of  the  7th  instant,  to  his  Government,  relative  to  his  acquisition  of 
Batteries  Wagner  and  Gregg,  contains  several  errors,  which  I feel 
called  upon  to  correct. 

1.  Seventy-five  men  were  not  taken  on  Morris  Island,  for  only  two 
boats’  crews,  about  19  men  and  27  soldiers,  or  about  46  men  in  all, 
were  captured  by  the  enemy’s  armed  barges  between  Cumming’s 
Point  and  Fort  Sumter. 

2.  Colonel  Keitt’s  captured  dispatches  could  not  have  shown  that 
the  garrisons  of  Wagner  and  Gregg  amounted  to  between  1,500  and 
1,600  effective  men  on  the  day  of  the  evacuation  (6th  instant),  for 
Colonel  Keitt  reported  that  morning  900  men  all  told,  only  about 
two-thirds  of  whom  could  be  considered  effectives,  the  others  being 
wounded  or  more  or  less  disabled  from  exposure  for  so  long  a period 
to  the  weather  and  the  incessant  fire  (day  and  night)  of  the  enemy’s 
land  and  naval  batteries.  The  forces  holding  these  works  and  the 
north  end  of  Morris  Island  during  the  fifty-eight  days’  siege  varied 
from  1,000  to  1,200  men,  seldom  exceeding  the  latter  number  when 
it  could  be  avoided. 

3.  Battery  Wagner  was  not  a work  of  the  most  formidable  kind, 
but  an  ordinary  field  work  with  thick  parapets,  but  with  ditches  of 
little  depth.  The  sand  thrown  up  by  the  enemy’s  shells  and  drifted 
by  the  winds  during  so  long  a siege  had  nearly  filled  up  the  ditches 
in  many  places,  and  had  partially  covered  up  the  explosive  shells, 
spiked  planks,  and  pikes  placed  in  the  ditch  for  its  defense. 

4.  The  bomb-proof  of  Wagner  could  not  contain  1,800  men,  or 
more  than  about  600,  the  garrison  of  the  work  being  about  800  men. 

5.  “Nineteen  pieces  of  artillery  and  a large  supply  of  excellent 
ammunition  were  captured.  ” The  pieces  of  heavy  and  light  artillery 
left  in  Wagner  and  Gregg  were  more  or  less  damaged,  and  all  with 
their  vents  not  too  much  enlarged  were  spiked.  The  carriages, 
chassis,  &c.,  were  more  or  less  disabled  by  the  enemy’s  shot  and 
shell.  Only  1,800  (200  in  Wagner,  1,600  in  Gregg)  pounds  of  ammu- 
nition were  left,  to  explode  the  magazines  and  bomb-proofs ; but, 
unfortunately,  through  some  accident,  the  fuses  left  burning  did  not 
ignite  the  powder. 


* See  inclosure,  p.  93. 


Chap.  XL.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


93 


6.  The  city  of  Charleston  may  he  completely  covered  by  General 
Gillmore’s  guns  on  Morris  Island,  but  at  the  distance  of  4 miles  from 
his  advanced  battery  to  the  nearest  point  of  the  city. 

I will  conclude  by  stating  that,  strange  as  it  may  appear,  the  total 
loss  in  killed  and  wounded  on  Morris  Island  from  July  10  to  Septem- 
ber 7,  was  only  641  men,  and,  deducting  the  killed  and  wounded  due 
to  the  landing  on  July  10  and  to  the  assaults  of  July  11  and  18,  the 
killed  and  wounded  due  to  the  terrible  bombardment,  which  lasted 
almost  uninterruptedly  night  and  day  during  fifty-eight  days, 
amounted  to  296  men,  many  of  whom  were  only  slightly  wounded. 
It  is  still  more  remarkable  that  during  the  same  period  of  time,  when 
the  enemy  fired  6,202  shots  and  shells  at  Fort  Sumter,  varying  in 
weight  from  30  pounds  to  300  pounds,  only  3 men  were  killed  and  49 
wounded.  Indeed,  the  hand  of  the  Almighty  would  seem  to  have 
protected  the  heroic  garrison  of  that  now  historic  work. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General , Commanding. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjt.  and  Insp.  Gen.  C.  S.  Army , Richmond , Va. 

[Inclosure.] 

Official  report  of  the  occupation  of  Morris  Island. 

The  following  is  General  Gillmore’s  official  report  of  the  occupa- 
tion of  Morris  Island  : 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

In  the  Field , September  7,  1863. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  Fort  Wagner  and  Bat- 
tery Gregg  are  ours.  Last  night  our  sappers  crowned  the  crest  of 
the  counter-scarp  of  Fort  Wagner  on  its  sea  front,  masking  all  its 
guns,  and  an  order  was  issued  to  carry  the  place  by  assault  at  9 
o’clock  this  morning,  that  being  the  hour  of  low  tide. 

About  10  o’clock  last  night  the  enemy  commenced  evacuating  the 
island,  and  all  but  75  made  their  escape  from  Cumming’s  Point  in 
small  boats. 

Captured  dispatches  show  that  Fort  Wagner  was  commanded  by 
Colonel  Keitt,  of  South  Carolina,  and  garrisoned  by  1,400  effective 
men,  and  Battery  Gregg  by  between  100  and  200.  Fort  Wagner  is  a 
work  of  the  most  formidable  kind.  Its  bomb-proof  shelter,  capable 
of  holding  1,800  men,  remains  intact  after  the  most  terrible  bombard- 
ment to  which  any  work  was  ever  subjected.  We  have  captured 
nineteen  pieces  of  artillery  and  a large  supply  of  excellent  ammuni- 
tion. 

The  city  and  harbor  of  Charleston  are  now  completely  covered  by 
my  guns. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient 
servant, 

Q.  A.  GILLMORE, 

Brigadier-  General , Commanding , 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W Halleck, 

Qeneral-in-  Chief , 


94 


S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 


LChap.  XL. 


* ADDENDA  NO.  1. 

Confidential.]  Charleston,  S.  C., 

August  28,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  R.  S.  Ripley, 

Commanding  First  Military  District: 

General  : I am  informed,  to  my  utter  surprise,  that  the  honor- 
able Secretary  of  War  is  of  the  following  opinion  relative  to  the 
attack  of  the  enemy  on  Morris  Island  on  the  10th  ultimo : 

I have  no  disposition  to  criticise  military  operations,  or  point  out  errors  and  omis- 
sions which  can  no  longer  be  avoided  or  remedied,  but  you  compel  me,  in  self- 
defense,  to  advert  to  the  true  cause  of  the  lodgment  made  by  the  enemy  on  Morris 
Island.  According  to  my  conception,  it  was  not  the  want  of  infantry  force  at  the 
command  of  that  department,  but,  as  I had  before  supposed  was  universally  ad- 
mitted, the  want  of  adequate  work  of  defense  at  the  lower  end  of  the  island,  known 
long  to  be  the  external  gate  of  the  city,  and  the  establishment  by  the  enemy,  with- 
out the  knowledge  of  the  military  authorities,  of  powerful  land  batteries  on  Folly 
Island,  screened  and  concealed  until  fully  prepared  to  open  upon  or  with  all  the 
effect  of  a surprise,  by  the  woods,  which  had  been  allowed  to  remain  unfelled  on 
that  island. 

That  these,  and  not  the  want  of  men,  were  the  true  causes  of  the  possession 
effected  by  the  enemy,  is  shown  by  their  inability  to  improve  their  success  by  the 
capture  of  Forts  Wagner  and  Gregg. 

It  is  no  pleasure  to  me  to  refer  to  these  causes  of  disaster,  but  under  the  implica- 
tions of  your  letter  I could  not  say  less. 

Yon  will  please  make  to  these  headquarters,  at  your  earliest  con- 
venience, a full  and  detailed  report  on  the  subject,  referring  es- 
pecially to  the  following  points  : 

1st.  W as  not  the  presence  of  the  enemy  in  force  on  Folly  and  Lit- 
tle Folly  Islands  known,  and  to  what  extent  were  his  movements 
ascertained  ? 

2d.  What  measures  had  been  adopted,  ordered,  or  contemplated  for 
the  protection  of  the  south  end  of  Morris  Island,  including  flanking 
batteries  on  Black  Island,  commanding  crossing  of  Light-House  Inlet, 
and  at  Marsh  Point,  to  flank  Morris  Island  in  front  of  Wagner  ? 

3d.  Why  were  not  all  those  works  constructed;  and,  if  con- 
structed, could  they  have  been  armed  ? 

4th.  Even  with  works  on  the  south  end  of  Morris  Island,  and  the 
small  force  then  available  for  its  defense,  could  not  the  enemy  have 
landed,  with  the  assistance  of  their  gunboats  and  iron-clad  fleet,  a 
strong  force  on  the  beach  north  of  Craig’s  Hill  during  the  night, 
cut  off  the  retreat  of  the  troops  south  of  it,  and  then  crossed,  almost 
unmolested,  Little  Folly  Inlet  ? 

5th.  What  works  did  the  enemy  construct  on  Little  Folly  Island, 
up  to  July  10  ? What  caliber  and  number  of  pieces  did  he  put  in 
position  ? 

6th.  How  long  did  it  take  him  from  the  time  he  broke  ground  until 
he  opened  fire  ? 

7th.  What  was  about  his  force  then  on  Little  Folly  and  Folly  Isl- 
ands, and  on  board  of  transports  ? 

8th.  What  were  your  forces  of  infantry  in  the  district,  and  how 
distributed  ? 

9th.  Could  a better  disposition  have  been  made  of  them  ? 

10th.  What  should  have  been  the  full  force  at  each  point  for  the 
proper  defense  of  Morris,  James,  and  Sullivan’s  Islands  ? 

11th.  Do  our  means  of  transportation,  and  other  circumstances  of 


Chap.  XL.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


95 


tide  and  locality,  admit  a rapid  concentration  of  force  from  one  point 
to  the  other  ? 

12th.  Which  of  those  three  lines  of  approach  was  most  vital  to 
Charleston  ? 

13th.  Might  not  the  enemy  have  intended  a feint  on  Morris  Island, 
and  then  a rapid  concentration  on  James  Island  ? 

14th.  How  long  would  it  have  then  required  him  to  take  posses- 
sion of  it,  and  what  would  have  been  the  result  as  to  the  safety  of 
Charleston  and  its  harbor,  by  establishing  his  batteries  from  Fort 
Johnson  to  Battery  Glover  ? 

15th.  How  could  we  have  then  maintained  our  communications 
with  Sumter  and  Morris  Island,  his  iron-clads  having  command, 
meanwhile,  of  the  outer  harbor  ? 

16th.  Was  it  not  a fortunate  circumstance  the  enemy  attacked 
Morris  instead  of  James  Island  ? 

17th.  From  the  apparent  number  of  troops  and  vessels  in  North 
Edisto,  about  the  10th  of  July  last,  was  it  not  possible  for  the  enemy 
to  have  concentrated,  his  forces  rapidly  on  James  Island,  and  attempt 
to  cross  the  Upper  Stono,  to  march  into  Saint  Andrew’s  Parish  ? 

18th.  Was  it  not,  then,  necessary  to  guard  also  that  line  of  ap- 
proach ? 

19th.  From  the  small  force  of  infantry  in  the  Second,  Third,  and 
Fourth  Military  Districts,  and  the  difficulties  and  insufficiency  of 
our  means  of  transportation,  could  much  assistance  have  been  ex- 
pected or  derived  from  them  ? 

20th.  Were  not  the  forces  in  the  Second  and  Third  Districts  abso- 
lutely required  where  they  were,  to  the  last  moment,  to  guard  our 
important  communication  with  Savannah  ? 

21st.  When  did  they  get  here,  and  how  many  ? 

22d.  How  much  infantry  force  was  in  Georgia  ? 

23d.  How  many  came  from  there  ? 

24th.  When  did  they  arrive  ? 

25th.  Did  not,  in  your  judgment,  these  headquarters  do  all  that 
our  restricted  means  permitted  to  be  done,  to  afford  you  all  the  aid 
possible  from  other  districts,  and,  so  far  as  you  are  aware,  even  from 
North  Carolina,  and  from  the  Government  itself  at  Richmond?  |See 
my  telegrams  on  the  subject,  if  you  desire.) 

26th.  Did  not  these  headquarters  object  most  strenuously,  to  the 
last,  in  sending  troops,  in  April  and  May,  to  the  State  of  Mississippi, 
stating  the  enemy’s  force  was  still  too  great  in  this  department,  and 
such  a depletion  would  endanger  Charleston  or  Savannah,  or  their 
communications  with  each  other  ? 

27th.  Did  not  the  W ar  Department  insist,  on  the  contrary,  that  the 
enemy’s  forces  had  been  greatly  reduced,  if  not  mostly  withdrawn, 
to  attack  Mobile  or  re-enforce  Banks  on  the  Mississippi  River  ? 

28th.  Was  not  the  truth  of  this  information  doubted,  if  not  denied, 
at  these  headquarters  ? 

29th.  Were  not  ample  calls  made,  during  the  last  six  months,  for 
negro  labor  to  construct  all  the  works  required  for  the  complete  de- 
fense of  Charleston  ? 

30th.  W ere  those  calls  answered  satisfactorily  ? 

31st.  With  those  works  completed  and  armed,  and  the  troops  we 
had  then  in  this  district,  would  not  Charleston  have  been  safe  until 
re-enforcements  could  have  been  sent  from  other  points  for  its  pro- 
longed defense  ? 


96 


S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 


[Chap.  XL. 


33d.  Should  it  fall,  will  it  not  be  due  entirely,  first,  to  the  want 
of  troops  on  the  10th  of  J uly  last,  and  then  of  labor  ? 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General,  Commanding . 

N.  B. — Battery  Wagner  was  located  by  General  Pemberton,  and 
nearly  finished  when  I arrived  here  in  September,  1862.  I strengthened 
it  greatly  by  adding  three  heavy  guns  to  its  sea  face,  where  it  had 
none ; also  by  traverses  between  its  land  guns,  bomb-proofs,  and 
closing  its  gorge,  &c.  I then  located  and  built  Battery  Gregg  at 
Cumming’s  Point,  where  I always  intended,  whenever  practicable, 
to  put  a strong  work,  well  armed,  if  the  guns  could  be  had.  A good 
work  southeast  of  Morris  Island  was  also  contemplated,  with  ad- 
vanced rifle-pits,  and  a battery  for  a few  field  guns,  in  embrasure, 
and  well  traversed. 


ADDENDA  NO.  2. 

Headquarters  First  Military  District, 

Charleston,  August  29,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan, 

Chief  of  Staff,  &c. : 

General  : In  answer  to  the  letter  of  General  Beauregard’s  of  yes- 
terday, I beg  to  say  that  I fear  it  will  take  more  time  than  General 
Beauregard  might  desire,  for  me  to  make  a report  which  might  be 
considered  a full  and  detailed  report  of  the  circumstances  which 
took  place  during  the  several  months  preceding  the  attack  on  Morris 
Island.  I will,  however,  proceed  to  answer  his  interrogations  as  fully 
as  possible,  and  make  up  any  deficiencies  when  time  is  allowed. 

To  the  1st  question.  I would  answer  that  the  presence  of  the  enemy 
on  Folly  and  Little  Folly  Islands  was  known  from  the  time  that  he 
landed,  just  before  the  attack  of  the  7th  of  April.  His  movements 
were  ascertained  by  means  of  observations  from  Long,  Battery, 
Black,  and  Morris  Islands,  and  reported  upon  almost  daily.  They 
consisted  for  some  weeks  in  throwing  up  defensive  works  on  Folly. 
The  force  was  variously  estimated  at  from  three  to  six  regiments, 
and,  as  his  defensive  operations  progressed,  his  works  across  the 
neck  of  Folly  were  plainly  observed  and  reported  upon.  They  were 
about  3,000  yards  from  Light-House  Inlet. 

To  the  2d  question.  In  the  early  part  of  March  last,  the  command- 
ing general,  with  me,  visited  Morris  Island,  and  then  determined 
and  ordered  the  location  of  five  guns,  four  shell  guns  and  one  rifled 
24-pounder,  in  detached  batteries,  to  sweep  the  beach  and  crossing  to 
Morris  Island  from  Little  Folly.  Some  time  afterward,  it  was  deter- 
mined to  locate  a battery  in  the  marsh  at  the  mouths  of  Vincent’s 
Creek,  to  flank  Morris  Island  in  front  of  Wagner.  It  was  also  in- 
tended to  place  a battery  on  Black  Island,  to  flank  the  crossing  of 
Light-House  Inlet.  The  battery  at  Vincent’s  Creek  was  to  have  two 
or  three  guns  of  long  range.  A communication  from  James  to  Mor- 
ris Island  was  also  ordered. 

To  the  3 d interrogatory.  I would  state  that  these  operations  being 
under  the  engineer  department,  and  in  no  way  under  my  charge,  1 
can  only  give  my  opinions.  Some  reasons  why  they  were  not  com- 
pleted were  alluded  to  in  my  correspondence  with  the  headquarters 
of  the  department  of  the  24th  of  May,  6th  and  14th  of  June,  and 


Chap.  XL.J 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


97 


subsequently;  but  the  prominent  difficulties,  as  declared,  were  the 
want  of  labor  and  transportation.  After  the  failure  of  the  attack 
by  iron-clads  on  the  7th  of  April,  and  they  had  retired,  the  works 
could  have  been  armed  with  a certain  class  of  guns  taken  from  the 
closed  casemates  of  Fort  Sumter.  Difficulties  would  have  occurred 
with  the  carriages  and  ordnance  stores.  These  guns,  however,  would 
not  have  answered  for  what  was  required  for  the  armament  at  the 
south  end  of  Morris  Island  or  Black  Island.  Some  guns,  reported  to 
be  of  the  class  wished  for,  having,  as  I understood,  arrived  from 
Europe  at  Wilmington,  were  asked  for  and  refused.  As  the  enemy 
persisted  in  his  occupation,  although  the  works  were  not  completed 
at  the  south  end  of  Morris  Island,  the  armament  was  increased  by 
a captured  30-pounder  Parrott,  a light  Whitworth,  and  three  10-inch 
seacoast  mortars.  It  was,  I have  understood,  intended  to  have  con- 
structed bomb-jy.*oof  and  hospital  arrangements  at  the  south  end  of 
Morris  Island,  but  they  had  hardly  been  commenced. 

To  the.  4 th  questioyi.  In  my  opinion  it  would  have  been  possible, 
had  the  works  at  the  south  end  of  the  island  been  completed,  and 
with  the  small  force  at  our  disposal,  for  the  enemy  by  a bold  dash 
from  their  iron-clads  and  gunboats  to  have  cut  off  the  retreat  of  the 
troops  south  of  Craig’s  Hill.  Nevertheless,  as  it  was  intended  that 
the  whole  beach  should  be  swept  with  grape,  and  the  landing  is  quite 
difficult,  it  is,  in  my  opinion,  doubtful  whether  he  would  have  un- 
dertaken so  hazardous  an  enterprise.  He  would  probably  have  at- 
tempted to  shell  out  the  work  at  the  south  end  directly,  or,  still 
more,  so  changed  his  point  of  attack — or  what  is  still  more  proba- 
ble, had  we  been  fully  prepared,  he  never  would  have  made  it. 

To  the  5th  question . Up  to  the  8th  or  9th  of  July,  the  enemy,  as 
far  as  could  be  ascertained,  had  constructed  no  works  on  Little  Folly, 
excepting  to  shelter  his  pickets  from  our  shells.  An  expedition  had 
been  organized  to  cross  the  inlet,  drive  in  his  pickets,  and  ascertain 
his  works  as  early  as  the  6th,  but  had  been  delayed  by  the  weather 
and  the  character  of  our  boats.  His  works,  such  as  they  were,  were 
discovered  on  the  9th,  and  a scouting  expedition,  under  Captain 
Haskell,  on  the  night  of  the  8th  reported  a fleet  of  boats  moored  as 
if  in  readiness  to  attempt  a crossing.  There  is  no  doubt,  from  the 
character  of  the  guns  which  he  used — of  which  there  were  about 
thirty  of  different  caliber,  from  30-pounder  Parrotts  down — that  they 
had  been  placed  on  temporary  platforms,  behind  the  sand-hills  for 
the  most  part.  Any  shot  heavier  than  a 30-pounder  Parrott  fired  on 
the  10th  came  from  the  gunboats  or  from  the  works  on  Big  Folly. 

To  the  6th  question.  The  enemy  was  reported  at  work  on  the 
night  of  the  8th,  and  opened  fire  at  about  5 o’clock  on  the  morning 
of  the  10th. 

To  the  7th  question.  From  the  best  source  of  information,  the 
enemy’s  force  consisted  of  four  brigades,  one  of  which  landed  on 
James  Island,  besides  the  fleet ; probably  in  all,  say,  10,000  men. 

To  the  8 th  question.  My  force  of  infantry  was  in  all  2,462  effect- 
ive— 1,184  on  James  Island,  612  on  Morris  Island,  204  on  Sullivan’s 
Island,  and  462  in  Charleston. 

To  the  9 th  question.  I do  not  know  that  a better  disposition 
could  have  been  made,  for  had  we  concentrated  on  Morris  Island, 
the  enemy  would  at  once  have  turned  to  James  Island.  He  might 
have  gone  to  Sullivan’s  Island  by  way  of  Long  Island,  but  having  a 
foothold  on  James,  and  that  being  the  most  vital  approach  to 
Charleston,  could  he  have  taken  our  extended  lines  by  a coup  de 
7 R R— VOL  XXVIII,  PT  I 


98  S.  C.  A ND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  EL  A.  [Chap.  XL. 

main , he  would  have  selected  that  route.  The  opportunity  would 
have  been  given  him  had  we  reduced  the  small  force  of  infantry  on 
that  island.  Had  I had  the  troops,  I should  have  thrown  2,500  men 
on  Morris  Island  to  meet  this  attack.  These  would  have  been  about 
as  many  as  could  have  been  advantageously  used,  and  is  about  the 
fullest  strength  the  garrison  has  been  increased  to  at  any  one  time 
since  the  10th  of  July.  James  Island,  under  the  circumstances,  ought 
— the  enemy  having  a position  upon  it — to  have  been  watched  by 
from  3,000  to  5,000  infantry,  besides  the  cavalry  and  artillery.  An 
estimate  for  defense  must,  of  course,  be  made  as  against  certain  at- 
tacks, and  while  the  enemy  has  transportation  in  abundance,  with 
a powerful  steam  navy,  both  offensive  and  transport,  while  ours  is 
deficient  in  both  respects  and  not  sufficient  for  current  service,  he 
having  the  option  which  route  to  choose,  we  are  compelled  to  guard 
all  at  once,  to  such  an  extent  as  will  prevent  a complete  surprise  of 
some  one  of  them.  These  remarks  will,  I think,  answer  the  10th, 
11th,  12th,  and  13th  interrogatories.  In  answer  to  the  14th,  15th, 
and  16th,  I think,  had  we  decreased  our  force  on  James  Island,  by 
any  number  sufficient  to  have  given  positive  strength  to  any  other 
point,  and  the  enemy  had  chosen,  and  acted  with  as  much  eclat  as  he 
did  at  the  south  end  of  Morris  Island,  or  at  either  of  the  two  assaults 
on  Battery  Wagner,  he  could  have  penetrated  our  long  unguarded 
lines  in  a day,  and  obtained  possession  of  the  approaches  to  Charles- 
ton, which,  if  he  chose  to  make  use  of  them,  would  have  at  once  cut 
off  our  communications  with  Morris  Island  and  Fort  Sumter.  I con- 
sider it  fortunate,  under  all  circumstances,  that,  situated  as  we  were, 
the  enemy  chose  the  Morris  Island  route. 

To  the  17 th,  18th,  19th,  and  20 th  questions,  I would  answer  that 
there  has  been  no  time  since  the  15th  of  April  that  the  enemy  could 
not  have  thrown  a force,  by  the  Edisto,  into  Saint  Andrew’s  Parish, 
cutting  our  communications  with  Savannah,  and  threatening  our 
city  in  that  direction,  rendering  it  necessary  to  guard  that  approach, 
and  also  necessitating  the  retention  of  certain  troops  in  that  locality 
until  the  last  moment,  or  until  the  enemy’s  attack  had  been  fully 
developed.  The  forces  in  the  Second,  Third,  and  Fourth  Military 
Districts  have  always  been  small ; but,  small  as  they  were,  they  fully 
employed  our  means  of  transport  when  they  had  to  be  removed  with 
rapidity. 

To  the  21  st  question.  From  the  Second  District,  Nelson’s  battalion 
of  260  effectives  arrived  on  the  morning  of  the  10th  of  July,  and  pro- 
ceeded to  Morris  Island  in  time  to  re-enforce  the  garrison  after  it 
had  retreated  to  Battery  Wagner.  The  Marion  Artillery,  four  guns 
and  39  effectives,  arrived  on  the  12th,  and  was  placed  on  James  Isl- 
and. From  the  Third  Military  District,  a battalion  of  the  Eleventh 
South  Carolina  Regiment,  400  effectives,  arrived  on  the  12th  of  July, 
but  soon  had  to  return  to  guard  our  communications  with  Savannah. 

The  22 d,  23 d,  and  2Uh  questions  can  be  answered.  According  to 
my  information,  there  were  1,795  effective  infantry  in  Georgia.  Of 
these,  1,430  effectives  arrived  in  detachments  on  the  10th,  12th,  and 
13th  of  July.  Colonel  Olmstead’s  command,  composed  of  detach- 
ments of  the  First,  Twelfth,  Eighteenth,  and  Sixty-third  Georgia 
Regiments,  534  effectives,  arrived  on  the  10th,  and  proceeded  at  once 
to  Morris  Island,  and  assisted  in  the  repulse  of  the  attack  on  the 
morning  of  the  11th. 

To  the  25th  question.  As  soon  as  it  was  positively  ascertained  that 
the  attack  was  imminent,  I believe  that  every  available  man  was 


Chap.  XL.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


99 


ordered  to  this  point,  and  that  requisitions  were  made  for  troops 
from  North  Carolina  and  other  sources.  I reported  the  matter  and 
the  necessities  personally  to  the  headquarters  of  the  department,  and 
took  the  orders  for  the  quartermasters  to  provide  transportation. 
The  troops  reported  to  me  as  they  came  in,  and  were  stationed  with- 
out one  moment’s  delay.  Up  to  the  9th  of  July  there  had  been  no 
other  appearances  to  indicate  the  enemy’s  positive  intentions  than 
previously.  N ay,  from  intelligence  received  from  Richmond,  coupled 
with  the  incorrect  accounts  of  the  battle  of  Gettysburg,  the  cause  of 
the  arrival  of  transports  in  the  Stono  was  questionable,  and  we 
knew  not  whether  they  brought  troops  or  came  to  take  those  on 
Folly  Island  away.  I know  that  strenuous  objections  were  urged 
against  sending  the  troops,  in  April  or  May  last,  from  this  depart- 
ment while  the  enemy  was  in  force  in  our  front,  and  while  it  was 
contemplated  to  dislodge  him  from  his  position ; and  it  is  also  within 
my  knowledge  thajb  the  War  Department  had  the  opinion  that  the 
enemy’s  force  had  been  greatly  reduced.  The  truth  of  this  opinion 
was  questioned,  and  continued  observations  were  made,  resulting  in 
the  information  that  the  enemy  was  still  in  our  front  in  force. 
What  we  he  had  not  the  means  of  ascertaining  [sic]  which  could  only 
be  learned  by  the  assistance  of  naval  means.  The  naval  officers  had 
been  applied  to,  but  could  not  co-operate  on  account  of  the  defective 
character  of  their  iron-clads,  and  they  had  no  other  vessels.  The 
above  will  answer  the  26th,  2?th,  and  28th  interrogatories. 

Calls  were  made,  through  the  State  authorities,  for  labor  for 
months  previous  to  the  attack,  but  this  subject  not  being  under  my 
charge  or  control,  I can  only  state  that  I have  always  understood 
that  they  were  not  responded  to  satisfactorily.  I know  that  the  sup- 
ply of  labor  was  limited  in  the  extreme,  and  the  weak  garrisons  were 
called  on  to  supply  certain  deficiencies.  My  observations  on  this 
point  can  best  be  learned  by  a reference  to  my  correspondence  con- 
cerning the  preparation  of  Morris  Island  for  defense,  alluded  to 
heretofore,  commencing  May  24,  and  continued.  This  is  already  at 
department  headquarters.  . 

To  the  31  st  question.  I believe,  had  the  works  for  the  defense  of 
Morris  Island  been  completed  and  armed,  that  with  the  troops  of 
my  command,  with  small  re-enforcements,  we  could  have  held  the 
southern  extremity  of  Morris  Island  until  larger  had  arrived  from 
other  points,  and,  if  no  other  method  of  attack  had  been  attempted, 
the  chances,  in  my  mind,  were  that  his  whole  attempt  would  have 
been  repulsed.  As  for  the  prolonged  defense,  I think  it  may  be  con- 
sidered that  the  defense  of  our  advanced  works,  Batteries  Wagner 
and  Gregg,  and  Fort  Sumter,  against  two  powerful  assaults,  and  open 
trenches  of  attack  armed  with  the  most  powerful  modern  artillery,  for 
nearly  fifty  days,  has  been  tolerably  good  already.  I hope  it  will  be 
prolonged  still  further,  and  successfully.  Should  Charleston  fall,  it 
certainly  will  be  due  to  want  of  labor  and  troops,  but  the  ultimate 
cause  of  an  abridgment  to  the  defense  of  Charleston  is,  in  my  mind, 
clearly  attributable  to  the  abandonment  of  Cole’s  Island.  This  situ- 
ation, far  stronger  by  nature  than  Battery  Wagner,  and  well  fortified 
by  art,  with  a far  heavier  armament,  approachable  only  by  water 
by  the  enemy,  and  then  by  his  light-draught  vessels,  with  two  ap- 
proaches by  water  and  two  by  land  in  our  hands,  which  could  be 
garrisoned  by  2,000  men,  nearly  all  of  whom  were  provided  with 
bomb-proof  shelters,  without  an  attack,  or  the  slightest  demonstra- 
tion of  one,  was  abandoned.  By  this  abandonment,  against  which  I 


tchap.  xl. 


100  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

urged  and  advised  in  vain,  the  enemy  obtained  his  point-d’appui, 
and  a convenient  post,  with  the  choice  of  two  routes  of  attack,  one 
by  James  and  the  other  by  Morris  Island.  The  first  led  directly  to 
the  city,  the  other  to  its  outer  defenses.  The  first  was  attempted, 
and  was  defeated  by  the  gallantry  of  our  troops  at  Secessionville, 
and  the  circumstance,  somewhat  fortuitous  and  in  no  wise  attribu- 
table to  the  commander  who  ordered  the  evacuation  of  Cole’s  Island, 
that  the  place  was  fortified,  although  some  miles  from  that  position. 
The  second  attack  has  been  attempted,  and  has  progressed  thus  far 
with  a fearful  loss  of  life  to  the  enemy,  and  a considerable  loss  of 
materiel  and  fortifications  to  us.  The  loss  of  the  whole  garrison  at 
Cole’s  Island,  and  the  position,  would  have  advanced  the  enemy  no 
farther  than  he  was  at  any  time  during  the  last  fifteen  months;  and, 
as  I have  said,  the  chances  of  its  defense  were  good.  Indeed,  I 
believe  it  was  stronger  by  itself  than  all  the  lines  and  works  which 
have  ever  been  projected  for  the  defense  of  Charleston,  and,  if  held, 
would  have  forced  the  enemy  to  make  either  a purely  land  or  a 
purely  naval  attack,  and  these  separated  from  each  other  by  con- 
siderable distances.  We  were  tolerably  well  prepared  for  either. 
Few  men  answered  to  repel  the  naval  attack ; our  advanced  posi- 
tions and  the  nature  of  the  country  would  have  compelled  the  enemy 
to  give  us  time  for  the  concentration  of  troops  to  repel  the  other. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

R.  S.  RIPLEY, 

Brigadier-  General,  Commanding. 
addenda  no.  3. 

Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston,  S.  C.,  September  24,  1863. 

At  11  a.  m.,  4th  instant,  a meeting  of  officers  was  convened  by  the 
commanding  general  at  his  office,  for  the  purpose  of  enabling  him  to 
determine  how  much  longer  he  should  attempt  to  hold  the  north  end 
of  Morris  Island.  Present : General  G.  T.  Beauregard,  commanding; 
Maj.  Gen.  J.  F.  Gilmer,  second  in  command;  Brig.  Gen.  R.  S.  Ripley, 
commanding  First  Military  District;  Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan, 
chief  of  staff  and  acting  recorder  ; Brig.  Gen.  Johnson  Hagood ; 
Brig.  Gen.  A.  H.  Colquitt ; Lieut.  Col.  D.  B.  Harris,  chief  engineer 
of  the  department. 

Brigadier-Generals  Hagood  and  Colquitt  have  both  recently  com- 
manded on  Morris  Island,  and  Lieutenant-Colonel  Harris,  who  had 
frequently  visited  Morris  Island  during  operations,  and  was  present 
during  the  assault  made  by  enemy  on  the  night  of  July  18,  in  com- 
pany with  Major-General  Gilmer  had  inspected  the  works  on  the 
night  of  the  3d  instant,  by  order  of  the  commanding  general. 

The  first  question  addressed  to  these  officers  was  as  follows : 

1st.  How  long  do  you  think  Fort  Wagner  can  be  held  without  re- 
gard to  safety  of  garrison  ? 

Generals  Colquitt  and  Hagood  replied  that  in  their  belief  enemy 
could  now  storm  and  carry  parapet  of  Battery  Wagner  before  our 
men  could  be  gotten  out  of  the  bomb-proofs,  and  we  would  then  be 
held  at  a fatal  disadvantage ; that  if  enemy  should  continue  his  ap- 
proaches as  now,  by  zigzags,  up  to  the  ditch,  some  eight  or  ten  days 
would  probably  elapse  before  he  could  be  expected  to  take  work  by 
regular  approaches,  but  that  an  assault  could  be  made  successfully 
some  days  sooner,  should  enemy  advance  somewhat  nearer,  by  con- 
structing another  parallel  and  thence  dash  forward  and  storm  work. 


Chap.  XL.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


101 


Colonel  Harris  thought  enemy  would  seek  to  take  work  by  regular 
approaches,  for  which  ten  days  would  be  necessary.  The  chances  of 
success  of  an  attempt  to  carry  work  after  a partial  approach  some- 
what nearer  them  than  at  present,  would,  he  believed,  be  unfavorable 
for  enemy.  An  attempt  to  carry  work  by  storm  or  assault  at  present 
would  scarcely  be  successful. 

2d.  How  long  can  the  fort  be  held  with  a fair  prospect  of  saving 
its  garrison  with  the  means  of  transportation  at  our  command  and 
circumstances  relative  thereto,  as  heretofore  indicated  by  actual  ex- 
perience ? 

General  Hagood  did  not  think  garrison  of  Battery  Wagner  can  be 
saved  without  we  steal  a march  on  enemy,  and  that  when  enemy  ap- 
proaches nearer  he  will  be  certain  to  get  knowledge  of  any  movement 
toward  evacuation. 

General  Colquitt  thought  enemy  may  take  the  position  at  his  pleas- 
ure; may  light  up  the  work  now  with  calcium  lights;  that  the  chances 
for  saving  garrison  are  diminishing  daily;  but  both  thought  with 
proper  precautions  garrison  might  be  successfully  withdrawn. 

Colonel  Harris  did  not  believe  enemy  would  attempt  assault,  but 
would  seek  to  take  by  regular  approaches  on  salient;  hence,  garrison 
might  be  saved  within  two  days  of  the  time  enemy  would  be  able  to 
reach  ditch,  or  the  completion  of  his  approaches. 

3d.  How  long  after  the  loss  or  evacuation  of  Wagner  could  Fort 
Gregg  be  held  ? 

General  Hagood.  If  vigorously  attacked,  Battery  Gregg  would  fall 
immediately  after  Wagner  was  carried. 

General  Colquitt  would  evacuate  both  same  night. 

Colonel  Harris  believed,  if  vigorously  followed  up,  Battery  Gregg 
must  fall  immediately  after  the  enemy  shall  get  possession  of  Wagner. 
In  case  reduction  of  Wagner  is  delayed  a week,  can,  however,  throw 
up  intermediate  works  for  infantry  to  check  advance  of  enemy,  and 
delay  fall  of  Battery  Gregg,  say,  three  days. 

4th.  Can  the  heavy  guns — two  in  Wagner  and  three  in  Gregg — in 
those  two  works  be  removed  before  their  evacuation  without  endan- 
gering the  safety  of  the  works  and  their  garrisons  ? 

Generals  Hagood  and  Colquitt  thought  the  columbiads  could  be 
removed  without  endangering  safety  of  garrison,  especially  if  pre- 
cautions were  taken  to  assure  the  men  that  these  guns  were  removed 
because  now  useless,  and  to  be  replaced  by  others  more  effective  in 
this  stage  of  defense.  The  columbiads  do  not  materially  enhance 
strength  of  works  at  this  time. 

Colonel  Harris  thought,  if  obstinate  resistance  is  to  be  made,  guns 
should  not  be  removed. 

oth.  Can  we  take  the  offensive  suddenly,  with  a fair  prospect  of 
success,  by  throwing  during  the  night  3,000  men  on  north  end  of 
Morris  Island,  making  in  all  4,000  men  available,  bearing  in  mind 
that  no  re-enforcements  could  be  sent  there  until  night,  and  perhaps 
none  for  several  nights,  according  to  the  movements  of  enemy’s  iron- 
clads and  the  fire  of  his  land  batteries  ? 

Generals  Hagood  and  Colquitt  did  not  think  the  offensive  can  now 
be  undertaken  with  our  present  means  of  transportation,  and  thought 
it  would  certainly  fail  if  attempted. 

At  2.30  p.  m.  Brigadier-Generals  Hagood  and  Colquit-t  were  dis- 
missed to  their  posts,  and  at  3 p.  m.  the  conference  was  adjourned 
to  meet  again  at  8 p.  m. 

At  8 p.  m.  the  conference  was  resumed.  Present : General  G. 


[Chap.  XL. 


102  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

T.  Beauregard,  Maj.  Gen.  J.  F.  Gilmer,  Brig.  Gen.  R.  S.  Ripley, 
Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan,  Lieut.  Col.  D.  B.  Harris. 

A discussion  until  10  p.  m.  then  took  place  relative  to  the  condition 
of  the  works,  the  probable  plan  of  attack  of  the  enemy,  our  means 
of  defense,  of  transportation,  and  reasons  for  prolonging  our  foot- 
hold on  Morris  Island,  the  result  of  which  was  the  determination  by 
the  commanding  general  to  hold  Morris  Island  so  long  as  communi- 
cation with  it  could  be  maintained  at  night  by  means  of  row-boats,  but 
for  which  purpose  sailors  or  men  able  to  handle  boats  and  oars  with 
efficiency  were  essential.  It  was  agreed  that  the  holding  of  Morris 
Island  as  long  as  possible  was  most  important  to  the  safety  and  free 
use  of  the  harbor  of  Charleston,  and  our  ability  to  keep  up  easy  com- 
munication with  the  works  on  Sullivan’s  and  James  Islands,  in  view 
of  which  it  was  thought  proper  to  renew  applications  by  telegraph 
to  the  Secretaries  of  War  and  Navy  Departments  for  some  200  sail- 
ors or  oarsmen,  which  was  done  at  once. 

It  was  further  decided  that  the  five  heavy  guns  on  Morris  Island, 
being  necessary,  morally  and  physically,  for  the  defense  of  the  posi- 
tions to  the  last  extremity,  and  such  being  the  difficulties  (if  not, 
indeed,  the  insurmountable  obstacles)  in  the  way  of  their  removal  at 
this  time,  that  no  effort  should  be  made  to  save  them,  and  conse- 
quently that  they  should  be  ultimately  destroyed,  with  as  much  of 
the  works  as  practicable,  when  further  defense  was  abandoned. 

The  conference  was  then  adjourned  until  an  answer  should  be  re- 
ceived to  application  for  oarsmen. 

Charleston,  S.  C.,  September  7,  [?]  1863. 

On  the  morning  of  the  6th  instant,  the  dispatches  herewith,  marked 
A,  and,  subsequently,  a letter,  marked  B,  from  Col.  L.  M.  Keitt,  com- 
manding Confederate  States  forces,  Morris  Island,  having  been  re- 
ceived, reporting  that  Battery  Wagner  was  no  longer  tenable,  and 
that  the  garrison  must  be  sacrificed  if  the  position  were  not  evacuated 
that  night,  detailed  orders  were  issued  for  the  withdrawal  of  the 
garrison  and  destruction  of  the  works  and  armament,  contingent  on 
the  report  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Harris,  chief  engineer,  who  was 
directed  to  repair  at  once  to  Battery  Wagner,  and  inspect  and  report 
its  condition  for  further  defense.  His  report  is  appended,  marked  C. 

Meantime  Flag-Officer  Tucker  was  conferred  with,  and  called  on 
for  such  means  of  assistance  in  the  withdrawal  of  the  garrison  as 
were  at  his  disposition,  and  every  possible  arrangement  was  made. 

The  orders  and  an  accompanying  memorandum,  marked  D and  E, 
were  finally  issued,  and  reached  Morris  Island  about  6 p.  m.  Orders 
under  instructions  from  these  headquarters,  had  been  issued  several 
days  previously,  by  the  district  commander,  regulating  the  manner  of 
destroying  the  work  and  armament  in  case  of  such  an  exigency. 
(See  paper  marked  F.) 

Respectfully  submitted. 

THOMAS  JORDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff. 

[Inclosure  A.] 

Morris  Island,  September  5,  1863. 

(Received  September  6,  12.45  a.  m.) 
Captain  [W.  F.]  Nance,  Assistant  Adjutant- General : 

I had  900  and  not  1,400  men.  About  100  of  these  to-day  were 
killed  and  wounded.  The  parapet  of  salient  is  badly  breached.  The 


Chap.  XL.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


103 


whole  fort  is  much  weakened.  A repetition  to-morrow  of  to-day’s 
fire  will  make  the  fort  almost  a ruin.  The  mortar  fire  is  still  very 
heavy  and  fatal,  and  no  important  work  can  be  done.  Is  it  desirable 
to  sacrifice  the  garrison  ? To  continue  to  hold  it  is  to  do  so.  Captain 
[F.  D.]  Lee,  the  engineer,  has  read  this,  and  agrees.  Act  promptly, 
and  answer  at  once. 

LAWRENCE  M.  KEITT, 

Colonel , Commanding. 

[Indorsement.] 


The  above  was  received  by  me  at  1.30  a.  m.  September  6. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 

[Inclosure  B.  ] 


Headquarters  Battery  Wagner, 

September  6,  1863. 


Captain  [W.  F.]  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Charleston,  S.  C.  : 

Captain  : The  enemy  will  by  night  advance  their  parallel  to  the 
moat  of  this  battery.  The  garrison  must  be  taken  away  immediately 
after  dark,  or  it  will  be  destroyed  or  captured.  It  is  idle  to  deny  that 
the  heavy  Parrott  shell  have  breached  the  walls  and  are  knocking 
away  the  bomb-proofs.  Pray  have  boats  immediately  after  dark  at 
Cumming’s  Point  to  take  away  the  men.  I say  deliberately  that 
this  must  be  done  or  the  garrison  will  be  sacrificed.  I am  sending 
the  wounded  and  sick  now  to  Cumming’s  Point,  and  will  continue 
to  do  so,  if  possible,  until  ail  are  gone.  I have  a number  of  them 
now  there.  I have  not  in  the  garrison  400  effective  men,  including 
artillery.  The  engineers  agree  in  opinion  with  me,  or,  rather,  shape 
my  opinion.  I shall  say  no  more. 

LAWRENCE  M.  KEITT. 


[Inclosure  C.] 

Office  of  Chief  Engineer, 

Charleston,  S.  C.,  August  6,  1863.’ 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan, 

Chief  of  Staff. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  I visited  our  works  on 
Morris  Island  to-day,  and,  in  consideration  of  their  condition ; of  our 
inability  to  repair  damages  at  Battery  W agner  as  heretofore ; of  the 
dispirited  state  of  its  garrison,  and  of  the  progress  in  the  enemy’s 
sap,  I am  reluctantly  constrained  to  recommend  an  immediate 
evacuation  of  both  Batteries  Wagner  and  Gregg.  The  thirty-six 
hours’  severe  bombardment  to  which  these  batteries  have  been  sub- 
jected, confining  the  troops  to  the  shelter  of  the  bomb-proofs,  has 
resulted  in  so  dispiriting  the  garrison  at  Wagner  as  to  render  it 
unsafe,  in  the  opinion  of  its  chief  officers,  to  rely  upon  it  to  repel  an 
assault  should  the  enemy  attempt  one.  The  head  of  the  enemy’s  sap 
is  within  40  yards  of  the  salient  of  the  battery,  and  he  is  making 
rapid  progress  in  pushing  it  forward,  unmolested  by  the  fire  of  a 
single  gun,  and  with  scarcely  any  annoyance  from  our  sharpshooters. 

In  consequence  of  the  accuracy  of  fire  of  his  land  batteries,  which 
are  now  in  close  proximity  to  Battery  Wagner — say  from  500  to  800 
yards — aided  by  reverse  fire  from  his  fleet,  it  is  impossible,  in  the 
opinion  of  the  officers  of  the  fort,  to  keep  up  a fire  either  of  artillery 


104  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

or  small-arms,  and  the  enemy  is  thus  left  free  to  work  in  his  trenches, 
which  he  is  pushing  rapidly  forward,  the  head  of  the  sap  being,  as 
above  stated,  within  40  yards  of  the  salient  of  the  work,  which  is 
so  seriously  damaged  by  a battery  of  Parrott  guns  kept  constantly 
playing  upon  it  as  to  render  it  untenable.  This  difficulty  could, 
however,  be  overcome  by  the  erection  of  a parapet  across  the  gorge 
of  the  salient,  and  the  conversion  of  the  bomb-proof  covering  into 
another  parapet  overlooking  the  salient,  if  it  were  practicable  to  work 
as  heretofore  at  night.  The  covering  to  the  bomb-proof  and  maga- 
zine also  needs  repair.  W e have  been  thus  far  able  not  only  to  re- 
pair damage  at  night,  but  to  add  from  day  to  day  to  the  strength  of 
the  battery  ; but  now  that  the  enemy’s  sap  is  in  such  close  proximity 
to  the  battery,  and  he  has  contrived  to  throw  light  upon  the  parapets 
at  night,  it  is  impossible  to  do  so  without  a heavy  loss  of  men. 

In  the  effort  last  night  to  repair  damages,  the  commanding  officer 
of  the  fort  reports  a loss  in  killed  and  wounded  of  60  or  80  men  of 
the  working  party  alone.  Without  our  ability  to  repair  damages  at 
night,  the  battery  would  become,  under  the  incessant  fire  of  the 
enemy’s  land  batteries  and  fleet,  untenable,  say,  in  two  days.  It  is 
in  view  of  these  facts  that  I have  thought  it  my  duty  to  make  the 
recommendation  at  the  commencement  of  this  report. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  yours,  very  respectfully, 

D.  B.  HARRIS, < 

Lieutenant- Colonel,  and  Chief  Engineer. 

[Inclosure  D.] 

Special  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  S.  C.,  Ga.,  and  Fla., 

Ho.  176.  f Charleston,  S.  C:,  September  6,  1863. 

Battery  Wagner,  Morris  Island,  being  no  longer  tenable  without 
undue  loss  of  life  and  the  risk  of  final  capture  of  its  entire  garrison, 
the  position  and  Battery  Gregg  will  be  evacuated  as  soon  as  practi- 
cable, to  which  end  the  following  arrangements  will  be  made  by  the 
district  commander  : 

I.  Two  of  the  Confederate  States  iron-clads  should  .take  up  posi- 
tions near  Fort  Sumter,  with  their  guns  bearing  on  Cumming’s 
Point  and  to  the  eastward  of  it.  At  the  same  time  all  our  land  bat- 
teries will  be  held  prepared  to  sweep  all  the  water  faces  of  Battery 
Gregg.  Transport  steamers  will  take  positions  within  the  harbor, 
but  as  near  as  practicable  to  Cumming^s  Point,  to  receive  the  men 
from  the  row-boats,  by  which  the  embarkation  will  be  effected  from 
Morris  Island.  As  many  row-boats  as  necessary,  or  which  can  be 
manned  by  efficient  oarsmen,  will  be  provided,  and  kept  in  readiness 
at  once  to  proceed  to  and  reach  Cumming’s  Point,  or  that  vicinity, 
as  soon  after  dark  as  may  be  prudent.  Having  reached  the  beach  of 
Morris  Island,  a courier  or  a relay  of  footmen  will  be  dispatched  by 
the  naval  officer  in  charge,  with  notice  of  the  fact  to  the  officer  in 
command  of  Battery  Wagner,  and  of  the  exact  transport  capacity 
of  the  boats.  A naval  officer  with  proper  assistants  will  have  exclu- 
sive charge  of  the  boats  and  of  their  movements. 

II.  The  commanding  officer  of  Battery  Wagner,  having  made  dur- 
ing the  day  all  arrangements  for  the  evacuation  and  destruction  of 
the  work  and  armament,  when  informed  of  the  arrival  of  the  boats, 
will  direct  first  the  removal  and  embarkation  of  all  wounded  men, 
and  thereafter,  according  to  the  capacity  of  the  boats  at  hand,  will 
withdraw  his  command  by  companies  with  soldierly  silence  and  de- 
liberation. Two  companies  will  remain,  in  any  event,  to  preserve  a 


Chap.  XL.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


105 


show  of  occupation  and  repair,  and  to  defend  from  assanlt  during 
the  embarkation,  and  it  is  strictly  enjoined  that  no  more  men  shall 
be  permitted  to  quit  the  work  and  go  to  the  landing  than  can  be 
safely  embarked.  The  embarkment  will  be  superintended  by  the 
field  officers  or  regimental  and  battalion  commanders,  who  will  halt 
and  keep  their  respective  commands  about  100  yards  from  the  boats, 
divide  them  into  suitable  squads  for  assignment  to  the  boats  in 
exact  conformity  with  the  directions  of  the  naval  officers  in  charge 
of  embarkation,  and  then  superintend  the  disposition  of  the  men  ac- 
cordingly, impressing  on  all  the  vital  necessity  for  silence,  obedience 
to  orders,  and  the  utmost  coolness. 

III.  The  companies  left  to  occupy  Battery  Wagner  to  the  last  will 
be  under  charge  of  a firm  and  intelligent  field  officer,  who  will  not 
withdraw  his  command  until  assured  there  is  sufficient  transporta- 
tion for  all  the  remaining  garrison  of  the  island,  including  that  of 
Battery  Gregg. 

IV.  The  final  evacuation  will  depend  for  success  on  the  utmost 
coolness  and  quiet  on  the  part  of  every  man.  At  least  two  officers, 
previously  selected,  will  be  left  to  light  the  fuses,  already  arranged 
and  timed  to  about  fifteen  minutes,  to  blow  up  the  magazine  and 
bomb-proof,  and  to  destroy  the  armament  in  the  manner  already  in- 
dicated by  special  instructions  from  district  headquarters  ; but  the 
fuses  must  not  be  set  on  fire  until  it  is  certain  that  there  is  transpor- 
tation for  the  removal  of  all  the  garrison,  or  excepting  the  enemy 
become  aware  of  the  evacuation,  and  are  evidently  about  to  storm 
and  enter  the  work.  The  men  must  be  embarked  with  arms  loaded, 
ready  to  repel  an  attack  by  boat  parties  of  the  enemy. 

. V.  The  garrison  of  Battery  Gregg  will  stand  staunchly  at  its  post 
until  the  last  company  from  Battery  Wagner  shall  be  embarked. 
It  will  then  take  to  the  boats  with  silence  and  deliberation,  provision 
having  been  duly  made  as  at  Battery  Wagner  for  the  destruction  of 
the  work  and  its  ordnance.  Both  explosions  shall  be  as  nearly  simul- 
taneous as  possible,  and  the  complete  success  of  the  evacuation  will 
probably  be  in  the  hands  of  those  whose  high  duty  it  will  be  to  apply 
the  fire  to  the  fuses  at  Battery  Wagner.  The  garrison  of  Battery 
Gregg  will  be  embarked  with  the  same  precaution  and  regulations 
as  prescribed  for  Battery  Wagner.  In  case  the  enemy  should  carry 
Battery  Wagner  immediately  after  the  garrison  shall  have  evac- 
uated, or  in  any  way  the  explosion  of  the  magazine  should  be  pre- 
vented, a signal  of  three  rockets  discharged  in  rapid  succession  shall 
be  made  from  Battery  Gregg,  when  the  naval  vessels  in  position  and 
our  land  batteries  bearing  on  Battery  Wagner  will  be  opened  with  a 
steady  fire  on  the  site  of  that  work,  as  will  be  done  likewise  imme- 
diately after  an  explosion  shall  take  place,  and  this  fire  will  be  main- 
tained slowly  during  the  night. 

Brigadier-General  Ripley  will  give  such  additional  orders  as  will  be 
calculated  to  secure  the  successful  evacuation  of  Morris  Island,  or  to 
meet  emergencies.  He  will  confer  with  Flag-Officer  Tucker,  and 
procure  all  necessary  assistance. 

The  operation  is  one  of  the  most  delicate  ever  attempted  in  war. 
Coolness,  resolute  courage,  judgment,  and  inflexibility  on  the  part 
of  officers,  obedience  to  orders,  and  a constant  sense  of  the  necessity 
for  silence  on  the  part  of  the  men,  are  essential  for  complete  success, 
and  the  credit  which  must  attach  to  those  who  achieve  it. 

By  command  of  General  Beauregard  : 

THOMAS  JORDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff . 


[Chap.  XL 


106  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

[Inclosure  E.] 

Memorandum  in  reference  to  the  removal  of  troops  from  Morris 

Island. 

Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , September  6,  1863 — 3.30  p.  m. 
Brig.  Gen.  R.  S.  Ripley, 

Comdg.  First  Military  District , Charleston,  S.  C. : 

The  steamboats  to  take  position  near  the  south  edge  of  channel, 
and  about  midway  between  Forts  Johnson  and  Sumter.  Small  boats 
to  ply  between  steamers  and  Cumming’s  Point.  Should  steamboats 
be  driven  from  their  position,  must  go  to  Fort  Johnson.  First  trip 
of  small  boats  to  take  off  sick  and  wounded  to  the  steamboats.  First 
(and  possibly  the  second)  trip  with  troops  to  be  landed  at  Sumter, 
the  rest  at  steamers ; if  the  steamboats  are  driven  away  by  shot  and 
shell,  then  at  Johnson.  The  trips  to  be  continued  until  all  are  off 
of  Morris  Island,  notwithstanding  shelling  of  the  enemy.  The 
troops  landed  at  Sumter  to  be  removed  to  steamers  or  Fort  Johnson 
as  soon  as  the  transportation  of  the  whole  from  Morris  Island  shall 
have  been  finished.  A fast  boat  to  be  left  behind  for  the  dozen 
(about)  officers  who  are  to  blow  up  magazines,  burst  guns,  &c. 

Officers  in  Sumter  must  be  notified  of  the  intention  to  land  troops 
at  that  work  from  Morris  Island.  All  the  batteries  must  be  notified 
of  this  movement  of  small  boats  and  steamers  in  the  harbor  to-night. 

When  the  officers  left  at  Wagner  and  Gregg  to  explode  magazines, 
&c. , shall  have  gotten  sufficiently  far  from  Cumming’s  Point  for  our 
batteries  to  open  on  the  site  of  those  two  works,  those  officers  will 
set  off  from  their  boat  three  rockets,  or  make  some  other  agreed 
signal,  to  notify  the  batteries  that  they  can  commence  firing. 

A blue  light  at  Gregg  will  indicate  when  the  ten-minute  fuses  in 
Wagner  are  to  be  lighted.  Those  in  Gregg  are  not  to  be  lighted 
until  the  officers  from  Wagner  shall  have  reported. 

Troops  in  Wagner  and  Gregg  will  march  at  proper  times  to  Cum- 
ming’s Point  beach  by  companies,  each  company  being  halted  about 
100  yards  from  position  of  boats.  Their  officers  will  then  send  them 
by  squads  equivalent  to  the  capacity  of  each  boat  destined  to  receive 
them.  All  men  must  have  their  arms  loaded  on  entering  the  boats, 
to  defend  themselves  in  case  of  necessity.  The  most  complete  silence 
and  order  must  be  maintained  throughout  the  entire  operation. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General,  Commanding. 

[Inclosure  F.] 

Headquarters  First  Military  District, 

Dept,  of  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston,  September  5,  1863. 

Commanding  Officer  Battery  Wagner: 

Sir  : As  it  is  within  the  contingencies  that  Batteries  Wagner  and 
Gregg  may  be  evacuated,  I wish  the  engineer  and  artillery  officers  to 
be  fully  prepared.  A quantity  of  safety  fuse  has  been  sent  down  at 
different  times  to  both  Batteries  Wagner  and  Gregg.  This  will  at 
once  be  examined,  and  kept  in  place  for  service.  All  magazines  will 
be  prepared  for  explosion  before  the  final  evacuation  takes  place  by 
causing  safety  fuses,  at  least  three  in  number,  to  be  inserted  in  a file 


Chap.  XL.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


107 


of  cartridges  or  a barrel  of  powder  in  each  magazine,  to  be  carefully 
trained,  so  that  ignition  be  not  premature,  and  of  the  length  to  insure 
time  for  leaving  with  the  rear  guard.  The  fuse  burns  fifteen  seconds 
to  the  foot,  so  that  if  ten  minutes  is  required  the  length  of  the  fuse 
should  be  40  feet,  or  more  in  proportion. 

The  engineer  officer  or  some  careful  person  should  be  provided  with 
matches  and  linstock,  and,  at  a signal  from  the  commanding  officer, 
should  light  carefully,  and  without  undue  haste,  each  safety  fuse,  and 
report. 

The  artillery  officer  should  destroy  the  implements  of  each  gun 
which  is  not  firing,  and  should  spike  securely  all  the  guns  of  smaller 
caliber,  destroy  the  elevating  screws,  and  render  the  carriages  un- 
serviceable. It  will  be  well  to  ram  a shot  or  shell  down  without 
cartridge,  first  inserting  a small  wedge  of  wood  to  cause  the  ball  to 
stick  in  its  position. 

The  10-inch  columbiads,  if  not  removed,  must  be  destroyed.  They 
must  be  burst,  if  possible.  It  is  intended  to  send  down  a few  210- 
pound  bolts  with  Tennessee  caps.  If  these  come,  put  in  two  car- 
tridges with  two  bolts,  prime  with  powder,  and  lash  a small  cartridge 
over  the  vent,  with  a slow  match  inserted.  Let  the  matches  be  fired 
at  the  same  time  with  the  magazines.  It  will  be  well  to  cut  through 
the  braces  of  the  carriage,  and  put  all  the  eccentric  wheels  in  gear. 
If  the  bolts  do  not  come,  put  in  two  cartridges,  two  solid  shot,  another 
cartridge,  and  then  fill  the  gun  up  to  the  muzzle,  priming  and  ar- 
ranging the  safety  fuses  as  before. 

Other  instructions  will  be  given  with  regard  to  the  evacuation  as 
far  as  the  troops  are  concerned,  but  should  it  take  place,  as  these 
arrangements  will  depend  on  circumstances,  and  the  circumstances 
and  the  destruction  of  armament,  &c.,  will  require  consideration, 
and  especially  coolness,  on  the  part  of  the  artillery  and  engineer  offi- 
cers, it  has  been  thought  proper  to  send  these  instructions  now.  You 
will  please  communicate  them  to  the  artillery  and  engineer  officers 
of  the  command,  and  furnish  them  with  the  copies  inclosed  in  strict 
confidence.  They  must  be  turned  over  to  their  successors,  as  will  be 
the  case  with  this  paper  to  the  officer  who  relieves  you.  Should 
Battery  Gregg  be  evacuated,  the  same  arrangements  will  be  made  for 
the  demolition  of  magazines  and  armament,  but  of  course  at  that 
point  it  will  not  take  place  until  the  last  moment,  according  to  in- 
structions from  these  or  department  headquarters. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

R.  S.  RIPLEY, 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding . 

[Inclosure  G.] 

Morris  Island, 
September  6,  1863 — 3.15  p.  m. 

Captain  [W.  F.]  Nance  : 

Will  boats  be  here  to-night  for  garrison  ? If  so,  at  what  time,  and 
if  our  sacrifice  be  of  benefit,  I am  ready.  Let  it  be  said  so,  and  I 
will  storm  the  enemy’s  works  at  once,  or  lose  every  man  here.  The 
enemy  are  within  50  yards  of  us,  and  before  day  dawns  we  should 
assault  him  if  we  remain  here.  Answer  positively  and  at  once. 

Assistant  Engineer  [R.  M.]  Stiles  has  just  inspected  the  fort.  He 
says  it  is  untenable. 

LAWRENCE  M.  KEITT, 

Colonel,  Commanding . 


[Chap.  XL. 


108  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

* 

[Indorsement.] 

Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , S.  C.,  September  24,  1863. 

This  dispatch  was  not  received  at  General  Ripley’s  headquarters 
until  after  orders  for  evacuation  had  been  issued  and  the  prepara- 
tions completed,  and  was  only  sent  up  to  these  headquarters  a few 
days  since. 

THOMAS  JORDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff. 

ADDENDA  NO.  4. 

Charleston,  September  6,  1863—2.15  a.  m. 
Col.  L.  M.  Keitt,  Commanding  Morris  Island: 

Repair  work  with  soldiers  and  negroes  on  island.  I will  deter- 
mine to-day  what  measures  to  adopt.  No  action  should  be  taken  in 
baste  It  is  too  late  to  act  this  night. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


Morris  Island,  September  6—8.45  a.  m. 
Captain  [W.  F.]  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General : 

Incessant  fire  from  Yankee  mortar  and  Parrott  battery.  Can’t 
work  negroes ; better  look  after  them  promptly.  Had  30  or  40  sol- 
diers wounded  in  an  attempt  to  work.  Will  do  all  I can,  but  fear 
the  garrison  will  be  destroyed  without  injuring  the  enemy.  The 
fleet  is  opening,  but  I hope  that  we  may  stand  till  to-night. 

KEITT, 

Colonel. 


Morris  Island,  September  6—10.30  a.  m. 
Captain  [W.  F.]  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General : 

Boats  must  be  at  Cumming’s  Point  early  to-night  without  fail. 

KEITT, 

Colonel. 


A DDENDA  NO.  5. 


Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston,  S.  C.,  September  19,  1863: 

Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

A.  A.  G.,  First  Military  District,  Charleston,  S.  C.: 

Captain  : The  general  commanding  directs  me  to  ascertain  from 
you  at  what  time  of  day  and  on  what  day  the  instructions  in  refer- 
ence to  the  evacuation  of  Batteries  Wagner  and  Gregg,  marked  con- 
fidential, and  dated  headquarters  First  Military  District,  Septem- 
ber 5,  1863,  left  your  headquarters  for  Morris  Island,  and  at  what 
time  these  instructions  reached  the  commanding  officer  of  that  post. 
The  general  commanding  does  not  find  that  information  in  Colonel 
Keitt’s  report  or  accompanying  papers. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

A.  N.  TOUTANT  BEAUREGARD, 

Aide-de-Camp. 


Chap.  XL.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


109 


Headquarters  First  Military  District, 

Dept,  of  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , S.  C.,  September  19,  1863. 

Lieut.  A.  1ST.  Toutant  Beauregard, 

Aide-de-Camp : 

Sir  : In  reply  to  your  inquiries  of  this  date,  relative  to  the  confi- 
dential letter  from  these  headquarters,  dated  5th  instant,  I have  the 
honor  to  state  that  that  communication  was  sent  down  on  the  after- 
noon of  the  6th  instant,  leaving  these  headquarters  between  4 and 
5 o’clock.  This  was  the  first  communication  with  Morris  Island 
after  the  morning  of  the  5th,  before  the  instructions  were  written. 
The  letter  was  started  down  on  the  night  of  the  5th,  but  I was  in- 
formed that  no  boat  reached  the  island  that  night,  and  all  communi- 
cations for  Colonel  Keitt  were  returned  to  this  office. 

Colonel  Keitt  received  this  letter  with  the  instructions  from  the 
headquarters  of  the  department.  I must  not  omit  to  state  that  I 
sent  similar  instructions  early  in  the  day  on  the  6th,  after  I had  been 
informed  that  the  commanding  general  had  determined  upon  the 
evacuation,  by  telegraph  and  signal.  Colonel  Keitt  informed  me 
that  these  were  not  received  until  late  in  the  day,  owing,  I suppose, 
to  the  difficulty  of  signaling  under  the  very  heavy  fire  of  that  entire 
day. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

WM.  F.  NANCE, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

ADDENDA  NO.  6. 

Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , S.  C.,  November  29,  1863. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  forward  for  the  information  of  the 
War  Department  the  following  papers  touching  operations  in  my  de- 
partment : Paper  marked  A,  return  and  estimate  of  troops  and  guns 
in  Department  of  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida,  November  • 
1,  1863;  Paper  B,  copy  of  Brigadier-General  Walker’s  letter  of  No- 
vember 19,  1863,  asking  for  re-enforcements  in  event  of  an  attack 
upon  his  district,  &c.,  with  my  indorsements  of  November  22  and 
28  upon  same  ; Paper  C,  copy  of  circular  of  25th  instant  from  these 
headquarters  to  Brigadier-Generals  W alker,  Mercer,  W ise,  and  Rob- 
ertson, for  their  information  in  regard  to  operations  in  case  of  an 
attempt  by  the  enemy  to  force  his  way  into  the  interior,  seize  the 
Charleston  and  Savannah  Railroad,  and  effect  a lodgment  upon  the 
main. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General , Commanding. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjt.  and  Insp.  Gen.,  C.  S.  Army,  Richmond,  Va. 

[Indorsement  No.  1.] 

December  3,  1863. 

Respectfully  submitted  to  the  Secretary  of  War. 

S.  COOPER, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General . 


110  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  EL  A. 


[Chap.  XL. 


[Indorsement  No.  2.] 


December  8,  1863. 

Respectfully  submitted  to  the  President  for  his  information  as  to 
the  condition  of  General  Beauregard’s  command  and  his  arrange- 
ments for  defense. 

J.  A.  SEDDON, 

Secretary  of  War. 

[Indorsement  No.  3.] 

It  is  not  seen  why  the  infantry  force  asked  for  by  General  Walker 
cannot  be  furnished  by  General  Beauregard,  arrangements  being 
made  to  secure  the  return  of  the  force  at  any  time  within  a few 
hours  to  Charleston  if  events  should  require  its  presence  at  the  latter 
place.  The  estimate  of  the  number  of  troops  requisite  for  the  per- 
fect defense  of  Charleston  and  its  approaches  against  possible  con- 
tingencies is  no  doubt  correct ; but  our  whole  force  does  not  permit 
the  Government  to  keep  at  each  assailable  position  as  many  troops 
as  may  become  necessary.  Immediate  wants  must  decide  the  loca- 
tion of  the  forces  we  have. 

JEFFERSON  DAYIS. 

[Indorsement  No.  4.] 


Adjutant  and  Inspector  General: 

Communicate  this  indorsement. 


J.  A.  SEDDON. 


[Inclosure  A.] 

Return  and  estimate  of  Infantry  in  the  Department  of  South  Carolina , Georgia, 

and  Florida. 


Command. 


First  Military  District  of  South  Carolina^ . . . 
Second  Military  District  of  South  Carolina§ . 
Third  Military  District  of  South  Carolina|| . . . 
Fourth  Military  District  of  South  Carolina^ 
District  of  Georgia 


District  of  Middle  Florida* * * * § ** 
District  of  East  Florida** . . . 


15,600 

5,000 

3,730 

270 

10,000 


2,334 

442 

558 

140 

1,745 


12,773 


603 

521 

1,050 


34,600 


5,219 

1,367 

473 


14,947 

1,485 

470 


18,500 

2.500 

3.500 

1.500 

10,000 


36,000 

1.500 

2.500 


Total 


34  600 


7,059 


16,902 


40,000 


REMARKS. 

* Date  the  enemy  took  possession  of  the  south  end  of  Morris  Island. 

+ Since  this  date,  Clingman’s  brigade  (1,810  effectives)  has  been  ordered  from  Sullivan’s  Island  to 
North  Carolina. 

X This  military  district  comprises  at  present  the  First,  Fifth,  Sixth,  and  Seventh  Military  Districts. 

§ With  the  estimated  number  of  infantry,  the  present  force  of  cavalry  and  artillery  is  assumed  to 
be  sufficient. 

||  General  Pemberton  estimated  5,000  men  of  all  arms.  The  cavalry  and  artillery  then  present  have 
been  deducted. 

1 General  Pemberton  estimated  three  companies  of  infantry  in  this  military  district. 

**  Middle  and  East  Florida  were  not  in  General  Pemberton’s  department. 


Chap.  XL.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


Ill 


Return  of  troops  and  guns  in  the  Military  Department  of  South  Carolina , 
Georgia,  and  Florida,  November  1,  1863. 


Command. 

Effectives. 

Guns. 

Total  infantry  required  for 

the  proper  defense.  J 

Infantry. 

i Companies  of  light 
artillery. 

Light  artillery. 

I Companies  of  heavy 

artillery. 

Heavy  artillery. 

Cavalry. 

Total. 

| Artillery  in  position. 

| Field  artillery. 

Total. 

First  Military  District,  Brigadier-General 

4,578 

2 

152 

15 

917 

184 

5,&31 

59 

8 

67 

5,000 

Ripley. 

Second  Military  District,  Brigadier-General 

2 

199 

1 

89 

749 

1,037 

6 

8 

14 

2,500 

Robertson. 

Third  Military  District,  Brigadier-General 

603 

5 

551 

1,368 

2,522 

21 

21 

3,500 

Walker. 

Fourth  Military  District,  Brigadier-General 

521 

2 

180 

1 

150 

320 

1,171 

11 

9 

20 

1,500 

Trapier. 

Fifth  Military  District,  Colonel  Rhett 

1,692 

1 

78 

5 

278 

106 

2, 154 

13 

4 

17 

2,500 

Sixth  Military  District,  Brigadier-General 

2,061 

1 

26 

2,087 

8 

8 

3,500 

Wise. 

Seventh  Military  District,  Brigadier-General 

4,442 

5 

376 

26 

1,851 

279 

6,948 

122 

20 

142 

7,500 

Taliaferro. 

District  of  Georgia,  Brigadier-General  Mer- 

1,050 

4 

224 

35 

1,395 

1,908 

4,577 

184 

17 

201 

10,000 

cer. 

District  of  Middle  Florida,  Brigadier-Gen- 

1,485 

2 

167 

1 

482 

2, 134 

5 

8 

13 

1,500 

eral  Gardner. 

District  of  East  Florida,  Brigadier-General 

470 

3 

140 

464 

1,074 

40 

8 

8 

2,500 

Finegan. 

Department  of  South  Carolina,  Georgia, 

*16,902 

26 

2,067 

85 

4,706 

5,860 

29,535 

448 

103 

511 

40,000 

and  Florida,  General  Beauregard. 

*Of  these,  about  1,754  men  belong  to  the  five  regiments  of  six-months’  State  troops. 


REMARKS. 

First  Military  District  South  Carolina— Sumter,  Sullivan’s  and  Long  Islands,  parishes  of  Christ 
Church  and  Saint  Thomas. 

Second  Military  District  South  Carolina — From  western  limits  of  the  Sixth  to  Ashepoo. 

Third  Military  District  South  Carolina — Country  between  Ashepoo  and  Savannah  Rivers. 

Fourth  Military  District  South  Carolina— Bounded  on  southwest  by  Santee  River  and  northwest  by 
boundary  line  of  North  and  South  Carolina. 

Fifth  Military  District  South  Carolina— City  of  Charleston,  to  include  lines  on  Neck,  Fort  Ripley, 
and  Castle  Pinckney. 

Sixth  Military  District  South  Carolina— Saint  Andrew’s,  south  of  Ashley  and  west  of  Stono  Church 
Flats,  and  tete-de-pont  at  Rantowles. 

Seventh  Military  District  South  Carolinar— James  Island. 

District  of  Georgia— State  of  Georgia,  excluding  defenses  of  the  Appalachicola  and  main  affluents. 

District  of  Middle  Florida — Bounded  by  Suwannee  and  Choctawhatchie  Rivers  and  defenses  of  Ap- 
palachicola and  affluents. 

District  of  East  Florida — Portion  of  Florida  east  of  Suwannee  River. 

Note.— First,  Fifth,  Sixth,  Seventh  Districts  comprise  the  defenses  of  Charleston,  S.  C.,  and  formed 
the  First  Military  District  until  October  22,  1863. 

[Inclosure  B.] 

Headquarters  Third  Military  District, 

Pocotaligo,  November  19,  1863. 

General  : I judge  that  the  Abolition  forces  will  soon  despair  of 
taking  Charleston  in  front.  If  they  do  attempt  it,  it  will  probably 
he  with  their  iron-clads  running  into  Charleston  Harbor,  in  which 
event  there  will  only  be  an  artillery  fight.  Their  present  force  is 
totally  inadequate  for  a land  attack. 

Failing  at  Charleston,  it  is  a probable  supposition  that  they  will 
attempt  to  do  something,  and  the  most  available  point  to  retrieve 
themselves  by  a cheap  success  is  presented  in  my  district.  You  are 
aware  that  there  is  only  a portion  of  one  company  (Captain  [John 
H.]  Mickler’s)  acting  as  infantry  in  my  command,  stationed  at  Bluff- 
ton,  and  390  old  men  and  boys  in  the  regiment  South  Carolina  State 
troops.  This  body  of  militia  cannot  be  depended  on  against  disci- 
plined troops,  though  it  might  do  well  at  certain  points  as  an  auxil- 


112  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

iary.  There  is  also  a small  company  acting  as  guard  of  Savannah 
River  Bridge.  From  your  acquaintance  with  this  country  and  the 
character  and  number  of  my  troops,  I know  you  do  not  consider  it 
practicable  for  me  to  concentrate  sufficient  force  in  my  command  to 
resist  the  advance  of  a column  of  4,000  of  the  enemy,  without  re- 
enforcements. If  the  plans  of  the  enemy  are  well* matured  and 
vigorously  carried  out,  I should  be  forced  to  retire  from  the  works 
commanding  the  railroad  before  the  re-enforcements  arrive.  The 
success  of  Pocotaligo  in  October,  1862,  was  largely  owing  to  the 
natural  strength  of  the  position.  Such  success  could  not  probably 
be  expected  should  the  enemy  advance  from  Field’s  Point  or  to- 
ward Graham ville  or  Coosawhatchie.  The  present  line  below  the 
railroad  is  a strong  one  if  there  are  troops  to  man  it.  If  driven 
from  the  railroad,  there  is  no  line  we  could  expect  to  hold  short  of 
the  Edisto  River.  % Should  the  enemy  occupy  the  railroad,  we  would 
not  only  lose  the  short  line  of  communication  between  Charleston 
and  Savannah,  but  we  would  lose  a strong  line  of  defense,  and  open 
an  immense  outlet  to  the  negro  population  of  the  State.  I think, 
therefore,  that  it  is  worth  a determined  and  anxious  effort  to  hold 
the  line.  For  this  purpose,  I should  have  at  Pocotaligo  not  less  than 
1,000  infantry  and  a battery  of  artillery,  seasoned  fighting  troops, 
with  transportation  ready  at  Pocotaligo  ; this  to  constitute  a mov- 
able column,  to  be  thrown  on  any  point  that  may  be  assailed.  At 
Charleston  there  should  be  2,000  or  3,000  infantry,  with  two  batter- 
ies of  artillery  near  the  line  of  the  Charleston  and  Savannah  Rail- 
road, with  transportation  ready,  to  serve  as  a reserve.  With  the 
first  named  and  my  cavalry  force,  I could  hope  to  hold  in  check  4,000 
men;  with  the  addition  of  the  re-enforcements  named,  10,000.  Should 
the  enemy,  however,  be  so  unwise  as  to  make  a land  attack  on 
Charleston,  the  force  here  could  serve  as  a reserve,  and  be  moved  to 
your  assistance.  It  might  be  of  the  last  importance  in  moving 
rapidly  to  the  defense  of  Savannah,  now  weakened.  If  re-enforce- 
ments  are  to  be  sent,  and  the  Charleston  and  Savannah  road  can 
only  furnish  a locomotive  without  cars,  I may  be  able  to  get  the 
latter  from  R.  R.  Cuyler,  president  Georgia  road,  as  I did  last  year. 
Even,  however,  in  the  absence  of  this  special  train,  I might  use  the 
sand  train  of  Mr.  Buckhalter,  as  was  done  so  successfully  in  Octo- 
ber, 1862.  With  the  re-enforcements  mentioned  above,  should  the 
attack  be  made  by  a column  of  15,000  men,  I judge  I would  have  to 
retire  after  fully  feeling  their  force.  There  would  not  be  sufficient 
transportation  at  Charleston  to  re-enforce  me  in  time.  Should  these 
views  be  approved,  I beg  to  suggest  that  no  time  should  be  lost  in 
carrying  them  out. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  S.  WALKER, 
Brigadier-General,  Commanding. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan, 

Chief  of  Staff,  and  Assistant  Adjutant-  General : 

[Indorsement  No.  1.] 

Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston,  S.  C.,  November  22,  1863. 

Respectfully  returned  to  Brig.  Gen.  William  S.  Walker  for  his  infor- 
mation. It  is  an  axiom  in  war  that  no  work  is  sufficiently  strong  to 
resist  a determined  attack  unless  properly  garrisoned.  The  defenses 
of  Charleston  require  18,500  infantry  and  at  least  ten  light  batteries. 
We  now  have  for  that  object  only  12,695  infantry  (of  which  a part 


Chap.  XL.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


113 


are  unreliable  troops)  and  eight  light  batteries.  If  one  portion  of 
the  railroad  and  country  between  Charleston  and  Savannah  is  worth 
guarding,  the  rest  is  in  the  same  condition ; hence,  if  1,000  infantry 
and  two  batteries  be  sent  to  your  district,  nearly  a like  number  must 
also  be  sent  to  the  Second  District  (General  Robertson’s),  thus  reduc- 
ing by  over  2,000  men  the  already  too  weak  forces  absolutely  required 
for  the  defense  of  Charleston.  To  represent  things  in  a more  tangible 
light,  let  us  assume  that  the  enemy  has  5,000  men  on  Morris  Island 
and  Folly  Island,  and  10,000  more  on  transports  in  North  Edisto,  Saint 
Helena  Sound,  and  Port  Royal.  Suppose  that  with  these  10,000  men 
he  should  make  a strong  demonstration  on  Hardeeville,  Graham- 
ville,  and  Coosawhatchie  Landing  with  about  one-half  of  this  force, 
holding  the  rest  in  reserve ; suppose,  also,  that  I should  send  to 
your  assistance  about  2,000  additional  men  from  Charleston  and 
1,000  from  the  Second  Military  District ; suppose,  then,  that  early  in 
the  evening  the  enemy  should  re-embark  4,000  of  the  men  landed  by 
him,  leaving  about  1,000  cavalry  to  mask  his  movement,  and  that  he 
should  start  at  once  the  balance  of  his  forces  for  James  or  Sullivan’s 
Island,  where  they  would  arrive  about  daybreak.  He  would  be  able 
to  commence  his  attack  before  you  could  be  made  aware  of  his  de- 
parture from  your  front ; the  troops  sent  to  re-enforce  you  from 
Charleston  and  the  Second  Military  District  could  not  be  returned 
here  and  be  in  position  at  the  point  attacked  until  about  twenty-four 
hours  after  its  probable  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy.  The  ques- 
tion then  arises,  Is  it  prudent  to  risk  the  safety  of  Charleston  for  that 
of  the  railroad  and  country  lying  between  it  and  Savannah  ? No 
one  could  hesitate  in  the  selection. 

I have  not  referred  to  withdrawing  troops  from  Savannah  to  be 
sent  to  your  assistance  for  the  simple  reason  that  only  1,050  infantry 
and  four  light  batteries  have  been  left  there  as  a support  to  its  many 
forts  and  batteries,  the  rest  of  its  infantry  and  light  artillery  having 
been  brought  to  this  place  for  its  defense. 

From  the  above  statement  you  will  perceive  the  impracticability 
of  carrying  out  your  suggestion.  Yourself  and  General  Robertson 
must  make  with  your  present  forces  (which  consist  almost  entirely 
of  cavalry)  the  best  show  of  resistance  to  the  demonstrations  of  the 
enemy,  contesting  every  inch  of  ground,  moving  your  forces  rapidly 
from  one  point  threatened  to  the  other,  and,  when  compelled,  retire, 
fighting,  so  as  to  guard  as  much  as  practicable  the  country  in  your 
rear  and  the  South  Carolina  Railroad  from  the  bridge  across  the 
Edisto,  near  Branchville,  toward  Charleston ; the  Edisto  and  Ashley 
Rivers  offering  a good  defensive  line  to  make  a final  stand.  Further 
instructions  on  the  subject  will  be  sent  you  as  soon  as  practicable. 

I must  advise,  to  deceive  the  enemy,  the  frequent  use  of  signal 
rockets,  salutes  of  light  artillery,  and  beating  of  drums  in  the  vicinity 
of  your  outposts,  not  so  near,  however,  as  to  indicate  their  true 
positions. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General , Commanding. 

[Indorsement  No.  2.] 

Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , S.  C.,  November  28,  1863. 

P . S. — Since  the  date  of  this  indorsement,  Clingman’s  brigade  (1,810 
effectives)  has  been  ordered  to  North  Carolina. 


8 R R — VOL  XXVIII,  PT  I 


G.  T.  B. 


[Chap.  XL, 


114  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

[Inclosure  C.] 

Circular.]  Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  S.  C.,  Ga.,  and  Fla., 

Charleston , S.  C.,  November  25,  1863. 

General  : The  following  views  of  the  commanding  general  are 
communicated  for  your  information  : 

1st.  Further  depletion  of  the  already  too  weak  forces  left  for  the 
defense  of  Charleston  is  improper,  and,  therefore,  you  must  depend 
solely  on  the  troops  of  your  command  to  repel  any  attack  of  the 
enemy  by  moving  rapidly  your  cavalry  and  light  batteries  to  any 
point  in  your  district  which  may  be  threatened.  Should  you  be 
compelled  to  abandon  the  line  of  the  Charleston  and  Savannah 
Railroad,  you  will  retire,  fighting  obstinately,  so  as  to  protect  as 
much  and  as  far  as  practicable  the  country  in  your  rear,  especially 
the  line  of  the  South  Carolina  Railroad,  for  which  latter  object  the 
best  defensive  line  would  be  the  “ overflows,”  the  Ashley  River  from 
Bee’s  Ferry  to  the  Little  Lakes ; thence  across  to  Gioham’s  Ferry, 
on  the  Edisto  River,  and  along  that  river  to  the  South  Carolina 
Railroad  bridge  above  Branch ville,  and  thence  along  as  near  the 
southern  boundary  line  of  Barnwell  District  as  shall  be  determined 
by  a close  reconnaissance  by  General  Walker’s  engineer  officer. 

2d.  The  line  of  the  “overflows”  and  the  works  in  advance  of  it 
along  the  Stono  will  be  defended  by  the  troops  under  Brigdier-Gen- 
eral  Wise,  commanding  the  Sixth  Military  District,  together  with 
such  additional  troops  as  he  may  receive  from  Brigadier-General 
Taliaferro’s  command,  the  Seventh  Military  District. 

3d.  The  line  in  rear  of  the  Ashley  River  from  Bee’s  Ferry,  in- 
clusive, to  Bossua  Creek,  near  Dorchester,  will  be  defended  by  the 
troops  from  the  Fifth  and  the  First  Military  Districts. 

4th.  The  forces  under  Brigadier-General  Robertson  are  intrusted 
with  the  defense  of  the  line  from  Bossua  Creek  to  Little  Lakes  ; 
thence  across  to  Gioham’s  Ferry,  on  the  Edisto,  and  the  Four  Hole 
Creek.  Colonel  Harris,  chief  engineer,  has  been  directed  to  throw 
up  certain  defensive  works  across  the  country  from  the  Ashley  to  the 
Edisto. 

5th.  The  line  in  rear  of  the  Edisto  from  Four  Hole  Creek  to  the 
South  Carolina  Railroad  bridge  above  Branchville  will  be  defended 
by  Colonel  [J.  H.]  Williams’  regiment  of  State  troops,  already  there, 
re-enforced  by  a portion  of  Brigadier-General  Walker’s  command, 
until  they  can  be  relieved  by  other  troops  in  the  department. 

6th.  From  the  Edisto  to  the  Savannah  River,  near  the  southern 
boundary  of  Barnwell  District,  will  be  defended  or  guarded,. as  far 
as  practicable,  by  the  remainder  of  Brigadier-General  Walker’s 
command.  That  officer  will  construct  such  field  works,  rifle-pits, 
and  abatis,  and  make  such  overflows  as  the  means  at  his  disposition 
and  the  nature  of  the  country  will  permit. 

7th.  Brigadier-Generals  Robertson  and  Walker  will  resort  to  such 
expedients  as  the  beating  of  drums,  firing  of  salutes  and  rockets  at 
or  near  their  line  of  pickets,  as  will  deceive  the  enemy.  A temporary 
concentration  of  cavalry  at  various  points  near  the  enemy’s  pickets 
and  lighting  numerous  camp-fires  at  night  must  also  be  resorted  to 
as  frequently  as  possible.  In  other  words,  we  must  make  up  for  our 
deficiency  in  numbers  as  far  as  practicable  by  ingenuity  and  activity. 
A thorough  knowledge  of  the  country  should  give  us  an  advantage 
over  our  adversary  which  must  be  improved  and  made  available  to 
the  utmost ; and  each  district  commander  will  be  expected  to  provide 
himself  with  an  ample  number  of  tried  and  reliable  guides. 


Chap  XL.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


115 


The  commanding  general  desires  particularly  to  impress  upon  you 
his  inability  to  re-enforce  your  command  at  present.  It  is  an  axiom 
of  war  that  4 4 no  work  is  sufficiently  strong  to  resist  a determined  at- 
tack unless  properly  garrisoned.”  The  defenses  of  this  city  require 
i force  of  18,500  infantry  and  at  least  ten  light  batteries.  In  lieu  of 
that  force,  only  12,695  infantry  (of  which  a portion  are  unreliable 
troops)  and  eight  light  batteries  compose  its  present  garrison.*  If 
one  portion  of  the  Charleston  and  Savannah  Railroad  is  worth 
guarding,  the  rest  has  the  same  claim ; hence,  if  1,000  men  are  sent 
to  the  Third  District,  nearly  a like  number  should  also  be  sent  to 
the  Second  District,  and  thus  weakening  the  already  too  small  forces 
absolutely  required  for  the  defense  of  Charleston,  invites  an  attack 
from  the  enemy  before  these  troops  from  those  districts  could  possi- 
bly be  recalled.  The  question,  then,  arises  whether  it  is  better  to 
risk  the  safety  of  Charleston  or  that  of  the  country  lying  between  it 
and  Savannah.  The  commanding  general  cannot  hesitate  in  the 
selection. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

THOMAS  JORDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff. 

Brig.  Gen.  W.  S.  Walker, 

Comdg.  3d  Mil.  Dist.  of  South  Carolina,  Pocotaligo,  S.  C. 


November  28,  1863. 


P.  S. — Since  the-  date  of  this  circular,  Clingman’s  brigade  (1,810 
effectives)  has  been  ordered  to  North  Carolina. 

G.  T.  B. 


Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office, 

Richmond,  December  26,  1863. 

General  Beauregard  : 

General  : I send  you,  by  direction  of  the  President,  the  inclosed 
letter  from  W.  P.  Robert,*  and  have  to  request  from  you  an  early 
answer  by  telegraph  to  the  indorsement  of  the  President  thereon. 
It  has  been  intimated  here  that  you  propose  abandoning  your  pres- 
ent line  of  defense,  and  to  establish  a new  line  farther  in  the  interior. 
You  are  further  requested  to  state  if  this  be  so,  for  the  consideration 
of  the  President. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

S.  COOPER, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 

[Indorsement  No.  1.] 

December  30,  1863. 

Respectfully  submitted  to  the  President.  The  inclosed  telegraphic 
dispatch  is  the  only  response  I have  received  to  the  letter  addressed 
on  the  26th  instant,  copy  of  which  is  herewith,  covering  his  letter 
of  November  29,  to  which  he  refers  in  the  dispatch. 

S.  COOPER, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 

[Indorsement  No.  2.] 

Answer  not  satisfactory.  I require  a specific  reply. 

J.  D.  [DAVIS.] 


*Not  found. 


116  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 


[Chap.  XL. 


[Inclosure.] 

Charleston,  December  29,  1863. 

General  S.  Cooper: 

The  papers  referred  to  and  inclosed  in  my  letter  of  November  29, 
will  show  my  plans  in  connection  with  matters  referred  to  in  yonr 
letter  of  December  26,  and  furnish  information  desired  by  the  Presi- 
dent. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


JOINT  RESOLUTION  of  thanks  to  General  Beauregard,  and  the  officers  and  men 
of  his  command,  for  their  defense  of  Charleston,  S.  C. 

Resolved  by  the  Congress  of  the  Confederate  States  of  America , 
That  the  thanks  of  Congress  are  eminently  due,  and  are  hereby  cor- 
dially tendered,  to  General  G.  T.  Beauregard  and  the  officers  and  men 
of  his  command  for  their  gallant  and  successful  defense  of  the  city 
of  Charleston,  S.  C. — a defense  which,  for  the  skill,  heroism,  and 
tenacity  displayed  by  the  defenders  during  an  attack  scarcely  par- 
alleled in  warfare — whether  we  consider  the  persistent  efforts  of  the 
enemy,  or  his  almost  boundless  resources  in  the  most  improved  and 
formidable  artillery,  and  the  most  powerful  engines  of  war  hitherto 
known — is  justly  entitled  to  be  pronounced  glorious  by  impartial 
history  and  an  admiring  country. 

Resolved,  That  the  President  be  requested  to  communicate  the  fore- 
going resolution  to  General  Beauregard  and  the  officers  and  men  of 
his  command. 

Approved  February  8,  1864. 


No.  5. 

Extract  from  Journal*  of  Operations  in  Charleston  Harbor,  Sep- 
tember 1-December  31,  1863. 

Charleston,  S.  C.,  September  1,  1863. 
Batteries  Simkins,  Cheves,  and  several  of  the  enemy’s  Morris  Isl- 
and batteries  have  been  in  occasional . action  during  the  night ; Bat- 
tery Wagner  firing  steadily.  Since  6 o’clock  last  night  213  shots  were 
fired  by  our  batteries  and  129  by  those  of  the  enemy. 

7 a.  m.  Two  vessels  arrived  from  southward,  laden. 

10.30.  Enemy  sent  dispatch  from  Gregg’s  Hill  to  inlet : 

Landward  began  another  30-pounder  battery  to  the  left  of  100-pounder. 

s , 

Colonel. 

Also 

When  are  you  going  to  fire  200-pounder  on  city  ? 

(No  signature.) 

11.30  a.  m.  One  bark  arrived  from  seaward,  laden. 

12  m.  Large  side-wheel  steamship  arrived  from  southward  with 
troops  ; one  brig  and  one  schooner  coming  in  from  northward,  laden. 

* Kept  at  headquarters  Department  of  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida,  and 
embodying  the  daily  reports  received  under  General  Beauregard’s  orders  of  July 
15,  1863. 


Chap.  XL.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


117 


1.30  p.  m.  Loaded  bark  arriving  from  southward.  The  usual  num- 
ber of  vessels  off  the  harbor  to-day.  The  iron-clad  reported  yesterday 
as  missing  from  Hilton  Head  has  joined  the  fleet  here,  making  six 
monitors  now  inside  the  bar. 

6 p.  m.  In  the  past  twelve  hours,  107  shots  have  been  fired  by  our 
batteries  and  395  by  the  enemy. 

6.30.  General  Gillmore  telegraphs  by  signal  to  Admiral  Dahlgren  : 

Three  guns  on  Sumter  were  knocked  out  of  sight  to-day,  and  another  is  cocked 
up  in  the  air  and  points  toward  Morris  Island.  There  was  a serviceable  gun  on 
Sumter  this  morning ; there  is  none  now. 

Mr.  J.  Fraser  Mathewes  reports  that  he  has  landed  on  Commercial 
Wharf  a 32-pounder  banded  rifled  gun  brought  from  Sumter. 

At  lip.  m.  Fort  Moultrie  opened  on  six  monitors  and  the  Ironsides, 
which  had  advanced  to  the  attack  of  Sumter,  and  did  not  cease  until 
the  withdrawal  of  the  enemy’s  vessels  at  daylight.  The  firing  is 
thought  to  have  been  excellent.  One  hundred  and  twenty-one  shots 
in  all  were  fired  from  Moultrie.  The  following  Yankee  dispatch  was 
intercepted : 

Colonel  T : 

Open  with  all  your  guns  on  Sumter,  and  keep  them  going  till  dark. 

GILLMORE. 

Three  hundred  and  eighty-two  shots  were  fired  at  Fort  Sumter,  of 
which  166  struck  outside,  95  inside,  and  121  missed. 

At  11.40  p.  m.  the  Ironsides  and  six  monitors  attacked  the  fort,  and 
after  firing  185  shots  retired  at  5 a.  m.  One  8-inch  gun  was  thrown 
over  parapet  and  shipped  off ; also  a lot  of  ordnance  stores,  &c. 
Three  privates  slightly  wounded. 

During  the  night,  the  enemy  succeeded  in  advancing  their  lines  a 
short  distance  toward  Wagner,  notwithstanding  a steady  fire  was 
kept  up  on  them  from  that  work.  At  daylight  the  enemy  opened  on 
Wagner  with  mortars,  and  continued  at  intervals  during  the  entire 
day.  The  two  32-pounder  howitzers  on  the  salient  are  still  disabled; 
the  two  8-inch  shell  guns  on  the  land  face  are  also  partially  disabled. 
From  the  guns  and  howitzers,  203  shots  were  fired  in  the  past  twenty- 
four  hours,  and  from  the  mortars,  61  shells.  The  effective  strength 
on  the  island  is  1,601. 

September  2,  1863 — 4.15.  The  six  monitors  and  Ironsides,  which 
commenced  an  attack  on  Sumter  last  night  at  about  11.40,  have  just 
withdrawn,  and  our  Sullivan’s  Island  batteries,  Wagner  and  Gregg, 
have  ceased  firing.  The  monitors  were  seen  to  have  been  struck 
many  times. 

6 a.  m.  In  the  last  twenty-four  hours,  982  shots  have  been  fired  by 
our  batteries  and  691  by  those  of  the  enemy. 

5 p.  m.  The  enemy  have  been  remarkably  quiet  all  day,  and  in  the 
fleet  have  been  engaged  placing  sand-bags  on  the  decks  of  monitors. 

Inside  of  bar,  thirty-eight  vessels,  including  Ironsides,  six  mon- 
itors, three  gunboats,  seven  mortars,  schooners,  &c.  Outside  of 
bar,  thirteen  vessels. 

6 p.  m.  During  the  day,  Batteries  Simkins,  Cheves,  and  Haskell 
have  been  firing  occasionally.  In  the  past  twelve  hours,  66  shots 
have  been  fired  by  our  batteries  and  148  by  the  enemy.  Colonel 
[Thomas  H.]  Johnson  telegraphs  from  Hardeeville  : 

No  change  in  the  fleet  at  Hilton  Head  since  yesterday. 

Only  38  shots  were  fired  by  the  enemy  to-day  at  Sumter,  of  which 


[Chat.  XL. 


118  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

12  struck  inside,  9 outside,  and  17  missed.  About  11,000  pounds  of 
powder  and  other  ordnance  stores  were  shipped  from  the  fort.  One 
shot  penetrated  the  scarp  wall,  opening  daylight  into  the  magazine 
in  southeast  pan  coupe.  The  negroes  and  also  the  garrison  worked 
all  day  repairing  damages  of  the  previous  night. 

Lieutenant  [John]  Johnson,  engineer  officer,  was  relieved  from 
duty  in  consequence  of  the  aggravated  condition  of  his  wound,  and 
Lieutenant  [T.  M.]  Hall  reported  in  his  stead.  No  guns  could  be 
removed  in  consequence  of  the  roughness  of  the  weather. 

The  enemy  in  front  of  Wagner  were  engaged  during  the  night  in 
strengthening  their  advanced  position,  which  is  now  a strong  work, 
and  it  is  within  80  or  100  yards  of  the  salient.  Our  batteries  kej)t 
up  a brisk  fire  to  impede  their  operations.  Owing  to  the  difficulty 
of  procuring  ammunition  at  Wagner,  the  fire  from  that  work  was 
slack.  The  effective  strength  of  the  command  on  Morris  Island  is 
1,656.  General  A.  H.  Colquitt  was  relieved  at  11  p.  m.  by  Colonel 
Keitt'. 

September  3,  1863 — 6 a.  m.  Batteries  on  both  sides  have  been  quiet 
since  7 o’clock  last  night,  excepting  Wagner.  In  the  past  twelve 
hours,  our  batteries  have  fired  172  shots  and  the  enemy  157. 

8.  a.  m.  River  steamer  arrived  from  the  northward,  laden. 

10  a.  m.  Inside  of  bar — Ironsides,  six  monitors,  four  gunboats, 
six  mortar-boats,  four  sloops  of  war,  transports,  &c.  Off  the  bar — 
French  vessel,  two  gunboats,  frigate,  and  nine  other  vessels. 

6 p.  m.  Batteries  Wagner,  Cheves,  and  Haskell  have  been  firing 
occasionally  during  the  day,  throwing  since  6 a.  m.  36  shots.  The 
enemy  in  the  same  period  have  fired  90. 

7 p.  m.  Enemy  directing  calcium  light  upon  Battery  Wagner. 

Colonel  Johnson  telegraphs  from  Hardeeville  that  there  is  one 

iron-clad  among  the  enemy’s  fleet  at  Hilton  Head. 

Lieutenant  [R.  Y.]  Dwight,  commanding  Battery  D,  Sullivan’s 
Island,  says  that  his  battery  was  constructed  with  a view  of  using 
a ship’s  gun-carriage,  and,  consequently,  the  men  and  the  gun  are 
very  much  exposed;  suggests  the  erection  of  sand-bag  traverses  that 
could  be  easily  and  quickly  removed,  so  as  not  to  interfere  with  the 
extent  of  the  field  fire. 

The  garrison  at  Fort  Sumter  have  been  employed  in  reliefs  the  past 
twenty-four  hours,  repairing  damages,  &c.  The  enemy  did  not  fire  a 
shot  to-day  at  work.  The  northeast  and  northwest  terre-pleins  have 
fallen  in,  and  western  wall  has  a crack  entirely  through  from  parapet 
to  berme.  Greater  portion  of  southern  wall  is  down,  upper  east  mag- 
azine penetrated,  and  lower  east  magazine  wall  cracked.  Eastern 
wall  nearly  shot  away,  and  large  portion  down;  ramparts  gone,  and 
nearly  every  casemate  breached.  Casemates  on  eastern  face  still 
filled  with  sand,  and  may  protect  garrison  from  shells.  There  is  not 
a single  gun  en  barbette , and  but  a single  smooth-bore  32-pounder  on 
west  face  that  can  be  fired.  A quantity  of  ordnance  stores  shipped 
during  the  night. 

September  4, 1863 — 6 a.  m.  During  the  past  night  Battery  Wagner 
has  been  firing  steadily,  and  Batteries  Simkins,  Cheves,  and  Haskell 
occasionally. 

Since  6 p.  m.  of  the  3d,  our  batteries  have  thrown  240  and  the  en- 
emy 110,  and  during  the  last  twenty-four  hours  276  shots  have  been 
fired  by  us  and  200  by  the  enemy. 

9.30  a m.  Inside  of  bar — thirty -seven  vessels,  including  Ironsides, 
six  monitors,  three  sloops  of  war,  three  gunboats,  five  mortar-boats, 


Chap.  XL.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


119 


&c.  Off  the  bar — French  vessel,  gunboat,  mortar-boat,  and  six  other 
vessels. 

6 p.  m.  Batteries  Cheves  and  Haskell  have  been  in  occasional  action 
during  the  day,  firing  since  6 a.  m.  55  shots.  The  enemy  in  the  same 
time  have  fired  107. 

6.30.  Enemy  showing  a calcium  light  on  one  of  their  monitors. 

8.30.  Second  calcium  light  at  one  of  enemy’s  batteries. 

At  about  2 p.  m.  to-day  the  enemy  discovered  the  work  at  Dill’s 
Bluff,  and  fired  several  shots  at  it  from  the  Pawnee,  only  two  of  which 
struck,  doing  no  damage. 

One  8-inch  columbiad  was  this  morning  brought  by  Mr.  J.  Fraser 
Mathewes  from  Fort  Sumter  to  the  city,  and  landed  on  Commercial 
Wharf.  The  fleet  at  Hilton  Head  is  sixty-nine  vessels.  No  iron- 
clad reported. 

Major  [Edward]  Manigault  in  his  journal  still  complains  of  the 
bad  quality  of  the  shell-fuses.  He  reports  that  the  Marsh  Battery, 
No.  1,  of  which  the  parapet  to  the  north  was  somewhat  damaged  and 
displaced  by  concussion  of  the  gun,  has  been  repaired,  and  the  gun 
itself  is  no  longer  visible. 

Fragment  of  an  intercepted  dispatch  by  the  signal  operators  on 
Sullivan’s  Island : 

* * * The  stoppage  of  our  fire  at  the  moment  of  assault  to-morrow  at 

about  9 o’clock  is  liable  to  uncertainty.  I would,  therefore,  * * * the  moment 
the  Ironsides  begins  her  rapid  fire,  say  about  8.30  o’clock,  that  she  shall  hoist  a 
red  flag,  and  when  half  an  hour  of  rapid  fire  shall  cease,  the  flag  shall  be  pulled 
down,  which  will  indicate  the  entire  cessation  of  her  fire.  The  fire  of  all  moni- 
tors is  to  cease  when  the  red  flag  is  hauled  down,  unless  directed  against  re-en- 
forcements from  Gregg.  * * * 

No  firing  to-day  at  Sumter.  Seventy-six  negroes  arrived,  and  fin- 
ished the  traverse  and  arch  of  the  second  tier,  and  began  to  fill  in 
the  arch. 

About  500  shots  and  shells  and  other  ordnance  stores  were  shipped 
last  night. 

At  10  p.  m.  the  Charleston  Battalion,  under  Major  [Stephen]  El- 
liott [jr.],  arrived,  and  relieved  Col.  Alfred  Rhett,  and  Captain 
[D.  G.]  Fleming,  Company  B,  detachments  of  Twenty-seventh  and 
Twenty-eighth  Georgia  Volunteers. 

[Scout  from  Battery  Marshall  visited  Long  Island,  and  discovered 
no  signs  of  the  enemy.*] 

September  5,  1863.  Battery  Wagner  has  been  firing  steadily  all 
night,  and  Moultrie,  Simkins,  Cheves,  and  Haskell  occasionally.  Our 
batteries  have  thrown  since  6 p.  m.  of  the  4th,  280  shots,  &c.,  and 
the  enemy  274.  All  of  the  latter  were  directed  against  Wagner. 

6 a.  m.  In  the  last  twenty-four  hours,  335  shots  have  been  fired  by 
us  and  381  by  the  enemy. 

12  m.  Since  6 a.  m.,  Moultrie,  Gregg,  Wagner,  Simkins,  and  Cheves 
have  fired  in  all  173  shots,  and  the  enemy,  from  land  batteries,  Iron- 
sides, and  monitor,  864,  principally  against  Wagner,  but  an  occa- 
sional shot  at  Gregg  and  Sumter. 

11a.  m.  The  Federal  flag,  which  has  been  100  yards  south  of  Wag- 
ner, is  now  abreast  of  south  angle  of  that  work. 

During  the  evening  our  batteries  have  been  firing  slowly  but 
steadily,  throwing  in  the  past  six  hours  105  shots,  while  the  enemy 
have  fired  615  shots  ; occasionally  at  Gregg,  and  the  remainder  (or 
majority)  at  Wagner. 


* Major  Rion’s  report,  541. 


[Chap.  XL. 


120  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

The  enemy  have  to-day  transferred  large  bodies  of  troops  from 
Folly  to  Morris  Island — probably  six  regiments  of  infantry. 

From  Major  Manigault’s  diary  is  extracted  the  following  : 

The  Ironsides  and  two  monitors  bombarded  Battery  Wagner  heavily  from  early 
dawn,  the  land  batteries  aiding  slightly,  and  was  continued  until  about  midday. 
Wagner  replied  slowly  until  about  10  a.  m. 

In  the  afternoon  the  iron-clads  retired,  and  the  bombardment  was 
resumed  by  the  rifle  batteries  near  Graham’s  house. 

About  5.30  p.  m.  information  was  received  that  an  attack  on  Cum- 
ming’s  Point  was  possible,  and  all  the  available  guns  in  Haskell  were 
gotten  in  readiness  to  open  on  Morris  Island  in  case  of  an  assault. 
Colonel  Johnson  reports  no  material  change  in  the  enemy’s  fleet  at 
Hilton  Head. 

The  following  are  copies  of  enemy’s  signal  messages  intercepted 
by  our  signal  corps  : 

Admiral  Dahlgren : 

I shall  try  Cumming’s  Point  to-night,  and  want  the  sailors  again  early.  Will  you 
please  send  in  two  or  three  monitors  just  at  dusk,  to  open  fire  on  Moultrie  as  a 
diversion  ? The  last  time  they  were  in  they  stopped  re-enforcements,  and  may  do 
so  to-night.  Don’t  want  any  fire  in  the  rear  from  re-enforcements. 

GILLMORE. 

The  signal  for  assault  will  be  the  hauling  down  the  red  flag  on  the  Ironsides. 
I shall  deploy  skirmishers  between  Wagner  and  Gregg ; don’t  fire  into  them.  Let 
the  monitors  engage  the by  9 o’clock. 

(No  signature.) 

One  private  was  killed  to-day  at  Fort  Johnson  by  a Parrott  shell 
from  one  of  the  enemy’s  batteries. 

In  pursuance  of  orders  from  these  headquarters,  Major  Stephen 
Elliott  [jr.]  assumed  command  to-day  of  Fort  Sumter,  relieving 
Col.  Alfred  Rhett.  He  reports  there  was  no  direct  fire  on  the 
fort  to-day  ; recommends  that  timber  for  bomb-proofs  be  sawed  in 
the  city,  as  there  are  no  facilities  for  doing  it  there. 

The  enemy  in  front  of  Wagner  remained  quiet  last  night.  Fire 
was,  however,  opened  on  them  by  Colonel  Keitt  with  five  guns  and 
one  mortar  until  about  11  p.  m.,  when  Colonel  Keitt  received  a mes- 
sage by  signal  that  three  regiments  of  infantry  were  thought  to  be 
advancing  on  the  battery.  The  infantry  were  immediately  placed 
in  position,  but  the  enemy  did  not  appear. 

At  about  4. 30  a.  m.  the  enemy  opened  a mortar  fire  on  the  bat- 
tery. 

At  daylight  a United  States  flag  was  visible  on  the  enemy’s  works 
about  300  yards  in  front,  which  during  the  night  had  been  much 
strengthened. 

About  5 o’clock  the  enemy  opened  with  a large  Pari  ott  gun  and 
from  the  Ironsides,  firing  heavily,  with  the  apparent  intention  of 
penetrating  the  bomb-proof  and  magazine,  from  which  much  sand 
is  continually  being  displaced. 

The  casualties  during  the  day  were  very  heavy.  No  official  re- 
port of  number  received  yet  at  these  headquarters. 

September  6,  1863 — 6 a.  m.  Moultrie,  Simkins,  Cheves,  and  Haskell 
have  been  firing  steadily  during  the  night,  and,  with  Wagner  and 
Gregg,  which  were  in  action  during  the  first  part  of  the  night,  have 
thrown  since  6 p.  m.  of  the  5th,  696  shots.  In  the  same  time  the 
enemy  have  expended  1,201  shots,  &c.  During  the  past  twenty-four 
hours,  our  batteries  have  fired  974  shots  and  the  enemy  2,680,  ma- 
jority of  which  directed  against  Wagner ; occasional  shot  at  Gregg. 


Chap.  XL.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


121 


12  m.  During  the  greater  part  of  the  morning  the  weather  has 
been  too  hazy  for  close  observation.  The  enemy  have  been  firing 
heavily  on  Wagner  from  monitors,  Ironsides,  and  land  batteries. 

5 a.  m.  Four  loads  of  troops  taken  by  river  steamer  from  Folly  to 
Morris  Island. 

Inside  of  bar — forty-one  vessels,  including  Ironsides,  six  monitors, 
flag-ship,  three  sloops  of  war,  three  gunboats,  six  mortar-boats,  &c. 
Off  the  bar — eight  vessels. 

6 p.  m.  In  the  last  twelve  hours,  our  batteries  have  thrown  128 
shot  and  shell,  while  they  have  fired  983,  majority  of  which  were 
directed  against  Wagner. 

At  1 a.  m.  the  enemy  attacked  Cumming’s  Point  in  barges,  open- 
ing with  a heavy  fire  from  boat  howitzers,  together  with  a rapid 
musketry  fire.  At  the  same  time  the  enemy’s  land  batteries  com- 
menced shelling  Wagner  rapidly,  and  also  that  portion  of  the  island 
between  Gregg  and  Wagner.  The  attack  lasted  twenty  or  thirty 
minutes,  and  resulted  in  the  repulse  of  the  enemy,  and  the  fire 
gradually  subsided  on  both  sides. 

Maj.  Edward  Manigault  reports  the  arrival  at  Battery  Haskell 
of  a double-banded  (rifled)  24-pounder  with  carriage,  &c.  Also 
fifty-four  very  heavy  bolts  for  the  same  gun,  which  he  thinks  will 
strain  it.  B 

At  7 p.  m.  he  received  notice  that  Morris  Island  is  to  be  evacuated 
to-night,  though  up  to  12  midnight  there  was  nothing  to  indicate 
that  such  a movement  was  intended. 

Honorable  Secretary  of  War  telegraphs  to-day  that  orders  were 
sent  yesterday  to  Wilmington  to  forward  from  there  the  other  large 
Blakely  gun,  the  carriage,  chassis,  &c.,  of  which  left  Wilmington 
this  morning  for  the  city. 

The  following  dispatches  were  received  to-day  from  Colonel  Keitt, 
commanding  Battery  W agner  : 

12.45  a.  m.  I had  about  900,  and  not  1,400  men.  About  100  of  these  to-day  were 
killed  and  wounded.  The  parapet  of  salient  is  badly  breached ; the  whole  fort  is 
much  weakened.  A repetition  to-morrow  of  to-day’s  fire  will  make  the  fort  almost 
a ruin.  The  mortar  fire  is  still  very  heavy  and  fatal,  and  no  important  work  can 
be  done.  Is  it  desirable  to  sacrifice  the  garrison  ? To  continue  to  hold  it  is  to  do 
so.  Captain  Lee,  the  engineer,  has  read  this,  and  agrees.  Act  promptly  and  an- 
swer at  once. 

8.45  a.  m.  Incessant  fire  from  Yankee  mortar  and  Parrott  battery.  Cannot  work 
negroes  ; better  look  after  them  promptly.  Had  30  or  40  soldiers  wounded  in  an 
attempt  to  work.  Will  do  all  I can,  but  fear  the  garrison  will  be  destroyed  without 
injuring  the  enemy.  The  fleet  is  opening,  but  I hope  that  we  may  stand  till  to- 
night. 

10.30  a.  m.  Boats  must  be  at  Cumming’s  Point  early  to-night,  without  fail. 

The  following  letter,  reporting  the  condition  of  Battery  Wagner, 
was  also  received  from  Colonel  Keitt : 

The  enemy  will  by  night  advance  their  parallel  to  the  moat  of  this  battery.  The 
garrison  must  be  taken  away  immediately  after  dark,  or  it  will  be  destroyed  or 
captured.  It  is  idle  to  deny  that  the  heavy  Parrott  shell  have  breached  the  walls 
and  are  knocking  away  the  bomb-proofs.  Pray  have  boats,  immediately  after 
dark,  at  Cumming’s  Point,  to  take  away  the  men.  I say  deliberately  that  this  must 
be  done,  or  the  garrison  will  be  sacrificed.  I am  sending  the  wounded  and  sick  now 
to  Cumming’s  Point,  and  will  continue  to  do  so,  if  possible,  until  all  are  gone.  I 
have  a number  of  them  now  there.  I have  not  in  the  garrison  400  effective  men, 
excluding  artillery.  The  engineers  agree  in  opinion  with  me,  or,  rather,  shape  my 
opinion.  I shall  say  no  more. 

At  p.  m.,  the  commanding  general  issued  detailed  orders  for  the 
evacuation  of  Batteries  Wagner  and  Gregg. 


122 


S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chat.  XL. 


Copies  of  Yankee  dispatches  intercepted  : 

General  Gillmore  : 

Ten-inch  gun  in  Wagner  dismounted  ; 8-inch  disabled  or  removed  ; look  out 

T , 

Colonel. 


Colonel  T : 

Don’t  stop  firing  for  any  flag  of  truce  to-day. 


GILLMORE, 

General. 


Colonel  T : 

I signaled  Admiral  Dahlgren  an  hour  ago  that  the  monitors  need  not  fire  at  Sum-  . 
ter.  You  take  a look  in  front.  I will  have  the  Ironsides  to  stop  also,  if  you  de- 
sire it. 

GILLMORE. 


Admiral  Dahlgren: 

Will  send  off  all  excepting  most  needed. 


GILLMORE. 


Admiral  Dahlgren  : 

Will  you  please  make  the  Ironsides  keep  up  a slow  but  steady  fire  on  the  right 
and  rear  of  Wagner?  I will  write  you  fully  in  reference  to  the  plans,  or  see  you 
myself  this  afternoon. 

GILLMORE, 

General. 


Colonel  T : 

I have  enough  sailors  to  man  the  boats.  Fifty  can  be  relied  on  going. 

S , 

Major. 


Admiral  Dahlgren: 

I would  like  H and  his  party  to  remain  on  shore  to-night  to  aid  in  picket 

duty  in  front  of  Cumming’s  Point.  If  you  have  no  objection,  the  sailors  will  be  re- 
lieved. I would  like  H to  remain  with  launches  and  crews. 

GILLMORE. 

Admiral  Dahlgren: 

General  Gillmore  says  his  approaches  have  reached  the  ditch  of  Wagner. 

(No  signature.) 

Major  Elliott,  commanding  Fort  Sumter,  reports  that  no  direct 
shots  have  been  fired  at  that  work.  About  the  time  the  Morris 
Island  movement  commenced,  two  monitors  took  position  and  com- 
menced throwing  random  shots  at  the  harbor  approaches,  and  so 
continued  during  the  night. 

September  7,  1863.  Admiral  Dahlgren  this  morning  demanded  the 
surrender  of  the  fort. 

6 a.  m.  Moultrie,  Simkins,  Cheves,  and  Haskell  have  been  firing 
slowly  during  the  night,  throwing  since  6 p.  m.  160  shot  and  shell, 
while  the  enemy  have  fired  877.  In  the  past  twenty-four  hours,  our 
batteries  have  fired  288  and  the  enemy  1,860. 

10  a.  m.  Enemy  sent  flag  of  truce  demanding  surrender  of  Sumter. 

2.45  p.  m.  Federal  flag  hoisted  over  Wagner. 

5 p.  m. ' Side-wheel  steamer,  loaded,  came  from  north,  and  anchored 
off  Gregg’s  Hill. 

6.30.  Fort  Moultrie  and  Batteries  Bee,  Simkins,  and  Cheves  have 
been  occasionally  firing  during  the  day.  The  enemy  have  remained 
silent.  Our  batteries  have  fired  since  6 a.  m.  404  shots. 


Chap.  XL.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


123 


The  following  are  copies  of  telegrams  received  from  Fort  Sumter : 

2.40  a.  m. 

All  the  garrison  of  Morris  Island  who  came  here  have  been  shipped.  Lieutenant 
Haskell’s  boat  from  the  Chicora  was  captured  by  a Yankee  barge.  Two  of  the 
crew  came  to  Sumter,  and  report  all  of  our  troops  had  left  the  island. 


10  A.  M. 

A flag  of  truce  from  Admiral  Dahlgren  demanding  the  surrender  of  the  fort  has 
been  met  by  Lieutenant  [David]  Brown,  of  the  Palmetto  State.  I presume  I shall 
refuse. 

Commander  J.  K.  Mitchell  telegraphs  from  Richmond  that  Master 
Barnum  leaves  to-day  and  [James  H.]  Rochelle  to-morrow  with  90 
men  for  Charleston.  * These  men,  with  60  more  from  Wilmington, 
furnished  for  temporary  service  on  the  requisition  of  General  Beau- 
regard. 

Colonel  [R.  F.]  Graham  telegraphs  at  12.35  p.  m.  that  the  enemy 
have  completely  occupied  W agner  and  Gregg. 

Captain  [J.  B.  L.]  Walpole  signals  from  John’s  Island  that  the 
enemy  are  on  a small  island  east  of  Horse  Island,  where  they  have 
a picket  stationed,  and  they  also  occupy  a very  small  island  south- 
east of  the  latter  island.  He  also  reports  that  a transport  and  the 
Pawnee  came  up  the  Stono,  and  stopped  in  front  of  Legareville. 
They  subsequently  landed,  and  advanced  two  companies  deployed  as 
skirmishers  about  2 miles  from  Legare’s,  and  returned  by  same  route, 
and  embarked  on  transport,  which,  with  the  Pawnee,  went  down  the 
river.  Colonel  Graham  reports  that  a monitor  is  apparently  aground 
between  Morris  and  Sullivan’s  Islands. 

About  2 a.  m.  the  enemy  apparently  became  aware  that  some  un- 
usual movement  was  going  on.  They  ceased  firing  into  Wagner, 
and  commenced  shelling  the  ground  between  that  work  and  Gregg. 

At  3 a.  m.  three  rockets,  as  previously  arranged,  were  thrown  up; 
but  as  Colonel  [J.  A.]  Yates,  who  was  so  much  nearer  the  scene  of 
operation,  did  not  open,  Major  Manigault  hesitated  for  some  time  to 
fire,  but  finally  opened  slowly,  and  continued  until  daylight. 

The  engineers  are  engaged  on  a covered  way  from  mortar  battery 
on  right  flank  of  Battery  Haskell  to  covered  way  already  constructed 
on  north  side  of  the  road  to  the  point. 

About  8 a.  m.  a flag  of  truce  was  sent  by  the  enemy’s  fleet,  de- 
manding the  surrender  of  Fort  Sumter. 

At  7 p.  m.  the  Ironsides  and  six  monitors  engaged  Fort  Moultrie, 
firing  an  occasional  shot  at  Sumter,  which  did  no  damage.  During 
the  night  the  noise  of  hammering  could  be  distinctly  heard  from  the 
parapet,  indicating  that  one  of  the  monitors  had  been  injured,  and 
was  repairing  damages.  One  of  them  appears  to  be  aground  about 
1,200  yards  from  the  fort.  There  are  thirty-six  vessels  inside  the 
bar,  including  the  Ironsides  and  six  monitors. 

[Scouting  parties  from  Battery  Marshall  to  Long  Island  report  no 
signs  of  the  enemy.*] 

September  8,  1863 — 6 a.  m.  Moultrie,  Bee,  Simkins,  and  Cheves 
have  been  firing  during  the  night,  engaging  the  Ironsides  and  five 
monitors,  who  have  fired,  since  6 p.  m.  of  the  7th,  197,  while  our  bat- 
teries in  the  same  time  have  thrown  697  shots,  a portion  of  which 
were  directed  against  Batteries  Wagner  and  Gregg. 


* Major  Rion's  report,  p.  541. 


124  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 


[Chap.  XL. 


8.30.  Weather  very  hazy. 

9.30.  One  monitor  reported  aground  between  Sumter  and  Cum- 
ming’s Point. 

6 p.  m.  During  the  day  the  Sullivan’s  Island  batteries,  Battery  Sim- 
kins,  and  all  of  the  enemy’s  iron-clads  have  been  in  action.  Seven 
hundred  and  twelve  shots  were  fired  by  us  at  the  iron-clads,  of  which 
122  were  good  shots  and  36  struck.  The  enemy  have  fired  700  shell. 
One  monitor  is  supposed  to  have  been  struck  thirteen  times,  and  is 
evidently  injured. 

6.30  p.  m.  Forty  vessels  inside  the  bar,  including  Ironsides,  six 
monitors,  flag-ship,  one  sloop  of  war,  three  gunboats,  six  mortar- 
boats,  &c.  French  vessel,  two  gunboats,  one  mortar-boat,  and  four 
other  vessels  outside  of  bar. 

General  Mercer  telegraphs  that  the  Twenty-Second  South  Caro- 
lina Regiment,  of  Evans’  brigade,  350  strong,  left  this  morning  at 
8.30  o’clock. 

This  regiment  and  Companies  B,  D,  F,  H,  I,  and  K,  of  Gantt’s 
Eleventh  South  Carolina,  and  the  Macbeth  Artillery,  Captain  [B. 
A.]  Jeter,  arrived  this  evening. 

At  8.30  a.  m.  fire  was  opened  from  Battery  D,  Sullivan’s  Island, 
with  the  treble-banded  Brooke  gun,  on  one  of  the  monitors  at  close 
range,  with  20  pounds  of  powder,  and  with  an  elevation  of  4°  or  5°. 
After  firing  5 or  6 shots,  it  was  discovered  that  the  band  through 
the  vent-passes  had  given  way  about  8 or  10  inches  below  the  vent, 
on  the  right,  and  the  next  band  in  rear  of  this  had  also  given  way  on 
the  left  near  the  breech  trunnion  band.  Subsequently,  by  General 
Ripley’s  order,  a bolt  with  13  pounds  of  powder  was  fired  from  this 
gun  at  the  grounded  monitor  off  Cumming’s  Point,  which  struck 
the  vessel  on  the  deck.  This  discharge  cracked  the  breech  open  in  a 
plane  passing  vertically  through  the  vent. 

Colonel  Yates  telegraphed  at  7.30  a.  m.  that  the  8-inch  gun  at 
Shell  Point  burst  last  night,  after  having  been  fired  1,200  times  at 
Simkins,  and  many  times  before  when  in  Sumter.  Further,  that  he 
will  open  on  the  grounded  monitor  with  three  mortars  and  one  gun, 
which  is  the  only  one  that  will  bear.  He  also  reports  that  pumping 
was  heard  last  night  on  both  the  grounded  monitors  and  the  Iron- 
sides. The  latter  he  saw  repeatedly  struck  yesterday. 

The  following  dispatches  were  received  during  the  day  from  Major 
Elliott : 

The  monitor  near  Cumming’s  Point  evidently  aground.  Deck  now  4 feet  above 
water,  and  will  be  some  2 feet  higher  at  low  water. 

9.45.  The  monitor  has  been  hit  three  times  on  water  line. 

11.15.  Ironsides  heavily  hit  just  now,  throwing  quantities  of  sand  off  her  deck. 

12  m.  Fragments  of  Ironsides  torn  away  by  shot  from  Sullivan’s  Island. 

2.10.  Ironsides  has  been  injured,  but  think  not  seriously.  One  monitor  smoke- 
stack down,  and  is  apparently  disabled  ; another  is  aground  off  Morris  Island,  and 
has  been  shelling  the  fort. 

General  Taliaferro  telegraphs : 

Attacked  the  enemy’s  pickets  on  Battery  Island  last  night.  Drove  them  off,  and 
destroyed  bridge  and  landing,  so  cannot  get  to  Horse  Island.  This  attack  was 
made  in  accordance  with  directions  of  the  6th  instant. 

Pawnee  at  this  time  (12  m.)  firing  on  our  batteries  on  the  Stono. 
Will  send  10-inch  destined  for  Pringle  to  Simkins,  although  much 
needed  at  Pringle,  especially  as  gunboats  persist  in  coming  up. 

In  the  engagement  to-day  with  the  monitors,  from  8 a.  m.  to  2 
p.  m.,  19  men  were  killed  and  26  wounded  at  Moultrie,  nearly  all  by 


Chap.  XL.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


125 


a shell  from  the  Weehawken,  which  exploded  a lot  of  ammunition 
in  chests.  Two  guns  were  also  disabled  by  the  enemy’s  fire. 

At  Beauregard  Battery,  Lieutenant  [E.  A.]  Erwin,  Company  A, 
was  killed  by  fragments  of  a shell,  and  Lieutenants  [E.  Wister] 
Macbeth  and  [J.  Lewis]  Wardlaw  were  slightly  wounded.  No  in- 
jury to  the  battery.  Two  men  slightly  wounded  at  Battery  K,  Sul- 
livan’s Island. 

During  the  attack  by  the  enemy  on  Fort  Sumter  last  night,  in 
barges,  Colonel  Graham,  commanding  at  Fort  Johnson,  reports  the 
batteries  at  his  post  were  prompt  in  assisting  the  firing,  which  was 
very  good. 

Major  Elliott,  commanding  Fort  Sumter,  having  for  several  nights 
expected  a boat  attack,  had  one-third  of  the  garrison  under  arms  on 
the  parapet,  and  the  remainder  so  posted  as  to  re-enforce  promptly 
in  an  emergency. 

September  9,  1863. — At  1 a.  m.  a fleet  of  boats  and  barges  was  seen 
approaching  from  the  eastward.  Fire  was  reserved  until  the  enemy 
approached  within  a few  yards  of  the  fort.  They  attempted  to  land 
on  the  southeast  and  south  faces,  but  were  received  with  a well- 
directed  fire  of  musketry  and  hand-grenades.  Fragments  of  the 
epaulements  were  also  thrown  down  upon  them.  The  crews  near 
shore  sought  refuge  in  the  recesses  of  the  foot  of  scarp,  those  farther 
off  in  flight.  The  repulse  was  decided,  and  the  assault  was  not  re- 
newed. The  attacking  force  is  represented  by  prisoners  at  400  men, 
but  is  thought  to  have  been  much  larger.  The  enemy’s  loss  is  4 men, 
killed,  2 officers  and  17  men  wounded,  and  10  officers  and  92  men  cap- 
tured. We  also  secured  5 stand  of  colors  and  five  barges.  The  Sul- 
livan’s Island  batteries  enfiladed,  and  contributed  to  prevent  a re- 
newal of  the  attack.  Many  of  their  shots,  however,  struck  the  fort. 

1.15  a.  m.  Enemy  assaulting  Sumter  with  infantry ; Moultrie  opens. 

1.35  a.  m.  Assault  upon  Sumter  still  continues.  Moultrie,  Beau- 
regard, Bee,  and  Simkins  firing  upon  that  point.  Rocket  thrown  up 
from  Sumter. 

2.15  a.  m.  Musketry  fire  fallen  off  in  last  twenty  minutes ; now 
only  scattering.  Johnson  and  Cheves  in  action. 

2. 50  a.  m.  Simkins  and  Cheves  still  firing  ; other  batteries  silent. 

6 a.  m.  Since  6 p.  m.  the  enemy’s  batteries  have  been  silent.  Our 
batteries  have  thrown  292  shot  and  shell. 

10  a.  m.  No  change  in  fleet  since  last  night’s  report. 

7.45  a.  m.  Cutter  from  Ironsides  with  flag  of  truce  off  Cumming’s 
Point.  Barge  left  Sumter  to  meet  it. 

1.45  p.  m.  Enemy’s  flag-of -truce  boat  from  flag-ship  awaiting  rec- 
ognition off  Cumming’s  Point. 

Captain  [T.  S.]  Hale  made  the  following  observations  this  after- 
noon from  Sullivan’s  Island,  to  wit:  Four  barges  stove  in  and  washed 
ashore  on  Morris  Island  ; men  repairing  smoke-stack  of  Monitor  No. 
2 ; turret  of  Monitor  No.  1 has  a dent  in  it,  and  apparently  deranged; 
Ironsides  has  several  layers  of  sand  amidships  abaft  smoke-stack  ; 
200  men,  black  and  white,  working  on  interior  of  Wagner ; enemy 
at  work  on  Black  Island ; also  on  a new  battery  on  Morris  Island 
bearing  on  James  Island. 

6 p.  m.  Batteries  Moultrie,  Bee,  Simkins,  and  Cheves  have  been 
in  slow  action  during  the  day,  throwing  in  all  135  shots.  The  enemy 
still  quiet,  and  have  not  fired  a gun  since  6 a.  m, 

Major  Manigault  reports  that  when  the  enemy  were  heard  attack- 
ing Sumter  this  morning,  the  commanders  of  Batteries  Haskell, 


126  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

Tatom,  Ryan,  and  Redoubt  No.  1 were  notified  to  hold  themselves  in 
readiness.  Battery  Haskell  did  not  fire,  but  was  ready  to  do  so. 

Captain  W alpole  telegraphs  that  the  Pawnee  came  up  to  Legare’s 
place,  John’s  Island,  at  10  a.  m. ; returned  in  two  hours,  and  fired  8 
shots  on  James  Island  and  8 at  Legareville. 

One  company  of  the  enemy  went  from  Dixon’s  Island  to  small 
island  south  of  it,  where  they  are  repairing  a causeway  from  Cole’s 
Island. 

A flag  of  truce  was  received  by  boat  from  Sumter  about  9 a.  m.  in 
reference  to  the  prisoners  captured  at  that  post  this  morning. 

Another  flag  was  received  at  4 p.  m.,  bringing  baggage,  &c.,  for 
the  prisoners. 

A flag  was  sent  to  the  enemy  at  about  6 p.  m. , bearing  dispatch 
from  General  Jordan,  and  the  bodies  of  the  dead. 

The  prisoners,  excepting  the  wounded,  sent  to-night  to  the  city. 

September  10,  1863. — Enemy  still  silent,  but  working  and  strength- 
ening their  works  on  Morris  Island,  putting  guns  in  position,  &c. 

5 p.  m.  Inside  of  bar — five  monitors,  one  sloop  of  war,  three  gun- 
boats, six  mortar  schooners,  twenty-six  transports,  &c.  Usual  num- 
ber off  the  bar. 

Batteries  Bee,  Simkins,  Cheves,  and  Fort  Moultrie  have  been 
firing  slowly  since  6 p.  m.  of  the  9th,  throwing  514  shots. 

Reports  from  John’s  Island  state  that  the  enemy’s  pickets  still  re- 
main on  Battery  Island,  and  are  passing  to  and  from  Horse  Island 
to  Cole’s  Island. 

Captain  Hale  telegraphs  from  Sullivan’s  Island  that  enemy  are 
constructing  a battery  abreast  of  Beacon  House.  Heavy  Parrott 
guns  in  positions  and  embrasure  for  another,  both  bearing  on  Moul- 
trie, Haskell,  and  Cheves. 

A letter  was  received  to-day  from  Major  [J.  T.]  Trezevant,  to  the 
effect  that  some  ten  days  ago  he  again  urged  the  arsenals  at  Augusta, 
Macon,  Columbus,  and  Atlanta  to  increase,  if  possible,  their  supply 
of  projectiles.  He  thinks,  however,  that  the  supply  from  these 
arsenals  will  not  equal  the  daily  demand  in  a continuous  fight  like 
yesterday,  and  he  is  satisfied  all  five  arsenals  cannot  furnish  more 
than  twenty  tons,  or  at  most  twenty-five  tons,  of  projectiles  per  day, 
even  if  an  abundant  supply  of  coal  and  iron  can  be  procured. 

September  11,  1863. — Captain  Hale  reports  that  the  enemy  have  two 
10-inch  columbiads  mounted  at  Battery  Gregg,  bearing  on  Sullivan’s 
Island.  Enemy  at  work  on  the  magazine  of  that  work,  and  also 
between  Gregg  and  Wagner.  A battery  is  being  constructed  north 
of  Gad  berry  "Hill,  where  two  guns  are  already  mounted,  bearing  on 
James  Island. 

At  2 p.  m.  the  enemy  opened  on  Battery  Simkins  from  the  battery 
with  two  30-pounder  Parrotts. 

6 p.  m.  Battery  Ramsay  fired  5 rounds  since  6 p.  m.  of  the  10th. 
Moultrie,  Bee,  Simkins,  and  Cheves  have  been  firing,  throwing  in  that 
time  459  shots,  while  the  enemy  in  the  same  time  have  fired  only  33. 

Inside  of  bar — Ironsides,  five  monitors,  and  thirty-two  other  ves- 
sels. Outside  of  bar — eight. 

Major  [J.  H.]  Rion,  commanding  Seventh  South  Carolina  Bab 
talion,  reports  that  a scouting  party  was  sent*  to  Long  Island,  and 
discovered  that  2 officers  and  3 men  had  been  on  the  island  the 
day  previous. 


* From  Battery  Marshall. 


Chap.  XL.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


127 


The  range  of  the  8-inch  navy  gun  at  Redoubt  No.  1 was  tried  to- 
day by  firing  5 shells,  3 only  of  which  burst,  and  it  was  demonstrated 
that  Black  Island  could  not  be  reached  with  that  gun.  The  large 
Blakely  gun  just  mounted  at  Battery  Ramsay  was  fired  to-day  at 
1 p.  m.,  with  a charge  of  40  pounds  weight  of  powder,  sabot  and 
shell  of  425  pounds  weight,  and  2°  elevation.  At  the  first  discharge 
the  gun  burst,  splitting  open  in  eight  places  in  rear  of  the  first  re- 
enforce band. 

Note. — In  a letter  of  the  21st  instant  from  Colonel  [Josiah]  Gor- 
gas  to  General  Beauregard,  it  is  suggested  that  an  experienced  ar- 
tillery officer  ought  to  have  been  led  to  reflect  over  the  thinness  of 
the  bronze  metal  at  the  base  of  the  breech,  and  that  such  reflection 
would  have  led  to  the  conviction  that  a heavy  charge  could  not  be 
fired  with  safety  if  placed  within  the  bronze  portion,  i.  e.,  the  so- 
called  air-chamber  of  the  gun. 

September  12,  1863. — Everything  has  been  unusually  quiet  since 
yesterday  morning.  The  enemy  continue  to  work  at  Battery  Gregg, 
and  have  apparently  succeeded  in  mounting  two  guns  at  that  point. 
The  batteries  on  James  and  Sullivan’s  Islands  kept  up  a slow  fire 
on  Morris  Island.  The  Ironsides  and  six  monitors  are  inside  of  the 
bar  this  morning,  besides  the  usual  number  of  gun  and  mortar  boats, 
transports,  &c. 

Mortar  fire  was  kept  up  day  and  night  from  Moultrie,  Battery  K, 
and  Cheves. 

About  5 p.  m.  the  enemy  opened  fire  on  Moultrie  from  one  of  their 
Morris  Island  batteries.  Only  1 shell,  however,  exploded  in  the 
fort,  which  did  not  do  any  harm.  Twenty-two  shots  were  fired 
at  the  enemy  from  Battery  Cheves.  The  carriage  of  the  10-inch 
columbiad  at  Simkins  being  out  of  repair,  there  was  no  firing  from 
that  battery. 

Major  Manigault  reports  that  an  attempt  was  made  to  mount  the 
double-banded  24-pounder  rifle  in  gun-chamber  No.  1,  but  from  the 
deranged  condition  of  the  gun  furnished  him  the  attempt  was  un- 
successful. An  artificer  was  immediately  charged  with  the  repair  of 
the  gun. 

The  enemy’s  fleet  at  Hilton  Head  to-day  is  two  steam  frigates,  two 
sloops  of  war,  eight  gunboats,  and  fifty -four  transports. 

One  of  the  enemy’s  wooden  gunboats  went  up  Kiawah  River  at  12 
m.,  and  landed  some  men  at  Wilson’s,  on  Kiawah  Island. 

September  13,  1863. — The  enemy  still  continue  silent,  but  are  work- 
ing industriously  at  Battery  Wagner,  altering  its  shape  and  mount- 
ing guns. 

There  are  inside  the  bar  this  morning  the  Ironsides,  three  mortars, 
and  twenty-four  other  vessels.  The  other  three  monitors  are  thought 
to  be  lying  behind  the  hulks  of  some  of  the  other  vessels,  as  they  are 
reported  not  to  be  in  the  Stono  River. 

Mortar  firing  was  kept  up  last  night  and  to-day  from  Battery  K 
and  Moultrie  on  the  enemy’s  works  on  Morris  Island.  Seven  shots 
only  were  fired  from  Battery  Simkins.  One  of  the  shells  fired  from 
Moultrie  fell  into  the  enemy’s  works,  and  caused  a great  explosion, 
supposed  to  be  ammunition  chests. 

Major  [John]  Jenkins  telegraphs  from  John’s  Island  that  the  en- 
emy have  established  a line  of  communication  across  the  marsh  from 
Dixon’s  Island  to  Folly  River,  by  bridging  the  intervening  creek. 
A number  of  men  can  be  seen  crossing. 


[Chap.  XL. 


128  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

Five  schooners,  four  brigs,  seven  steamers,  three  gunboats,  one 
tender,  and  one  bark  in  the  harbor. 

The  fleet  at  Hilton  Head  to-day  is  two  steam  frigates,  two  sloops 
of  war,  seven  gunboats,  and  fifty-three  transports. 

General  Walker  telegraphs  that  out  of  6 of  the  Yankee  telegraph 
party,  Colonel  [William]  Stokes  has  captured  1 chaplain,  1 lieuten- 
ant, and  1 negro  soldier;  also  the  Yankee  operator.  The  remaining 
negroes  are  being  pursued  with  dogs. 

A portion  of  [George  T.]  Anderson’s  Georgia  brigade  arrived  this 
evening  from  Virginia.  Two  more  brigades  are  expected. 

[Col.  Robert  H.  Anderson  assumes  command  of  outposts  on  Sulli- 
van’s Island.*] 

September  14,  1863. — The  enemy  are  reported  to  be  working  indus- 
triously on  Morris  Island,  chiefly  at  Battery  Wagner,  but  also  at 
Gregg. 

At  about  4 p.  m.  a large  party  could  be  plainly  seen  from  Battery 
Haskell  working  on  a new  battery  or  a covered  way  about  the  center 
of  Black  Island. 

Fire  was  immediately  opened  on  them  from  Haskell  with  8-inch 
seacoast  howitzer  and  from  Tatom  with  an  8-[inch]  siege  howitzer. 
Eight  shots  were  fired  from  the  former  and  6 from  the  latter.  Most 
of  the  shots  fell  short,  and  many  did  not  explode,  f The  effect,  how- 
ever, was  to  prevent  the  enemy  from  prosecuting  their  work  any 
further  for  the  time  being.  Mortar  fire  is  still  kept  up  day  and  night 
from  Moultrie  and  Battery  K,  Sullivan’s  Island,  and  direct  fire  from 
Simkins  and  Cheves.  Seventy-nine  shells  were  fired  from  Simkins 
and  48  from  Cheves. 

The  enemy’s  fleet  off  the  harbor  to-day  is  Ironsides,  five  monitors, 
and  twenty-six  other  vessels. 

The  other  monitor  is  reported  by  Colonel  Johnson  to  be  at  Hilton 
Head. 

September  15,  1863. — The  enemy  continue  very  quiet,  but  are  work- 
ing steadily  on  their  Morris  Island  batteries.  About  dusk  they  threw 
a few  shell  at  Battery  Simkins. 

Thirty-three  shots  were  fired  to-day  by  Simkins  and  100  by  Cheves. 
At  about  11.05  a.  m.  the  magazine  at  this  latter  battery  blew  up, 

killing  Lieutenant  L and  4 men  and  wounding  2 others.  J It 

is  thought  the  accident  occurred  from  the  premature  explosion  of 
a shell  from  which  the  sergeant  of  the  magazine  was  endeavoring  to 
extract  a short-time  fuse,  in  order  to  replace  it  by  a longer  one.  As 
all  4 men  in  the  magazine  were  killed,  the  cause  of  the  explosion  can 
only  be  a matter  of  conjecture.  None  of  the  guns  at  the  battery 
were  injured  or  dismounted. 

The  enemy  still  have  a working  party  on  Black  Island.  They 
were  fired  on  from  Battery  Cheves  with  10-inch  seacoast  mortar  and 
8-inch  seacoast  howitzers.  The  majority  of  the  shots  fell  short.  A 
few  shot  were  also  fired  at  the  party  from  the  4-inch  Blakely,  but 
the  result  was  very  unsatisfactory.  \ The  elevation  used  was  13°, 
14°,  15°,  and  16°  30'.  It  is  believed,  however,  that  the  enemy  were 
seriously  annoyed. 

A scouting  party  returned  to-day  from  Long  Island.  They  dis- 
covered no  signs  of  the  enemy. 

* Anderson’s  report. 

fMaj.  Edward  Manigault’s  report. 

X See  September  15,  1863,  Explosion  at  Battery  Cheves,  p.  730, 


Chap.  XL.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


129 


Captain  Walpole  reports  that  enemy  have  been  passing  to  and 
from  Dixon’s  Island  to  Green  Creek  all  day. 

The  fleet  at  Port  Royal  is  two  steam  frigates,  two  sloops  of  war, 
nine  gunboats,  one  iron-clad,  and  sixty-eight  transports  of  various 
classes. 

Brigadier-General  Clingman  this  day  assumed  command  of  the 
second  subdivision,  First  Military  District. 

September  16,  1863. — There  are  inside  the  bar  this  morning  the 
Ironsides,  five  monitors,  two  mortar-boats,  and  twenty-five  other 
vessels,  and  the  blockading  vessels  off  the  bar. 

Major  Elliott,  commanding  at  Sumter,  reports  that  the  enemy 
are  still  working  at  Battery  Gregg,  and  exposing  themselves  with 
impunity.  One  banded  42-pounder  at  Sumter  was  thrown  on  the 
berme. 

A few  shots  were  fired  to-day  at  the  enemy  from  some  of  our 
Sullivan’s  and  James  Islands  batteries. 

Fourteen  shells  were  fired  from  Simkins  up  to  4 p.  m.  Want  of 
friction  tubes  caused  that  battery  to  cease  firing  from  4 p.  m.  to  11 

p.  m. 

Battery  K,  Sullivan’s  Island,  kept  up  a slow  mortar  fire  on  the 
enemy  during  the  day. 

Capt.  R.  Press  Smith,  jr.,  reports  that  he  to-day  assumed  com- 
mand of  the  triple-banded  Brooke  gun  and  three  mortars  west  of 
Moultrie.  One  purcussion  shell  was  fired  from  the  Brooke  gun  at  a 
battery  the  enemy  were  erecting  on  Morris  Island,  and  struck  near 
the  working  party.  Twenty -one  shells  were  fired  from  the  mortars 
during  the  day ; but  in  the  evening,  owing  to  a violent  rain  storm 
and  continued  high  wind,  the  firing  ceased. 

Twenty-five  men  were  seen  going  to-day  from  Cole’s  Island,  with 
spades,  to  the  island  south  of  James  Island,  and  a company  of  50 
men,  with  guns,  returned  to  Cole’s  Island. 

Major  Manigault  reports : 

No  force  visible  on  Black  Island,  though  one  or  two  individuals  seen  there  in  the 
course  of  the  day.  No  firing  from  Battery  Haskell. 

An  8-inch  columbiad  was  to-day  mounted  on  the  extreme  right  of 
the  West  Columbiad  Battery,  Sullivan’s  Island. 

The  last  of  Anderson’s  brigade  arrived  to-night.  This  brigade  is 
composed  of  the  following  regiments:  Seventh  Georgia,  Colonel 
[W.  W.]  White ; Eighth  Georgia,  Colonel  [John  R.]  Towers  ; Ninth 
Georgia,  Colonel  [B.]  Beck;  Eleventh  Georgia,  Colonel  [F.  H.] 
Little  ; Fifty -ninth  Georgia,  Colonel  [Jack]  Brown. 

A report  of  this  date  was  received  from  Colonel  Stokes,  giving  the 
details  of  the  capture  of  a portion  of  a party  of  the  enemy  who  were 
endeavoring,  by  means  of  attaching  a wire  to  our  telegraph  line  be- 
tween here  and  Savannah,  to  intercept  any  important  dispatches. 
Their  early  discovery  and  the  subsequent  capture  of  the  operator, 
all  of  the  white  persons,  and  1 negro  on  the  13th  instant,  frustrated 
their  designs.  It  is  believed  the  remainder  of  the  party,  composed 
of  negroes,  have  escaped,  though  every  exertion  .was  used  to  prevent 
it  on  the  part  of  Colonel  Stokes.  * 

General  Taliaferro  telegraphs  that  he  discovered  yesterday  that  the 
enemy  had  erected  a battery  on  Dixon,  f looking  toward  Secession- 
ville,  and  a stockade  across  the  island  in  the  rear.  A subsequent 

*See  Capture  of  Union  telegraph  party  near  Lowndes  Mill,  Combahee  River, 
{South  Carolina,  September  13-14,  1863,  p,  728. 

f “ Dixon’s  Arm.” 

9 R R— VOL  XXVIII,  PT  I 


130  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID  \ND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

examination  proved  that  the  enemy  had  increased  their  pickets. 
General  Taliaferro  concludes  from  these  facts  that  the  enemy  antici- 
pate an  attack  from  ns. 

September  17,  1863. — Not  a shot  was  fired  to-day  by  the  enemy, 
and  the  fire  from  onr  batteries  was  very  slow  and  irregular,  owing  to 
the  equinoctial  storm,  which  commenced  last  night,  with  wind  from 
the  east  and  southeast,  accompanied  by  heavy  showers  of  rain,  which 
continued  all  day.  The  Ironsides  and  four  monitors  lay  at  anchor 
in  the  channel  off  Morris  Island,  nearly  abreast  of  Graham’s  house, 
and  appeared  to  weather  the  gale  with  hut  little  difficulty.  The 
wooden  vessels  were  rolling  and  pitching  heavily,  while  the  iron- 
clads had  but  little  motion. 

Long  trains  of  wagons  were  seen  by  Major  Elliott  coming  down 
the  beach  on  Morris  Island,  and  discharging  their  contents  at  Battery 
Gregg.  It  is  reported  that  these  wagons  were  fired  on. 

Captain  Walpole  reports  that  enemy’s  pickets  are  still  at  Green 
Creek  Bridge. 

September  18,  1863. — The  equinoctial  storm  appears  to  be  over. 
Some  rain  and  wind  during  the  night,  but  this  morning  is  clear  and 
pleasant. 

The  enemy  are  busy  at  work  near  Battery  Wagner  and  did  not  fire 
a gun  to-day. 

Batteries  K and  Beauregard  kept  up  mortar  practice  from  Sulli- 
van’s Island  on  the  enemy  at  Battery  Gregg.  The  commander  of 
Beauregard  Battery  thinks  his  fire  was  without  effect.  Fifteen  shots 
were  fired  with  good  effect  from  the  Brooke  gun  at  Battery  Simkins. 

Colonel  [C.  H.  ] Olmstead  reports  that  a rope  has  been  sent  for  to 
stretch  across  the  mouth  of  Light-House  Creek,  and  he  expects  to 
establish  our  pickets  on  the  opposite  side  to-night. 

A working  party  on  Black  Island  and  at  Battery  Wagner  was  fired 
on  at  different  times  to-day  from  Battery  Haskell. 

The  practice  from  the  4. 62-inch  gun  was  very  good,  hut  the  colum- 
biad  fired  wild,  and  many  shell  did  not  burst.  Complaint  is  made 
of  the  irregularity  of  the  burning  of  the  fuses. 

At  the  twelfth  fire  (5.10p.  m.)  the  8-inch  columbiad  burst,  mortally 
wounding  1 private  of  the  Second  South  Carolina  artillery,  and  break- 
ing the  leg  of  another  man  of  the  same  company.  A solid  shot  was 
fired  from  the  gun  at  the  working  party  at  Wagner  with  a charge  of 
10  pounds  of  powder  and  elevation  of  19°  30'.  The  report  of  the  acci- 
dent was  returned  with  the  indorsement  by  the  chief  of  the  staff  that 
it  was  not  seen  why  a solid  shot  was  fired  at  a working  party  instead 
of  a shell,  and  the  attention  of  battery  commanders  was  directed  to 
be  specially  called  to  the  matter. 

The  Abolition  fleet  at  Port  Royal  to-day  is  two  steam  frigates,  two 
sloops  of  war,  one  iron-clad,  eight  gunboats,  and  sixty-four  trans- 
ports. 

September  T9,  1863 — 6 a.  m.  Since  6 a.  m.  yesterday,  Batteries  Sim- 
kins, Haskell,  and  West  Columbiad  Battery,  on  Sullivan’s  Island, 
have  been  slowly  firing  at  the  enemy’s  working  parties  on  Morris 
Island,  throwing  in  that  period  133  shots  in  all. 

The  enemy  fired  a few  shots  in  the  morning,  and  agaiiTa  few  more 
in  the  evening  at  Fort  Johnson,  but  doing  no  damage. 

At  9.30  a.  m.  one  loaded  transport  arrived  from  the  northward. 

11  a.  m.  Thirty-nine  vessels  inside  of  the  bar,  including  Ironsides, 
five  mortars,  four  gunboats,  four  mortar-boats,  &c.  Off  the  bar — 
French  vessel,  one  mortar-boat,  and  five  blockaders. 


Chap.  XL.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


131 


The  enemy  continues  to  work  industriously  by  strengthening  our 
old  batteries  and  erecting  new  ones  on  Morris  Island,  placing  guns 
in  position  at  Wagner,  &c.,  though  seriously  annoyed  at  the  latter 
place  by  the  fire  of  our  James  Island  batteries. 

A large  quantity  of  shot,  some  shells,  a lot  of  iron  shipped  from 
disabled  carriages,  and  also  two  guns,  were  shipped  from  Sumter  last 
night. 

The  Charleston  Battalion,  which  has  been  on  duty  in  Sumter  for 
some  time,  was  this  evening  relieved  by  a detachment  of  250  men 
from  the  Eleventh  South  Carolina  Volunteers,  under  command  of 
Captain  [J.  J.]  Gooding. 

About  11  a.  m.  a large  working  party  of  the  enemy  at  Battery 
Wagner  were  fired  at  from  Battery  Haskell  with  the  4.62-inch  rifled 
gun.  After  discharging  7 shots  with  precision,  the  rear  band  showed 
symptons  of  starting  from  the  one  in  front  of  it,  and  a black,  semi- 
liquid, unctious  residuum  of  burned  powder  oozed  out  from  between 
the  bands.  This  latter  was  seen  only  by  the  gunner,  and  was  not 
observed  by  the  commanding  officer.  The  gun  being  now  regarded 
dangerous,  no  more  shots  were  fired  from  it.*  Up  to  this,  the  gun 
had  only  been  discharged  261  times,  with  an  average  elevation  of 
13°  30";  charge  of  4 pounds,  of  powder  and  weight  of  projectile  27 
to  28  pounds.  The  vent  of  the  piece  is  reported  ragged  and  much 
enlarged. 

Reports  from  the  Stono  state  that  100  men  crossed  the  creek  and 
marsh,  going  toward  the  bridge  over  Green  Creek. 

In  the  afternoon  a gunboat  went  up  Folly  River  to  the  obstruc- 
tions, and,  after  remaining  a short  time,  returned,  firing  blank  car- 
tridges. 

The  enemy’s  fleet  at  Hilton  Head  to-day  is  two  steam  frigates,  two 
sloops  of  war,  one  iron-clad,  eight  gunboats,  and  thirty -nine  trans- 
ports. 

The  last  of  General  Henry  A.  Wise’s  brigade  arrived  to-day.  It 
. is  composed  of  the  Twenty-sixth  Virginia,  Colonel  [P.  R.]  Page; 
Fourth  Virginia  Heavy  Artillery,  Colonel  [J.  T.]  Goode;  Forty- 
sixth  Virginia,  Colonel  [R.  T.  W.l  Duke,  and  Fifty-ninth  Virginia, 
Colonel  [W.  B.]  Tabb. 

The  following  is  a copy  of  a Yankee  dispatch  intercepted : 

D : 

What  shall  be  done  with  the  guns  and  carriages  directed  by  you  to  be  put  on  the 
schooner  Nelly  Brown  ? The  schooner  now  draws  too  much  water  to  leave  the  inlet. 

GILLMORE. 

September  20,  1863,  6 a.  m. — Since  this  hour  yesterday  morning 
mortars  on  Sullivan’s  Island  and  Batteries  Cheves,  Haskell,  and  Sim- 
kins  have  been  firing  slowly  at  the  enemy’s  working  parties  on  Morris 
Island.  Only  a few  shots  were  fired  by  the  enemy  during  the  day, 
and  these  were  directed  against  Fort  Johnson.  The  effect  of  the 
practice  from  both  Batteries  Simkins  and  Cheves  is  reported  unsatis- 
factory. In  the  past  twenty-four  hours,  238  shots  have  been  fired  by 
our  batteries. 

There  are  inside  the  bar  this  morning  thirty-five  vessels,  including 
the  Ironsides,  five  monitors,  four  gunboats,  four  mortar-boats,  &c. 
Outside  the  bar,  a French  vessel  and  five  others. 

Notwithstanding  the  fire  of  our  batteries,  the  enemy  still  progresses 


* Manigault’s  report. 


[Chap.  XL. 


132  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

in  his  defensive  and  offensive  works  on  Morris  Island.  Working 
parties  are  reported  behind  every  sand-hill  between  Gregg  and  Wag- 
ner. 

Major  Elliott  reports  that  the  change  of  garrison  at  Fort  Snmter 
was  effected  last  night  at  10  o'clock.  A 7-inch  gun,  rifled  and  banded, 
was  removed  by  Mr.  Mathewes. 

At  4.30  p.  m.  Major  Elliott  telegraphs  that  a monitor  was  towed  to 
the  southward,  in  which  direction  she  disappeared. 

Captain  Walpole  reports  that  enemy  are  constantly  passing  and 
repassing  from  Battery to  Cole’s  Island,  and  that  a large  num- 

ber of  Yankees  are  on  Kiawah  Island. 

The  fleet  at  Port  Royal  to-day  is  two  steam  frigates,  two  sloops  of 
war,  eight  gunboats,  and  fifty-eight  transports. 

The  following  are  copies  of  intercepted  messages  sent  by  the  enemy : 
Colonel  Hawley  : 

Is  the  lantern  at  the  end  of  the  island  placed  there  last  night  still  there  ? Is  there 
oil  enough  to  last  until  morning  ? 


GILLMORE, 

General. 

General  V : 

I shall  be  absent  from  my  headquarters  for  twenty-four  hours.  During  my  ab- 
sence, the  troops  on  Morris  Island  and  Folly  Island  will  be  under  the  command  of 
General  Terry. 

GILLMORE, 

General. 

September  21,  1863. — The  Ironsides,  four  monitors,  and  twenty- 
nine  other  vessels  are  reported  by  Major  Elliott  inside  the  bar  this 
morning,  and  five  propellers  outside. 

The  10-inch  columbiad  left  by  us  at  Gregg  has  been  dismounted 
by  the  enemy  and  rolled  over  upon  the  parapet,  where  it  now  lies. 

Battery  Wagner  is  being  strengthened  and  enlarged.  The  enemy 
are  throwing  up  heavy  parapets  facing  the  northward  and  westward. 
The  sand-hills  between  Batteries  Gregg  and  Wagner  are  filled  with 
working  parties. 

The  usual  fire  was  kept  up  to-day  with  mortars  from  Sullivan’s 
Island  and  from  Batteries  Simkins  and  Haskell. 

The  magazine  at  Battery  Cheves  not  being  completed,  no  firing 
from  there  to-day.  Seventy-six  rounds  were  fired  from  8-inch  shell 
gun  and  55  rounds  from  the  Brooke  gun  at  Simkins.  Effect  good. 

Major  Manigault,  at  Battery  Haskell,  fired  12  shell  from  4. 62-inch 
rifle  STo.  2 at  a working  party  on  Black  Island,  but  owing  to  differ- 
ence either  in  quality  of  powder  or  size  of  cartridges,  the  practice 
was  very  unsatisfactory.  To-day  9°,  10°,  and  even  11°  elevation 
was  used  to  attain  the  same  range  which  was  yesterday  obtained 
with  an  elevation  of  only  7|°  and  8°.  The  firing  from  the  4-inch 
Blakely  was  also  indifferent,  and  is  attributed  to  the  character  of 
the  projectiles  furnished.  The  attention  of  Colonel  [J.  R.]  Waddy, 
chief  of  ordnance,  was  called  to  both  points,  in  the  hope  that  some 
remedy  could  be  devised. 

The  Abolition  fleet  to-day  at  Port  Royal  is  two  steam  frigates, 
two  sloops  of  war,  one  iron-clad,  seven  gunboats,  and  fifty-seven 
transports. 

September  22,  1863. — There  are  inside  the  bar  this  morning  the 
Ironsides,  four  monitors,  one  sloop  of  war,  four  gunboats,  three 
mortar-boats,  and  twenty -nine  other  vessels.  Seven  vessels  off  the 


Chap.  XL.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


133 


bar,  including  a French  and  an  English  sloop  of  war.  Several  ves- 
sels arrived  during  the  day  from  both  the  north  and  south ; and 
though  some  of  them  were  loaded,  none  brought  troops. 

The  enemy’s  working  parties  kept  well  under  cover  to-day,  and 
did  not  make  much  progress.  Only  a few  shots  were  fired,  all  di- 
rected against  Moultrie,  and  all  of  which  fell  short. 

Battery  Simkins  fired  22  shots  from  the  Brooke  gun  with  good 
effect.  Twelve  shots  were  fired  from  Cheves  and  20  from  Haskell. 
Very  few  of  the  shells  from  the  latter  battery  exploded,  and  all  those 
fired  from  the  double-banded  24-pounder  rifle  against  Battery  W ag- 
ner  fell  short,  although  a charge  of  6 pounds  of  powder  was  used, 
with  an  elevation  of  17°. 

Since  the  increase  in  negro  labor,  the  .engineer  work  at  Fort  John- 
son is  progressing  favorably. 

One  banded  7-inch  gun  was  taken  from  Sumter  last  night  and 
brought  to  the  city.  A large  quantity  of  32-pounder  canister  and 
8-inch  shot  were  also  brought  away,  and  an  8-inch  shell  gun  was 
placed  on  the  berme  ready  for  shipment. 

Reports  from  the  Stono  state  that  men  were  seen  working  all  day 
on  the  bridge  at  Green  Creek,  and  that  a regiment  appears  to  be  on 
Kiawah  Island. 

A daring  reconnaissance  was  made  on  Black  Island  last  night 
by  Capt.  Samuel  Le  Roy  Hammond,  who,  accompanied  by  2 men, 
proceeded  in  an  open  boat  to  that  island.  Arriving  there  at  about 
2.30  a.  m.,  Captain  Hammond  approached  to  within  a few  yards  of 
the  enemy’s  pickets,  and  discovered  them  at  work  erecting  a new 
battery  on  the  wooded  portion  of  the  island.  He  estimates  this  force 
at  about  250  men.  Leaving  the  island  at  dawn,  his  party  were  very 
near  being  intercepted  by  a barge  with  about  10  men,  who  were 
probably  returning  from  a similar  reconnaissance  of  our  works. 
Fortunately,  the  enemy  passed  without  discovering  Captain  Ham- 
mond, who  returned  to  camp  in  safety.  Captain  Hammond  reports 
that  from  observation  to-day  with  his  glass  he  is  led  to  believe  the 
enemy  have  a rope  obstruction  across  Light-House  Inlet.  Will  en- 
deavor to  ascertain  nature  of  obstruction  whenever  opportunity 
offers. 

September  23, 1863,  5 a.  m. — Buildings  observed  on  fire  on  Sullivan’s 
Island. 

6 a.  m.  Enemy’s  Battery  No.  1 fired  2 shots. 

In  the  past  twenty-four  hours,  Moultrie,  Simkins,  Cheves,  and 
Haskell  have  been  at  various  times  in  slow  action,  firing  during  that 
time  218  shots,  to  which  the  enemy  only  replied  by  firing  twice. 

Thirty-nine  vessels  are  inside  the  bar,  including  the  Ironsides, 
four  monitors,  one  sloop  of  war,  three  guns,  three  mortar-boats,  &c. 

The  enemy  have  been  working  to-day  in  large  numbers  at  Wagner 
and  Gregg  and  the  intermediate  sand-hills.  The  effect  of  Moultrie’s 
fire  is  not  perceptible;  but  the  fire  of  the  James  Island  batteries, 
when  directed  against  Wagner,  where  the  working  party  is  larger, 
always  causes  them  to  seek  cover. 

Sixty-eight  shots  were  fired  to-day  with  good  effect  from  Battery 
Simkins. 

Mr.  J.  Fraser  Ma*thewes  reports  that  he  brought  away  last  night 
from  Fort  Sumter  one  32-pounder  rifled  and  banded  gun.  The  high 
wind  which  has  prevailed  for  the  last  three  or  four  days  has  prevented 
him  from  bringing  away  one  10-inch  columbiad  and  one  8-inch  shell 
gun  lying  on  the  north  and  east  berme  of  the  fort. 


134  S.  C.  AND  OA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

There  are  now  left  in  the  fort  two  10-ipch  and  two  8-inch  colum- 
biads ; two  42-pounder  rifled  guns,  one  with  band  burst  and  the  other 
buried  in  the  ruins ; one  8-inch  shell  gun ; two  rifled  32-pounders, 
and  two  smooth-bore  32-pounders. 

One  iron-clad  is  reported  among  the  enemy’s  fleet  at  Port  Royal. 

[The  enemy  opened  fire  upon  Secession  ville  from  two  of  his  gun- 
boats, and  threw  20  or  25  rifled  shells,  mostly  percussion.  *] 

September  24,  1863. — The  enemy  are  actively  employed  at  Battery 
Wagner,  and  the  tire  from  Sullivan’s  Island,  Batteries  Simkins  and 
Haskell  only  causes  a momentary  discontinuance  of  their  work. 

In  the  past  twenty-four  hours,  264  shots  have  been  fired  from  our 
works  and  only  17  from  the  enemy’s. 

There  are  forty-two  vessels  inside  the  bar,  including  the  Ironsides, 
four  monitors,  one  sloop  of  war,  four  gunboats,  four  mortar-boats,  &c. 

Ninety  shots  were  fired  to-day  from  Battery  Simkins,  with  good 
effect. 

At  about  10  a.  m.  Battery  Haskell  commenced  firing  upon  Marsh 
Battery  No.  1 with  the  banded  and  rifled  24-pounder  and  the  smooth- 
bore of  same  caliber,  both  with  an  elevation  of  9°.  Of  the  6 shots 
fired  from  the  rifled  gun,  only  1 is  supposed  to  have  struck  the  bat- 
tery (distance  estimated  at  1^  miles).  Twelve  shots  were  fired  from 
the  smooth-bore,  and  2 of  them  either  struck  the  battery  or  passed 
immediately  over. 

In  the  afternoon,  as  many  men  were  visible  at  Battery  Wagner,  a 
few  solid  shot  with  Tennessee  cap  were  fired  from  the  double-banded 
24-pounder  (rifled)  with  6 pounds  charge  of  powder  and  an  elevation 
of  17°.  They  all,  however,  fell  short.  Four  hollow  shot,  of  Eason’s 
manufacture,  with  leaden  basis  or  sabots,  were  next  tried  at  17°,  15°, 
14°,  and  13°  elevation ; all  passed  over  the  fort  with  the  exception 
of  the  fourth  shot,  which  fell  a little  short.  This  appears  to  be  the 
only  kind  of  projectile  which,  with  6 pounds 'charge  of  powder  and 
the  maximum  elevation  of  17°,  can  be  fired  from  this  gun  at  long 
ranges  with  any  degree  of  accuracy. 

Major  Elliott  reports  that  six  of  the  sub-terra  torpedoes  exploded 
after  midnight  during  the  rising  of  tide.  Their  ignition  was  caused 
by  the  surf  rolling  fragments  upon  them. 

The  enemy  has  reconstructed  the  bridge  over  Green  Creek,  and 
men  are  constantly  passing  and  repassing  over  it. 

An  encampment  of  the  enemy  is  reported  on  Kiawah  Island. 

The  fleet  at  Port  Royal  to-day  is  one  steam  frigate,  two  sloops  of 
war,  one  iron-clad,  seven  wooden  gunboats,  and  sixty-six  transports. 

A national  salute  was  fired  to-day  by  orders  of  the  commanding 
general  in  honor  of  General  Bragg’s  victory  in  Georgia. 

September  25,  1863. — The  enemy  in  the  past  twenty-four  hours  have 
fired  only  8 shots  in  reply  to  144  fired  by  Simkins,  Cheves,  Haskell, 
and  from  Sullivan’s  Island. 

At  9 a.  m.  the  weather  is  hazy,  and  it  is  impossible  to  distinguish 
number  and  character  of  vessels  of  the  enemy. 

In  the  afternoon  the  enemy  had  guys  up  at  Batteries  Wagner  and 
Gregg,  either  mounting  or  dismounting  guns.  During  the  night 
a row  of  palisades  was  built  around  Gregg  anc[  also  across  the  re- 
entering angle  of  Wagner,  and  a large  Parrott  gun  mounted  in  the 
sand-hills  near  Gregg.  What  appears  to  be  a masked  battery  is 
nearly  completed  at  the  latter  work. 

As  usual,  firing  was  kept  up  to-day  on  the  enemy’s  working 


Manigault’s  report. 


Chap.  XL.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


135 


parties  on  Morris  Island  ; rounds  were  fired  from  Simkins ; 

Moultrie  and  Haskell  were  also  engaged.  The  magazine  at  Cheves 
not  being  completed,  that  work  was  silent.  The  enemy  at  Wagner 
were  much  annoyed  by  the  fire  from  Moultrie  and  Simkins,  particu- 
larly the  latter,  by  which  two  ammunition  chests  were  exploded  at 
Wagner. 

At  2. 45  the  heavy  rifled  battery  south  of  Graham’s  house  opened 
on  Battery  Simkins,  and  fired  7 or  8 shots  at  the  Columbiad  Battery 
very  accurately,  but  without  doing  any  damage.  One  or  more  shots 
were  also  fired  from  the  same  battery  at  Fort  Johnson  with  like 
result. 

Twelve  shots  were  fired  at  Battery  Wagner  from  Battery  Haskell 
with  the  double-banded  24-pounder  rifle.  Only  one  shot  struck  the 
parapet,  3 were  good,  and  the  remainder  either  fell  short  or  were 
not  seen.  Seven  shots  were  also  fired  at  the  same  object  with  4.62 
rifle  No.  2,  with  a charge  of  4 pounds  of  powder,  weight  of  shell  25 
pounds,  and  elevation  15°  to  17°.  None  of  the  shell  burst,  and  most 
of  them  fell  short. 

The  engineer  force  was  engaged  in  revetting  and  completing  trav- 
erses and  in  raising  road  and  causeway  at  Battery  Haskell  above  the 
level  of  the  spring  tides. 

A row  of  floating  torpedoes  was  placed  at  the  mouth  of  the  small 
creek  which  runs  past  Battery  Haskell  and  empties  into  Schooner 
Creek  300  or  400  yards  below. 

September  26,  1863. — Fort  Moultrie  and  Batteries  Bee,  Simkins,  and 
Haskell  have  been  firing  slowly  since  yesterday  morning,  throwing 
in  all  284  rounds,  which  were  replied  to  by  the  enemy  with  only  16 
shots  fired  from  Gadberry  Hill. 

The  enemy  are  industriously  employed  in  strengthening  and  en- 
larging old  works,  erecting  new,  mounting  guns,  &c. , and  though 
frequently  driven  to  cover  by  the  fire  of  our  batteries,  they  immedi- 
ately resume  work  when  the  fire  slackens.  Much  work  was  accom- 
plished by  them  last  night  on  Batteries  Wagner  and  Gregg.  The 
former  battery  has  been  extended  to  the  southward  and  westward, 
and  the  latter  to  the  southward  and  eastward.  Six  four-horse  wag- 
ons are  employed  in  hauling  timber  to  Wagner  from  the  inlet,  and 
others  are  engaged  in  hauling  sand  to  Battery  Gregg  for  the  purpose 
of  constructing  traverses  for  protection  against  our  James  Island 
batteries,  which  appear  to  annoy  them  exceedingly. 

The  enemy  have  a guy  on  the  northeast  angle  of  Wagner,  and  are 
mounting  a gun  bearing  on  Sullivan’s  Island. 

There  are  42  vessels  inside  the  bar,  including  the  Ironsides,  4 mon- 
itors, 3 gunboats,  5 mortar-boats,  &c. 

Colonel  Olmstead,  commanding  at  Fort  Johnson,  complains  that 
work  there  is  much  delayed  for  want  of  proper  tools ; for  instance, 
they  have  but  three  cross-cut  saws  and  one  handsaw,  while  car- 
penter work  is  going  on  in  three  or  four  different  places. 

Eight  shots  were  fired  from  Battery  Haskell  to-day  at  Battery 
Wagner  with  the  double-banded  24-pounder  rifle,  using  a charge  of 
5|  pounds,  14f°  to  15°  elevation,  and  Eason’s  hollow  shot,  43  pounds. 
Of  the  two  shots  fired  at  15°  elevation,  one  was  good,  and  the  other 
went  over ; at  14f°  elevation  one  shot  struck  the  parapet,  and  most 
of  the  others  fell  short.  Up  to  this  time,  48  shots  in  all  have  been 
fired  from  this  gun. 

The  engineer  force  is  engaged  at  Haskell  in  thickening  the  earth 
on  the  south  and  southeast  side  of  the  gun  magazine. 


136  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

Major  Jenkins  reports  that  the  enemy  are  moving  troops  from 
Folly  to  Kiawah  Island. 

September  27,  1863. — There  are  inside  the  bar  this  morning  4 
monitors,  the  Ironsides,  two  mortar-boats,  27  transports,  &c.,  and  8 
vessels  off  the  bar  of  the  usual  class. 

The  enemy  continue  to  work  on  Wagner  and  Gregg,  and  are  still 
hauling  timber — for  stockades,  it  is  supposed. 

Moultrie,  Bee,  Simkins,  and  Haskell  have  been  firing  at  various 
times  in  the  past  twenty-four  hours,  and  have  thrown,  in  all,  126 
shots.  The  enemy  did  not  reply. 

Battery  Simkins  fired  47  rounds  to-day,  with  good  effect  it  is 
thought.  Battery  Cheves  was  silent,  as  the  magazine  at  that  post  is 
still  unfinished. 

September  28, 1863. — An  exchange  of  companies  in  Fort  Sumter  was 
effected  last  night.  Captain  [J.  M.]  Carson’s  company,  Twenty- 
fifth  South  Carolina  Y olunteers,  was  ordered  to  relieve  Company  D, 
Eleventh  South  Carolina  V olunteers,  as  the  commander  of  that  com- 
pany was  the  senior  officer  under  Major  Elliott,  and  was  reported  in- 
competent to  command  the  fort  in  case  of  accident  to  Major  Elliott. 
Captain  Carson  is  now  the  senior  line  officer,  and  is  believed  to  be 
fully  competent  to  command  in  an  emergency.  The  garrison  is  now 
composed  of  Companies  H,  I,  and  K,  Eleventh  South  Carolina  Vol- 
unteers, and  Captain  Carson’s  company,  Twenty-fifth  South  Carolina. 
Total,  267  men. 

Major  Elliott  reports  that  the  enemy  have  constructed  a covered 
way  from  Battery  Gregg  to  the  sand-hills.  Southern  slope  of  one  of 
the  faces  of  Wagner  directed  on  Sumter  finished  and  merlons  con- 
structed. Major  Elliott  complains  that  the  commander  of  the  water- 
boat  is  an  arrant  coward,  and  if  the  boat  is  not  seized  and  placed 
under  military  control,  the  garrison  may  suffer  for  want  of  water,  as 
was  the  case  last  night. 

Moultrie,  Bee,  and  Simkins  have  been  in  occasional  action  since 
yesterday  morning,  firing  in  all  97  shots.  The  enemy  fired  but  once, 
and  then  against  Fort  Johnson. 

Thirty-three  vessels  were  inside  the  bar  this  morning,  including 
the  Ironsides,  four  monitors,  four  gunboats,  three  mortar-boats,  &c. 
One  mortar-boat,  a French  vessel,  and  four  others  were  outside. 

The  enemy  are  working  to-day  on  W agner  and  the  mud  battery. 

At  1.45  p.  m.  the  enemy’s  land  batteries,  distant  about  2£  miles 
from  Sumter,  opened  on  that  work,  directing  their  fire  against  the 
angle  under  the  flag-staff.  One  hundred  shots  were  fired,  of  which 
48  struck,  16  fell  short,  and  36  passed  over.  The  damage  to  the  fort 
was  slight,  and  one  casualty  only  occurred — a negro  who  was  slow  in 
seeking  cover. 

Ninety-six  shots  were  fired  to-day  from  Battery  Simkins  with  sup- 
posed good  effect.  As  the  magazine  at  Battery  Cheves  is  not  yet 
completed,  there  was  no  firing  from  that  work  to-day. 

The  engineers  at  Fort  Johnson  having  received  an  additional  sup- 
ply of  tools,  the  carpenter  work  on  the  bomb-proof  at  that  work  is 
progressing  vigorously. 

Dispatches  from  the  Stono  state  the  usual  arrival  and  departure  of 
transports,  &c.,  but  no  troops  were  observed  on  any  of  them. 

The  fleet  at  Port  Royal  is  composed  of  one  steam  frigate,  two 
sloops  of  war,  five  gunboats,  and  seventy-five  transports. 

General  Taliaferro  telegraphs  from  Royal’s  that  Colonel  [Charles 
H.]  Simonton,  commanding  in  front,  reports  the  enemy’s  pickets  on 
Dixon’s  and  Horse  Islands,  much  reduced. 


Chap.  XL.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


137 


Gunboat  in  Folly  River  threw  shells  at  the  lower  part  of  this 
(Janies)  island  last  evening,  but  they  fell  short. 

Application  was  made  to-day  by  telegraph  to  Colonel  Gorgas  for 
two  10-inch  mortars.  A reply  was  received,  signed  T.  S.  Rhett : 

We  have  no  10-inch  mortars. 

September  29,  1863. — Atmosphere  too  hazy  this  morning  to  count 
number  and  character  of  the  enemy’s  fleet. 

Since  yesterday  morning,  Moultrie,  Bee,  Simkins,  Haskell,  and 
Cheves  have  been  in  action  at  various  times,  firing  in  all  about  141 
shots. 

The  enemy’s  work  on  Morris  Island  progresses  as  usual.  A trav- 
erse has  been  thrown  up  at  Gregg  to  protect  a gun  there  from  the 
fire  from  Sullivan’s  Island,  and  two  other  traverses  for  the  protec- 
tion of  two  columbiads  from  the  fire  of  our  J ames  Island  batteries. 
It  is  thought  a mortar  battery  has  been  built  in  the  sand-hill  east  of 
Gregg,  to  bear  upon  Sumter. 

Work  is  progressing  at  Wagner.  The  glacis  on  the  northeast  face 
is  completed ; also  embrasures  for  three  guns  bearing  on  Sullivan’s 
Island. 

The  enemy  opened  fire  again  to-day  on  Fort  Sumter  from  Gad- 
berry  Hill,  and  ceased  after  firing  94  shots  at  the  fort  and  a few  at 
Battery  Simkins.  Their  fire  against  the  latter  work  occasioned  no 
damage  or  casualties.  Of  the  94  shots  thrown  at  the  former,  35 
struck.  The  damage  was  immaterial,  and  no  casualties  are  reported. 

Col.  Ormsby  Blanding  reports  that  59  rounds  were  fired  to-day 
from  8-inch  shell  gun  in  Battery  Simkins,  and  7 shells  from  Cheves. 
The  effect  of  the  fire  from  Simkins  was  apparently  good,  while  the 
shells  from  Cheves  failed  to  explode. 

The  engineer  force  at  Battery  Haskell  is  still  engaged  in  raising 
the  frame  of  the  bomb-proof.  Some  shots  were  fired  to-day  from  this 
work  with  the  4.62  gun  No.  2 at  a party  on  Black  Island."  The  ele- 
vation used  was  first  8-£°  and  the  last  shot  was  fired  with  10i°  eleva- 
tion. Three  shells  were  thrown,  of  which  only  the  first  burst. 

At  5 p.  m.  two  shots  were  fired  from  the  24-pounder  smooth-bore  at 
Marsh  Battery  No.  1,  both  good — one  to  the  right  and  the  other  to 
the  left.  The  elevation  used  was  8°. 

The  following  dispatches,  sent  by  the  enemy,  were  intercepted  by 
the  signal  corps : 

Captain  M : 

The  Twenty-fourth  Massachusetts  Regiment  and  Ninety-seventh  Pennsylvania 
are  ordered  to  Saint  Augustine  and  Fernandina.  When  will  transportation  be  fur- 
nished ? 

T , 

General, 


[Reply.] 


Transportation  is  ready  at  any  moment.  How  many  men  ? 


[Answer.] 

Twenty-fourth  Massachusetts  Regiment,  750  men  ; Pennsylvania  Regiment,  660. 
It  will  take  a large  steamer  for  each. 

T , 

General. 


Colonel  Gorgas  telegraphed  the  commanding  general  to-day  asking 
that  further  experiments  with  the  large  Blakely  shall  be  placed  in 
his  hands.  Colonel  Gorgas’  request  was  accordingly  complied  with. 


[Chap.  XL. 


138  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

September  30,  1863. — Moultrie,  Simkins,  and  Cheves  have  been  in 
occasional  action  since  yesterday  morning,  firing  in  all  141  rounds. 

The  enemy  opened  from  Gadberry  Hill  at  11.40  on  Sumter,  and 
throwing  an  occasional  shot  at  Fort  J ohnson.  In  the  afternoon, 
however,  their  fire  on  the  latter  work  became  so  vigorous  as  to  in- 
terfere with  the  working  party,  and  finally  to  cause  the  negroes  to 
be  withdrawn.  At  dusk,  operations  were  resumed,  and  continued 
during  the  night,  to  make  up  for  time  lost  in  the  day.  Of  the  68 
shots  fired  at  Fort  Sumter,  31  struck  inside  and  14  outside.  The 
damage  to  the  work  was  inconsiderable,  and  only  1 man  was  slightly 
wounded.  There  were  no  casualties  whatever  at  Fort  Johnson. 

Battery  Simkins  replied  to  the  enemy’s  fire  with  48  rounds  from 
the  8-inch  columbiad,  but  with  what  effect  it  is  not  stated. 

The  enemy  are  still  industriously  employed  on  their  Morris  Island 
batteries,  and  it  is  believed  four  guns  have  been  mounted  at  Wagner. 

The  10-inch  columbiad  on  the  north  angle  at  Sumter  was  removed 
to  the  parade  last  night  by  Mr.  Butterfield,  and  a 42-pounder  rifle 
was  placed  on  skids,  ready  for  removal  to  the  casemate. 

Report  from  the  Stono  is  unimportant.  Transports  arrived  and 
departed  during  the  day,  but  without  troops. 

Scout  E.  B.  Bell  returned  to-day  from  a fruitless  attempt  to  reach 
Otter  Island.  He  reached  Hutchinson’s  Island,  and  was  about  to 
proceed  to  Otter  Island  when  he  discovered  two  sail-boats  and  two 
eight-oared  boats  loaded  with  negro  troops  in  pursuit.  By  running 
his  boat  into  a small  inlet  in  the  marsh,  he  evaded  the  enemy  and  re- 
turned in  safety. 

October  1,  1863. — There  are  thirty-eight  vessels  inside  the  bar  this 
morning,  including  the  Ironsides,  four  monitors,  three  gunboats,  three 
mortar-boats,  &c. , and  one  frigate,  one  mortar-boat,  French  vessel, 
and  four  others  off  the  bar.  Fourteen  vessels  are  in  the  Stono. 

Fort  Moultrie  and  Battery  Simkins  have  been  in  slow,  irregular 
action  since  yesterday  morning.  The  latter  battery  fired  13  rounds 
from  the  columbiads  and  10  rounds  from  the  Brooke  gun,  both  with 
good  effect.  Owing  to  the  want  of  fuse  reamers  at  Battery  Cheves,  that 
battery  did  not  fire  to-day.  ~No  casualties  occurred  at  either  battery. 

The  Brooke  gun  placed  in  position  to-day  at  Fort  Johnson  drew 
so  heavy  a fire  from  the  enemy  as  to  oblige  the  withdrawal  again  of 
the  working  party  from  exposed  positions  until  night,  when  labor 
was  resumed.  The  only  casualties  at  Fort  Johnson  were  1 private 
slightly  wounded  by  fragment  of  a shell,  and  1 negro,  whose  left 
arm  was  broken  with  shell  so  as  to  render  amputation  necessary. 

The  enemy’s  fire  against  Sumter,  Johnson,  and  Simkins  is  increas- 
ing, and  is  altogether  from  his  heavy  rifle  batteries  near  Graham’s 
house.  One  hundred  and  twenty-nine  shots  were  fired  against  Sum- 
ter, of  which  75  struck,  inflicting,  however,  no  material  injury.  To- 
day the  removal  of  all  the  available  copper  and  lead  from  this  work 
was  completed. 

Work  on  the  bomb-proof  at  Battery  Haskell  is  suspended  for  want 
of  material.  Wagons  are,  however,  engaged  in  hauling  timber  for 
the  purpose.  At  2. 30  p.  m.  3 shots  were  fired  from  this  battery  at  a 
party  of  the  enemy  on  Black  Island,  distant  If  miles.  The  gun  used 
was  the  4.62  rifle  No.  2,  with  4 pounds  powder  and  28-pound  shell. 
The  first  shot,  fired  at  an  elevation  of  9°,  and  10-second  fuse,  passed 
over,  and  did  not  burst.  Second  shot,  8^°  elevation,  same  length  of 
fuse,  like  result.  Third  shot,  8°  elevation,  8i-second  fuse,  good,  but 
did  not  burst. 


Chap.  XL.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


139 


The  report  from  the  Stono  to-day  gives  the  usual  number  of  ar- 
rivals and  departures  of  vessels.  No  troops  on  board  any  of  them. 

There  is  no  material  change  in  the  fleet  at  Port  Royal.  Neither 
of  the  missing  monitors  is  reported  there. 

October  2,  1863. — The  fleet  inside  the  bar  this  morning  is  composed 
of  the  Ironsides,  four  monitors,  two  mortar-boats,  and  twenty-five 
transports,  gunboats,  &c. 

Moultrie,  Simkins,  and  Haskell  have  kept  up  a slow  but  irregular 
fire  since  yesterday  morning. 

Appearances  on  Morris  Island  would  appear  to  indicate  permanent 
occupation  by  the  enemy  rather  than  immediate  operations.  All  the 
high  sand-hills  on  the  southern  end  of  the  island  are  strongly  in- 
trenched. Battery  Wagner  is  being  extended  still  more  to  the  south- 
west, and  two  siege  and  two  barbette  guns  are  mounted  upon  one  of 
the  faces  bearing  upon  Sumter. 

At  8 a.  m.  the  enemy’s  battery  on  Gadberry  Hill  opened  upon 
Sumter  and  fired  74  shots ; 44  struck  that  work,  and  two  of  these 
penetrated  the  gorge  wall  near  the  old  officers’  quarters.  No  other 
material  damage  to  the  work,  and  no  casualties  reported.  A few  shots 
were  fired  from  the  same  battery  at  Battery  Simkins,  which  last,  to- 
gether with  Moultrie  and  Battery  Cheves,  replied  slowly  to  the 
enemy.  A well-directed  shell  from  the  latter  battery  knocked  down 
the  enemy’s  lookout  at  Wagner. 

As  a large  force  of  negroes  were  at  work  on  the  bomb-proof  at 
Battery  Haskell,  it  was  not  deemed  advisable  to  draw  the  attention 
of  the  enemy  to  that  work  by  firing.  Battery  Haskell,  therefore, 
continued  silent  during  the  day. 

October  3,  1863. — Since  yesterday  morning,  Batteries  Simkins, 
Cheves,  Haskell,  and  some  of  the  Sullivan’s  Island  batteries  have 
fired  163  shots. 

During  the  past  night,  the  enemy  have  been  busy  at  Wagner, 
Gregg,  and  the  sand-hills  between  those  works,  where  a mortar  bat- 
tery (it  is  supposed)  is  rapidly  approaching  completion.  They  also 
appear  to  be  constructing  a work  on  Big  Folly  Island. 

A strange  vessel  is  reported  with  the  fleet  this  morning,  flying  the 
English  flag  at  the  main  peak  and  the  Federal  flag  at  the  fore.  It  is 
thought  she  is  a captured  blockade-runner.  She  left  for  the  north 
in  company  with  the  mail  steamer  at  6 p.  m. 

The  enemy  opened  this  morning  from  his  batteries  below  Gra- 
ham’s house  on  Sumter,  Johnson,  Simkins,  and  Cheves,  directing, 
however,  most  of  his  shots  against  Sumter.  Of  the  95  shots  fired 
at  that  work,  78  struck,  but  did  no  material  damage,  and  caused  no 
casualties,  as  was  the  case  also  at  the  other  batteries. 

Captain  [T.  E.]  Raysor’s  company  (H),  Eleventh  South  Carolina 
Volunteers,  was  relieved  from  duty  in  Sumter  last  night  by  Captain 
[E.  W.]  Lloyd’s  company  (B),  Twenty-fifth  South  Carolina  Volun- 
teers. 

Thirty-one  mortar  shells  were  fired  to-day  from  Simkins  and  89 
rounds  from  Cheves,  both  with  reported  good  effect. 

The  engineers  at  Haskell  have  the  bomb-proof  at  that  work  under 
construction. 

The  following  is  the  result  of  the  mortar  firing  from  that  post  to- 
day, directed  against  a party  of  the  enemy  on  Black  Island: 

First  shot,  10  pounds  powder,  26. 6 seconds,  2£  miles- ; fell  to  right, 
short ; did  not  burst. 


140  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

Second  shot,  10  pounds  powder,  26.2  seconds,  2f  miles;  burst  sev- 
eral hundred  yards  up  in  air. 

Third  shot,  10  pounds  powder,  26.2  seconds,  2f  miles ; did  not  see 
and  did  not  burst. 

Fourth  shot,  10  pounds  powder,  26. 6 seconds,  miles ; burst  high 
in  air. 

Fifth  shot,  10  pounds  powder,  26. 6 seconds,  2f  miles ; did  not  see. 

Sixth  shot,  10  pounds  powder,  26. 6 seconds,  2f  miles ; burst  high. 

Seventh  shot,  10  pounds  powder,  26. 6 seconds,  2f  miles ; did  not 
burst ; fell  to  right,  and  short. 

Eighth  shot,  10  pounds  powder,  26.6  seconds,  2f  miles ; burst  high. 

The  following  are  copies  of  signal  dispatches  sent  by  the  enemy 
and  intercepted  by  our  signal  corps.  * 

October  4,  1863. — There  is  no  material  change  in  fleet  off  the  har- 
bor this  morning. 

Three  hundred  and  seventeen  shots  have  been  fired  by  our  batter- 
ies (Sullivan’s  Island,  Simkins,  Cheves,  and  Haskell)  since  6 a.  m. 
yesterday.  The  enemy  have  fired  in  the  same  time  136  shots. 

Several  large  vessels  arrived  to-day  from  the  northward,  laden,  but 
it  is  not  believed  they  brought  any  troops;  probably  loaded  with  ord- 
nance and  other  stores. 

A small  submarine  affair  was  observed  to-day  with  the  fleet,  and 
was  towed  over  the  bar  and  brought  inside  by  one  of  the  blockading 
vessels. 

The  enemy  were  remarkably  quiet  to-day. 

Battery  Simkins  fired  with  good  effect  66  rounds  from  the  8-inch 
columbiad  and  38  rounds  from  Mortar  No.  2.  Eighteen  shots  were 
fired  from  Cheves. 

Dispatches  from  the  Stono  report  a diminution  of  tents  on  Kiawah 
Island.  The  tents  have  probably  been  removed  more  to  the  interior 
of  the  island. 

October  5,  1863. — There  are  inside  the  bar  this  morning  the  Iron- 
sides, four  moniters,  two  mortar- [boats],  seven  wooden  gunboats, 
and  twenty  supply  vessels ; also  a small  craft  having  the  appearance 
of  a submarine  boat  (mentioned  in  journal  yesterday).  Eleven  ves- 
sels of  the  usual  character  are  reported  off  the  bar  and  nineteen  in 
Light-House  Inlet. 

Monitor  No.  5 was  reported  from  Sumter  off  the  bar,  and  subse- 
quently a dispatch  from  the  Stono  stated  that  a monitor  in  tow  of  a 
steamer  was  seen  going  south . 

The  enemy  continue  working  on  the  Morris  Island  batteries.  Gregg 
is  being  enlarged  to  the  eastward  and  westward,  and  traces  on  the 
beach  observed  from  Fort  Sumter,  indicate  that  heavy  guns  have 
been  transported  thither. 

The  sand-hill  battery  between  Gregg  and  W agner  continues  to  be 
enlarged,  but  the  gun  previously  reported  there  is  now  masked  and 
cannot  be  seen.  Wagner  also  progresses  steadily. 

Major  Elliott,  commanding  at  Fort  Sumter,  reports  the  effect  of 
the  past  week’s  bombardment  on  that  work  to  cut  the  top  of  the 
gorge  wall  slightly  in  one  or  two  places;  to  make  holes  in  the  parade; 
to  extend  the  breach  in  the  north  wall,  and  to  give  indications  of 
future  breaches  at  some  remote  period.  Major  Elliott  thinks  when  the 
enemy  shall  have  brought  their  guns  nearer,  the  danger  from  reverse 
firing  will  be  lessened,  and  that  direct  breaches  can  be  made  secure 
if  1,000  or  2,000  sand-bags  are  furnished  him  every  night. 


*A  number  of  routine  dispatches  omitted  as  unimportant. 


Chap.  XL.]j 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


141 


The  10-inch  columbiad  with  broken  trunnion  was  removed  from 
Sumter  last  night  and  brought  to  the  city.  Carriages  and  chassis 
were  sent  to  Fort  Sumter  for  a 42-pounder  and  10-inch,  to  be  mounted 
in  casemate.  They  will  probably  be  in  position  to-night. 

To-day  the  enemy  were  unusually  quiet.  Eighty-eight  shells  were 
fired  at  Gregg  and  Wagner  from  Battery  Simkins  and  23  shots  from 
Cheves.  Effect  unknown. 

October  6,  1863. — The  enemy  are  at  work  on  Wagner  and  Gregg, 
and  are  making  rapid  improvements  to  those  works.  The  firing  to- 
day was  not  very  heavy  on  either  side.  One  hundred  and  nine 
shots  were  fired  from  Simkins  and  43  from  Cheves,  but  with  what 
effect  is  unknown. 

Major  Elliott  reports  two  submarine  affairs  near  the  Ironsides,  also 
several  wooden  gunboats.  The  Ironsides  appears  to  have  escaped 
injury  from  last  night’s  attempt  to  destroy  her. 

The  following  are  copies  of  signal  messages  sent  by  the  enemy  and 
translated  by  our  signal  corps  on  Sullivan’s  Island : 

Admiral  D : 

Trouble  among  the  navy  vessels.  Heavy  musketry  fire  near  the  Ironsides. 

T , 

General. 

General  Gillmore  : 

Enemy  quiet  now.  I did  not  receive  any  explanation  of  the  firing  near  the  Iron- 
sides. 

T , 

General. 

G : 

Have  not  yet  learned  the  cause  of  the  alarm.  Firing  seemed  to  be  around  the 
Ironsides  ; it  continued  some  fifteen  minutes.  The  admiral  is  outside  ; I will  signal 
to  him. 

T . 

Admiral  D : 

G is  anxious  to  learn  the  cause  of  the  firing  last  night.  Will  you  be  kind 

enough  to  inform  me,  so  that  I can  communicate  it  to  him  ? 

T , 

General. 


General  G : 

The  admiral  sends  me  the  following  dispatch  : “An  attempt  was  made  last  night 
to  blow  up  the  Ironsides  by  a small  steamer  and  a torpedo.  It  failed  signally  al- 
though the  torpedo  exploded  at  the  right  moment.  There  were  4 men  in  the  boat, 
2 of  whom  are  prisoners.” 


^ 5 

General. 

October  7,  1863.— There  is  no  material  change  in  the  fleet  this  morn- 
lng.  The  monitor  seen  off  the  bar  on  the  5th  instant  has  taken  posi- 
tion  inside,  and  the  one  reported  on  the  same  day  going  south  in  tow 
of  a steamer  has  probably  been  sent  to  Port  Royal  for  repairs. 

The  enemy’s  Morris  Island  works  progress  as  usual,  and  they  fired 
to-day  only  a few  shots  at  Battery  Cheves,  in  response  to  the  fire  of 
that  battery,  Simkins,  and  the  works  on  Sullivan’s  Island.  Seventy 
shots  were  fired  to-day  from  Simkins  and  74  from  Cheves 

About  100  of  the  enemy*  landed  last  night  from  the  Pawnee  at 
-Legareville,  but  re-embarked  this  morning.  It  is  supposed  this  re- 

* Taliaferro’s  dispatch  says  400 ; Hagood’s,  as  above. 


142  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  TChap.  XL. 

connaissance  was  designed  to  ascertain  the  state  of  our  works  on 
John’s  Island. 

Working  parties  of  the  enemy  extending  for  half  a mile  are  en- 
gaged in  making  causeways  connecting  the  small  islands  opposite 
Legareville. 

The  enemy’s  fleet  at  Port  Royal  is  composed  of  one  steam  frigate, 
two  sloops  of  war,  one  cutter,  five  gunboats,  and  seventy-two  trans- 
ports. 

A number  of  dispatches  of  the  enemy  were  intercepted  to-day  by 
our  signal  corps,  but  they  are  unimportant  and  generally  relate  to 
private  affairs. 

In  accordance  with  orders  from  the  War  Department,  Anderson’s 
brigade  left  this  morning  en  route  for  General  Bragg’s  army. 

Pursuant  to  instructions  from  department  headquarters,  General 
Ripley  issued  to-day  an  order  restricting  the  fire  of  our  batteries 
bearing  upon  Morris  Island  to  50  shot  or  shell  per  day  in  the  aggre- 
gate, excepting  upon  extraordinary  occasions. 

October  8,  1863. — Working  parties  of  the  enemy  are  revetting  and 
strengthening  Battery  Gregg,  where  a 200-pounder  Parrott  is 
mounted  on  the  northeast  angle,  in  place  of  a 10-inch  columbiad 
previously  in  that  position. 

A mortar  bed  is  being  put  in  position  in  a battery  east  of  Gregg. 
The  mortar  battery  south  of  Battery  Gregg  appears  to  be  completed. 

Wagner  is  being  pushed  forward  to  completion,  and  has  embra- 
sures for  four  guns.  Traverses  have  been  constructed  for  protection 
against  the  fire  of  our  James  Island  batteries. 

The  two  nondescript  affairs  previously  reported  inside  the  bar  are 
now  thought  to  be  constructed  to  remove  torpedoes.  As  seen  from 
Sullivan’s  Island,  they  are  described  as  elliptical  in  shape,  low  in  the 
water,  and  flush  deck. 

The  enemy’s  fleet  this  morning  is  unchanged. 

Two  shots  were  fired  last  night  by  the  advanced  monitor  at  a 
schooner  loaded  with  sand-bags,  lying  between  Sumter  and  Battery 
Bee. 

A 42-pounder  rifled  and  banded  gun  was  yesterday  mounted  in 
Sumter,  and  a 10-inch  gun  was  placed  in  position  ready  for  mount- 
ing. 

They  did  not  reply  to-day  to  the  fire  of  Moultrie,  Bee,  Simkins, 
and  Cheves.  One  hundred  and  seventeen  very  satisfactory  shots 
were  fired  from  Simkins,  and  37  from  Cheves. 

Two  experimental  shots  were  fired  to-day  at  Wagner  from  the 
mortars  in  Haskell,  which  resulted  as  follows  : 

First  shot,  10  pounds  (chamber  full),  45°  27.36";  burst  high  in  air 
and  to  left. 

Second  shot,  10  pounds  (chamber  full),  45°  30.4";  fell  short  and  to 
right ; burst  after  falling. 

October  9,  1863. — A steady  fire  has  been  kept  up  by  our  batteries 
(principally  from  Simkins  and  Cheves)  in  the  past  twenty-four  hours 
against  Wagner  and  Gregg.  This  fire  was  continued  during  the 
day,  and  was  replied  to  in  the  afternoon  by  a few  shots  from  Gad- 
berry  Hill,  directed  against  Fort  Johnson,  which,  however,  did  no 
damage  nor  caused  any  casualties. 

There  is  but  little  change  to  note  in  affairs  on  Morris  Island,  ex- 
cepting the  gradual  advance  toward  completion  of  the  enemy’s 
works.  A wide  embrasure  at  Gregg,  directed  toward  Sumter,  is 
being  revetted,  as  also  the  half -moon  battery  in  the  sand-hills. 


Chap.  XL.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


143 


The  following  is  the  report  of  the  scouting  party  sent  by  Colonel 
Simonton : 

The  enemy  have  been  busy  repairing  the  causeway  and  connecting  Horse  Island 
and  Long  and  Battery  Islands.  They  have  rebuilt  the  bridge  across  Green  Creek, 
and  have  put  up  a stockade  on  Long  Island,  commanding  it.  The  entire  strength 
of  the  working  party  and  pickets  on  Green  Creek  Bridge  is  20  men,  and  7 men  on 
picket  on  Horse  Island.  The  bridge  between  Horse  and  Battery  Islands  is  not  re- 
paired, nor  is  the  bridge  between  Dixon’s  and  Long  Islands,  excepting  about  two 
planks  wide.  Large  number  of  tents  on  Cole’s  Island  and  on  the  lower  end  of 
Folly  Island,  and  apparently  a large  force  on  Kiawah  Island. 

The  following  Yankee  dispatch  was  intercepted  to-day : 

General  T : 

All  the  heavy  guns  are  mounted  at  Gregg.  All  the  guns  are  in  position  at  Oyster 
Point.  Has  the  general  returned  ? 

M , 

Captain. 

October  10,  1863.— The  Federal  fleet  off  the  harbor  remains  un- 
changed. 

Work  is  going  on  as  usual  on  Morris  Island.  The  enemy  were 
observed  to-day  moving  five  gun  carriages  up  the  beach  toward 
Wagner.  The  Parrott  gun  mounted  at  Battery  Gregg  remains  with 
the  breech  toward  Sumter. 

While  the  post  boat  was  on  its  way  last  night  from  Fort  Johnson  to 
Sumter,  they  intercepted  a small  boat  containing  two  of  the  enemy, 
and  captured  them  without  resistance.  No  information  of  impor- 
tance was  elicited  in  the  examination  of  these  prisoners. 

Battery  Simkins  and  some  of  the  Sullivan’s  Island  batteries  fired 
slowly  on  the  enemy  to-day.  In  the  afternoon  the  enemy  replied 
from  a rifled  battery  beyond  Graham’s  house,  and  from  a mortar 
battery  near  the  same  place,  directing  their  shots,  as  usual,  against 
Fort  Johnson.  All  of  the  mortar  shell  fell  short;  but  the  range  of 
the  rifled  pieces  was  perfect,  nearly  every  shell  bursting  in  or  over 
our  works.  There  were,  however,  no  casualties. 

Only  43  shots  were  fired  to-day  from  Simkins  and  none  from  Cheves. 

The  bomb-proof  at  Battery  Haskell  is  progressing,  and  the  foun- 
dation of  that  at  Battery  Ryan  is  completed. 

Dispatches  from  the  Stono  state  that  the  enemy  have  a picket  on 
Horse  Island  at  the  foot  of  the  bridge  leading  from  that  island  to 
Battery  Island.  Thirty  or  forty  men  are  at  work  on  the  point  of 
Cole’s  Island. 

A few  unimportant  signal  messages  sent  by  the  enemy  were  to-day 
intercepted  by  our  signal  corps. 

October  11,  1863. — There  are  thirty-five  vessels  inside  the  bar  to- 
day, including  the  Ironsides,  four  monitors,  three  gunboats,  three 
mortar-boats,  two  nondescript  affairs,  &c. 

The  enemy,  as  usual,  continue  working  on  Morris  Island. 

Moultrie,  Marion,  and  Simkins  fired  to-day  on  Greggand  Wagner. 
Cheves  was  silent,  as  the  command  were  working  on  the  bomb-proof 
of  that  battery.  One  hundred  and  six  shots  were  thrown  by  Simkins, 
but  with  what  effect  is  unknown. 

In  the  afternoon  the  enemy  fired  a few  shots  from  their  mortar 
battery.  Some  of  the  shells  fell  near  Battery  Simkins,  but  caused  no 
damage. 

Four  floating  torpedoes  were  set  adrift  from  Sumter  last  night,  and 
at  the  proper  time  a heavy  explosion  was  heard  in  the  direction  of 
the  fleet.  The  result,  however,  was  not  apparent  this  morning. 


[Chap.  XL. 


144  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 


Our  signal  corps  intercepted  to-day  some  fifteen  of  the  enemy’s 
signal  messages,  many  of  which  are  lengthy  and  all  unimportant ; 
hence  they  are  not  entered. 

October  12,  1863. — There  is  no  change  in  the  fleet  off  the  harbor 
this  morning. 

The  enemy  are  throwing  up  another  line  of  works  from  southwest 
side  of  Gregg  to  the  marsh.  An  embrasure  cut  in  Gregg  bearing  on 
Fort  Johnson  is  masked  by  filling  it  up  with  sand  bags.  Two  mor- 
tars thought  to  be  in  position  in  their  new  mortar  battery  on  the  east 
side  of  Gregg.  No  guns  are  visible  in  the  battery  just  constructed 
between  Gregg  and  Wagner.  The  Parrott  gun  at  Battery  No.  1, 
Morris  Island,  has  been  removed. 

As  usual,  Moultrie,  Simkins,  and  Cheves  continued  firing  on  the 
enemy  to-day,  but  did  not  elicit  any  reply  until  the  afternoon,  when 
a few  mortar  shells  were  fired  from  the  battery  in  the  vicinity  of 
Gadberry  Hill  against  Simkins  and  Johnson.  No  casualties  or 
damage. 

October  13,  1863. — The  Federal  fleet  inside  the  bar  and  off  the  harbor 
remains  unchanged,  with  the  exception  of  one  additional  schooner. 

The  operations  of  the  enemy  on  Morris  Island  are  the  same  as 
usual,  though  there  was  less  apparent  activity  displayed  by  them 
to-day  than  usual. 

Thirty-nine  shots  fired  by  Simkins  and  38  by  Cheves  ; effect  not 
reported.  At  .the  former  battery  an  “infernal  machine”  floated  up 
last  night  and  was  secured.  (No  description  of  it  is  given  in  the 
report. ) 

A platform  for  Mortar  No.  2 at  Battery  Haskell  is  being  laid  down 
by  the  engineer  corps,  and  the  bomb-proof  at  that  work  is  under 
construction. 

[One  private  of  Company  E,  Second  South  Carolina  Artillery, 
severely  wounded  at  Fort  Johnson.*] 

Dispatches  from  the  Stono  state  that  87  men  with  knapsacks 
crossed  Stevens’  Bridge  and  proceeded  toward  Dixon’s  Island. 
The  enemy’s  pickets  are  still  on  Horse  and  Horseshoe  Islands. 

Brigadier-General  Mercer,  commanding  at  Savannah,  in  reply  to 
telegram  from  these  headquarters,  telegraphs  that  200  of  the  Fifty- 
seventh  Georgia  Regiment  have  arrived  in  Savannah.  He  also  ac- 
knowledges receipt  of  order  directing  [Robert  H.]  Anderson’s  regi- 
ment to  prepare  to  march  at  a moment’s  notice. 

October  14,  1863. — Raining  this  morning,  and  atmosphere  too  hazy 
to  see  number  and  character  of  the  enemy’s  fleet.  One  or  two  ves- 
sels arrived  from  the  northward,  loaded,  but  did  not  bring  any 
troops.  Fort  Moultrie,  Simkins,  and  Cheves  fired  slowly  on  the 
enemy  during  the  day,  but  elicited  no  reply.  Only  29  shots  fired 
from  Simkins  and  3 from  Cheves. 

About  60  hands  are  engaged  on  the  bomb-proof  at  Haskell,  and 
10  hands  on  the  mortar  platform  at  the  same  battery. 

Reports  from  the  Stono  are  unimportant. 

The  following  are  copies  of  some  of  the  signal  messages  sent  by 
the  enemy  and  intercepted  by  our  signal  corps  : 

General  T : 


How  is  the  mounting  of  guns  in  Wagner  progressing? 
small  scows  Captain  B is  building. 


Hurry  the  completion  of 

G . 

General. 


* So  reported  by  Col.  George  P.  Harrison,  jr. 


Chap.  XL.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


145 


General  G : 

Will  finish  mounting  guns  at  Wagner  to-morrow  night.  Captain  B will 

have  ready  to-morrow  night  the  five  scows  Can two  a day. 

T , 

General. 

October  15,  1863. — Raining  again  this  morning,  and  too  hazy  to  get 
report  of  the  fleet. 

To-day  was  exceedingly  qniet,  and  the  enemy  did  not  fire  a single 
shot,  although  Batteries  Simkins  and  Cheves  were  in  slow  action, 
the  former  firing  33  rounds  and  the  latter  10  rounds. 

The  mortar  platform  No.  2 at  Battery  Haskell  was  completed  to- 
day, and  the  work  on  the  bomb-proof  is  being  pushed  forward. 

An  unfortunate  accident  occurred  this  morning  with  the  submarine 
boat,  by  which  Capt.  F.  L.  Hunley  and  7 men  lost  their  lives,  in  an 
attempt  to  run  under  the  navy  receiving  ship.  The  boat  left  the 
wharf  at  9.25  a.  m.  and  disappeared  at  9.35.  As  soon  as  she  sunk, 
air  bubbles  were  seen  to  rise  to  the  surface  of  the  water,  and  from 
this  fact  it  is  supposed  the  hole  in  the  top  of  the  boat  by  which  the 
men  entered  was  not  properly  closed.  It  was  impossible  at  the  time 
to  make  any  effort  to  rescue  the  unfortunate  men,  as  the  water  was 
some  9 fathoms  deep. 

October  16,  1863. — Still  raining  and  foggy.  The  report  of  the  fleet 
from  Sumter  is  that  the  Ironsides,  four  monitors,  and  twenty-two 
other  vessels  are  inside  the  bar,  and  seven  blockading  vessels  out- 
side. 

Only  20  shots  were  fired  to-day  from  Simkins  and  12  from  Haskell. 
The  enemy  did  not  reply. 

The  brigades  of  Generals  Colquitt  and  Hagood,  on  James  Island, 
were  reviewed  to-day  by  the  commanding  general,  and  they  pre- 
sented a very  creditable  appearance. 

October  17,  1863. — There  is  no  change  in  the  fleet  this  morning,  ex- 
cepting that  the  fourth  monitor  cannot  be  seen.  She  is,  however, 
probably  masked  by  some  of  the  other  vessels. 

A lot  of  coal  and  iron  was  shipped  last  night  from  Sumter  to  the 
city  and  to  Sullivan’s  Island. 

The  improvement  of  the  earthworks  on  Morris  Island  is  steady 
and  the  enemy  continue  silent.  Not  a shot  was  fired  by  them  to- 
day. Twenty-nine  rounds  were  fired  from  Simkins  and  4 from 
Cheves. 

Col.  F.  H.  Gantt  last  night  relieved  Colonel  Olmstead  in  command 
at  Fort  Johnson. 

The  platform  for  Howitzer  No.  1 was  laid  to-day  at  Battery  Ryan, 
and  the  engineer  department  are  engaged  in  laying  a platform  for 
Mortar  No.  1 at  Haskell. 

October  18,  1863. — The  Federal  fleet  off  the  harbor  is  apparently 
unchanged.  The  fourth  monitor  is  still  missing,  and  it  is  thought 
she  may  be  behind  some  other  vessel. 

The  progress  of  the  enemy  on  the  work  next  the  Half-Moon  Bat- 
tery is  rapid.  The  disposition  of  their  batteries  at  present  would 
appear  to  indicate  operations  against  Sullivan’s  Island. 

Companies  I and  K,  Eleventh  South  Carolina  Volunteers,  at  Fort 
Sumter,  were  relieved  last  night  by  the  Twelfth  Georgia  Battalion, 
Major  [G.  M.]  Hanvey,  218  men.  Another  lot  of  coal  was  sent  off 
last  night  from  the  fort,  and  the  remainder  will  be  shipped  Monday. 

The  enemy  were  again  silent  to-day,  and  only  occasional  shots 
were  fired  from  Sullivan’s  Island,  Simkins,  and  Cheves, 

10  R R — YOL  XXVIII,  PT  I 


146  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 


[Chap.  XL. 


The  Abolition  fleet  at  Hilton  Head  is  one  steam  frigate,  two  sloops 
of  war,  one  cutter,  seven  wooden  gunboats,  and  seventy-six  trans- 
ports. 

Mr.  Smith,  provided  with  submarine  armor,  found  the  sunken  sub- 
marine boat  to-day  in  9 fathoms  of  water.  The  engineer  department 
were  instructed  to  furnish  Mr.  Smith  all  facilities  in  the  way  of  ropes, 
chains,  &c.,  that  an  attempt  might  be  made  to  recover  the  boat. 

The  following  is  a copy  of  an  intercepted  dispatch  : 

General  G : 

If  the  vicinity  of  the  Ironsides  is  lighted  with  a calcium  light,  may  show  the  ap- 
proach of  torpedoes.  We  chased  one  night  before  last. 

D , 

Admiral. 


October  19,  1863. — There  are  thirty-two  vessels  inside  the  bar  this 
morning,  including  the  Ironsides,  four  monitors,  one  sloop  of  war, 
one  gunboat,  three  mortar-boats,  &c. 

Fort  Moultrie,  Simkins,  and  Cheves  continued  their  fire  on  the 
enemy’s  works — Gregg  and  Wagner  ; but  as  usual,  the  latter  did  not 
reply.  Thirty-three  shots  were  fired  from  Simkins  and  18  from 
Cheves. 

Colonel  Johnson  reports  the  following  as  the  enemy’s  fleet  at  Port 
Royal,  to  wit : One  steam  frigate,  two  steam  sloops  of  war,  one  cut- 
ter, eight  gunboats,  and  seventy-five  transports. 

The  following  Yankee  dispatches  were  intercepted  to-day  : 

General  G : 

The  Gude  from  Fort  Monroe,  with  prisoners  and  conscripts  for  various  regiments, 
is  off  Light-House  Inlet.  Shall  I send  her  to  Hilton  Head  or  Stono? 

D , 

Captain. 


Captain  D : 

Send  Gude  to  Stono. 


G , 

General. 


General  Gillmore  : 

Your  communication  by  Mr.  Grant  is  at  hand, 
my  thanks. 


Will  use  calcium  light.  Accept 

DAHLGREN, 

Admiral. 


October  20,  1863. — There  is  no  change  to-day  in  the  enemy’s  fleet. 

The  usual  slow  fire  was  kept  up  from  our  batteries,  and,  as  usual, 
the  enemy  remained  silent.  They  are,  however,  progressing  with 
their  work  upon  Wagner  and  Gregg,  as  well  as  upon  two  batteries 
between  them,  commenced  a short  time  ago.  Much  activity  is  also 
observed  at  one  or  two  of  the  batteries  below  Wagner  ; probably 
dismounting  guns.  Several  heavy  guns  can  be  seen  at  Battery  Wag- 
ner ; but  one  only  is  unmasked  at  Gregg.  There  is  good  reason  to 
believe,  however,  that  there  are  others  in  position  at  that  work. 

Monitor  No.  2 arrived  to-day  about  11  o’clock,  and  Monitor  No.  7 
left  in  tow  of  a steamship  going  south ; probably  to  Hilton  Head,  for 
repairs. 

A large  decrease  in  the  number  of  tents  is  reported  on  Morris 
Island,  and  it  is  thought  there  is  but  a small  force  remaining. 

Colonel  [J.  W.]  Robertson,  engineer,  James  Island,  reports  that 
the  new  lines  on  that  island  are  ready  for  all  siege  guns. 


Chap.  XL.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


147 


Yankee  dispatches  intercepted  as  follows  : 

Dr.  W : 

By  reason  of  the  short  notice,  the  wounded  and  sick  cannot  all  be  sent  off  this 
noon.  Shall  I load  the  Morse  again,  and  send  her  to  the  Cosmopolitan? 

Dr.  G . 

Dr.  G : 

Send  to-morrow  those  you  cannot  get  off  by  noon  to-day  to  the  Cosmopolitan  at 
Pawnee  Landing. 

Dr.  W . 

October  21,  1863. — Thirty-one  vessels  of  the  usual  character  are  in- 
side the  bar  this  morning,  and  seven  vessels  outside,  including  a 
French  sloop  of  war. 

The  enemy  did  not  fire  a shot  to-day  in  response  to  the  fire  of  our 
Sullivan’s  Island  batteries  and  Batteries  Simkins  and  Cheves,  which 
directed  their  attention  to  Gregg  and  Wagner  and  the  working 
parties  constructing  batteries  between  those  works.  The  result  of 
our  practice  is  not  certainly  known,  but  it  is  believed  to  be  usually 
effective. 

Last  night,  at  11  o’clock,  the  commanding  officer  at  Fort  Johnson 
observed  some  of  the  enemy’s  barges  inside  of  Gregg,  and  he  fired 
three  stand  of  grape  at  them,  which  caused  the  enemy  to  retire.  It 
is  supposed  their  object  was  either  to  cut  the  telegraph  cable  to  Sum- 
ter or  to  attach  a wire.*  In  either  event,  their  object  was  frustrated. 

General  Hagood  telegraphs  that  two  transports  with  troops,  and 
bands  playing,  went  down  Folly  River  toward  Cole’s  Island.  He 
could  not,  however,  see  whether  or  not  they  went  to  sea. 

Orders  were  issued  to-day  for  the  rearrangement,  as  follows,  of  the 
batteries  along  the  eastern  margin  of  James  Island  from  Secession- 
ville  to  Fort  Johnson,  and  also  of  the  harbor  batteries  on  the  same 
island : 

Redoubt  No.  1,  one  8-inch  shell  gun,  one  32-pounder  smooth-bore, 
one  30-pounder  Parrott. 

Secessionville  (rear),  one  24-pounder  rifle,  two  32-pounder  smooth- 
bores (to  be  mounted  on  a barbette  carriage),  one  30-pounder  Par- 
rott (whenever  received  from  Macon). 

Battery  Ryan  (right),  two  12-pounder  James,  reamed  to  18-pounders 
or  24-pounder  howitzers  (one  to  be  taken  from  Battery  Tatom  and 
the  other  from  Battery  Haskell),  two  24-pounder  Austrian  howitzers. 

Battery  Ryan  (left),  two  24-pounders,  rifled  and  banded,  two  8- 
inch  siege  howitzers  ; one  of  the  24-pounders  to  be  taken  from  Re- 
doubt No.  1 and  the  other  from  those  on  old  lines  not  already  other- 
wise assigned. 

Battery  Tatom,  two  8-inch  siege  howitzers,  two  4.62-inch  rifled 
guns  (one  to  be  taken  from  Battery  Haskell,  the  other  to  be  put  in 
position  whenever  received),  two  shell  guns  (to  be  designated  by  the 
chief  of  artillery). 

Battery  Haskell,  one  4-inch  Blakely,  one  8-inch  seacoast  howitzer, 
one  20-pounder  Parrott,  one  24-pounder,  rifled  and  banded,  one  24- 
pounder  smooth-bore,  two  10-inch  seacoast  howitzers,  one  8-inch  co- 
Iumbiad  (to  be  taken  from  Battery  Cheves  and  to  be  used  only  as  a 
shell  gun),  two  42-pounder  carronades,  already  ordered,  which  will 
be  placed  in  position  as  soon  as  available. 

Battery  Cheves,  two  8-inch  columbiads,  to  be  used  only  as  shell 
guns. 


* Major  Blanding’s  report. 


[Chap.  XL. 


148  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

Brooke  Gun  Battery,  one  8-inch  shell  gun  (to  be  taken  from  Bat- 
tery Simkins  ; the  one  most  worn). 

Battery  Simkins,  one  8-inch  shell  gun  (navy),  three  10-inch  sea- 
coast  mortars,  one  8-inch  columbiad  (to  be  taken  from  Battery  Cheves 
and  used  only  as  a shell  gun). 

Bay  Batteries  (Fort  Johnson),  three  10-inch  columbiads,  one  8-inch, 
rifled  and  banded. 

Tower  Battery,  three  10-inch  columbiads,  one  42-pounder,  rifled 
and  double-banded,  one  7-inch  Brooke,  one  6.40  Brooke  (to  be  taken 
from  Simkins). 

Battery  Wampler,  two  10-inch  columbiads;  one  already  ordered 
from  the  city. 

Battery  Glover,  three  32-pounder  rifled. 

Battery  No.  5 (new  lines),  two  24-[pounder]  smooth-bores  (to  be 
taken  from  Battery  Keid) ; two  24-pounder  howitzers  (to  be  taken 
from  old  lines). 

The  following  are  copies  of  Yankee  intercepted  dispatches : 

General  S : 

General  Gillmore  directs  that  you  take  command  of  all  troops  on  Morris  Island 
and  Folly  Island  during  his  absence. 

TURNER, 

Brigadier-General , Chief  of  Staff. 

Generals  V and  G : 

By  command  of  General  Gillmore,  I assume  command  of  Morris  and  Folly  Islands. 

S , 

General. 

October  22,  1863. — No  material  change  is  reported  in  the  fleet  this 
morning,  and  the  enemy  on  Morris  Island  still  fail  to  respond  to  the 
fire  of  our  batteries,  which  is  kept  up  slowly  on  Wagner,  Gregg,  and 
the  intermediate  works. 

Two  embrasures  in  Battery  Gregg  were  unmasked  this  morning. 

Fifty-three  shots,  with  very  satisfactory  effect,  were  fired  to-day 
from  Battery  Simkins  and  17  from  Cheves. 

Owing  to  the  departure  of  General  Gillmore,  probably  for  Port 
Royal,  and  certain  movements  of  the  enemy’s  troops  down  Folly 
Island,  the  commanding  general  was  induced  to  believe  a demon- 
stration was  intended  in  the  Third  Military  District,  and  accord- 
ingly [W.  L.J  De  Pass’  battery,  and  one  regiment  each  from  Wise’s 
and  Evans’  brigades  (and  subsequently  all  the  former’s  brigade),  were 
ordered  to  be  held  in  readiness  to  move  at  a moment’s  notice.  De 
Pass’  battery  was  directed  to  await  orders  at  the  Savannah  Railroad 
depot,  and  to  be  provided  with  three  days’  cooked  rations. 

October  23,  1863. — No  change  of  consequence  is  reported  in  the  fleet 
this  morning. 

Heavy  showers  of  rain  from  7 to  10  a.  m. 

Thirty-one  shots  were  fired  during  the  day  from  Simkins  and  8 
from  Cheves,  to  which  the  enemy  did  not  reply. 

The  rearrangement  of  the  armaments  of  the  batteries  on  James 
Island  is  being  made,  in  accordance  with  an  order  issued  on  the  21st 
instant.  It  was  found  necessary  in  the  transfer  of  the  guns  to  use 
the  light  artillery  horses  and  harness.  Much  of  the  latter  is  re- 
ported to  have  given  way  and  to  be  otherwise  injured. 

Captain  De  Pass’  battery  was  ordered  to  the  Third  Military  Dis- 
trict to-day. 


Chap.  XL.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


149 


October  24,  1803. — To-day  commenced  with  rain,  which  continued 
at  intervals  until  4 p.  m. 

The  Ironsides,  four  monitors,  one  mortar-boat,  and  twenty  other 
vessels  are  inside  of  the  bar.  Five  blockaders  and  24  vessels  of  va- 
rious character  in  Light-House  Inlet. 

Eleven  shots  were  fired  to-day  from  Battery  Cheves  and  37  rounds 
from  Battery  Simkins.  The  enemy  did  not  reply.  They  are  re- 
ported busy  upon  the  battery  between  Gregg  and  Wagner,  and  have 
opened  an  embrasure  in  that  work  bearing  upon  Sumter,  and  have 
constructed  a traverse  for  protection  against  the  fire  of  our  guns  on 
James  Island.  Battery  Wagner  is  being  revetted  with  sods  along 
the  entire  line  of  parapet. 

At  5 p.  m.  a bay  steamer  arrived  from  northward  with  troops, 
which  were  disembarked  on  Folly  Island. 

A force  of  about  200  negroes  is  employed  on  the  bomb-proof  and 
thickening  the  parapet  of  Battery  Tatom. 

The  following  Yankee  dispatch  was  intercepted  to-day  : 

Lieutenant  M : 

Will  bring  your  leave  up  in  the  morning 


October  25,  1863. — There  is  no  change  reported  in  the  fleet  this 
morning. 

Monitor  [No.]  2 rejoined  the  fleet  to-day,  and  Monitor  No.  6 de- 
parted— it  is  supposed  for  repairs. 

Now  inside  the  bar — Monitors  [Nos.]  2,  3,  4,  and  5,  while  Nos.  1, 
6,  and  7 are  absent. 

Only  8 shots  were  fired  by  us  to-day,  and  those  from  Battery  Sim- 
kins. The  enemy  still  silent. 

Four  guns  are  now  observed  in  position  at  Battery  Gregg — three 
Parrotts  and  one  10-inch  columbiad.  The  Parrott  gun  on  the  north- 
east angle  still  has  the  breech  toward  Sumter  and  the  muzzle  in  the 
sand.  One  Parrott  and  the  columbiad  is  mounted  on  the  north 
face,  and  one  Parrott  on  southwest  angle,  bearing  on  the  city. 

At  the  midway  battery  (between  Gregg  and  Wagner)  the  embra- 
sure toward  Sumter  is  masked  with  sand-bags.  The  southeast  angle 
of  this  work  appears  to  be  intended  for  mortars  bearing  in  the  di- 
rection of  Sullivan’s  Island.  All  the  guns  seem  to  be  removed  from 
the  Gadberry  Hill  batteries. 

An  extensive  work  has  been  completed  south  of  Gregg’s  Hill;  also 
the  batteries  on  each  side  of  Light-House  Inlet  and  near  the  observa- 
tory on  Folly  Island.  At  the  former  battery  three  naval  guns  are  in 
position,  but  none  are  observed  in  the  latter. 

Four  heavy  guns  are  thought  to  be  in  position  at  Battery  Wagner. 

A large  increase  of  tents  is  reported  on  Cole’s  and  Folly  Islands. 

October  26,  1863. — The  Federal  fleet  this  morning  is  composed  of 
the  Ironsides,  four  monitors,  a mortar-boat,  and  twenty-four  other 
vessels  of  various  classes. 

No  material  change  is  to  be  observed  in  the  appearance  of  affairs 
on  Morris  Island,  excepting  the  large  Parrott  gun  at  Battery  Gregg 
has  finally  been  turned  with  the  muzzle  toward  Fort  Sumter. 

Until  about  12.30  p.  m.  to-day  the  enemy’s  guns  were  silent,  when 
Battery  Gregg,  the  midway  battery,  and  Battery  Wagner  opened 
upon  Fort  Sumter,  Sullivan’s  Island,  and  Fort  Johnson,  directing 
most  of  their  fire  at  Johnson  and  Sumter.  One  hundred  and  eighty- 


R , 

Captain. 


[Chap.  XL. 


150  S.  C.  AND  GrA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

eight  shots  were  fired  at  the  latter  work,  of  which  165  struck  and  23 
passed  over.  Their  shots  were  directed  against  the  gorge  wall,  upon 
which  some  impression  was  made.  Later  in  the  afternoon,  a wooden 
gunboat  joined  one  of  the  monitors,  and  fired  10  shots  at  the  fort. 
One  of  these  penetrated  the  sand-bag  traverse  about  the  hospital, 
and  wounded  a negro.  This  was  the  only  casualty  during  the  day. 

Of  the  seven  guns  mounted  at  Gregg,  two  bear  upon  Sumter,  and 
there  are  embrasures  in  the  curtain  for  two  more.  A 300-pounder 
Parrott  is  mounted  in  the  midway  battery,  also  two  smaller  guns. 
About  five  guns  appear  to  be  in  position  at  Wagner,  which  bear  also 
upon  Sumter. 

The  powder  in  the  old  magazine  has  been  removed,  and  placed  in 
the  new  magazine  near  the  casemate  battery,  and  the  remainder  in 
the  bomb-proof  near  the  old  sally-port. 

Battery  Simkins  to-day  fired  72  shots  from  the  rifled  gun  and  10 
shells  from  mortars.  The  effect  was  very  unsatisfactory. 

Twenty-three  shots  were  fired  from  Cheves.  No  casualties  oc- 
curred at  either  battery. 

The  Federal  fleet  at  Port  Royal  is  reported  to-day  as  follows  : Two 
steam  frigates,  three  sloops  of  war,  one  cutter,  one  iron-clad,  eight 
gunboats,  and  seventy-nine  transports. 

In  response  to  an  application  to  the  Secretary  of  War  for  the  regi- 
ment of  heavy  artillery  (Tennessee)  captured  and  paroled  at  Vicks- 
burg, a letter  was  received  to«day  signed  C.  H.  Lee,  assistant  adju- 
tant-general, stating  that,  in  view  of  existing  affairs  in  the  south- 
west, it  is  impossible  to  comply  with  the  request. 

October  27,  1863.— At  7 a.  m.  the  enemy  again  opened  fire  from 
Batteries  Gregg,  Wagner,  and  the  low  battery  to  the  east  of  Gregg. 
As  was  the  case  yesterday,  their  principal  attack  was  against  Sum- 
ter, although  Fort  Johnson  received  due  attention  from  two  guns 
until  12  m. , when  fire  was  concentrated  upon  Sumter,  which  occasion- 
ally received  also  some  shots  from  the  monitors.  At  dark,  625  shots 
had  been  fired  at  this  work.  Only  90  missed. 

The  enemy  at  this  time  ceased  firing  for  a short  period,  and  then 
reopened  with  two  guns  from  Battery  Gregg,  a few  shots  from  a mon- 
itor, and  a mortar  from  the  battery  east  of  Gregg.  To  prevent  any 
reconnaissance  around  the  fort,  the  enemy  used  after  dark  shrapnel 
and  grape  to  sweep  the  channel. 

The  result  of  the  fire  to-day  was  to  seriously  injure  the  entire  sea 
face,  the  arches  of  the  second  tier  being  all  breached  and  the  mate- 
rial falling  outside.  This  was  accomplished  by  the  monitors,  Gregg, 
and  the  battery  east,  both  the  latter  having  an  enfilading  fire  on  this 
face.  The  gorge  wall  was  also  much  damaged.  Several  shots  pene- 
trated through,  exploding  and  dropping  beneath.  The  remains  of 
the  north  wall  were  breached  in  several  places.  Two  guns  seem  to 
have  directed  their  entire  attention  to  the  southwest  angle,  which, 
with  the  southeast  angle,  were  struck  about  100  times.  Many  of  the 
shells  from  the  monitors  fell  immediately  to  the  north  of  the  new 
sally-port.  The  traverse  over  the  hospitals  on  the  west  side,  which 
was  shot  away  yesterday  and  repaired,  again  met  with  the  same  fate 
to-day. 

An  arch  on  the  northeast  angle  was  filled  to-day,  and  the  work  is 
progressing  to-night. 

At  12  m.  one  of  the  enemy’s  shots  penetrated  the  magazine  of  the 
Brooke  Gun  Battery  at  Fort  Johnson,  and  exploded  about  125  pounds 
of  powder,  killing  1 private  and  wounding  another  [of  Company  A, 
Second  South  Carolina  Artillery]. 


Chap.  XL.]  ' 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


151 


General  Hagood  telegraphs  that  he  was  at  Fort  Johnson  this 
morning  when  the  enemy  opened  from  Cumming’s  Point  on  the 
city  (about  11.10  a.  m.).  The  gun  was  mounted  en  barbette , and  was 
loaded  while  lying  parallel  with  the  parapet.  It  was  then  slowly 
elevated  to  an  angle  of  about  45°,  and  fired ; in  which  position,  being 
very  conspicuous,  he  directed  the  Brooke  gun  at  Shell  Mound  to  fire 
at  it.  After  a few  discharges,  which  appeared  to  excite  the  enemy 
very  much,  they  returned  the  fire,  and  succeeded  in  exploding  the 
magazine,  as  above  stated.  It  is  thought  only  three  shells  were 
thrown  in  the  direction  of  the  city,  and,  of  these,  two  fell  short. 

The  fire  from  our  batteries  to-day  was  very  slack,  and  the  enemy 
did  not  appear  to  pay  much  attention  to  it. 

The  Federal  fleet  at  Port  Royal  to-day  is  one  steam  frigate,  two 
sloops  of  war,  four  gunboats,  and  sixty-four  transports. 

The  following  are  copies  of  Yankee  messages  intercepted  : 

General  Gillmore  : 

A 100-pounder  Parrott  has  just  burst  at  Gregg : 1 man  wounded.  Three  Greek- 
fire  shells  have  been  thrown  into  the  city.  All  the  guns  are  being  turned  on  the  city. 
* * * * * * *• 

October  28,  1863. — During  the  past  night  the  enemy  have  been 
busily  engaged  at  Battery  Cumming,  east  of  Gregg,  have  somewhat 
enlarged  the  work,  and  have  thrown  up  two  traverses  for  protection 
against  the  fire  of  our  James  Island  batteries. 

The  bombardment  of  our  works  to-day  was  a repetition  of  yester- 
day’s fire.  A few  shots  were  fired  by  the  enemy  at  Battery  Simkins ; 
and  an  occasional  one  at  the  Brooke  gun  (Fort  Johnson),  but  no 
damage  whatever  was  inflicted  at  either  of  these  two  posts. 

Our  fire  from  Battery  Simkins  was  confined  to  18  shells  thrown 
from  two  mortars  ; 30  shells  were  also  thrown  from  the  Brooke  gun. 
The  effect  of  the  mortar  shells  was  very  unsatisfactory,  while  the 
fire  of  the  Brooke  gun  was  annoying  to  the  enemy.  Some  of  our 
Sullivan’s  Island  batteries  also  participated  to  a limited  extent  in  the 
engagement,  but  the  result  of  their  fire  does  not  appear. 

The  magazine  at  the  Brooke  Gun  Battery,  which  was  exploded 
yesterday,  was  thoroughly  repaired  last  night. 

Six  hundred  and  seventy -nine  shots  were  fired  by  the  enemy 
against  Sumter,  88  of  which  missed.  A breach  was  made  in  the  sea 
face,  knocking  down  two  arches,  and  the  top  of  the  gorge  wall  was 
cut  very  thin. 

Copy  of  Yankee  intercepted  dispatch  : 

Order  Colonel Hawley’s  brigade  to  report  on  Folly  Island  to  General  S . 

D , 

Colonel. 

October  29,  1863. — The  enemy  from  Gregg,  Wagner,  and  the  inter- 
mediate battery,  assisted  by  one  or  more  monitors,  continue  the 
attack  with  vigor  upon  Forts  Sumter  and  Johnson.  The  fire,  how- 
ever, upon  the  latter  work  was  not  so  heavy  as  during  the  preceding 
twenty -four  hours,  and  their  attention,  as  heretofore,  was  given 
principally  to  Fort  Sumter,  against  which  779  shots  were  fired,  80 
of  which  missed.  The  top  row  of  arches  on  the  sea  face  was  cut 
down,  and  it  is  reported  that  the  whole  of  that  face  and  also  the 
gorge  is  now  perfectly  accessible  from  the  outside.  Only  1 man  was 
killed  at  Fort  Sumter,  while  at  Fort  Johnson  there  were  no  casualties. 

Battery  Simkins  and  Fort  Johnson  replied  slowly  to  the  enemy, 
the  former  battery  firing  16  8-inch  columbiad  shell  and  the  latter  26 


[Chap.  XL. 


152  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

shell  from  the  Brooke  gun,  and  also  G mortar  shells.  The  fire  from 
these  batteries  did  not  appear  to  be  very  satisfactory. 

Battery  Cheves,  not  being  supplied  with  8-inch  shell,  did  not  par- 
ticipate in  the  defense  to-day. 

Major  Elliott  complains  that  not  one  captain  in  the  Georgia  bat- 
talion stationed  in  Fort  Sumter  is  present  with  his  company,  and  if 
the  company  commanders  are  not  present,  he  cannot  be  responsible 
for  the  result.  Most  of  these  officers,  he  states,  are  absent  on  sick  cer- 
tificates, but  he  has  reason  to  believe  they  are  fit  for  duty.  Orders 
were  accordingly  issued  for  the  arrest  of  these  absentees,  and  for  their 
return  to  their  posts. 

Major  Manigault  reports  the  arrival  at  Battery  Haskell  of  a 24- 
pounder  smooth-bore,  with  carriage,  ammunition,  and  implements. 
The  gun  is  damaged,  having  the  knob  of  the  cascabel  broken  off, 
and  also  part  of  the  breech.  It  is,  besides,  old  and  worn.  Major 
Manigault  thinks  the  gun  scarcely  fit  for  use,  and  the  carriage  is 
defective. 

October  30,  1863. — The  enemy  commenced  a very  heavy  bombard- 
ment about  daylight  from  Wagner,  Gregg,  and  the  intermediate 
battery,  directing  his  fire  exclusively  against  Sumter. 

Battery  Simkins  replied  during  the  day  with  31  mortar  shells  and 
5 shells  from  the  8-inch  columbiad.  Ten  shells  were  fired  from  the 
Brooke  gun  at  Fort  Johnson,  but,  owing  to  the  defective  character 
of  the  fuses  used,  the  effect  was  not  satisfactory. 

Battery  Cheves  was  again  silent  for  want  of  8-inch  shell. 

About  12  m.  three  of  the  monitors  joined  in  the  attack,  which  was 
continued  until  5.30  p.  m.,  when  fire  gradually  ceased,  but  was  slowly 
resumed  in  about  two  hours,  and  continued  at  intervals  during  the 
night.  The  only  casualties  during  the  day  were  3 men  slightly 
wounded  in  Sumter. 

From  sunrise  to  sunset,  955  shots  were  fired  by  the  enemy,  68  of 
which  missed.  The  effect  of  this  heavy  fire  upon  the  gorge  wall 
and  sea  face  was  to  render  them  still  more  accessible  from  the  outside, 
and  to  very  much  break  up  and  interfere  with  the  interior  communi- 
cations of  the  fort. 

About  11  a.  m.  a floating  pile-driver  of  the  enemy  came  to  a point 
in  the  creek  to  the  southwest  of  Black  Island,  and  commenced  to 
drive  a pile.  Fire  was  opened  upon  her  from  Redoubt  No.  1,  with  an 
8-inch  navy  shell  gun  and  a 30-pounder  Parrott.  Eight  shots  were 
fired  from  the  former  gun  and  10  from  the  latter,  when  the  vessel 
withdrew  out  of  range.  Only  about  one-half  of  the  shells  burst,  and 
the  timing  of  the  fuses  did  not  appear  to  be  very  accurate. 

October  31,  1863. — The  Federal  fleet  off  the  harbor  this  morning  is 
composed  of  the  Ironsides,  four  monitors,  one  gunboat,  two  mortar- 
boats,  and  nineteen  other  vessels  inside  the  bar,  and  six  blockading 
vessels  outside. 

During  the  past  night,  the  enemy  have  fired  at  intervals  68  shots 
at  Fort  Sumter,  8 of  which  missed. 

About  3 o’clock  this  morning,  a Parrott  shot  struck  an  iron  girder 
on  the  sea  wall,  and  a moment  after  the  roof  fell  in,  crushing  13  men, 
who  were  posted  there  in  readiness  to  mount  the  crest  in  the  event 
of  a boat  attack. 

About  dawn,  the  enemy  opened  a heavy  fire  from  two  heavy  and 
two  light  guns  at  Battery  Gregg,  three  heavy  rifled  guns  and  four 
10-inch  mortars  at  the  midway  battery,  and  four  heavy  rifled  guns  at 
Wagner.  Toward  midday  their  fire  slackened  materially ; but  im- 


Chap.  XL.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


153 


mediately  afterward  two  monitors  joined  in  the  bombardment,  which 
was  renewed  with  spirit  and  continued  until  dark. 

The  enemy  fired  exclusively  at  Sumter,  and  threw  during  the  day 
443  rifled  shots  from  their  land  batteries,  61  of  which  missed;  86 
shots  from  the  monitors  (none  missed),  and  373  mortar  shells,  120 
of  which  did  not  strike.  Three  mortar  fuses  were  cut  so  as  to  ex- 
plode the  shell  a second  or  two  after  impact.  The  enemy’s  land  bat- 
teries directed  their  fire  chiefly  at  the  southwest  angle,  which  suffered 
seriously.  The  flag-staff  was  shot  away  twice,  and  was  replaced  by 
Sergeant  [James]  Garahan,  Corporal  [W.  M.]  Hitt,  and*  Private  R. 
J.  Swain,  all  of  Company  F,  Twelfth  Georgia  Battalion.  It  was  so 
much  injured,  however,  that  it  finally  became  necessary  to  raise  the 
battle-flag  of  the  Georgia  battalion. 

Besides  the  13  men  killed  this  morning  by  the  falling  of  a wall, 
there  were  3 privates  of  the  Twelfth  Georgia  Battalion  killed  by 
shells,  and  3 privates  and  1 non-commissioned  officer  wounded,  all 
with  fragments  of  mortar  shells. 

Major  Elliott  telegraphs  that  in  view  of  the  difficulty  that  would 
ensue  in  mounting  the  parapet  to  repel  an  assault,  he  wished  eight 
or  ten  ladders  15  feet  in  length,  which  could  be  used  to  facilitate  that 
operation.  Orders  were  accordingly  given  to  the  engineer  department 
to  furnish  them,  as  requested. 

The  usual  semi-monthly  inspection  of  Fort  Sumter  was  made  this 
evening,  and  the  proper  police  and  sanitary  measures  are  reported 
as  being  carried  on  as  effectively  as  it  is  possible  while  the  fort  is 
undergoing  a severe  bombardment. 

Early  this  morning  a transport  with  troops  on  board  was  seen 
lying  at  Folly  Point.  Soon  after,  she  went  up  the  river.  Another 
steamer  went  to  Kiawah  Island,  and  returned  to  Folly  River  loaded 
with  troops. 

November  1,  1863. — Seventy  rifle  shots  and  33  mortar  shells  were 
fired  by  the  enemy’s  land  batteries  during  the  night  at  Sumter.  Ten 
of  the  former  and  12  of  the  latter  missed. 

During  the  day  the  enemy’s  land  batteries  again  opened  on  the 
fort,  directing  their  fire  at  the  southwest  angle,  which  was  breached 
on  the  outside,  but  not  to  that  extent  to  make  the  protection  within 
insecure  as  yet.  After  meridian,  two  monitors  assisted  in  the  attack, 
firing  upon  the  sea  wall  and  in  reverse  upon  the  city  face,  and  doing 
some  damage  in  the  vicinity  of  the  new  sally-port.  Owing  to  the 
difficulty  of  observing  the  monitors  during  their  period  of  action, 
an  accurate  estimate  of  the  number  of  shots  fired  by  them  was  not 
obtained.  It  was,  however,  about  the  same  as  yesterday — say  80  shots 
and  375  rifle  shells,  40  of  which  missed,  and  308  mortar  shells  were 
fired  by  the  land  batteries.  Of  the  mortar  shells,  87  did  not  strike  the 
fort.  The  wounding  of-  a private  was  the  only  casualty  in  the  fort 
since  yesterday. 

Only  6 shells  were  fired  to-day  from  Battery  Simkins.  Battery 
Cheves  was  again  silent  for  want  of  shells. 

Col.  George  P.  Harrison,  jr.,  commanding  post  at  Fort  Johnson, 
recommends  the  propriety  of  ceasing  fire  at  his  post  until  he  shall 
be  properly  supplied  with  ammunition,  and  then,  in  conjunction  with 
the  Sullivan’s  Island  batteries,  to  open  a concentrated  fire  upon  Cum- 
ming’s  Point. 

The  commanding  general  replied  that  a simultaneous  fire  could  do 
but  little  good  unless  continued  for  several  days  and  nights.  This 
he  hopes  to  do  as  soon  as  a full  supply  of  projectiles  can  be  procured, 
especially  10-inch  mortar  shells. 


154  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

Orders  by  signal  were  issued  in  the  morning  to  General  Hagood, 
commanding  Seventh  Military  District,  to  relieve  with  two  fresh 
companies  of  the  same  regiment  the  two  companies  of  the  Twenty- 
fifth  South  Carolina  Volunteers  who  have  now  been  in  Fort  Sumter 
for  about  five  weeks.  The  quartermaster’s  department  not  being 
advised  of  the  expected  movement,  did  not  have  the  necessary  trans- 
portation prepared,  and  only  a portion  of  these  two  companies  were 
transferred  to  Sumter.  They  were  sent  over  in  the  post-boat  be- 
longing to  the  fort. 

The  enemy’s  fleet  at  Port  Royal  to-day  is  two  steam  frigates,  three 
sloops  of  war,  one  cutter,  one  iron-clad,  six  wooden  gunboats,  and 
seventy-five  transports. 

Y esterday  at  2 p.  m.  one  gunboat,  accompanied  by  ten  schooners, 
went  to  sea.  The  weather  was  too  hazy  to  observe  whether  they  had 
any  troops  on  board. 

His  Excellency  the  President  arrived  to-day  in  a special  train  from 
Savannah. 

[Col.  D.  H.  Hamilton  assumes  command  of  outposts  on  Sullivan’s 
Island.*] 

November  2,  1863. — This  morning  an  English  ship  of  war  is  ob- 
served with  the  enemy’s  fleet,  which  is  composed  of  the  Ironsides, 
four  monitors,  one  gunboat,  two  mortar-boats,  and  seventeen  vessels 
inside  the  bar  and  the  usual  blockading  squadron  outside. 

As  usual,  a slow  fire  from  the  enemy’s  land  batteries  was  kept  up 
against  Fort  Sumter  during  the  night,  f Of  the  87  rifle  shots  thrown, 
36  did  not  strike  the  fort.  Five  mortar  shells  were  thrown,  all  of 
which  fell  inside. 

Early  in  the  morning  a heavy  bombardment  was  recommenced 
from  the  shore  batteries,  and  again  about  noon  three  monitors  as- 
sisted in  the  attack,  relieving  in  a measure  the  heavy  guns  on  Morris 
Island. 

During  the  day,  140  15-inch  round  shot  and  6-J-inch  rifled  bolts  were 
fired  from  the  monitors,  all  of  which  struck  the  fort.  Two  hundred 
and  fifty  bolts  and  345  mortar  shells  were  fired  from  the  shore  bat- 
teries ; 85  of  the  rifled  shots  and  135  of  the  mortar  shells  missed.  The 
upper  portion  of  the  scarp  wall  on  the  southwest  angle  is  cut  away, 
but  the  debris  assuming  the  natural  slope,  contributes  to  the  safety 
of  the  lower  casemates. 

Immediately  after  dark,  a small  boat  containing  4 of  the  enemy’s 
scouts  effected  a landing  at  the  southeast  angle.  Our  sentinels,  be- 
lieving it  to  be  our  picket-boat,  allowed  the  men  to  escape.  Several 
shots  were  fired  at  them  as  they  disappeared  in  the  darkness,  but  the 
effect  was  not  apparent. 

The  infantry  garrison  at  Fort  Sumter  was  relieved  to-night  by  2 
officers  and  40  men  each  from  the  Sixth,  Nineteenth,  Twenty -third, 
Twenty-seventh,  and  Twenty-eighth  Georgia  Regiments,  and  by 
Companies  C and  D,  Twenty-fifth  South  Carolina  Volunteers,  96 
men. 

Only  one  casualty  occurred  in  the  fort  to-day,  viz,  Private  Calvin 
Giles,  Company  B,  Twelfth  Georgia  Battalion. 

The  fire  of  the  enemy  was  replied  to  by  Battery  Simkins,  which 
threw  33  mortar  shells. 

Commander  [JohnR.]  Tucker  reports  that  a section  of  the  obstruc- 

* Hamilton’s  report. 

f These  shots  were  fired  on  the  night  of  the  1st  instead  of  the  2d;  entered  by 
mistake. 


Chap.  XL.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


155 


tions  has  floated  up.  The  necessary  orders  were  given,  and  they  were 
soon  replaced. 

His  Excellency  the  President,  accompanied  by  the  commanding 
general  and  others,  visited  Sullivan’s  Island  about  10.30  a.  m.  No 
review  of  troops  was  had,  but  those  on  the  line  of  route  were  drawn 
up  for  inspection. 

The  following  are  copies  of  intercepted  dispatches  : 

10.45  p.  m. 

General  Gillmore  : 

Captain  F sends  word  that  he  mounted  the  sea  face  of  Sumter  to-night,  and 

was  fired  at  by  about  40  muskets. 

S , 

General. 

General  G : 

Attempt  last  night  was  unsuccessful. 


November  3,  1863. — The  enemy’s  fleet  off  the  harbor  this  morning 
is  composed  of  the  Ironsides,  four  monitors,  two  gun  and  two  mortar 
boats,  and  twenty-five  other  vessels  of  various  classes.  Five  vessels 
are  outside  the  bar.  About  5 p.  m.  another  monitor  in  tow  of  a 
steamship  from  the  southward  joined  the  fleet. 

A bombardment  from  rifled  pieces  and  mortars  was  continued  last 
night  by  the  enemy  upon  Sumter.  Of  the  87  rifle  shots,  51  struck. 
Five  mortar  shells  were  fired,  all  of  which  fell  inside.  To-day  114 
shots  were  fired  by  the  monitors ; all  struck  the  fort.  Two  hundred 
and  seventy -seven  rifle  shells  and  178  mortar  shells  from  the  land 
batteries ; 40  rifle  and  17  mortar  shells  did  not  strike. 

One  of  the  mortar  shells  penetrated  the  casemate  battery,  exploded, 
and  wounded  3 men  seriously.  The  traverses  over  the  hospital  were 
penetrated,  and  the  top  of  the  shell  room  on  the  southwest  angle  was 
breached. 

Company  G,  First  South  Carolina  Artillery,  relieved  Lieutenant 
[Edward]  Lowndes’  company,  of  the  same  regiment.  The  casualties 
at  Sumter  to-day  were  : Private  William  B.  Estes,  Company  E ; B.  F. 
Morris,  Company  H;  J.  A.  Smith,  Company  D;  James  Chambers, 
Company  E;  J.  R.  Morris,  Company  E,  T wenty-seventh  Georgia  Reg- 
iment, all  wounded  by  explosion  of  shells. 

As  usual,  Battery  Simkins  replied  to  the  enemy,  firing,  however, 
only  28  shells. 

At  Battery  Haskell,  a negro  force  is  engaged  in  altering  gun  cham- 
bers 4 and  8.  A large  force  is  also  employed  at  Batteries  Tatom  and 
Ryan  (right).  At  Battery  Ryan  (left),  carpenters  are  laying  down 
platform. 

A dispatch  in  cipher  was  received  to-night  from  Major  [William] 
Norris,  stating  that  a dispatch  from  Washington,  which  is  deemed 
reliable,  had  been  received  to  the  effect  that  the  enemy  off  Charleston 
propose  either  this  week  or  next  week  to  make  a night  boat  attack 
on  Sullivan’s  or  James  Island,  and,  should  this  prove  a failure,  then 
the  monitors,  &c. , were  to  dash  in  and  endeavor  to  reduce  the  city. 
Copies  of  this  telegram  were  immediately  communicated  to  the 
several  district  commanders,  and  the  necessary  orders  given  in  the 
emergency. 

November  4,  1863. — Firing  at  intervals  was  kept  up  last  night  by 
the  enemy’s  land  batteries  upon  Fort  Sumter.  Fifty-nine  rifle  shells 


S , 

General. 


156  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 


[Chap.  XL. 


struck  and  27  missed.  For  the  past  two  days  their  fire  upon  that 
post  has  materially  slackened,  though  to-day  the  bombardment  was 
somewhat  heavier  than  yesterday.  Eighty-six  shells  from  the  mon- 
itors, 174  rifle  shells  from  the  land  batteries,  and  100  mortar  shells 
struck,  while  26  rifle  and  36  mortar  shells  missed. 

None  of  our  batteries  are  reported  to  have  been  in  action  to-day. 

About  noon  His  Excellency  the  President  of  the  Confederate  States, 
accompanied  by  Governor  Bonham,  General  Beauregard,  and  others, 
visited  and  inspected  the  various  defensive  works  upon  James  Island. 

It  is  reported  from  the  Stono  River  that  a steamer  with  troops  from 
the  southward  arrived,  and  proceeded  up  Folly  River. 

November  5,  1863. — During  the  night,  86  rifle  shots  were  fired  by 
the  enemy  at  Fort  Sumter;  27  of  these  missed.  The  fire  from  the  land 
batteries,  which  was  resumed  this  morning,  was  directed,  as  usual, 
upon  the  southwest  angle  of  Fort  Sumter.  The  eastern  pan  coupe 
received  most  of  the  fire  from  the  monitors.  The  crown  of  the  east- 
ern arch  was  destroyed,  but  the  debris  falling  in  assisted  the  work 
of  the  engineers. 

The  only  casualty  was  Private  A.  Larender,  Company  F,  Twenty- 
fifth  Georgia  Regiment,  severe  flesh  wound  in  the  back. 

During  the  day,  200  rifle  shots  were  fired  at  the  fort  from  the  shore 
batteries  ; 43  of  these  missed  ; 213  mortar  shells,  of  which  98  missed. 
Of  the  68  shots  fired  by  the  monitor,  7 missed. 

In  addition  to  the  usual  fire  from  Battery  Simkins,  whence  11  shells 
were  thrown  at  the  enemy,  some  of  the  Sullivan’s  Island  batteries 
also  joined  in  the  defense. 

Major  Manigault,  commanding  artillery  section  No.  2,  James  Isl- 
and, reports  that  in  consequence  of  certain  information  received 
[the  number]  of  his  cannoneers  was  strengthened  ; also  the  infantry 
pickets  and  supports. 

Lieut.  Col.  William  Stokes  reports  that,  in  obedience  to  orders,  he 
directed  Lieut.  J.  P.  De  Yeaux,  Company  D,  Fifth  South  Carolina 
Cavalry,  to  ascertain  whether  the  enemy’s  boats  are  habitually  on 
duty  at  the  mouth  of  Ashepoo  River.  Lieutenant  De  Yeaux  made 
the  reconnaissance,  and  states  that  he  saw  no  signs  of  the  enemy;  but 
he  thinks  these  boats  were  placed  there  to  stop  any  observations  of 
their  fleet,  which  was  reported  to  be  moving  south  at  the  time. 

Reports  from  the  Stono  state  that  one  transport  arrived  from  the 
south  and  another  from  a direction  that  was  not  ascertained.  Both 
brought  troops,  and  landed  them  on  Folly  Island. 

Copy  of  enemy’s  message  intercepted : 

General  S : 

Will  you  order  the  200-pounders  in  Fort  Putnam  to  cease  firing  till  further 
orders  ? 

V , 

General. 

November  6,  1863. — The  enemy  has  inside  the  bar  this  morning 
the  Ironsides,  four  monitors,  flagship,  two  mortar-boats,  and  twenty- 
two  other  vessels  of  various  classes.  Outside  the  bar  there  are  seven 
blockading  vessels. 

Thirty-seven  rifle  and  1 mortar  shell  struck  Fort  Sumter  last 
[night],  while  21  rifle  shells  missed. 

During  the  day,  the  usual  fire  from  the  Morris  Island  batteries 
and  the  monitors  was  continued. 


Chap.  XL. } GENERAL  REPORTS.  157 

The  enemy’s  fire  was  replied  to  by  a few  mortar  shells  from  Sulli- 
van’s Island  and  11  shells  from  Battery  Simkins. 

The  shots  from  the  monitors  were  directed  upon  the  east  angle  and 
upon  the  scarp  of  the  northeast  face,  which  was  somewhat  injured. 
One  of  the  monitor  shells  again  found  its  way  to  the  eastern  entrance 
of  the  main  bomb-proof,  exploded,  killed  2,  and  wounded  several 
men. 

During  the  bombardment  to-day,  the  flag-staff  was  once  more  shot 
away,  but  was  quickly  replaced  by  Sergt.  N.  D.  Currie,  Company  D, 
and  Corpl.  S.  Montgomery,  Company  C,  Twenty-fifth  South  Carolina 
Volunteers. 

Two  privates  killed,  10  slightly  and  2 seriously  wounded,  all  of 
the  Twenty-seventh  Georgia,  were  the  casualties  to-day  in  Sumter. 

One  hundred  and  fifty -three  rifle,  193  mortar  shells,  and  80  shots 
from  the  monitors  were  fired  at  the  fort  to-day.  Of  these,  31  rifle 
and  34  mortar  shells  and  14  shots  from  the  monitors  did  not  strike. 

Last  night,  Captain  [William  H.]  Rentfro,  with  1 lieutenant  and 
24  men  from  the  Twenty-seventh  Georgia ; Lieutenant  [W.  P.]  Mat- 
thews, Sixth  Georgia,  with  34  men,  and  Lieutenant  [George  W.] 
Smith,  of  the  Twenty-eighth  Georgia,  with  33  men,  relieved  detach- 
ments of  40  and  20  men  and  3 officers  from  the  Twenty-seventh, 
Sixth,  and  Twenty-eighth  Georgia  Regiments,  respectively,  whose 
tour  of  duty  had  expired. 

[Captain  Webb  assigned  to  command  of  Battery  Haskell  and  Cap- 
tain Smith  assigned  to  command  of  Batteries  Ryan  and  Tatom.  *] 

An  enemy’s  steamer  to-day  appeared  in  the  creek  between  Black 
and  Long  Islands,  distant  about  2£  miles  from  Redoubt  No.  1,  when 
3 shots  were  fired  at  her  from  that  work  with  a 30-pounder  Parrott, 
with  the  following  result  : 

First  shot,  3^  pounds  powder,  14°  elevation,  17-second  fuse  (Selma) ; 
burst  very  high  after  eight  or  ten  seconds’  flight. 

Second  shot,  3i  pounds  powder,  15°  elevation,  18-second  fuse 
(Selma) ; did  not  burst ; fell  short  one-third  to  one-half  mile ; good 
line  shot. 

Third  shot,  3^  pounds  powder,  17°  elevation,  20-second  fuse 
(Selma;)  did  not  burst ; fell,  say,  quarter  mile  short. 

During  the  past  two  days  the  enemy  have  been  observed  in  small 
boats  in  Schooner  Creek,  engaged,  as  was  thought,  in  sounding  and 
staking  the  channel,  but  it  is  now  ascertained  that  they  have  com- 
pleted a line  of  obstructions  across  the  creek  at  the  point  of  Dixon’s 
Island.  These  obstructions  are  composed  of  branches  of  trees,  logs, 
and  one  or  more  cables,  and  are  probably  intended  to  prevent  any 
approaches  on  our  part  to  Dixon’s  or  to  Folly  Island  in  this  direc- 
tion. f 

November  7,  1863. — The  enemy  have  inside  the  bar  this  morning 
the  Ironsides,  four  monitors,  flag-ship,  two  mortar-boats,  twenty 
transports,  &c.  Outside  the  bar  there  are  six  vessels. 

The  enemy  last  night  continued  a fire  from  light  rifled  pieces, 
throwing  at  Fort  Sumter  68  shells,  29  of  which  either  failed  to  ex 
plode  or  exploded  after  passing  over. 

To-day  the  usual  bombardment  of  Fort  Sumter  was  resumed  by 
the  enemy’s  land  batteries,  with,  however,  still  further  abatement, 
the  monitors  taking  no  part  in  the  action.  Seventy-one  rifle  shots 


*Manigaiilt’s  report. 

f So  reported  by  Col.  C.  H.  Simonton,  commanding  advance  lines,  James  Island. 


158  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

and  212  mortar  shells  were  thrown  ; of  the  former  15  and  of  the  lat- 
ter 46  failed  to  strike.  The  injury  done  to  the  work  appears  to  have 
been  less  marked  than  on  any  previous  day’s  bombardment. 

First  Lieut.  [T.]  Davis  Waties,  Company  G,  First  South  Carolina 
Artillery,  and  2 privates,  slightly  wounded,  were  the  only  casualties 
during  the  day. 

The  mountain  howitzer  sent  to  the  fort  to  aid  in  repelling  an  as- 
sault, and  placed  in  a position  of  supposed  security,  was  struck  on 
the  chase  by  a fragment  of  a mortar  shell,  which  caused  a convexity 
of  the  bore.  This,  however,  it  is  thought,  may  be  remedied  by  re- 
boring. 

The  following  is  a condensed  statement  of  the  work  performed  by 
the  engineer  department  in  the  fort  during  the  nights  of  the  6th 
and  7th  : Force  engaged,  170  hands  ; discharged  2,700  bags  of  sand  ; 
repaired,  raised,  and  enlarged  traverses  on  west  circular  stairway  ; 
filled  mortar  holes  over  gorge  bomb-proof  and  in  traverse  in  rear  of 
northeast  lower  casemate  battery,  Carpenters  worked  on  ladders, 
ventilators,  and  chevaux-de-frise,  being  obliged  to  remodel  the  latter. 

In  reply  to  the  fire  of  the  enemy  to-day  against  Fort  Sumter,  4 
shells  were  thrown  from  the  8-inch  gun  and  6 shots  from  the  Brooke 
gun  at  Battery  Simkins.  A few  mortar  shells  were  also  thrown 
from  Sullivan’s  Island. 

General  Taliaferro  telegraphs  that  he  has  directed  200  men  to  be 
held  in  readiness  at  Fort  Johnson  to  go  to  Sumter  in  the  event  of  an 
assault  upon  that  work,  and  he  asks  whether  he  shall  await  a signal 
from  Major  Elliott,  or  send  the  men  upon  the  first  indication  of  an 
attack.  He  was  instructed  to  be  governed  by  the  latter. 

About  500  troops  were  seen  to-day  on  a steamer,  which  transferred 
them  from  Folly  to  Kiawah  Island. 

November  8,  1863. — The  enemy  to-day  continued  a slow  firing 
upon  Fort  Sumter  from  their  Morris  Island  batteries,  assisted  in  a 
measure  by  their  monitors.  Ninety -three  rifle  shots  were  fired,  of 
which  70  struck  the  fort  and  23  missed.  One  hundred  and  eighty- 
eight  mortar  shells  were  fired,  of  which  45  missed  and  143  struck. 
Monitors  fired  11  shots,  of  which  5 missed.  Casualties,  2 negroes 
seriously  wounded. 

Major  Manigault  reports  that  5 shots  were  fired  at  two  steamers 
passing  through  the  creek  between  Black  and  Long  Islands  from 
Battery  Tatom.  Three  shots  were  fired  at  the  first  and  two  at  the 
second,  all  falling  very  near.  Also  reports  that  he  put  out  a new 
picket-boat  in  front  of  the  right  flank  of  Battery  Haskell,  but  that 
it  leaked  so  badly  it  had  to  be  withdrawn.  He  reports  no  casualties. 

Battery  Simkins  fired  3 shells. 

Information  received  from  deserter  and  intercepted  dispatches 
state  that  General  Terry  (Yankee)  arrived  out  on  the  Arago. 

Lieutenant-Colonel  Johnson  reports  the  fleet  at  Port  Royal  as  num- 
bering eighty  sail.  An  iron-clad  went  to  sea  about  sundown. 

Major  Jenkins  reports  the  fleet  in  the  Stono  about  as  usual.  A 
monitor  was  observed  going  to  the  southward,  towed  by  a transport. 

Captain  Hale  reports  a large  propeller  steamer,  with  schooner  in 
tow  laden  with  ammunition,  came  to  off  bar,  and  at  10.30  moved  to 
the  southward,  still  towing  schooner.  Transport  with  troops  on 
board  from  north  going  south,  with  signal  set.  He  reports  also 
twenty-eight  vessels  inside  the  bar,  including  Ironsides,  four  moni- 
tors, flag-ship,  two  mortar-boats,  &c.  Outside — seven  vessels,  in- 
cluding steam  frigate  Wabash,  light-boat,  French  corvette,  &c. 


Chap.  XL.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


159 


Capt.  J.  J.  Magee,  Company  B,  Rutledge  Mounted  Rifles  (horse 
artillery),  reports  his  return  from  a reconnaissance  within  the 
enemy’s  lines.  Accompanied  by  Sergt.  Bowie  W.  Barnwell,  he 
started  on  the  2d  instant  from  Chisholm’s  Island,  and,  returning, 
reached  Palmetto  Point  on  the  6th  instant,  the  interval  being  spent 
within  the  enemy’s  lines.  He  proceeded  as  far  as  Beaufort  in  a 
canoe,  descending  the  various  small  streams  in  that  region,  and  he 
concludes  from  his  investigations  that  there  are  but  few  troops  on 
the  route. 

November  9,  1863. — The  enemy  have  inside  the  bar  this  morning 
the  Ironsides,  four  monitors,  flag-ship,  two  mortar-boats,  twenty 
transports,  &c.  Six  vessels  are  outside  the  bar. 

Last  night  only  42  rifled  shots  struck  Fort  Sumter,  and  16  missed. 
The  usual  bombardment  of  the  fort  continued  to-day  with  a still 
further  abatement.  Of  the  61  rifled  shots  fired  from  the  Morris 
Island  batteries,  21  missed.  Seven  of  the  25  shots  from  the  monitors 
failed  to  strike.  The  same  number  (25)  was  fired  from  the  mortars, 
but  of  these  only  5 missed. 

The  heavy  guns  from  the  enemy’s  land  batteries  have  ceased  fire  to 
a great  extent,  being  replaced  by  light  pieces. 

The  only  casualty  reported  to-day  was  the  wounding  of  1 private 
in  Sumter  by  a piece  of  shell. 

Only  one  of  our  batteries  is  reported  to  have  been  in  action  to-day, 
to  wit,  Battery  Simkins,  which  threw  8 shells,  but  with  what  effect 
is  unknown. 

A negro  force  is  still  engaged  at  Batteries  Tatom  and  Ryan.  The 
platform  for  one  gun  was  laid  down  in  the  battery  to  the  left  of 
Tatom. 

Major  Manigault  states  that  the  new  picket  -boat  has  been  recalked, 
and  stationed  in  advance  of  the  right  flank  of  Battery  Haskell. 

Reports  from  the  Stono  are  unimportant.  Fourteen  schooners, 
two  gunboats,  two  brigs,  two  transports,  and  one  steamer  are  in  the 
harbor. 

To-day  Brigadier-General  Walker  reports  having  sent  two  scouting 
parties — one  to  Port  Royal  Island  and  one  to  Hilton  Head  Island. 
Also  sends  report  of  a daring  and  successful  reconnaissance  around 
the  enemy’s  lines  made  by  Captain  Magee  and  Sergt.  Bowie  W.  Barn- 
well, of  the  Rutledge  Mounted  Rifles  (horse  artillery).  The  return 
of  the  other  party  is  not  expected  for  two  or  three  days.  The  for- 
mer is  confident  that  the  telegraph  wire  over  Archer’s  Creek  can  be 
tapped  with  great  security,  and  the  general  proposes  trying  it  when 
circumstances  justify  the  risk.  Captain  Magee  also  states  that  a 
vedette  of  the  enemy  can  be  captured  without  much  risk  whenever 
desirable.  The  fact  of  the  discovery  of  the  wire  should  be  kept  as 
secret  as  possible.  General  Walker  also  suggests  that  whatever 
commendation  may  be  bestowed  upon  the  scouts,  it  should  be  for  the 
present  of  a private  character,  to  prevent,  if  possible,  the  enemy’s 
becoming  aware  of  our  proceedings.  Captain  Magee  is  organizing 
a fine  body  of  scouts. 

November  10,  1863. — The  enemy’s  fleet  off  the  harbor,  and  this 
morning  remains  unchanged. 

F or  the  first  time  since  the  commencement  of  the  bombardment  of 
F ort  Sumter,  the  enemy  last  night  resorted  to  mortar  shelling.  The 
rifle  practice  was  also  more  continuous  than  on  any  previous  night. 
One  hundred  and  fifty-four  of  this  class  of  projectiles  were  fired,  of 
which  62  missed,  and  152  mortar  shells,  50  of  which  fell  outside  the  fort. 


[Chap.  XL. 


160  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

In  the  morning,  a slow  fire  from  the  Morris  Island  batteries  was 
resumed,  and  in  the  afternoon  one  or  two  monitors  joined  in  the 
engagement,  from  which  30  shots  were  fired,  9 of  which  missed. 
Forty  rifle  projectiles  were  thrown  from  the  shore  batteries,  of  which 
8 did  not  strike,  and  25  of  the  mortar  shells  fell  without  the  fort. 
Fortunately,  no  casualties  whatever  occurred  to-day. 

A detachment  of  100  men  and  10  officers,  under  command  of  Cap- 
tain [E.  A.]  Crawford,  of  the  Seventeenth  South  Carolina  Volun- 
teers, relieved  a detachment  of  100  men  and  officers  from  the  Sixth, 
Nineteenth,  and  Twenty-eighth  Georgia  Regiments. 

In  reply  to  the  enemy’s  batteries,  to-day  our  Sullivan’s  Island  bat- 
teries fired  to  a limited  extent.  The  works  on  James  Island  were, 
however,  silent. 

The  telegraph  wire  from  Sumter  having  been  cut  by  a shell,  com- 
munication by  that  means  with  the  fort  is  now  suspended,  and  for 
the  time  being  messages  are  sent  by  signal. 

Reports  from  the  Stono  state  that  about  200  men  were  seen  going 
from  Cole’s  to  Battery  Island,  and  about  400  men  were  transported 
on  a steamer  from  Cole’s  to  Folly  Island. 

The  fleet  to-day  at  Port  Royal  is  composed  of  one  steam  cutter, 
two  iron-clads,  seven  wooden  gunboats,  and  seventy  transports. 

November  11,  1863. — The  enemy’s  fleet  inside  the  bar  this  morning 
have  not  materially  changed,  either  in  number  or  character  of  ves- 
sels, since  yesterday. 

Last  night  a false  alarm  was  created  in  Fort  Sumter  by  the  report 
of  a blue  light.  The  men  got  upon  the  ramparts  with  only  a mod- 
erate amount  of  skulking. 

The  usual  firing  was  renewed  against  Fort  Sumter  to-day,  both 
from  the  land  batteries  and  monitors,  and  one  shot  carried  away  the 
flag-staff,  which  was  promptly  replaced  by  Sergeant  [G.  H.]  Mayo, 
Company  B,  and  Private  Robert  Autry,  Company  C,  Twenty-eighth 
Georgia  V olunteers.  Twenty-three  rifle  shells  were  fired  at  Sumter, 
of  which  13  missed;  196  mortar  shells,  113  of  which  missed,  and 
about  4 shots  from  the  monitors. 

About  8 p.  m.  a calcium  light  was  displayed  at  Gregg  for  the  ap- 
parent purpose  of  illuminating  the  fort  and  preventing  the  location 
of  obstructions  at  the  slopes. 

At  9 p.  m.  rapid  musketry  firing  was  observed  at  Battery  Gregg, 
while  voices  were  heard  to  cry  out  “ Halt !”  It  is  supposed  that  two 
parties  of  the  Yankees  met  on  the  beach,  and,  mistaking  each  other 
for  enemies,  commenced  firing.  The  result  of  this  affair  has  not 
been  discovered.  The  firing  continued  for  about  ten  minutes,  during 
which  time  several  hundred  of  small-arms  were  discharged. 

The  only  casualty  in  Sumter  to-day  was  Sergeant  [W.  S.]  Lang- 
ford, Company  G,  First  South  Carolina  Artillery,  who  was  wounded 
in  the  head  by  a fragment  of  a shell. 

The  enemy  for  the  first  time  in  many  days  opened  fire  this  after- 
noon upon  Fort  Johnson  and  the  adjacent  batteries,  and  continued 
their  practice  for  about  two  hours,  but  caused  no  damage  to  the  work 
or  its  garrison.  This  fire  was  replied  to  by  16  shells  from  Simkins. 

[The  Orleans  Guard  Artillery  ordered  to  Battery  Bee.  ] 

November  12,  1863. — At  11  o’clock  last  night,  Company  G,  First 
Regiment  South  Carolina  Artillery  (40  men),  was  relieved  by  Com- 
pany D,  of  the  same  regiment  (45  men).  Owing  to  the  refusal  of 
the  captain  of  the  steamer  to  approach  the  fort,  the  transfer  was 
made  in  small  boats,  and  consumed  much  time. 


Chap.  XL.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


161 


Battery  Gregg  and  the  auxiliary  mortar  batteries  firing  slowly  upon 
Sumter  and  a little  on  Moultrie  (21  shots)  and  Simkins  (wild)  during 
the  greater  part  of  the  day,  Fort  Moultrie  (41  shots)  and  Battery 
Simkins  (18  shells)  replying  slowly.  In  the  afternoon  the  fire  was 
more  brisk.  Soon  after  nightfall  the  enemy  increased  the  rapidity 
of  his  fire,  and  a pretty  heavy  bombardment  (principally  from  mor- 
tars) was  kept  up  during  the  greater  part  of  the  night. 

During  the  day,  144  rifle  shots  were  fired  against  Sumter,  of  which 
34  missed  ; mortars,  159,  of  which  92  missed.  Monitor  fired  twice, 
struck  both  times.  One  shot  passed  through  the  flag. 

During  the  night,  180  rifle  shots  were  fired,  of  which  51  passed 
over  ; mortars,  282,  of  which  110  missed. 

The  following  casualties  occurred : Private  W.  J.  Hadden,  Com- 
pany I,  Twenty-eighth  Georgia,  killed  by  a fragment  of  shell ; Pri- 
vate A.  J.  Clinton,  Company  K,  Seventeenth  South  Carolina  Vol- 
unteers, killed  by  a mortar  shell  while  on  post  ; Private  E.  John- 
son, Company  C,  Twenty-fifth  South  Carolina  Volunteers,  wounded 
severely  in  the  face  while  on  post. 

About  10  p.  m.  one  monitor  and  a wooden  vessel,  supposed  to  be 
the  Flambeau,  came  up  in  front  of  Battery  Marshall,  and  fired  7 shots. 
The  2 from  the  monitor  fell  short  outside  the  first  line  of  breakers. 
Four  from  the  Flambeau  fell  short ; one,  however,  passed  over  the 
battery.  After  firing  the  7 shots,  the  vessels  retired. 

Captain  Brown,  of  the  Charleston,  reports : 

11.50  a.  m.  A large  boat,  without  visible  means  of  motion,  has  just  come  out 
from  Gregg  toward  Fort  Sumter,  against  the  tide,  and  gone  back. 

Captain  Seabrook  from  [found]  in  Stono  Harbor  two  gunboats, 
three  steamers,  ten  schooners,  and  one  brig. 

At  3 p.  m.  the  enemy  opened  an  embrasure  at  Wagner  bearing  on 
the  city. 

The  calcium  light  reflected  on  the  fort  at  7. 30  p.  m. 

November  13,  1863. — The  enemy  are  reported  to  have  inside  the 
bar  this  morning  twenty-six  vessels,  including  the  Ironsides,  four 
monitors,  one  gunboat,  two  mortar-boats,  &c. 

During  the  past  night  quite  a severe  bombardment  from  the  en- 
emy’s rifled  and  mortar  batteries  was  sustained  by  Fort  Sumter,  which 
was  struck  one  hundred  and  twenty-nine  times  with  rifle  shell  and 
one  hundred  and  seventy-two  times  with  mortars.  Fifty-one  of  the 
former  passed  over  and  110  of  the  latter  missed. 

The  Morris  Island  batteries  to-day  fired  indiscriminately  on  Forts 
Johnson  and  Sumter,  and  Battery  Simkins,  Brooke  Gun  Battery,  and 
Rutledge.  Fort  Sumter,  as  usual,  however,  received  the  most  atten- 
tion. Battery  Rutledge  returned  the  enemy’s  fire  with  12  mortar 
shells  ; Brooke  Gun  Battery  60  mortar  shells,  which  sometimes  burst 
with  evident  good  effect ; Battery  Simkins  40  shells,  and  Battery 
Cheves  2. 

One  private,  at  Fort  Johnson,  wounded,  was  the  only  casualty  among 
our  different  land  works. 

Fort  Sumter  was  struck  to-day  by  12  rifle  shots  and  129  mortar 
shells.  Of  the  former  fired  by  the  enemy,  9 failed  to  strike  and  96  of 
the  latter  missed. 

One  casualty  (Private  [J.  G.]  Pound,  Company  K,  Twenty-seventh 
Georgia)  occurred  in  the  fort  since  last  report. 

Our  telegraph  cable  across  the  Cooper  River  was  broken  to-day  by 
the  steamer  Indian  Queen.  This  cuts  off  communication  with  Sul- 

11  R R — VOL  XXVIII,  PT  I 


162  S'.  0.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

livan’s  Island.  Measures  are,  however,  being  instituted  for  repair- 
ing the  damage,  and  also  to  recover  the  cable  between  Forts  Sumter 
and  Johnson. 

The  Abolition  fleet  at  Port  Royal  is  reported  as  follows:  Two 
steam  frigates,  two  sloops  of  war,  one  steam  cutter,  two  iron-clads, 
seven  wooden  gunboats,  and  seventy-three  transports. 

November  14,  1863. — At  3 a.  m.  the  enemy  extinguished  his  calcium 
light  at  Battery  Gregg,  which  during  the  past  night  has  been  re- 
flected on  Fort  Sumter. 

A bark  heavily  laden,  probably  with  ordnance  stores,  is  lying  off 
Gregg’s  Hill,  having  arrived  this  morning  from  the  northward. 

[The  Chestatee  Artillery  relieves  the  Orleans  Guard  Artillery  at 
Battery  Bee.] 

It  is  observed  from  Sullivan’s  Island  that  the  enemy  on  Morris 
Island  are  busily  engaged  repairing  a traverse  at  Battery  Gregg, 
which  has  been  injured  by  our  shells.  Two  embrasures  on  the  east 
side  of  that  battery  have  been  recently  opened,  in  which  it  is  thought 
two  30-pounder  Parrotts  are  mounted,  making  eight  guns  now  in 
position  at  Battery  Gregg,  to  wit : Four  30-pounder  Parrotts,  three 
200-pounder  Parrotts,  and  one  10-inch  columbiad.  Two  mortars  are 
also  observed  in  the  same  battery. 

There  appears  to  be  a 300-pounder  Parrott  at  Battery  Cumming, 
and  two  200-pounder  Parrotts  and  four  mortars  in  a position  south  of 
this  work. 

Between  Battery  Cumming  and  the  midway  battery  the  enemy 
are  at  work  in  force  upon  a new  battery,  which  opened  to-day  on 
Sumter  with  one  mortar,  and  is  evidently  intended  for  a mortar  ex- 
clusively. 

At  Battery  Wagner  no  additional  guns  are  observed,  but  traverses 
are  being  rapidly  thrown  up. 

The  enemy’s  lire  to-day  was  directed  against  Forts  Moultrie  and 
Sumter.  The  former  work  was  not  damaged  to  the  slightest  extent, 
and  but  1 private*  was  killed,  although  130  shots  were  fired  at  it 
during  the  day.  Five  shots  only  were  fired  from  Moultrie  in  re- 
sponse to  the  enemy.  As  usual,  Fort  Sumter  sustained  the  brunt  of 
the  bombardment.  Of  the  16  rifle  shells,  6 missed,  and  115  of  the  320 
mortar  shells  fell  outside. 

The  only  casualty  in  the  fort  to-day  was  Sergt.  J.  C.  Grimball, 
Company  D,  First  South  Carolina  Artillery,  who  was  wounded  se- 
verely in  the  head,  abdomen,  and  knee  by  fragments  of  a mortar 
shell. 

The  following  is  a summary  of  the  work  done  by  the  engineer  de- 
partment in  the  fort  during  the  past  two  days : Repaired  top  of 
traverse  over  the  three-gun  battery;  constructed  infantry  epaule- 
ment  on  west  front  near  southwest  pan  coupe  ; built  barricades  with 
loop-holes  at  north  end  of  three-gun  battery;  commenced  remodeling 
east  end  of  center  bomb-proof  for  infantry  defense. 

About  10  a.  m.  a steamer  and  sloop  passed  from  behind  Long 
Island  into  Light-House  Inlet  by  the  route  approaching  Black  Island. 
Five  shots  were  fired  at  them  from  Battery  Tatom  with  the  two  4. 62- 
inch  rifles ; distance,  If  to  2 miles,  10°  elevation,  solid  conical  shots, 
19  pounds  ; 2 shots  fell  very  near,  but  none  hit. 

Private  W.  A.  Mackay,  of  the  Beaufort  Volunteer  Artillery,  re- 
ports that  in  company  with  Private  S.  R.  Stoney,  of  the  same  corps, 

* Company  C,  Third  South  Carolina  Artillery. 


Chap.  XL.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


163 


he  left  Palmetto  Point  on  the  11th  instant,  and  from  Bear  Island 
examined  Little  and  Big  Islands  (known  on  the  map  as  Barnwell’s 
Island).  The  former  appeared  to  be  occupied  by  negroes  and  a few 
pickets  ; the  front  of  the  latter  is  not  occupied,  but  the  rear  is 
picketed.  He  proceeded  up  Whale  Branch  as  far  as  Dr.  F.  Capers’, 
where  he  landed,  and,  scouting  the  place,  passed  near  enough  to 
Flers’  to  hear  negroes  laughing  and  talking.  Scouting  the  rear  of 
Barnwell’s  brick  and  white  houses,  at  the  former  place,  he  found  a 
strong  picket  force.  From  the  sound  of  drums,  &c. , he  thinks  most 
of  the  enemy’s  forces  are  occupying  the  upper  portion  of  the  island — • 
that  is,  in  front  of  Port  Royal  Ferry — and  only  a picket  guard  along 
the  coast  of  Broad  River.  He  spent  two  nights  and  one  day  in  the 
lines. 

A negro  driver,  recently  returned  from  the  enemy’s  lines,  reports  a 
regiment  at  Barnwell’s  white  house  ; also  one  at  Baynard’s,  east  side 
Broad  River,  several  miles  below  Barnwell’s.  This  man  confirms 
the  report  of  our  lookout  at  Foot  Point — that  some  troops  (supposed 
to  be  a regiment  of  drafted  men)  had  arrived  from  Hilton  Head. 

The  following  dispatches  of  the  enemy  were  intercepted  : 

Colonel  S : 

Captain Cruse  selected  the  best  boat  crews.  There  are  no  good  ones  here. 

C , 

. Lieutenant. 

General  G : 

I have  two  11-incli  guns  in  a vessel  drawing  7 feet  of  water 
you. 


Admiral  D : 

Thank  you.  I will  take  them,  and  will  order  the  quartermaster  to  have  the 
vessel  towed  into  Light-House  Inlet. 

G , 

General. 

On  the  12th  instant,  General  Ripley  addressed  a letter  to  the  chief 
of  staff  relating  to  Captain  [G.]  Le  Garaeur  [jr.’s]  battery,  the 
proper  defense  of  Sullivan’s  Island,  and  to  the  scarcity  of  beef  fur- 
nished to  his  command.  This  scarcity  makes  serious  inroads  upon 
his  supply  of  bacon.  So  much  of  the  above  as  relates  to  the  sub- 
sistence department  was  referred  to  Major  [H.  C.]  Guerin,  who  re- 
turns it  to-day  with  his  remarks,  to  wit : 

On  the  10th  instant,  250  beeves  (for  the  use  of  Sullivan’s  Island  and  Mount  Pleas- 
ant) were  waiting  near  Monk’s  Corner  for  drivers  to  bring  them  down. 

Captain  [W.  H.]  Wigg  had  men  for  this  service,  but  their  horses 
were  disabled,  and  it  has  been  found  impracticable  to  furnish  others 
for  them.  A cavalry  detail,  he  believes,  has  been  made  for  the  pur- 
pose, and  his  department  will  make  strenuous  efforts  to  get  and 
drive  down  cattle  while  there  are  any  to  be  had.  Bacon  cannot  be 
supplied  for  three  months,  probably,  but  the  troops  will  get  some 
pickled  pork  and  beef.  A great  scarcity  of  meat  is  inevitable,  and 
interruptions  of  the  supply  will,  he  fears,  be  sometimes  unavoid- 
able. 

November  15,  18.63. — The  usual  bombardment  was  sustained  last 
night  by  Sumter.  The  number  of  shots,  however,  that  were  fired  by 
the  enemy  is  not  reported,  as  is  also  the  case  with  to-day’s  bombard- 


I can  lend  them  to 

D , 

Admiral. 


164  S.  C.  AND  GrA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

ment,  in  which,  the  land  batteries  were  assisted  by  one  of  the  moni- 
tors. 

In  reply  to  the  enemy,  to-day  the  Brooke  Gun  Battery  fired  40  mor- 
tar shells;  Battery  Rutledge,  21  columbiad  shells  and  13  mortar 
shells ; Fort  Moultrie,  29  shells,  and  Battery  Marion,  28  shells.  The 
fire  from  the  two  latter  works  was  directed  with  a view  to  extinguish 
the  enemy’s  calcium  light,  the  position  of  which  has  been  deter- 
mined by  triangulation  from  several  points,  by  direction  of  the  com- 
manding general,  and  it  is  believed  to  be  in  an  embrasure  of  Battery 
Gregg.  General  Ripley  telegraphs  that  he  fired  briskly  for  about 
three-quarters  of  an  hour,  and  did  not  succeed  in  putting  it  out,  but 
frightened  the  Yankees,  and  induced  them  to  believe  that  a night 
boat  attack  on  Gregg  was  intended,  as  is  shown  by  one  of  the  inter- 
cepted dispatches. 

Major  Jenkins  dispatches  by  signal  that  the  enemy  have  reoccu- 
pied Seabrook’s  Island  in  force,  and  came  near  capturing  our  pick- 
ets. They  landed  troops  from  a steamer  which  came  in  the  North 
Edisto  last  night,  and  also  crossed  over  boats  from  Kiawah  Island. 

General  Robertson  reports  that  some  scouts  on  Edisto  Island  have 
returned  with  2 negro  soldiers  of  the  Fifty-fifth  Massachusetts 
Regiment,  who  state  that  there  are  only  120  men  (chiefly  black)  on 
Edisto  Island,  and  also  12  engineers,  engaged  in  establishing  signal 
communications. 

Colonel  Harrison,  commanding  at  Fort  Johnson,  reports  the  ele- 
vating apparatus  of  the  two  guns  (one  at  Battery  Wampler  and  the 
other  at  the  Tower  battery)  as  out  of  order,  owing  to  failure  of  the 
ordnance  department  to  fill  requisitions.  Colonel  Waddy,  chief  ord- 
nance officer  of  the  department,  was  directed  to  make  strict  investi- 
gation into  the  cause  of  the  alleged  delay,  from  which  it  appears 
that  the  requisitions  were  overlooked  by  Major  Trezevant,  com- 
manding the  arsenal,  and  who  expresses  his  regret  at  the  occurrence. 

The  following  are  copies  of  intercepted  dispatches  : 


10.30  A.  M. 

Admiral  D : 

When  do  you  send  in  a flag  of  truce  ? I have  some  letters  to  go. 

G , 

General. 


General  G : 

I will  send  one  as  soon  as  your  letters  are  received. 


D , 

Admiral. 


1.25  P.  M. 

Admiral  D : 

If  you  will  drop  down  to  the  mouth  of  the  Inlet,  I will  come  out  tosee  you. 

General. 


General  G 

I will  come. 


D , 

Admiral. 


10.30  p.  m. 

Admiral  D : 

The  enemy  have  opened  a heavy  fire  on  Cumming’s  Point.  Let  some  of  your 
vessels  move  up,  so  as  to  prevent  a boat  attack  on  the  sea  front  of  the  point. 


General. 


Chap.  XL.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


165 


General  T : lip.  m. 

Will  send  the  Nantucket  abreast  the  Point,  and  two  tugs  to  look  out  for  boats. 
Are  they  enough  ? 

D , 

Admiral. 


Admiral  D : 

Quite  enough.  Very  much  obliged. 


General. 


November  16,  1863. — There  is  no  change  of  importance  in  the  num- 
ber or  character  of  the  enemy’s  fleet  this  morning. 

About  7.15  a.  m.  a monitor  was  discovered  to  be  aground  opposite 
Fort  Moultrie,  distant  about  2,300  yards,  and  immediately  that 
work,  assisted  by  Battery  Rutledge,  opened  on  her  with  effect. 
Soon,  however,  three  other  monitors  moved  up  to  the  rescue,  and 
hook  position  at  about  1,800  or  2,000  yards  from  the  fort,  and  opened 
with  shot,  shell,  and  grape.  The  action  continued  about  three 
hours,  when  the  grounded  monitor  got  off  and  the  vessels  withdrew. 
Fort  Moultrie  fired  in  all  about  179  shots,  and  Battery  Rutledge  89 
solid  shot  and  33  shells.  The  grounded  monitor  and  also  her  con- 
sorts were  struck  repeatedly,  but  the  distance  was  so  great  it  is  not 
probable  they  were  seriously  injured. 

The  monitors  were  assisted  in  their  reply  to  our  works  by  the 
Morris  Island  batteries.  The  former  threw  50  shots,  20  of  which 
struck  Fort  Moultrie  and  1 the  east  mortar  battery.  A shot  struck 
the  muzzle  of  the  32-pounder  rifled  gun,  carrying  away  10  inches  of 
it,  and  dismounting  the  gun.  The  escarpment  of  the  front  was  struck 
four  times,  the  merlons  five  times,  and  the  magazine  once.  The 
damage  sustained,  however,  was  so  slight  that  it  was  repaired  by 
20  hands  in  one  hour.  Three  privates  wounded  and  1 killed  were 
the  only  casualties  in  Moultrie. 

Last  night  132  rifle  and  10  mortar  shells  struck  Fort  Sumter,  while 
52  rifle  and  2 mortar  [shells]  missed. 

The  firing  to-day  was  as  follows  : Struck,  38  rifle  shots,  245  mor- 
tar shells  ; missed,  5 rifle  and  118  mortar  shells.  No  casualties. 

Fort  Johnson  received  also  an  occasional  shot,  and  replied  with  a 
few  shells.  No  casualty  occurred  during  the  day  at  this  post. 

November  17,  1863. — During  the  night,  Fort  Sumter  sustained  the 
usual  bombardment  by  light  rifle  and  mortar  shells  from  the  Morris 
Island  batteries.  Of  the  156  rifle  and  6 mortar  shells  fired  at  the 
fort,  55  of  the  former  and  1 of  the  latter  failed  to  strike. 

During  the  day,  the  enemy,  as  usual,  bestowed  most  of  their  at- 
tention on  the  fort,  firing  only  an  occasional  shot  at  Battery  Simkins 
and  some  of  the  Sullivan’s  Island  batteries,  which  latter  replied  to  a 
limited  • extent  with  mortar  shells.  Fourteen  rifle  and  366  mortar 
shells  were  fired  to-day  at  Sumter.  Five  of  the  rifle  and  117  of  the 
mortar  shells  fell  without  the  fort.  The  damage  done  to  the  work 
was  inconsiderable,  and  no  casualties  occurred  during  the  day.  One 
private  (Edmund  Lake,  Company  D,  Twenty-seventh  South  Carolina 
Volunteers,  attached  to  the  quartermaster’s  boat)  was,  however, 
killed  last  night  by  a fragment  of  a shell,  while  approaching  the  fort! 

At  11  a.  m.  the  enemy  from  Battery  Gregg  opened  fire  upon  the 
city,  and  continued  for  two  hours,  during  which  time  20  shells  fell 
inside,  or  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of,  the  city,  as  follows:* 

* * He  * * * * 


*See  August  21-December  31,  Bombardment  of  Charleston,  S.  C.,  p.  682, 


166  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

Although  several  buildings  were  struck  in  which  were  occupants, 
not  a person  in  the  city  was  injured. 

November  18,  1863. — Last  night  the  enemy  fired  at  Sumter  133  rifle 
shells,  of  which  11  missed.  One  hundred  and  ninety-five  mortar 
shells  also  fell  within  the  fort,  and  75  mortar  shells  missed. 

To-day  an  occasional  shot  was  fired  from  Morris  Island  in  the  di- 
rection of  our  Sullivan’s  Island  batteries,  none  of  which  responded, 
excepting  Battery  Marion,  whence  9 mortar  shells  were  discharged 
at  the  enemy. 

Fort  Sumter,  as  usual,  was  the  recipient  of  most  of  the  shots  from 
the  enemy’s  land  batteries  to-day,  which  fired  12  rifle  shots  and  278 
mortar  shells  at  the  fort,  of  which  8 of  the  former  and  186  of  the 
latter  struck. 

About  1.30  a.  m.  a small  boat  was  observed  approaching  the  fort. 
The  sentinel  hailing  it  was  answered  with  an  oath,  whereupon  he 
fired,  and  the  boat  immediately  withdrew.  Shortly  after  this,  mus- 
ketry firing  from  several  boats  was  directed  against  the  fort ; and 
again,  near  daylight,  two  boats  approached  to  within  about  400 
yards  opposite  the  southeast  angle.  Upon  being  fired  at,  they  re- 
treated toward  Morris  Island. 

Lieut.  J.  H.  Rochelle,  C.  S.  Navy,  reports  having  heard  the  firing 
at  different  hours  of  the  night,  and  that  some  of  the  picket-boats 
attempted  to  discover  the  cause  of  it,  but  failed  to  find  any  indica- 
tions of  the  enemy’s  whereabouts. 

The  following  is  a summary  of  engineer  work  done  last  night  on 
Sumter  : The  force,  120  hands,  employed  on  repairs  of  southwest 
angle  bomb-proof  over  stair ; constructing  position  for  howitzer  at 
west  sally-port  casemate;  filling  ordnance  store-room  southwest 
angle,  and  completing  loop-holed  blindage  east  and  center  bomb- 
proof. Garrison  employed  in  filling  passage  to  southeast  magazine. 

A flag  of  truce  from  enemy  was  met  by  the  officer  commanding 
Battery  Marshall,  who,  when  offered  a bundle  directed  to  the  com- 
manding general,  refused  to  receive  it,  in  accordance  with  instruc- 
tions from  these  headquarters  not  to  receive  anything  but  written 
communications  addressed  to  the  commanding  general. 

The  superintendent  of  military  telegraph  succeeded  in  laying  the 
cable  this  morning  at  5 o’clock,  and  the  line  is  now  working  to  Sum- 
ter and  all  points. 

November  19,  1863. — From  Sumter  Major  Elliott  reports  that  285 
rifle  shots  were  fired  last  night,  of  which  96  missed,  and  3 mortar 
shells,  which  struck.  To-day  44  rifle  shots  were  fired,  of  which  9 
missed,  and  362  mortar  shells,  of  which  113  missed.  No  casualties 
have  occurred  since  the  last  report. 

The  engineer  in  charge  engaged  his  force  during  the  night  refilling 
large  holes  in  the  top  of  center  bomb-proof ; also  filling  ordnance 
store-room  adjoining  western  magazine,  second  tier ; completed  loop- 
holes in  splinter-proof  at  east  end  of  center  bomb-proof,  continued 
filling  passages  inside  south  angle,  and  blew  up  middle  kitchen  in 
east  barracks. 

Captain  [R.  M.]  Mitchell,  with  3 officers  and  100  men  from  Sixth, 
Nineteenth,  Twenty-third,  and  Twenty-seventh  Georgia  Regiments,  ! 
relieved  Captain  Rentfro  and  3 officers  and  100  men  from  the  Sixth, 
Twenty-seventh,  and  Twenty-eighth  Georgia. 

The  "telegraph  which  had  been  temporarily  [obstructed]  between  ; 
the  city  and  Fort  Sumter  connected  at  12.35  p.  m. 

The  enemy  fired  an  occasional  shell  during  the  day  at  Battery 
Simkins,  but  without  effect. 


Chap.  XL.j 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


167 


About  10  o clock  this  morning  at  Battery  Rutledge  2 privates  of 
Company  I,  First  South  Carolina  Infantry  (Frank  Hill  and  John 
Funderburk),  were  killed,  and  Private  Joseph  Evans  wounded,  by 
the  bursting  of  a 30-pounder  Parrott  shell,  from  which  the  powder 
was  being  extracted. 

The  enemy’s  fleet  in  Port  Royal  Harbor  this  morning  is  one  steam 
frigate,  two  steam  sloops  of  war,  one  cutter,  two  iron-clads,  six 
wooden  gunboats,  and  sixty-two  transports ; grand  total,  seventy- 
four. 

The  enemy  opened  fire  upon  the  city  from  Batteries  Gregg  and 
Cumming  at  10.35  a.  m.,  firing  11  shells  in  all.  Ceased  firing  at 
12.20  p.  m.* 

* * * * H«  * * 

Colonel  [William  M.]  Shannon  writes  to-day  to  General  Jordan 
that  the  labor  call  of  July  16  furnishes  423.  The  call  of  October  14 
and  16  only  produced  741.  The  Legislature  convenes  on  Monday 
next.  He  hopes  some  measure  may  be  taken  to  furnish  a permanent 
supply. 

On  the  16th  instant,  a letter  was  received  from  Maj.  C.  D.  Melton, 
inclosing  communication  from  Capt.  T.  R.  Sharp,  superintendent  of 
the  Charlotte  and  South  Carolina  Railroad,  asking  exemption  from 
service  on  the  coast  of  certain  slaves  employed  by  his  company  and 
now  under  orders  for  service.  It  was  referred  to  the  attention  of  the 
Governor,  who  returns  it  with  an  indorsement  of  this  date,  regretting 
his  inability  to  control  this  matter. 

November  20,  1863. — The  enemy  continued  last  night  their  usual 
bombardment  of  Sumter.  Seventy-two  rifle  shells  struck  the  fort 
and  25  missed. 

At  2.30  a.  m.,  the  moon  being  down  and  the  weather  being  favora- 
ble for  an  assault,  the  commander  at  Fort  Sumter  (Major  Elliott) 
aroused  and  placed  the  whole  garrison  under  arms. 

At  3 o’clock  a detachment  of  the  enemy’s  barges,  variously  esti- 
mated from  four  to  nine,  approached  within  300  yards  of  the  fort, 
and  opened  fire  with  musketry.  Most  of  the  troops  in  the  fort  got 
into  position  very  rapidly,  but,  in  spite  of  all  instructions,  commenced 
a random  fire  at  the  distant  boats.  The  troops  stationed  in  the 
center  bomb-proof  for  the  most  part  refused  to  ascend  the  parapet, 
though  encouraged  by  the  examples  of  Lieutenant  Mironell  [ ?]  and  a 
few  other  brave  men.  Major  Elliott  also  complains  of  the  conduct 
of  2 lieutenants,  against  whom  he  has  not  sufficient  evidence  to 
convict,  but  he  has  no  further  need  for  their  services. 

No  rockets  were  sent  up  from  the  fort  (the  signal  agreed  upon  in 
case  of  assault),  as  no  positive  attack  was  made.  Our  shore  batteries, 
however,  hearing  the  musketry,  opened  an  enfilading  fire  on  the 
faces  of  the  fort. 

Major  Elliott  reports  th erichochet  practice  from  Sullivan’s  Island 
as  remarkably  fine,  while  the  fire  from  Fort  Johnson  was  not  so  sat- 
isfactory, the  balls  passing  directly  over  the  fort. 

About  2 a.  m.  two  rifle  shells  were  fired  from  Morris  Island  into 
the  city.  The  first  struck  between  Church  and  East  Bay  streets, 
and  the  second  near  Circular  Church,  on  Meeting  street. 

At  10  a.  m.  5 more  shots  were  thrown  into  the  city,  at  intervals  of 
about  five  minutes. 

First  shell  struck  Market  and  Cumberland. 

* See  Bombardment  of  Charleston,  p.  682. 


168  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

Second  shell,  corner  Clifford  and  King. 

Third  shell,  rear  of  Circular  Church. 

Fourth  shell,  front  of  Circular  Church. 

Fifth  shell,  near  Horlbeck’s  alley. 

These  last  shots  supposed  to  have  been  fired  into  the  city  for  the 
especial  gratification  and  entertainment  of  several  women,  who  were 
observed  near  the  battery  whence  the  shells  were  thrown. 

At  3.40  p.  m.  the  enemy  again  [opened]  upon  the  city,  and  fired  10 
more  shells,  ceasing  at  about  4.30. 

Fort  Sumter  sustained  to-day  a severe  bombardment,  principally 
from  mortars,  which  were  fired  with  unusual  accuracy,  due,  it  is 
thought,  to  the  fact  that  the  enemy  are  using  new  guns.  Eighteen 
rifle  and  377  mortar  shells  were  fired,  of  which  10  of  the  former  and 
146  of  the  latter  missed.  One  man  killed  was  the  only  casualty. 

A slow,  irregular  fire  was  also  maintained  by  the  enemy  against 
Fort  Johnson  and  the  Sullivan’s  Island  batteries,  both  of  which  re- 
plied to  a limited  extent. 

At  Battery  Bee,  1 private  was  killed,  and  1 wounded  by  the  pre- 
mature explosion  of  a gun. 

November  21,  1863. — Twenty-four  of  the  enemy’s  vessels  are  inside 
the  bar  this  morning,  including  the  Ironsides  and  four  monitors. 

Last  night  124  rifle  shots  were  fired  at  Sumter,  41  of  which  passed 
over  without  exploding. 

At  9 p.  m.  Captain  [N.  A.]  Burley,  Seventeenth  South  Carolina 
Volunteers,  and  Lieutenant  [A.  M.]  Hutchison,  Sixth  Georgia,  re- 
lieved Lieutenants  [J.  A.  F.J  Coleman  and  [J.  D.]  James,  of  the 
same  regiments,  respectively,  who  were  removed  at  the  request  of 
Major  Elliott. 

At  5 o’clock  this  morning  the  broken  arch  in  the  gorge  wall  was 
struck  by  a Parrott  shell,  and  fell,  killing  2 and  wounding  6 negroes ; 
also  wounding  2 privates  of  the  Sixth  Georgia.  Repeated  efforts 
had  been  made  a few  hours  before  to  pull  the  arch  down,  but  to  no 
purpose. 

During  the  day,  the  fire  from  the  enemy’s  batteries  was  distributed 
between  the  batteries  near  Fort  Johnson,  Fort  Sumter,  and  our 
works  in  the  vicinity  of  Moultrie.  Fort  Sumter,  however,  sustained 
most  of  the  bombardment.  Of  the  23  rifle  shots  fired  at  that  work, 
7 missed,  and  99  of  the  238  mortar  shells  fell  outside. 

• With  a view  to  ascertain  the  proper  elevation,  some  of  the  Sulli- 
van’s and  the  James  Island  batteries  to-day  practiced  richochet  firing 
to  enfilade  the  faces  of  Sumter. 

At  10.40  this  morning,  the  enemy  again  amused  themselves  by 
firing  shells  into  the  city  from  Battery  Putnam,  Cumming’s  Point, 
and  continued  at  intervals  of  about  five  minutes  until  16  shells  had 
fallen  within  the  city.  The  last  shell  was  fired  at  about  12  o’clock. 

The  enemy’s  fleet  at  Port  Royal  to-day  is  reported  as  follows  : One 
steam  frigate,  one  steam  sloop  of  war,  one  cutter,  two  iron-clads, 
four  gunboats,  and  sixty-one  transports  of  various  classes. 

November  22, 1863. — Last  night  the  enemy  continued  rifle  practice, 
as  usual,  against  Sumter,  which  was  struck  fifty-nine  times ; 45  of 
the  rifle  shells  passed  over. 

At  about  1 a.  m.  the  enemy  again  opened  upon  the  city  from 
Morris  Island,  and  fired  at  intervals  of  from  five  to  ten  minutes  until 
about  3 a.  m.  During  this  time  17  shells  fell  within  the  city.  Sev- 
eral houses  were  struck,  but  none  materially  damaged,  and  it  is  not 
reported  that  any  one  was  killed  or  wounded. 


Chap.  XL.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


169 


During  the  day,  the  enemy  fired  heavily  from  rifled  pieces  at  Bat- 
tery Simkins,  Fort  Moultrie,  and  the  adjacent  batteries,  all  of  which 
replied  slowly,  using  mostly  mortar  shells. 

The  fire  against  Sumter  to-day  was  confined  almost  exclusively  to 
mortars,  of  which  80  fell  inside  and  63  missed;  4 rifle  shots  also 
struck  the  fort.  No  casualties  occurred  to*day  at  any  of  our  works, 
so  far  as  reported. 

In  the  afternoon,  Fort  Johnson  and  several  other  batteries  prac- 
ticed richochet  firing  to  enfilade  the  faces  of  Sumter,  in  order  to  secure 
the  proper  elevation  in  case  of  a night  assault  on  that  work.  Their 
practice  is  said  to  have  been  very  satisfactory. 

It  is  reported  from  the  Stono  that  a side-wheel  steamer  left,  going 
north,  with  troops. 

The  fleet  at  Port  Royal  to-day  is  composed  of  one  steam  frigate, 
two  sloops  of  war,  one  cutter,  two  iron-clads,  six  gunboats,  and  sixty- 
two  transports. 

November  23,  1863. — The  enemy’s  fire  to-day  was  directed  against 
Simkins,  Sumter,  and  in  the  direction  of  Sullivan’s  Island.  Their 
mortar  practice  against  the  latter  island  is  said  (by  Major  [W.  S.] 
Basinger)  to  have  been  unusually  good,  and  was  replied  to  from 
Battery  Marion  and  Fort  Moultrie  with  a few  shots,  the  effect  of 
which  was  not  ascertained. 

Battery  Simkins  sustained  a somewhat  heavier  fire  than  usual, 
which  injured  to  a slight  extent  one  of  the  traverses,  but  caused  no 
casualties. 

Seven  rifle  shots  and  111  mortar  shells  struck  Fort  Sumter  to-day, 
while  81  mortar  shells  fell  outside.  No  casualties  occurred  during 
the  day. 

November  24,  1863. — The  enemy  have  inside  the  bar  this  morning 
twenty-five  vessels,  including  the  Ironsides,  four  monitors,  one  gun- 
boat, two  mortar-boats,  &c.  Five  vessels  are  also  outside. 

The  fire  of  the  enemy  was  not  so  heavy  to-day  as  usual,  and  was 
distributed  between  Sumter,  Moultrie, “Simkins,  and  Johnson.  Sum- 
ter was  struck  65  times  with  mortar  shells.  Only  2 rifle  shells  were 
fired  at  this  work  during  the  day,  and  they  both  missed;  33  mortar 
shells  also  fell  outside.  No  casualties  occurred. 

About  9.30  a.  m.  Fort  Moultrie  opened  on  a working  party  at  Gregg, 
and  fired  14  shots.  The  Yankees  replied  from  both  their  rifled  Par- 
rotts and  mortars,  and  continued  until  5 p.  m.,  during  which  time  67 
shots  were  fired  at  Moultrie  and  10  at  other  posts  on  the  island.  The 
fort  sustained  no  damage  whatever.  > Three  privates  * of  the  First 
South  Carolina  [Regular]  Infantry  [Third  Artillery  ] were,  however, 
wounded. 

Battery  Simkins  returned  the  fire  of  the  enemy  with  30  10-inch 
mortar  shells  and  7 8-inch  columbiad  shells,  the  effect  of  which  was 
not  perceived. 

General  Hagood  reports  that  since  yesterday  the  enemy  have  been 
repairing  the  wharf  at  Legareville,  and  are  now  at  work  with  a pile- 
driver  at  Battery  Island,  apparently  building  a similar  structure  there. 

November  25,  1863. — Major  Elliott  reports  that  166  rifle  and  17 
mortar  shells  were  fired  at  Fort  Sumter  last  night,  of  which  115  of 
the  former  and  only  6 of  the  latter  struck  the  fort.  The  casualties 
during  the  night  were  Captain  [R.  M.]  Mitchell,  Company  F, 
Twenty-third  Georgia  Volunteers,  slightly  wounded,  1 negro  killed, 
and  another  severely  wounded. 

* And  one  negro,  according  to  Capt.  Jacob  Valentine’s  report. 


[Chap.  XL. 


170  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

The  fire  of  the  enemy  to-day  diminished  materially  from  the  aver- 
age, and  was  directed  principally  against  Battery  Simkins,  though 
Sumter  and  Johnson  received  an  occasional  shot.  Ten  rifle  and  11 
mortar  shells  only  were  fired  at  Sumter  during  the  day;  3 rifle  and  3 
mortars  missed.  No  casualties  are  reported  to  have  occurred  at  any 
of  our  batteries. 

Colonel  Simonton  reports  that  a pile-driver  has  been  driving  piles 
all  day  in  the  Stono,  about  one-fourth  of  the  distance  across  the  river. 
As  the  piles  extend  rather  too  far  for  a wharf,  it  is  not  yet  determined 
for  what  they  are  intended. 

The  engineers  at  Battery  Tatom  were  engaged  to-day  in  construct- 
ing a banquette  for  musketry  fire  and  in  giving  the  superior  slope  of 
the  parapet  the  proper  inclination  to  command  the  beach  in  front 
with  infantry  fire. 

The  second  battery  for  field  howitzers  between  Tatom  and  Ryan 
(left)  was  completed  to-day. 

The  following  is  a recapitulation  of  the  casualties  in  Fort  Sumter 
since  October  26,  the  day  the  bombardment  from  Cumming’s  Point 
commenced,  until  November  25  :* 


Officers  and  men. 

i Killed.  | 

Wounded. 

Total. 

Commissioned  officers 

2 

2 

4 

Enlisted  men 

25 

52 

Negroes 

3 

15 

18 

Total 

30 

69 

99 

November  26, 1863. — Twenty-six  vessels  were  inside  the  bar  to-day, 
including  the  Ironsides,  four  monitors,  two  mortar-boats,  &c.,  and 
five  vessels  of  the  usual  classes  outside,  acting  as  blockaders. 

During  the  day,  the  Weehawken  (No.  4)  arrived,  and  Monitor  No. 
5 departed,  probably  to  undergo  some  repairs. 

Two  schooners  from  the  northward,  loaded  with  stores,  arrived,  and 
from  one  of  them  mortars  were  landed  at  Oyster  Point.  The  other 
schooner  continued  her  way  toward  the  south. 

The  bombardment  of  Sumter  last  night  was  unusually  severe  and 
accurate,  242  rifle  shots  having  been  fired  at  that  work,  88  only  of 
which  failed  to  strike. 

The  firing  against  Sumter  to-day  was  principally  from  a new  Parrott 
gun  just  placed  in  position  in  the  northwest  angle  of  Battery  Cum- 
ming.  Twenty-three  rifle  and  48  mortar  shells  were  fired  at  the  fort, 
and  5 of  the  former  and  18  of  the  latter  missed.  No  casualties  oc- 
curred either  last  night  or  during  the  day. 

A continuous  and  heavy  fire  from  Battery  Gregg  and  the  adjacent 
mortar  batteries  was  directed  during  the  greater  portion  of  the  day 
against  Battery  Simkins  and  Fort  Johnson,  which  replied  to  the  enemy 
with  27  mortar  and  1 columbiad  shell.  A few  shells  were  also  fired 
at  Battery  Gregg  from  Sullivan’s  Island,  but  the  effect  of  the  shots 
was  not  perceived. 

It  is  reported  from  the  Stono  that  the  enemy  landed  troops  from  a 
transport  at  Legareville. 

The  pile-driver  previously  referred  to  is  lying  near  Legareville, 
and  has  driven  about  ten  piles,  near  the  middle  of  the  river. 


* See  Elliott’s  reports,  Bombardment  of  Fort  Sumter. 


Chap.  XL.]  GENERAL  REPORTS.  171 

The  fleet  at  Port  Royal  is  reported  one  steam  cutter,  two  iron-clads, 
six  wooden  gunboats,  and  sixty-nine  transports. 

November  27, 1863. — Major  Elliott,  at  Fort  Sumter,  reports  that  169 
rifle  shells  were  fired  at  Sumter  last  night,  and  that  92  missed. 

No  casualties  have  occurred  in  the  fort  during  the  past  twenty-four 
hours,  nor  has  the  work  sustained  any  further  serious  damage. 

Captain  [J.  A.]  Roe  and  the  detachment  of  100  men  from  the  Nine- 
teenth, Twenty-third,  Twenty-seventh,  and  Twenty-eighth  Georgia 
Regiments  were  relieved  by  Captain  [ W.  J.]  Jordan  with  6 officers 
and  a similar  detachment  from  the  same  commands. 

The  engineers  have  nearly  completed  extension  of  traverse  over 
loop-holed  blindage  at  entrance  of  battery ; blocked  up  western  sally- 
port within  and  without ; continued  and  nearly  completed  the  filling 
of  the  ordnance  store-room,  second  tier  southwest  pan  coupe;  finished 
barrier  of  sand-bags  at  north  end  of  hospital  casemates,  and  contin- 
ued mining  for  passage  from  center  bomb-proof  through  lower 
gorge  rooms  toward  south  magazines. 

During  the  day,  Battery  Gregg  and  the  adjacent  mortar  and  other 
batteries  fired  on  Simkins,  Sumter,  and  Fort  Johnson.  Battery  Sim- 
kins  replied  slowly  from  both  mortar  and  gun.  One  hundred  and  six 
rifle  and  105  mortar  shells  were  fired  at  Sumter,  of  which  53  rifle 
and  40  mortar  shells  missed.  One  of  the  two  heavy  guns  at  Gregg 
bearing  on  Sumter  has  been  ascertained  to  be  a 10-inch  columbiad, 
and  its  shell  practice  against  the  southwest  angle  was  very  good  and 
rather  effective.  Fragments  of  a 13-inch  mortar  shell  were  picked 
up  to-day  in  Sumter. 

This  morning  Private  James  Tupper,  Company  D,  Twenty-seventh 
South  Carolina  Y olunteers,  observing  that  the  flag  had  been  shot 
down,  walked  along  the  whole  extent  of  the  gorge  wall  on  the 
parapet,  and  endeavored  to  raise  it ; finding,  however,  that  the  staff 
was  too  short,  he  procured  an  additional  piece  of  spar,  and  (with  the 
assistance  of  C.  B.  Foster,  same  command,  and  Corpls.  W.  C.  Buck- 
heister  and  A.  J.  Bluett,  Company  B)  succeeded  in  splicing  and 
planting  the  staff ; not,  however,  before  it  had  been  again  cut  away 
while  in  their  hands.  This  act  of  distinguished  gallantry  was  no- 
ticed by  the  commanding  general,  in  orders. 

At  11.25  a.  m.  the  enemy  once  more  opened  on  the  city,  and  fired  9 
shells  at  intervals  of  about  five  minutes.  They  ceased  firing  at  12. 10 
p.  m. 

The  enemy  have  at  Port  Royal  two  steam  frigates,  two  sloops  of 
war,  one  cutter,  two  iron-clads,  six  wooden  gunboats,  and  seventy- 
two  transports. 

November  28,  1863. — The  usual  practice  with  light  Parrott  guns 
was  continued  by  the  enemy  last  night  against  Sumter,  which  was 
struck  one  hundred  and  twenty-one  times ; 136  of  those  fired  passed 
over  or  exploded  prematurely. 

In  the  bombardment  of  the  fort  to-day,  one  of  the  monitors  assisted 
and  fired  22  shots,  8 of  which  missed ; the  land  batteries  97  shots,  of 
which  43  missed,  and  21  mortar  shells,  of  which  6 missed.  No  cas- 
ualties occurred. 

Fort  Moultrie,  Battery  Simkins,  and  Fort  Johnson  also  came  in 
for  a share  of  the  enemy’s  attention  to-day.  The  first-named  work 
sustained  a bombardment  from  mortar  shells  and  300-pounder  Par- 
rott guns,  and,  although  struck  several  times,  was  not  injured  in  the 
least.  Capt.  J.  Valentine,  commanding  post,  was  severely,  and  2 
privates  slightly,  wounded.  To  the  87  shots  fired  by  the  enemy,  only 


[Chap.  XL. 


172  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

4 were  fired  in  reply  from  this  work.  Battery  Marion,  however,  re- 
sponded with  44  mortar  shells,  directed  against  a large  working 
party  near  Cumming’s  Point,  and  apparently  succeeded  in  retarding 
their  operations. 

Battery  Cumming  and  Battery  Wagner  fired  during  the  day  at 
Battery  Simkins  31  mortar,  39  columbiad,  and  29  rifle  shells.  This 
was  replied  to  with  33  mortar  shells,  directed  against  Cumming’s 
Point,  and  17  8-inch  columbiad  shells,  against  Battery  Wagner. 

General  Ripley  telegraphs  in  reply  to  order  concerning  the  move- 
ment from  this  department  of  Clingman’s  brigade : 

Telegram  received  and  extended  [executed?].  What  troops  relieve  them?  An 
equal  force  is  absolutely  necessary. 

As  the  enemy’s  movements  appear  to  indicate  operations  in  the 
Second  and  Third  Military  Districts,  the  commanding  general  was 
only  enabled  to  send  General  Ripley  the  remaining  regiments  of 
Evans’  South  Carolina  brigade. 

The  enemy  still  occupy  Legareville,  and  two  gunboats  remain  in 
the  river.  No  change  is  reported  in  position  of  enemy  in  that  vicin- 
ity since  yesterday. 

Owing  to  the  dense  fog,  no  report  can  be  obtained  from  the  fleet  at 
Port  Royal,  though  from  noise  of  hammers,  firing  of  muskets, 
beating  of  drums,  &c.,  they  are  evidently  making  preparations  of 
some  kind. 

Major  Manigault  reports  .that  3 of  the  men  in  the  night  picket-boat 
at  Haskell  deserted  to  the  enemy  last  night  on  Black  Island.  The 
fourth  man  says  he  was  forced  to  accompany  them  until  they  arrived 
within  100  yards  of  land,  when  the  3 got  out,  and  he  returned  with 
the  boat  and  arms. 

November  29,  1863. — Last  night  the  enemy  fired  at  Port  Sumter 
126  rifle  shells,  of  which  59  missed ; also  1 mortar  shell,  which  fell 
inside. 

This  morning  the  weather  is  so  hazy  it  is  impossible  to  get  a re- 
port of  the  enemy’s  vessels  off  the  harbor. 

To-day  the  enemy  remained  remarkably  quiet,  firing  only  8 rifle 
shots  at  Fort  Sumter,  and  of  these  only  4 struck.  Not  a gun  was 
fired  from  any  of  our  batteries. 

Clingman’s  brigade  arrived  in  the  city  from  Mount  Pleasant,  en 
route  for  North  Carolina,  in  pursuance  of  orders  from  the  War  De- 
partment. Instructions  had  been  given  to  arrange  transportation, 
so  that  baggage,  &c.,  could  accompany  the  regiments,  in  order  that 
the  troops  might  be  in  condition  to  take  the  field  immediately  on 
arrival  at  their  destination.  Owing  to  some  misunderstanding,  how- 
ever, their  heavy  baggage  was  not  ready  in  time,  and  was,  conse- 
quently, left  behind  to  follow  on  next  train. 

In  consequence  of  the  fog  and  rain,  but  few  of  the  fleet  at  Port 
Royal  can  be  seen  this  morning.  One  gunboat  went  up  Skull  Creek 
without  troops. 

Y esterday  about  noon  four  gunboats  with  several  barges  appeared 
opposite  Buckingham’s  Ferry,  and,  after  shelling  the  pickets  from 
that  post,  landed  about  200  men  from  the  barges  and  advanced  about 
one-fourth  of  a mile  from  the  landing.  Coming  in  sight,  liovever, 
of  a few  of  our  troops,  the  enemy  retired,  and  embarked  without 
firing  a shot. 

November  30,  1863. — The  fleet  inside  the  bar  is  composed  of  four 
monitors,  the  Ironsides,  one  gunboat,  two  mortar-boats,  and  twenty 


Chap.  XL.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


173 


transports,  sloops  of  war,  steamers,  &c.  Six  vessels  are  outside  the 
bar. 

At  11  a.  m.  a propeller  transport  and  a schooner,  both  loaded, 
arrived  from  the  northward,  and  at  12  m.  a large  steamship  passed, 
going  south,  apparently  loaded  with  troops. 

Last  night  Fort  Sumter  was  bombarded  as  usual.  The  number  of 
shots,  however,  is  not  reported.  The  only  casualty  was  1 negro 
killed  by  a Parrott  shell. 

The  engineers  in  that  work  are  uncovering  and  reconstructing  the 
bomb-proof  over  the  southwest  stairway ; extending  mining  galleries 
toward  east  magazine  from  center  bomb-proof,  and  from  northwest 
casemate  to  the  three-gun  battery.  Owing  to  unfavorable  weather, 
it  has  been  impossible  for  the  last  two  nights  to  supply  the  fort  with 
sand-bags. 

From  the  Morris  Island  batteries,  were  fired  to-day  at  Sumter  1 rifle 
shell,  which  struck;  20  mortar  shells,  11  of  which  missed ; at  Moul- 
trie, 8 shells,  3 of  which  struck,  but  did  no  damage ; at  the  Brooke 
Gun  Battery,  4 300-pounder  Parrott  and  4 mortar  shells.  This  bat- 
tery responded  to  the  enemy’s  fire  with  a few  mortar  shells. 

At  7.45  p.  m.  Battery  Gregg  fired  2 shells  at  Castle  Pinckney. 
Both,  however,  fell  short. 

It  is  reported  from  the  Stono  that  a tug  and  two  transports  came 
up  to  Legareville.  One  of  the  latter  was  loaded  with  troops,  and  at 
dark  was  still  lying  in  front  of  the  village. 

December  1,  1863. — The  firing  of  the  enemy  upon  Sumter  has 
nearly  ceased.  Only  8 mortar  shells  were  thrown  at  that  work  to- 
day, and  of  these,  4 fell  outside. 

At  12  midnight  the  enemy  opened  fire  from  Batteries  Wagner  and 
Cumming  upon  the  city,  and  fired  10  shells  at  intervals  of  about  five 
minutes.  Only  5 of  these  shells  exploded. 

At  4.15  p.  m.  the  city  was  again  shelled  from  Battery  Cumming, 
the  enemy  using  two  Parrott  guns.  After  firing  17  shells,  they  ceased, 
as  was  the  case  last  night.  Only  about  one-half  the  shells  exploded. 

The  enemy  from  Morris  Island  shelled  Fort  Moultrie,  the  adjacent 
batteries,  and  also  Fort  Johnson  and  Battery  Simkins,  from  all  of 
which  posts  a limited  fire  was  returned.  Fort  Moultrie  was  struck 
ten  times,  but  sustained  not  the  slightest  injury.  No  casualties  are 
reported  to-day  at  any  of  our  works. 

The  Yankees  appeared  to  be  exceedingly  jubilant  to-day  both  in 
their  fleet  and  on  shore,  and  evinced  their  joy  by  firing  salutes,  dis- 
playing flags,  &c.  Possibly  a rumor  of  our  recent  reverse  at  Look- 
out Mountain  may  have  reached  them. 

December  2,  1863. — Not  a shot  was  fired  from  any  of  the  enemy’s 
batteries  during  the  night. 

Twenty-nine  vessels  are  reported  inside  the  bar,  including  the 
Ironsides,  four  monitors,  &c.  The  usual  number  (six)  are  outside. 

The  enemy’s  batteries  at  Cumming’s  Point  fired  slowly  during  the 
day  at  Forts  Sumter,  Johnson,  and  the  adjacent  batteries  ; also  an 
occasional  shot  at  Sullivan’s  Island.  Our  works  responded  slowly 
until  a short  time  after  dark,  when  the  fire  increased  in  rapidity. 
Fifteen  shots  were  fired  from  Battery  Rutledge,  29  from  the  Brooke 
gun  battery,  a few  shots  from  Battery  Marion,  35  from  Simkins,  10 
from  Fort  "Johnson,  and  18  shots  from  Battery  Cheves. 

One  private  wounded  in  Sumter  was  the  only  casualty  reported 
during  the  day. 

Against  this  latter  work  were  fired  72  rifle  shots,  of  which  26 


[Chap.  XL. 


174  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

' I 

missed;  73  mortar  shells,  38  of  which  missed,  and  68  columbiad 
shots,  of  which  14  missed. 

Two  gunboats  and  the  pile-driver  are  still  opposite  Legareville, 
which  the  enemy  quietly  hold. 

General  Walker  reports  that  a flag  of  truce  from  the  enemy  was 
received  at  Port  Royal  Ferry  on  the  26th  instant. 

December  3,  1863. — There  was  no  firing  upon  Fort  Sumter  last 
night.  The  enemy,  however,  opened  fire  with  three  guns  from  Bat- 
tery Cumming  upon  the  city  at  3 a.  m.,  and  fired  25  shots  in  one 
hour,  ceasing  at  about  4 o’clock.  Only  9 of  the  shells  exploded. 
The  last  one  was  thrown  from  Battery  Wagner. 

During  the  day  a slow  fire  was  kept  up  from  the  Morris  Island 
batteries  upon  Forts  Sumter  and  Johnson  and  Battery  Simkins, 
which  latter  battery  replied  with  only  1 8-inch  columbiad  shell.  Not 
a shot  was  fired  either  at  or  from  the  Sullivan’s  Island  works,  and  no 
casualties  are  reported  at  any  of  our  batteries. 

Eleven  rifle  and  27  columbiad  shots  were  fired  at  Fort  Sumter  to- 
day. Of  the  former,  2,  and  of  the  [latter],  1,  missed.  The  southwest 
angle  of  the  fort  appeared  to  be  the  point  aimed  at,  but  the  damage 
done  was  inconsiderable.  The  only  noticeable  effect  of  the  enemy’s 
fire  on  this  work  recently  has  been  to  render  the  exterior  slopes  of 
the  gorge  and  sea  walls  exceedingly  steep  and  the  footing  very  in- 
secure, so  that  in  the  event  of  an  assault  nothing  like  a rush  can  be 
made  up  these  slopes  so  long  as  they  retain  their  present  inclination. 

December  4,  1863. — The  enemy  were  again  silent  last  night.  This 
morning  they  appear  hard  at  work  on  the  extreme  northeast  point  of 
Morris  Island,  close  to  the  water’s  edge,  and  are  supposed  to  be  con- 
structing a new  battery.  They  also  appear  to  be  arranging  positions 
at  Battery  W agner  for  guns  bearing  upon  the  city. 

The  enemy’s  fire  to-day  was  somewhat  heavier  than  yesterday, 
and  was  directed  against  Fort  Sumter  and  Batteries  Simkins,  Rut- 
ledge, Brooke  Gun  Battery,  Marion,  and  Fort  Moultrie,  all  of  which, 
excepting  Sumter,  replied  slowly.  No  casualties  are  reported  at  any 
of  our  works.  Sumter  was  struck  to-day  with  56  rifle  and  8 mortar 
shells  ; 21  rifle  and  9 -mortar  shells  passed  over. 

Capt.  J.  J.  Magee  reports  having  made  a reconnaissance  of  Mor- 
gan’s Island,  passing  through  Coosa  River  from  Chisolm’s  Island  to 
Saint  Helena  Sound.  He  landed  on  Morgan’s  Island  after  daylight  of 
the  23d  ultimo,  and  remained  until  the  24th.  Only  negroes  on  this 
island.  Next  visited  Pine  Island,  where  he  found  a line  blazed  out 
— probably  for  extension  of  telegraph.  On  other  island  is  a very 
high  observatory — for  signals,  probably — and  Captain  Magee  thinks 
that  messages  may  be  intercepted  from  Thickety  Island,  distant 
about  1,000  yards. 

The  fleet  to-day  at  Port  Royal  is  composed  of  two  steam  frigates, 
two  steam  sloops  of  war,  one  steam  cutter,  two  iron-clads,  five 
wooden  gunboats,  and  eighty-six  transports. 

December  5,  1863. — The  enemy  have  recommenced  night  firing  on 
Sumter.  Last  night  49  rifle  and  6 columbiad  shells  were  fired  at  that 
work.  Of  these,  27  rifle  and  2 columbiad  shells  missed. 

Captain  [M.  H.]  Sellers,  with  3 officers  and  89  men,  relieved  Cap- 
tain [J.  W.]  Hopkins,  6 officers  and  107  men,  of  the  Twenty-seventh 
South  Carolina  Volunteers. 

The  fire  to-day  from  the  Morris  Island  batteries  was  chiefly  directed 
against  Fort  Moultrie  and  the  adjacent  works.  One  hundred  and 
five  shots  were  fired,  but  caused  no  damage  ; and  only  one  casualty  (1 
private  wounded)  in  Moultrie. 


Chap.  XL.]  GENERAL  REPORTS.  175 

Not  a round  was  fired  from  the  James  Island  works,  and  hut  few 
from  Sullivan’s  Island. 

Fort  Sumter  was  struck  hut  four  times  out  of  the  6 shots  fired  by 
the  enemy. 

Major  [W.  H.]  Campbell  to-day  relieved  Major  Manigault  in  com- 
mand of  artillery  section  2,  James  Island,  and  the  latter  withdrew 
his  siege  train  to  the  vicinity  of  Fort  Pemberton. 

Major  Jenkins  reports  that  the  enen^  are  collecting  the  boards 
taken  from  the  houses  in  Legareville  on  the  head  of  the  wharf. 

The  pile-driver  has  been  at  work  all  day,  and  has  driven  thirty- 
five  or  more  in  the  river. 

J.  R.  Saunders,  of  Company  C,  Sixth  South  Carolina  Cavalry,  and 
S.  E.  Legard  and  J.  L.  Taylor,  Stono  scouts,  returned  to-day  from  a 
reconnaissance  of  Kiawah  Island,  each  with  a prisoner — horses,  arms, 
and  accouterments — from  the  Third  Rhode  Island  Artillery.  These 
prisoners  state  that  the  enemy’s  force  on  the  island  is  six  regiments 
of  infantry  and  one  light  battery.  In  recognition  of  the  gallantry 
of  the  men  who  captured  these  prisoners,  the  commanding  general 
was  pleased  to  direct  that  the  prisoners’  horses,  &c.,  should  be  turned 
over  to  the  captors. 

The  enemy’s  fleet  at  Port  Royal  to-day  is  reported  as  follows  : Two 
steam  frigates,  two  steam  sloops  of  war,  one  cutter,  wo  iron-clads, 
five  wooden  gunboats,  and  ninety  transports. 

December  6,  1863. — The  Ironsides,  four  monitors,  flag-ship,  one 
sloop  of  war,  one  gunboat,  two  mortar-boats,  sixteen  transports,  &c. , 
compose  the  enemy’s  fleet  inside  the  bar  this  morning.  Six  vessels, 
as  blockaders,  are  outside  the  harbor. 

Not  a shot  was  fired  last  night,  and  to-day  was  remarkably  quiet. 
Only  7 shells  were  fired  from  the  Morris  Island  batteries,  all  of  which 
were  directed  against  Sullivan’s  Island.  None  of  our  batteries  re- 
sponded, and  no  casualties  are  reported. 

Major  Campbell,  with  Captains  [Thomas  A.]  Holtzclaw’s  and  [S. 
M.]  Richardson’s  companies,  Palmetto  Battalion,  light  artillery,  re- 
lieved Major  Manigault’s  South  Carolina  siege  train  and  a section 
of  Company  C,  Georgia  siege  train. 

The  changes  in  the  armament  of  Batteries  Haskell,  Tatom,  and 
Ryan  (left),  required  by  special  orders  from  department  headquar- 
ters, were  also  executed. 

Weather  cold  and  blustering. 

December  7,  1863. — The  enemy  again  quiet  to-day.  Not  a single 
shot  was  fired  from  any  of  their  batteries,  and  only  an  occasional 
one  from  Batteries  Bee  and  Marion. 

Twenty-seven  vessels  are  inside  and  seven  outside  the  bar,  of  the 
usual  character. 

Colonel  Harrison,  commanding  at  Fort  Johnson,  reports  that  a few 
experimental  shots  were  fired  from  that  post  of  the  10-inch  rifled 
gun.  The  result  of  the  practice,  however,  is  not  stated. 

General  Walker  reports  that  Privates  [S.  E.]  Magrathand  [D.  A.] 
Fripp,  Beaufort  Volunteer  Artillery,  have  returned  from  a recon- 
naissance around  Beaufort  Island.  They  saw  three  regiments  of 
troops  on  the  island,  and  state  that  they  can  land  there  with  impunity, 
as  the  enemy  are  not  on  the  qui  vive  for  scouts. 

The  fleet  to-day  at  Port  Royal  is  as  follows  : Two  steam  frigates, 
two  steam  sloops  of  war,  one  steam  cutter,  two  iron-clads,  five  wooden 
gunboats,  and  ninety-two  transports. 


176  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 


[Chap.  XL. 


Copy  of  intercepted  dispatch  from  flag-ship  to  headquarters  on 
Morris  Island : 

Please  send  a dispatch  to  Stono,  inquiring  why  the  tug  De  Ford  has  not  come  up. 
Request  Captain  B to  send  her,  if  the  weather  permits. 

December  8,  1863. — There  is  no  material  change  noted  in  the  ap- 
pearance of  the  enemy’s  fleet  off  the  harbor  to-day. 

The  enemy  appear  to  have  altogether  ceased  any  further  attempts 
against  Sumter,  and  have  not  fired  a shot  at  that  work  in  the  past 
two  days. 

A party  was  observed  this  morning  at  Battery  Gregg  (Fort  Put- 
nam) engaged  in  placing  sand  on  the  magazine  of  that  work,  and 
also  erecting  what  is  thought  to  be  a new  battery  in  that  vicinity. 

The  fire  of  the  enemy  to-day  was  confined  to  an  occasional  shot, 
directed  against  Sullivan’s  Island  and  Battery  Simkins,  which  re- 
plied with  a few  shots  from  columbiads  and  mortars.  The  effect, 
however,  was  not  apparent. 

The  enemy’s  fleet  at  Port  Royal  is  composed  of  two  steam  frigates, 
two  sloops  of  war,  one  steam  cutter,  two  iron-clads,  five  wooden  gun- 
boats, and  eighty-seven  transports.  Considerable  activity  was  ob- 
served in  the  fleet,  but  no  troops  were  noticed  on  any  of  the  vessels. 

December  9,  1863. — The  Morris  Island  batteries  were  again  silent 
last  night.  To-day,  however,  the  enemy  engaged  Battery  Simkins 
and  some  of  our  Sullivan’s  Island  works,  which  replied  from  Bat- 
teries Marion  and  Rutledge  with  about  40  mortar  shells.  Battery 
Simkins  also  fired  a few  shots. 

Colonel  Elliott  reports  that  the  enemy  show  themselves  in  consid- 
erable numbers  at  Batteries  Gregg  and  Wagner,  where  the  work  of 
revetting  those  batteries  with  sods  still  continues. 

Only  6 rifle  shots  were  fired  at  the  fort  to-day,  and  of  these  1 
missed. 

Colonel  Harris,  chief  engineer,  reports  that  a large  supply  of  sand 
and  other  material  was  thrown  into  Sumter  without  interference 
from  the  enemy. 

At  4. 10  p.  m.  one  of  the  batteries  at  Cumming’s  Point  opened  on 
the  city,  apparently  with  three  guns,  and  fired  at  intervals  of  from 
one  to  three  minutes.  After  throwing  7 shells,  they  ceased  at  4.26 
p.  m. 

At  9.40  p.  m.  fire  was  again  opened  from  the  same  point,  and,  after 
4 shells  had  been  thrown  into  the  city,  Batteries  Simkins,  Marion, 
and  Moultrie  returned  the  fire,  whereupon  Cumming’s  Point  ceased. 

The  enemy  have  at  Port  Royal  to-day  two  steam  frigates,  two 
steam  sloops  of  war,  one  steam  cutter,  two  iron-clads,  eight  wooden 
gunboats,  and  eighty-six  transports. 

December  10,  1863.— There  was  no  firing  by  the  enemy  at  Fort 
Sumter  to-day,  with  the  exception  of  1 rifle  shot,  which  missed. 

Captain  [A.  S.]  Gaillard,  Company  K,  First  South  Carolina  Artil- 
lery, and  40  men,  relieved  Captain  [William  H.]  Peronneau,  Com- 
pany G,  and  40  men  of  the  same  corps,  last  night. 

The  enemy  fired  6 mortar  shells  at  James  Island.  Our  batteries 
were  engaged  as  follows:  Marion,  19  mortar  shells;  Simkins,  16  10- 
incli  mortar  shells,  20  8-inch  columbiad  shells,  and  6 rifle  shots; 
Cheves,  15  8-inch  columbiad  shells.  Effect  unknown.  No  casualties 
reported. 

Eleven  shells  were  thrown  into  the  city  last  night  and  this  morn- 
ing. Officers  in  charge  of  picket-boats  last  night  are  of  opinion  that 


Chap.  XL.]  • GENERAL  REPORTS.  177 

on©  of  the  two  guns  used  by  the  enemy  burst  at  the  eighth  dis- 
charge. 

Cumming’s  Point  again  opened  fire  at  7.30  p.  m.,  and  3 shells  fell 
into  the  city,  only  1 of  which  exploded.  'They  ceased  firing  at  8.30. 

[Capt.  T.  A.  Holtzclaw  relieved  Major  Campbell  in  command  of 
artillery  section  No.  2,  James  Island.] 

Went  southward  to-day  from  inside  the  bar,  one  gunboat;  from 
the  northward,  a river  steamboat  and  a bark,  both  heavily  laden. 
Two  laden  schooners  from  the  northward  came  inside.  At  4 p.  m. 
atmosphere  became  too  hazy  to  admit  of  further  observation  of  the 
enemy’s  fleet. 

From  the  Stono,  Major  Jenkins  reports  the  enemy  are  still  destroy- 
ing the  houses  in  Legareville  and  carrying  off  the  lumber. 

A steamer  came  up  the  river  to-day.  Two  gunboats  (the  Pawnee 
and  the  Marblehead),  one  steamer,  and  a pile-driver  are  up  the  Stono 
and  in  front  of  Legareville. 

Brigadier-General  Hagood  telegraphed  to-day  that  there  will  not 
be  meat  enough  for  issue  to  his  command  to-morrow  without  calling 
on  his  reserve  supply  in  Saint  Andrew’s.  This  supply  is  but  a few 
days’  rations,  and  was  ordered  by  the  commanding  general  for  a dif- 
ferent contingency.  He  has  ordered  it  used  for  this  occasion.  His 
dispatch  was  at  once  referred  to  the  immediate  and  particular  atten- 
tion of  Major  Guerin,  who  returned  it  with  an  indorsement  that 
some  time  ago  he  had  informed  the  commanding  general  that  there 
is  a scarcity  of  meat,  and  that  interruptions  were  to  be  expected.  The 
present  failure  would  not  have  occurred  so  soon  if  transportation  on 
the  railroads  was  more  prompt. 

December  11,  1863. — At  1 a.  m.  the  enemy  opened  fire  upon  the  city 
from  Cumming’s  Point.  Batteries  Simkins  and  Clieves,  however, 
returned  the  fire,  and  forced  the  enemy  to  cease  after  they  had  fired 
only  3 shots,  1 of  which  fell  short.  The  other  2,  though  falling 
within  the  city,  failed  to  explode. 

At  6 a.  m.  fire  was  recommenced  on  the  city,  and  after  throwing 
4 shells  the  enemy  were  again  compelled  to  cease  by  a few  well- 
directed  shots  from  Simkins  and  Cheves. 

At  9.30  a.  m.  large  volumes  of  smoke  and  flame  were  observed 
issuing  from  the  city  and  south  faces  of  Sumter.  Soon  afterward 
General  Ripley  reported  this  fact,  and  appeared  to  believe  that  the 
cotton  in  the  gorge  wall  had  become  ignited  from  the  enemy’s  shells. 
About  this  time,  the  enemy,  observing  the  fire,  opened  upon  Sumter 
with  rifle  and  mortar  shells,  to  prevent  assistance  reaching  the  fort. 
Commander  Tucker,  however,  sent  a boat’s  crew,  under  a heavy  fire, 
with  buckets.  On  their  return,  it  was  discovered  that  the  fire  origi- 
nated from  the  explosion  of  the  small-arms  magazine  from  some  un- 
explained cause.  Telegraphic  communication  having  been  cut  off  by 
the  explosion,  which  destroyed  the  instrument,  it  was  not  until  late 
in  the  afternoon  that  the  extent  of  the  damages  and  the  casualties 
were  known.  It  now  appears  that  the  defensive  strength  of  the  fort 
has  not  been  at  all  impaired.  The  casualties  are  reported  to  be  40 
killed  and  wounded,  among  whom  are  Captain  [E.  D.  | Frost,  acting 
commissary  of  subsistence,  killed,  and  Colonel  Elliott  slightly 
wounded.  Only  three  of  the  bodies  of  those  killed  have  thus  far 
been  recovered.  * 

* See  Elliott’s  report  of  December  12,  1863,  under  Bombardment  of  Fort 
Sumter,  p.  622. 

12  R R— VOL  XXVIII,  PT  I 


[Chap.  XL. 


178  S,  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  ELA. 

At  4 p.  m.  communication  by  signal  having  been  re-established, 
the  following  dispatch  was  received  from  Colonel  Elliott : 

Send  provisions,  100  muskets,  buckshot  cartridges,  and  50  men ; also  set  of  tele- 
graph instruments  and  200  yards  of  wire. 

The  50  men  above  referred  to  were  sent  olf  from  Fort  Johnson 
soon  after  dark. 

At  10.40  a.  m.  the  enemy  again  opened  fire  upon  the  city,  and,  as 
before,  the  fire  from  Simkins  and  some  of  the  Sullivan’s  Island  works 
caused  them  to  cease  after  4 shots  had  fallen  in  the  city.  Three  more 
shells  were  thrown  into  the  city  at  1 p.  m.,  the  enemy  ceasing  as  soon 
as  our  Sullivan’s  Island  works  and  Battery  Simkins  opened. 

The  number  of  shots  fired  to-day  by  the  enemy  against  Sumter 
was  220 ; of  these,  187  struck.  An  occasional  shell  was  fired  toward 
Sullivan’s  Island,  but  no  damage  was  done,  nor  were  there  any  cas- 
ualties. 

The  pile-driver  in  the  Stono  has  driven  eighty-five  piles.  The  gun- 
boats Marblehead  and  Pawnee  are  still  in  front  of  Legareville. 

The  following  dispatches  of  the  enemy  were  intercepted  : 

Admiral  D : 

The  general  wishes  to  see  the  admiral.  Can  he  come  into  the  Inlet  ? 

G , 

General. 

The  admiral  cannot  come  in  his  steamer  on  account  of  the  state  of  the  weather. 

December  12,  1863. — A heavy  southeast  storm  prevailed  during 
the  entire  day,  and  only  an  occasional  shot  was  fired  from  the  enemy’s 
batteries  against  Fort  Sumter  and  Sullivan’s  Island.  No  damage  or 
casualties  are  reported  at  any  of  our  works. 

Twelve  mortar  shells  from  the  Brooke  gun  battery,  Sullivan’s 
Island,  and  15  shells  from  Battery  Simkins,  were  fired  during  the 
day  against  Morris  Island.  The  effect  produced  by  our  shells  was 
not  observed. 

About  11  a.  m.  Battery  Tatom  and  Battery  Ryan  (left)  opened 
with  2 shots  each  upon  a sail-boat  passing  from  Long  to  Black 
Island.  The  only  effect  was  to  draw  the  fire  of  the  enemy,  who 
threw  4 shots  into  Secessionville. 

At  10.40  p.  m.  one  of  the  batteries  upon  Cumming’s  Point  opened 
with  three  guns  upon  the  city,  and,  after  firing  10  shells,  ceased  at  11 
p.  m.  Only  two  of  these  shells  failed  to  explode.  One,  which  struck 
in  Broad  street,  in  front  of  the  Mansion  House,  exploded,  and  a roll 
of  combustible  matter  about  3 inches  in  length  and  1 inch  in  diame- 
ter burned  on  the  pavement  for  about  two  minutes  with  a steady 
white  flame.  This  was  doubtless  a specimen  of  the  much  talked  of 
Greek  fire. 

General  Ripley  reported  to-day  that  there  is  reason  to  hope  that 
one  of  the  monitors  has  foundered,  as  but  three  are  in  sight,  and  at 
low  tide  something  like  a smoke-stack  appears  above  the  water,  with 
the  enemy’s  boats  working  around  it.  * 

December  13,  1863. — Colonel  Elliott,  commanding  Fort  Sumter, 
reports  that  the  steamer  did  not  communicate  last  night  with  the 
fort,  her  commander  alleging  as  a reason  the  heavy  weather,  which, 


* Note  in  journal. — It  was  subsequently  ascertained  from  a copy  of  the  Free 
South  newspaper,  received  by  flag  of  truce  from  the  enemy’s  lin  es  in  the  Third 
Military  District,  that  the  monitor  Weehawken  had  foundered  off  tlfig  harbor  in  thq 
recent  gale  of  wind,  and  that  4 officers  and  24  men  had  been  lost. 


Chap.  XL.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


179 


however,  was  not  bad  enough  to  prevent  the  passage  of  the  guard- 
boat  and  the  telegraph-boat.  During  the  middle  and  the  latter  por- 
tion of  the  night,  the  wind  subsided,  and  a landing  could  have  then 
been  easily  effected ; but,  as  the  boat  appears  to  have  been  under  the 
immediate  control  of  an  irresponsible  person,  the  state  of  the  weather 
was  not  taken  advantage  of.  In  view  of  these  facts,  the  chief  quar- 
termaster was  directed  to  give  his  special  and  immediate  attention  to 
this  important  matter. 

The  action  of  the  waves  upon  the  slopes  of  the  walls  of  Sumter  has 
made  them  inaccessible  for  the  present  from  the  outside,  but  at  the 
loss  of  much  valuable  material. 

At  4 p.  m.  to-day  the  fire  at  Sumter  was  reported  to  have  been  ex- 
tinguished, excepting  in  the  ruins  of  the  magazine,  and  no  danger 
of  its  further  spread  is  apprehended.  The  northwest  casemates  are 
gradually  cooling  off. 

Six  officers  and  100  men  from  the  Sixth,  Nineteenth,  Twenty-sev- 
enth, and  Twenty-third  Georgia  Regiments  relieved  Captain  [J.  M.] 
Bateman,  6 officers,  and  100  men  from  the  Sixth,  Nineteenth,  Twenty- 
seventh,  and  Twenty-eighth  Georgia  Regiments  at  a late  hour  to- 
night. About  the  same  time,  the  steamer  with  ordnance  and  com- 
missary stores  for  Sumter  effected  a landing  at  the  wharf  of  that 
work. 

During  the  morning,  the  enemy  were  silent,  as  were  also  our  bat- 
teries. At  about  2.20  p.  m.,  however,  Battery  Cumming  opened 
upon  the  city,  but,  after  firing  4 shots,  was  compelled  to  desist  by  a 
concentrated  fire  from  Simkins,  Cheves,  Rutledge,  and  Marion.  * As 
ambulances  could  be  distinctly  seen  going  to  and  from  Battery 
Gregg,  it  is  thought  our  fire  was  not  altogether  without  effect. 

December  14,  1863. — The  enemy  have  inside  the  bar  this  morning 
thirty-two  vessels,  including  the  Ironsides,  three  monitors,  flag-ship, 
one  sloop  of  war,  one  gunboat,  two  mortar-boats,  &c.  Five  vessels 
are  outside  the  harbor  as  blockaders. 

This  has  been  a day  of  unusual  quiet,  not  a gun  having  been  fired 
from  either  our  batteries  or  those  of  the  enemy. 

At  Fort  Sumter  details  from  the  garrison  were  made  and  assigned 
to  the  engineer  in  charge,  for  the  purpose  of  assisting  in  the  removal 
of  rubbish.  The  work  of  repair  is  reported  to  be  progressing  favor- 
ably. 

It  is  reported  from  the  Stono  that  the  Federal  steamer  Marblehead 
came  up  that  river  in  the  morning,  but  returned  during  the  day. 

The  Pawnee  and  the  pile-driver  retain  their  positions  in  front 
of  Legareville.  The  latter  has  not  been  at  work  during  the  past 
twenty-four  hours.  Only  a few  men  are  to  be  seen  walking  about 
the  village. 

Owing  to  some  defect  in  the  submarine-  cable  across  the  Cooper 
River,  communication  with  Sullivan’s  Island  was  interrupted  to- 
day. It  is  thought,  however,  that  the  defect  will  be  remedied  to- 
morrow. 

December  15,  1863. — There  is  no  material  change  in  the  fleet  off 
the  harbor  this  morning.  About  1.30  p.  m.,  however,  Monitor  No. 
4 arrived  from  the  southward,  and  there  are  now  four  vessels  of 
that  class  among  the  fleet. 

Not  a shot  was  fired  during  the  night,  and  the  enemy  remained 
quiet  until  about  11  a.  m.,  when  they  opened  upon  the  city  with  two 
guns  from  Battery  Cumming  and  one  gun  from  Battery  Gregg,  and, 
after  firing  14  shells,  ceased  at  11.26.  Six  of  the  shells  thrown  in 


[Chap.  XL. 


180  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

the  direction  of  the  city  fell  short,  and,  of  those  that  fell  within  the 
limits  of  the  city,  2 failed  to  explode.  After  the  enemy  had  thrown 
6 shots,  Batteries  Simkins,  Cheves,  Rutledge,  Marion,  and  the  Brooke 
gun  battery  opened  a severe  fire  on  both  of  the  enemy’s  works,  and 
it  is  thought  that  a shell  from  Battery  Simkins,  which  struck  an 
embrasure  in  Gregg,  dismounted  the  gun. 

The  following  is  a summary  of  shot  and  shell  thrown  by  our  bat- 
teries during  the  day  : Marion,  25  mortar  shells  ; Simkins,  21  mortar 
and  12  rifle  and  columbiad  shells ; Cheves,  18  columbiad  shells  ; Rut- 
ledge, 27  mortar  shells,  and  Brooke  gun  battery,  103  mortar  shells. 

The  enemy  seem  to  be  at  work  upon  Battery  Gregg,  raising  a trav- 
erse on  the  east  side,  to  protect  the  guns  bearing  upon  Sumter,  James 
Island,  and  the  city  from  the  fire  of  our  Sullivan’s  Island  batteries. 
A line  of  works  from  Gregg  eastward  to  Cumming  is  also  being  ex- 
tended. The  new  work  between  Gregg  and  Cumming,  in  which  was 
recently  mounted  a Parrott  gun  bearing  on  the  city,  is  now  being 
demolished,  and  the  sand  carted  to  Gregg. 

The  steamers  Pawnee  and  Marblehead  are  still  reported  to  be  in 
the  Stono,  lying  below  the  line  of  piles. 

The  enemy’s  fleet  at  Port  Royal  is  composed  of  two  steam  frigates, 
two  sloops  of  war,  one  steam  cutter,  two  iron-clads,  seven  wooden 
gunboats,  and  ninety-eight  transports. 

December  16,  1863.- — Clothing  unusual  occurred  to-day.  The  en- 
emy remained  silent  until  10  a.  m.,  when  they  opened  on  the  city, 
and  fired  but  one  shell,  which  brought  on  a general  engagement  be- 
tween Batteries  Simkins,  Cheves,  Rutledge,  Marion,  and  the  Brooke 
gun  battery.  As  the  enemy  desisted  for  the  time  from  firing  in  the 
direction  of  the  city,  our  batteries  soon  closed. 

Captain  [J.  D.]  Franklin,  with  6 officers  and  100  men  from  the 
Fifth  [Sixth],  Twenty-third,  Twenty-seventh,  and  Twenty-eighth 
Georgia  Regiments,  relieved  Captain  [R.  A.]  Harkey,  with  the  same 
number  of  officers  and  men  from  the  Sixth,  Nineteenth,  Twenty- 
third,  and  Twenty-seventh  Georgia  Regiments,  who  were  on  duty 
in  Fort  Sumter,  and  who  had  lost  most  of  their  blankets,  clothing, 
and  accouterments  in  the  recent  fire. 

Affairs  at  that  post  continue  quiet,  and  the  repair  of  the  damages 
is  being  carried  on  without  interruption  from  the  enemy. 

At  11  p.  m.  Battery  Cumming  again  opened  on  the  city,  but  after 
firing  only  4 shells,  none  of  which  exploded.  Batteries  Marion, 
Cheves,  and  Simkins  replied  with  such  vigor  that  the  enemy  were 
forced  to  cease. 

The  following  is  a summary  of  the  shots  fired  by  our  batteries  to- 
day : Brooke  gun  battery,  10  mortar  shells  ; Marion,  10  mortar  shells; 
Rutledge,  16  shells  ; Simkins,  14  mortar  and  2 rifle  and  columbiad 
shells;  "Cheves,  5 8-inch  columbiad  shells. 

It  is  reported  from  the  Stono  that  a steamer  came  up  that  river  to- 
day, and  landed  about  100  men  at  Legareville.  On  her  return,  she 
took  on  the  same  number.  The  pile-driver,  Marblehead,  and  Pawnee 
still  retain  their  usual  positions  near  Legareville. 

The  fleet  at  Port  Royal  is  reported  to  be  composed  as  follows : Two 
steam  frigates,  two  steam  sloops  of  war,  one  steam  cutter,  two  iron- 
clads, seven  wooden  gunboats,  and  ninety-six  transports. 

December  17,  1863. — Capt.  R.  Chisolm,  with  6 officers  and  100  men 
of  the  Twenty-seventh  South  Carolina  Volunteers,  last  night  relieved 
Captain  Sellers,  6 officers,  and  83  men  of  the  Twenty-fifth  South  Caro- 
lina Volunteers,  on  duty  in  Fort  Sumter. 


Chap.  XL.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


181 


There  was  no  firing  during  the  night  by  any  of  the  enemy’s  bat- 
teries, and  to-day  an  occasional  shot  only  was  fired  from  Battery 
Gregg,  which  was  replied  to  by  8 mortar  shells  from  the  Brooke 
gun  battery  on  Sullivan’s  Island.  This  was  the  only  one  of  our 
batteries  in  action  during  the  entire  day. 

The  weather  was  stormy  and  hazy,  and  prevented  observations  of 
the  enemy’s  fleet,  both  off  the  harbor  and  at  Port  Royal. 

The  commanding  general  to-day  organized  an  expedition,  to  be 
composed  of  infantry  and  artillery,  under  command  of  Lieut.  Col. 
Del.  Kemper,  for  the  destruction  of  the  Federal  steamers  Pawnee 
and  Marblehead,  which  have  been  reported  for  several  days  past  in 
the  Stono,  off  Legareville.  The  programme  also  includes  the  de- 
struction of  that  village,  and  the  capture  of  such  of  the  enemy’s 
forces  as  may  be  there  stationed.  The  artillery  to  accompany  the 
expedition  is  composed  of  8-inch  siege  howitzers,  30  and  10  pounder 
Parrotts,  and  a few  other  guns  of  lighter  caliber.  It  is  arranged  for 
them  to  open,  if  practicable,  Christmas  morning,  and  it  is  hoped  the 
results  will  be  commensurate  with  the  importance  of  the  attempt. 

December  18,  1863. — The  enemy  were  again  silent  last  night,  but 
at  the  usual  hour  this  morning,  about  11  o’clock,  opened  on  the  city 
from  the  mortar  battery  near  Gregg  with  two  Parrott  guns.  After 
the  second  shot  had  been  fired,  Batteries  Marion,  Rutledge,  and  the 
Brooke  gun  battery,  on  Sullivan’s  Island,  and  Batteries  Simkins  and 
Cheves,  on  James  Island,  opened  vigorously  on  Morris  Island,  and 
compelled  the  enemy  to  close  after  they  had  fired  only  5 shells.  All 
of  these  shells  fell  short. 

It  is  reported  from  the  Stono  that  the  Pawnee  and  the  pile-driver 
went  down  the  river  to-day,  and  did  not  return.  The  Marblehead, 
however,  still  lies  in  the  vicinity  of  Legareville. 

The  enemy  signaled  several  hours  to-day  from  the  Botany  Bay 
Observatory,  and  it  is  thought  they  have  a complete  line  of  stations 
from  Morris  Island  to  Port  Royal.  All  of  their  messages  were  in- 
tercepted, but  none  were  of  any  importance. 

Colonel  Elliott,  commanding  Fort  Sumter,  reports  that  he  pene- 
trated this  morning  to  that  portion  of  the  magazine  used  as  a 
commissary  storehouse,  and  that  he  discovered  a small  amount  of 
burning  material  on  the  floor.  This,  however,  was  completely 
extinguished  in  a few  moments  with  buckets  of  water. 

The  following  is  the  number  of  shots  fired  by  our  batteries  to-day: 
Rutledge,  23  mortar  shells ; Marion,  19  mortar  shells ; Brooke  gun 
battery,  34  mortar  shells  ; Simkins,  12  mortar  and  18  columbiad  rifle 
shells;  Cheves,  17  columbiad  shells.  No  casualties  are  reported  at 
any  of  our  works. 

The  fleet  to-day  off  Port  Royal  is  as  follows : Two  steam  frigates, 
two  steam  sloops  of  war,  one  cutter,  two  iron-clads,  seven  wooden 
gunboats,  and  ninety -three  transports. 

December  19,  1863. — There  was  but  little  firing  during  the  morning 
and  afternoon  between  our  batteries  and  those  of  the  enemy.  A few 
shots,  however,  were  fired  from  Simkins  and  Cheves  against  parties 
of  the  enemy  on  Morris  Island. 

Colonel  Elliott  reports  that  Fort  Sumter  was  unmolested  during 
the  day,  and  that  the  engineer  work  at  their  post  is  progressing  as 

usual. 

A sergeant  and  10  men  were  detailed  from  Company  H,  and  6 men 
from  Company  K,  Palmetto  Battalion  Light  Artillery,  as  a firing 
party  to  execute  the  deserter,  Elisha  Clark,  of  Company  D,  Palmetto 
Battalion  Light  Artillery.  He  was  shot  on  James  Island  at  meridian. 


[Chap.  XL. 


182  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  EL  A. 

[Major  Campbell  resumes  command  of  Artillery  Section  No.  2, 
on  James  Island.] 

Thirty  vessels  are  reported  inside  the  bar  this  morning,  and  six 
vessels  as  blockaders  outside.  All  of  same  character  and  class  as 
last  reported. 

At  10.50  p.  m.  Battery  Cumming,  with  two  guns,  opened  on  the 
city,  and  fired  12  shells,  one-half  only  of  which  exploded.  As  usual, 
Batteries  Simkins,  Cheves,  Marion,  Rutledge,  and  the  Brooke  gun 
battery  returned  the  fire,  and  ceased  as  soon  as  the  enemy  closed, 
which  he  did  at  11.40  p.  m. 

The  number  of  shots  fired  from  our  works  to-day  is  reported  as 
follows : Battery  Rutledge,  26  shells ; Marion,  24  mortar  shells ; 
Brooke  gun  battery,  18  shells ; Simkins,  18  shells,  and  Cheves,  14 
shells. 

Two  steamers  came  up  the  Stono  to-day,  and  one  of  them  landed 
about  50  men  at  Legareville,  and  at  dark  she  was  still  lying  at  the 
village.  The  other  had  no  troops,  but  returned  after  remaining  only 
about  thirty  minutes. 

The  Marblehead  is  still  lying  in  front  of  Legareville. 

From  the  tenor  of  certain  of  the  enemy’s  dispatches  which  have 
been  intercepted,  it  is  believed  that  there  is  a regular  line  of  stations 
between  Hilton  Head  and  Morris  Island,  and  that  there  is  also  a 
submarine  cable  connecting  those  two  points.  As  orders  and  mes- 
sages to  intermediate  points  will  probably  be  continued  to  be  sent 
by  signal,  it  is  deemed  important  that  our  operators  on  John’s  Island 
shall  be  ever  on  the  alert.  Major  Jenkins  was  accordingly  directed 
to  assume  control  of  all  members  of  the  signal  corps  in  his  com- 
mand. 

December  20,  1863. — The  enemy  have  remained  silent  since  4.40 
last  night,  at  which  time  they  ceased  shelling  the  city. 

This  morning  the  fleet  off  the  harbor  is  composed  of  the  usual 
number  (six  blockaders),  while  twenty-six  vessels  form  the  fleet  in- 
side the  bar. 

During  the  entire  morning  our  batteries,  as  well  as  those  of  the 
enemy,  remained  silent,  but  at  3.45  p.  m.  three  guns  at  Battery  Cum- 
ming opened  on  the  city,  and  in  thirty  minutes  threw  17  shells,  only 
5 of  which  failed  to  explode.  Several  buildings  are  said  to  have 
been  struck,  and  one  was  set  on  fire,  but  was  soon  extinguished.  No 
casualties  are  known  to  have  occurred. 

Shortly  after  the  enemy  commenced  shelling  the  city,  Batteries 
Simkins,  Cheves,  Marion,  Rutledge,  and  the  Brooke  gun  battery 
opened  a steady  fire  with  mortars,  columbiad,  and  rifle  shells,  and 
ceased  as  soon  as  the  guns  on  Cumming’s  Point  ceased. 

The  effect  of  our  fire  was  not  ascertained,  and  no  casualties  are  re- 
ported at  any  of  our  works. 

The  Federal  steamer  Marblehead  is  still  near  Legareville,  and  par- 
ties of  the  enemy  can  be  seen  in  that  village. 

The  enemy’s  fleet  at  Port  Royal  is  composed  of  two  steam  frigates, 
two  steam  sloops  of  war,  one  steam  cutter,  two  iron-clads,  seven 
wooden  gunboats,  and  ninety-four  transports. 

The  following  is  the  number  of  shots  fired  by  our  batteries  during 
the  day : Brooke  gun  battery,  30  mortar  shells ; Rutledge,  27  shells; 
Marion,  20  shells  ; Simkins,  *4  columbiad,  3 rifle,  and  11  mortar  shells, 
and  Cheves,  11  columbiad  shells. 

December  21,  1863. — There  is  no  material  change  in  either  the 
number  or  character  of  the  Federal  fleet  off  the  harbor  this  morning. 


Chap.  XL.] 


OtMEEAL  REPOETS. 


183 


During  a portion  of  the  morning  the  enemy  continued  to  work  un- 
molested at  Batteries  Gregg  and  Wagner,  but  at  10.30  a.  m.  one  of 
the  Cumming’s  Point  batteries  opened  on  Fort  Moultrie  with  a few 
shots,  which  soon  brought  on  a general  engagement  between  that 
work  and  Batteries  Cheves,  Simkins,  Rutledge,  Moultrie,  Marion, 
and  the  Brooke  gun  battery.  The  firing  from  our  side  was  continued 
slowly  but  steadily  until  about  4 p.  m. 

Two  steamers  were  observed  to-day  off  Black  Island,  and  were  fired 
upon  by  Battery  Tatom  with  the  4. 62-incli  rifled  gun.  It  is  thought 
one  of  the  vessels  was  struck. 

The  following  is  the  number  of  shots  reported  to  have  been  fired 
by  our  batteries  during  the  day  : Fort  Moultrie,  6 shots;  Brooke  gun 
battery,  17  shells;  Rutledge,  59  shells;  Marion,  11  shells;  Simkins, 
37  shells,  and  Cheves,  12  shells. 

It  is  reported  by  the  engineer  in  charge  that  the  mortar  batteries 
at  Simkins  are  now  repaired,  and  that  the  mortar  magazine  will 
soon  be  in  the  same  condition. 

The  two-masted  gunboat  remains  in  the  same  position  in  the 
Stono,  and  the  enemy  are  still  to  be  seen  in  Legareville. 

The  fleet  at  Port  Royal  to-day  is  reported  as  follows : Two  steam 
frigates,  one  steam  sloop  of  war,  one  steam  cutter,  one  iron-clad, 
seven  wooden  gunboats,  and  ninety-six  transports. 

December  22,  1863. — To-day  there  were  twenty-eight  vessels  inside 
the  bar,  including  the  Ironsides,  four  monitors,  &c.  Eight  vessels 
were  outside. 

Just  after  midnight,  the  enemy  opened  on  the  city  with  one  gun 
from  Cumming’s  Point,  and  fired  4 shots  at  intervals  of  about  five 
minutes.  Rone  of  the  shells  exploded,  and  1 of  them  fell  short.  The 
firing  ceased  at  12.20  a.  m. 

As  usual,  Simkins,  Cheves,  and  the  Sullivan’s  Island  batteries  re- 
turned the  fire,  and  continued  until  the  enemy  closed. 

During  the  remainder  of  the  day  all  the  batteries  were  quiet. 

At  1 a.  m.  one  of  the  enemy’s  barges  was  observed  off  Fort  Sum- 
ter, taking  soundings.  It  finally  retired,  however,  in  the  direction 
of  Morris  Island. 

The  condition  of  the  fort  is  reported  to  be  about  the  same  as  usual, 
very  few  changes  having  recently  been  made  in  its  arrangements. 

Captain  [W.  G.  L.]  Butt,  of  the  Twenty-third  Georgia  Regiment, 
with  6 officers  and  109  men  from  the  Nineteenth,  Twenty-third, 
Twenty-seventh,  and  Twenty-eighth  Georgia  Regiments,  last  night 
relieved  Captain  [T.  J.]  Abercrombie,  of  the  same  regiment,  and 
6 officers  and  101  enlisted  men  from  the  Sixth,  Nineteenth,  Twenty- 
third,  and  Twenty-seventh  Georgia  Regiments,  on  duty  in  Sumter. 

The  two-masted  gunboat  is  still  in  the  Stono  near  Legareville, 
which  place  continues  to  be  occupied  by  the  enemy. 

The  enemy  have  at  Port  Royal  to-day  two  steam  frigates,  one  steam 
sloop  of  war,  one  steam  cutter,  one  iron-clad,  six  wooden  gunboats, 
and  ninety-eight  transports. 

December  23,  1863. — No  material  change  is  reported  in  the  enemy’s 
fleet  off  the  harbor  to-day. 

Last  night  not  a shot  was  fired  by  either  our  or  the  enemy’s  batter- 
ies. During  the  day  the  only  one  of  our  works  in  action  was  Battery 
Rutledge,  which  fired  26  mortar  shells  against  Cumming’s  Point,  but 
failed  to  elicit  any  reply  from  the  enemy. 

At  3 p.  m.  a propeller  transport  filled  with  troops  was  observed 
going  south.  A loaded  schooner  was  also  seen  going  in  the  same 
direction. 


184  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

Iii  connection  with  the  expedition  organized  for  the  attack  on  Le- 
gareville  and  the  enemy’s  vessels  lying  off  that  village,  it  is  reported 
that  the  Pawnee  came  up  the  Stono  this  afternoon,  and  that  the  Mar-  • 
blehead  is  in  the  same  position.  All  that  remains  to  be  done  is  to 
build  the  battery  at  Lady’s  Island,  and  this  will  be  accomplished  to- 
morrow night.  The  siege  train  to  accompany  this  expedition  passed 
Church  Flats  at  9 o’clock  this  morning. 

The  enemy’s  fleet  at  Hilton  Head  is  reported  as  follows  : Two  steam 
frigates,  one  sloop  of  war,  one  cutter,  one  iron-clad,  six  gunboats, 
and  ninety-eight  transports. 

December  24,  1863. — Since  5 p.  m.  of  the  23d,  not  a shot  has  been 
fired.  During  the  day,  there  was  no  firing  on  the  part  of  the  enemy, 
and  only  an  occasional  shot  from  our  batteries,  directed  against  work- 
ing parties  at  Cumming’s  Point. 

There  are  reported  inside  the  bar  this  morning  the  Ironsides,  four 
monitors,  and  the  usual  number  of  transports,  gunboats,  &c. 

It  is  observed  that  the  enemy  have  extensive  camps  on  Cole’s  and 
Big  Folly  Islands,  with  large  storehouses  on  the  south  end  of  the 
latter,  which  appear  to  be  at  least  300  feet  in  length,  two  stories  high, 
with  a cupola  on  top,  used  as  a lookout  and  signal  station. 

Infantry  intrenchments  and  a lookout  and  signal  station  can  also 
be  seen  on  the  northeast  end  of  Dixon’s  Island.  No  decrease  of  camps 
can  be  noted  either  on  Morris  or  Little  Folly  Islands. 

On  the  west  end  of  Black  Island  the  enemy  have  erected  a two-gun 
battery,  and  on  the  south  end  of  Morris  Island,  on  Light-House  In- 
let, there  appears  to  be  a one-gun  battery.  Another  battery  for  two 
guns  is  on  the  north  end  of  Little  Folly  Island.  All  of  these  works 
bear  on  Secession ville. 

The  Marblehead  remains  off  Legareville,  and  the  Pawnee,  having 
in  tow  a bark,  came  up  the  Stono  in  the  evening,  and  anchored  off 
Lady’s  Island.  She  subsequently  changed  her  position,  and  at  7. 30 
p.  m.  was,  together  with  the  Marblehead  and  a supply  vessel,  lying 
directly  in  front  of  our  Parrott  gun  battery. 

Two  steam  frigates,  one  steam  sloop  of  war,  one  steam  cutter,  five 
wooden  gunboats,  and  ninety-eight  transports  compose  the  enemy’s 
fleet  at  Port  Royal  to-day. 

December  25,  1863. — The  enemy  remained  quiet  last  night  until 
about  la.  m. , when  they  opened  a heavy  fire  upon  the  city  from  Bat- 
tery Cumming.  After  about  60  shells  had  been  thrown,  Battery 
Gregg  and  the  mortar  battery  also  joined  in  the  bombardment,  which 
was  then  carried  on  vigorously  until  1.12  p.  m.,  by  which  hour  133 
shells  had  fallen  within  the  limits  of  the  city.  The  evening  gun, 
which  was  fired  from  Battery  Cumming  as  the  flag  was  lowered  at 
sunset,  was  charged  with  a shell  which  exploded  in  the  city. 

Soon  after  the  bombardment  commenced,  Batteries  Simkins,  Clieves, 
Rutledge,  Moultrie,  Marion,  and  the  Brooke  gun  battery  opened  on 
Cumming’s  Point  with  vigor,  but  did  not,  as  usual,  succeed  in  check- 
ing the  fire  of  the  enemy.  These  batteries  continued  in  action  at  in- 
tervals during  the  entire  bombardment.  Their  fire,  however,  does 
not  appear  to  have  been  very  effective,  judging  from  the  result. 

Captain  [T.  S.]  Hale  remained  at  his  post  of  observation  (Saint 
Michael’s  steeple)  during  the  entire  bombardment,  and  recorded  each 
shot.  He  reports  that  the  second  shell  thrown  into  the  city  struck 
and  set  on  fire  a building  on  Broad  near  Church  street ; that  he  called 
to  the  police  at  the  guard-house,  directing  their  attention  to  the 
matter  (the  watchman  in  the  belfry  had  left  when  the  first  shell 


Chap.  XL.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


185 


struck  the  city) ; that  the  alarm  was  not  given  for  twenty  minutes, 
and  the  first  engine  did  not  arrive  on  the  ground  until  an  hour  after 
the  alarm.  In  the  meantime  the  flames  had  spread  to  other  build- 
ings, and  before  they  were  extinguished  several  houses  were  destroyed. 
Captain  Hale  is  of  the  opinion  that,  had  the  police  and  firemen  been 
prompt  in  the  discharge  of  their  respective  duties,  no  such  misfortune 
would  have  occurred.  Captain  Hale  also  reports  that  he  distinctly 
saw  from  his  elevated  position  a man  with  a torch,  who  set  fire  to  a 
building  known  as  Turner’s  Hall.  This  matter  was  placed  in  the 
hands  of  the  police  for  investigation. 

The  regiment  of  reserves  and  several  companies  of  the  First  South 
Carolina  Artillery,  under  Col.  Alfred  Rhett,  rendered  efficient  serv- 
ice as  firemen,  and  it  is  owing,  probably,  to  their  efforts  that  this 
conflagration  was  finally  checked. 

The  following  is  the  number  of  shots  fired  by  our  batteries  : Rut- 
ledge, 58  shells  ; Brooke  gun  battery,  39  ; Moultrie,  49  ; Marion,  48 ; 
Simkins,  111,  and  Cheves,  40  shells. 

As  previously  arranged,  our  batteries  on  the  Stono  having  been 
completed  and  everything  in  readiness,  fire  was  opened  on  the  Fed- 
eral steam  gunboat  Marblehead  at  daylight  this  morning,  lying 
about  300  yards  from  the  wharf  at  Legareville  Landing.  The  enemy's 
force  on  land  was  about  200 — not  in  the  village,  but  on  a little  island 
with  a narrow  defile  leading  to  it.  Colonel  [P.  R.]  Page  determined 
to  attack  with  a field  battery  and  the  infantry  ; but  to  do  so  waited 
for  our  siege  guns  to  drive  the  gunboat  from  the  wharf.  She  did  not 
open  fire  for  twenty  minutes  after  our  fire  commenced.  Our  fire  was 
kept  up  for  about  an  hour  at  1,000  yards  distance  without  making  the 
least  impression,  or,  as  Colonel  Page  thinks,  even  hitting  her  at  all. 

In  the  meantime  the  Pawnee  and  a mortar-boat  ran  up  the  Kiawah, 
and  opened  fire  on  the  flank  and  rear  of  our  lower  batteries,  killing 
1 private,  severely  wounding  5 others  (2  supposed  mortally),  and 
killing  8 horses.  Colonel  Page  instantly  withdrew,  and  fell  back ; 
the  infantry  to  Roper’s  and  the  artillery  to  Walpole’s.  General  Wise 
having  arrived  at  the  latter  place,  and  learning  from  Colonel  Page 
that  the  body  of  1 private  and  two  heavy  howitzers  had  been  left  on 
the  ground,  in  consequence  of  the  loss  of  the  horses  and  wheels, 
ordered  him  to  regain  them,  if  possible,  to-night.  * 

List  of  casualties  by  the  enemy’s  fire  on  the  city  to-day  : 

1.  Mr.  Knighton,  eighty-three  years  of  age,  right  leg  shot  off  be- 
low the  knee  by  a shell  at  the  southeast  corner  of  Meeting  and  Market 
streets. 

2.  Miss  Plane,  wounded  on  foot  by  shell  at  same  place. 

3.  Jerry  Murray,  a member  of  tlie  Charleston  Fire  Engine  Com- 
pany, wounded  in  leg  by  a brick. 

4.  Sergt.  H.  P.  McClemons,  Company  H,  First  Regiment  State 
Troops,  contusion  of  left  arm  by  fragment  of  stone. 

5.  Private  Thomas  Brown,  Company  H,  First  Regiment  State 
Troops,  painfully  in  right  hip  and  neck  by  a fragment  of  stone. 

6.  Private  Elijah  Ballinger,  arm  and  thigh,  flesh  wound. 

7.  Private  A/Valker  Madders,  contusion  in  thigh.  Both  of  Company 
H,  First  Regiment  State  Troops. 

Last  night  the  enemy’s  gunboat  Sonoma  and  a small  schooner 
came  up  Tampa  Bay,  Florida,  and  anchored  in  front  of  Fort  Brooke. 
This  morning  the  gunboat  fired  upon  the  town  and  garrison  for  two 

*See  Attack  on  U.  S.  steamer  Marblehead,  etc.,  p.  747. 


186  S.  C.  AND  GrA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

hours,  throwing  at  intervals  150  and  32  pounder  shells,  while  the 
schooner  shelled  the  shore  to  the  northward  and  eastward  of  her, 
while  lying  in  the  main  channel.  They  withdrew  about  12  o’clock 
without  coming  in  range  of  our  guns.  No  casualties. 

December  26, 1863. — With  the  exception  of  an  occasional  gun  heard 
in  the  direction  of  the  Stono,  not  a shot  was  fired  from  our  batteries 
or  those  of  the  enemy  during  the  day. 

The  fleet  off  the  harbor  is  about  the  same  in  number  and  character 
as  last  recorded. 

Colonel  Elliott  reports  that  at  12  m.  yesterday,  at  the  signal  of  a 
steam  whistle  in  the  fleet  and  a gun  from  the  direction  of  Light- 
House  Inlet,  a Federal  flag  was  raised  at  the  middle  battery  on  Cum- 
ming’s  Point.  He  adds,  as  a significant  fact,  that  at  the  first  attempt 
the  bunting  went  up  “Union  down.” 

Major  Jenkins  reports  that  soon  after  the  withdrawal  of  our  forces 
yesterday  from  near  Legareville,  the  enemy  commenced  shelling  the 
vicinity,  and  in  the  afternoon  advanced  their  pickets  so  as  to  occupy 
our  deserted  batteries.  After  dark,  with  a view  to  ascertain  the 
exact  position  of  the  enemy,  Major  Jenkins  advanced  a cavalry  force, 
and  discovered  that  they  had  evacuated  the  batteries,  and  retired 
some  distance  to  the  rear,  and  that  the  8-inch  howitzers  left  by 
Colonel  Kemper  had  been  dismounted,  carriages  overturned,  and 
wheels  taken  off,  so  as  to  render  it  extremely  difficult  to  recapture 
them.  The  night  being  very  still  and  the  enemy  only  a short  dis- 
tance off,  the  attempt  was  for  the  time  abandoned. 

December  27,  1863. — The  Ironsides,  four  monitors,  and  the  usual 
number  of  gunboats,  transports,  &c.,  compose  the  enemy’s  fleet  off 
the  harbor  this  morning. 

At  3 a.  m.  Battery  Cumming  opened  fire  with  one  gun,  and,  after 
firing  5 shells,  ceased.  Before  the  second  shell  had  been  fired,  Bat- 
teries Simkins  and  Marion  and  the  Brooke  gun  battery  responded, 
and  continued  firing  until  the  enemy  closed.  From  this  time  until 
4.20  p.  m.  everything  was  quiet,  when  Cumming  and  Gregg  each 
fired  one  gun  at  Sumter.  This  brought  on  a reply  from  Simkins  and 
the  Sullivan’s  Island  works.  As  the  enemy  appeared  to  be  satisfied 
with  firing  only  two  guns  at  the  fort,  our  batteries  soon  closed. 

It  is  reported  that  the  embrasure  at  Battery  Gregg  formerly  occu- 
pied by  our  10-inch  columbiad  is  closed  up,  and  one  large  Parrott  is 
the  only  heavy  gun  now  bearing  on  the  fort  from  that  point. 

The  following  is  a summary  of  shots  fired  by  our  batteries  since 
last  report : Simkins,  3 ; Marion,  5,  and  Brooke  gun  battery,  1. 

The  enemy  have  at  Hilton  Head  two  steam  frigates,  one  steam 
sloop  of  war,  one  steam  cutter,  five  wooden  gunboats,  and  one  hun- 
dred and  three  transports. 

The  telegraph  station  at  Secessionville  was  reopened  to-day  for 
business. 

December  28,  1863. — There  was  no  firing  last  night,  but  at  9 o’clock 
this  morning  the  enemy  opened  upon  the  city  from  Batteries  Cum- 
ming and  Gregg  and  the  mortar  battery,  and  fired  5 shells,  2 of 
which  failed  to  explode.  Our  batteries  did  not,  as  usual,  respond. 
They  remained  silent  the  entire  day,  and  it  was  not  until  9.30  p.  m. 
that  a gun  was  fired  on  our  side.  At  this  time  the  enemy’s  calcium 
light  at  Gregg  being  reflected  on  the  channel,  Batteries  Bee,  Marion, 
Rutledge,  the  Brooke  gun  battery,  Moultrie,  Cheves,  and  Simkins 
opened  a brisk  fire  with  a view  to  extinguish  it.  At  10.40,  the  light 
being  no  longer  visible,  our  batteries  ceased. 


Chap.  XL.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


187 


The  following  is  a summary  of  the  shots  fired  by  us  m the  last 
twenty-four  hours  : Moultrie,  35  ; Bee,  17  ; Brooke  gun  battery,  22 ; 
Rutledge,  10  ; Cheves,  28,  and  Simkins,  34. 

General  Hagood  reports  that  there  is  no  change  in  the  enemy’s 
vessels  in  the  Stono,  and  that  they  are  throwing  up  a heavy  work  on 
the  end  of  Long  Island,  opposite  Secessionville. 

Captain  [McMillan]  King  and  41  men  of  Company  D,  First  South 
Carolina  Artillery,  last  night  relieved  Captain  Gaillarcl  and  35  men 
of  Company  K,  same  regiment,  who  were  on  duty  in  Sumter. 

December  29,  1863. — About  dark  last  evening,  four  large  parties, 
supposed  to  be  regiments  of  the  enemy,  were  observed  proceeding 
from  Battery  Wagner  toward  Cumming’s  Point.  It  is  thought  the 
object  of  this  movement  was  to  repair  the  damages  done  to  their 
works  by  the  recent  storm.  General  Ripley  determined  to  interrupt 
their  operations,  and  directed  the  batteries  on  Sullivan’s  Island  to 
open  heavily,  which  they  did  at  about  9 p.  m.  The  commanding 
officer  at  Fort  Johnson  having  been  notified,  the  batteries  adjacent 
to  that  work  also  joined  in  the  action.  About  45  mortar  and  50  di- 
rect shells  were  thrown  in  half  an  hour,  but  the  enemy  did  not  reply. 
Our  practice  is  said  to  have  been  fair,  the  chief  defect  being  the 
often-repeated  one  of  fuses. 

At  2 a.  m.  the  enemy  at  Cumming’s  Point  opened  with  two  guns, 
and,  after  firing  10  shells  into  the  city,  closed  at  2.36.  Eight  of  the 
shells  which  fell  within  the  city  failed  to  explode. 

As  usual,  Batteries  Cheves,  Simkins,  Marion,  and  Rutledge  re- 
sponded to  the  fire  of  the  enemy,  and  closed  shortly  after  the  enemy 
ceased  firing.  Battery  Gregg,  however,  soon  opened  upon  Battery 
Simkins,  and  several  shots  were  exchanged  between  those  works 
until  3 a.  m. , when  both  batteries  ceased. 

During  the  morning,  some  little  firing  was  going  on  at  the  batteries 
in  the  vicinity  of  Secessionville,  in  reply  to  the  enemy’s  works  on 
Black  Island. 

At  6. 10  p.  m.  the  enemy  again  opened  on  the  city  from  Cumming’s 
Point,  and  fired  6 shells,  2 only  of  which  failed  to  explode. 

It  is  reported  that  the  work  at  the  end  of  Long  Island,  near  Seces- 
sionville, appears  to  be  completed,  but  no  guns  are  yet  to  be  seen. 

About  8. 30  this  morning,  the  gunboats  shelled  the  neighborhood 
and  in  front  of  the  batteries  in  the  Stono  for  half  an  hour,  after 
which  they  landed  from  a flat  about  200  men  at  the  Lady’s  Island 
battery.  They  came  up  Deep  Creek,  which  touches  immediately  in 
rear  of  the  batteries.  The  enemy  have  thrown  forward  their  pickets 
to  the  creek  heading  toward  the  village,  and  in  advance  of  the  bat- 
teries. They  appeared  to  be  working  at  the  guns  left  on  the  25tli 
instant.  Major  Jenkins  had  sent  yesterday  to  General  Wise  for 
sling-carts,  to  attempt  their  removal  and  recovery,  but  they  did  not 
reach  him  in  time  to  make  the  trial  last  night,  and  to-day  three  gun- 
boats were  lying  as  near  the  battery  as  they  could  get,  while  the 
Pawnee  went  up  Kiawah,  and  took  a position  opposite  an  open  field 
across  the  peninsula,  to  command  all  approaches  and  prevent  our 
advance.  After  shelling  for  some  time,  she  was  relieved  by  another 
vessel  taking  position  near  the  batteries.  It  will  be  impossible  to 
recover  the  guns.  The  enemy  occupy  batteries  with  stronger  force 
than  wei  can  bring  against  them,  with  pickets  between,  and  covered 
by  intervening  embankments  and  protected  by  four  gunboats. 

The  three  gunboats  left  Lady’s  Island,  but  the  atmosphere  was  too 
thick  to  tell  whether  troops  were  on  board. 


[Chap.  XL. 


188  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

Twenty  men  landed  at  Seabrook  Island  from  boats,  and  took  off 
lumber.  They  remained  two  hours. 

The  commanding  general  ordered  that  the  recovery  of  the  guns 
should  not  be  attempted  without  an  apparent  prospect  of  success  and 
at  not  too  great  sacrifice  of  life. 

The  following  are  the  numbers  of  shots  fired  by  our  batteries  to- 
day: Battery  near  Fort  Johnson,  8;  Simkins,  8;  Cheves,  10;  Rut- 
ledge, 2;  Marion,  5;  Brooke  gun  battery,  10. 

December  30,  18G3. — No  change  is  to  be  noted  in  the  appearance  of 
the  enemy’s  fleet  off  the  harbor. 

During  the  day  nothing  of  importance  occurred,  except  for  about 
an  hour  in  the  morning,  and  again  in  the  afternoon  an  artillery  duel 
was  maintained  by  our  batteries  in  the  vicinity  of  Secession ville  with 
those  of  the  enemy  on  Black  Island  and  Light-House  Inlet. 

Occasional  shots  were  also  exchanged  between  Gadberry  Hill  bat- 
tery and  some  of  our  works  on  James  Island,  the  effect  of  which  fire 
is  not  stated. 

Battery  Simkins  appears  to  have  been  the  only  one  of  our  harbor 
batteries  in  action  during  the  day,  whence  G mortar  shells  were  di- 
rected against  a working  party  of  the  enemy  at  Gregg,  at  which 
work  the  embrasure  formerly  occupied  by  the  10-inch  columbiad  has 
been  reopened,  and  traverses  constructed  to  protect  the  guns  from 
the  fire  of  our  Sullivan’s  Island  batteries. 

The  detail  from  the  Twenty-seventh  South  Carolina  Volunteers, 
under  Captain  Chisolm,  on  duty  in  Fort  Sumter,  were  last  night  re- 
lieved by  Captain  [S.  L.]  Hammond,  100  men,  and  6 officers  of  the 
Twenty-fifth  South  Carolina  Volunteers. 

The  two  8-inch  howitzers  left  by  the  Legareville  expedition  on  the 
morning  of  the  25th  instant  in  our  batteries  on  the  Stono  were  car- 
ried off  by  the  enemy  on  the  evening  of  the  28th.  The  limber  of  one 
of  them  was  left  behind,  and  was  brought  away  last  night  by  Major 
Jenkins,  who  also  set  fire  to  the  wharves  and  bridges  at  Legareville, 
and  left  them  burning  at  11  p.  m.  It  was  ascertained,  however,  this 
morning  that  owing  to  the  material  of  which  the  foundation  of  the 
bridges  was  composed  the  entire  structures  were  not  consumed,  but 
were  sufficiently  damaged  to  prevent  further  use  at  present. 

General  Hagood  telegraphs  that  this  morning  there  are  no  signs  of 
the  enemy  at  or  near  Legareville,  and  that  they  are  again  at  work  on 
the  end  of  Long  Island  in  front  of  Secessionville. 

This  evening  from  Fort  Sumter  indications  were  observed  of  some 
parade  or  ceremony  on  Morris  Island.  Music  was  heard,  batteries 
fired  their  guns,  the  slopes  of  the  works  at  the  southern  end  of  the 
island  were  thronged  with  men,  and  a steamer  with  more  than  the 
usual  amount  of  decorations  lay  at  the  landing  at  Light-House  Inlet. 
A volley  of  musketry  was  also  heard  at  8 p.  m. 

The  steamer  Moultrie  attempted  last  night  to  run  the  blockade 
from  this  harbor,  but  she  was  fired  into  by  the  enemy’s  pickets  on  the 
beach,  and  was  forced  to  return. 

December  31,  1863. — To-day  was  stormy,  with  wind  and  rain,  and 
there  was  very  little  activity  among  either  the  enemy’s  fleet  or  land 
batteries. 

At  10  a.  m.  Battery  Cumming  opened  on  the  city  with  two  guns, 
but  ceased  after  firing  5 shells,  2 only  of  which  exploded.**#  Cheves, 
the  battery  near  Fort  Johnson,  Marion,  and  the  Brooke  gun  battery 
responded,  and,  as  usual,  ceased  immediately  after  the  enemy  had 
closed. 


Chap.  XL.] 


CAPTURE  OF  THE  C.  S.  S.  ATLANTA. 


189 


From  this  time  until  3.30  p.  m.  everything  was  quiet,  when  Battery 
Gregg  threw  a few  shots  in  the  direction  of  the  bridge  connecting 
Mount  Pleasant  with  Sullivan’s  Island.  Some  of  the  shells  fell  near 
Battery  Bee,  but  inflicted  no  damage. 

About  sunset  the  enemy  fired  2 shots  over  Fort  Sumter,  and,  at  the 
report  of  the  evening,  gun  from  the  latter  work,  the  Federal  flag  on 
Morris  Island  was  dipped  in  respect.  This  unusual  and  unexpected 
piece  of  courtesy  on  the  part  of  the  Yankees  is  deemed  worthy  of 
record. 

It  is  reported  from  the  Stono  that  after  dark  last  evening  seven 
camp-fires  were  observed  on  John’s  Island,  but  no  sentinel  could  be 
seen,  as  usual,  on  the  bridge.  The  Stono  is  said  to  be  clear. 

Owing  to  the  state  of  the  atmosphere,  it  was  impossible  to  obtain 
a report  of  the  Federal  fleet  at  Hilton  Head.  Their  tugs,  however, 
appeared  to  be  busy  plying  between  Hilton  Head,  Skull  Creek,  Bay 
Point,  and  Beaufort. 

A communication  from  these  headquarters  addressed  to  the  chief 
ordnance  officer  of  the  department,  with  a view  to  hasten  the  repair 
of  the  bands  of  the  10-inch  rifle,  was  returned  to-day  with  the  in- 
dorsement by  Major  [FT.  R.]  Chambliss,  commanding  the  arsenal, 
that  every  effort  had  been  made  to  procure  band  iron,  and  that  some 
was  expected  to-day,  when  the  work  would  be  commenced  and  soon 
finished. 

The  superintendent  of  harbor  defense  telegraph  reports  that  during 
the  current  month  1,557  messages,  embracing  47,977  words,  have  been 
transmitted  by  that  line. 

The  following  are  the  number  of  shots  fired  by  our  batteries  which 
were  in  action  to-day  : Brooke  gun  battery,  3 ; Marion,  5;  Cheves,  2; 
battery  near  headquarters  (Fort  Johnson),  3. 

No  casualties  were  reported  at  any  of  our  works. 


JUNE  17, 1863. — Capture  of  the  Confederate  States  Steamer  Atlanta  (Fingal), 

in  Warsaw  Sound,  Ga. 


EEPORTS.* 


No.  1.—  Maj.  Charles  G.  Halpine,  Assistant  Adjutant-General,  U.  S.  Army. 

No.  2.— Brig.  Gen.  H.  W.  Mercer,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  Military  District  of 
Georgia. 


No.  1. 


Report  of  Maj.  Charles  G.  Halpine , Assistant  Adjutant- General, 

U . S.  Army. 

Washington,  D.  C., 

January  25,  1864. 

. General  : I have  the  honor  to  transmit  herewith  certified  copies 
of  a letter  from  Rear-Admiral  S.  F.  DuPont,  relative  to  the  capture 
of  the  rebel  iron-clad  Atlanta,  in  Warsaw  Sound,  just  as  she  was 
sallying  out  upon  the  high  seas ; also  copy  of  a letter  from  me  to 
the  Hon.  Gideon  Welles,  Secretary  of  the  Navy,  transmitting  Ad- 
miral DuPont’s  letter,  and  asking  that  it  be  inserted  in  the  records  of 

* For  reports  of  Rear-Admiral  S.  F.  DuPont  and  Capt.  John  Rodgers,  U.  S.  Navy, 
see  Annual  Report  of  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy,  December  7,  1863. 


[Chap.  XL. 


190  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

the  Navy  Department  as  part  of  the  history  of  the  capture  of  the 
Atlanta,  and  also  copy  of  letter  from  the  Hon.  Gideon  Welles  to  me, 
announcing  that  my  request  would  he  complied  with. 

I would  also  state — a fact  not  appearing  in  Admiral  DuPont’s 
letter — that  the  Weehawken  was  towed  to  the  scene  of  conflict  by  an 
army  transport  steamer,  and  the  same  was,  I think,  but  am  not  sure, 
the  case  with  the  Nahant. 

I would  add  that  the  deserters  from  whom  the  information  relative 
to  the  Atlanta  was  obtained  came  within  the  lines  of  Col.  William  B. 
Barton,  commanding  the  Forty-eighth  Regiment  New  York  Volun- 
teers, and  were  by  him  promptly  forwarded  to  me  for  examination, 
their  statements  when  taken  down  being  at  once  transmitted  to  Fleet 
Capt.  C.  R.  P.  Rodgers,  South  Atlantic  blockading  squadron,  who 
instantly,  on  the  receipt  of  the  information,  applied  to  me  as  chief  of 
staff  for  Maj.  Gen.  David  Hunter,  commanding  Department  of  the 
South,  for  the  use  of  one  army  transport  steamer,  certainly,  and,  I 
think,  of  two,  for  the  purpose  of  towing  the  monitors  Weehawken 
and  Nahant  to  Warsaw  Sound. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  most  obe- 
dient servant, 

CHAS.  G.  H ALPINE, 

Major,  and  Assistant  Adjutant-  General  of  Volunteers. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-Chief,  U.  S.  Army. 

[Inclosure  No.  1.] 

Near  Wilmington,  Del., 

January  8,  1864. 

Col.  Charles  G.  Halpine,  &c. : 

Colonel  : A friend  has  called  my  attention  to  an  omission  in  my 
official  report  of  June  17  to  the  Navy  Department,  to  be  found  in 
public  document  recently  published. 

I omitted  in  that  letter  to  state  the  source  of  the  information  which 
had  led  me  to  believe  that  the  rebel  iron-clad  Atlanta  was  preparing 
for  a raid  and  about  moving. 

This  most  important  fact  was  sent  off  by  you  to  the  fleet  captain, 
Commander  C.  R.  P.  Rodgers,  after  you  had  closely  interrogated  cer- 
tain deserters  just  in  from  Savannah.  I acted  instantly  on  your 
letter,  relieving  Capt.  John  Rodgers  from  a court-martial  of  which 
he  was  a member,  and  ordering  him  to  proceed  with  the  monitor 
Weehawken  in  all  haste  to  Warsaw  Sound.  I sent  a similar  order 
to  Commander  [John]  Downes  f j r . ] , of  the  Nahant,  then  lying  in 
North  Edisto,  who  proceeded  also  to  Warsaw  with  the  utmost  dis- 
patch. 

So  important  did  I consider  the  information  transmitted  by  you, 
that  I not  only  acted  on  it  instantly,  as  above  stated,  but,  if  I re- 
member rightly,  I wrote  a note  to  thank  you  for  your  prompt  action 
in  the  matter,  but  for  which  very  different  results  might  have  oc- 
curred. How  I committed  the  oversight  not  to  mention  officially 
this  opportune  public  service,  so  valuable  to  me  as  the  commanding 
naval  officer  on  the  coast,  I can  only  account  for  by  great  pressure 
of  business,  and  great  haste  in  order  to  avail  myself  of  a departing 
mail. 

I seize  this  opportunity,  not  only  to  rectify  this  omission,  but  to 
state  also  how  often  I had  occasion  to  recognize  your  intelligent  and 


Chap.  XL.] 


CAPTURE  OE  TIIE  C.  S.  S.  ATLANTA. 


191 


efficient  zeal  in  conducting  the  duties  and  business  of  your  important 
position  in  the  Department  of  the  South,  whenever  the  military  and 
naval  services  were  blended  or  had  official  relation  and  intercourse. 

Taking  the  greatest  pleasure  in  making  this  statement,  I am,  colo- 
nel, very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

S.  F.  DUPONT, 
Rear-Admiral,  XJ.  S.  Navy. 

[Inclosure  No.  2.] 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  East, 

New  York  City,  January  14,  1864. 

Hon.  Gideon  Welles, 

Secretary  of  the  Navy,  Washington,  D.  C.  : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  of  transmitting  herewith  certified  copy  of 
a letter  received  a few  days  since  from  Rear-Admiral  S.  F.  DuPont, 
relative  to  certain  imformation  furnished  by  me,  while  assistant 
adjutant-general  and  chief  of  staff,  Tenth  Army  Corps  and  Depart- 
ment of  the  South,  to  Commander  C.  R.  P.  Rodgers,  fleet  captain 
South  Atlantic  blockading  squadron,  which  led  to  and  resulted  in  the 
capture  of  the  rebel  iron-clad  Atlanta  in  W arsaw  Sound.  As  the  facts 
set  forth  in  the  letter  of  Admiral  DuPont  form  part  of  my  military 
record,  I have  most  respectfully  to  request,  if  consistent  with  the 
rules  of  your  Department,  that  you  will  cause  the  records  of  the 
Department  to  be  amended  by  the  insertion  of  this  letter  in  its  proper 
place. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient 
servant, 

CHAS.  G.  HALPINE, 

Major,  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

[Inclosure  No.  3.] 

Navy  Department,  January  18,  1864. 
Maj.  Charles  G.  Halpine, 

A.  A.  G.,  Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  the  East,  N.  Y.  City : 

Sir  : I have  received  your  letter  of  the  14th  instant,  transmitting 
a certified  copy  of  a letter  addressed  to  you  by  Rear-Admiral  Du 
Pont,  acknowledging  your  promptness  in  communicating  to  him  the 
information  that  led  him  to  believe  the  rebel  iron-clad  Atlanta  was 
preparing  for  a raid,  and  on  account  of  which  timely  preparation 
was  made  to  meet  her,  and  her  capture  secured.  Agreeably  to  your 
request,  the  records  of  the  Department  will  be  amended  by  placing 
your  letter  and  inclosure  with  the  reports  relating  to  the  capture  of 
the  Atlanta. 

Very  respectfully.  See., 

GIDEON  WELLES, 

Secretary  of  the  Navy. 


No.  2. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  H.  W.  Mercer,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding 
Military  District  of  Georgia. 

Headquarters  Military  District  of  Georgia, 

Savannah,  June  17,  1863. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  report  to  the  commanding  general 
that  the  Confederate  States  steamer  Atlanta  (Fingal)  surrendered  to 


[Chap.  XL. 


192  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

the  Abolitionists  at  7 a.  m.  this  day.  The  Atlanta  proceeded  to 
Warsaw  Sound  to  attack  two  monitors  which  arrived  there  several 
days  since.  Captain  [J.  S.]  Kennard,  C.  S.  Navy,  who  witnessed 
the  meeting  at  a distance  of  2}  miles,  reports  that  the  Atlanta  fired 
only  four  shots.  She  appeared  to  be  aground  at  the  time,  and  the 
enemy  at  once  took  possession.  It  is  surmised  that  the  crew  muti- 
nied and  overpowered  the  officers. 

Colonel  [D.  L.]  Clinch,  commanding  Fourth  Georgia  Cavalry, 
reports  that  the  Abolitionists  are  landing  a large  force  on  Saint 
Simon’s  Island.  He  thinks  that  cavalry  or  artillery  constitute  a 
part  of  the  force,  and  that  a very  serious  incursion  is  intended. 

I shall  use  every  effort  to  repel  the  invaders,  but,  as  the  general 
is  aware,  my  force  is  much  reduced  and  my  means  small. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  W.  MERCER, 
Brigadier- General , Commanding. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan, 

Chief  of  Staff. 


JUNE  18,  1863. — Skirmish  on  Edisto  Island,  S.  C. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  G.  Stevenson , U.  S.  Army . 

Headquarters  U.  S.  Forces  on  the  Edisto, 

June  19,  1863. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  yesterday  afternoon 
the  enemy  attacked  our  pickets  with  one  piece  of  artillery  and  about 
300  cavalry.  I immediately  advanced  the  picket  reserve,  consisting 
of  the  Tenth  Connecticut  Volunteers,  and  one  section  of  Battery  B, 
Third  New  York  Artillery,  which  soon  caused  the  enemy  to  leave  the 
island.  Private  Joseph  Williamson,  of  the  artillery,  was  badly 
wounded  in  the  knee,  and  3 horses  were  killed. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

THOS.  G.  STEVENSON, 
Brigadier- General,  U.  S.  Volunteers,  Commanding. 

Brig.  Gen.  Q.  A.  Gillmore, 

Commanding  Department  of  the  South. 


JUNE  21,  1863.— Affair  on  Dixon’s  Island,  S.  C. 

Report  of  Col.  jCharles  H.  Simonton,  Twenty-fifth  South  Carolina 

Infantry. 

Secessionville,  June  21,  1863. 

Sir  : Twelve  of  the  Abolition  pickets  came  upon  Dixon  s Island, 
within  500  yards  of  our  cavalry  pickets,  this  evening  at  6 o’clock. 
Our  men  fired  at  them,  when  they  retired  without  replying,  and 
have  not  been  seen  since.  , 

Small  steamers  have  been  plying  between  Folly  and  Cole  s Islands 
during  the  day.  Our  scouts  report  seeing  one  company^  land  on 
Cole’s  Island.  Our  infantry  pickets  have  been  strengthened  and  ad- 

Vanted'  CHAELES  H.  SIMONTON, 

Colonel,  Commanding. 

Capt.  B.  H.  Read,  Assistant  Adjutant-General. 


Chap.  XL.J 


EXPEDITION  TO  OSSA B AW  ISLAND,  GA. 

JULY  3,  1863. — Expedition  to  Ossabaw  Island,  Ga. 


193 


Report  of  Maj.  Edward  C.  Anderson , jr. , Twenty -fourth  Georgia 

Battalion. 

Headquarters  Military  District  of  Georgia, 

Savannah , July  6,  1863. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  inclose  a copy  of  Major  Ander- 
son’s report  of  his  expedition  to  Ossabaw  Island,  and  to  commend 
the  good  conduct  of  those  concerned. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  W.  MERCER, 
Brigadier-  General,  Commanding. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan, 

Chief  of  Staff. 

[Inclosure.l 


Camp  Lee,  July  4,  1863. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  I have  just  returned 
from  a scout  of  Ossabaw  Island.  With  a party  of  9 men,  I landed 
there  just  about  daylight  yesterday  morning,  July  3.  We  scouted 
it  carefully  up  to  McDonald’s  place,  where  we  arrived  about  12  m., 
without  seeing  any  sign  of  the  enemy,  excepting  a few  abandoned 
picket  posts.  After  our  arrival  at  McDonald’s,  we  lay  in  wait  there 
until  this  morning  without  seeing  a human  being,  though  I know 
some  were  there,  from  hearing  a pistol  fired  off.  Wishing  to  see 
the  battery  at  the  north  point,  and  ascertain  the  number  of  men, 
if  practicable,  we  left  our  lair  before  day ; but  on  our  way  Captain 
[R.  H.]  Wylly,  of  Company  C,  was  taken  suddenly  and  violently 
sick,  and  we  had  to  return  without  accomplishing  it.  On  our  way 
back,  however,  we  paid  a formal  visit  to  McDonald’s,  and  surprised 
and  captured  there  a Yankee  picket  post  of  2 men ; also,  we  captured 
8 negroes.  The  names  of  the  former  are  Sergt.  J.  C.  Wilson,  Com- 
pany B,  Forty-seventh  Yew  York,  and  Private  Thomas  Rourke,  Com- 
pany D,  Forty -seventh  Yew  York.  The  sergeant  is  reserved,  but 
the  other  seems  capable  of  having  information  obtained  from  him. 
He  states  the  force  on  the  island  to  be  about  800  or  900,  and  they 
have  six  guns  mounted.  This  the  sergeant  contradicts.  I got  no 
papers  or  letters.  They  state  that  within  the  last  few  days  120,000 
men  have  been  sent  from  Hilton  Head  to  Folly  Island.  This  has 
either  just  been  done  or  is  about  to  be  done.  So  much  for  what 
they  say.  Of  the  negroes,  I could  bring  off  but  3 ; my  boat  would 
hold  no  more.  The  others  were  turned  loose.  Those  brought  off 
are  a boy,  Cato,  belonging  to  Mr.  Starr  (he  was  waiting  upon  a 
Yankee  officer),  a girl,  Maria,  with  infant,  belonging  to  Mr.  Hart, 
and  a girl,  Jane,  belonging  to  Dr.  Johnston,  all  of  this  county. 

The  alarm  was  given  to  the  battery  and  gunboats,  and  the  latter 
were  stationed  so  as  to  cut  us  off ; but  thanks,  under  Providence,  to 
the  heroism  and  endurance  of  Privates  A.  W.  Dixon  and  [J.  M.  S/ 
Cosby,  of  Company  B,  [John  S.]  Perrin,  of  Company  C,  [G. 
Lewis,  of  Company  A,  and  of  my  acting  surgeon,  Dr.  Ruddell,  who 
pulled  the  boat  through  the  marsh  grass,  in  water  up  to  their  waists, 
for  nearly  2 miles,  we  eluded  their  watch,  and  arrived  up  here  at  12 
m.  to-day. 

13  R R— VOL  XXVIII,  PTI 


[Chap.  XL. 


194  S.  C.  AND  GA*.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

The  field  officers  of  the  Forty-seventh  New  York  are  Coi.  

Brown  [?],  Lieutenant-Colonel  [George]  Van  Brunt,  and  Mai  or 
[David  A.]  Allen. 

I remain,  captain,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

ED.  C.  ANDERSON,  Jr., 

Major  Twenty -fourth  Georgia  Battalion. 

Capt.  George  A.  Mercer, 

Assistant  Adjutant-General. 


JULY  10,  1863. — Engagement  at  Willstown  Bluff,  Pon  Pon  River,  S.  C. 

REPORTS. 


No.  1.— Col.  Thomas  W.  Higginson,  First  South  Carolina  Colored  Infantry. 

No.  2. — Col.  H.  K.  Aiken,  Sixth  South  Carolina  Cavalry,  commanding  Second 
Military  District. 

No.  3. — Lieut.  Thomas  G.  White,  Palmetto  Battalion  (South  Carolina)  Light  Artil- 
lery. 

No.  4. — Capt.  George  H.  Walter,  Washington  (South  Carolina)  Artillery. 

No.  1. 

Report  of  Col.  Thomas  W.  Higginson,  First  South  Carolina  Colored 

Infantry. 

On  Board  Steamer  John  Adams, 

July  11,  1863. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  a report  of  an  expedition 
up  the  South  Edisto  River,  undertaken  with  your  consent  and  that 
of  General  Gillmore,  commanding  department. 

I left  Beaufort  on  the  afternoon  of  the  9th,  with  the  armed  steamer 
John  Adams,  the  transport  Enoch  Dean,  and  the  small  tug  Governor 
Milton.  I had  with  me  250  officers  and  men  of  my  regiment  and  a 
section  of  the  First  Connecticut  Battery,  under  command  of  Lieu- 
tenant Clinton. 

By  4 o’clock  the  next  morning  we  anchored  before  Willstown,  20 
miles  up  the  river,  and  engaged  a three-gun  field  battery  there  sta- 
tioned. After  3 shots  they  ceased  firing,  and,  landing  with  Lieutenant 
[James  B.]  West  and  30  men,  I took  possession  of  the  bluff,  where 
the  clothing,  equipments,  and  breakfast  fires  left  behind  betrayed 
a very  hasty  departure.  This  bluff  affords  the  key  to  the  river,  and 
we  held  it  all  day,  until  sunset,  though  with  constant  skirmishing 
between  my  pickets  and  those  of  the  enemy. 

We  found,  as  we  expected,  a row  of  spiles  across  the  river  at  Wills- 
town, and  a prisoner,  whom  we  had  taken,  affected  great  terror  of 
torpedoes.  None,  however,  appeared,  and  the  able  engineering  of 
Captain  [Charles  T.  ] Trowbridge  in  three  hours  effected  a passage 
for  the  two  small  vessels.  This  was  too  late  for  the  tide,  and  we  were 
obliged  to  wait  till  noon  before  ascending  farther.  At  the  first  effort 
to  ascend  with  the  flood  tide,  the  Governor  Milton  went  aground,  and 
the  Dean,  going  about  a mile  farther,  had  another  engagement  with 
the  same  battery,  and  again  drove  it  back.  She  also  running 


Chap.  XL.]  ENGAGEMENT  AT  WILLSTOWN  BLUFF,  S.  C.  195 

aground,  we  were  compelled  to  wait  an  hour  longer  for  the  tide, 
when  the  two  small  vessels  ascended  together.  We  met  with  no 
further  interruption  (the  rice-fields  on  each  side  being  indefensible) 
till  within  2 miles  of  the  railroad  bridge ; here  the  Dean  unluckily 
grounded  again,  and  all  efforts  to  get  her  off  being  fruitless,  I sig- 
naled to  the  tug  to  proceed  upward  to  the  bridge. 

She  soon  found  herself  under  the  fire,  at  200  yards,  of  a six-gun 
field  battery,  planted  that  morning  on  the  shore,  and  after  a severe 
engagement,  in  which  my  vessel  could  render  but  little  aid,  our  lit- 
tle consort  was  compelled  to  withdraw ; and  when,  at  last,  the  Dean 
was  gotten  off,  the  tide  rendered  it  necessary  to  abandon  the  attempt. 
We  were  at  this  time  more  than  30  miles  from  the  mouth  of  the 
river  and  about  20  miles  from  Charleston. 

Descending  the  river,  the  Dean  had  another  fight  with  her  old 
enemies,  apparently  re-enforced,  who  shelled  us  very  severely  from 
a point  near  Willstown.  We  passed  the  spiles  successfully,  but  re- 
gretted to  find  the  Milton  aground  upon  them.  The  John  Adams 
tried  in  vain  to  pull  her  off,  and  the  officers  on  board  were  reluc- 
tantly compelled  to  abandon  her,  as  the  tide  was  rapidly  falling.  I 
was  drawing  in  the  pickets  and  taking  them  on  board  the  Dean  when 
this  decision  was  made,  and  when  informed  of  it  it  was  too  late  for 
me  to  do  anything  but  order  the  little  vessel  to  be  set  on  fire,  which 
was  accordingly  done,  the  few  men — small  force — on  board  having 
been  safely  removed. 

After  this  we  met  with  no  further  incident,  except  one  more  ar- 
tillery fight  on  the  way  down  the  river,  making  five  in  all.  I am 
happy  to  say  that  in  all  these  engagements  our  artillerists,  both 
white  and  black,  did  themselves  much  credit,  as,  indeed,  did  all  my 
command.  I must  especially  mention  Companies  K (Captain  Whit- 
ney) and  G (Lieutenant  Sampson),  upon  whom  the  most  exposed 
duty  devolved.  We  brought  away  about  200  contrabands,  6 bales 
of  cotton  of  the  best  quality,  and  2 prisoners — F.  Hall,  Sixth  Cavalry, 
and  G.  Henry  Barnwell  (of  the  rebel  troops),  one  of  the  well-known 
family  of  that  name.  Both  were  captured  by  my  skirmishers,  with 
their  horses  and  full  equipments. 

For  want  of  transportation,  we  left  behind  a number  of  fine  horses  ; 
we  destroyed  large  quantities  of  rice  by  burning  the  houses,  and  cut 
the  dams  of  the  rice-fields.  No  private  property,  not  amenable  to 
military  rules,  was  burned  or  pillaged,  though  there  was  abundant 
opportunity  for  so  doing. 

My  command  reports  2 killed  (Privates  July  Green,  Company  A, 
and  William  S.  Yerdier,  Company  C)  and  1 wounded  (myself),  not 
severely;  struck  by  a splinter  in  the  side.  Besides  these,  the  assistant 
engineer  of  the  Milton  (Mr.  Mills)  was  killed,  and  1 contraband, 
name  unknown;  1 sailor  was  slightly  wounded  in  the  foot,  and  1 
contraband  lost  a leg. 

Considering  the  number  of  shells  that  exploded  in  and  near  the 
vessels,  I am  surprised  that  the  list  is  no  larger. 

The  loss  of  the  enemy  is  unknown,  but  the  prisoners  stated  that 
one  of  our  first  shots  dismounted  a gun  and  killed  3 men. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient 
servant, 

T.  W.  HIGGINSON, 

Colonel , Commanding. 

Brigadier-General  Saxton. 


196 


[Chap.  XL. 


S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

No.  2. 

Report  of  Col.  H.  K.  Aiken,  Sixth  South  Carolina  Cavalry,  com- 
manding Second  Military  District. 

Headquarters  Second  Military  District, 

Adams  Run,  S.  C.,  July  12,  1863. 

General  : About  6 o’clock  on  Friday  morning,  the  10th  instant,  I 
was  informed  that  three  steamers  were  in  Pon  Pon  River,  at  Colonel 
Morris’  mill,  where  they  had  arrived  before  early  dawn,  under  cover 
of  a dense  fog.  I immediately  ordered  Lieutenant-Colonel  [L.  P.] 
Miller,  with  about  50  men  of  the  Sixth  South  Carolina  Cavalry,  to 
support  our  forces  at  Willstown,  and  the  remainder  of  the  same 
command  to  follow,  under  Major  [Thomas  B.]  Ferguson.  I arrived 
on  the  ground  about  7 a.  m.,  but  found  Lieutenant  White,  com- 
manding the  section  of  the  Chesnut  Artillery  at  Willstown, 
had,  unfortunately,  abandoned  his  position.  I would  respectfully 
refer  you  to  his  report.  (Appended  and  marked  A.)*  I at  once 
ordered  all  the  remaining  negroes  driven  back  from  the  river,  and 
deployed  our  entire  force  as  skirmishers,  the  right,  north  of  Wills- 
town, resting  on  and  perpendicular  to  the  river,  and  the  remainder 
parallel,  with  instructions  to  advance  upon  Willstown.  The  almost 
impenetrable  undergrowth  prevented  rapid  movements,  yet  the  left 
and  front  had  advanced  fully  half  way  to  the  river,  most  of  the  time 
under  a brisk  fire,  when  Lieutenant-Colonel  Miller,  by  courier  and 
afterward  in  person,  reported  his  right  flanked  and  the  enemy  in  his 
rear.  I ordered  him  to  fall  back.  The  report,  however,  proved  upon 
investigation  to  proceed  from  undue  caution,  and  placed  us  at  great 
disadvantage. 

At  this  juncture,  two  gunboats  passed  up  the  river  toward  Jackson- 
borough  Bridge,  when  they  were  intercepted  by  a section  of  the 
Washington  Artillery,  under  Lieutenant  [S.  G.]  Horsey,  and  by  them 
driven  back.  (I  inclose  Captain  Walter’s  report,  marked  B.)  f 
Before  their  return,  a section  of  the  Marion  Artillery,  Lieutenant 
[Robert]  Murdoch  commanding,  had  arrived,  and  was  ordered  to 
join  the  Chesnut  Artillery  at  Gibbes’  farm.  These  men  deserve 
special  mention  for  their  conduct,  and  to  their  guns  is  attributable 
the  destruction  of  one  of  the  enemy’s  gunboats.  It  was  set  on  fire 
by  a shell  and  burned  to  the  water’s  edge. 

I again  ordered  an  advance  upon  Willstown,  but  found  it  aban- 
doned, and  the  enemy  hurriedly  moving  down  the  river  out  of  the 
reach  of  our  guns.  A section  of  the  Chesnut  Artillery  and  a com- 
pany of  the  Sixth  Cavalry  were  ordered  below  Morris’  Mill,  and  fired 
into  the  retreating  vessels  with  marked  effect.  One  of  their  gun- 
boats was  towed'  out  by  the  other  through  South  Edisto. 

The  enemy  burned  the  mill  of  Colonel  Morris,  and  in  their  despoli- 
ation upon  the  residences  at  Willstown  left  unmistakable  evidences 
of  their  despicable  character  as  a set  of  thieves  and  marauders. 
They  took  off  about  120  to  130  negroes,  all  of  whom  evidently  had 
been  informed  of  this  intended  raid,  as  the  sound  of  the  first  gun 
^seemed  a signal  for  them  to  assemble  on  board  of  the  transport, 
where  they  were  taken  soon  after  daylight,  and  moved  down  South 
Edisto. 


*See  No.  3,  p.  197. 
f See  No.  4,  p.  199. 


Chap.  XL.]  - 


ENGAGEMENT  AT  WILLSTOWN  BLUFF,  S.  C. 


197 


Tlie  force  of  the  enemy  was  variously  reported  from  300  to  500;  the 
former  number,  I think,  is  in  excess.  Some,  though  very  few,  may 
have  been  negroes.  Our  own  force  was  but  little  over  100  besides 
the  artillery. 

I have  no  means  of  ascertaining  our  injury  to  the  enemy.  Marks 
of  blood  were  discovered  at  several  places  in  the  woods,  and  screams 
and  groans  were  distinctly  heard  from  their  gunboats.  Two  bodies 
were  said  to  have  been  seen  the  next  day  floating  down  the  river.  From 
the  wreck  of  the  steamer  destroyed  we  took  two  brass  rifled  0-pound- 
ers,  with  carriages,  &c.,  uninjured  and  in  good  order.  We  had  2 
men  wounded,  1 of  whom  was  taken  prisoner.  A courier  is  also 
missing. 

We  probably  prevented  the  enemy  doing  more  than  they  have 
done,  but  cannot  congratulate  ourselves  that  we  did  not  accomplish 
more. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  K.  AIKEN, 

Colonel,  Commanding. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  and  Chief  of  Staff. 

— 


No.  3. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Thomas  G.  White,  Palmetto  Battalion  ( South 
Carolina)  Light  Artillery. 

Camp  Jenkins, 

Toogoodoo  Creek,  July  11,  1863. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  state  that  on  the  morning  of  Thurs- 
day, July  10,  instant,  I was  aroused  at  daylight  by  the  sergeant  of 
my  section  of  [F.  C.]  Schulz’s  battery,  stationed  on  picket  at  Wills- 
town  Bluff,  with  the  information  that  the  enemy’s  boats  had  ap- 
proached, under  cover  of  a dense  fog  overhanging  the  river,  to  the 
obstructions,  distant  about  800  yards  from  my  position.  I immedi- 
ately harnessed  up  my  horses  and  prepared  one  of  my  guns  (the  nearest 
to  the  enemy)  for  action.  At  4.45  o’clock  I fired  the  first  gun  at  the 
smallest  of  the  enemy’s  steamers  nearest  inland,  situated  then  up^o 
the  obstructions,  and  apparently  on  and  over  them.  A column  i©f 
the  enemy  numbering  about  150,  composed  of  negroes  and  white 
men,  was  seen  advancing  up  the  causeway  by  file  at  long  intervals, 
and  was  then  within  300  yards  of  the  side  road  leading  to  the  rear 
of  my  position.  At  this  stage  a friction-primer  became  impacted  in 
the  vent  of  this  piece,  rendering  it  unfit  for  immediate  service. 
The  enemy  in  the  meantime  kept  up  an  incessant  firing  of  shot,  shell, 
and  grape.  I ordered  this  gun  to  withdraw  out  of  range,  and  re- 
paired to  the  other,  to  my  right  and  in  battery,  and  found  that  a 
ball  had  been  forced  into  it  without  a cartridge.  Under  these  cir- 
cumstances, and  having  no  support  of  infantry  or  cavalry  (excepting 
7 vedettes),  I thought  it  prudent  to  withdraw  the  section  beyond  the 
risk  of  the  flankers. 

I remained  alone  to  watch  the  operations  of  the  enemy.  After 
saddling  my  horse  with  my  own  hands,  I caught  up  my  valise  and 


[Chap.  XL. 


193  S.  C.  AND  a A.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

saddle-bags,  and  after  finding  tbat  the  enemy  bad  by  this  time  gained 
the  edge  of  the  bluff,  I retired  just  in  time  to  save  myself  from  cap- 
ture. 

The  enemy  were  now  deployed  through  the  dense  woods  and  un- 
dergrowth that  surrounds  the  position,  and  while  in  the  act  of  try- 
ing to  force  back  a party  of  negroes,  who  were  being  driven  before 
them  from  above,  I perceived  a party  of  the  enemy  in  the  road  mak- 
ing toward  me.  I then  rejoined  the  section  at  a safe  distance  to  the 
rear. 

My  impression  is  that  the  boats  landed  their  infantry  at  early  dawn 
(perhaps  at  midnight)  at  Mr.  Morris’  mills,  situated  in  a rice-field  to 
my  left,  and  moved  along  the  river  to  our  position,  the  strength  and 
nature  of  which  they  doubtless  had  been  fully  informed  of  by  the  ne- 
groes surrounding  us.  I am  warranted  in  my  supposition  from  the 
fact  that  there  were  several  negroes  about  the  camp  on  the  previous 
evening,  when  the  company  of  infantry  stationed  with  us  had  been 
removed  to  be  sent  to  Charleston,  and  from  the  fact  that  at  the  first 
gun  that  was  fired  the  negro  women  from  Colonel  Morris’  rushed 
in  a body  in  the  direction  of  the  approaching  party,  knowing,  appar- 
ently, exactly  what  to  do  to  get  off  to  the  boats.  The  men  had 
doubtless  all  gone  before,  for  I did  not  see  a single  male  slave  with 
them.  All  were  women  and  children. 

I remained  at  the  junction  of  the  Jacksonboroughand  Adams  Run 
road,  awaiting  orders  and  for  a support,  for  fully  two  hours  before 
any  arrived.  It  was  then  feeble,  and  of  a character  not  to  warrant 
an  approach  or  attack,  and  I was  ordered  to  repair  above,  and  open 
upon  the  boats  as  they  passed  Barnwell’s,  which  was  done,  when  quite 
a spirited  engagement  took  place,  the  enemy,  however,  enjoying  the 
advantage  of  his  long-range  and  heavier  guns.  Twice  they  essayed 
to  pass  and  twice  they  retired  beyond  range  of  our  guns,  while  we 
were  within  range  of  theirs. 

I was  then  ordered  to  retire,  and  to  follow  the  river  road  up,  and 
endeavor  to  punish  them  when  they  got  up  higher.  Lieutenant 
[Augustus]  Fludd  then  rode  up  and  assumed  command.  The  enemy 
passed  up,  and  encountered  Captain  Walter’s  battery  above  and  on 
the  other  side  of  the  river,  which  caused  them  to  retire. 

We  again  took  up  our  position  at  Gibbes’  place,  in  company  with 
a section  of  the  Marion  Artillery,  under  Lieutenant  Murdoch,  and 
there  I believe  we  inflicted  serious  damage  to  the  two  boats  return- 
ing, as  several  shots  were  seen  to  strike  them  both.  These  two  got 
away,  however,  after  leaving  the  third  and  smallest  aground  and 
afire  on  the  obstructions  below  Willstown  Bluff. 

In  this  raid  the  enemy  burned  Colonel  Morris’  mills  and  barn, 
and  pillaged  and  plundered  the  adjoining  private  residences,  carry- 
ing off  negroes  of  Colonel  Morris  and  those  of  Mr.  Manigault,  ad- 
joining. 

I take  pleasure  in  stating  that  our  men  behaved  with  coolness  and 
courage,  and,  like  myself,  regretted  the  want  of  support  which  neces- 
sitated our  withdrawal. 

Owing  to  the  want  of  transportation,  some  baggage  was  lost  by 
being  left  in  our  camp. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully, 

THOMAS  G.  WHITE, 

Lieut.  Co.  F,  Palmetto  Bait.  Lt.  Art.,  Comdg.  Post  Willstown  Bluff. 

Capt.  P.  K.  Molony, 

Assistant  Adjutant-General. 


Chap.  XL.] 


199 


No.  4. 

Report  of  Capt.  George  H.  Walter , Washington  (South  Carolina) 

Artillery. 

Headquarters, 

Jacksonborough,  July  12,  1863. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  on  Friday  last  (10th  in- 
stant), two  gnnboats  of  the  enemy  passed  np  the  Edisto  River,  and 
rapidly  advanced  to  a point  opposite  the  plantation  of  Dr.  Glover, 
about  3 miles  below  the  railroad  bridge.  At  this  place  I had  placed 
in  position  two  pieces  of  the  Washington  Artillery ? Lieutenant 
Horsey  commanding,  who  opened  fire  with  great  steadiness  and 
precision,  and,  after  a sharp  action  of  about  an  hour,  succeeded  in 
driving  back  both  boats,  one  of  which  was  seriously  injured  and 
evidently  in  a sinking  condition.  Lieutenant  [John]  Banskett,  with 
Company  B,  Sixth  South  Carolina  Cavalry,  were  deployed  as  skir- 
mishers, and,  although  not  engaged,  were  of  material  assistance  in 
giving  information  and  acting  as  scouts. 

I have  no  casualties  to  report,  excepting  the  loss  of  a battery  horse 
from  the  effects  of  the  intense  heat. 

Yours,  respectfully, 

GEO.  H.  WALTER, 

Captain , Commanding  Post. 

Capt.  P.  K.  Molony, 

Assistant  Adjutant-General. 


JULY  10-SEPTEMBER  7,  1863. — Operations  on  Morris  Island,  S.  C. 

SUMMARY  OF  THE  FVEUNTTS. 

July  10,  1863.— Union  forces  occupy  the  south  end  of  Morris  Island. 

11,  1863. — First  assault  on  Battery  Wagner. 

14-15,  1863. — Sortie  from  Battery  Wagner. 

18,  1863. — Second  assault  on  Battery  Wagner. 

18-Sept.  7,  1863. — Siege  of  Battery  Wagner. 

Aug.  2,  1863. — Attack  on  Confederate  steamer  Chesterfield,  at  Cumming’s  Point. 
17,  1863.— Fire  opened  upon  Fort  Sumter  from  Morris  Island  batteries.* 

25,  1863. — Assault  on  Confederate  rifle-pits. 

26,  1863. — Capture  of  Confederate  rifle-pits.  , 

Sept.  4-6,  1863. — Boat  expeditions  against  Battery  Gregg. 

6-7,  1863.— Batteries  Gregg  and  Wagner  evacuated  by  the  Confederates,  and 
occupied  by  the  Union  forces. 

7,  1863. — Affair  on  Battery  Island. 

REPORTS. 

No.  1.— Brig.  Gen.  Quincy  A.  Gillmore,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Department  of 
the  South. 

No.  2. — Return  of  Casualties  in  the  Union  forces. 

No.  3.— Brig.  Gen.  John  W.  Turner,  U.  S.  Army,  Chief  of  Artillery,  including  bom- 
bardment of  Fort  Sumter. 

No.  4.— Col.  Edward  W.  Serrell,  First  New  York  Engineers,  Assistant  Engineer. 
No.  5.— Maj.  Thomas  B.  Brooks,  U.  S.  Army,  Aide-de-Camp,  and  Assistant  Engi- 
neer. 


* See  Bombardment  of  Fort  Sumter,  August  17-December  31,  p.  596. 


200  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 


[Chap.  XL. 


No.  6.  —Lieut.  Peter  S.  Michie,  U.  S.  Corps  of  Engineers,  Assistant  Engineer. 

No.  7. — Lieut.  Townsend  L.  Hatfield,  Forty-eighth  New  York  Infantry,  Acting 
Signal  Officer. 

No.  8. — Lieut.  Peter  H.  Niles,  U.  S.  Signal  Corps. 

No.  9. — Brig.  Gen.  Truman  Seymour,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  division. 

No.  10. — Lieut.  Col.  Richard  H.  Jackson,  Assistant  Inspector-General,  U.  S.  Army, 
commanding  Artillery. 

No.  11. — Brig.  Gen.  Israel  Yogdes,  U.  S.  Army. 

No.  12. — Brig.  Gen.  George  C.  Strong,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  brigade. 

No.  13. — Lieut.  Col.  Lorenzo  Meeker,  Sixth  Connecticut  Infantry. 

No.  14. — Capt.  Sylvester  H.  Gray,  Seventh  Connecticut  Infantry. 

No.  15. — Col.  Edward  N.  Hallowell,  Fifty-fourth  Massachusetts  (Colored)  Infantry. 
No.  16. — Lieut.  Col.  Joseph  C.  Abbott,  Seventh  New  Hampshire  Infantry. 

No.  17. — Lieut.  Col.  John  Mc.Conihe,  One  hundred  and  sixty-ninth  New  York  In- 
• fantry. 

No.  18. — Lieut.  Thomas  E.  Weber,  Ninety-seventh  Pennsylvania  Infantry,  Acting 
Signal  Officer  on  Folly  Island, 

No.  19. — Brig.  Gen.  Roswell  S.  Ripley,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  First  Military  Dis- 
trict, including  operations  July  8-September  22. 

No.  20. — Returns  of  Casualties  in  the  Confederate  forces  on  Morris  Island. 

No.  21. — Maj.  Henry  Bryan,  Assistant  Inspector-General,  C.  S.  Army. 

No.  22. — Col.  Robert  F.  Graham,  Twenty-first  South  Carolina  Infantry,  command- 
ing on  Morris  Island,  July  10-14. 

No.  23. — Brig.  Gen.  William  B.  Taliaferro,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  on  Morris 
Island  July  14-19  and  22-26,  and  afterward  on  James  Island. 

No.  24. — Brig.  Gen.  Johnson  Hagood,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  on  James  Island 
July  10-18,  and  on  Morris  Island  July  19-22,  August  6-10,  and  21-25. 

No.  25. — Brig.  Gen.  A.  H.  Colquitt,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  on  Morris  Island  July 
26-28  and  August  27-September  2. 

No.  26. — Col.  Lawrence  M.  Keitt,  Twentieth  South  Carolina  Infantry,  commanding 
on  Morris  Island  August  1-6,  15-21,  and  September  2-7. 

No.  27. — Col.  George  P.  Harrison,  jr.,  Thirty-second  Georgia  Infantry,  commanding 
on  Morris  Island  August  10-15  and  25-27. 

No.  28. — Capt.  J.  W.  Gregorie,  C.  S.  Corps  of  Engineers. 

No.  29. — Capt.  J.  T.  Champneys,  C.  S.  Corps  of  Engineers. 

No.  30. — Mr.  William  Tennent,  jr.,  Assistant  Engineer,  C.  S.  Service. 

No.  31. — Capt.  C.  E.  Chichester,  Gist  Guard  Artillery,  Chief  of  Artillery,  etc. 

No.  32.— Maj.  F.  F.  War  ley,  Second  South  Carolina  Artillery,  Chief  of  Artillery. 
No.  33. — Capt.  C.  C.  Pinckney,  C.  S.  Artillery,  Ordnance  Officer,  First  Military  Dis- 
trict. 

No.  34. — Lieut.  Edmund  Mazyck,  C.  S.  Artillery  Ordnance  Officer,  Battery  Wagner. 
No.  35. — Capt.  M.  M.  Gray,  in  charge  of  Torpedo  Service. 

No.  36.— Lieut.  Col.  Charles  W.  Knight,  Thirty-first  North  Carolina  Infantry. 

No.  37. — Col.  Hector  McKethan,  Fifty-first  North  Carolina  Infantry. 

No.  38. — Lieut.  Col.  Joseph  A.  Yates,  First  South  Carolina  Artillery. 

No.  39. — Capt.  H.  R.  Lesesne,  First  South  Carolina  Artillery. 

No.  40. — Lieut.  T.  George  Dargan,  First  South  Carolina  Artillery. 

No.  41. — Lieut.  James  R.  Pringle,  First  South  Carolina  Artillery. 

No.  42. — Capt.  Warren  Adams,  Third  South  Carolina  Artillery. 

No.  43. — Capt.  Thomas  A.  Huguenin,  Third  South  Carolina  Artillery. 

No.  44. — Maj.  James  H.  Rion,  Seventh  South  Carolina  Battalion. 

No.  45. — Lieut.  Col.  P.  C.  Gaillard,  Charleston  Battalion. 

No.  46. — Capt.  Julius  A.  Blake,  Charleston  Battalion. 

No.  47. — Capt.  Robert  Pringle,  Lucas’  Artillery  Battalion. 


Chap.  XL.] 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 


201 


No.  48.—  Lieut.  R.  C.  Gilchrist,  Lucas’  Artillery  Battalion. 

No.  49.—  Capt.  W.  L.  De  Pass,  Palmetto  Artillery  Battalion. 

No.  50.— Col.  Charles  H.  Olmstead,  First  Volunteer  Georgia  Infantry,  commanding 
at  Fort  Johnson,  James  Island. 

No.  51.— Maj.  Edward  Manigault,  C.  S.  Artillery,  commanding  Artillery  at  Legare’s 
Point,  James  Island. 

No.  52.— Capt.  John  C.  Mitchel,  First  South  Carolina  Artillery,  commanding  Bat- 
tery at  Shell  Point,  James  Island. 

No.  53.— Maj.  John  V.  Glover,  Twenty-fifth  South  Carolina  Infantry,  commanding 
Battery  Haskell,  James  Island. 

No.  54.— Capt.  Samuel  Le  Roy  Hammond,  Twenty-fifth  South  Carolina  Infantry. 
No.  55.— Corpl.  D.  L.  Crawley,  Company  A,  Twenty-second  Battalion  Georgia  Ar- 
tillery. 

No.  56.— Col.  Alfred  Rhett,  First  South  Carolina  Artillery,  commanding  Fort  Sum- 
ter. 

No.  57. — Confederate  Roll  of  Honor. 

No.  1. 

Reports  of  Brig.  Gen.  Quincy  A.  Gillmore,  U.  S.  Army , com- 
manding Department  of  the  South. 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

In  the  Field , Morris  Island , S.  C.,  July  21,  1863. 
Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  no  material  change  in  the  condi- 
tion of  affairs  here  since  my  brief  dispatch*  announcing  the  capture 
of  two-thirds  of  this  island  on  the  10th  instant  and  the  assault  of 
Fort  Wagner  on  the  morning  of  the  11th. 

My  project  for  inaugurating  offensive  operations  here  comprised  : 
First.  A real  attack  of  Morris  Island,  to  be  made  by  a force  land- 
ing from  small  boats,  preceded  by  unmasking  and  opening  our 
batteries  from  Folly  Island,  should  it  be  deemed  best  to  do  so. 

Second.  A strong  demonstration  up  the  Stono  against  James 
Island,  to  occupy  the  attention  of  the  enemy  there. 

Third.  The  cutting  of  the  Savannah  Railroad  by  ascending  the 
South  Edisto  and  burning  the  bridge. 

The  first  and  second  of  these  operations  were  successful.  The 
third  was  not.  It  resulted  in  the  loss  of  two  field  guns  and  a small 
steamer  of  little  value,  formerly  captured  from  the  enemy.  The 
steamer  was  burned,  with  the  guns  on  board.  The  force  operating 
on  James  Island,  about  3,500  men,  was  under  the  command  of 
Brigadier-General  Terry,  and  was  aided  by  three  gunboats.  On 
the  16th  instant,  General  Terry  was  attacked  by  the  enemy  in 
force,  comprising  infantry,  artillery,  and  cavalry.  General  Terry’s 
report  of  the  action  is  herewith  inclosed.!  He  estimates  the  enemy’s 
strength  on  James  Island  at  5,000  to  6,000.  I evacuated  James 
Island  on  the  17th,  as  I required  more  men  here,  and  did  not  consider 
General  Terry’s  position  longer  tenable. 

On  the  18th,  an  attack  on  Fort  Wagner  was  made  by  the  land  and 
naval  forces,  commencing  about  noon  in  a combined  cannonade  and 
bombardment,  and  terminating  in  an  assault  of  the  army  about 
sunset.  We  gained  and  held  for  more  than  one  hour  the  southeast 
salient  or  half  bastion  of  the  work,  but  finding  it  isolated  from  and 


* Of  July  12.  See  p.  12. 


f See  p.  755. 


[Chap.  XL. 


202  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

commanded  by  the  main  body  of  the  work,  we  were  obliged  to 
abandon  it. 

During  the  bombardment,  the  enemy  served  but  two  guns,  and 
scarcely  a man  showed  himself.  Deserters  say  the  work  contains 
bomb-proof  shelter  for  from  1,200  to  1,800  men.  It  is  a strong  work. 

Three  of  its  guns  were  dismounted  during  the  action.  My  losses 
in  the  three  actions  of  the  10th,  11th,  and  18th  are  not  yet  accurately 
reported,  but  have  been  very  heavy.  My  sick  list,  on  account  of 
the  enervating  climate  and  heavy  fatigue  duty,  is  also  enormous. 

The  enemy  admit  a loss  of  300,  including  16  commissioned  officers, 
on  the  10th,  and  their  losses  since  then  will  swell  the  aggregate  sev- 
eral hundred  men. 

I renew  the  application  for  re-enforcements  made  in  my  first  com- 
munication of  this  date,  herewith  inclosed.* 

General  Saxton,  commanding  at  Beaufort,  reports  the  enemy  very 
active  in  his  front  yesterday.  A large  force  from  James  Island 
would  be  available  for  an  attack  on  Hilton  Head,  where  all  my  stores 
are.  I feel  quite  weak  there,  and  must  re-enforce  the  place  from 
here,  even  at  the  expense  of  operations  in  this  quarter. 

I notice  in  the  Washington  papers  of  the  11th  a communication, 
bearing  the  stamp  of  genuineness,  prescribing  the  manner  of  obtaining 
drafted  men  for  the  old  regiments.  The  exigencies  of  the  case  in- 
duce me  to  act  upon  this  information  in  advance  of  the  official  order. 
I have,  therefore,  detailed  men  to  proceed  to  the  rendezvous  desig- 
nated, obtain  recruits,  and  return  to  their  regiments  at  the  earliest 
possible  moment. 

I trust  I have  not  acted  too  hastily.  I would  like  some  instruc- 
tions given  to  the  commanders  of  the  several  rendezvous  to  give  the 
preference  to  my  requisitions,  unless  there  are  strong  reasons  to  the 
contrary. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

Q.  A.  GILLMORE, 

Brigadier-General,  Commanding. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-Chief,  U.  8.  Army. 

P.  S. — A report  from  my  chief  medical  [officer]  gives  625  killed 
and  wounded  that  have  fallen  into  our  hands  up  to  this  date.  The 
enemy  probably  have  300  more. 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

In  the  Field,  Morris  Island,  July  25,^1863. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to^report  matters  progressing  satisfac- 
torily here.  The  difficulties  in  the  way  of  transportation  have  been 
serious,  but  are  being  overcome.  Light-House  Inlet  is  of  little  prac- 
tical use  for  that  purpose,  there  being  only  4 feet  of  water  on  the 
bar  at  low  tide,  with  a tortuous  and  ever-changing  channel.  My 
primary  supply  depot  is  on  the  west  side  of  Folly  Island.  The  trans- 
ports reach  it  by  way  of  Stono  Inlet.  After  the  assault  on  Fort 
Wagner  of  the  18th,  on  which  day  my  rifle-pits  and  sharpshooters 
were  at  a distance  of  600  yards  from  the  work,  and  my  intrench- 
ments,  armed  with  rifled  guns,  howitzers,  and  mortars,  about  twice 
that  distance,  I commenced  making  arrangements  to  establish  a 
second  parallel,  strongly  offensive  as  well  as  defensive,  in  the  posi- 
tion of  the  advanced  rifle-pits. 


*See  Part  II,  p.  23. 


Chap.  XL.] 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 


203 


This  was  successfully  accomplished  on  the  night  of  the  23d,  and 
the  covered  communication  between  it  and  the  first  parallel  was  com- 
pleted last  night.  The  offensive  element  of  this  parallel  will  consist 
of  a battery  of  four  200-pounders,  against  Fort  Sumter,  at  3, 350  yards 
distance. 

Another  battery  against  Sumter,  containing  two  heavy  Whitworth 
guns  and  two  200-pounders  (furnished  by  the  navy),  will  be  estab- 
lished at  3,800  yards  distance,  while  there  will  be  still  another  of 
heavy  Parrotts  at  4,250  yards  distance. 

Between  the  second  parallel  and  Fort  Wagner  there  is  very  little 
earth  for  covered  approaches,  but  I shall  push  forward  gradually, 
making  liberal  use  of  sand-bags. 

The  enemy  are  constructing  heavy  batteries  of  long-range  guns  on 
my  left,  and  are  strengthening  their  batteries  on  Cumming’s  Point 
and  Fort  Wagner. 

On  the  shell  beach,  stretching  in  a southeasterly  direction  from 
Fort  Johnson,  three  batteries,  containing  rifles  and  mortars,  are  al- 
ready completed  and  in  active  operation. 

On  James  Island,  directly  abreast  of  the  middle  of  Morris  Island, 
a long  line  of  batteries  is  also  just  completed.  These  are  mostly 
defensive,  but  contain  a few  long-range  guns. 

I can  and  do  reach  all  these  batteries,  and  annoy  them  constantly. 

They  succeed,  however,  in  annoying  my  camps  and  trenches,  and 
inflict  an  average  loss  of  3 or  4 men  daily. 

By  next  mail  I hope  to  be  able  to  report  the  result  of  my  first  bat- 
teries against  Sumter,  on  which  will  depend  in  a measure  the  char- 
acter of  subsequent  operations. 

Two  of  my  regiments — the  One  hundred  and  seventy -fourth  and 
One  hundred  and  seventy-sixth  Pennsylvania  (nine-months’  militia) — 
are  to  go  north  immediately,  their  time  having  expired.  I shall  feel 
the  loss  of  them  very  much. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient 
servant, 

Q.  A.  GILLMORE, 

Brigadier-  General,  Commanding . 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-Chief,  TJ.  S.  Army. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

In  the  Field,  Morris  Island,  S.  C.,  July  31,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  matters  quietly  but  satisfactorily 
progressing  here. 

There  has  been  no  fighting  since  the  18th,  excepting  engagements 
between  the  sharpshooters  on  both  sides,  and  daily  but  desultory 
bombardments  in  which  Forts  Sumter  and  Wagner,  the  Cumming’s 
Point  battery,  and  three  batteries  on  the  beach  southeast  from  Fort 
Johnson  take  part  on  one  side  and  the  gunboats  and  our  land  bat- 
teries on  the  other. 

I lose  2 or  3 men  daily,  mostly  wounded. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

Q.  A.  GILLMORE, 
Brigadier-  General,  Commanding. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-Chief,  U.  S.  Army,  Washington,  D.  C . 


204  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

In  the  Field,  Morris  Island,  S.  C.,  Augusts,  1803. 

Sir  : I have  to  report  no  change  in  the  condition  of  affairs  here, 
excepting  that  due  to  the  regular  and  uninterrupted  progress  of  our 
operations  against  Forts  Sumter  and  Wagner. 

By  the  time  the  300-pounder,  platform,  and  ammunition  arrive, 
I shall  be  ready  with  my  batteries  against  Fort  Sumter,  and  shall 
then  have,  at  distances  varying  between  3,300  yards  and  4,250  yards, 
the  following  named  pieces,  viz  : 

One  300-pounder,  weight  of  projectile  250  pounds;  seven  200- 
pounders,  weight  of  projectile  150  pounds ; nine  100-pounders,  weight 
of  projectile  80  pounds ; two  Whitworth  guns,  weight  of  projectile 
80  pounds,  and  300  rounds  of  ammunition  per  gun  in  the  batteries, 
and  as  much  more  in  reserve  and  due  from  the  north. 

Three  brigades  of  re-enforcements  from  Major-General  Foster’s 
command,  amounting  in  the  aggregate  to  3,200  white  and  2,000  col- 
ored troops,  are  now  arriving.  They  will  set  me  up  at  once. 

I hope  to  be  able  to  open  my  batteries  on  Fort  Sumter  in  seven  or 
eight  days,  and  shall  in  the  meantime  gradually  push  forward  my 
approaches  toward  Fort  Wagner. 

It  gratifies  me  to  be  able  to  state  that  my  command  is  in  excellent 
spirits  throughout  the  whole  department. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient 
servant, 

Q.  A.  GILLMORE, 

Brigadier - General,  Commanding. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-Chief,  U.  S.  Army,  Washington,  D.  C. 

P.  S. — There  has  been  but  one  casualty  within  the  last  three  days, 
although  yesterday  the  firing  from  Sumter,  Wagner,  Cumming’s 
Point,  and  the  batteries  near  Fort  Johnson,  was  very  brisk  for  sev- 
eral hours. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

In  the  Field,  Morris  Island,  S.  C.,  August  28,  1863. 

General  : I have  to  report  a slow  but  steady  progress  in  our 
operations  against  Fort  Wagner,  although  its  reduction  is  no  longer 
deemed  essential  to  the  successful  prosecution  of  the  naval  operations 
since  the  fire  of  Fort  Sumter  is  silenced. 

The  narrow  neck  of  land  in  front  of  Fort  Wagner  being  only  20 
yards  wide  and  2 feet  deep  at  high  tide,  our  progress  is  necessarily 
slow.  The  enemy’s  development  is  many  times  greater  than  ours. 
On  the  26th,  the  Twenty-fourth  Massachusetts  carried  by  assault  a 
bold  sand  ridge  which  had  been  most  persistently  held  by  the  enemy. 
We  lost  8 in  killed,  wounded,  and  missing,  and  took  70  prisoners, 
including  2 officers.  The  enemy  sustained  additional  loss  in  killed 
and  wounded,  which  I am  unable  to  report  accurately. 

The  prisoners  report  that  the  space  between  the  ridge  and  Fort 
Wagner  is  filled  with  formidable  torpedoes.  We  have  already  en- 
countered eight  in  our  trenches  beyond  the  ridge. 


Chap.  XL.] 


205 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 

The  monitors  are  expected  to  commence  operations  against  the 
obstructions  very  soon. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient 
servant, 

Q.  A.  GILLMORE, 

Brigadier-  General,  Commanding . 
Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-Chief,  U.  S.  Army,  Washington,  D.  C. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

Morris  Island,  S.  C.,  August  29,  1863. 

Sir  : The  most  important  circumstance  that  has  transpired  within 
the  last  twenty-four  hours  is  the  arrival  of  heavy  re-enforcements 
to  the  enemy.  It  is  estimated  that  during  that  time  4,000  men  came 
down  Cooper  River  in  steamers,  probably  from  the  railroad  wharf, 
and  landed  at  Sullivan’s  Island  and  at  Mount  Pleasant.  This  oc- 
curred in  the  daytime.  What  may  have  been  accomplished  during 
the  night  is  not  known. 

The  monitors  have  not  yet  commenced  operations  upon  the  ob- 
structions. 

Q.  A.  GILLMORE, 

Brigadier-General,  Commanding. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-Chief,  U.  S.  Army,  Washington,  D.  C. 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

Morris  Island,  S.  C.,  September  4,  1863. 

General  : I have  no  important  change  in  the  condition  of  affairs 
here  to  report.  We  are  gradually  creeping  up  to  Fort  Wagner.  If 
my  plans  succeed,  I shall  have  possession  of  all  of  this  island  in  four 
or  five  days.  The  two  days’  firing  at  Sumter  (31st  ultimo  and  1st 
instant)  resulted  in  knocking  down  five  guns  that  may  have  been  par- 
tially serviceable  before  that.  All  the  rampart  of  Sumter  is  plainly 
visible  from  our  lookout,  and  not  a gun  remains  in  position  there  at 
the  present  moment.  On  the  night  of  the  1st,  the  monitors  went  in 
and  opened  on  Sumter  at  500  yards.  They  remained  in  action  four 
or  five  hours,  hauling  off  at  daybreak.  The  fort  did  not  respond  at 
all.  There  are,  therefore,  no  casemate  guns  on  either  the  east  or 
southeast  faces. 

On  the  north  and  northwest  faces  our  shots  have  passed  through 
and  through.  I deem  it  safe  to  say  that  Sumter  is  perfectly  silenced, 
and  has  been  so  practically  since  the  23d  ultimo.  I think  some  guns 
were  remounted  between  the  23d  and  31st  ultimo. 

Q.  A.  GILLMORE, 
Brigadier-  General,  Commanding. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-Chief,  U.  S.  Army,  Washington,  D.  C. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

Morris  Island,  S.  C.,  September  6,  1863. 
Sir  : I have  to  report  that  my  approaches  to  Fort  W agner  have 
now  been  pushed  forward  so  as  to  inask  all  the  guns  on  the  south 


206 


S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 


[Chap.  XL. 


front  of  that  work  that  could  he  brought  to  hear  on  an  assaulting 
column,  and  it  is  not  improbable  that  an  assault  will  be  made  to- 
morrow morning  by  way  of  the  beach  on  the  seaside. 

I think,  also,  that  by  the  use  of  several  howitzer  boats,  borrowed 
from  the  fleet,  I have  succeeded  in  thoroughly  investing  this  island. 

Several  of  my  heavy  guns  are  at  work  trying  to  breach  the  bomb- 
proof shelter  of  Fort  Wagner,  with  a fair  prospect  of  success. 

Whether  the  work  will  be  assaulted,-  or  its  garrison  starved  out,  or 
driven  out  by  the  fire  of  the  bomb-proof,  will  in  all  probability  be 
determined  within  the  next  twenty-four  hours. 

Some  prisoners,  taken  on  the  water  by  one  of  the  picket-boats  night 
before  last,  among  whom  is  Major  Warley,  Second  South  Carolina 
Artillery,  and  chief  of  artillery  on  General  Ripley’s  staff,  confirm 
the  former  reports  that  there  are  no  serviceable  guns  in  Fort  Sumter. 

After  we  obtain  possession  of  Cumming’s  Point,  I desire  to  visit 
Washington  for  conference  and  instruction. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

Q.  A.  GILLMORE, 
Brigadier-General , Commanding . 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-Chief , U.  S.  Army , Washington , D.  C. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

Fort  Wagner,  Morris  Island,  S.  C.,  September  7,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  last  night  our  sappers  crowned 
the  crest  of  the  counterscarp  of  Fort  Wagner  on  its  sea  front,  mask- 
ing all  its  guns,  and  an  order  was  issued  to  carry  the  place  by  assault 
at  9 o’clock  this  morning,  that  being  the  hour  of  low  tide.  About 
10  o’clock  last  night  the  enemy  commenced  evacuating  the  island, 
and  all  but  75  of  them  made  their  escape  from  Cumming’s  Point  in 
small  boats.  Captured  dispatches  show  that  Fort  Wagner  was  com- 
manded by  Colonel  Keitt,  of  South  Carolina,  and  garrisoned  by 
1,400  effective  men,  and  Battery  Gregg  by  between  100  and  200. 

Fort  Wagner  is  a work  of  the  most  formidable  kind.  Its  bomb- 
proof shelter,  capable  of  containing  1,800  men,  remains  intact,  after 
the  most  terrific  bombardment  to  which  any  work  was  ever  subjected. 

We  have  captured  nineteen  pieces  of  artillery  and  a large  supply 
of  excellent  ammunition. 

The  city  and  harbor  of  Charleston  are  now  completely  covered  by 
my  guns. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

Q.  A.  GILLMORE, 
Brigadier-  General,  Commanding. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-Chief , U.  S.  Army,  Washington,  D.  C. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

In  the  Field,  Morris  Island,  S.  C.,  September  8,  1863. 
Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  for  the  defense  of  this  island, 
and  to  enable  us  to  take  advantage  of  the  position  we  now  hold,  I 
have  made  the  following  arrangements  : 

First.  At  Cumming’s  Point  I shall  construct  a small  inclosed 


Chap.  XL.]  OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C.  207 

stockaded  work,  containing  five  or  six  heavy  guns,  to  bear,  a part  of 
them  on  the  channel  and  a part  up  the  harbor  and  on  the  city. 

Second.  I shall  stockade  the  ditch  of  Fort  Wagner,  and  render  it 
capable  of  resisting  an  assault  on  all  sides. 

Third.  I shall  establish  a battery  of  light  guns  on  Light-House 
Inlet,  and  cover  it  by  two  or  three  heavy  guns,  placed  in  the  bat- 
teries erected  by  the  enemy  on  the  high  bluffs  near  the  inlet.  The 
guns  on  these  bluffs  I shall  also  secure  against  escalade. 

Fourth.  I shall  place  the  picket  on  the  hummock  between  Morris 
Island  and  James  Island,  northwest  from  the  mouth  of  Light-House 
Inlet,  within  a defensive  stockade,  so  that  a small  force  can  hold 
that  position. 

Fifth.  In  the  defense  of  Morris  Island,  according  to  this  project, 
3,000  men  will  be  ample. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

Q.  A.  GILLMORE, 
Brigadier-  General , Commanding. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-Chief , U.  S.  Army,  Washington , D.  C. 

P.  S. — I request  permission  to  visit  Washington  for  instructions 
as  to  future  operations. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

Morris  Island,  S.  C.,  September  8,  1863. 

Sir  : Capt.  Alfred  Mordecai,  my  chief  of  ordnance,  reports  that 
twenty-one  pieces  of  artillery  were  captured  by  us  in  Fort  Wagner 
and  Battery  Gregg  yesterday  instead  or  nineteen,  as  I reported,  mak- 
ing an  aggregate  of  thirty-two  pieces  taken  on  this  island. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

Q.  A.  GILLMORE, 
Brigadier- General,  Commanding . 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-Chief,  U.  S.  Army,  Washington,  D.  C. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

In  the  Field,  Morris  Island,  S.  C.,  September  9,  18G3. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  since  my  letter  of  yesterday 
four  additional  pieces  of  artillery  have  been  found,  making  an  ag- 
gregate of  thirty-six  pieces  captured  on  this  island.  It  is  not  im- 
probable that  others  still  remain  concealed. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

Q.  A.  GILLMORE, 
Brigadier-  General,  Commanding. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-Chief,  U.  S.  Army,  "Washington,  D.  C. 


[Chap.  XL. 


208  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

ADDENDA. 

Orders.]  Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

Morris  Island,  S.  C.,  July  13,  1863. 

The  brigadier-general  commanding  presents  his  congratulations 
and  thanks  to  the  army  which  he  has  the  honor  to  command,  for 
the  brilliant  victory  of  the  10th  instant,  which  places  them  3 miles 
nearer  the  rebel  stronghold — Sumter — the  first  among  all  our  coun- 
try’s defenses  against  foreign  foes  that  felt  the  polluting  tread  of 
traitors.  Our  labors,  however,  are  not  over ; they  are  just  begun, 
and  while  the  spires  of  the  rebel  city  still  loom  up  in  the  dim  dis- 
tance, hardships  and  privations  must  be  endured  before  our  hopes 
and  expectations  can  find  their  full  fruition  in  victory. 

Let  us  emulate  the  heroic  deeds  of  our  brothers  in  arms  at  Gettys- 
burg and  Vicksburg,  and  add  to  that  roll  of  fame  which  will  be 
transmitted  to  a grateful  posterity. 

Special  thanks  are  due  to  Brig.  Gen.  I.  Vogdes  and  his  command 
for  the  untiring  energy  and  patient  endurance  displayed  by  them  in 
erecting  the  batteries  on  Folly  Island  under  almost  every  conceiv- 
able disadvantage,  and  to  Brig.  Gen.  George  C.  Strong  and  his  com- 
mand for  the  heroic  gallantry  with  which  they  carried  the  enemy’s 
batteries  on  Morris  Island,  this  being  the  first  instance  during  the 
war  in  which  powerful  batteries  have  been  successfully  assaulted  by 
a column  disembarked  under  a heavy  artillery  fire. 

Q.  A.  GILLMORE, 
Brigadier-General , Commanding. 


Instructions  for  the  third  assault  on  Battery  Wagner . 

[September  6,  1863.] 

In  obedience  to  instructions  from  the  general  commanding  the  de- 
partment,* an  assault  will  be  made  upon  Battery  Wagner  to-morrow 
morning  at  9 o’clock  precisely. 

Fire  from  the  navy,  the  breaching  batteries,  and  mortars  will  be 
kept  up  on  the  work  till  the  latest  moment ; it  will  cease  as  far  as 
necessary  on  the  signal  hereinafter  named.  The  assaulting  columns 
will  instantly  move  forward  when  the  hour  named  arrives. 

The  Third  Regiment  New  Hampshire  Volunteers  and  the  Ninety- 
seventh  Regiment  Pennsylvania  Volunteers  will  occupy  the  trenches 
in  the  extreme  advance,  and  when  the  signal  is  given  will  leap  over 
the  parapet,  and  rush  upon  the  sea  face  of  the  work.  One  hundred 
men,  under  a competent  officer,  will  be  detailed  from  the  leading  regi- 
ments to  attack  the  flank  of  the  sea  face,  spike  the  guns  upon  it, 
and,  mounting  the  parapet,  prevent  the  enemy  from  passing  in  or 
out  of  the  sally-ports  behind  the  flank. 

Those  who  attack  the  sea  face  will  spike  the  guns  and  then  mount 
the  bomb-proof  by  the  traverse,  and  fire  down  into  the  interior  of  the 
work.  They  must  also  seize  the  opening  from  the  bomb-proof  to 
the  sea  face. 

Brigadier-General  Stevenson’s  brigade,  re-enforced  by  the  Fourth 
New  Hampshire  and  Ninth  Maine  Volunteer  Regiments,  will  occupy 
the  trenches  immediately  in  rear  of  the  advanced  party.  When  the 


*See  p.  27, 


Chap.  XL.]  OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C.  209 

signal  is  given,  they  will  spring  out  on  the  beach,  move  forward  at 
the  donble-qnick,  pass  between  Wagner  and  the  sea,  and  extend 
themselves  along  the  rear  face  of  the  fort  to  the  marsh.  They  will 
then  mount  the  parapet,  and  fire  down  upon  the  parade. 

Col.  W.  W.  H.  Davis’  brigade  will  occupy  the  trenches  in  the  rear 
of  Stevenson’s  brigade,  and  at  the  same  signal  will,  with  all  possible 
dispatch,  form  upon  the  beach,  left  in  front,  and  follow  Stevenson’s 
brigade. 

Having  passed  the  fort,  it  will  form  across  the  island,  facing 
toward  Battery  Gregg,  so  as  to  prevent  any  aid  being  sent  from  that 
quarter  to  Wagner.  Skirmishers  will  be  thrown  out  toward  Gregg 
as  far  as  possible. 

The  force  thus  thrown  upon  the  flank  and  rear  should  close  upon 
the  garrison  of  Wagner,  drive  them  to  their  bomb-proofs,  and  make 
them  prisoners. 

The  above-mentioned  troops  will  move  to  the  places  assigned  to 
them  at  half  past  1 a.  m.  They  will  have  their  breakfast  in  their 
haversacks. 

In  order  that  they  may  do  so,  the  guard  of  the  trenches  (the 
Second  Brigade)  will  be  withdrawn  to  the  rear  of  the  second 
parallel,  and  as  much  farther  as  may  be  necessary.  As  soon  as  the 
assaulting  column  moves  upon  the  work,  the  Second  Brigade  will 
move  up  through  the  approaches  to  the  extreme  front,  prepared  to 
re-enforce  the  assault. 

The  whole  detail  of  sharpshooters  will  be  sent  to  the  front  before 
daylight ; a portion  of  them  will  be  placed  in  the  rifle-pits  in  front 
of  the  fifth  parallel,  the  remainder  in  such  a position  in  the  zigzags 
in  front  of  the  fifth  parallel  as  will  enable  them  to  fire  into  the  em- 
brasures in  the  flank  of  the  fort  which  covers  the  salient  next  to  the 
sea.  They  must  keep  up  a constant  and  rapid  fire  on  the  parapet  of 
the  work  and  the  embrasures. 

When  the  work  is  carried,  it  will  be  garrisoned  by  General  Steven- 
son’s command. 

Davis’  brigade  will  remain  in  position  beyond  the  fort,  and  his  men 
will  cover  themselves  as  much  as  possible,  but  keeping  skirmishers 
out. 

All  the  remaining  troops  in  the  command  will  be  relieved  from 
fatigue  duty  at  midnight,  and  will  be  placed  under  arms  at  half  past 
3 o’clock. 

Montgomery’s  brigade  will  move  up  and  occupy  the  trench  south 
of  the  Beacon  House  before  light. 

These  troops  and  all  others  must  be  kept  carefully  concealed  from 
view,  and  perfectly  quiet. 

No  man  will  be  permitted  to  leave  the  ranks  during  the  assault,  to 
assist  the  wounded  or  for  any  purpose  whatever.  The  wounded  can 
be  taken  care  of  when  the  affair  shall  be  over.  All  commanding  offi- 
cers will  caution  their  men  upon  this  point. 

All  prisoners  who  may  be  taken  will  be  kept  in  the  fort  until 
orders  shall  be  given  for  their  removal. 

The  signal  for  the  movement  will  be  the  raising  of  a signal  flag 
on  the  surf  battery  and  on  the  right  of  the  fifth  parallel,  and  the 
American  ensign  on  the  Beacon  House. 

By  order  of  Brigadier-General  Terry  : 

ADRIAN  TERRY, 

Captain , and  Assistant  Adjutant- General, 

14  R R— VOL  XXVIII,  PT  I 


210  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 


[Chap.  XL. 


No.  2. 


Return  of  Casualties  in  the  Union  forces. 

[Compiled  from  nominal  list  of  casualties,  returns,  &c.] 


Events,  &c. 


Attack  on  Morris  Island,  July  10 


First  assault  on  Battery  Wagner , July  11. 

7th  Connecticut  (Companies  A,  B,  I,  and  K). . 

9th  Maine 

76th  Pennsylvania 


Total  July  11. 


Second  assault  on  Battery  Wagner , July  18. 


General  officers 

6th  Connecticut 

9th  Maine 

54th  Massachusetts  (Colored; 

3d  New  Hampshire 

7th  New  Hampshire 

48th  New  York 

100th  New  York 

62d  Ohio 

67th  Ohio 

76th  Pennsylvania 

3d  Rhode  Island  Heavy  Artillery,  Battery  C . 
3d  U.  S.  Artillery,  Battery  E 


Total  July  18 


Siege  of  Battery  Wagner , July  18 -September  7. 


7th  Connecticut 

10th  Connecticut 

17th  Connecticut 

39th  Illinois 

9th  Maine  

11th  Maine  (detachment) 

24th  Massachusetts 

40th  Massachusetts 

54th  Massachusetts  (C.olored) 

3d  New  Hampshire 

4th  New  Hampshire 

7th  New  Hampshire 

1st  New  York  Engineers 

3d  New  Y ork  Light  Artillery,  Batteries  B and  F . 

47th  New  York 

100th  New  York 

144th  New  York 

157th  New  York 

Enfans  Perdus  (New  York) 

62d  Ohio 

67th  Ohio 

75th  Ohio 

52d  Pennsylvania 

85th  Pennsylvania 

97th  Pennsylvania 

104th  Pennsylvania 

3d  Rhode  Island  Heavy  Artillery 

3d  U.'S.  Colored  Troops 

1st  U.  S.  Artillery,  Battery  B 

1st  U.  S.  Artillery,  Battery  C 

3d  U.  S.  Artillery,  Battery  E 


Total,  siege  of  Battery  Wagner,  July  18- 
September  7. 

Grand  total,  operations  on  Morris  Island . 


Killed. 


28 


14 


45 


218 


69 


346 


Wounded. 


12 


91 


90 


120 


73 

86 

135 

33 

108 

105 

92 

77 

72 

18 

1 

5 


805 


266 


1,281 


Captured  or 
missing. 


160 


381 


548 


106 


103 

56 

180 


339 


2 

138 

117 

272 

46 

216 

242 

175 

151 

126 

24 

1 

5 

1,515 


358 


2,318 


Chap.  XL.] 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 


211 


OFFICERS  KILLED. 

Morris  Island,  July  10. 

NEW  YORK. 

Capt.  Louis  H.  Lent,  48th  Infantry. 

Battery  Wagner,  July  11. 

CONNECTICUT. 

Capt.  Theodore  Burdick,  7th  Infantry.  | Lieut.  John  H.  Wilson,  7th  Infantry. 

Battery  Wagner,  July  18. 

CONNECTICUT. 

Lieut.  Stephen  S.  Stevens,  6th  Infantry.  I Lieut.  Marshall  J.  Tourtelotte,  6th  In- 

I fantry. 


MAINE. 


Capt.  Chester  B.  Shaw,  9th  Infantry. 


MASSACHUSETTS. 


Col.  Robert  G.  Shaw,  54th  Infantry. 
Capt.  William  H.  Simpkins,  54th  In- 
fantry. 


Capt.  Cabot  J.  Russell,  54th  Infantry. 


NEW  HAMPSHIRE. 


Lieut.  Alvan  H.  Libby,  3d  Infantry. 
Col.  Haldimand  S.  Putnam,  7th  In- 
fantry. 

Capt.  Warren  E.  F.  Brown,  7th  In- 
fantry. 

Lieut.  Virgil  H.  Cate,  7th  Infantry. 


Lieut.  Henry  W.  Baker,  7th  Infantry. 
Lieut.  Perley  B.  Bryant,  7th  Infantry. 
Lieut.  Andrew  J.  Lane,  7th  Infantry. 
Lieut.  Alfred  N.  Bennett,  7th  Infantry. 


NEW  YORK. 


Lieut.  Col.  John  M.  Green,  48th  Infantry. 
Capt.  James  Farrell , 48th  Infantry. 
Lieut.  Robert  S.  Edwards,  48tli  Infantry. 
Lieut.  Herbert  H.  Haddock,  100th  In- 
fantry. 


Lieut.  Charles  H.  Runckle,  100th  In- 
fantry. 

Lieut.  James  Kavanagh,  100th  In- 
fantry. 


OHIO. 


Lieut.  Perley  B.  Johnson,  62d  Infantry. 
Lieut.  William  Beadling,  62d  Infantry. 
Lieut.  Joseph  M.  Paul,  62d  Infantry. 
Lieut.  George  S.  Brownell,  62d  Infantry. 


Lieut.  Henry  C.  Knoop,  62d  Infantry. 
Capt.  John  C.  Albert,  67th  Infantry. 
Lieut.  James  H.  Baxter,  67th  Infantry. 


PENNSYLVANIA. 

Lieut.  Seth  Thompson,  76th  Infantry. 

Siege  of  Battery  Wagner,  July  18 -September  7. 

Lieut.  Col.  Henry  A.  Purviance,  85th  Pennsylvania,  August  30. 
Lieut.  James  A.  Perkins,  24tli  Massachusetts,  August  26. 

OFFICERS  MORTALLY  WOUNDED. 

Battery  Wagner,  July  18. 


CONNECTICUT. 

gol.  John  L.  Chatfleld,  6th  Infantry. 


212 


S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 


[Chap.  XL. 


MAINE. 

Lieut.  Amaziah  N.  Goodwin,  9th  Infantry. 

NEW  HAMPSHIRE. 

Capt.  Henry  B.  Leavitt,  7th  Infantry.  I Lieut.  John  H.  Worcester,  7th  Infantry. 

Capt.  Jerome  B.  House,  7th  Infantry.  | Lieut.  Ezra  Davis,  7th  Infantry. 

NEW  YORK. 

Capt.  James  O.  Paxson,  48th  Infantry.  I Lieut.  Charles  E.  Fox,  48th  Infantry. 
Capt.  Frederick  Hurst,  48th  Infantry.  | Lieut.  Cyrus  Brown,  100th  Infantry. 

OHIO. 

Maj.  William  Edwards,  62d  Infantry.  I Lieut.  Daniel  C.  Liggett,  62d  Infantry. 
Lieut.  Andrew  J.  Fouts,  62d  Infantry.  | 

UNITED  STATES  VOLUNTEERS. 

Brig.  Gen.  George  C.  Strong. 

Siege  of  Battery  Wagner,  July  18-September  7. 

Lieutenant  Henry  Holbrook,  3d  Rhode  Island  Heavy  Artillery,  August  19. 


No.  3. 

Reports  of  Brig.  Gen.  John  W.  Turner , U.  S.  Army,  Chief  of 
Artillery,  including  bombardment  of  Fort  Sumter. 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

Office  Chief  of  Artillery, 
Morris  Island,  S.  C.,  September  8,  1863. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  transmit  the  following  general  re- 
port of  the  artillery  operations  on  Morris  Island  from  the  26th  day 
of  July  1863,  when,  in  obedience  to  your  orders,  I assumed  the  direc- 
tion of  them,  to  the  7th  day  of  September,  when  our  flag  was  suc- 
cessfully planted  on  the  enemy’s  works  at  Fort  Wagner  and  Battery 
Gregg  : 

After  the  failure  of  the  assault  upon  Fort  Wagner  on  the  18th  of 
July,  it  was  determined  by  the  commanding  general  to  proceed  to 
the  erection  of  breaching  batteries  against  Fort  Sumter  upon  ground 
then  within  our  possession,  and  as  the  work  required  upon  them 
would  nearly,  if  not  quite,  consume  the  entire  labor  of  the  command, 
the  approaches  to  W agner  were  not  to  be  pushed  till  the  completion 
of  the  batteries  should  render  the  labor  of  the  troops  available  for 
this  purpose. 

The  selection  of  the  ground  for  the  location  of  the  batteries  being 
determined  upon,  work  was  commenced  upon  them  on  the  night  of 
the  24th  of  July,  and  from  this  date  steadily  progressed  day  and 
night,  with  the  labor  of  mounting  guns,  supplying  magazines  -with 
implements  and  ammunition,  till  all  were  completed. 

The  batteries,  commencing  on  the  right,  ran  around  to  the  left,  as 
follows : 

BATTERY  BROWN. 

On  right  of  second  parallel,  near  the  beach  ; distance  from  Fort 
Sumter,  3,560  yards;  from  Battery  Gregg,  2,170  yards;  from  Fort 
Wagner,  830  yards. 


Chap.  XL.] 


213 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 

Armament. — Two  8-inch  Parrott  rifles. 

Garrison. — Company  I,  Third  Rhode  Island  Heavy  Artillery, 
commanded  by  Capt.  Charles  G.  Strahan,  Third  Rhode  Island 
Heavy  Artillery. 

BATTERY  ROSECRANS. 

Near  left  of  second  parallel ; distance  from  Fort  Snmter,  3,500 
yards;  from  Battery  Gregg,  2,110  yards;  from  Fort  Wagner,  830 
yards. 

Armament. — Three  100-pounder  Parrott  rifles. 

Garrison. — Company  M,  Third  Rhode  Island  Heavy  Artillery,  and 
a detachment  of  the  One  hundred  and  seventy-eighth  New  York 
Volunteer  Infantry,  commanded  by  Capt.  J.  J.  Comstock,  jr.,  Third 
Rhode  Island  Heavy  Artillery. 

BATTERY  MEADE. 

Near  left  of  second  parallel,  in  front  of  Battery  Rosecrans ; dis- 
tance from  Fort  Sumter,  3,475  yards  ; from  Battery  Gregg,  2,085 
yards;  from  Fort  Wagner,  820  yards. 

Armament. — Two  100-pounder  Parrott  rifles. 

Garrison. — Detachments  from  Third  Rhode  Island  Heavy  Artil- 
lery, One  hundredth  New  York  Volunteers,  and  One  hundred  and 
seventy-eighth  New  York  Volunteer  Infantry,  commanded  by  First 
Lieut.  Henry  Holbrook,  Third  Rhode  Island  Heavy  Artillery,  and 
after  his  death  by  First  Lieut.  A.  E.  Greene  Third  Rhode  Island 
Heavy  Artillery. 

NAVAL  BATTERY. 

Center  of  first  parallel,  200  yards  north  of  Beacon  House  ; distance 
from  Fort  Sumter,  3,980  yards  ; from  Battery  Gregg,  2,590  yards  ; 
from  Fort  Wagner,  1,335  yards. 

Armament. — Two  8-inch  Parrott  rifles  and  two  80-pounder  Whit- 
worths. 

Garrison. — Detachment  of  sailors  from  the  U.  S.  frigate  Wabash, 
commanded  by  Commander  Foxhall  A.  Parker,  U.  S.  Navy. 

BATTERY  HAYS. 

On  creek,  312  yards  west  of  Beacon  House  ; distance  from  Fort 
Sumter,  4,225  yards;  from  Battery  Gregg,  2,850  yards;  from  Fort 
Wagner,  1,710  yards. 

Armament. — One  8-inch  Parrott  rifle. 

Garrison. — Detachment  of  Company  D,  Third  Rhode  Island  Heavy 
Artillery,  commanded  by  Capt.  R.  G.  Shaw,  Third  Rhode  Island 
Heavy  Artillery. 

BATTERY  RENO. 

On  creek,  135  yards  west  of  Battery  Hays,  in  sand  ridge  ; distance 
from  Fort  Sumter,  4,320  yards ; from  Battery  Gregg,  2,950  yards ; 
from  Fort  Wagner,  1,860  yards. 

Armament. — One  8-inch  Parrott  rifle  and  two  100-pounder  Parrott 
rifles. 

Garrison. — Company  H,  Third  Rhode  Island  Heavy  Artillery,  and 
a detachment  of  the  One  hundred  and  seventy-eighth  New  York  Vol- 
unteer Infantry,  commanded  by  Capt.  A.  W.  Colwell,  Third  Rhode 
Island  Heavy  Artillery. 


214  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 


[Chap.  XL. 


BATTERY  STEVENS. 

Immediately  to  the  left  of  Battery  Reno  ; distance  from  Fort 
Sumter,  4,320  yards ; from  Battery  Gregg,  2,950  yards  ; from  Fort 
Wagner,  1,860  yards. 

Armament. — Two  100-pounder  Parrott  rifles. 

Garrison. — Detachments  Company  C,  First  U.  S.  Artillery,  and 
Seventh  Connecticut  Volunteer  Infantry,  commanded  by  First  Lieut. 
James  E.  Wilson,  Fifth  U.  S.  Artillery. 

BATTERY  STRONG. 

Immediately  to  left  of  Battery  Stevens;  distance  from  Fort  Sumter, 
4,345  yards;  from  Battery  Gregg,  2,950  yards;  from  Fort  Wagner, 
1,900  yards. 

Armament. — One  10-inch  Parrott  rifle. 

Garrison. — Detachment  Seventh  Connecticut  Volunteer  Infantry, 
commanded  by  Capt.  S.  H.  Gray,  Seventh  Connecticut  Volunteer 
Infantry. 

BATTERY  KIRBY. 

One  hundred  yards  to  the  left  of  Battery  Strong ; distance  from 
Fort  Sumter,  4,400  yards ; from  Battery  Gregg,  3,000  yards : from 
Fort  Wagner,  1,960  yards. 

Armament. — Two  10-inch  seacoast  mortars. 

Garrison. — Detachment  Eleventh  Maine  Infantry,  commanded  by 
First  Lieut.  Charles  Sellmer,  Eleventh  Maine  Volunteer  Infantry. 

Most  of  this  heavy  artillery  had  been  brought  from  Hilton  Head, 
and  all  of  it  landed  on  this  island  since  the  24th  of  July.  The  place 
of  landing  for  our  artillery,  and,  indeed,  of  all  our  supplies,  was  at  the 
south  end  of  Morris  Island,  in  Light-House  Inlet,  a narrow,  confined 
stream,  approached  from  the  sea  only  through  a crooked,  narrow 
channel,  and  over  a bar  admitting  at  high  water  vessels  of  only  8 and 
10  feet  draught.  Nearly  one-half  the  time  there  was  no  ingress  or 
egress  to  the  inlet,  and  much  valuable  time  was  lost  in  waiting  for 
high  water,  on  which  to  float  our  transports  over  the  bar. 

Where  we  landed  our  artillery  on  Morris  Island  to  our  batteries 
was  a distance  varying  from  li  to  2 miles.  This  entire  distance  was 
heavy  sand,  through  which  all  the  guns  were  dragged  into  position 
by  troops  at  night.  Seven  heavy  guns  were  thus  dragged  to  the  im- 
mediate front  of  Fort  Wagner,  put  in  position,  equipped,  magazines 
filled,  and  the  batteries  served  for  seven  days,  though  within  half 
range  of  seven  heavy  pieces  of  artillery  with  which  that  place  was 
garnished  and  within  400  yards  of  their  sharpshooters,  with  their 
whole  front  covered  with  marksmen  armed  with  telescopic  rifles  of 
extraordinary  power. 

On  the  evening  of  the  16th  of  August,  a sufficient  number  of  bat- 
teries being  completed  and  in  readiness  to  warrant  the  opening  of 
the  bombardment,  final  orders  were  issued  to  open  fire  upon  Fort 
Sumter  at  daybreak  on  the  morning  of  the  17th  from  all  the  batteries 
which  were  completed,  opening  the  other  batteries  as  fast  as  they 
were  finished. 

Accordingly,  on  the  morning  of  the  17th — 

Battery  Brown  opened  with  one  8-inch,  throwing  shell.  A gunner’s 
gimlet  having  been  accidentally  broken  off  in  the  vent  of  the  other 
piece  of  this  battery,  its  service  was  lost  for  three  days  while  drill- 
ing it  out. 


215 


Chap.  XL.]  OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 

Battery  Rosecrans,  one  gnn  throwing  shell  and  the  other  two 
shot. 

Battery  Meade,  both  pieces  throwing  shell. 

Naval  Battery,  the  Parrotts  throwing  shell  and  the  Whitworths 
shot. 

Fire  was  opened  in  the  first  instance  from  the  Whitworths  with 
shell,  but  the  frequent  instances  of  premature  explosion  which  oc- 
curred made  it  necessary  to  abandon  the  use  of  shell  entirely. 

Battery  Hays,  one  8-inch,  throwing  shot. 

Battery  Kirby,  throwing  mortar  shell. 

On  the  morning  of  the  18th,  there  was  added  to  this  fire  from 

Battery  Reno,  one  8-inch,  throwing  shell ; one  100-pounder  throw- 
ing shell  and  a 100-pounder  throwing  shot. 

On  the  19th — 

Battery  Stevens,  one  100-pounder,  throwing  shell. 

On  the  20th,  all  our  guns  were  in  operation,  adding  to  the  fire  of 
the  19  th. 

Battery  Brown,  one  8-inch,  throwing  shot. 

Battery  Stevens,  one  100-pounder,  throwing  shot. 

Battery  Strong,  one  10-inch,  throwing  both  shot  and  shell. 

The  following  batteries  had  also  been  erected  with  the  view  of 
keeping  down  the  enemy’s  fire  which  was  to  be  expected  from  Fort 
Wagner  and  Battery  Gregg  when  we  should  open  our  breaching 
batteries  upon  Fort  Sumter. 

BATTERY  HAYS. 

On  creek,  312  yards  west  of  Beacon  House;  distance  from  Battery 
Gregg,  2,950  yards;  from  Fort  Wagner,  1,830  yards. 

Armament . — Seven  30-pounder  Parrott  rifles. 

Garrison. — Detachment  Company  D,  Third  Rhode  Island  Heavy 
Artillery,  commanded  by  Capt.  R.  G.  Shaw,  Third  Rhode  Island 
Heavy  Artillery. 

BATTERY  WEED. 

In  rear  of  first  parallel,  125  yards;  distance  from  Fort  Wagner, 
1,460  yards. 

Armament. — Five  10-inch  siege  mortars. 

Garrison. — Detachments  Companies  H and  D,  Seventh  Connecticut 
Volunteer  Infantry,  commanded  by  Capt.  B.  F.  Skinner,  Seventh 
Connecticut  V olunteer  Infantry. 

BATTERY  REYNOLDS. 

In  first  parallel,  distance  from  Fort  Wagner,  1,335  yards. 

Armament. — Five  10-inch  siege  mortars. 

Garrison. — Company  B,  Third  Rhode  Island  Heavy  Artillery,  and 
detachment  One  hundred  and  seventy-eighth  New  York  Volunteer 
Infantry,  commanded  by  Capt.  A.  E.  Greene,  Third  Rhode  Island 
Heavy  Artillery. 


BATTERY  KEARNY. 

On  extreme  left  of  second  parallel,  next  to  creek;  distance  from 
Fort  Wagner,  720  yards;  from  Battery  Gregg,  1,955  yards. 
Armament. — Three  30-pounder  Parrott  rifles. 


[Chap.  XL. 


216  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  EL  A. 

Garrison.  — Detachments  Companies  C and  K,  Seventh  Connecticut 
Volunteer  Infantry,  commanded  by  Lieut.  S.  S.  Atwell,  Seventh  Con- 
necticut Volunteer  Infantry. 

Besides  the  above-mentioned  guns,  there  were  in  position  in  the 
second  parallel,  at  a distance  of  885  yards  from  Wagner,  eight  field 
guns  for  defensive  purposes,  to  repel  sorties,  viz  : 

Four  12-pounder  howitzers  of  Light  Company  B,  First  U.  S.  Artil- 
lery, Lieut.  Guy  V.  Henry,  First  U.  S.  Artillery,  commanding,  and 
manned  by  detachments  from  Company  B,  First  U.  S.  Artillery,  and 
Light  Company  E,  Third  U.  S.  Artillery  ; two  12-pounder  Napoleon 
guns  of  Light  Company  F,  Third  New  York  Artillery,  Capt.  James 
E.  Ashcroft  commanding,  and  two  12-pounder  Wiards,  of  Light 
Company  B,  Third  New  York  Artillery,  Lieut.  Paul  Berchmire 
commanding. 

The  fire  from  the  breaching  batteries  upon  Sumter  was  incessant, 
and  kept  up  continuously  from  daylight  till  dark,  until  the  evening 
of  the  23d.  For  five  days  all  the  guns  were  directed  upon  the  gorge 
wall,  and  had  resulted  in  bringing  it  down  to  such  an  extent  that  on 
the  evening  of  the  21st  a practicable  breach  had  been  accomplished. 
On  the  morning  of  the22d,  the  fire  from  Batteries  Meade,  Rosecrans, 
and  Brown  was  directed  upon  the  parapet  of  the  southeasterly  face, 
or  right  flank,  of  the  work,  with  the  view  of  dismounting  the  guns 
on  the  barbette  of  this  face,  which  commanded  the  entrance  to  the 
harbor,  as  well  as  to  destroy  the  guns  on  the  northeasterly  face,  which 
this  fire  would  take  in  reverse.  The  fire  upon  the  gorge  had,  by  the 
morning  of  the  23d,  succeeded  in  destroying  every  gun  upon  the 
parapet  of  it,  and,  as  far  as  could  be  observed,  had  disabled  or  dis- 
mounted all  the  guns  upon  the  parapet  of  the  two  faces  looking  to- 
ward the  city,  which  it  had  taken  in  reverse.  The  parapet  and  ram- 
parts of  the  gorge  were  completely  demolished  for  nearly  the  entire 
length  of  the  face,  and  in  places  everything  was  swept  off  down  to 
the  arches,  the  debris  forming  an  accessible  ramp  to  the  top  of  the 
ruins.  Nothing  further  being  gained  by  a longer  fire  upon  this  face, 
all  the  guns  were  directed  this  day  upon  the  southeasterly  flank, 
and  continued  an  incessant  fire  throughout  the  day.  The  demolition 
of  the  fort  at  the  close  of  this  day’s  firing  was  complete,  so  far  as  its 
offensive  powers  were  considered.  Every  gun  upon  the  parapets  was 
either  dismounted  or  seriously  damaged;  the  terre-plein  for  the  entire 
circuit  of  the  place  must  have  been  shattered  and  plowed  up  by  our 
projectiles,  hundreds  of  which  had  been  seen  to  strike  upon  it.  The 
parapet  could  be  seen  in  many  places,  both  on  the  sea  and  channel 
faces,  completely  torn  away  down  to  the  terre-plein ; the  place,  in  fine, 
was  a ruin,  and  effectually  disabled  for  any  immediate  defense  of  the 
harbor  of  Charleston. 

Having  accomplished  the  end  proposed,  orders  were  accordingly 
issued  on  the  evening  of  the  23d  for  the  firing  to  cease,  having  been 
continuously  sustained  for  seven  days.  There  had  been  thrown 
5,009  projectiles,  of  which  about  one-half  had  struck  the  fort. 

The  labor  required  for  the  service  of  these  heavy  guns  for  such  a 
long  period  of  continuous  firing  was  very  great,  and  at  its  termina- 
tion both  officers  and  men  were  nearly  exhausted.  The  zeal  they  dis- 
played and  the  manner  in  which  they  performed  their  duties  through- 
out entitle  them  to  much  credit.  The  battery  commanders  are  de- 
serving of  especial  mention  for  the  interest  and  attention  which  they 
gave  to  their  duties  and  for  their  efforts  to  attain  that  accuracy  of 
fire  so  essential  to  success,  and  which,  with  the  service  of  rifled  guns 
in  the  field,  is  attained  only  by  unremitted  attention. 


Chap.  XL.] 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 


217 


Lieut.  Henry  Holbrook,  Third  Rhode  Island  Artillery,  command- 
ing Battery  Meade,  was  mortally  wounded  in  his  battery,  on  the  19th, 
by  a fragment  of  a shell.  He  had  been  the  first  selected  from  the 
subordinates  of  his  regiment  to  command  a battery,  and  had  proved 
himself  an  energetic,  zealous,  and  brave  soldier. 

The  loss  in  the  batteries  during  the  seven  days  was  1 commissioned 
officer  and  12  enlisted  men  wounded,  and  3 men  killed. 

The  immense  labor  of  landing  all  this  heavy  artillery,  putting  it 
in  position,  equipping  the  batteries,  and  supplying  them  with  ammu- 
nition and  projectiles,  was  under  the  supervision  of  Capt.  Alfred  Mor- 
decai,  ordnance  department,  to  whose  untiring  industry,  energy,  and 
ability  you  are  indebted  for  so  speedy  a completion  of  your  bat- 
teries. 

Lieut.  James  E.  Wilson,  Fifth  U.  S.  Artillery,  had  the  immediate 
charge  of  mounting  guns,  and  rendered  most  efficient  service  in  this 
particular.  He  was  engaged  every  night  for  over  a month  on  this 
laborious  duty. 

A detachment  of  Company  C,  First  U.  S.  Artillery,  have  been  in- 
valuable in  the  experience  which  they  possessed  in  handling  ord- 
nance and  ordnance  stores,  and  magazine  work ; their  attention  to 
duty  and  their  industry  do  them  great  credit. 

From  the  23d  of  August  till  the  30th,  a desultory  fire  was  kept  up 
on  Sumter,  to  prevent  repairs  and  hinder  the  enemy  from  mounting 
guns. 

On  the  30th,  a severe  cannonade  was  opened,  and  continued  during 
the  day  and  the  31st,  at  the  request  of  the  commanding  officer  of 
the  naval  forces,  who  had  in  view  to  enter  the  harbor  on  the  night  of 
the  31st.  This  fire  destroyed  every  vestige  of  a gun  or  carriage  left 
on  the  parapet  of  the  work. 

During  this  period,  our  approaches  toward  Fort  Wagner  had  pro- 
gressed rapidly,  and  were,  on  the  evening  of  the  4th  of  September, 
within  150  yards  of  the  ditch.  A battery  of  four  8-inch  siege  mortars 
and  three  Coehorns  had  been  established  in  the  fifth  parallel,  at  a 
distance  of  250  yards  from  the  enemy’s  works,  and  one  of  two  10-inch 
siege  mortars  at  a distance  of  500  yards.  Capt.  B.  F.  Skinner,  Sev- 
enth Connecticut,  commanded  the  8-inch  mortars,  and  Capt.  J.  Ben. 
Dennis,  Seventh  Connecticut,  the  10-inch. 

At  this  period  of  our  operations,  the  great  disadvantage  under 
which  we  labored  from  the  want  of  development  in  our  attack  was 
most  severely  felt,  in  limiting,  as  it  did,  our  artillery  fire,  and  enabling 
the  enemy  in  a corresponding  degree  to  keep  up  his,  as  well  as  to 
keep  his  front  lined  with  sharpshooters.  Unable  to  establish  bat- 
teries on  the  flanks  of  our  approaches,  we  were  left  to  the  only  re- 
source of  using  our  guns  over  the  heads  of  our  own  troops  and  working 
parties  at  the  front.  This  led  to  repeated  and  unfortunate  accidents, 
as,  when  a rifled  shot  would  prematurely  explode  or  capsize,  or  the 
brass  ring  at  the  base  would  strip  off,  it  would  almost  always  injure 
some  one  among  the  thickly  crowded  troops  in  the  trenches,  and 
obliged  us  to  suspend  this  fire  almost  entirely.  We  replaced  it,  as 
far  as  our  means  would  allow,  by  a vertical  fire,  but  the  enemy,  de- 
spite it,  brought  his  artillery,  with  a formidable  fire  of  sharpshooters, 
to  bear  with  fury  upon  the  head  of  our  sap,  which,  together  with 
the  want  of  earth  for  cover,  about  stopped  further  progress. 

A consultation  was  here  held  with  the  commanding  general  and 
the  assistant  engineer  in  charge  of  operations  at  the  front,  in  which 
it  was  determined  to  bombard  the  place  again  in  conjunction  with 


218  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  F.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

the  naval  forces,  if  this  plan  should  he  agreed  upon  by  the  com- 
manding officer  of  the  squadron,  and  if,  after  thirty  hours’  bom- 
bardment it  should  appear  to  be  justifiable,  to  follow  it  by  an  assault. 

In  conference  with  the  commanding  officer  of  the  naval  forces,  it 
was  agreed  upon  to  put  the  Ironsides  into  the  attack  upon  Wagner, 
which  would  bring  a battery  of  eight  heavy  guns  into  action ; the 
monitors  to  prevent  the  succor  of  the  place  during  the  night  after 
the  first  day’s  bombardment,  to  interrupt  communication  between 
Forts  Wagner  and  Gregg,  and  to  engage  Wagner  just  previous  to 
the  assault. 

Accordingly,  at  daylight  on  the  morning  of  the  5th  of  September, 
all  the  troops  but  a picket  guard  being  withdrawn  to  the  rear  of  the 
batteries,  our  artillery  opened  fire. 

The  following  pieces  of  artillery  were  brought  into  action  : One 
10-inch  rifle  ; four  8-inch  rifles  ; nine  100-pounder  rifles  ; ten  30- 
pounder  rifles  ; ten  10-inch  siege  mortars ; four  8-inch  siege  mortars, 
and  three  Coehorn  mortars. 

The  30-pounder  Parrotts  were  used  principally  to  intercept  com- 
munication between  Wagner  and  Gregg.  The  heavy  guns,  with  the 
exception  of  two  8-inch  in  Battery  Brown,  were  directed  upon  the 
bomb-proof.  Battery  Brown  was  used  upon  the  left  flank  of  the 
enemy’s  works  extending  down  to  the  sea ; the  vertical  fire  searched 
the  fort  from  right  to  left,  and  the  Ironsides  took  it  in  flank,  enfilad' 
ing  the  entire  front. 

This  fire  contined  with  no  abatement  during  the  day  and  night,  and 
opened  with  renewed  vigor  on  the  morning  of  the  6th, 

The  enemy’s  fire  was  completely  silenced  by  it,  and  he  was  driven 
for  cover  to  his  bomb-proof.  Our  engineers,  availing  themselves  of 
this,  renewed  their  labors,  and  on  the  morning  of  the  6th  had 
crowned  the  glacis  of  the  work. 

The  enemy  was  unable  to  withstand  for  an  instant  the  fury  of 
our  fire,  but  kept  close  in  his  bomb-proof,  and  our  parties  pushing 
the  sap  worked  undisturbed.  On  the  morning  of  the  6th,  it  became 
apparent  that  under  our  fire  we  could  run  our  approaches  so  far 
forward  as  to  mask  all  the  enemy’s  artillery,  and  so  enable  an  as- 
saulting column  to  debouch  from  them  and  gain  the  enemy’s  para- 
pets without  being  exposed  to  a single  gun.  This  it  was  deemed 
desirable  to  do,  and  accordingly  the  fire  was  ordered  to  be  continued 
till  the  following  morning,  the  7th,  when  an  assault  was  arranged  to 
take  place  at  low  tide,  which  would  give  us  the  greatest  breadth  of 
beach.  The  fire  of  the  heavy  rifle  guns,  though,  was  slackened,  it 
being  evident  they  were  doing  no  great  damage  to  the  bomb-proof, 
and  five  of  them  were  turned  upon  other  parts  of  the  work. 

During  the  night  of  the  6th,  information  was  received  that  the 
enemy  was  evacuating  the  place,  which  was  confirmed  by  a reconnais- 
sance, when  our  fire  ceased,  and  our  troops  immediately  took  pos- 
session. 

This  bombardment  lasted  about  forty  hours,  in  which  time  there 
were  thrown  by  the  land  batteries  1,663  rifle  projectiles  and  1,553 
mortar  shells. 

Notwithstanding  the  heavy  fire  of  this  bombardment,  together 
with  all  the  fire  Fort  Wagner  had  been  subjected  to  since  the  com- 
mencement of  our  attack,  from  land  and  naval  batteries,  its  defenses 
were  not  materially  injured ; that  is  to  say,  the  parapets,  bomb-proofs, 
and  traverses  of  sand  still  remained  and  would  have  afforded  shelter 
to  infantry  behind  them,  though  greatly  tossed  about  and  torn  up  by 


Chap.  XL.] 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 


219 


onr  projectiles,  but,  under  our  fire,  it  was  impossible  to  serve  their 
artillery,  nor  could  they  expose  themselves  outside  of  their  bomb- 
proof for  an  instant. 

Our  fire  of  rifle  shells  on  the  5th  and  6th  instant  at  the  bomb- 
proof did  it  little  or  no  damage  ; still,  it  was  very  effective  in  other 
respects,  seriously  interrupting  the  communications  which  ran  under 
the  traverses  of  the  sea  face  by  filling  them  with  sand.  It  was  also 
found  that  a magazine  located  in  one  of  those  traverses  was  seriously 
in  danger  of  being  penetrated  by  our  rifle  projectiles. 

The  great  range  which  had  been  attained  by  the  Parrott  guns 
gave  the  means,  with  the  control  which  we  had  of  the  swamp  on  the 
left  of  our  position,  in  which  to  establish  a gun  for  throwing  pro- 
jectiles into  Charleston.  The  difficulty  was  in  preparing  a battery 
in  the  center  of  this  swamp,  a mile  distant  from  firm  ground,  as  it 
was  required  to  be  to  attain  an  effective  range  of  Charleston.  It 
was  finally  overcome  by  the  commanding  general,  and  a battery  for 
an  8-inch  Parrott  established,  under  the  direction  of  Col.  E.  W. 
Serrell,  Volunteer  Engineers,  at  7,900  yards  from  Saint  Michael’s 
Church,  in  the  city  of  Charleston. 

The  piece  was  mounted  under  the  supervision  of  Lieutenant  Wad- 
lie,  Third  New  Hampshire,  who  deserves  great  credit  for  the  ac- 
complishment of  this  work,  done  under  so  many  difficulties.  The 
battery  was  garrisoned  by  a detachment  of  the  Eleventh  Maine  Vol- 
unteer Infantry,  commanded  by  Lieut.  Charles  Sellmer,  Eleventh 
Maine. 

This  battery  was  opened,  on  the  night  of  the  22d  of  August,  on 
Charleston,  and  fired  some  15  rounds.  Unfortunately,  on  the  second 
occasion  of  firing,  the  gun  burst,  the  breach  breaking  just  in  rear  of 
the  vent,  and  was  blown  clear  of  the  re-enforce.  Some  35  shells 
were  fired  in  all  from  it.  Both  incendiary  shells  and  shells  filled 
with  Greek  fire  were  used.  The  latter  worked  very  poorly,  nearly 
every  one  prematurely  exploding,  and  it  is  not  determined  whether 
any  shells  containing  Greek  fire  ever  reached  Charleston. 

The  total  number  of  projectiles  thrown  against  Sumter  up  to  the 
7th  of  September  was  6,451,  and  against  Wagner,  since  the  26th  of 
July,  9,875,  making  a total  of  artillery  projectiles  of  16,326. 

In  closing  this  report,  I would  call  the  attention  of  the  command- 
ing general  to  the  zeal  and  efficient  services  rendered  by  Capt.  C.  R. 
Brayton,  Third  Rhode  Island  Heavy  Artillery,  who  has  acted  during 
this  period  of  operations  as  my  assistant. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOHN  W.  TURNER, 
Colonel , and  Chief  of  Artillery. 

Brig.  Gen.  Q.  A.  Gillmore, 

Commanding  Department  of  the  South. 


Office  Chief  of  Artillery, 

Folly  Island , S.  C.,  November  30,  1863. 

General  : In  compliance  with  your  verbal  request  that  I give 
some  of  the  details  of  firing,  with  what  observations  I may  have 
made  in  the  artillery  practice,  particularly  in  the  use  of  the  Parrott 
rifle,  during  the  artillery  operations  upon  Morris  Island,  I would  sub- 
mit the  following : 


220  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

The  armament  of  the  breaching  batteries  first  erected  against  Fort 
Sumter,  as  I have  before  enumerated  in  my  first  report,  consisted  of 
one  10-inch,  six  8-inch,  nine  100-pounder  Parrott  rifles,  and  two  80- 
pounder  Whitworths. 

In  the  second  bombardment,  commencing  the  26th  of  October, 
there  were  in  position  one  10-inch,  two  8-inch,  and  nine  100-pounder 
rifles,  one  10-inch  columbiad,  and  four  10-inch  seacoast  mortars ; and 
subsequently,  at  the  date  of  this  report,  there  were  added  eight  10- 
inch  seacoast  mortars,  two  10-inch  siege  mortars,  and  two  13-inch 
seacoast  mortars. 

The  garrisons  of  these  batteries  were  made  sufficiently  strong,  so 
that  each  gun  had  three  reliefs.  A relief  consisted  of  a full  detach- 
ment of  cannoneers,  with  2 and  3 men  for  service  in  magazine  with 
each  relief. 

A tour  of  duty  for  a relief  with  the  breaching  batteries  was  four 
hours  on  and  eight  off.  The  relief,  however,  which  came  on  at  8 
o’clock  in  the  evening  generally  remained  till  4 next  morning  when 
no  night  firing  took  place. 

The  firing  from  the  batteries  against  Wagner  not  being  so  rapid 
or  so  constant  as  from  the  other  batteries,  men  served  in  them  twelve 
hours  on  and  twenty-four  off. 

It  was  quite  a task  for  the  men  simply  to  go  to  and  from  the  bat- 
teries, when  added  to  the  labor  they  performed  at  their  guns.  The 
numerous  guns  of  the  enemy  which  encircled  us  swept  the  ground 
for  a space  of  nearly  a mile  in  rear  of  our  batteries.  Throwing  our 
camps  necessarily  beyond  it,  this  distance  had  to  be  passed  over  at 
every  tour  of  duty. 

It  very  soon  became  manifest,  after  our  fire  upon  Sumter  had 
opened,  that  unremitted  attention  to  the  service  of  these  rifled  guns 
in  every  particular  of  detail  would  be  imperative  to  insure  that  ac- 
curacy necessary  for  success. 

The  precision  of  fire  of  the  Parrott  rifles  was  remarkable,  probably 
excelling  any  artillery  ever  before  brought  on  to  the  field  in  siege 
operations  ; but  it  was  quickly  found  that,  in  the  field,  where  prepara- 
tions are  not  always  very  complete  and  necessary  appliances  are 
scanty,  many  elements  entered  to  disturb  this  accuracy,  more  particu- 
larly when  the  power  of  the  gun  came  to  be  taxed,  as  in  the  range  we 
wished  to  attain  in  our  fire  upon  Sumter  ; that  errors  at  this  distance 
multiplied  in  these  guns  very  rapidly,  and  therefore  greater  atten- 
tion than  that  ordinarily  given  to  a smooth-bore  gun  would  be  re- 
quired to  eliminate  them.  To  this  end,  battery  commanders  were 
required  to  be  present  at  all  firing,  and  were  constantly  instructed 
and  strictly  enjoined  in  the  observance  of  everything  connected  with 
the  service  of  the  piece  which  it  was  thought  might  in  any  way  affect 
its  accuracy. 

It  was  expected  that  the  100-pounders  and  the  8-inch  would  fire 
with  a rapidity  of  about  one  discharge  in  eight  minutes,  but  the 
result  of  the  first  day’s  firing  showed  that  this  time  was  greatly 
exceeded.  Afterward,  however,  when  officers  and  men  had  more 
experience,  and  the  machinery  of  the  carriages  had  worked  smooth, 
the  firing  was  more  rapid,  and,  when  necessary,  the  100-pounders 
could  be  fired  once  in  five  minutes,  and  the  8-inch  once  in  seven  and 
eight  minutes.  The  10-inch  was  never  fired  faster  than  once  in  ten 
minutes,  but  could  be  served  with  facility  for  a day  at  a rate  of  once 
in  eight  minutes. 

There  is  an  immense  labor  incurred  in  the  handling  of  the  pro- 


Chap.  XL.] 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 


221 


jectiles  of  these  guns,  carrying  them  to  and  from  the  magazine  while 
serving  the  piece,  when  continuous  firing  is  required.  To  lighten 
this  task,  I have  had  in  our  later  firing  fatigue  parties  regularly  de- 
tailed for  this  work. 

It  was  the  practice,  in  obedience  to  instructions,  to  wash  the  guns 
out  thoroughly  after  about  the  20th  round.  I do  not  know  as  this 
was  absolutely  necessary,  but  it  insures  a better  service  of  the  gun, 
when  dirt  and  sand  are  so  liable,  as  in  field  works,  to  get  into  the 
bore  of  the  piece,  and  it  was  found  a useful  measure  of  precaution, 
as  time  was  thus  taken  to  allow  the  gun  to  cool,  as  it  became  quite 
hot  after  about  this  number  of  rounds. 

The  projectiles  were  also  carefully  greased,  and  latterly  an  oiled 
sponge  has  been  used,  in  addition,  after  every  third  or  fourth  shot. 
The  very  great  liability,  though,  of  having  dirt  and  sand  adhere  to 
the  projectiles  and  sponge  when  thus  greased,  notwithstanding  every 
care  may  be  taken,  make  these  expedients  very  doubtful.  If  per- 
mitted to  be  used,  close  attention  must  be  given  it  at  all  times. 

As  with  the  smaller  Parrott  rifles,  when  the  projectile  failed  to  take 
the  groove,  it  received  a wabbling  motion  and  frequently  capsized. 
The  remedy  of  slightly  separating  the  band  of  brass  from  the  base 
of  the  projectile,  to  allow  the  gas  to  penetrate,  was  quite  effectual  in 
stopping  it.  This  required  one  or  two  men  more  in  each  battery,  to 
attend  to  this  duty  alone.  Great  care  must  be  taken  to  avoid  the 
danger  of  separating  the  brass  to  such  extent  as  to  wedge  the  shell 
in  the  gun,  which  is  liable  to  occur. 

But  few  instances  occurred  of  the  brass  stripping  from  the  pro- 
jectile. 

The  frequent  premature  explosion  of  shells  while  in  the  piece  or 
just  after  leaving  it,  attracted  attention,  and  led  to  the  belief  at  first 
that  the  powder  was  ignited  by  the  flame  passing  around  the  thread 
of  the  fuse.  Every  precaution  was  immediately  taken  by  the  use  of 
white  lead  applied  to  the  thread  when  inserting  the  fuse-plug,  but 
without  correcting  the  evil. 

A close  examination  through  a long  period  of  firing,  with  many 
examples,  has  finally  led  to  the  opinion  that  it  is  due  to  defects  in  the 
iron  at  the  base  of  the  shell  when  it  comes  from  the  foundry. 

Flaws  and  cracks,  which  are  frequently  detected  by  the  eye,  permit 
the  flame  of  the  burning  powder  in  the  gun  to  penetrate  and  ignite 
the  charge  in  the  shell.  This  was  a serious  evil,  producing  a rapid 
destruction  of  the  gun,  and  caused  a suspension  of  fire  entirely  when- 
ever it  became  necessary  to  throw  troops  in  advance  of  the  batteries. 
I understand  it  is  now  being  corrected  by  a change  in  the  mode  of 
casting  the  shell. 

Two  kinds  of  percussion  fuses  were  used,  both  of  Parrott’s  inven- 
tion. In  the  one,  to  the  plunger  is  attached  two  metallic  prongs  for 
retaining  it  in  a fixed  position  for  transportation,  and  which  are  de- 
signed to  be  wrenched  off  by  the  rifle  motion  of  the  projectile  in  the 
first  moments  of  flight,  before  the  inertia  of  the  plunger  is  overcome ; 
in  the  other,  the  plunger  is  kept  in  position  by  a wooden  washer  over 
the  nipple,  and  which  is  broken  by  the  concussion  when  the  projectile 
strikes.  The  metallic  prongs  in  the  former  were  found  to  be  too  stiff 
to  be  always  wrenched  off,  as  it  is  expected  they  will  be,  or,  when 
broken  off,  they  caught  the  plunger  and  retarded  its  motion  sufficently 
to  prevent  its  striking  with  a force  necessary  to  explode  the  cap.  It 
therefore  became  necessary  to  take  off  these  prongs  before  inserting 
the  fuse  in  the  shell.  In  this  shape,  this  kind  of  fuse  was  used  exclu- 


222  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

sively.  But  few  of  the  others  were  used,  and  they  did  net  give  satis- 
faction. The  explosion  of  a shell  was  generally  insured  when  strik- 
ing against  a vertical  wall,  but  it  was  by  no  means  so  certain  when 
entering  rubbish  or  broken  masonry,  which  the  walls  of  Sumter  soon 
became,  or  mounds  of  earth  or  sand,  as  the  defenses  of  Wagner, 
unless  the  projectile  struck  very  fair,  point  foremost.  The  slightest 
cause,  it  was  found,  would  deflect  a rifle  projectile  when  striking  upon 
earth  or  sand,  and,  when  deflected,  it  almost  invariably  failed  to  ex- 
plode. 

In  our  firing  upon  the  sand  parapets  and  traverses  of  Wagner,  a 
rifle  projectile  would  bound  off  when  a spherical  one  would  be  ar- 
rested in  its  flight,  the  rifle  shot  almost  always  making  one  high 
bound  after  striking,  and  turning  end  over  end. 

The  great  number  of  shells  which  failed  to  explode  in  our  firing 
from  this  cause  plainly  indicated  the  advantages  that  would  be  de- 
rived from  a fuse  so  constructed  as  to  insure  an  explosion  however 
the  projectile  might  strike. 

A violent  gale  which  prevailed  for  three  days  exhibited  most  satis- 
factorily the  constancy  of  range  of  these  guns.  The  10-inch  was  just 
perceptibly  affected  by  it ; the  8-inch  felt  it  more,  but  was  not  seri- 
ously disturbed;  the  100-pounders  varied  more  than  the  rest,  but  the 
deviation  was  not  so  great  but  that  good  work  was  obtained  from 
them  during  the  whole  of  it. 

There  seemed  to  be  causes  slightly  affecting  the  range  of  a gun  for 
the  same  elevation  during  different  parts  of  the  day  which  could  not 
be  traced  either  to  the  powder,  or  the  projectile,  or  the  manner  of 
serving  the  guns  ; also  two  guns  of  the  same  caliber  in  the  same  bat- 
tery would  with  the  same  elevation  vary  in  range.  This  difference 
was  more  constant. 

The  10-inch  required  a little  greater  elevation  to  attain  the  same 
range  than  the  8-inch,  but  was  more  accurate.  It  was  mounted  on 
an  iron  carriage,  with  a center  pintle  chassis,  and  worked  with  great 
ease  and  facility.  Steps  were  cut  in  the  parapet  upon  which  Nos.  1 
and  2 were  mounted  to  load;  the  projectiles  were  carried  on  hand 
barrows. 

Unfortunately,  it  was  disabled,  soon  after  opening  fire,  by  a pre- 
mature explosion  of  a shell  near  its  muzzle,  which  blew  off  about  18 
inches  of  its  length.  It  was  repaired  at  the  suggestion  and  under  the 
supervision  of  Captain  Gray,  Seventh  Connecticut,  the  battery  com- 
mander, who  was  a skillful  mechanic,  by  chipping  off  the  bands  for 
a distance  beyond  the  fractures,  and  enlarging  the  diameter  of  the 
bore  this  distance  from  an  eighth  to  a quarter  of  an  inch.  This  left  a 
band  of  iron,  as  it  were,  around  the  muzzle.  The  gun  was  fired  three 
hundred  and  seventy  times,  after  this,  without  any  appreciable  dif- 
ference in  the  range  or  accuracy  being  noticed.  Subsequently  it  was 
completely  disabled  by  continued  premature  explosions  of  shells. 

The  iron  used  in  the  manufacture  of  this  gun  is  of  a superior  quality, 
and  I see  no  reason,  if  it  had  not  been  for  this  accident,  which  can  be 
guarded  against  in  future,  why  it  would  not  have  endured  for  1,000 
or  1,500  rounds,  in  which  case  it  appears  to  be  the  perfection  of  a 
heavy  rifled  gun.  No  one  could  witness  its  performance  during  the 
bombardment  of  Sumter,  and  notice  the  terrible  crushing  effect  of  its 
huge  projectiles  upon  the  masonry  of  that  place,  the  ease  with  which 
it  was  worked,  and  its  remarkable  accuracy  at  a distance  of  2-J  miles, 
without  being  filled  with  admiration  and  wonder. 

Iron  carriages  of  the  Ordnance  and  Parrott  pattern  were  used  and 


Chap.  XL]  OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C.  223 

worked  well.  Friction  clamps  were  used  on  the  Parrott  carriages  to 
lessen  the  recoil,  which  was  sufficient  without  them  to  take  the  car- 
riage of  the  chassis. 

The  working  of  the  8-inch  gun  is  much  facilitated  by  the  use  of 
roller  handspikes  to  rais -a  the  rear  part  of  the  carriage  from  the  rail 
when  running  the  piece  in  battery.  The  want  of  them  imposed  much 
additional  labor  upon  our  men  in  working  the  guns. 

The  two  80-pounder  Whitworth  guns  in  the  naval  battery,  though 
not  under  my  supervision,  came  under  my  observation. 

These  guns  opened  fire  with  shell,  but  it  was  found  necessary  to 
abandon  their  use  entirely,  in  consequence  of  their  repeated  and  con- 
stant premature  explosions,  which  greatly  endangered  our  troops  in 
the  advance  trenches,  and  of  the  probable  injury  it  would  do  the 
guns.  Solid  shot  was  then  used  exclusively.  There  appeared  to  be 
much  difficulty  experienced  at  times  in  loading  these  guns  by  the 
projectile  wedging  when  part  way  down.  It  could  then  be  rammed 
home  only  by  heavy  blows  of  a handspike  or  by  attaching  a powerful 
purchase.  They  were  very  unsatisfactory  in  point  of  accuracy,  shoot- 
ing very  wild,  seldom  hitting  Fort  Sumter  at  a distance  of  3,980  yards. 
In  comparison  with  the  8-inch  Parrotts  in  the  same  battery,  they  fell 
far  short  in  accuracy,  and  subsequently  one  of  them  became  disabled 
by  the  gun  apparently  sliding  through  the  re-enforce  to  the  rear. 
A displacement  of  nearly  an  inch  took  place,  closing  the  vent  com- 
pletely. The  other  being  considered  unsafe  after  this,  further  use 
of  it  was  discontinued. 

I append  to  this  report  a statement  of  the  number  of  Parrott  guns 
which  have  burst,  with  a brief  description  of  the  peculiarities  of 
fracture  exhibited  in  each  case. 

This  number,  being  so  great,  naturally  excites  attention,  and  has 
raised  grave  doubts  as  to  the  durability  of  the  gun,  and,  therefore,  a 
question  as  to  its  practical  usefulness,  notwithstanding  its  great 
power. 

Without  entering  into  this  question,  for  which  I am  in  no  manner 
prepared,  I may  note  those  points  which  have  come  to  my  observa- 
tion in  the  service  of  the  piece,  and  which  I believe  have  had  no  in- 
considerable influence  in  the  bursting  of  these  guns. 

The  proper  service  of  these  heavy  rifled  guns  is  everything,  and  to 
secure  it  in  the  field,  where  firing  takes  place  over  parapets  and 
through  embrasures,  with  sand  and  dirt  constantly  flying  about, 
will  always  be  a matter  of  difficulty. 

The  simple  matter  of  sponging  to  prevent  the  admission  of  sand 
and  dirt  in  the  bore  rises  to  much  importance. 

The  serious  evil  that  may  arise  from  the  presence  of  sand  in  the 
grooves  when  the  projectile  has  taken  the  rifle  in  passing  out  is  well 
understood. 

The  material  of  our  field  works  upon  Morris  Island  was  dry,  hard, 
flinty  sand,  which,  in  a windy  day,  was  constantly  blowing  about, 
and  at  times  to  such  an  extent  did  it  fill  the  air  that  it  was  a most 
severe  annoyance  to  officers  and  men.  On  such  occasions,  it  was  al- 
most impossible  to  keep  the  pieces  free  from  it ; and  at  all  times  the 
sponge  and  rammer  staves,  moist  from  the  hands  of  the  men,  strik- 
ing the  sides  and  soles  of  the  embrasures,  would  carry  in  no  incon- 
siderable quantity.  No  doubt  this  difficulty  was  an  extreme  one 
with  us  in  the  position  of  our  batteries,  and  I am  of  the  opinion  that 
it  entered  to  some  considerable  extent,  as  an  element  causing  the  de- 
struction of  the  guns  which  have  burst  lately,  though  by  no  means 
sufficient  in  itself, 


[Chap.  XL. 


224  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

A more  serious  matter  was  the  premature  explosion  of  shells,  of 
which  so  many  have  occurred  in  our  late  firing. 

The  shock  produced  by  an  explosion  of  a shell  within  a gun  cannot 
but  tend  rapidly  to  destroy  it ; indeed,  in  instances  which  have  come 
under  my  personal  observation,  I am  confident  it  was  the  direct  and 
immediate  cause. 

In  one  instance  of  the  bursting  of  a 100-pounder  where  the  breech 
had  been  blown  from  the  re-enforce,  I found  the  base  of  the  shell  in 
the  gun.  The  shell  had  prematurely  exploded,  leaving  the  base  in 
the  gun.  It  had  taken  the  grooves,  and  was  left  perpendicular  to 
the  axis  of  the  piece  and  some  inches  to  the  rear  of  its  first  position, 
showing  that  the  last  force  acting  upon  it  was  from  the  explosion  of 
the  powder  in  the  shell. 

These  two  cases,  the  presence  of  considerable  quantities  of  sand, 
and  the  premature  explosions  of  shell,  may  account  for  the  failure  of 
the  100-pounder  in  our  late  firing.  The  sudden  giving  way  of  so 
many  before  reaching  300  rounds,  when  they  had  attained  1,000  to 
1,200  in  our  first  firing,  would  appear  to  indicate  that  some  cause 
existed  in  the  latter  that  did  not  in  the  former,  and  these  two  diffi- 
culties undoubtedly  have  existed  to  a much  greater  degree  in  our 
firing  since  the  26th  of  October  than  they  did  before. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOHN  W.  TURNER, 
Brigadier-General , Chief  of  Artillery . 

Maj.  Gen.  Q.  A.  Gillmore. 

[Inclosure.] 

Statement  of  the  number  of  Parrott  guns  which  burst. 


Number. 

Date. 

Caliber  of  gun. 

Elevation  when  gun 
burst. 

Greatest  elevation  at 
which  the  gun  had 
ever  been  fired. 

Average  elevation  at 
which  the  piece  was 
fired. 

Number  of  rounds  the  ; 
gun  had  been  fired.  | 

Number  of  premature 
explosions  of  shells. 

Description. 

1863. 

O / 

O / 

O / 

The  fracture  took  place  about  1 inch 
in  rear  of  vent,  perpendicular  to  axis 
of  piece,  the  breech  being  blown  out 
of  the  re-enforce ; no  injury  to  re- 
enforce. The  gun  was  thrown  for- 
ward on  to  the  parapet. 

1 

Aug.  24 

8-inch 

31  30 

31  30 

31  30 

35 

10 

2 

Aug.  25 

8-inch 

2 00 

10  00 

7 6 

193 

3 

Same  as  above,  only  the  gun  was  not 
disturbed  from  its  position  on  the 
carriage. 

3 

Aug.  26 

8-inch 

11  55 

12  00 

11  45 

354 

Same  as  above;  gun  thrown  forward 
on  to  parapet. 

4 

Aug.  30 

8-inch 

11  00 

11  00 

11  00 

599 

5 

A fracture  simply,  without  breaking 
the  gun  apart ; commencing  under 
re-enforce,  and  coming  out  forward 
about  2 inches  on  right  and  below 
the  highest  point  of  metal,  and  ex- 
tending in  curve  forward  and  down 
to  rim-base  of  right  trunnion. 

5 

Aug.  30 

100- 

pounder 

9 45 

9 45 

9 45 

439 

39 

The  breech  of  the  gun  and  forward  to 
trunnions  broke  in  several  frag- 
ments. The  re-enforce  divided  in 
two  nearly  equal  pieces,  separating 
longitudinally. 

6 

Sept.  5 

8-inch 

1 50 

10  30 

4 50 

222 

5 

Breech  blown  from  re-enforce,  same 
as  8-inch  guns  on  24th,  25th,  and  26th. 

7 

Sept.  27 

8-inch 

12  00 

12  10 

12  05 

230 

Several 

Re-enforce  band  blown  apart.  The 
breech  above  a horizontal  plane 
through  the  axis  and  forward  to 
trunnions  blown  off,  separating  in 
two  or  three  fragments,. 

Chap.  XL.] 


225 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  0. 

Statement  of  the  number  of  Parrott  guns  which  burst — Continued. 


Number. 

Date. 

Caliber  of  gun. 

Elevation  when  gun 
burst. 

Greatest  elevation  at 
which  the  gun  had 
ever  been  fired. 

Average  elevation  at 
which  the  piece  was 
fired. 

Number  of  rounds  the 

gun  had  been  fired. 

Number  of  premature  ! 

| explosions  of  shells.  1 

Description. 

1863. 

o */ 

O / 

O / 

8 

Oct.  12 

100- 

pounder 

12  30 

13  55 

13  00 

1,150 

Several 

The  top  of  the  gun  from  a point  just 
in  front  of  trunnions,  including  right 
trunnion  back  to  and  under  re-en- 
force, making  a wedge-shaped  frag- 
ment, was  blown  off  the  apex  in 
front  of  trunnions,  the  base  under 
re-enforce.  The  fracture  under  the 
re-enforce  was  perpendicular  to  the 
axis  of  the  piece,  about  5 inches  from 
front  of  band,  and  extending  down 
to  a horizontal  plane  through  the 
axis. 

9 

Oct.  30 

100- 

pounder 

6 30 

7 00 

6 40 

183 

15 

The  breech  broke  off  perpendicularly 
to  axis,  2 inches  under  the  re-enforce, 
the  band  remaining  attached  to  the 
breech  ; forward  of  this,  the  top  of 
the  gun,  in  a wedge  shape,  including 
right  trunnion,  with  apex  of  wedge 
just  in  front  of  trunnion,  was  blown 
off. 

10 

Oct.  31 

100- 

pounder 

4 00 

4 00 

4 00 

331 

19 

Same  as  the  gun  on  the  12th,  except  it 
took  off  both  trunnions. 

11 

Oct.  28 

100- 

pounder 

3 00 

2 20 

2 40 

140 

10 

Re-enforce  separated  in  two  pieces; 
the  breech  in  rear  of  trunnions  broke 
in  several  fragments. 

12 

Oct.  31 

100- 

pounder 

6 35 

6 50 

6 40 

219 

11 

| 

Same  as  gun  on  28th. 

13 

Oct.  30 

100- 

pounder 

3 15 

3 20 

3 18 

121 

9 

Same  as  gun  on  28th. 

14 

Oct.  31 

100- 

pounder 

6 20 

29  45 

11  19 

190 

13 

Breech  blew  out  of  re-enforce,  same 
as  8-inch  gun  on  24th. 

15 

Nov.  27 

100- 

pounder 

4 00 

34  00 

15  06 

27- 

3 

Same  as  gun  on  31st. 

16 

Nov.  28 

100- 

pounder 

6 25 

6 35 

6 30 

377 

5 

The  re-enforce  separated  longitudi- 
nally. and  the  breech  in  rear  of  trun- 
nions broke  in  several  fragments. 

jSTo.  4. 

Reports  of  Col.  Edward  W.  Serrell,  First  New  York  Engineers , 

Assistant  Engineer. 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 
Engineer  Office , Morris  Island , S.  C.,  September  10,  1863. 

1.  General  : I have  the  honor,  in  obedience  to  your  orders,  to 
submit  herewith  a report  of  the  engineering  operations,  and.  the 
preparations  therefor,  which  have  been  executed  under  my  imme- 
diate direction,  as  one  of  the  assistant  engineers  of  this  department, 
during  this  campaign,  independently  of  the  works  constructed  and 
duties  performed  by  my  regiment. 

2.  Hilton  Head , Jidy  1. — This  afternoon  drilled  two  boats’ crews  in 
Skull  Creek,  with  the  saws  for  cutting  off  piles  under  water.  Saws 
work  well.  These  saws  are  represented  in  Plate  II,  and  are  else- 
where described  and  referred  to. 

3.  Received  orders  to  get  material  ready,  and  ship  same,  for  a bridge. 

15  R R — VOL  XXVIII,  PT  I 


226  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

500  yards  long,  similar  to  the  model  bridge  at  the  Volunteer  Engi- 
neer camp  at  Hilton  Head. 

4.  This  bridge  is  represented  in  Plate  I.  Fig.  1 is  a general  eleva- 
tion; Pig.  2,  plan;  Fig.  3,  a cross-section;  Fig.  4,  the  method  of  se- 
curing the  floor  beams  to  the  uprights;  Fig.  5,  an  enlarged  figure, 
showing  the  method  of  holding  the  floor  boards  a in  place;  b is  a 
strip,  li  inches  by  5 inches,  which  is  lashed  over  the  floor  planks; 
Fig.  6 represents  the  shoe  used  at  the  bottom  of  the  trestle,  to  pre- 
vent it  sinking  too  deep  into  a muddy  bottom ; c is  the  knot  used  in 
the  lashing. 

5.  July  2. — Got  ready  the  suspension  bridge,  leaving  this  matter 
particularly  in  charge  of  Lieut.  Hiram  Farrand,  V olunteer  Engi- 
neers. The  span  of  the  bridge  is  200  feet.  New  towers  of  timber 
work  have  to  be  made,  which  were  planned,  and  instructions  left 
with  Major  Butt  to  have  Lieutenant  Farrand  make  them  as  soon  as 
possible,  and  ship  the  bridge  with  the  trestle  bridge  and  engineer 
tools. 

6.  July  3. — Continued  building  the  trestle  bridge  day  and  night, 
with  a detail  of  75  engineers  and  150  infantry,  Major  Butt  in  charge. 

7.  Had  a large  party  of  engineers  repairing  the  pontoon  train 
No.  7. 

8.  July  4. — Getting  the  bridges  and  pontoons  ready,  and  repairing 
all  the  boats  and  scows  that  can  be  found. 

9.  July  5. — Same  work  as  yesterday.  Some  delay  for  want  of 
lumber. 

10.  July  6. — Fourteen  hundred  feet  of  the  trestle  bridge  nearly 
ready  to  ship.  Suspension  bridge  and  boats  progressing. 

11.  July  7.— Began  to  ship  the  bridges  on  the  steamer  General 
Meigs.  Some  delay  for  want  of  timber.  At  work  until  midnight 
getting  tools  and  materials  shipped;  then  left  with  the  commanding 
general,  on  board  the  Mary  Benton,  for  Folly  Island,  taking  the  saws 
for  cutting  piles  under  water,  on  this  steamer,  having  given  Major 
Butt,  Volunteer  Engineers,  instructions  to  ship  the  remainder  of 
the  bridges  and  tools. 

12.  July  8. — Arrived  in  Folly  River  at  10  a.  m. 

13.  Orders  were  received  to  remove  as  many  of  the  piles  in  the 
Folly  River,  at  the  point  indicated  on  the  general  maps,  as  would 
admit  the  passage  of  the  largest  launches  and  the  large  scows. 

14.  This  was  done  the  same  night,  by  sawing  them  off  under  water, 
at  a depth  of  8 feet  below  low  tide.  Plate  II  shows  the  machinery 
used. 

15.  Fig.  1 represents  a front  view  of  the  saw,  and  Fig.  2 shows  a 
side  elevation;  Fig.  3,  the  general  disposition  in  plan. 

16.  The  saw  is  worked  by  boring  a hole  in  the  pile  to  be  saw'ed  off, 
at  the  proper  height  above  water,  and  in  this  hole  an  iron  pin  is  in- 
serted, upon  which  the  saw-frame  vibrates.  Ropes  from  the  rings 
at  either  end  of  the  saw  are  taken  to  boats  properly  anchored,  or 
held,  as  they  were  in  this  case,  by  sharp-pointed  poles,  b b , thrust 
into  the  sand  at  the  bottom  of  the  river.  At  a given  signal,  the  ropes 
are  pulled  alternately,  and  the  saw  vibrated. 

17.  In  this  way,  a pile  10  or  12  inches  in  diameter  was  cut  off  in  an 
average  length  of  time  of  from  six  to  seven  minutes ; including  the 
change  from  one  pile  to  another,  about  ten  minutes  were  occupied. 

18.  The  piles  were  driven  in  two  rows,  alternating  with  one  an- 
other, 4 feet  apart  in  each  row.  The  rows  were  3 feet  apart.  Three 
piles  had  been  taken  out  previously,  or  a space  of  about  that  extent 


Chap.  XL.] 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 


227 


was  found  in  the  channel  way.  An  opening  was  cut  22  feet  wide. 
During  the  time  the  work  was  being  done,  a six-oared,  heavily 
manned  rebel  boat  came  down  upon  us,  but  did  no  damage. 

19.  So  much  importance  seemed  to  be  attached  to  the  operation, 
that  I superintended  it  in  person,  and  took  charge  of  the  working 
of  one  saw.  Lieut.  Charles  B.  Parsons,  Volunteer  Engineers,  took 
charge  of  the  other,  and  is  entitled  to  credit  for  his  efficiency. 

20.  The  army  did  not  pass  here  during  the  night,  as  was  expected, 
but  did  the  next  night,  to  assault  Morris  Island. 

21.  During  the  time  General  Strong’s  column  was  passing,  at  day- 
break, Lieutenant  Parsons  sawed  off  several  more  piles,  increasing 
the  width  of  the  opening  some  9 or  10  feet,  under  heavy  fire  of  the 
enemy. 

22.  As  a very  material  improvement  in  the  machinery  used,  I 
suggest  that  the  arms  to  which  the  saws  are  fastened,  c c,  should  be 
lengthened,  so  that  the  ends  may  project,  say, a foot  beyond  the  teeth 
of  the  saw,  that  the  saw  can  never  be  drawn  out  of  its  scarf. 

23.  The  direction  of  the  cut  should  be  slightly  oblique  to  the  cur- 
rent, but  the  pressure  of  the  water  must  be  on  the  back  of  the  saw. 
The  pin  a,  on  which  the  saw-frame  vibrates,  should  be  set  slightly 
inclined  downward  into  the  pile,  and  the  ropes  should  be  pulled  so 
as  to  bring  the  saw  up  to  its  work.  Where  this  cannot  be  done,  a 
third  boat  must  be  used,  with  a feeding  line,  which  is  simply  a cord 
attached  to  either  side  of  the  saw-frame,  and  the  two  ends  brought 
together  to  pull  the  saw-teeth  against  the  log. 

24.  As  the  pile  is  cut  off  and  falls  over,  the  pin  on  which  the  saw 
is  hung  is  pulled  out  with  a lanyard,  d,  and  the  saw  is  hung  upon 
the  next  pile,  in  which  a hole  has  already  been  bored  for  the  pin. 

25.  July  9,  4 a.  m. — Learned  that  the  attack  was  not  to  be  made 
this  morning,  and  prepared  to  land  engineer  material  that  had  been 
brought  up  from  Hilton  Head,  and  in  the  evening  visited  the  batter- 
ies at  the  north  end  of  Folly  Island,  which  were  ready  to  open  fire, 
and  some  others  still  in  course  of  erection. 

26.  July  10. — The  south  end  of  Morris  Island  having  been  carried 
by  our  forces,  established  a flying-scow  ferry  across  Light-House 
Inlet,  and  took  over  the  artillery  and  horses  of  the  staff  and  quarter- 
master’s department,  and  several  regiments,  the  ferry  being  made 
with  the  scow  brought  through  the  opening  in  the  piles  in  Folly 
River,  and  worked  under  the  direction  of  Lieutenant  Parsons. 

27.  During  the  night  some  work  was  begun  to  secure  our  front 
against  the  enemy,  but  the  tools  had  not  arrived,  and  but  little  was 
executed.  They  were  merely  rifle-pits. 

28.  July  11. — Preparations  made  for  beginning  work  in  front, 
getting  on  shore  materials  and  tools. 

29.  Began  the  erection  of  a bridge  across  Light-House  Inlet,  which 
had  previously  been  prepared  and  shipped  on  a steamer  which  lay  in 
Folly  River,  but  for  want  of  transportation  little  progress  was  made. 
The  bridge  was  intended  to  extend  across  the  Light-House  Inlet,  but 
for  various  reasons — the  principal  one  being  the  difficulty  in  getting 
the  material  on  to  the  ground,  and  the  fact  that  the  flying-scow  ferry 
worked  very  well — after  about  80  or  90  feet  had  been  built  and  used 
as  a boat  landing,  it  was  abandoned.  This  plan  will  not  answer  in 
hard  bottoms,  where  the  slope  is  considerable,  or  where  the  tide  runs 
very  fast. 

30.  July  12. — All  day  occupied  getting  materials  forward.  Re- 
ceived orders  to  begin  a line  of  works  against  Fort  Wagner  ; to  put 


2-28 


S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 


[Chap.  XL. 


in  six  Wiard  guns,  four  of  Bray  ton’s  battery,  six  Parrott  10-pound- 
ers, and  five  Requa  guns;  and,  in  the  second  line  on  the  left,  prepare 
for  ten  Parrott  20  and  30  pounders,  as  they  could  be  obtained,  and 
to  intersperse  with  light  mortars  in  the  sand-hills,  in  suitable  posi- 
tions. 

31.  Moved  up  the  entire  volunteer  engineer  force  present,  consist- 
ing of  428  men  for  duty,  near  the  old  rebel  hospital  in  front. 

32.  Personally  reconnoitered  toward  Fort  Wagner,  some  300  yards 
beyond  our  advanced  pickets,  an  hour  before  dark.  At  8 in  the  even- 
ing, began  the  work  afterward  converted  into  the  first  parallel  of  the 
siege,  at  a point  indicated  by  Captain  Brooks,  aide-de-camp,  as  that 
selected  by  the  commanding  general,  working  three  companies  of 
engineers  and  200  men  of  Colonel  Jackson’s  Third  New  Hampshire 
Volunteers  all  night,  under  fire  of  the  enemy. 

33.  Some  other  operations  had  been  contemplated,  but  at  5 p.  m. 
the  following  order  was  received : 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  South,  *. 

July  12,  1863. 

Colonel  : The  general  directs  that  you  confine  your  work  to-night  to  the  light 
rifle  batteries  immediately  in  front  of  Fort  Wagner. 

Very  respectfully, 

JOHN  W.  TURNER, 

Colonel,  and  Chief  of  Staff. 

Colonel  Serrell, 

Volunteer  Engineers. 

P.  S. — This  may  modify  your  requirements  for  working  parties. 

34.  July  13. — Began  a pier,  with  piles  worked  in  by  hand  and  a 
scow,  at  the  north  end  of  Folly  Island.  Frieze  had  been  prepared 
at  the  suggestion  of  an  officer  of  the  staff,  and  ordered  by  the  general 
to  be  used  in  the  scarp  of  the  batteries  in  the  first  parallel,  if  prac- 
ticable, which  I made  and  had  taken  to  the  ground  last  night.  They 
were  not  used,  because,  if  so  placed,  a very  large  part  would  be  cut 
away  to  open  the  embrasures.  They  were,  therefore,  set  in  advance 
of  the  batteries  about  150  yards. 

35.  The  work  was  done  under  the  direction  of  First  Lieut.  R.  F. 
Butt,  Volunteer  Engineers,  and  under  a heavy  fire.  He  deserves 
credit  for  the  efficiency  he  displayed  on  this  occasion. 

36.  July  14. — At  3 p.  m.,  turned  over  the  works  in  the  batteries  to 
Lieutenant  Suter,  U.  S..  Engineers,  and  was  ordered  to  give  personal 
attention  to  the  piers  and  means  of  crossing  Light-House  Inlet. 

37.  Wind  blowing  very  hard,  and  great  delay  experienced  for 
want  of  means  to  land  materials.  Worked  all  night,  Capt.  J.  L. 
Suess,  Volunteer  Engineers,  assisting  with  a large  working  party. 

38.  The  batteries  as  they  were  turned  over  are  represented  in 
Plate  III,  Figs.  1,  2,  and  3. 

39.  July  15. --Sent  for  pile-driver,  which,  on  its  way  from  Stono, 
was  afterward  rendered  useless  by  certain  parts  being  thrown  over- 
board in  a storm.  Finished  a pier  at  Folly  Island  to  6 feet  deep  at 
low  water.  This  is  represented  in  Plate  VIII,  Figs.  1 and  2. 

40.  July  16. — Examined  and  reported  on  the  state  of  the  batteries, 
and  selected  a site  for  three  breaching  batteries  on  the  left,  to  be 
directed  against  Sumter.  Staked  out  same,  en  echelon;  directed  the 
establishment  of  a telegraph  cable  across  Light-House  Inlet,  one  that 
had  previously  been  put  down  having  been  dragged  up  by  a steamer’s 
anchor. 


Chap.  XL.] 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 


229 


41.  Between  the  17tli  and  19th  July,  a large  quantity  of  frieze  was 
made,,  and  the  ground  in  front  of  our  position  examined  personally 
for  600  yards  toward  Wagner,  with  a view  to  the  establishment  of 
parallels  or  batteries.  The  next  day,  triangulated  the  position  of 
the  enemy’s  works  on  James  Island,  and  having,  by  order  of  General 
Gillmore,  requested  Captain  [George]  Bacon,  of  the  U.  S.  gunboat 
Commodore  McDonough,  to  make  a reconnaissance  up  the  Light- 
House  Inlet,  went  with  him,  and  succeeded  in  shelling  out  the  rebels, 
dismounting  one  gun  they  had  just  put  in  position. 

42.  During  the  following  two  days,  the  party  making  frieze  were 
at  work,  and  all  the  available  strength  and  resources  of  the  com- 
mand that  could  be  applied  were  kept  at  constantly  improving  the 
means  of  crossing  the  inlet  from  Folly  to  Morris  Islands,  and  in 
making  sap-rollers  and  150  more  panels  of  frieze.  The  piers  were 
by  this  time  in  a good  condition  to  use  them.* 

43.  On  the  25th,  t wo  batteries  were  begun  in  the  first  line  of  works, 
which  was  now  known  as  the  first  parallel,  in  which  to  mount  four 
naval  guns.  Heavy  parties  were  worked  at  night  and,  as  far  as 
practicable,  during  the  day  until  these  batteries  were  finished.  They 
occupied  the  center  of  the  line,  and  had  two  200-pounder  Parrott 
rifled  guns  and  two  80-pounder  Whitworth  guns  mounted  in  them. 

44.  The  Naval  Battery  as  finally  completed  is  represented  in  Plate 
X.  Fig.  1 is  a plan,  and  Fig.  2 a cross-section,  on  the  line  a b. 

45.  On  the  morning  of  the  27th,  a very  thorough  survey  of  Black 
Island  and  its  situation,  relative  to  the  enemy’s  works  on  James 
Island,  was  made.  During  the  next  day,  a lookout  was  built  at  an 
advanced  point,  in  the  top  of  a very  high  pine  tree,  and  a causeway 
across  the  marsh  from  the  sand  ridge  on  the  left  of  Morris  Island, 
near  where  the  left  center  batteries  had  been  established,  to  Black 
Island,  was  begun,  under  the  direction  of  Captain  Eaton,  Volunteer 
Engineers. 

46.  During  the  night  of  the  28th  of  July,  an  attempt  was  made  to 
put  in  abatis  across  the  beach  from  the  right  of  the  second  parallel, 
beginning  at  low-water  mark,  but  when  some  15  or  20  yards  had 
been  planted,  the  enemy  came  out  on  the  beach  in  front  of  Wagner, 
and  poured  in  such  a heavy  fire  of  grape  and  canister  from  four 
field  guns,  that  the  party  was  very  much  annoyed,  and  several  of 
the  horses  which  had  been  used  in  bringing  up  the  material  having 
been  either  killed  or  wounded,  the  others  took  fright,  although  sta- 
tioned 300  yards  to  the  rear  of  the  work,  and  lan  off  with  23  wagons 
which  had  not  yet  been  unloaded. 

47.  A number  of  attempts  were  made  to  continue  the  work,  and 
the  men  behaved  well,  but  before  the  materials  could  again  be 
brought  together  and  the  work  proceeded  with,  the  tide  had  risen  so 
much  as  to  make  it  impracticable.  Some  good  men  were  lost  in  this 
affair,  and  daylight  and  the  enemy’s  sharpshooters  terminated  the 
effort.  Capt.  Charles  P.  McKenna  and  Sergeant  [Theodore]  Mande- 
ville,  Volunteer  Engineers,  were  very  useful.  Sergeant  Mandeville 
was  killed. 

48.  Experiments  were  now  made  for  the  purpose  of  continuing 
the  investigations  as  to  the  practicability  of*  erecting  batteries  on  the 
marsh. 


* The  temporary  pier  at  south  end  of  Morris  Island  is  represented  in  Plate  IX,  in 
plan,  elevation,  and  sections. 


230  S.  C.  AND  a A.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 


[Chap.  XL. 


THE  MARSH  BATTERY. 

49.  On  the  16th  July,  an  order  was  received  to  see  if  a position 
could  be  found  on  the  marsh,  on  our  left  front,  where  a battery 
could  be  constructed. 

50.  Taking  Lieut.  1ST.  M.  Edwards,  Volunteer  Engineers,  to  assist, 
I proceeded  at  once  on  foot  across  the  swamp  to  the  creek  which 
runs  from  near  the  junction  of  the  Plank  road  to  Charleston  Har- 
bor. The  following  is  the  report  made  on  this  reconnaissance  : 

51.  Headquarters  Volunteer  Engineers, 

Morris  Island , July  16,  1863. 

Major  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that,  agreeably  to  the  orders  of  the  general 
commanding  the  department,  I made  this  morning,  assisted  by  Lieut.  N.  M.  Ed- 
wards, Volunteer  Engineers,  a reconnaissance  across  the  marsh,  from  the  batteries 
on  our  left  to  the  creek  between  this  island  and  Light-House  Creek,  a distance  of 
about  half  a mile,  bearing,  from  the  southwesterly  end  of  the  hard  ground,  a course  by 
magnetic  compass  north  40°  west,  to  a point  from  which  the  bearing  to  Fort  Sum- 
ter is  north  12°  east,  and  to  the  old  beacon  light  south  89°  east.  At  this  point  there  is 
a spot  of  hard  ground  a few  inches  above  or  below  high-water  mark,  irregular, 
from  25  to  30  feet  long,  and  15  to  18  feet  wide,  the  longer  axis  being  perpendicular 
to  the  fire  of  Fort  Sumter,  or  nearly  so.  Between  this  spot  and  the  hard  ground  on 
which  the  batteries  are  now  being  built,  the  marsh  may  be  crossed  by  infantry  at 
low  tide,  with  some  difficulty.  About  one-third  of  the  distance  will  bear  a man, 
sinking  in  1 or  2 inches,  another  third,  6 or  8 inches,  the  other  third,  somewhat 
deeper. 

52.  A battery  to  be  constructed  at  this  point  must  be  entirely  made  of  sand-bags, 
with  platforms  grillaged. 

53.  I think  a gun  weighing  not  over  10,000  pounds  can  be  drawn  across  the  marsh 
on  skids  framed  together  to  slip  on  the  mud,  similar  to  those  used  by  General  Bona- 
parte for  crossing  the  Alps  on  the  snow. 

54.  Two  thousand  three  hundred  men  can  carry  filled  sand-bags  enough,  in  one 
night,  to  make  the  battery  and  cover  the  magazine,  if  they  are  well  organized. 
Sixty  more  can  carry  the  platform  across  and  put  it  down,  including  the  grillage. 
It  will  require  about  400  or  450  more  men  to  put  the  guns  in  position  the  next  night. 

55.  The  skid  should  have  a bearing  surface  equal  to  90  or  100  square  feet. 

56.  One  small  creek,  about  9 feet  wide,  will  have  to  be  crossed.  Two  or  three  logs 
put  over  it  will  be  sufficient. 

57.  Thirty-five  additional  men  can  carry  the  magazine  and  put  it  up. 

58.  The  work  can  be  done  better  in  daylight  than  dark,  excepting  that  it  may 
draw  the  fire  of  the  enemy. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

EDWARD  W.  SERRELL. 

Colonel  of  Volunteer  Engineers . 

Major  Smith, 

Assistant  Adjutant-G.eneral. 

59.  Subsequently  the  examinations  were  pushed  down  the  stream 
between  Light-House  Creek  and  Vincent’s  Creek  to  various  positions, 
and,  on  the  morning  of  the  30th,  soundings  were  made  with  an  iron 
rod  three-quarters  of  an  inch  in  diameter  and  30  feet  long. 

60.  The  extreme  edges  of  the  swamps  on  the  small  creeks  are  hard, 
and  frequently  filled  with  oysters  and  oyster  shells,  but  at  a few  feet 
from  the  water  they  become  very  soft,  and  within  10  or  12  feet  the 
mud  will  not  afford  foothold  for  a man. 

61.  In  these  marshes,  back  from  the  harder  edges  of  the  creeks, 
the  mud  is  from  18  to  23  feet  deep,  generally  about  20  feet  deep.  It 
is  so  soft  that  the  weight  bf  the  sounding  iron  will  carry  it  down  8 
or  10  feet,  and  a man  can  with  one  hand  push  it  the  remainder  of  the 
distance. 

62.  The  bottom  is  hard  sand,  or  has  that  feeling  with  the  point  of 
the  sounding  iron. 


Chap.  XL.] 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 


231 


63.  On  the  mud  there  is  a growth  of  very  coarse  grass,  Sparfina 
glabra  and  Uniola  spicata , which  is  4 or  5 feet  high,  it  does  not, 
however,  form  a sod,  and  the  roots  are  not  deep,  hut  fine ; they 
afford  but  little  resistance  to  anything  sinking  through  them.  Ex- 
treme high  water  covers  the  surface  of  the  mud. 

64.  Geologically  the  marsh  is  held  to  be  sedimentary  deposits  of 
the  very  finest  particles,  brought  down  by  the  fresh-water  streams, 
and  are  mostly  vegetable.  The  blowing  sands  from  the  outer 
beaches,  which  are  less  recent  in  their  formation,  are  sometimes 
mixed  with  the  mud. 

65.  The  resistance  is  increased  by  quantities  of  small  shells,  Auri- 
cula bidentata  and  Littorina  irroratus,  and  occasionally  muscles. 

66.  Some  idea  of  the  extreme  softness  of  the  marsh  can  be  formed 
by  the  extent  that  a couple  of  men  on  a plank  resting  on  the  surface 
can  shake  it,  by  surging  themselves  about. 

67.  The  vibrations  extend  over  many  hundreds  of  square  yards,  as 
if  they  were  on  jelly. 

68.  A general  idea  of  the  kind  of  structure  to  be  built  having  been 
formed,  preparations  were  made  to  obtain  the  necessary  material,  , 
and  provide  the  means  of  getting  it  on  to  the  ground. 

69.  The  commanding  general  having  ordered  that  the  work  should 
be  made  suitable  for  one  200-pounder  Parrott  rifled  gun,  and  that  it 
should  be  placed  as  near  to  the  city  of  Charleston  as  practicable,  on 
our  side,  however,  of  the  stream  next  southeasterly  from  Light-House 
Creek,  it  became  evident  that  whatever  details  of  plan  might  be 
adopted,  the  general  features  of  the  localities  being  similar,  the  pri- 
mary arrangement  would  remain  constant,  wherever  the  position 
might  be  finally  determined  upon. 

70.  During  the  time  that  preceded  the  approval  of  the  plan  and 
the  commencement  of  the  work  on  the  ground,  but  after  it  had  been 
determined  to  make  a battery  on  the  marsh,  at  some  advanced  point, 
the  causeway  before  described  leading  from  the  left  center  batteries 
to  Black  Island  was  in  progress  of  construction. 

71.  Finding  ii  practicable  to  build  this  road  under  the  enemy’s 
fire,  which  was  sometimes  quite  heavy,  it  became  apparent  that  it 
might  be  made  use  of,  in  part,  at  least,  to  facilitate  the  erection  of 
the  other  work,  and  it  thenceforward  entered  into  the  plan  of  opera- 
tions. 

72.  As  it  seemed  settled  that  whatever  arrangement  might  finally 
be  approved  would  involve  the  use  of  large  timber  in  great  quantities, 
working  parties  were  sent  to  Folly  Island,  at  the  nearest  point  where 
suitable  trees  could  be  found,  to  cut  and  prepare  them  and  bring 
them  forward  ready  for  use  ; and  as  it  was  determined  that  the  whole 
parapet  must  be  made  of  bags  filled  with  sand,  a point  was  selected 
near  the  old  camp  of  the  engineer  troops,  and  working  parties,  su- 
perintended by  the  volunteer  engineers,  were  employed  day  and 
night  filling  bags  and  hiding  them  from  the  enemy’s  view,  under 
cover  of  the  bushes  and  ridges. 

73.  The  old  engineer  camp  was  selected  for  this  purpose,  because 
it  was  one  of  the  two  points  farthest  advanced  into  the  marsh,  in  the 
right  direction,  and  afforded  plenty  of  good  material  and  water  com- 
munication to  the  battery  to  be  constructed,  wherever  it  might  be, 
between  it  and  Charleston  Harbor,  on  any  part  of  the  marsh,  if  upon 
the  edge  of  any  of  the  streams. 

74.  In  order  to  determine  the  sustaining  qualities  of  the  marsh, 
and  to  ascertain  what  uniformly  distributed  weight  might  safely  bo 


232  S.  C.  AND  G A.  COARTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

placed  upon  it,  a platform  of  3-incli  plank  4 feet  square  was  made 
.and  laid  on  the  natural  surface. 

75.  The  platform  was  then  loaded  with  filled  sand-bags,  piled  with 
care  in  regular  layers,  until  a load  equal  to  400  pounds  to  the  square 
foot  was  attained;  and  although  the  mud  was  so  soft  that  the  bags 
could  not  be  carried  by  the  men  over  it  to  make  the  trial,  excepting  by 
walking  on  boards,  the  column  on  the  platform  remained  erect,  and, 
after  standing  twenty-four  hours,  showed  no  signs  of  settlement. 

76.  The  mud  was  12  feet  deep  under  the  platform  where  the  trial 
was  made. 

77.  After  it  had  stood  for  twenty-four  hours,  additional  sand-bags 
were  piled  upon  the  column,  and  when  it  reached  a height  of  about 
7 feet,  corresponding  to  a pressure  of  about  650  pounds  to  the  square 
foot,  a tendency  to  lean  on  one  side  was  manifested ; this,  however, 
was  supposed  to  be  occasioned  by  the  soldiers  tramping  about  near 
the  corner  that  went  down  first.  The  platform  seemed  to  act  in  the 
manner  of  a punch  cutting  its  way  into  the  surface. 

78.  After  about  another  hour  and  a half,  additional  bags  were 
.piled  upon  the  column,  until  a force  of  about  900  pounds  to  the 
square  foot  on  the  platform  had  been  obtained,  when  the  whole  sud- 
denly upset,  throwing  the  sand-bags  over,  burying  many  of  the 
upper  tiers,  which  fell  the  farthest,  out  of  sight  in  the  mud ; the 
platform,  however,  sank  but  about  a foot  at  one  corner,  and  the  trial 
was  considered  merely  as  showing  that  the  sustaining  strength  of 
the  marsh  was  equivalent  to  over  600  pounds  to  the  square  foot, 
where  the  load  is  uniformly  distributed.  The  ultimate  sustaining 
strength  was  not  ascertained. 

79.  This  is  represented  in  Plate  IV,  Fig.  4.  The  full  lines  repre- 
sent the  weight  while  the  column  remained  erect ; the  lighter  lines 
show  it  as  increased  in  height,  somewhat  inclined ; the  dotted  lines 
show  the  column  thrown  over. 

80.  A man’s  foot,  having  a surface  of  from  30  to  35  inches,  and  sus- 
taining a weight  equal  to  150  pounds,  would  sink  into  the  mud  18  to 
25  inches  every  step,  and,  if  these  were  not  made  with  some  rapidity, 
much  deeper.  Two  elements  are  involved  here  not  in  the  other  case; 
first,  that  of  the  motion  of  the  foot,  and,  second,  the  suction  of  the 
mud  against  the  leg,  one  tending  to  favor  the  penetration,  the  other 
retarding  it;  neither  of  these  conditions  applied  where  the  load  was 
static  and  rested  on  the  surface. 

81.  In  the  case  of  a man  attempting  to  walk,  it  was  shown  that, 
under  the  conditions  he  presented,  something  like  a force  of  500  or 
550  pounds  to  the  square  foot  could  not  be  sustained  by  the  marsh,  but 
here  there  was  the  heavy  weight  of  the  body  brought  on  the  small 
point  of  the  toe,  or  the  side  of  the  foot,  or  upon  some  other  part  of 
the  sole  of  the  shoe,  in  motion.  If  a battery  was  to  be  built,  so  long 
as  the  guns  were  not  fired  the  forces  would  essentially  be  static,  and 
the  condition  of  rest  become  an  important  element  in  the  calculation. 

82.  But  guns,  to  be  offensively  useful;  must  be  fired,  and  to  fire 
them  while  floating,  as  it  were,  on  the  surface  of  the  mud,  would 
produce  vibrations.  How  far  these  vibrations  woidd  affect  the  sta- 
bility of  any  structure  so  situated  was  still  undetermined. 

83.  If  any  machinery  like  a pile-driver  was  to  be  employed  to  make 
a foundation,  provision  must  be  made  to  hide  it  during  the  day  and 
work  it  at  night,  or  it  would  be  destroyed  by  the  enemy’s  fire.  So 
large  and  unhandy  a machine  as  a common  pile-engine  could  not  be 
used.  The  time  required  to  set  it  up  and  take  it  down  during  the 


Chap.  XL.] 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 


233 


short  nights  of  summer  would  consume  too  much  of  the  few  hours 
there  were  left  to  work  in  with  any  degree  of  security,  as  was  after- 
ward proved;  so  for  this  reason  experiments  were  made  with  sheet 
piling  of  3-inch  plank. 

84.  With  a square  platform  loaded  with  sand,  a long  pole  was  used 
as  a lever  of  the  second  power,  and  a rope  sling,  with  the  bight  taken 
twice  around  the  plank  and  made  fast  to  the  pole  at  the  short  end,  the 
plank  forming  the  sheet  pile  was  forced  into  the  marsh  by  a number 
of  men,  who  applied  their  own  weight  to  the  longer  end  of  the  lever. 
This  simple  contrivance  is  represented  in  Plate  Y,  Fig.  1. 

85.  This  answered  very  well,  but  the  difficulty  of  moving  the  coun- 
ter-weight was  so  great  in  practice,  that  a still  more  simple,  but 
equally  effective,  method  was  used.  Instead  of  a counter-weight,  a 
number  of  men  took  hold  of  the  pole  at  either  end,  and  having  the 
plank  secured  by  a sling,  it  was  forced  down  into  the  mud  until  the 
point  reached  the  hard  bottom,  when  it  was  driven  into  the  sand 
securely  by  heavy  wooden  mauls.  This  method  is  shown  in  Fig.  2 
of  the  same  plate. 

86.  On  the  morning  of  the  2d  of  August,  a general  plan  for  the 
battery  was  submitted  to  the  commanding  general,  who  so  far  ap- 
proved it  as  to  order  an  estimate  of  the  labor  necessary  to  build  it. 

87.  The  same  night  this  estimate  was  made,  and  ten  thousand  days’ 
work  were  thought  to  be  required,  and  the  battery  was  ordered. 

88.  The  plan  on  which  the  battery  is  built  is  represented  in  Plate 
IY.  Fig.  1 shows  a cross-section,  Fig.  2 a plan,  and  Fig.  3 the  ar- 
rangement of  the  logs  in  the  foundation. 

89.  The  general  theory  of  the  structure  is  this  : The  marsh  being 
capable  of  sustaining  a given  weight,  and  no  more,  to  the  square 
foot,  and  it  being  necessary  to  have  a certain  height  and  thickness  of 
parapet,  which  in  this  case  it  was  thought  best  to  make  of  sand-bags, 
an  equation  had  to  be  formed  between  the  size  of  the  foundation  and 
the  weight  to  be  supported.  In  other  words,  the  foundation  had  to 
be  large  enough  to  support  the  necessary  weight  without  sinking. 

' 90.  This  foundation  is  of  grillage,  made  of  large  yellow  pine  logs, 
crossed  and  bolted  together,  and  the  center  of  gravity  of  the  bat- 
tery, independently  of  the  system  upon  which  the  gun  rests,  is 
placed  in  the  center  of  the  platform. 

91.  The  timber  work  on  which  the  gun  rests  in  the  center  of  the 
battery  is  in  no  way  connected  with  the  parapet  or  its  foundation. 

92.  The  foundation  of  the  parapet  receives  a much  greater  load 
to  the  square  foot  than  the  gun-deck,  and  the  resultants  of  the  forces 
are  tending  rather  to  elevate  the  whole  structure  on  which  the  gun 
rests  than  to  allow  it  to  settle. 

93.  That  is,  if  the  battery  should  sink  in  the  mud,  the  gun  would 
be  left  standing  on  its  own  foundation,  while  the  displacement  would 
elevate  the  surface  of  the  surrounding  marsh,  and  tend,  so  far  as  it 
acted,  through  or  under  the  sheet  piling  which  surrounds  the  gun 
platform,  to  elevate  it  also. 

94.  Thus,  if  the  epaulement  sank  upon  its  foundation,  sand-bags 
could  be  piled  upon  it  indefinitely,  while  the  upheaved  mud  would 
form  a glacis  around  it,  and  the  gun  would  remain  in  one  con- 
stant position. 

95.  The  system  upon  which  the  gun  rests  is  represented  in  Fig.  1 
of  Plate  IY. 

96.  It  consists  of  a rectangular  figure  of  sheet  piling,  driven  as 
before  described,  within  which,  and  upon  the  natural  surface  of  the 


234  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

mud,  a thick  stratum  of  grass  was  laid  and  thoroughly  trampled 
down  ; on  this  were  placed  two  thicknesses  of  tarpaulin,  filling  the 
entire  space,  and  on  these  about  15  inches  of  well-rammed  sand  ; over 
these  are  three  thicknesses  of  3-inch  yellow  pine  plank.  The  lower 
two  courses  rest  on  one  another  and  the  sand,  and  the  ends  on  a welt- 
ing strip  spiked  inside  the  sheet  piling  ; the  third,  or  top  layer,  in- 
cludes the  heads  of  the  sheet  piling,  and  rests  on  the  course  below  it 
and  the  heads  of  the  piles.  The  two  lower  tiers  are  diagonal  to,  and  the 
top  course  is  in  the  line  of,  fire.  The  lower  courses  cross  one  another. 

97.  Under  the  logs  of  the  foundation  of  the  parapet,  upon  the 
mud,  and  transversely  to  the  direction  of  the  lower  tier,  quantities  of 
grass,  cut  in  the  swamp,  are  laid,  and  upon  this  two  thicknesses  of 
heavy  canvas  tarpaulins.  The  interstices  between  the  grillage  logs 
are  filled  with  sand  and  the  bags  broken  in  transportation,  and 
around  the  logs  are  piled  other  broken  bags  in  the  nature  of  a ramp, 
to  give  additional  weight  on  the  surface,  or  near  the  surface,  of  the 
surrounding  marsh,  to  keep  it  from  rising  unequally  if  the  battery 
should  sink. 

98.  On  the  left  of  the  battery  a road  was  made,  leading  from  the 
gorge  around  the  left  flank  to  the  edge  of  the  river.  It  is  formed  of 
logs  and  planks  transversely  bedded  in  the  mud,  and  has  a layer  of 
sand-bags  over  it.  The  gun  and  gun  carriage,  and  system  of  timber 
work,  forming  the  authorized  gun  platform,  were  taken  over  this 
road  from  boats  brought  to  the  landing  place,  at  the  end,  at  high 
water. 

. 99.  During  the  time  the  battery  was  in  course  of  construction,  all 

the  material  was  carried  by  boats,  and  many  of  the  details — all,  at 
first — went  to  the  work  and  returned  in  this  way;  but,  as  soon  as  prac- 
ticable, a plank  walk  was  built  from  the  angle  of  the  road  between 
the  left  center  breaching  batteries  and  Black  Island  to  the  Marsh 
Battery,  and  after  the  night  of  the  12th  of  August  most  of  the  work- 
men were  marched  over  it.  A platform  was  built  near  the  inter- 
section, on  which  the  reserve  of  the  covering  party  were  placed,  by 
order  of  General  Terry. 

100.  To  secure  the  working  parties  against  surprise,  picket-boats 
were  kept  in  the  stream  leading  to  James  Island  and  Charleston 
Harbor,  and  two  naval  boats  with  bow  howitzers  were  also  stationed 
by  the  admiral  in  the  same  water. 

101.  During  the  night  of  the  12th  of  August,  a boom  of  heavy 
round  pine  logs,  chained  together,  was  put  across  the  river,  at  the 
point  indicated  on  the  map,  and  securely  anchored  to  the  banks,  to 
obstruct  the  passage  of  boats  that  might  attempt  to  come  up  from 
Charleston  Harbor. 

102.  The  work  was  done  under  the  direction  of  Lieut.  Charles 
B.  Parsons,  Volunteer  Engineers. 

103.  In  the  construction  of  the  Marsh  Battery,  I was  assisted  on 
the  ground  by  Capt.  Charles  P.  McKenna,  Lieut.  Nathaniel  M.  Ed- 
wards, and  Lieut.  Charles  B.  Parsons,  Volunteer  Engineers. 

104.  The  gun  in  this  battery  is  a 200-pounder  Parrott  rifle,  upon 
an  iron  carriage,  with  the  authorized  wooden  platform  resting  on  the 
gun-deck.  It  is  manned  by  a detachment  of  Colonel  Plaisted’s 
Eleventh  Maine  Regiment,  commanded  by  Lieutenant  Sellmer. 

105.  In  the  construction  of  the  Marsh  Battery,  the  following  labor 
and  materials  were  expended  : 

106.  Thirteen  thousand  sand-bags  ; 123  pieces,  15  to  18  inch  diameter, 
yellow  pine  timber,  45  to  55  feet  long;  5,000  feet  1-inch  boards ; 8 


Chap.  XL.] 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 


235 


paulins,  18  by  28  feet  each;  9,156  feet  3-inch  June  plank;  300  pounds 
7-inch,  and  300  pounds  4-inch,  spikes  and  nails ; 600  pounds  round 
and  square  iron;  75  fathoms  3-inch  rope. 

107.  These  quantities  do  not  include  the  material  or  labor  employed 
in  the  bridges  and  plank  walk  across  the  marsh,  and  the  boom,  or 
the  road  and  pier  at  the  old  engineer  camp. 


108.  Table  of  average  haul. 


109.  Average  pressure  on  the  foundation  of  the  battery,  513  pounds 
to  the  square  foot. 

110.  Average  pressure  on  the  gun-deck,  123  pounds  to  the  square 
foot,  at  rest. 

111.  The  elevation  of  the  gun,  from  35°  to  37°. 

112.  Greatest  range  by  Coast  Survey  map,  9,240  yards,  or  5d  miles. 

113.  Table  of  labor  expended  in  construction  of  the  Marsh  Battery: 
91  days’  work  of  engineer  officers,  1,384  days’  work  of  engineer  sol- 
diers, 7,390  days’  work  of  infantry,  172  days’  work  of  four-horse 
teams,  93  days’  work  of  boats. 

114.  During  the  night  of  the  10th  of  August,  I tested  Mr.  Grant’s 
calcium  light,  from  the  left  center  batteries,  and  found  that  the  illu- 
mination was  sufficient  to  be  serviceable  in  siege  operations.  The 
light  was  not,  however,  used  under  my  immediate  observation,  ex- 
cepting in  this  first  experimental  trial. 

115.  During  the  night  of  the  16th  of  August,  Capt.  F.  E.  Graef, 
Y olunteer  Engineers,  made  a covered  way  from  the  mortar  batteries, 
in  the  rear  of  the  first  parallel,  to  the  first  parallel,  and  then  extended 
it  to  the  rear  some  distance,  to  include  the  Beacon  House.  The  same 
day  the  roads  to  Black  Island  and  the  Marsh  Battery,  which  had 
previously  been  built,  were  strengthened  and  widened  by  a working 
party  under  Capt.  S.  C.  Eaton,  Volunteer  Engineers.  This  is  rep- 
resented in  Figs.  5 and  6,  Plate  IY. 

116.  Captain  Graef  directed  the  construction  of  the  road  from  the 
junction  to  the  Marsh  Battery,  and  was  assisted  by  Lieut.  J.  S. 
Baldwin,  Volunteer  Engineers. 

117.  On  the  night  of  the  17th  of  August,  the  Marsh  Battery  was 
ready  for  the  gun,  and  Lieutenant  Wadlie,  Third  New  Hampshire 
Volunteers,  and  Lieutenant  Parsons,  Volunteer  Engineers,  made 
their  preparations  to  put  the  gun  in  place. 

118.  This  was  done  by  first  carrying  the  timber  parts,  and  then  the 
iron  work  of  the  carriage,  to  the  battery  in  boats,  and  landing  them 
at  the  point  previously  prepared  on  the  edge  of  the  marsh,  as  shown 
in  the  drawings. 


236  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

110.  August  19. — In  connection  with.  Major  Brooks,  aide-de-camp, 
organized  four  sap  brigades  for  approaches  against  Fort  Wagner. 

120.  Between  the  18th  and  20th  of  the  month,  a netting,  made  of 
large  ropes  and  floated  on  barrels,  was  put  across  Light-House  Inlet 
by  Lieut.  R.  F.  Butt,  Volunteer  Engineers,  to  catch  torpedoes  or 
other  incendiary  bodies  intended  by  the  enemy  to  float  down  Light- 
House  Inlet  and  destroy  our  shipping  in  the  harbor.  This  contriv- 
ance is  represented  in  Plate  V,  where  Fig.  1 is  a general  elevation ; 
Fig.  2,  a plan ; Fig.  3,  an  enlarged  view  of  one  q>anel . Fig.  4 shows 
the  method  of  securing  the  floats,  which  are  barrels;  a a,  are  10-inch 
mortar  shells  hung  to  pieces  of  rope,  to  keep  the  whole  steady  and 
vertical. 

121.  During  the  night  of  the  21st  of  August,  another  platform, 
large  enough  to  hold  200  men,  to  serve  as  a covering  party,  was 
constructed  on  the  marsh,  near  the  junction  of  the  causeways;  and 
to  the  left  and  front  of  this  position,  out  in  the  marsh,  a mock  bat- 
tery of  boards  and  grass  was  built  by  Lieut.  N".  M.  Edwards  and 
Lieutenant  Hartmann,  to  draw  the  fire  of  the  enemy,  in  which  the 
device  was  eminently  successful.  At  this  stage  of  the  work,  a maga- 
zine was  made  on  the  hard  ground  at  the  easterly  end  of  the  cause- 
way, and  was  intended  for  supplying  the  Marsh  Battery.  Yokes  were 
also  made  to  fit  on  the  necks  of  men  to  carry  powder,  but  it  was  after- 
ward found  that  boats  could  be  most  advantageously  used  for  that 
purpose. 

122.  It  having  been  reported  at  headquarters  that  some  difficulty 
had  occurred  during  the  night  at  the  Marsh  Battery,  an  examination 
and  the  following  report  were  made  : 

123.  Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 
Engineer  Office,  Morris  Island , S.  C.,  August  22,  1863. 

Major  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that,  agreeably  to  orders  from  the  command- 
ing general,  I have  examined  the  battery  on  the  marsh,  and  find  that  the  founda- 
tion, parapet,  and  system  of  piles,  including  the  gun-deck — in  fact,  everything,  ex- 
cepting the  gun  and  its  parts — are  in  perfect  order. 

124.  The  arrangement  of  parts  that  prevented  the  wooden  platform  from  sliding 
on  the  gun-deck  having  been  removed  by  some  person  to  me  unknown,  the  gun 
and  all  its  parts  down  to  the  deck  have  slidden  to  the  rear  some  20  inches. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  W.  SERRELL, 

Colonel,  and  Assistant  Engineer , Department  of  the  South. 

Maj.  E.  W.  Smith, 

Assistant  Adjutant-General,  Department  of  the  South. 

125.  The  difficulty  was  remedied  by  spiking  heavy  cleets  on  to  the 
gun-deck,  and  firing  was  resumed. 

126.  On  the  morning  of  the  23d  of  August,  orders  were  received 
from  the  commanding  general  to  put  three  30-pounder  Parrott  rifled 
guns  on  Black  Island,  and  to  so  build  the  batteries  for  them  and 
construct  platforms  that  they  could  fire  over  the  enemy’s  works 
on  James  Island  directly  upon  the  city  of  Charleston.  The  range, 
as  ascertained  by  the  Coast  Survey  map,  was  required  to  be  8,800 
yards. 

127.  The  work  was  immediately  commenced,  and  a covered  way 
run  from  the  camp  near  the  center  of  the  island  to  the  extreme  right, 
or  nearly  so,  and  the  batteries  were  built  as  represented  in  Plate  VI 
and  Plate  VII,  wherein  Fig.  1,  Plate  VI,  is  a general  plan  of  the 
whole  line  of  batteries,  covered  way,  surgery,  and  magazine;  a is  the 
surgery;  b,  covered  way  ; c,  the  magazine ; d d,  30-pounder  gun  bat- 
teries ; e,  100-pounder  gun  battery ; /,  one  30-pounder  battery  made 


Chap.  XL.]  OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C.  237 

for  the  gun  to  be  mounted  on  a top  carriage.  The  guns  at  d d are 
on  siege  carriages. 

128.  Subsequently  the  order  was  modified  to  put  one  100-pounder 
Parrott  and  two  30-pounders  into  position,  instead  of  three  30-pound- 
ers, and,  finally,  batteries  were  built  for*  guns  as  above  described. 
Fig.  2,  Plate  VI,  represents  a cross-section,  and  Fig.  3 a longi- 
tudinal section,  of  the  surgery. 

129.  Plate  VII  represents  these  batteries  on  an  enlarged  scale. 
Fig.  1 shows  all  four  batteries  together;  Fig.  2 is  a section  on  a b of 
Fig.  1;  Fig.  3 is  a section  of  c d,  Fig.  1;  Fig.  4 is  a cross-section  on 
e f,  Fig.  1;  Fig.  5 is  a cross-section  on  g h,  Fig.  1;  Fig.  6 is  the  maga- 
zine and  the  right  of  the  covered  way;  Fig.  7 represents  the  method 
of  taking  the  100-pounder  gun  across  the  marsh ; i is  a side  view  and 
k an  end  elevation. 

130.  The  30-pounders  were  taken  from  the  ordnance  yard  on  Morris 
Island  in  a small  scow,  and  mounted  on  siege  carriages  without  lim- 
bers, and  were  afterward  drawn  across  the  marsh  about  150  yards, 
in  the  dead  of  night,  in  a heavy  storm  of  rain. 

131.  The  roadway  across  the  marsh  was  made  by  throwing  down 
a layer  of  brush,  say,  3 feet  deep ; on  this,  which  was  well  trampled 
down,  were  placed  transversely  1-inch  boards,  which  were  the  best 
that  could  be  obtained,  and  longitudinally  over  these  were  3-inch 
planks,  for  the  wheels  to  run  upon. 

132.  The  100-pounder  gun  was  taken  farther  up  the  creek  to  the 
right,  and  having  been  provided  with  a wooden  cylinder  secured 
around  the  cone  of  the  chase  by  iron  hoops,  after  the  manner  of 
staves,  and  corresponding  in  diameter  with  the  re-enforce,  was  par- 
buckled and  rolled  over  the  marsh  on  two  thick  planks. 

133.  Some  difficulties  having  occurred  with  the  iron  carriages  used 
with  the  Parrott  rifle  gun,  but  more  particularly  as  there  were  fewer 
of  them  in  the  department  than  were  required  for  use,  and  as  the  com- 
manding general  desired  to  fire  these  guns  at  a higher  angle  of  ele- 
vation than  the  authorized  carriages  admitted  of,  two  experimental 
carriages  were  made,  which  are  represented  in  Plate  XIII. 

134.  The  object  of  these  carriages  being  to  admit  the  use  of  high 
degrees  of  angles  of  elevation,  the  top  carriage  was  so  made  that 
the  whole  rear  of  the  gun,  including  the  re-enforce,  passed  between 
the  side  cheeks,  the  cascabel  clearing  the  rear  transom  of  the  top 
carriage. 

135.  They  were  made  of  the  common  hard  pine  of  the  country, 
hewed  in  the  woods.  These  carriages  worked  well,  and  possessed  the 
advantage  of  being  easily  made.  Any  engineer  company  can  con- 
struct them  in  almost  any  part  of  the  southern  department,  from  ma- 
terial found  in  the  country,  excepting  a few  iron  bolts  and  trunnion 
plates,  which  were  easily  made  at  the  portable  forge.  I think  they 
will  be  found  as  good  or  better  than  the  authorized  iron  gun  carriage. 

136.  A modification  of  this  plan  is  used  at  Black  Island  for  a 100- 
pounder  gun  at  the  right  batteries.  The  only  difference  consists  in 
an  eccentric  shaft  being  used  with  the  top  carriage.  This  carriage 
is  represented  in  Plate  XIV. 

137.  They  have  not  yet  been  sufficiently  tested  to  determine  their 
value,  but  everything  indicates  durability  and  sufficient  strength. 
The  carriage  represented  in  Plate  XIII  requires  roller  handspikes  to 
maneuver  it,  but  is  otherwise  more  simple  than  that  represented  in 
Plate  XIV. 

138.  The  batteries  on  Black  Island  having  been  constructed  for 


[Chap.  XL. 


238  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

the  purpose  of  firing  in  one  constant  direction,  no  provision  was 
necessary  in  the  carriages  for  a horizontal  field. 

139.  The  peculiar  arrangement  of  the  right  batteries  represented 
in  Plate  VII  was  to  admit  of  a gun  mounted  on  a siege  carriage 
being  fired  at  a very  high  elevation.  The  trail  of  the  gun  carriage 
drops  into  the  pit  and  rests  on  the  lower  platform.  The  wheels  are 
supported  by  the  upper  platform,  the  platforms  being  parallel  to  one 
another.  The  recoil  takes  place  without  changing  the  vertical  angle 
of  the  axis  of  the  piece. 

140.  The  platforms  are  laid  at  an  angle  of  5 degrees  from  the 
horizontal  rising  to  the  rear.  These  batteries  work  very  well ; but 
I am  of  opinion  that  it  would  be  better  to  have  a less  inclination 
of  the  platforms. 

141.  Plate  XII  represents  a pier,  constructed  during  the  latter 
part  of  July  by  Captain  Walker,  Volunteer  Engineers,  at  Pawnee 
Landing,  Folly  Island.  Fig.  1 is  a general  elevation;  Fig.  2,  a 
plan.  It  was  for  the  purpose  of  facilitating  transportation  from 
Folly  River  to  Morris  Island. 

142.  A fortification,  for  a garrison  of  200  men,  is  now  in  course  of 
erection  upon  the  left  of  Black  Island.  I shall  have  the  honor  to 
describe  this  work  in  some  other  report. 

143.  A permanent  pier,  155  feet  long,  31  feet  wide,  and  having  a T 
69  feet  long,  has  been  constructed  and  is  now  nearly  ready  for  use 
at  the  south  end  of  Morris  Island,  near  the  ordnance  yard.  This 
pier  extends  out  into  the  channel  of  Light-ITouse  Inlet  to  9 feet  of 
water  at  low  tide  ; it  is  very  strong  and  substantial.  The  piles  were 
all  driven  by  a hand  engine  ; the  timbers  were  obtained  upon  Folly 
Island,  and  brought  to  and  across  the  river  with  great  labor.  The 
work  was  under  the  direction  of  Maj.  Richard  Butt,  Volunteer 
Engineers. 

144.  During  the  siege,  there  had  been  made,  under  the  direction  of 
Lieutenants  Mehles  and  Harrold,  Volunteer  Engineers,  1,429  gabions, 
464  fascines,  11  sap-rollers,  and  4 anchor  baskets. 

145.  During  the  bombardment,  Lieut.  W.  H.  Baldwin,  Volunteer 
Engineers,  had  charge  of  the  repairs  of  the  first  parallel  and  the 
mortar  batteries  in  the  rear. 

146.  Lieut.  James  Baxter,  Volunteer  Engineers,  while  directing 
the  construction  of  the  naval  batteries,  was  dangerously  wounded. 

147.  Where  all  have  done  so  well,  it  is  impossible  to  make  dis- 
tinctions. 

148.  To  the  officers  and  men  of  all  arms  I am  greatly  indebted  for 
hearty  co-operation  and  assistance.  The  fatigue  duty  has  been  ex- 
cessive, but  it  has,  under  the  most  trying  circumstances,  in  all  cases 
been  most  cheerfully  performed. 

149.  Individual  acts  of  heroism  and  personal  bravery  have  been 
of  daily  occurrence.  Nothing  has  seemed  too  hazardous  to  under- 
take or  too  difficult  to  execute. 

150.  The  establishment  of  the  engineer  depot  on  Morris  Island  by 
Capt.  Frederick  H.  Cruso,  and  the  manner  in  which  he  conducted 
the  manufacture  of  large  quantities  of  engineer  material,  while 
under  my  direction,  during  the  early  part  of  the  siege,  was  satisfac- 
tory. Captain  Cruso  was  assisted  by  Lieut.  Richard  Coe. 

151.  The  following-named  officers  have  acted  as  my  assistants,  and 
it  is  with  great  pleasure  that  I present  them  to  your  favorable  con- 
sideration : Maj.  Richard  Butt,  Capt.  Frederick  E.  Graef,  Capt. 
Samuel  C.  Eaton,  Capt.  Joseph  Walker,  Capt.  JohnL.  Suess,  Capt. 


Chap.  XL.] 


239 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 

Cliarles  P.  McKenna,  Lieut.  Edward  N.  Kirk  Talcott,  acting  adju- 
tant, Lieut.  Hiram  Farrand,  Lieut.  James  Baxter,  Lieut.  Patrick  Mc- 
Guire, Lieut.  Henry  Mehles,  Lieut.  Charles  L.  Wilcken,  Lieut. 
Charles  B.  Parsons,  Lieut.  Nathaniel  M.  Edwards,  Lieut.  James 
H.  Harrold,  Lieut.  James  S.  Baldwin,  Lieut.  William  H.  Baldwin,  all 
of  the  Volunteer  Engineers. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

EDWARD  W.  SERRELL, 

Col.  Vol.  Engs.,  Asst,  to  Chief  Engineer,  Dept,  of  the  South. 
General  Q.  A.  Gillmore, 

Commanding,  and  Chief  Engineer,  Dept,  of  the  South. 

Note. — The  drawings  accompanying  this  report  have  been  pre- 
pared by  Corpl.  Edwin  D.  Doolittle,  assisted  by  artificers  and  pri- 
vates of  the  V olunteer  Engineers. 


240  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

INDEX  OE  DDATES. 

Plate  I. — The  bridge  for  crossing  Light-House  Inlet,  made  at  Hilton  Head,  after 

the  model  at  the  engineer  camp.  Fig.  1 is  an  elevation  ; Fig.  2,  a 
plan ; Fig.  3,  a cross-section ; Fig.  4,  method  of  lashing  the  truss ; 
Fig.  5,  the  arrangement  for  holding  the  floor  planks  ; Fig.  G,  shoe 
to  keep  the  truss  from  sinking  too  deeply  into  the  mud. 

Plate  II. — The  method  of  sawing  off  piles  under  water.  Fig.  1,  a general  view  ; 

Fig.  2,  a side  elevation,  the  saw  hung  on  the  pile ; Fig.  3,  disposi- 
tion of  the  piles  to  be  cut,  and  the  machinery  to  do  it  with  in  plan  ; 
a,  method  of  hanging  the  saw  on  the  piles ; c,  saw  secured  to  the 
saw-frame. 

Plate  ill. — Plan  of  the  first  parallel,  as  turned  over  to  Lieutenant  Suter,  14th  of 
July. 

Plate  IV. — The  Marsh  Battery.  Fig.  1,  a cross-section;  Fig.  2,  general  plan; 

Fig.  3,  the  foundation  of  the  battery  and  road ; Fig.  4,  the  experi- 
ments for  testing  the  sustaining  strength  of  the  marsh  ; Figs.  5 and 
G,  the  roadway  leading  over  the  marsh  to  the  battery. 

Plate  V.  - The  torpedo  obstruction,  or  “ Devil  Catcher,”  at  Light-House  Inlet. 

Fig.  1,  general  elevation ; Fig.  2,  plan ; Fig.  3,  a panel,  on  an  en- 
larged scale  ; Fig.  4,  method  pf  securing  the  floats. 

Plate  VI. — The  right  batteries  on  Black  Island.  Fig.  1,  general  plan  of  surgery, 
four  batteries,  and  a magazine ; Fig.  2,  cross-section  of  the  sur- 
gery ; Fig.  3,  longitudinal  section  of  the  same. 

Plate  VII. — The  batteries  on  Black  Island,  on  an  enlarged  scale.  Fig.  1,  plan  of 
four  batteries  ; Fig.  2,  longitudinal  section  of  the  100-pounder  rifle- 
gun  battery ; Fig.  3,  longitudinal  section  of  the  30-pounder  rifle- 
gun  batteries;  the  guns  on  siege  carriages ; Fig.  4,  cross-section  of 
the  30-pounder  platform ; Fig.  5,  cross-section  of  the  100-pounder 
gun  platform,  showing  the  pit ; Fig.  6,  plan  of  the  magazine  on  the 
right  of  the  covered  way. 

Plate  VIII. — The  pier  at  the  north  end  of  Folly  Island,  constructed  during  the 
siege.  Fig.  1,  an  elevation  ; Fig.  2,  a plan.  Both  of  these  figures 
show  the  scow  which  was  permanently  moored  at  the  end  of  the 
pier,  which  raised  and  lowered  with  the  tide. 

Plate  IX. — Shows  the  temporary  pier  built  at  the  south  end  of  Morris  Island 
during  the  siege,  plan  elevation,  and  cross-sections. 

Plate  X. — The  first  parallel,  as  finally  completed. 

Plate  XI. — The  method  of  putting  in  the  piles  in  the  Marsh  Battery.  Fig.  1,  first 
arrangement  adopted ; Fig.  2,  plan  finally  used. 

Plate  XII. — The  pier  at  Pawnee  Landing,  constructed  during  the  siege.  Fig.  1, 
general  elevation  ; Fig.  2,  a plan. 

Plate  XIII. — The  100-pounder  and  30-pounder  gun  carriages  made  for  experimental 
purposes.  Fig.  1,  general  plan ; Fig.  2,  side  elevation ; Fig.  3,  an 
end  view  of  the  100-pounder  gun  carriage ; Fig.  4,  plan  of  the  30- 
pounder  carriage  and  chassis ; Fig.  5,  side  elevation  of  the  same ; 
Fig.  6,  end  elevation  of  the  same.  These  carriages  were  for  guns 
to  fire  at  any  angle  from  zero  to  40°  elevation. 

Plate  XIV. — The  100-pounder  gun  carriage  used  at  Black  Island  for  firing  at  an 
elevation  of  37°.  Fig.  1,  general  plan;  Fig.  2,  side  elevation  ; Fig. 
3,  end  view. 

Plate  XV. — The  permanent  wharf  at  the  south  end  of  Morris  Island,  completed 
at  the  close  of  the  siege.  Fig.  1,  side  elevation ; Fig.  2,  general 
plan. 


Chap.  XL.] 


241 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  0. 


16  R R — VOL  XXVIII,  PT  I 


PLATE  I, 


PLATE  II. 


242 


[Chap.  XL. 


S.  C.  AND  G A,  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 


Scale  for  Details. 


CROSS  SECTION  ON  A B. 


Chap.  XL.] 


OPERATION'S  ON"  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C 


243 


PLATE  III. 


Chap.  XL.] 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 


245 


Scale  for.  Figs,  i,  5 & 6.  ' 

19  1*1*911  _V.V  V feet 

* Scale,  for  Fig.  ■?.  • 

10  5 0 10 20 30 40 aj.feeU 


PLATE  V, 


24G  S.  C.  AND  OA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MTD.  AND  T.  FLA 


[Chap.  XL 


Scale  for  Details. 


'£  ‘Z  's6m  uo/ainos 


Chap.  XL.] 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 


247 


! 


PLATE  VI, 


248  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 


[Chap.  XL. 


9 PLATE  VII. 


Fig.  7. 


Scale  for  Figs.  2, 3,  i,  5 & 7. 

1' 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10  15  20  feet. 


0 10  20 


Scale  for  Figs.  1 & 6. 

40  50  60  70  80  90  100  110  feet 


,H OSS  Enyran'ng  Co. 


50  feet.,  I 


Chap.  XL.] 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 


249 


PLATE  YIIL 


PLATE  IX. 


250 


S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 


[Chap.  XL 


Scale. 


Scale  for  Plan. 


Chap.  XL.] 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 


251 


PLATE  X. 


252  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

\ 1 \ . 


Chap.  XL.]  OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 


25  8 


PLATE  XIII. 


lOO  P’D’R  PARROTT  GUN  CARRIAGE  AND  CHASSIS. 


Fig.  1. 


; 1 "T-'OC 

- - ^ 

: 1 iTFq 

Fig.  3. 


30  P’D’R  PARROTT  GUN  CARRIAGE  AND  CHASSIS. 

Fig.  4. 


— 

r n- 

r 

- . 1 

--■n 

□ 


Fig.  5. 


Fig.  6. 

Jtt 1 


0 12  3 4 


Scale . 

8 

: 1- 


12  16  foot 


I 


254 


S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA, 


[Chap.  XL. 


PLATE  XIV. 


Fig.  1. 


Fig.  3. 


Scale 


\ 


Chap.  XL] 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C.  255 


PLATE  XV. 


Sc.ale. 

30  40 


256  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

In  the  Field,  Eng.  Office,  Folly  Island,  S.  C.,  January  6,  1864. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  report,  for  the  information  of  the 
major-general  commanding,  that  the  line  of  signal  towers  from  these 
headquarters  to  Hilton  Head  is  now  completed  and  in  operation. 

Beginning  at  Hilton  Head,  the  line  commences  at  the  old  head- 
quarters building,  from  which  it  was  proposed  to  telegraph  to  the 
signal  tower  erected  at  the  junction  of  the  roads  between  Beaufort 
and  Saint  Helena  Village,  and  that  leading  to  the  Episcopal  Church 
on  Saint  Helena  Island,  but  the  distance  was  found  to  be  too 
great,  and  an  intermediate  station  has  been  established  at  Jenkins’ 
plantation,  8i  miles  from  Hilton  Head.  This  is  merely  a reading- 
room  and  platform.  From  Jenkins’  to  the  tower,  6£  miles,  commu- 
nication is  made  by  military  magnetic  electric  telegraph. 

The  tower  upon  Saint  Helena  Island  is  formed  upon  three  very 
large  hard  pine  trees,  and  over  them,  framing  in  successive  sections 
up  to  a total  height  of  138  feet  above  the  ground. 

The  next  tower*  is  at  Otter  Island,  8-J  miles  farther  up  the  coast. 
The  framework  is  two  towers,  one  within  the  other,  counterbraced. 
The  total  height  is  142  feet  above  the  ground.  This  tower  is  stock- 
aded, and  could,  with  a good  garrison,  hold  out  against  an  attack  of 
the  enemy  for  some  considerable  time.  The  stockade  is  flanked  by 
tambours  at  two  angles. 

The  next  station  is  at  Bay  Point,  Edisto  Island,  distant  5 miles 
from  Otter  Island.  This  is  merely  a temporary  work  43  feet  high, 
16  feet  square,  and  stands  on  a sand-hill  about  18  feet  above  high- 
water  mark.  It  is  surrounded  by  abatis,  but  is  not  otherwise  for- 
tified. 

The  next  point  is  at  Botany  Bay  Island,  where  there  is  a tower  138 
feet  high  above  the  ground  and  30  feet  square  at  the  base. 

This  tower,f  being  at  a very  exposed  point,  has  been  well  fortified 
by  stockade,  flanked  on  the  angles  by  tambours  and  abatis  outside. 
The  entrance  is  by  ladders  over  the  abatis  and  stockade.  These  lad- 
ders are  movable,  and  are  to  be  drawn  in  at  night,  or  in  case  of  an 
attack.  In  the  tower,  18  feet  above  the  ground,  there  is  a platform 
of  timber,  surrounded  by  a loop-holed  wall  of  timber  4 feet  high  and 
7 inches  thick.  This  tower  should  be  able  to  resist  a strong  attack. 

RECAPITULATION. 


Miles. 

Hilton  Head  to  Jenkins’ 84 

Jenkins’  to  Saint  Helena 6| 

Saint  Helena  to  Otter  Island 81- 

Otter  Island  to  Bay  Point  Island 5 

Bay  Point  to  Botany  Bay 94 

Botany  Bay  to  Folly  Island,  south  end 14 

To  department  headquarters,  Folly  Island 34 

Total 554 


The  towers  at  Botany  Bay  and  south  end  of  Folly  Island  are  too 
far  apart  for  service  in  bad  weather,  and  an  intermediate  small 
station  has  been  erected  on  Kiawah  Island.  Those  on  Folly  Island 
do  not  form  a part  of  the  subject  of  this  report. 

The  towers  at  Kiawah,  Botany  Bay,  Bay  Point,  Otter  Island, 
Saint  Helena  Island,  and  the  station  at  Jenkins’,  were  built  by  Lieut. 

* This  tower  is  shown  in  the  accompanying  drawing,  Plate  XVI,  p.  258. 

[This  tower  is  represented  by  Plate  XVII,  259, 


Chap.  XL.]  OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C.  257 

Charles  F.  Hartmann,  from  plans  furnished  from  this  office. 
The  work  was  done  by  three  detachments  of  volunteer  engineers, 
assisted  by  fatigue  parties  of  infantry. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

EDWARD  W.  SERRELL, 

Colonel  Vol.  Engineers , and  Asst.  Eng.,  Dept,  of  the  South. 
Captain  Burger, 

Assistant  Adjutant  General,  Dept,  of  the  South. 

Note. — The  following  drawings*  represent  the  booms  used  to  ob- 
struct the  water  communications  between  our  positions  on  Morris  and 
Folly  Islands  and  the  enemy.  For  obvious  reasons,  their  positions 
are  not  designated  at  this  date.  Plates  XVIII,  XIX,  and  XX  repre- 
sent in  plan,  elevation,  and  cross-section  the  method  of  construction. 
I consider  Plate  XX  the  most  desirable  form  to  use.  No  boat  or 
other  floating  body  can  pass  over  it  without  first  submerging  the 
logs  and  frieze,  and,  if  turned  upside  down,  the  obstruction  still  pre- 
sents itself.  Great  attention  has  been  paid  to  this  matter.  Many 
hundred  yards  of  booms  like  these  have  been  constructed  and  put  in 
place. 

* XVIII,  XIX,  and  XX. 

17  R R — VOL  XXVIII,”  PT  I 


258 


S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS.  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA, 


LChap.  XL. 


€hap.  XL.] 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 


259 


260  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL 


PLATE  XVIII. 


Mott' Enprmring  Co. 


Chap.  XL.] 


261 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 


262 


S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 


[Chap.  XL. 


SINCE  3 O’CLOCK  A,  M.  AUGUST  .8th. 


Chap.  XL.] 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 


263 


264  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

No.  5. 

Reports  and  Journal  of  Maj.  Thomas  B.  Brooks , U.  S.  Army, 
Aide-de-Camp,  and  Assistant  Engineer. 

Engineer’s  Office, 
Morris  Island,  S.  C.,  August  22,  1863. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  state  that  at  9 o’clock  yesterday 
morning  Fort  Wagner  opened  an  artillery  fire  on  the  head  of  onr 
sap,  distant  about  400  yards  from  the  work.  Capt.  J.  Walker,  in 
charge  at  the  time,  continued  the  work  to  11  o’clock.  At  least  16 
shots  were  fired.  One  exploded  in  the  sap-roller,  several  touched 
it,  and  the  parapet  was  much  torn.  At  11.30  o’clock  the  work  was 
discontinued  on  account  of  this  fire  and  that  of  the  enemy’s  sharp- 
shooters, who  occupied  a position  in  the  ruins  on  the  left,  which 
enfiladed  the  trench. 

The  Eighty-fifth  Pennsylvania  did  the  advance  guard  duty  yester- 
day. Their  casualties  amounted,  I am  informed  to  25  during  the 
tour  of  duty. 

Yesterday  I requested  General  Terry  to  have  the  advanced  posts 
of  the  guard  of  the  trenches  occupy  a ridge  about  150  yards  in  ad- 
vance of  the  head  of  the  sap  (see  sketch*)  and  then  by  means  of 
the  flying  sap  I hoped  to  get  a lodgment  in  that,  favorable. 

The  One  hundredth  New  York  Volunteers,  Colonel  Dandy  in  com- 
mand, made  three  unsuccessful  efforts  to  hold  this  ground,  but  were 
driven  back,  losing  5 or  6 men.  I witnessed  a part  of  the  skirmish- 
ing, and  believe  this  ridge  could  only  have  been  retaken  with  a much 
larger  force  and  considerable  loss,  the  enemy  being  i$  stronger  force 
than  usual. 

The  advanced  line  finally  settled  down  to  near  the  position  occu- 
pied the  night  before,  excepting  the  left,  which  was  advanced  to  in- 
clude the  old  ruins. 

Captain  Suess,  by  means  of  the  flying  sap,  made  a parallel  on 
this  picket  line  entirely  across  the  island.  This  line  is  now  being 
strengthened  and  put  in  defensible  condition. 

One  Requa  piece  was  last  night  mounted  on  the  right  of  this  line, 
enfilading  its  face  and  the  beach.  Another  Requa  piece  is  about  50 
yards  in  the  rear  of  this  fourth  parallel  and  near  the  center  of  the 
island,  and  two  are  in  the  third  parallel.  These  four  defensive  pieces 
comprise  all  the  artillery  in  position  beyond  the  second  parallel. 

I think  it  will  be  impossible  to  continue  the  sap  in  the  daytime 
under  Wagner’s  artillery  fire,  but  if  our  picket  line  continues  to  ad- 
vance, which  can  only  be  done  with  considerable  loss,  we  may  make 
some  progress  with  the  sap  each  night.  Should  the  enemy’s  pickets 
retire  inside  his  works,  which  they  will  soon  be  forced  to  do,  he  will 
then  keep  up  an  artillery  fire  from  his  light  guns  in  the  fort,  which 
will  make  it  impossible  for  the  sap  to  progress  night  or  day  until  this 
fire  be  subdued  of  kept  down. 

These  light  guns  are  run  behind  the  merlons  to  avoid  our  shot; 
hence  it  is  only  by  destroying  this  curtain  with  our  heavy  guns  in  the 
second  parallel,  thus  uncovering  them,  or  by  rendering  their  service 
impossible  by  a superior  fire  from  light  guns  mounted  in  the  fourth 
parallel,  assisted  by  a strong  infantry  force. 

Our  light  guns  in  the  second  parallel  cannot  be  used  effectively 


*See  p.  263. 


Chap.  XL.]  OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C.  265 

against  Wagner  on  account  of  the  distance  and  the  fact  that  their 
fire  endangers  our  own  men  in  the  advance.  Five,  I am  informed, 
have  been  already  injured. 

The  first  I consider  the  best  plan,  for  so  long  as  the  enemy  are 
strongly  intrenched  in  Fort  Wagner  they  will  give  us  serious  annoy- 
ance and  have  an  excellent  base  from  which  to  assault  our  works, 
which  they  must  now  more  than  ever  he  convinced  is  their  only 
hope. 

The  destruction  of  Fort  Wagner  would  give  us  possession  of  the 
whole  of  Morris  Island  and  probably  Fort  Sumter. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

T.  B.  BROOKS, 

Captain,  and  Assistant  Engineer. 

Brig.  Gen.  Q.  A.  Gillmore, 

Commanding  Department  of  the  South. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 
Engineer’s  Office , Morris  Island , S.  C.,  September  27 , 1863. 

General  : In  compliance  with  paragraph  836,  Revised  United 
States  Army  Regulations,  and  your  verbal  instructions,  I have  the 
honor  to  submit  the  following  report  concerning  those  engineer 
operations  against  the  defenses  of  Charleston  Harbor,  which  were 
executed  under  my  direction,  between  July  12  and  the  evacuation 
of  Morris  Island  by  the  enemy  on  September  7,  1863  : 

I was  appointed  as  assistant  to  yourself  as  chief  engineer,  by  Gen- 
eral Orders,  No.  6,  dated  headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 
Morris  Island,  S.  C.,  July  15,  1863. 

On  the  29th  of  August,  Capt.  C.  B.  Reese,  U.  S.  Engineers,  was 
appointed  assistant  and  consulting  engineer,  Department  of  the 
South.  From  that  date  I received  your  instructions  concerning  the 
work  through  him. 

The  siege  works  executed  on  Morris  Island  may  be  conveniently 
classified  under  the  following  heads,  arranged  in  chronological  order: 

I.  Erection  of  siege  batteries  against  Fort  Wagner,  used  in  the 
unsuccessful  operations  of  July  18. 

II.  Establishment  of  defensive  lines  across  Morris  Island,  in  order 
to  secure  our  lodgment. 

III.  Construction  of  batteries  employed  in  the  demolition  of  Fort 
Sumter. 

IV.  Execution  of  approaches  and  batteries  against  Fort  Wagner, 
which  compelled  its  evacuation  on  September  7. 

I had  charge  of  the  construction  of  ‘a  part  of  the  batteries  em- 
braced in  the  first  and  third  classes,  and  entire  direction,  excepting 
for  five  days,  as  noted  below,  of  the  second  and  fourth  operations. 

The  following  summary  exhibits  the  amount  and  .nature  of  the 
principal  items  of  engineering  work  herein  described  : 

Yards, 


Aggregate  length  of  approaches 3, 440 

Musketry  parapet 1,025 

Sand-bag  revetting 2, 000 

Splinter-proof  shelter 360 

Inclined  palisading 520 

Wire  entanglement 300 

Road  and  causeway 750 


[Chap.  XL. 


266  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 
Number  of  emplacements  built  for  guns  and  mortars  : 


Against  Fort  Sumter  on  the  left 1 

Against  Fort  Sumter  on  the  right 7 

Against  Fort  Wagner  previous  to  July  18 17 

Against  Fort  Wagner  after  July  18 28 

Defensive  purposes 36 


Total 89 


Number  of  bomb-proof  service  magazines 11 

Number  of  splinter-proof  service  magazines 7 


Total 18 


Number  of  defensive  booms ,r. 3 


This  summary  includes  ten  emplacements  for  ordnance  and  one 
bomb-proof  service  magazine  built,  but  never  used.  It  also  em- 
braces four  emplacements  for  ordnance,  one  bomb-proof  magazine, 
and  300  yards  of  sap,  executed  under  the  direction  of  Lieut.  P.  S. 
Michie,  U.  S.  Engineers,  assistant  engineer,  Department  of  the 
South,  who  relieved  me  while  sick,  during  the  first  week  of  Sep- 
tember. 

This  siege  work,  extending  through  a period  of  fifty -five  days, 
was  chiefly  done  under  cover  of  darkness,  and  under  a fire  of  artillery 
and  sharpshooters,  more  or  less  severe.  In  its  execution,  23,500  sol- 
diers’ day’s  work,  of  six  hours  each,  were  expended.  This  number 
does  not  include  the  labor  of  preparing  engineer  material,  only  a 
small  part  of  which  was  done  under  my  direction. 

Of  this  work,  8,000  days  were  employed  on  the  defensive  arrange- 
ments, 5,600  against  Fort  Sumter,  and  9,900  against  Fort  Wagner. 

The  “day’s  work”  of  the  soldier  above  mentioned  is,  as  meas- 
ured by  the  amount  of  work  done,  about  one-fifth  that  which  is 
ordinarily  accomplished  by  a citizen  laborer  in  civil  constructions  in 
a day  of  ten  hours.  The  earth  in  which  the  men  wrought  was  a fine 
quartz  sand,  containing  a small  amount  of  calcareous  and  vegetable 
matter. 

Excepting  the  severe  storm  which  occurred  in  the  middle  of  Au- 
gust, the  weather  was  favorable  for  work,  the  midsummer  heat  being 
greatly  modified  by  cool  sea  breezes. 

Considerable  part  of  the  siege  material  used  was  prepared  and 
stored  at  the  engineer  depot  at  the  south  end  of  Morris  Island. 
Sand-bags  were  by  far  the  most  expensive  item  of  material  employed, 
having  been  almost  exclusively  used  for  revetting.  About  46,000 
were  expended. 

The  accompanying  journal  records,  with  considerable  minuteness, 
in  accordance  with  your  instructions,  details  of  the  siege  operations. 
It  embraces  an  account  of  methods  used  and  progress  made,  officers 
and  troops  employed,  dangers  and  difficulties  encountered.  It  is 
compiled  frpm  the  construction  reports  of  superintending  engineer 
officers,  my  own  official  communications,  and  reliable  private  dia- 
ries. In  a few  instances  grammatical  errors  of  documents  herein 
incorporated,  which  had  been  hastily  prepared  during  the  active 
operations,  have  been  corrected.  In  order  conveniently  to  connect 
this  record  with  others  that  may  be  submitted  to  you,  I have  noted 
several  important  facts  relating  to  the  siege  not  necessarily  belong- 
ing to  my  report. 

The  following  list  embraces  the  most  important  events  described 


Chap.  XL.] 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 


267 


and  noted  in  this  journal,  from  the  time  of  landing  on  Morris  Island 
to  the  evacuation  of  Fort  Wagner,  with  the  date  of  their  occurrence  : 

Our  lodgment  on  the  south  end  of  Morris  Island  was  effected  on 
the  morning  of  July  10.  An  unsuccessful  assault  on  Fort  Wagner 
was  made  on  the  morning  of  the  11th. 

July  12,  night. — Opened  the  first  parallel,  and  began  the  construc- 
tion of  batteries  against  Fort  Wagner,  1,350  yards  distant. 

July  Ik,  noon. — Broke  ground  for  the  left  batteries. 

July  15. — Mounted  first  piece  of  ordnance  against  Fort  Wagner. 

July  18,  day. — Bombarded  Fort  Wagner  with  forty-two  siege  and 
field  guns  and  siege  mortars. 

July  18,  evening. — Made  an  unsuccessful  assault  on  the  fort. 

July  18,  night.—  Began  to  transform  first  parallel  into  a defensive 
line. 

July  19. — Began  seacoast  mortar  battery  at  the  Beacon  House. 

July  21. — -Began  emplacement  on  the  left  for  the  first  gun  used 
against  Fort  Sumter. 

July  23,  evening. — Completed  the  defensive  arrangements  and 
improvements  in  the  offensive  arrangements  of  the  first  parallel. 

July  23,  midnight. — Opened  second  parallel  at  870  yards  from  Fort 
Wagner,  and  placed  six  defensive  howitzers  in  it,  and  began  ob- 
structions in  its  front. 

July  25,  morning. — Received  first  fire  from  the  enemy’s  batteries 
on  James  Island. 

July  25,  day. — Mounted  in  Battery  Hays  the  first  heavy  gun  used 
against  Fort  Sumter. 

July  26,  night. — Reported  the  second  parallel  as  being  as  strong  as 
Fort  Wagner.  The  first  parallel  is  abandoned  as  a defensive  line. 
Began  the  construction  of  splinter-proof  shelters  in  the  second  par- 
allel. Began  the  construction  of  breaching  batteries  against  Fort 
Sumter  in  the  second  parallel. 

July  29,  night. — Began  seaward  defensive  barricade  on  right  of 
second  parallel. 

August  1. — Seven  platforms  for  heavy  rifled  guns  are  laid  in  sec- 
ond parallel. 

August  2,  night. — Ordnance  corps  mounted  the  first  breaching  gun 
in  the  second  parallel  used  against  Fort  Sumter. 

August  5,  night. — Completed  obstacle  in  front  of  second  parallel. 

August  8,  day. — Made  experiments  relating  to  sapping. 

August  9,  night. — Opened  third  parallel,  distant  540  yards  from 
Fort  Wagner,  and  approach  to  it,  by  flying  sap. 

August  10,  night. — Used  calcium  light  against  Cumming’s  Point. 

August  11,  morning. — Heavy  firing  from  Fort  Wagner.  Work 
was  stopped  by  it,  for  the  first  time. 

August  11,  day. — Began  preparation  of  siege  material  on  Folly 
Island. 

August  11,  night. — Finished  seaward  defensive  barricade. 

Augustin,  day. — First  experimental  shot  fired  at  Fort  Sumter  from 
Battery  Hays. 

August  15,  day. — Began  instruction  of  engineer  soldiers  in  sapping. 

August  17,  morning. — Commenced  the  first  bombardment  of  Fort 
Sumter. 

A.ugust  18. — Trenches  are  flooded  with  water  in  consequence  of 
spring  tide  and  heavy  northeasterly  storm. 

August  19,  morning. — Started  the  full  sap  against  Fort  Wagner 
from  the  left,  of  the  third  parallel. 


268  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

August  21,  noon. — The  artillery  fire  so  severe  that  the  progress 
of  the  sap  was  stopped.  A few  8-inch  Parrott  rifle  projectiles  were 
fired  at  Fort  Wagner. 

August  21,  night. — Established  fourth  parallel,  distant  350  yards 
from  Fort  Wagner. 

August  22,  day. — Reported  on  difficulties  of  sapping  under  the 
fire  of  Fort  Wagner. 

August  23,  evening. — The  first  bombardment  of  Fort  Sumter  is 
ended. 

August  23,  night. — Built  redan  on  left  of  fourth  parallel. 

August  25,  evening. — Unsuccessful  attempt  was  made  to  dislodge 
the  enemy  from  the  ridge. 

August  25,  night. — J ames  Island  fire  very  severe. 

August  26,  evening. — The  ridge  was  taken  by  assault. 

August  26,  night. — Fifth  parallel  established,  at  245  yards  from 
Fort  Wagner,  and  approaches  opened  to  within  100  yards  of  the 
ditch  of  the  fort. 

August  29,  evening. — Began  second  (two  days’)  bombardment  of 
Fort  Sumter. 

August  29,  night. — Completed  8-inch  siege  mortar  battery  in  fifth 
parallel. 

September  5,  mornm^.^Beganfinalbombardment  of  Fort  Wagner. 

September  6,  night. — Crowned  the  glacis  of  the  work.  Fort  Wag- 
ner was  evacuated  during  the  night. 

Information  relating  to  several  subjects  connected  with  engineer- 
ing operations  of  the  siege,  which  possesses  professional  and  general 
interest,  yet  is  not  entirely  suitable  to  be  incorporated  in  the  journal, 
is  appended  thereto. 

The  following  is  a list  of  these  papers,  arranged  and  numbered  for 
convenience  of  reference.  Attached  to  each  paper  are  the  drawings 
necessary  for  its  illustration  : 

1.  Inclined  palisading. 

2.  Wire  entanglement. 

3.  Booms. 

4.  The  seaward  defensive  barricade. 

5.  Torpedoes  (enemy’s). 

6.  Observations  concerning  the  location,  organization,  and  admin- 
istration of  an  engineer  depot  or  park,  from  experience  in  these  siege 
operations. 

7.  List  of  the  various  kinds  of  tools,  materials,  and  machines  fur- 
nished from  the  engineer  depot,  and  employed  in  the  siege  opera- 
tions against  the  defenses  of  Charleston  Harbor,  1863. 

8.  Statement  of  the  quantities  of  the  most  important  items  of  engi- 
neer material  expended  on  the  siege  works  herein  described,  accord- 
ing to  accounts  kept  at  the  engineer  depot. 

9.  Preparation  or  manufacture  of  siege  material. 

10.  Sand-bags. 

11.  Mortar  platforms. 

12.  Iron  embrasure  linings. 

13.  Sapping. 

14.  Sharpshooters. 

15.  Penetration  of  rifled  musket-balls,  into  various  kinds  of  siege 
materials,  as  ascertained  by  experimental  firing  on  Morris  Island. 

16.  The  Billinghurst  and  Requa  rifle  battery. 

17.  Broad- wheeled  sling-carts. 

18.  Working  parties,  and  health  of  the  troops. 


Chap.  XL.] 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 


269 


19.  Colored  troops  for  work. 

20.  The  main  magazine,  telegraph  office,  lookout,  and  latrine  in 
the  second  parallel. 

21.  Splinter-proof  shelter. 

The  following-described  drawings,  prepared  for  general  reference, 
will  illustrate  this  report  : 

Plate  No.  IV.*  Plan  of  a portion  of  the  siege  operations  against 
the  defenses  of  Charleston  Harbor,  showing  the  left  batteries. 

1.  Apart  of  the  batteries  erected  against  Fort  Wagner  prior  to 
July  18,  1863. 

2.  A part  of  the  breaching  batteries  against  Fort  Sumter,  used 
also  against  Fort  Wagner  and  Battery  Gregg. 

All  the  last-named  batteries,  excepting  Hays,  were  constructed 
under  the  direction  of  Lieutenant  Michie,  assistant  engineer. 

Plate  No.  III.  Plan  of  a portion  of  the  siege  operations  against 
the  defenses  of  Charleston  Harbor,  prior  to  the  evacuation  of  Fort 
Wagner,  September  7,  1863,  showing— 

1.  Defensive  lines  across  Morris  Island. 

2.  Approaches  and  batteries  against  Fort  Wagner. 

3.  Part  of  the  breaching  batteries  against  Fort  Sumter,  together 
with  sections  showing  the  more  important  details. 

Much  of  the  credit  which  attaches  to  the  success  of  the  operations 
above  enumerated  belongs  to  the  following-named  line  officers  of 
the  New  York  Volunteer  Engineers.  It  is  just  that  I should  here 
briefly  mention  their  most  valuable  services,  which  are  more  fully 
recorded  in  the  journal. 

Capt.  Joseph  Walker  was  highly  conspicuous  for  his  display  of 
bravery  and  energy  in  advancing  the  approaches  against  Fort  Wag- 
ner. During  the  nights  of  the  19th  and  26th  of  August  and  the  5th 
and  6th  of  September,  Captain  Walker  being  in  charge  of  the  sap, 
more  than  one-half  of  the  whole  distance  from  the  third  parallel  to 
Fort  Wagner  was  executed  by  the  flying  sap. 

To  Capt.  J.  L.  Suess  belongs  all  the  credit  of  building  the  surf 
battery  and  seaward  defensive  barricade  on  the  right  of  the  second 
parallel,  which  formed  one  of  the  most  important  and  characteristic 
features  in  our  defensive  lines.  Captain  Suess  established  the 
fourth  parallel  on  the  night  of  August  21.  He  was  severely  wounded 
in  the  hand  at  the  head  of  the  sap,  September  3. 

Capt.  F.  E.  Graef,  from  sickness  and  duties  elsewhere,  was  not 
long  engaged  on  the  works  herein  described.  He  built  the  large 
magazine  in  the  second  parallel,  and  rendered  valuable  service  in 
the  advanced  parallels. 

Capt.  S.  C.  Eaton  was  but  a few  days  on  duty  on  the  work  executed 
under  my  direction.  He  was  chiefly  employed  on  the  extreme  left. 

Lieut.  H.  Farrand  had  chief  superintendence  of  the  earthwork  of 
the  second  and  third  parallels,  throughout  the  siege.  His  services 
in  opening  both  were  conspicuous. 

Lieut.  C.  L.  Wilcken  had  entire  charge  of  building  the  splinter 
and  bomb  proof  shelters  in  the  second  parallel.  After  completing 
this  work  he  was  engaged  on  the  sap. 

Lieutenants  Farrand  and  Wilcken  were  more  days  on  duty  under 
my  orders  than  any  other  engineer  officers. 

Lieut.  E.  N.  K.  Talcott  assisted  Lieutenant  Farrand  in  the  opera- 
tions above  enumerated,  and  chiefly  superintended  the  construction 
of  Batteries  Rosecrans  and  Meade.  He  has  given  valuable  aid  in 
preparing  this  report. 


* To  appear  in  Atlas. 


[Chap.  XL. 


270  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

Lieut.  J.  S.  Baldwin  superintended  the  construction  of  the  left 
batteries  used  in  the  first  bombardment  of  Fort  W agner.  His  serv- 
ices since,  on  the  right,  have  been  valuable. 

Lieut.  P.  McGuire  built  the  first  emplacement  for  a breaching  gun 
against  Fort  Sumter.  He  was  on  duty  a few  days  in  the  approaches, 
and  superintended  the  construction  of  a 10-inch  seacoast  mortar 
battery. 

Lieut.  Charles  B.  Parsons  was  one  of  the  four  officers  detailed  for 
and  employed  on  sapping  duty. 

Capt.  F.  H.  Cruso  and  Lieut.  R.  W.  Coe  were  constantly  on  duty 
in  the  engineer  depot. 

Lieut.  H.  Mehles,  and,  after  him,  and  for  a much  longer  period, 
Lieut.  J.  H.  Harrold,  commanded  the  detachment  on  Folly  Island, 
which  made  nearly  all  the  sap-rollers,  gabions,  and  fascines  used  in 
the  siege. 

Capt.  W.  Pratt,  Fifty-fifth  Massachusetts  Volunteers,  and  Lieut. 
M.  Adams,  Fourth  Hew  Hampshire  Volunteers,  were  the  only  in- 
fantry officers  detailed  for  engineer  duty.  They  rendered  efficient 
services  during  the  latter  part  of  the  siege,  while  under  my  orders. 

Lieut.  James  E.  Wilson,  U.  S.  Artillery,  assisted  in  establishing 
the  defensive  lines. 

Lieut.  H.  M.  Edwards,  Hew  York  Volunteer  Engineers,  has  chiefly 
superintended  the  execution  of  the  surveys,  maps,  and  plans  which 
accompany  this  report,  besides  rendering  important  services  on  siege 
works  not  under  my  direction. 

In  the  former  duty  he  has  been  assisted  by  artificers  [Christo- 
pher J.]  Lorrigan,  [Latham  L.]  Buckland  (now  a lieutenant),  and 
[Robert  D.]  Conroy,  of  Company  A,  Hew  York  Volunteer  Engi- 
neers, and  Corporal  [August]  Becker,  of  the  One  hundred  and  third, 
and  Private  De  Chambord,  of  the  Independent  Battalion  Hew  York 
Volunteers  [Enfans  Perdus]. 

Of  the  troops  employed  in  the  fatigue  duties,  the  Hew  York  Vol- 
unteer Engineers  stand  pre-eminently  foremost.  From  the  first  blow 
to  the  last,  in  every  part  of  the  work,  at  all  times  of  the  day  and 
night,  in  all  weathers,  and  under  the  most  severe  fire,  the  line  offi- 
cers, non-commissioned  officers,  artificers  and  privates  of  this  regi- 
ment were  to  be  found  on  duty,  executing  themselves  the  more  diffi- 
cult kinds  of  work,  and  directing  the  infantry  details  on  the  other 
work. 

Of  the  numerous  infantry  regiments  which  furnished  fatigue  de- 
tails, the  Fourth  Hew  Hampshire  Volunteers  did  the  most  and  best 
work.  Hext  follow  the  blacks — the  Fifty-fourth  Massachusetts  Vol- 
unteers, and  Third  U.  S.  Colored  Troops. 

Brig.  Gen.  Alfred  H.  Terry  commanded  the  United  States  forces 
on  Morris  Island,  from  which  the  guards  of  the  trenches  and  the 
working  parties  were  chiefly  furnished. 

As  an  assistant  engineer,  I am  under  many  obligations  to  him  as 
commandant  of  the  infantry  employed  in  the  siege  operations  herein 
described. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

T.  B.  BROOKS, 

Major , Aide-de-Camp,  and  Assistant  Engineer. 

Maj.  Gen.  Q.  A.  Gillmore, 

Comdg.  Department  of  the  South ? and  Chief  Engineer. 


Chap.  XL.] 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 


271 


MAJOR  BROOKS'  JOURNAL  OF  ENGINEER  OPERATIONS  EXECUTED 

UNDER  HIS  DIRECTION  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  BETWEEN  JULY  12 

AND  SEPTEMBER  7,  1863. 

The  batteries  employed  in  the  bombardment  of  Fort  Wagner  on 
the  18th  of  July  were  in  two  lines. 

The  advanced  line,  1,350  yards  from  the  fort,  formed  the  right 
wing,  and  was  commenced  on  the  evening  of  July  12,  on  the  site 
selected  by  the  general  commanding.  This  line  was  afterward  des- 
ignated the  first  parallel  of  the  siege.  Its  center  is  285  yards  N.  by 
E.  from  the  Beacon  House.  I superintended  the  opening  of  this 
parallel,  and  was  relieved  about  midnight  by  Col.  E.  W.  Serrell, 
New  York  Volunteer  Engineers,  who  had  the  direction  of  the  work. 
I also  had  charge  of  this  work  the  first  half  of  the  night  of  July  13, 
and  was  again  relieved  by  Colonel  Serrell. 

The  second  line,  or  the  left  batteries,  was  built  on  a narrow  penin- 
sula hummock,  which  projects  westward  into  the  marsh  from  Morris 
Island  proper.  This  retired  line  is  1,830  yards  from  Fort  Wagner, 
and  about  400  yards  to  the  left  of  the  first  line. 

I received  the  order  to  begin  the  construction  of  the  left  batteries 
about  noon,  July  14,  1863. 

Tuesday,  July  14. — Began,  on  site  of  what  appeared  to  be  an  un- 
finished defensive  work  of  the  enemy,  excavations  for  the  emplace- 
ments and  magazine  for  four  10-inch  siege  mortars,  which  will  con- 
stitute the  right  wing  of  Battery  O’Rorke. 

Wednesday,  July  15.— Continued  work  on  Battery  O’Rorke. 

Began  and  completed  positions  for  four  30-pounder  Parrott  rifles, 
being  the  left  guns  of  Battery  Hays,  which  is  110  yards  in  advance 
of  Battery  O’Rorke,  and  1,830  yards  from  Fort  Wagner. 

The  ordnance  corps  mounted  one  10-inch  siege  mortar  in  Battery 
O’Rorke,  being  the  first  piece  placed  in  position  against  Fort  Wagner. 

Lieut.  James  E.  Wilson,  U.  J3.  Artillery,  under  the  direction  of 
Lieut.  C.  R.  Suter,  U.  S.  Engineers,  assistant  engineer,  Department 
of  the  South,  had  charge  of  the  construction  of  the  left  wing  of 
Battery  O’Rorke,  afterward  called  Battery  Kirby.  Emplacements 
and  a bomb-proof  service  magazine  were  prepared  for  four  10-inch 
siege  mortars.  Only  one  was  mounted  until  after  the  18th  instant, 
when  two  10-inch  seacoast  mortars  were  added ; these  were  used 
against  Fort  Sumter  in  the  first  bombardment. 

Thursday,  July  16. — Completed  the  right  wing  of  Battery 
O’Rorke,  including  a splinter-proof  service  magazine.  The  mortar 
platforms  in  this  battery  consisted  of  four  3-inch  by  10-inch  sills 
covered  with  ordnance  deck  plank  well  spiked  down.  They  failed 
after  six  hours’  firing.*  The  interior  slope  of  the  parapet  of  the  bat- 
tery was  revetted  with  one  thickness  of  sand-bags  4 feet  high,  f 

Emplacements  were  also  completed  for  three  additional  30-pounder 
Parrbtt  rifles,  making  the  seven  which  constituted  the  left  wing  of 
Battery  Hays.  Five  were  in  embrasure,  and  two,  on  the  extreme 
left,  en  barbette.  The  latter  were  arranged  to  be  used  against  the 
enemy’s  boats  in  the  south  part  of  Charleston  Harbor  and  Light- 
House  Creek,  as  well  as  against  Fort  Wagner. 

Began,  in  the  right  wing  of  Battery  Hays,  emplacements  for  four 
20-pounder  Parrott  rifles.  The  platforms  of  these  pieces  are  8 feet 
square,  built  of  light  plank,  laid  on  five  sills,  the  center  one  running 
far  enough  to  the  rear  to  support  the  trail  of  the  piece. 


*See  Note  11,  following  journal,  p.  319. 


f See  Note  10,  p.  318. 


[Chap.  XL. 


272  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

Friday , July  17. — Completed  the  work  on  the  right  wing  of  Bat- 
tery Hays,  except  emplacements  for  two  additional  30-pounder 
Parrott  rifles,  being  the  right  guns  of  the  battery,  which  were 
ordered  to-day  and  commenced  this  night.  But  for  the  rain  last 
night,  the  batteries  would  have  opened  to-day  without  these  last- 
named  guns. 

Saturday,  July  18. — The  right  wing  of  Battery  Hays  was  com- 
pleted this  morning,  all  of  its  guns  being  in  embrasure,  arranged  to 
embrace  Fort  Wagner  and  Battery  Gregg  in  their  field  of  fire. 
Four  small  splinter-proof  magazines  were  built  for  the  service  of 
the  guns  of  this  battery. 

All  the  left  batteries  were  half  sunken.  Sand-bag*  revetting  was 
used  throughout,  even  for  the  embrasures.  The  fifteen  pieces  first 
ordered  were  ready  in  sixty  hours  from  the  time  of  breaking  ground. 
About  five  hundred  and  forty  days’  workf  were  expended.  The 
work  was  mostly  done  in  the  night.  Considerable  care  was  taken 
the  first  two  days  to  mask  the  batteries.  No  inconvenience  was  ex- 
perienced from  the  enemy’s  fire. 

Lieut.  J.  S.  Baldwin,  New  York  Volunteer  Engineers,  superin- 
tended the  construction  of  these  batteries. 

The  following  pieces  were  in  position  and  ready  this  morning,  but, 
owing  to  the  heavy  rain,  which  again  fell  last  night,  the  batteries 
could  not  be  opened  at  daylight,  as  had  been  ordered.  Constituting 
the  left  batteries  are  Battery  Hays,  comprising  nine  30-pounder  and 
four  20-pounder  Parrott  rifles  ; Battery  O’Rorke,  comprising  five 
10-inch  siege  mortars — in  all,  eighteen  pieces.  On  the  right,  as  I 
learn  from  the  order  for  firing,  are  ten  siege  mortars,  and  fourteen 
rifled  guns,  making  the  total  amount  of  ordnance  in  position,  right 
and  left,  forty-two  pieces,  embracing  twenty-seven  rifled  siege  and 
field  guns,  and  fifteen  siege  mortars. 

At  about  10  a.  m.  to-day  all  these  batteries  opened  fire  on  Fort 
W agner,  and,  with  several  vessels  of  the  navy,  continued  the  bom- 
bardment until  dusk,  when  an  unsuccessful  assault  was  made  on 
the  work. 

During  the  night  of  the  18th,  an  obstacle  consisting  of  inclined 
palisading,  \ which  had  been  prepared  according  to  directions  given 
by  the  general  commanding,  was  extended  under  my  direction 
across  Morris  Island,  from  the  creek  on  the  left  to  high  tide  on  the 
right,  at  a distance  of  225  yards  in  advance  of  the  first  parallel.  Had 
the  assault  been  successful,  this  obstacle  would  have  been  placed  be- 
yond Fort  Wagner,  if  at  all.  Capt.  John  L.  Suess,  New  York  Vol- 
unteer Engineers,  and  Lieutenant  Wilson,  had  charge  of  this  work. 
Much  delay  was  experienced  in  the  transportation  of  the  obstacle 
material,  on  account  of  the  demand  for  wagons  to  carry  the  wounded. 

During  the  night,  the  first  parallel  was  extended  to  the  left  or 
westward  about  75  yards  by  a rifle  trench,  so  arranged  as  to  deliver 
its  fire  on  the  obstacle.  This  work  was  not  done  under  my  direction. 

Sunday,  July  19. — The  general  commanding  has  ordered  me  to 
have  executed  the  following  alterations  and  additions  in  the  first 
parallel,  with  a view  to  making  it  a secure  defensive  line,  and  to 
perfect  its  offensive  arrangements,  thus  to  be  prepared  to  resist  an 
advance  of  the  enemy,  should  his  last  night’s  success  encourage  him 
to  make  one,  as  well  as  for  further  operations  against  him  : 

1.  Extend  the  obstacle  each  way  ; on  the  right  by  a return  along 


*See  Note  10,  p.  318. 


f See  Note  18,  p.  326. 


% See  Note  1,  p.  303, 


Chap.  XL.] 


OPERATION S ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 


273 


the  beach  • on  the  left  by  a boom*  across  the  creek,  to  obstruct  the 
passage  of  the  enemy’s  small  boats. 

2.  Place  Requa  batteries \ in  position  on  the  flanks  of  this  parallel, 
for  its  defense. 

3.  Elevate  platforms  and  rebuild  revetting  and  embrasures  for  six 
guns  on  right  of  the  parallel. 

4.  Transform  the  center  light  gun  battery  into  a siege  mortar  bat- 
tery. 

5.  Extend  the  siege  gun  battery,  so  that  it  may  contain  one  addi- 
tional 30-pounder  Parrott  rifle. 

6.  Build  one  bomb-proof  magazine  for  the  service  of  the  arma- 
ment of  the  first  parallel. 

7.  Build  emplacements  and  a bomb-proof  magazine  for  four  10-inch 
seacoast  mortars  in  rear  of  first  parallel,  opposite  the  Beacon  House. 

The  troops  were  allowed  to  rest,  bury  the  dead,  and  care  for  the 
wounded  during  the  day,  but  to-night  work  was  resumed  in  the  first 
parallel,  all  the  operations  above  enumerated  being  commenced. 
The  defensive  arrangements  received  the  most  attention. 

Monday,  July  20. — Continued  work  in  the  first  parallel,  and  on  the 
seacoast  mortar  battery,  day  and  night.  The  return  in  the  palisad- 
ing and  the  boom  were  completed.  Three  emplacements  for  Requa 
batteries  were  finished  and  occupied,  one  on  the  extreme  left  of  the 
whole  line,  firing  so  as  to  flank  the  parallel  and  defend  the  en- 
tire obstacle,  and  two  on  the  right,  placed  between  the  parallel  and 
obstacle  for  economy  of  room,  and  so  arranged  as  to  enfilade  the 
beach,  flank  the  return  in  and  the  fire  on  the  entire  palisading. 
These  advanced  pieces  were  protected  from  the  fire  of  the  parallel 
by  a traverse  in  their  rear. 

The  land  batteries  and  gunboats  kept  a heavy  fire  on  Fort  Wag- 
ner to-day. 

Tuesday,  July  21. — Continued  the  uncompleted  work  of  yester- 
day. An  abundance  of  lumber  suitable  for  magazines,  platforms, 
&c.,  was  found  at  a landing  on  the  creek  (the  lumber  yard),  just  in 
advance  of  the  first  parallel,  having  been  left  there  by  the  enemy. 

The  general  commanding  has  decided  to  place  one  8-inch  Parrott 
rifle  in  position  on  the  left,  the  immediate  object,  as  I understand, 
being  to  experiment  at  long  ranges.  I was  ordered  to  locate  and 
begin  the  emplacement  for  this  gun  to-day.  The  position  selected 
was  the  most  northerly  point  of  ground  on  the  left,  being  about  100 
yards  in  advance  of  Battery  Hays,  and  4,200  yards  from  Fort  Sumter. 
To  reach  this  battery,  as  well  as  others  that  may  be  built  on  the  left, 
more  easily  than  by  the  road  now  traveled,  I have  directed  Capt.  F.  E. 
Graef,  New  York  Volunteer  Engineers,  to  build  a new  road,  which 
shall  leave  the  beach  about  800  yards  south  of  the  Beacon  House. 
It  was  completed  to-day,  and  afterward  used  for  the  heavy  transpor- 
tation. 

This  morning  the  enemy  made  a reconnaissance  from  a balloon 
over  Fort  Johnson. 

Wednesday , July  22. — The  work  on  the  seacoast  mortar  battery 
and  emplacements  for  the  8-inch  Parrott  rifle  is  in  progress.  The 
latter  advances  slowly,  owing  to  the  distance  which  the  earth  used 
in  its  construction  must  be  wheeled. 

But  little  was  accomplished  to-day,  as  the  regiment  of  New  York 

* See  Note  3,  p.  308. 

18  R R— VOL  XXVIII,  PT  I 


fSee  note  16,  p.  324. 


274  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

Volunteer  Engineers,  which  is  our  main  dependence  in  siege  work, 
is  being  paid. 

This  night  I made,  in  compliance  with  official  instructions,  a sec- 
ond careful  reconnaissance  of  all  the  ground  included  within  our 
picket  line  which  is  in  advance  of  the  first  parallel,  and  reported  the 
facts  observed  to  the  general  commanding. 

Thursday , July  23. — To-day  the  second  series  of  engineering 
operations  in  the  first  parallel,  and  immediately  to  its  rear,  is  com' 
pleted,  and  my  supervision  of  it,  which  began  on  the  night  of  the 
18th  instant,  is  ended.  About  one  thousand  days’  work*  has  been 
expended  on  it  and  the  seacoast  mortar  battery,  in  which  no  pieces 
were  mounted.  Three-fourths  of  the  work  was  done  in  the  night, 
Neither  the  enemy’s  artillery  nor  sharpshooters  gave  us  any  serious 
annoyance  at  this  period.  Captain  Suess,  and  Lieuts.  H.  Farrand 
and  P.  McGuire,  New  York  Volunteer  Engineers,  chiefly  superin- 
tended the  work. 

The  general  commanding  has  decided  to  attempt  the  demolition  of 
Fort  Sumter,  from  positions  now  held  by  his  forces,  the  nearest  of 
which  is  about  2 miles  from  the  fort.  If  this  plan  succeeds,  it  is 
understood  that  the  navy  will  be  able  to  occupy  Charleston  Harbor, 
thus  investing  Morris  Island  and  causing  a speedy  surrender  of  its 
earthworks,  which,  from  their  favorable  position  and  thorough  con- 
struction, have  proved  so  formidable. 

As  the  first  step  in  this  plan,  I have  been  ordered  to  direct  the 
establishment  of  a strong  defensive  line  across  Morris  Island  at  the 
most  advanced  practicable  point,  thus  securing  our  lodgment  on  the 
island  and  depots  of  supplies,  and  rendering  the  construction  and 
operation  of  the  necessary  breaching  batteries  comparatively  safe 
from  interruption  by  sorties.  In  verbal  instructions,  my  particular 
attention  was  called  to  the  importance  of  a formidable  material 
obstacle  in  front  of  the  line — one  that  would  go  far  to  “ keep  the 
enemy  out,  even  if  the  work  was  not  defended.” 

Accordingly,  on  the  night  of  July  23,  this  main  defensive  line  and 
second  parallel  was  opened  by  the  flying  sap.  Its  right  is  situated 
480  yards  in  advance  of  the  first  parallel,  870  yards  from  Fort  Wagner, 
and  about  3,550  yards  from  Fort  Sumter. 

A bright  moon  rendered  the  first  part  of  the  night  too  light  to  ex- 
pose a large  number  of  men,  the  enemy’s  pickets  being  within  200 
yards,  and  vigilant,  from  the  effect  of  some  skirmishing  which  oc- 
curred in  establishing  our  advanced  line  of  posts.  Had  Fort  Wagner 
opened  fire,  the  work  would  have  been  stopped.  At  about  midnight, 
ground  was  broken,  and  the  following  work  accomplished  by  day- 
break, when  the  fatigue  parties  retired  : 

1.  A parapet  10  feet  thick  and  175  yards  long,  following  the  face 
of  a low  ridge,  which  extended  northwest  and  southeast  across  the 
island,  was  built,  under  the  direction  of  Captain  Suess. 

2.  On  the  right  of  this  line,  enfilading  the  beach,  and  defending 
all  the  passable  ground  in  front,  six  field  howitzers,  belonging  to 
Lieut.  G.  V.  Henry’s  battery  (B,  First  U.  S.  Artillery),  and  used  as 
guns  of  position,  were  placed  in  a battery  having  platforms,  embra- 
sures, traverses,  and  a splinter-proof  shelter  for  ammunition.  This 
work  was  superintended  and  rapidly  completed  by  Lieutenant  Far- 
rand. 

3.  An  obstacle,  consisting  of  75  yards  of  inclined  palisading,  and 


* See  Note  18,  p.  326. 


Chap.  XL.]  OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C.  275 

60  yards  of  wire  entanglement,*  was  bnilt  across  Morris  Island, 
from  low  water  on  the  right  to  impassable  marsh  on  the  left,  at  a 
mean  distance  of  100  yards  in  advance  of  the  parapet.  Lieutenant 
Wilson  assisted  in  the  superintendence  of  this  work. 

4.  A large  bomb-proof  service  magazine  was  begun  in  the  center 
of  an  old  graveyard  (which,  it  is  to  be  regretted,  was  too  evidently 
the  best  place  for  it),  just  in  rear  of  the  parapet,  under  the  superin- 
tendence of  Captain  Graef.  This  structure  was  intended  to  be  used 
as  a bomb-proof  shelter  for  men,  until  needed  for  powder. 

5.  The  transportation  of  engineer  materials  from  the  depot  was 
conducted  by  Lieut.  C.  L.  Wilcken,  New  York  Volunteer  Engineers. 

The  establishment  of  the  second  parallel  was  regarded  at  this 
period  as  one  of  the  most  critical  operations  of  the  siege.  It  was 
performed  to  the  satisfaction  of  the  general  commanding. 

The  Fourth  New  Hampshire  Volunteers,  numbering  425  effective 
men,  and  a detachment  of  about  75  men  from  the  New  York  Volun- 
teer Engineers,  did  the  work.  All  the  field  officers,  Colonel  Bell, 
Lieutenant-Colonel  Sleeper,  and  Major  Drew,  of  the  first-named 
regiment,  were  present.  Brig.  Gen.  I.  Vogdes  was  general  of  the 
trenches. 

I had,  on  first  learning  the  intention  of  the  general  commanding, 
expressed  the  belief,  and  was  not  alone  in  it,  that  the  enemy  could 
probably  prevent  our  placing  very  heavy  guns  in  this  advanced 
position  by  means  of  his  artillery  fire  from  Fort  Wagner.  Two 
weeks  later  (night  of  August  10),  when  he  began  to  use  a part  of 
this  fire,  I saw  its  effect  upon  our  troops,  then  well  sheltered  by 
parapets,  and  was  confirmed  in  this  belief.  The  enemy  made  but 
little  use  of  Fort  Wagner’s  fire,  excepting  for  the  immediate  defense 
of  the  work  itself. 

Friday , July  24. — No  work  was  attempted  in  the  second  parallel 
during  the  day.  It  was  occupied  by  our  sharpshooters  and  a strong 
advanced  guard. 

To  give  security  and  concealment  to  our  line  of  communication, 
zigzag  approaches  from  the  first  to  the  second  parallel  were  built 
to-night,  under  the  supervision  of  Lieutenant  McGuire,  by  means  of 
the  flying  sap.  \ 

The  parapet  of  the  second  parallel  was  strengthened,  and  extended 
westward  by  Lieutenant  Farrand.  Sand-bags  % only  were  used  for 
revetting. 

The  inclined  palisading  was  extended  by  a return  along  the  beach, 
in  a manner  similar  to  the  arrangement  in  front  of  the  first  parallel. 
The  wire  entanglement  was  also  increased. 

Heavy  firing  from  both  sides  to-day,  which  was  continued  by  our 
mortars  in  the  first  parallel  through  the  night. 

Saturday,  July  25. — Completed  on  the  left  the  first  emplacement 
for  a heavy  breaching  gun  (8-inch  Parrott  rifle).  This  gun  was 
mounted  to-day,  and  first  fired  at  Sumter  August  12.  It  was  served 
from  a bomb-proof  magazine  built  expressly  for  it.  When  after- 
ward employed  against  Sumter,  it  was  designated  as  constituting  a 
part  of  Battery  Hays.  Lieutenant  McGuire,  assisted  by  Lieut. 
James  Baxter,  New  York  Volunteer  Engineers,  superintended  this 
work. 

(This  is  the  last  engineering  operation  with  which  I have  been 
connected  on  the  left.  Henceforward  my  duties  will  be  on  the  right, 
and  chiefly  in  advance  of  the  first  parallel.) 


* See  Note  2,  p.  804. 


f See  Note  13,  p.  328. 


X See  Note  10,  p.  318. 


[Chap.  XL. 


276  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

To-day  was  performed  the  first  work  by  daylight  in  the  second 
parallel,  in  continuing  its  defensive  arrangements.  Built  traverses, 
formed  banquette  tread,  and  continued  sand-bag  revetting.  For  the 
first  time,  the  enemy’s  sharpshooters  have  annoyed  our  working 
parties. 

At  night,  extended  the  parapet  to  the  left,  and  finished  the  bomb- 
proof magazine ; also  built  two  barbette  emplacements  for  Napoleon 
guns  in  the  salient  angles  near  the  center  of  the  line,  for  its  defense. 
Water  casks,  procured  from  the  navy,  were  used  as  splinter-proof 
service  magazines  for  these  and  other  defensive  guns. 

The  defensive  arrangements  of  the  second  parallel  are  now  so  far 
perfected  that  the  first  parallel  has  been  abandoned  as  a defensive 
line,  and  to-night  the  remaining  inclined  palisading  in  front  of  it 
was  taken  up  and  set  in  front  of  the  second  parallel,  thus  extending 
the  return  in  the  obstacle  nearly  back  to  the  left  of  the  howitzer 
battery.  Captain  Graef  had  charge  of  the  magazine,  Lieutenant 
Wilcken  of  the  obstacle,  and  Lieutenant  Farrand  of  the  other  work. 

The  enemy  opened  on  our  advanced  works  on  the  right  this  morn- 
ing with  columbiads  and  a Brooke  rifle,  from  what  was  afterward 
known  as  Battery  Simkins,  on  Shell  Point,  distant  from  the  second 
parallel  about  3,300  yards.  This  is  the  first  fire  we  have  received 
from  James  Island,  and  was  particularly  heavy  to-day.  (It  after- 
ward, with  the  fire  of  Sumter  and  Battery  Gregg,  continued  day 
and  night.)  Our  batteries  reply  by  firing  at  Wagner,  which  does 
not  respond.  This  James  Island  battery  will  be  most  annoying, 
because  our  works  are  not,  and  could  not  easily  be,  defiladed  against 
it,  either  in  profile  or  trace,  on  account  of  the  form  and  scarcity  of 
the  ground  on  which  we  have  to  operate. 

Sunday , July  26. — The  construction  of  splinter-proof  shelters* 
for  the  protection  of  the  guard  of  the  trenches  was  begun  this  night 
in  the  second  parallel,  using  frames  that  had  been  prepared  to  the 
rear  during  the  day.  A boom,f  which,  had  been  built  at  the  lumber- 
yard by  Sergt.  Samuel  Clark,  New  York  Volunteer  Engineers,  was 
floated  down  with  the  tide,  and  made  fast  across  the  creek  on  the 
extreme  left  of  the  second  parallel,  thus  securing  that  flank  from 
being  turned  by  the  enemy’s  boats.  An  important  topographical 
feature  in  the  second  parallel  is  a small  artificial  island,  situated 
about  75  yards  east  from  the  creek,  and  175  yards  in  advance  of  the 
right  of  the  parallel.  Upon  this  island,  emplacements  were  built  for 
one  Requa  battery  and  three  Coehorn  mortars,  to  be  used  against  the 
enemy’s  sharpshooters.  The  former  also  flanked  the  obstacle.  This 
was  afterward  designated  Battery  Kearny.  Our  line  was  to-night 
located  and  worked  to  the  creek,  which  limits  its  farther  extension 
westward.  The  left  third  of  this  line  follows  an  artificial  dike. 

I reported  verbally  to  the  general  commanding,  to-day,  that  the 
second  parallel  is  necessarily  stronger  than  Wagner,  in  this,  that 
it  admits  of  as  large  a musketry  fire,  has  a greater  number  of,  and 
better,  defensive  guns,  and  a formidable  material  obstacle  in  front, 
while  the  fort  has  none. 

The  bomb-proof  shelter  in  Wagner,  its  superior  natural  position, 
and  stronger  profile,  are  advantages  over  our  line. 

To-night  we  ceased  to  employ  Lie  entire  fatigue  force,  now  aver- 
aging 375  infantry  and  130  engineers,  on  defensive  works,  and 
began,  on  the  right  of  the  second  parallel,  by  order  of  the  general 


*See  Note,  21,  p.  331. 


fSee  Note  3,  p.  308. 


Chap.  XL.]  OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C.  277 

commanding,  the  construction  of  Battery  Brown,  for  two  8-inch 
Parrott  rifles,  intended  to  he  employed  in  the  demotion  of  Sumter. 
Sergt.  Walter  Smith,  New  York  Volunteer  Engineers,  had  charge 
of  this  work. 

About  two  thousand  two  hundred  days’  work  * have  already  been 
expended  in  advance  of  the  first  parallel. 

Col.  J.  W.  Turner,  chief  of  staff,  Department  of  the  South,  was 
to-day  announced  as  chief  of  artillery  also. 

Monday,  July  27. — Continued  work  in  second  parallel  day  and 
night,  strengthening  parapets  of  approaches,  revetting  breast 
heights,  f building  splinter-proof  shelters,  and  constructing  breach- 
ing battery.  Only  a small  detachment  of  engineers  work  during 
the  day,  the  heavy  work  being  all  done  at  night.  This  arrange- 
ment is  made  necessary  by  the  enemy’s  sharpshooters,  who  during 
this  period  give  us  more  trouble  by  day  than  his  heavy  guns.  The 
least  exposure  above  the  crest  of  the  parapet  will  draw  the  fire  of 
his  telescopic  Whitworths,  which  cannot  be  dodged.  Several  of  our 
men  were  wounded  by  these  rifles  at  a distance  of  1,300  yards  from 
Wagner,  where  prisoners  informed  us  the  riflemen  were  stationed. 

Tuesday,  July  28. — The  parapet  and  epaulementof  Battery  Brown 
are  finished.  Began  laying  the  platforms  to-day ; it  will  be  ready 
for  its  armament  to-morrow  morning.  This  battery  is  to  be  served 
from  the  large  magazine  already  built.  Commenced  an  emplacement 
for  a Requa  battery  on  the  extreme  left  of  the  line  for  the  defense 
of  the  boom  ; in  charge  of  Corpl.  P.  Berry,  New  York  Volunteer 
Engineers.  Also  began  a lookout!  of  sand-bags  on  top  of  the  large 
magazine,  and  a splinter-proof  latrine,  % found  to  be  necessary,  on  its 
west  side. 

About  10  p.  m.  I received  at  the  front,  through  Lieut.  Henry 
M.  Bragg,  aide-de-camp,  an  order  from  the  general  commanding, 
“to  make  my  arrangements  for  five  100-pounder  Parrott  rifles  in 
the  second  parallel.”  At  this  time  some  work  had  been  done  with  a 
view  to  putting  these  guns  in  position  on  the  left.  I had  recom- 
mended that  they  be  changed  to  the  right,  and  expected  the  order. 
To  receive  them,  a battery  for  three  and  one  for  two  guns,  afterward 
named  Rosecrans  and  Meade,  respectively,  were  laid  out,  en  echelon, 
near  the  center  of  the  second  parallel,  and  work  was  commenced  on 
them  before  midnight.  Battery  Rosecrans  is  distant  from  Fort  Sum- 
ter 3,500  yards;  Battery  Meade,  3,475  yards.  In  order  to  accom- 
modate the  heavy  transportation  to  these  batteries,  a road  was  located 
from  them,  which  struck  the  beach  about  160  yards  in  rear  of  the 
second  parallel.  Its  construction  was  begun  this  night. 

Wednesday,  July  29. — The  destructive  effect  of  the  wind  on  our 
works  greatly  increases  the  labor  of  the  siege.  Strong  parapets, 
built  of  fine  sand,  the  only  available  material,  are  half  destroyed  in 
a week,  and  the  trenches  are  correspondingly  filled  up  ; hence  a force 
must  be  constantly  kept  on  repairs.  This  same  difficulty  was  expe- 
rienced at  the  siege  of  Fort  Pulaski.  Any  other  than  the  temporary 
work  of  a siege  should  be  covered  with  mud  or  sods  ; and  I am  not 
sure  but  it  would  pay  to  expend  the  great  amount  of  labor  which 
would  be  required  in  thus  covering  important  siege  works. 

Guide-boards,  containing  the  names  of  parallels,  batteries,  &c., 
were  erected  on  the  right  to-day. 

Began  to-night  a bomb-proof  magazine,  for  service  of  all  the  100- 


*See  Note  18,  p.  326. 


f See  Note  10,  p.  318. 


\ See  Note  20,  p.  331. 


[Chap.  XL. 


278  S.  C.  AND  G A.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

pounder  Parrott  rifles  in  the  second  parallel,  so  located  as  to  form 
the  left  epaulements  of  Battery  Rosecrans. 

Great  difficulty  is  experienced  at  the  second  parallel,  which  has 
been  the  case  elsewhere  on  this  coast,  in  making  a permanent  obstacle 
across  the  beach,  to  prevent  an  advance  of  the  enemy  at  low  water. 
Our  wire  entanglement  in  front  of  the  defensive  line  has  been  carried 
away  by  the  spring  tides,  which  caused  to  float  against  it  timbers 
which  had  been  used  by  the  enemy  for  the  obstruction  of  Charleston 
Harbor. 

To  remedy  this,  as  well  as  to  increase  the  development  of  the  second 
parallel,  consequently  its  amount  of  fire,  I proposed  to  extend  the 
line  seaward  below  high  tide,  by  a defensive  barricade,  * supported  on 
piles.  The  general  commanding  gave  his  approval,  and  the  work 
was  begun  this  night,  under  the  direction  of  Captain  Suess,  who  ar- 
ranged the  details  of  the  plan.  He  completed,  at  this  low  tide,  em- 
placements for  three  Requa  batteries.  The  pieces  are  in  embrasure, 
protected  by  a splinter-proof  parapet  of  timber  and  sand-bags.  The 
fire  of  these  batteries  enfilades  the  beach  perfectly. 

During  the  latter  part  of  last  night,  Col.  Edward  W.  Serrell,  New 
York  Volunteer  Engineers,  assistant  engineer,  Department  of  the 
South,  by  order  of  the  general  commanding,  undertook  to  extend  the 
obstacle  in  front  of  the  second  parallel  seaward  by  means  of  abatis, 
thus  to  replace  the  lost  wire  entanglement.  His  operations  drew  a 
fire  of  grape  and  canister  from  the  enemy,  which  caused  the  with- 
drawal of  his  fatigue  party  without  accomplishing  anything,  and 
with  the  loss  of  Sergt.  Theodore  Mandeville,  New  York  Volunteer 
Engineers.  This,  so  far,  is  the  only  engineering  operation  attempted 
in  advance  of  the  first  parallel  which  has  not  been  under  my  direc- 
tion. The  abatis  provided  for  this  use  was  deposited  at  various 
points  along  the  beach,  to  the  rear  of  the  second  parallel,  and  was 
afterward  used  as  a part  of  the  obstacle  in  front  of  it. 

Thursday,  July  30. — To-day  began  to  put  down  heavy  gun  plat- 
forms in  Batter jes  Rosecrans  and  Meade;  also  continued  sand-bag  re- 
vetting in  same.  This  work  was  in  charge  of  Sergeants  [Joseph  C.] 
Howell  and  [Charles  H.]  Dutcher,  New  York  Volunteer  Engineers. 
These  platforms  for  the  Parrott  rifles  are  more  easily  laid  than  any 
other  heavy  gun  platforms  that  have  been  used  in  this  department. 

At  night,  as  usual,  those  portions  of  the  work  which  require  the 
men  to  expose  themselves  above  the  crest  of  the  parapets,  such  as 
epaulements,  magazines,  splinter-proof  shelters,  and  seaward  barri- 
cade, were  progressed.  Built  a splinter-proof  shelter  for  the  head- 
quarters of  the  general  officer  of  the  trenches,  and  used  also  as  a tel- 
egraph office  f on  the  east  side  of  the  large  magazine. 

Heavy  firing  from  both  sides  during  these  twenty -four  hours. 

Friday,  July  31. — Continued  the  work  which  was  in  progress  yes- 
terday. 

The  timber  required  for  the  piling  and  cribbing  of  the  seaward 
work  on  the  right  of  the  second  parallel  has  to  be  cut  on  Folly  Island 
(there  being  but  two  trees  on  Morris  Island),  then  hauled  to  Light- 
House  Inlet,  rafted  across,  again  loaded  in  wagons  and  hauled  at  night 
and  at  low  tide  nearly  3 miles  to  the  work.  I sought  some  plan  to 
avoid  this  labor  and  delay.  Having  observed  that  brush  caused  the 
accumulation  of  sand,  which  was  moved  either  by  wind  or  water,  I 
thought  piers  built  of  filled  sand-bags,  and  resting  on  a foundation 
of  brush,  which  would  prevent  their  being  undermined,  would  an- 


*See  Note  4,  p.  308. 


fSee  Note  20,  p.  331. 


Chap.  XL.]  OPERATION'S  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C.  279 

swer  to  support  the  banquette  tread  of  the  barricade.  Experiments 
tried  this  day,  on  the  south  end  of  Morris  Island,  did  not  warrant 
the  application  of  this  method  in  practice.  Had  the  bags  been  of  a 
closer  texture,  and  more  firmly  bound  together  with  ropes,  I think 
they  would  have  stood.  A coating  of  pitch  or  tar  would  have  been 
advantageous. 

Saturday , August  1. — To-day  was  laid  the  last  heavy  gun  platform 
in  the  second  parallel,  making  seven  in  all — two  8-inch  Parrott  rifles 
in  Battery  Brown  and  five  100-pounder  Parrott  rifles  in  Battery  Rose- 
crans  and  Meade.  All  these  batteries  can  now  receive  their  arma- 
ment, although  the  earthwork  is  not  entirely  finished. 

The  engineering  operations  in  the  second  parallel  are  out  of  the 
way  of  the  ordnance  and  artillery,  but  the  progress  is  very  slow. 
One  important  cause  of  delay  and  of  increased  labor,  which  affects 
all  the  work  on  the  right,  is  a lack  of  ground.  This  want,  whether 
it  be  expressed  by  surface  or  volume,  is  constantly  felt.  For  want 
of  sufficient  space,  all  the  defensive  and  offensive  works  of  the  sec- 
ond parallel  are  crowded  into  an  area  of  less  than  9 acres,  having  a 
square  development  of  225  yards.  Consequently,  the  heavy  breach- 
ing guns  have  to  fire  over  defensive  ones,  and  they  over  each  other. 
There  is  not  room  enough,  nor  earth  enough,  to  make  suitable  trav- 
erses, epaulements,  and  bomb-proof  shelters  for  the  protection  of 
guns,  ammunition,  and  garrison.  From  lack  of  depth  (the  earth 
does  not  average  over  3 feet),  our  trenches  have  to  be  sunk  so  low 
that  they  are  flooded  at  spring  tides. 

A very  unpleasant  feature  connected  with  this  lack  of  earth 
arose  from  the  number  of  dead  bodies  found  in  all  our  advanced 
works  on  the  right,  particularly  in  the  second  parallel,  and  immedi- 
ately in  front  of  Wagner.  Ten  have  been  exhumed  in  one  night. 
Handling  these  bodies  was  very  disagreeable.  They  were  generally 
in  coffins,  but  many  soldiers,  friend  and  foe,  were  wrapped  in  blankets 
only,  and  others  not  that.  At  first  we  endeavored  to  r e-bur y the 
bodies  in  places  away  from  the  works  where  they  would  not  be  dis- 
turbed. But  as  the  siege  progressed,  the  scarcity  of  earth  compelled 
a second,  and,  in  one  case,  a third  disinterment  of  the  same  corpse. 
After  this  experience  in  the  second  parallel,  all  bodies  that  had  to  be 
moved  were  buried  in  the  parapets  of  the  works,  where  they  lie  un- 
disturbed. 

On  an  old  map,  Morris  Island  is  called  “Coffin  Land.”  It  was 
used,  I am  informed,  as  a quarantine  burying-ground  for  the  port 
of  Charleston. 

For  the  protection  of  the  artillerists  serving  the  defensive  guns  in 
the  second  parallel  from  sharpshooters,  the  construction  of  circular 
rope  mantlets,  to  be  attached  to  the  guns,  was  commenced  to-day,  at 
the  request  of  Colonel  Tprner,  chief  of  artillez^y*  But  little  use  was 
made  of  them,  as  these  guns  were  seldom  used  by  daylight. 

Lieutenant  Wilcken,  who,  up  to  this  time,  has  superintended  the 
construction  of  splinter-proof  shelters,  was  for  this  night  relieved  by 
Capt.  Joseph  Walker,  New  York  Volunteer  Engineers. 

Sunday , August  2. — Not  having  succeeded  in  fastening  the  hides 
which  are  used  in  lining  the  sand-bag  embrasures  of  the  defensive 
guns  so  but  that  the  blast  of  the  piece  soon  destroyed  them,  I to-day 
sent  a small  squad  of  men  to  obtain  plates  of  sheet  or  boiler  iron 
from  the  wreck  of  the  steamer  Ruby,  a blockade-runner,  to  be  used 
for  this  purpose.  * 


* See  Note  12,  p.  322. 


[Chap.  XL. 


280  S.  C.  AND  a A.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

Tliis  night  the  return  in  the  obstacle  in  front  of  the  second  parallel 
was  extended  back  to  the  left  of  the  howitzer  battery  ; thence  along 
its  front  to  the  defensive  barricade,  from  which  point,  with  an  inter- 
mediate link  of  abatis,  the  barricade  continues  the  obstacle  to  low 
water.  Began,  by  order  of  the  general  commanding,  a breaching 
battery,  about  130  yards  in  front  of  the  second  parallel,  just  inside 
the  northeast  salient  of  the  obstacle  ; also  an  approach  to  it  from  the 
parallel.  Captain  Walker  superintended  the  work.  This  battery 
was  afterward  abandoned,  and  converted  into  a defensive  splinter- 
proof  shelter  for  the  use  of  reserves  of  the  grand  guard. 

To-night  Lieutenant  Earrand,  who  has  had  the  superintendence 
of  the  musketry  and  defensive  gun  arrangements  of  the  second  par- 
allel, and  of  a portion  of  its  heavy  batteries,  was  relieved  temporarily 
by  Lieut.  E.  N.  K.  Talcott,  New  York  Volunteer  Engineers. 

Being  convinced,  from  constant  observation,  that  the  enemy’s 
sharpshooters  are  doing  better  service,  and  our  own  becoming  less 
efficient  every  day,  I reported  the  facts  to  the  general  commanding 
to-day,  and  suggested  a remedy.* 

An  8-inch  Parrott  rifle  was  mounted  in  Battery  Brown  .to-night, 
being  the  first  heavy  breaching  gun  placed  in  position  on  the  right. 

Monday , August  3. — A 10-inch  Parrott  rifle  has  been  received  by 
the  ordnance  department  for  use  in  the  siege,  and  the  question  of  its 
position  is  under  consideration.  I to-day  submitted  to  the  general 
commanding  the  following  memoranda,  setting  forth  the  advantages 
(as  they  appeared  to  me)  of  a position  225  yards  in  advance  of  the 
first  parallel,  and  midway  between  the  beach  and  the  lumber-yard, 
over  a position  on  the  left  : 

1.  The  distance  to  Sumter  is  550  yards  (about  one-seventh)  less. 

2.  Greater  isolation  is  obtained  from  the  James  Island  fire,  which 
has  given  us  most  annoyance. 

3.  Much  less  cost,  in  labor  and  time,  is  required  for  the  trans- 
portation of  guns  and  projectiles. 

4.  The  position  on  the  right  gives  the  best  fire  on  the  channel, 
to  be  used  in  case  our  land  batteries  had  to  defend  themselves  from 
the  enemy’s  iron-clads,  in  the  contingency,  which  is  now  considered 
possible,  that  the  navy  may  be  driven  to  the  open  sea  by  a storm. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  left  position  gives  10  degrees  more  favor- 
able fire  for  breaching  the  gorge  wall  and  enfilading  the  sea  face  of 
Sumter,  and  masks  all  of  its  guns  which  are  on  the  southeast  face. 
The  left  position  does  not  require  the  gun  to  fire  over  other  batteries, 
which  the  right  does. 

I received  the  order  from  the  general  commanding  to  lay  out  and 
begin  the  construction  of  an  emplacement  for  this  10-inch  Parrott 
rifle,  on  the  right,  in  the  position  above  designated.  This  order  was 
countermanded  before  the  work  was  commenced,  and  the  gun  put 
in  Battery  Strong,  on  the  left.  Twenty-five  hundred  nights’  work 
were  expended  in  hauling  the  gun  to  its  place,  nine-tenths  of  the 
work  being  after  it  had  left  the  beach.  In  its  transportation,  the 
wheels  of  the  two  sling-carts  sank  into  the  sand  on  the  beach  2 
inches,  and  on  a dry  sand  road  12  inches,  f 

This  night  began,  under  the  superintendence  of  Lieutenant 
Wilcken,  the  construction  of  a bomb-proof  surgery  in  the  second 
parallel,  using  lumber  obtained  during  the  day  from  the  Beacon 
House. 


*See  Note  14,  p.  323. 


fSee  Note  17,  p.  326. 


Chap.  XL.]  OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C.  281 

Built  a road  to  proposed  Battery  Kearny  on  left  of  second  par- 
allel, being  a continuation  of  the  road  to  Battery  Meade.  Lieutenant 
Talcott  reports  : ‘ 4 My  infantry  detail  for  this  work  were  blacks.  I 
found  that  they  did  at  least  one-fourth  more  than  the  whites  who 
were  with  me  on  the  preceding  night.”*  Similar  reports  in  favor  of 
the  black  troops  for  work  were  frequently  made. 

Tuesday , August  4. — To-day  began  the  construction,  at  the  en- 
gineer depot,  of  iron-plate  linings  f for  embrasures  from  material 
obtained  from  the  wreck  of  the  Ruby. 

This  night  commenced  work  on  Battery  Kearny,  a half-sunken 
siege  battery  for  three  30-pounder  Parrott  rifles  in  embrasure.  The 
material  for  its  bomb-proof  magazine  and  platforms  was  gotten  out 
at  the  lumber-yard  during  the  day.  Captain  Walker  superintended 
the  work.  He  reports  that  the  prisoners  employed  by  him  do  not 
work  satisfactorily  ; that  he  would  much  prefer  to  have  soldiers. 

This  was  a general  complaint.  Prisoners  cannot  be  depended  on 
for  night  work  under  fire.  Sometimes  more  than  one-half  the  detail 
would  escape  the  guard  and  go  back  to  camp.  , 

Lieutenant  Farrand  reports  that  all  the  heavy  breaching  batteries 
and  their  magazines  in  the  second  parallel  are  completed  and  re- 
ceiving their  armament  and  ammunition. 

Next  to  the  want  of  earth,  which  could  not  be  remedied,  our  work 
on  the  right  is  delayed  at  this  period  from  lack  of  men.  On  the 
31st  July,  the  general  commanding  reduced  my  infantry  detail  to 
about  125  effective  men  per  day.J  This  force,  with  the  engineer 
troops,  is  only  sufficient  for  repairs  and  to  keep  the  work  now  com- 
menced slowly  progressing.  Large  details,  I am  informed,  are  being 
employed  on  the  Marsh  Battery. 

Wednesday , August  5. — This  night  we  continued  the  obstruction 
westward  by  abatis  across  an  arm  of  the  marsh  to  Battery  Kearny, 
thence  along  its  front  by  inclined  palisading,  and  thence  by  wire  en- 
tanglement to  the  booms  which  cross  the  creek.  This  is  the  last 
work  excepting  repairs  done  on  the  obstacle  in  front  of  the  second 
parallel.  The  general  commanding  has  given  me  more  instructions 
concerning  it  than  for  all  other  portions  of  the  work  together.  I 
have  accordingly  always  personally  superintended  its  construction. 
The  Fourth  New  Hampshire  Volunteers  have  furnished  all  the 
fatigue  details  employed  in  setting  the  palisading  and  abatis.  Ser- 
geant [William  W.]  Walters  and  Corporal  [Martin  C.]  Bennett, 
New  York  Volunteer  Engineers,  have  put  in  the  wire  entangle- 
ment. The  palisading§  was  made  in  panels,  at  the  engineer  depot, 
chiefly  from  rough  bridge  material  brought  from  Hilton  Head.  It, 
with  all  engineering  material,  was  transported  to  the  works  in  the 
night  by  means  of  wagons  drawn  by  4 horses. 

To-night  also  began  to  thoroughly  repair  and  revet  with  sand-bags  || 
the  lines  of  approach  between  the  first  and  second  parallels.  This 
will  increase  the  protection  afforded  by  their  parapets,  and  fit  them  for 
splinter-proof  shelters,  which  are  rapidly  being  extended  through 
them,  and  it  is  hoped  will  to  some  extent  lessen  the  destructive 
effects  of  the  wind,  and  the  “rat  hole”  operations  of  the  infantry 
guard  of  the  trenches,  who  constantly  occupy  and  destroy  them. 
Boards,  instead  of  sand-bags,  for  revetting  these  trenches,  would  cost 

* See  Note  19,  p.  328.  i See  Note  18,  p.  826.  fl  See  Note  10,  p.  318. 

f See  Note  12,  p.  322.  §See  Notes  1 to  4,  pp.  303-308.  *f[  See  Note  21,  p.  331. 


[Chap.  XL. 


282  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

less  for  material  and  labor,  but  at  this  period  none  could  be  bad  for 
the  purpose. 

Captain  Suess  reports  three  Requa  batteries  in  position  on  the  left 
of  the  seaward  defensive  barricade,  and  34  yards  (extending  nearly 
to  low  water)  for  infantry  defense.  He  proposes  that  on  the  right 
flank  of  this  work  (hence  of  the  second  parallel)  be  built  a surf  bat- 
tery * for  two  field  howitzers.  The  foundation  to  be  crib  work,  sup- 
porting the  gun  platforms,  and  a parapet  built  of  filled  sand-bags. 
The  general  commanding  approved  the  plan;  the  work  was  accord- 
ingly begun  to-day. 

The  enemy  shelled  our  works  very  heavily  to-day.  Our  mortar 
batteries  in  the  first  parallel  and  30-pounder  Parrott  rifles  on  the  left 
replied  briskly. 

Thursday , August  6. — Made  repairs  in  defensive  howitzer  battery 
on  right  of  second  parallel.  Two  Wiard  field  guns  now  in  position 
there  have  proven  very  destructive  to  platforms  and  embrasures; 
more  so  than  any  field  guns  which  have  come  under  my  observation. 

Continued  yesterday’s  work. 

Scarcely  a gun  has  been  heard  to-day. 

Friday , August  7. — I made  an  official  communication  to-day,  sug- 
gesting— 

That  preparatory  to  extending  our  approaches  beyond  the  second  parallel,  the 
outposts  of  the  guard  of  the  trenches  should  be  advanced  gradually,  night  after 
night,  that  as  much  ground  as  possible  be  secured  on  which  the  advance  can  be 
made  by  the  flying  sap,  thus  saving  time. 

The  general  commanding  ordered  this  to  be  done. 

Battery  Kearny  is  ready  for  its  armament;  the  bomb-proof  mag- 
azine will  be  finished  in  one  more  night.  Other  work  in  progress  the 
same  as  yesterday. 

Saturday , August  8. — Conducted  experiments  to-day  which  relate 
to  sapping,  f Fired  30-pounder  Parrott  rifle  projectiles  into  a sap- 
roller;  ascertained  “constants  of  work”  (work  of  one  man  for  one 
hour)  in  a trench ; also  penetration  of  rifle-balls  into  wet  and  dry 
sand,  fascines,  pine  planks,  and  palmetto  logs.  J 

Began  to-night  an  emplacement  for  one  Wiard  field  gun  in  the 
salient  on  the  left,  and  just  in  advance  of  Battery  Kearny.  This 
gun  had  two  embrasures — one  for  defense  of  the  obstacle,  the  other 
for  firing  on  Battery  Gregg  and  Wagner.  Other  work  in  progress 
the  same  as  yesterday. 

This  night  I made  a second  full  reconnaissance  of  all  the  ground 
inside  the  picket  line,  and  located  position  of  third  parallel  and  ap- 
proach to  it,  in  compliance  with  instructions  from  the  general  com- 
manding. 

Sunday , August  9. — The  engineering  difficulties  anticipated  at  this 
time  in  the  construction  of  the  approaches  against  Wagner  were — 

First.  The  narrow  front  on  which  to  conduct  the  operations,  to- 
gether with  the  scarcity  of  earth  for  covering  masses,  as  heretofore 
experienced. 

Second.  The  heavy  cross-fire  from  Wagner  and  Sumter,  Battery 
Gregg,  and  the  James  Island  batteries,  which  will  necessarily  take 
in  reverse  and  enfilade  a part  of  our  trenches ; together  with  the 
vigilance,  skill,  and  obstinacy  of  the  enemy’s  sharpshooters. 

Third.  The  difficulty  of  protecting  the  flanks  of  our  parallels  from 
being  turned  by  the  sorties  of  the  enemy.  At  each  low  tide  our 


*See  Note  4,  p.  308. 


f See  Note  13,  p.  323.  % See  Note  15,  p.  324. 


Chap.  XL.] 


283 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 

right  flank,  as  we  progress,  will  be  irreparably  open.  At  all  times 
the  dry,  intermediate  marsh,  between  mud  and  sand,  on  the  left 
endangers  that  flank,  for  this  marsh  is  too  wet  to  trench,  but  still 
entirely  passable  for  troops. 

For  the  first  difficulty  there  is  no  remedy  ; we  can  only  make  the 
most  of  what  earth  there  is.  Our  counter-batteries,  and  the  fire  of 
the  navy  against  Sumter  and  Wagner,  together  with  the  more  effi- 
cient corps  of  sharpshooters  * now  forming,  will  lessen  the  amount 
of  the  enemy’s  fire. 

To  protect  the  flanks  of  our  advanced  parallels,  two  plans  are  pro- 
posed. First,  to  construct  two  nearly  parallel  lines  of  obstacle 
(abatis  or  palisading),  extending  toward  Wagner,  and  keeping 
progress  with  the  approaches,  which  lines  will  embrace  all  the  ground 
fit  for  siege  operations,  averaging  about  75  yards  in  width;  this 
obstacle  to  be  defended  by  the  guard  of  the  advanced  trenches,  as- 
sisted by  an  artillery  fire  from  parallels  in  the  rear,  enfilading  its 
fronts.  Second,  to  build  keeps  (block-houses,  or  inclosed  stockade 
works),  in  which  the  guard  of  the  advanced  trenches  could  take 
refuge,  and  make  an  independent  defense  until  support  could  arrive 
from  the  rear. 

The  second  plan  was  off  hally  approved.  It  will  require  far  less 
material  than  the  first.  This  material  is  brought  from  Folly  Island, 
and  carried  from  the  second  parallel  forward  by  men. 

I was  ordered  by  the  general  commanding  to  direct  the  opening 
this  night  (August  9),  by  the  flying  sap,  of  a third  parallel,  330  yards 
in  advance  of  the  right  of  the  second  and  540  yards  from  Wagner, 
and  construct  an  approach  to  it  from  the  obstacle  of  the  second  par- 
allel. 

My  official  instructions  relating  to  these  approaches  against  Wag- 
ner were  to  devote  only  my  spare  men  to  them,  attending  more  par- 
ticularly to  keeping  in  repair  and  strengthening  the  works  already 
built  in  the  second  parallel.  My  daily  details  at  this  time  were  300 
men. 

I was  informed  that  these  approaches  would  probably  only  amount 
to  a feint,  as,  on  the  demolition  of  Sumter,  the  monitors  can  invest 
Morris  Island,  and  thus  reduce  Wagner  and  Battery  Gregg. 

The  detail  for  to-night’s  work  is  124  volunteer  engineers,  under 
Lieutenants  Farrand  and  Talcott,  and  80  infantry,  under  Captain 
Walker.  The  engineers  were  in  advance.  Two  hundred  and  sixty 
yards  of  trench  were  opened,  and  a splinter-proof  parapet,  from  6-J 
to  8 feet  high,  built  throughout  its  length.  No  portion  was  revetted. 
Our  grand-guard  outposts  were  but  30  yards  in  front  of  the  working 
party,  and  the  enemy’s  pickets,  who  could  be  seen,  were  apparently 
not  over  30  yards  farther.  The  engineers,  on  their  knees,  shoveled 
almost  noiselessly.  I could  scarcely  hear  or  see  them  from  the  line 
of  outposts,  30  yards  distant.  The  following  method  of  setting  the 
engineers  at  work  was  adopted  : They  carried  no  arms.  Each  man 
held  a short-handled  shovel  in  his  right  hand ; in  the  left,  at  intervals 
of  6 feet,  each  grasped  a marked  rope.  The  engineer  officer  who  lo- 
cated the  line  took  the  lead.  The  men  marched  forward,  stooping. 
At  a signal  the  rope  was  dropped,  and  each  man  went  to  digging  a 
pit  where  he  stood,  throwing  the  earth  over  the  rope.  These  pits 
were  connected,  and  good  cover  was  soon  obtained. 

Sand-bag  loop-holes  were  built  in  the  third  parallel  for  the  use  of 
the  sharpshooters,  who  occupied  it  next  day. 


See  Note  14,  p.  323. 


284  S.  C.  AND  a A.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

Monday , August  10. — This  night  perfected  the  defensive  arrange- 
ments of  the  third  parallel.  Built  banquette  tread  with  sand-bags, 
strengthened  the  parapet,  built  a barbette  for  a Requa  battery*  in 
salient  angle  near  the  center  of  the  parallel,  and  began  to  set  palisad- 
ing to  inclose  the  keep,  in  a dike  which  fortunately  ran  in  the  right 
direction. 

At  about  2 o’clock  on  the  morning  of  the  11th,  when  the  last-men- 
tioned work  was  about  one-half  completed,  W agner  opened  a heavy 
fire  of  grape,  canister,  and  shell,  which,  with  the  fire  of  the  James 
Island  batteries  and  Sumter,  stopped  our  working  parties  entirely  for 
the  first  time  in  the  siege.  Lieutenant  Farrand,  who  had  charge  of 
the  work,  supposed  that  the  tall  palisading  which  was  set  across  the 
gorge  of  the  keep  attracted  the  fire.  This  is  the  most  spiteful  fire 
delivered  landward  by  Wagner  since  the  18th  July.  Indeed,  this 
work  has  been  very  quiet  since  that  time  for  fear  of  drawing  the  fire 
of  the  heavy  guns  of  the  navy,  and  that  of  the  land  siege  batteries 
upon  it.  Our  reply  to  all  the  enemy’s  fire,  from  whatever  direction, 
has  been  directed  against  Wagner. 

Lieutenant  Wilcken  began  the  construction  of  the  defensive 
splinter-proof  shelter,  for  the  reserve  of  the  grand  guard,  in  front  of 
the  second  parallel. 

Dr.  Grant  undertook  to-night  to  light  up  Cumming’s  Point  with 
two  calcium  lights,  placed  in  the  left  batteries,  distant  3,000  yards. 
The  object  was  to  reveal  to  our  gunners  any  of  the  enemy’s  succor 
boats  that  may  be  attempting  to  communicate  with  his  forces  on 
Morris  Island,  and  interrupt  the  operations  with  our  fire.  On  the 
night  of  August  4,  Captain  [Lewis  S.]  Payne,  the  scout,  and  party, 
were  captured  while  repeating  their  endeavors  • to  discover  these 
relief  boats.  Neither  plan  fully  succeeded. 

Tuesday,  August  11. — As  is  usual  after  particularly  heavy  firing,  f 
it  is  very  quiet  on  both  sides  to-day. 

Up  to  this  time  no  fascines  or  gabions  have  been  used  on  the  right, 
nor  are  there  any  considerable  number  on  hand  in  the  department. 
To-day  their  construction,];  together  with  that  of  sap-rollers,  was 
begun  on  Folly  Island,  by  a detachment  of  engineers,  under  command 
of  Lieut.  Henry  Mehles,  New  York  Volunteer  Engineers.  This  work 
soon  passed  from  under  my  direction  to  that  of  the  commander  of 
the  engineer  depot. 

In  an  official  communication  made  to-day,  I stated  that — 

On  account  of  the  scarcity  of  material  in  this  vicinity,  and  lack  of  men  for 
fatigue  duty,  I would  recommend  that  1 non-commissioned  officer  and  6 artificers 
of  volunteer  engineers  be  sent  to  Hilton  Head  to  instruct  50  infantry,  who  should 
be  detailed  for  this  purpose,  in  the  duty  of  making  gabions  and  fascines. 

This  work  was  ordered  to  be  commenced  at  Beaufort  by  engineers 
already  there. 

The*  reason  that  sand-bags,  § which  are  far  more  expensive  and 
require  more  labor,  have  been  used  in  place  of  gabions  for  revetting 
is,  that  the  latter  leak  the  dry  sand  rapidly ; hence  cannot  be  used. 
The  gabions];  used  about  embrasures  were  often  filled  with  sand-bags. 

I reported  in  writing  to-day  to  the  general  commanding  concern- 
ing— 

The  great  inconvenience  and  extra  expense  we  are  incurring  in  our  engineering 
operations  in  the  second  parallel  (in  magazine  floors,  revetting,  and  splinter-proof 
shelters)  from  the  want  of  lumber. 


* See  Note  16,  p.  324. 
f See  Note  18,  p.  326. 


See  Note  9,  p.  317. 
See  Note  10,  p.  318. 


Chap.  XL.]  OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C.  285 

I was  informed  that  the  foot  causeways  over  the  marsh  were  con- 
suming it. 

To-night  continued  last  night’s  unfinished  work.  Captain  Suess 
finished  the  surf  battery.*  This  is  the  last  work,  excepting  repairs, 
done  on  the  defensive  arrangements  of  the  second  parallel.  This 
seaward  work  could  only  be  carried  on  at  those  low  tides  which 
occurred  in  the  night.  The  palisading  which  closes  the  gorge  of  the 
keep  of  the  third  parallel  was  completed,  as  was  also  the  emplace- 
ment for  the  Requa  battery  in  its  salient.  Built  20  linear  yards  of 
splinter-proof  shelter  in  the  north  end  of  the  approach  to  the  third 
parallel.  Built  a traverse  arranged  for  musketry  defense  ctn  the  right 
and  20  yards  to  the  rear  of  the  third  parallel,  to  defend  its  right 
flank.  This  traverse  afterward  became  the  parapet  of  two  successive 
mortar  batteries.  Began  to  extend  an  abatis  along  the  front  of  the 
keep,  thus  entirely  inclosing  it  by  an  obstacle. 

Wednesday , August  12. — Lieutenant  Talcott  reports — 

That,  in  accordance  with  instructions  received  from  you  last  evening,  I had 
charge  of  work  in  and  in  front  of  the  second  parallel.  Owing  to  a heavy  fire  from 
Wagner,  we  did  not  commence  our  work  until  11  o’clock,  and  consequently  did  not 
accomplish  as  much  as  could  be  desired.  The  infantry  detail  (colored  troopsf)  broke 
at  the  first  fire,  near  the  entrance  to  the  approaches  to  the  second  parallel,  and  be- 
came so  scattered  that  it  was  impossible  to  collect  them  again.  This  would  have 
been  prevented  by  the  presence  of  more  commissioned  officers,  there  being  but  one 
lieutenant  with  175  men. 

The  want  of  a sufficient  number  of  good  officers  with  the  infantry 
fatigue  details  was  frequently  felt.  Regimental  and  brigade  com- 
manders too  often  seem  to  consider  that  second-rate  officers,  and  but 
few  of  them,  will  answer  for  fatigue  duty.  Soldiers  usually  work 
with  reluctance.  “ I did  not  come  to  war  to  work,  but  to  fight,”  is 
often  heard  from  the  infantry  private.  If  the  officers  and  non-com- 
missioned officers  commanding  details  sympathize  with  this  idea, 
and  take  no  interest  in  the  duty  to  be  performed,  the  position  of  the 
engineer  officer  in  charge  is  very  unpleasant.  “Too  much  pains 
cannot  be  taken,”  says  a celebrated  engineer,  “to  prevent  the  recur- 
rence of  a feeling  so  radically  opposed  to  the  success  of  siege  opera- 
tions.” 

The  parapets  of  the  approaches  in  advance  of  the  second  parallel 
were  strengthened  to-night. 

The  fire  of  the  enemy’s  sharpshooters  was  particularly  brisk 
during  the  day. 

Thursday , August  13. — To-day  I was  instructed  by  the  general 
commanding  to  attempt  no  farther  advance  of  our  approaches  against 
Wagner  (which  henceforward  will  have  to  proceed,  in  part,  at  least, 
by  the  full  sapj)  until  our  batteries  open  on  Sumter,  which  will  be  in 
a few  days.  These  batteries  will  then  silence  a portion  of  the  ene- 
my’s fire,  and  attract  a part  of  it  to  themselves.  Nearly  all  this  fire 
is  now  directed  on  our  advanced  trenches.  In  the  interim  to  com- 
plete the  defensive  arrangements  of  the  third  parallel,  thoroughly 
repair  the  whole  line  of  approaches,  and  complete  the  final  arrange- 
ments for  opening  the  breaching  batteries. 

The  magazines  in  the  second  parallel  were  to-day  floored  with 
lumber  just  obtained.  I sent  a party  to  pick  up  some  plank  in  the 
creeks  west  of  Morris  Island,  not  used  in  the  construction  of  the 
marsh  causeways.  It  was  hauled  to  the  creek  near  Battery  Hays, 
and  afterward  rafted  to  the  left  of  the  second  parallel. 


* See  Note  4,  308. 


f See  Note  19,  328. 


X See  Note  13, 323. 


[Chap.  XL. 


286  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

Continue  to  get  iron  from  the  wreck  of  the  Ruby,  to  be  used  as  lin- 
ing for  embrasures,  also  for  mantlets  for  the  heavy  guns.  Seven 
iron  linings  are  already  in — three  in  the  surf  battery  and  four  in 
Battery  Kearny.  They  work  well  thus  far. 

During  the  night  the  line  of  abatis  in  front  of  the  third  parallel 
was  finished,  thus  completing  the  keep.  The  services  of  the  Thirty- 
ninth  Illinois  Volunteers  are  highly  spoken  of,  in  connection  with 
this  work,  by  the  superintending  engineer  officer. 

Improved  the  embouchure  of  approach  from  second  parallel  to 
make  it  passable  for  carts. 

At  the  request  of  Colonel  Turner,  chief  of  artillery,  bullet-proof 
merlons,  made  of  iron  gabions  * filled  with  sand-bags  were  begun  in 
Battery  Brown,  under  Sergeant  [Joshua]  Felter,  New  York  Volun- 
teer Engineers.  To  accomplish  a similar  end  (the  protection  of  the 
artillerists  from  Wagner’s  sharpshooters),  the  soles  of  the  embra- 
sures of  Battery  Kearny  are  given  a counter  slope. 

Friday,  August  14. — Since  the  occupation  of  the  third  parallel  by 
our  sharpshooters,  those  of  the  enemy  have  given  much  less  annoy- 
ance to  the  second  parallel,  as  they  have  been  driven  farther  back, 
and  their  attention  fully  occupied  by  our  advanced  riflemen.  This 
gives  opportunity  for  more  day  work  in  the  second  parallel,  and  ac- 
cordingly, from  this  time  forward,  an  engineer  officer  will  be  con- 
stantly on  duty  there,  f which  has  not  been  the  case  heretofore. 

To-day,  for  the  third  time,  the  trenches  to  the  rear  of  the  second 
parallel  were  cleaned  out  and  their  parapets  rebuilt.  Continued 
work  on  splinter-proof  shelters  % between  the  first  and  second  paral- 
lels, it  being  designed,  if  the  enemy’s  fire  continues  annoying,  to 
build  cover  for  the  entire  guard  of  the  trenches  and  the  artillerists, 
altogether  at  least  1,100  men. 

This  night  added  sand  to  the  covering  of  all  the  service  magazines 
in  the  second  parallel,  to  supply  waste  caused  by  the  wind.  They 
are  now  receiving  powder. 

Continued  splinter-proof  merlons  for  heavy  guns,  and  commenced, 
at  the  request  of  Colonel  Turner,  chief  of  artillery,  putting  boiler- 
plate mantlets  in  their  embrasures,  to  give  the  gunners  additional 
protection  against  sharpshooters.  But  little  use  was  made  of  these 
mantlets.  After  the  fire  opened  on  Sumter,  the  enemy’s  sharpshoot- 
ers directed  their  attention  to  the  sappers,  who  then  commenced 
their  advance. 

To-day  was  built,  at  the  request  of  the  chief  of  artillery,  a small 
splinter-proof  magazine,  in  which  to  load  shells  for  the  use  of  Bat- 
tery Brown. 

Saturday,  August  15.— Portions  of  the  sand-bag  revetting  § of  the 
second  parallel  are  failing.  The  dry  sand  runs  out  through  rents 
made  in  the  bags  by  the  service  of  the  defensive  guns,  and  the  de- 
structive operations  of  the  guard  of  the  trenches  in  their  efforts  to 
shelter  themselves  from  the  sun  and  the  night  air.  It  is  probable 
that  many  of  the  bags  that  are  giving  out  are  the  ones  that  had  been 
already  once  used  in  revetting  the  siege  batteries  on  the  north  end 
of  Folly  Island,  and  a second  time  here  for  want  of  better.  This 
can  only  be  remedied  by  replacing  or  facing  such  revetting  with  new. 
The  latter  plan  was  adopted,  and  a poor  quality  of  sods  cut  from  the 
marsh  was  used.  This  work  was  begun  in  the  howitzer  battery,  on 
the  right  of  the  second  parallel,  and,  with  the  unfinished  work  of 
yesterday,  is  in  progress  this  day  and  night. 


*See  Note  9,  p.  317. 
f See  Note  18,  p.  326. 


% See  Note  21,  p.  331. 
§See  Note  10,  p.  318. 


Chap.  XL.] 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 


287 


The  mortar  schooners  have  been  firing  on  Wagner  yesterday  and 
to-day.  One  of  their  shells  dropped  in  our  advanced  trenches  and 
killed  1 man.  . _ 

It  is  anticipated  that  the  sap  will  have  to  advance  from  the  third 
parallel  against  an  artillery  fire  from  Wagner,  more  or  less  severe, 
and  as  it  is  believed  that  the  fort  has  at  least  one  rifled  gun  bearing 
this  way,  serious  annoyance  is  feared.  To  advance  under  this  fire, 
a system  of  blinded  direct  sap,  or  surface  mining,  has  been  consid- 
ered and  experimented  upon.  It  is  intended  to  protect  the  ap- 
proaches from  all  horizontal,  and  from  the  splinters  of  a vertical, 
fire.  This  method  could  not  be  employed,  as  was  afterward  ascer- 
tained, because  it  required  a depth  of  4 feet  of  earth,  which  could 
only  be  found  for  a very  small  portion  of  the  distance. 

Capts.  Joseph  Walker  and  John  L.  Suess  have  been  detailed  on 
sapping  duty,  and  are  now  engaged  in  drilling  four  brigades  of  sap- 
pers from  Companies  I,  B,  and  D,  New  York  Volunteer  Engineers. 
The  full  sap,  revetted  with  gabions  and  without  any  revetting 
material  whatever,  has  been  executed  for  practice.  * In  the  latter 
method,  the  parapet  is  kept  closed  upon  the  sap-roller,  which  is  moved 
forward  but  a few  inches  at  a time.  Captain  Walker  is  the  special 
advocate  of  the  last  plan,  which  was  afterward  chiefly  used,  and 
found  to  work  well.  It  is  slow,  but  has  the  advantage  of  not  re- 
quiring instructed  sappers  or  revetting  material. 

Sunday,  August  16.— To-day  Lieutenant-Colonel  Sleeper,  Fourth 
New  Hampshire  Volunteers,  with  a detail  of  30  men  from  his  own 
regiment,  is  making  gabionsf  on  Black  Island.  The  same  work  is 
in  progress  on  Folly  Island,  under  Lieut.  J.  H.  Harrold,  New  York 
Volunteer  Engineers. 

Built  splinter-proof  shelter  in  rear  of  Battery  Kearny,  for  use 
of  artillerists  serving  its  guns.  Continued  repairs  on  revetting  of 
second  parallel.  Three  hundred  and  sixty  linear  yards  of  wide  and 
narrow  splinter-proof  shelter,  J;  capable  of  accommodating  over  1,000 
men,  are  finished,  and  the  work  of  its  construction  is  suspended  for 
the  present.  Corporal  [Jacob]  Steinhilber,  Company  D,  New  York 
Volunteer  Engineers,  assisted  in  its  erection. 

Brig.  Gen.  A.  H.  Terry,  commanding  forces  on  Morris  Island,  re- 
quested to-day  that  a parapet  be  built  sufficiently  strong  to  shelter 
the  brigade  which  will  be  stationed  near  the  Beacon  House,  as  a re- 
serve during  the  bombardment,  which  will  begin  to-morrow  morn- 
ing. The  general  commanding  approved  the  plan.  Accordingly, 
this  night,  Capt.  S.  C.  Eaton,  New  York  Volunteer  Engineers,  with 
an  infantry  detail  of  300  men,  built  750  yards  of  splinter-proof  parapet, 
6-J  feet  high,  extending  from  the  Beacon  House  southerly  along  ex- 
treme high-water  line.  At  the  same  time,  Captain  Graef  built  the 
approach  from  the  Beacon  House  to  the  first  parallel,  thus  supplying 
a link,  the  want  of  which,  for  its  moral  effect  on  the  men  entering 
the  trenches,  has  frequently  been  felt. 

Twenty-five  sand-bags  for  each  breaching  gun  were  filled  and  piled 
up  in  rear  of  the  batteries,  to  be  used  for  repairs  during  the  fight. 
A large  quantity  of  engineering  material, § consisting  of  sand-bags, 
gabions,  fascines,  lumber,  hides,  ropes,  spikes,  abatis  material,  See., 
is  collected  at  the  engineer  service  depot§  in  the  second  parallel,  for 
use  in  repairs  during  the  bombardment. 


*See  Note  13,  p.  323. 
fSee  Note  9,  p.  317. 


% See  Note  21,  p.  331. 

§See  Notes  6,  7,  and  8,  pp.  312-316. 


288  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 


[Chap.  XL. 


About  midnight  a shell  from  Wagner  penetrated  the  splinter-proof 
shelter  used  as  headquarters  and  telegraph  office,  * in  the  second  par- 
allel, wounding  Colonel  [Joshua  B.]  Howell,  general  officer  of  the 
trenches,  and  two  others.  The  necessary  repairs  were  immediately 
made  by  Captain  Walker,  who  was  on  duty,  replacing  the  sand-bag 
revetting  of  the  embrasures  of  the  howitzer  battery  with  gabions 
and  fascines. 

The  fire  from  Wagner,  although  inflicting  much  less  real  injury, 
up  to  this  time,  than  the  aggregate  firef  from  the  other  batteries  of 
the  enemy,  still  gives  far  greater  interruption  to  the  working  parties, 
on  account  of  our  nearness  to  the  fort.  “ Cover — Johnson  or  Sum- 
ter,” gives  sufficient  warning  for  those  in  the  trenches  to  seek  partial 
shelter,  if  the  shell  is  seen  to  be  coming  toward  them;  but  “ Cover, 
Wagner,”  cannot  be  pronounced  before  the  shell  has  exploded  and 
done  its  work.  At  these  cautionary  words,  I have  often  observed 
soldiers,  particularly  negroes,  fall  flat  on  their  faces,  under  the  delu- 
sion that  they  were  obtaining  cover  from  mortar  shells  exploding 
over  them,  when,  in  truth,  their  chances  of  being  hit  were  much  in- 
creased by  this  posture.  On  one  occasion,  a soldier  was  observed  to 
place  an  empty  powder  barrel  over  his  head,  to  shield  him  from 
heavy  shells. 

The  enemy’s  fire  was  heavier  than  usual  to-day,  but  has  done  but 
little  injury  to  our  men  or  material. 

Monday,  August  17. — All  the  heavy  rifle  guns  on  the  right,  ex- 
cepting one  that  was  accidentally  spiked,  and  so  many  as  are  ready 
on  the  left,  with  the  Naval  Battery,  opened  fire  on  the  gorge  wgll  of 
Sumter  this  morning  at  sunrise. 

The  navy,  together  with  the  siege  pieces  in  battery  on  the  land, 
fired  on  Wagner  a considerable  portion  of  the  day,  to  prevent  it  from 
opening  fire  on  the  breaching  batteries  of  the  second  parallel. 

Two  engineer  officers  were  on  duty  during  the  day,  to  make  re- 
pairs in  the  second  parallel.  None  of  importance  were  necessary. 

The  booms];  on  the  left  of  the  second  parallel  were  fixed  to-night 
by  Sergeant  [Robert]  Scott,  New  York  Volunteer  Engineers,  having 
been  moved  by  the  spring  tide.  Gabions  and  block-house  material 
were  carried  forward  to  the  third  parallel.  Continued  to  increase 
the  covering  of  service  magazines  for  breaching  batteries. 

Tuesday,  August  18. — Firing  on  Sumter  is  continued  to-day.  This 
afternoon  the  spring  tide,  which  is  now  at  its  height,  was  fearfully 
increased  by  a northeast  storm.  Nearly  the  whole  line  of  trenches 
contained  water,  from  a few  inches  to  2 feet  in  depth.  One-third  of 
the  parapet  of  the  surf  batteryg  was  carried  away,  and  the  sea 
broke  over  it  so  furiously  that  its  two  guns  had  to  be  removed. 

This  night  the  general  commanding  ordered  the  full  sap  to  be 
started  from  the  left  of  the  third  parallel.  Accordingly,  the  trench 
of  this  parallel  was  cleared  out  and  widened,  the  parapet  strength- 
ened, and  the  debouch  made.  A Requa  battery  was  placed  in  posi- 
tion on  the  extreme  left  of  the  third  parallel,  to  enfilade  the  front  of 
the  parapet  of  the  proposed  sap.  Sap-rollers  ||  and  sapping  tools  were 
carried  forward.  The  extreme  high  tide,  requiring  the  men  to  work 
in  mud  and  water,  greatly  interfered  with  all  these  operations. 

Wednesday,  August  19. — This  morning  at  2 o’clock,  the  water 
having  so  subsided  as  to  render  it  possible,  the  full  sap  was  started 
from  the  point  above  indicated,  by  Captain  W alker,  with  a sapping 

* See  Note  20,  p.  331.  f See  Note  18,  p.  326.  % See  Note  3,  p.  308. 

§See  Note  4, 308.  ||  See  Note  9,  p.  317. 


Chap.  XL.]  OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C.  289 

brigade,  consisting  of  10  men  from  his  own  company  (I,  New  York 
Volunteer  Engineers).  He  had  executed  60  feet  at  8 a.  m.,  and  was 
then  relieved  by  Captain  Suess,  with  a sapping  brigade  from  his 
company  (B),  same  regiment,  who  completed  70  feet  of  approach 
during  the  day.  The  enemy’s  sharpshooters  opened  on  the  head  of 
the  sap  as  soon  as  they  observed  its  progress  in  the  morning,  and 
fired  at  it  all  day.  One  casualty  occurred  among  the  sappers,  a 
slight  wound  from  the  explosion  of  a shell.  Captain  Walker  again 
took  the  advance  this  night,  and,  by  means  of  the  flying  sap,  exe- 
cuted about  160  yards  of  approach,  leaving  the  sap-roller  at  day- 
break in  position  several  yards  in  advance  of  our  picket  line. 

In  the  second  parallel,  during  this  day  and  night,  a force  has  been 
repairing  the  damage  done  by  the  storm.  The  two  field  guns,  which 
had  to  be  removed  from  the  surf  battery,  are  being  put  in  position 
at  high-water  line,  6 yards  in  advance  of  the  parapet  of  the  second 
parallel.  The  merlons  of  the  breaching  batteries  have  received  some 
repairs.  Lieutenant  Baldwin  relieved  Lieutenant  Farrand  on  this 
work. 

At  the  request  of  the  officers  in  charge  of  the  sap,  I to-day  pre- 
pared instructions  for  the  guard  of  the  advanced  trenches.  They 
received  the  approval  of  the  general  commanding,  and  went  into 
operation  this  night.  Three  regiments,  averaging  300  men  each, 
were  assigned  to  alternate  as  guard  of  the  advanced  trenches.  The 
Third  New  Hampshire  Volunteers,  Captain  Randlett  commanding, 
went  on  duty  this  night. 

The  commander  of  the  detachment  making  gabions  on  Folly 
Island  reports  that  he  has  sent  to  Light- House  Inlet  350  gabions,  and 
for  the  future  60  will  be  furnished  per  day,  or  about  1 gabion  to  2 
men  employed.  This  is  small  work.  It  was  soon  afterward  more 
than  doubled.  * 

Thursday , August  20. — Captain  Walker  was  relieved  in  the  sap 
this  morning  by  Lieutenant  Wilcken,  who  was  relieved  by  Captain 
Suess,  who  was  relieved  in  the  evening  by  Lieut.  Charles  B.  Parsons, 
New  York  Volunteer  Engineers,  each  tour  of  duty  being  about  six 
hours  long.  The  sap  progresses  very  slowly,  but  constantly.  The  soil 
is  easily  worked,  but  averages  less  than  2 feet  in  depth  to  the  water; 
hence  the  slow  progress  in  keeping  a strong  parapet  closed  up  against 
the  sap-roller.  Three  sappers  were  slightly  wounded  to-day. 

Completed  emplacements  and  a barrel  splinter-proof  magazine  for 
two  howitzers  in  the  second  parallel,  begun  yesterday.  Increased  the 
size  of  left  epaulement  of  Battery  Meade,  to  secure  its  guns  against 
an  increased  fire  from  James  Island,  as  the  enemy  are  opening  new 
batteries  in  that  direction.  The  frame  of  the  bomb-proof  surgery, 
which  shows  evidences  of  failing,  has  been  braced  and  strengthened 
to-day.  The  repairs  made  in  the  embrasures  of  several  breaching 

funs  in  the  second  parallel  consist  chiefly  in  replacing  the  iron  ga- 
ions  * which  are  worn  out  by  new  ones.  In  these  repairs  of  embra- 
sures, both  of  defensive  and  offensive  guns,  in  the  second  parallel, 
it  is  observed  that  those  having  iron  lining  \ require  the  least ; in  fact, 
almost  none.  Captain  Comstock,  commanding  Battery  Rosecrans, 
says  of  the  iron  embrasure  of  gun  No.  1,  which  had  a boiler-plate 
hanging  door  for  a mantlet : 

It  worked  very  well,  indeed,  until  disabled  by  a shot.  I consider  it  a good  protec- 
tion against  musketry  fire.  It  was  not  in  my  way  in  the  least  in  loading  and  sight- 
ing upon  Sumter. 


* See  Note  9,  p.  317. 

19  R R — VOL  XXVIII,  PT  I 


f See  Note  12,  p.  322. 


290  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  IChap.  XL. 

Lieut.  M.  Adams,  Fourth  Ner  Hampshire  Volunteers,  was  de- 
tailed, at  my  request,  for  engineer  duty,  and  reported  to-day. 

The  10-inch  Parrott  rifle  on  the  left  has  opened  fire  on  Sumter. 

The  Marsh  Battery  against  Charleston  City  is  completed. 

Friday , August  21. — Captain  Walker  reports  that  he  relieved 
Lieutenant  Parsons  in  the  sap  at  3.30  a.  m.,  at  which  time  the  enemy 
were  directing  a heavy  fire  of  grape  and  canister  upon  it,  which  fire 
ceased  before  daylight.  This  permitted  him  to  place  a line  of  gabions 
on  the  reverse  side  of  the  trench,  to  shield  the  sappers  from  the 
enemy’s  sharpshooters,  who,  it  was  feared,  would  occupy  the  cover 
furnished  by  the  old  ruins  to  the  front  and  head  of  the  sap.  This 
they  endeavored  to  do  at  daylight,  but  were  prevented  by  our  sharp- 
shooters, who  had  been  stationed  by  the  captain,  for  this  purpose,  so 
as  to  command  the  approach  to  these  ruins.  At  about  9 o’clock  an 
artillery  fire  was  opened  upon  the  head  of  the  sap  from  Wagner. 
Several  shells  burst  directly  over  it  ; others  entered  the  parapet  and 
grazed  the  sap-roller.  The  fire  of  the  sharpshooters  was  constant 
and  accurate.  At  11.30  a.  m.  Lieutenant  Wilcken  took  charge  of 
the  sap,  but  was  soon  obliged  to  retire  on  account  of  the  enemy’s 
artillery  fire,  and  that  of  his  sharpshooters,  who  reached  the  ruins 
above  referred  to  during  a flag  of  truce. 

On  being  informed  of  these  facts  by  the  general  commanding,  the 
naval  commander  opened  on  Wagner  a fire  from  his  vessels,  which, 
to  a considerable  extent,  subdued  the  fire  of  the  work. 

At  my  request,  General  Terry  ordered  the  One  hundredth  New 
York  Volunteers,  Colonel  Dandy  commanding  (the  guard  of  the  ad- 
vanced trenches),  to  endeavor  this  night  to  drive  the  enemy  from  be- 
hind a small  ridge  150  yards  to  our  front,  where  their  picket  reserves 
were  stationed,  and  which  was  the  only  natural  cover  outside  of 
Wagner.  We  hoped  and  expected  to  have  obtained  a lodgment  here 
by  the  flying  sap,  which  would  bring  us  within  200  yards  of  the  fort. 
Several  efforts  were  made,  which  caused  brisk  skirmishing  and  the 
loss  of  6 men,  but  we  did  not  get  the  ridge.  The  picket  line  settled 
down  in  nearly  the  position  occupied  last  night.  I examined  the 
ground,  and  concluded  to  establish  a fourth  parallel,  in  order  to  se- 
cure possession  of  the  ruins  on  the  elevated  ground  to  the  left,  from 
which  the  enemy’s  sharpshooters  had  long  given  us  so  much  annoy- 
ance, and  to  increase  our  front  preparatory  to  another  attempt  to  take 
the  ridge.  This  parallel,  comprising  a linear  development  of  300 
yards,  was  opened  from  the  beach  to  the  marsh,  close  along  the  heels 
of  our  outposts  (its  right  being  350  yards  from  Wagner),  by  Captain 
Suess.  He  reports  most  part  of  the  work  was  done  by  means  of  the 
flying  sap,  the  engineers  placing  the  gabions  and  the  negro  troops 
(Third  Regiment  United  States  Colored)  digging  the  trench.  The 
part  on  the  left,  near  the  ruins,  being  constantly  swept  by  the  en- 
emy’s musketry  fire,  was  performed  by  the  full  sap ; not,  however, 
using  the  sap-roller,  as  a flank  fire  only  had  to  be  provided  against.  * 
The  details  for  this  advanced  work  this  night  were  100  infantry  and 
15  engineers. 

The  same  repairs  and  improvements  are  in  progress  in  the  second 
parallel  as  yesterday,  and  under  the  same  officers. 

Seventeen  8-inch  Parrott  rifle  projectiles  were  fired  from  Battery 
Brown  at  W agner  to-day.  Each  threw  up  large  quantities  of  earth, 
but  did  no  serious  injury  to  the  work,  so  far  as  could  be  observed. 


* See  Note  13,  p.  323. 


Chap.  XL.] 


291 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 

Saturday , August  22. — No  attempt  to  advance  the  sap  was  made 
to-day.  The  sappers  and  an  infantry  detail  were  employed  in 
strengthening  the  fourth  parallel,  widening  trench,  and  building 
banquette  tread  and  loop-holes  for  sharpshooters. 

To-day  I reported  in  writing  to  the  general  commanding  the  facts 
above  recorded,  relating  to  the  progress  of  the  sap  for  the  past  twenty- 
four  hours  ; also  that — 

One  Requa  battery  * was  mounted  last  night  on  the  right  of  the  first  line  of  ap- 
proach to  the  rear  of  the  fourth  parallel,  so  placed  as  to  enfilade  its  face  and  the 
beach.  Another  battery  of  this  kind  is  about  50  yards  in  rear  of  the  fourth  paral- 
lel, near  the  center  of  the  island,  and  taking  this  parallel  in  reverse.  Two  other 
Requa  batteries  are  in  the  third  parallel.  These  four  light  defensive  pieces  comprise 
all  the  artillery  in  position  in  advance  of  the  second  parallel. 

I think  it  will  be  impossible  to  continue  the  sap  in  the  daytime  under  Wagner's  ar- 
tillery fire.  But  if  our  picket  line  continues  to  advance,  which  can  only  be  done  with 
considerable  loss,  we  may  make  some  progress  each  night.  Should  the  enemy's  pick- 
ets retire  inside  his  work,  which  they  will  soon  be  forced  to  do,  he  will  then  main- 
tain an  artillery  fire  from  his  light  guns  in  the  fort,  which  will  make  it  impossible 
for  the  sap  to  progress  night  or  day  until  this  fire  be  subdued  or  kept  down.  His 
light  guns  are  now  run  behind  the  merlons  of  the  work  to  avoid  our  shot  ; hence 
it  is  only  by  destroying  the  parapet  of  the  fort  with  our  heavy  guns  in  the  second 
parallel,  thus  uncovering  them,  or  by  rendering  their  service  impossible  by  a supe- 
rior fire  from  light  pieces  which  can  be  mounted  in  the  fourth  parallel,  assisted  by 
a strong  force  of  sharpshooters,  that  we  can  proceed  with  certainty.  (Our  light 
guns  in  the  second  parallel  cannot  be  used  effectively  against  Wagner,  on  account 
of  the  distance,  and  the  fact  that  their  fire  endangers  our  own  men  in  the  advanced 
works  ; five,  I am  informed,  have  already  been  injured.)  Destroying  the  parapets  I 
consider  the  best  plan,  for,  so  long  as  the  enemy  is  so  strongly  intrenched  in  Wagner, 
he  will  give  us  serious  annoyance,  and  possess  an  excellent  base  from  which  to  as- 
sault our  works,  which  he  must  more  than  ever  be  convinced  is  his  only  hope. 

The  general  commanding  expressed  himself  unwilling  to  risk  a 
battery  of  light  guns  in  the  fourth  parallel,  and  not  yet  ready  to 
spare  any  considerable  amount  of  the  heavy  gun  fire  of  the  second 
parallel. 

Capt.  W.  Pratt,  Fifty-fifth  Massachusetts  Volunteers,  having  been 
detailed  by  Brigadier-General  Vogdes,  at  my  request,  for  engineer 
duty,  reported  to-day. 

The  following  instructions  are  approved  by  the  general  command- 
ing, and  take  effect  immediately  : 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 
Engineer's  Office,  Morris  Island,  S.  C.,  August  22,  1863. 

Instructions  for  superintending  engineer  officers  employed  on  tb  1 right  and  in 
advance  of  the  first  parallel,  under  direction  of  Captain  Brooks,  aic .e-de-camp  and 
assistant  engineer. 

I.  The  sapf  which  is  in  progress  toward  Fort  Wagner  is  in  charge  of  Captain 
Walker,  assisted  by  Lieutenant  Parsons,  and  Captain  Suess,  assisted  by  Lieutenant 
Wilcken,  New  York  Volunteer  Engineers. 

Twenty-five  men  from  Company  I,  under  Sergeant  [Cyrenius  R.]  Stickle  and 
Corporals  [John  G.]  Brooks  and  [Joseph]  Longto  as  chiefs  of  sap ; 12  men  from 
Company  B,  under  Sergeants  [Henry]  Fiene  and  [William]  Huebbers  as  chiefs  of 
sap  ; and  12  men  from  Company  D,  under  Sergeants  [Frederick]  Buerkle  and 
[Charles]  Spilker  as  chiefs  of  sap,  New  York  Volunteer  Engineers,  will  be  formed 
into  four  sapping  brigades.  The  above-named  officers  will  arrange  their  brigades, 
times  of  relief,  &c.,  as  they  see  fit.  One-third  the  length  of  the  sap  must  be  fitted 
for  infantry  defense.  The  advanced  guard  of  the  trenches  will  furnish  a constant 
detail  of  20  infantry  for  duty  in  the  sap,  in  accordance  with  written  instructions 
given  them. 

Captains  W alker  and  Suess  will  each  report  progress  of  themselves  and  assistants 
daily,  according  to  inclosed  form.! 


* See  Note  16,  p.  324. 


f See  Note  13,  p.  323. 


X Omitted. 


[Chap.  XL. 


292  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

II.  Captain  Graef  and  Lieutenants  Farrand,  Talcott,  and  J.  S.  Baldwin,  New 
York  Volunteer  Engineers  ; Captain  Pratt,  Fifty-fifth  Massachusetts  Volunteers, 
and  Lieutenant  Adams,  Fourth  New  Hampshire  Volunteers,  will  relieve  each  other 
on  the  work  specified  in  Section  V below,  alternately  at  8 a.  m.,  4 p.  m.,  and  12 

. midnight  each  day,  according  to  roster  kept  at  this  office.*  These  officers  will  re- 
ceive notification  of  their  turn  from  this  office.  All  officers  will  also  report  here  for 
instructions  before  going  on  duty  with  details,  excepting  the  one  going  on  at  mid- 
night. Each  officer  will  confer  with  the  one  he  relieves  concerning  the  work,  con- 
tinuing what  has  been  begun,  and  beginning  such  new  work  as  may  be  necessary. 

III.  Fatigue  details,  consisting  habitually  of  19  engineers  and  75  infantry,  will 
relieve  each  other  at  4 a.  m.,  12  m.,  and  8 p.m.,  reporting  to  the  engineer  officer  in 
charge  of  the  works  at  the  engineer  service  depot,  second  parallel.  The  rendezvous 
of  the  fatigue  details  is  on  the  beach  opposite  the  lookout,  where  the  engineers  and 
infantry  will  meet  at  the  hours  herein  specified,  the  senior  non-commissioned  officer 
of  engineers  conducting  the  united  details  to  the  trenches. 

IV.  The  headquarters  of  engineers  in  the  trenches  is  in  the  splinter-proof  shelter 
to  the  rear  of  the  general  magazine,  in  the  second  parallel.  Engineering  tools,  ma- 
terials, service  carts,  &c.,  are  in  charge  of  Corporals  [William  L.]  Crane  and  [David 
M.]  Chandler,  New  York  Volunteer  Engineers,  at  engineer  headquarters. 

V.  The  duties  to  be  performed  by  the  group  of  officers  designated  in  Section  II 
are  to  keep  in  as  perfect  condition  as  possible  all  the  various  defenses  and  offensive 
works  in  front  of  the  first  parallel,  excepting  the  advance  of  the  sap,  which  is  in 
charge  of  a special  detail.  (See  Section  I.) 

The  more  important  works  to  be  looked  after  are  the  following  : 

1.  One  general  and  two  service  magazines.  These  must  be  kept  constantly  cov- 
ered with  8 feet  of  earth  on  the  shortest  line  from  the  surface  to  the  sheeting.  As 
the  wind  is  continually  removing  this  covering,  it  will  be  necessary  to  examine  it 
with  an  iron  sounding  rod  at  8 p.  m.  each  day  , and  the  earth  increased  during  the 
night,  if  necessary.  The  interior  of  the  magazine  to  be  examined  at  the  same  time, 
in  order  to  ascertain  if  the  floor  be  damp,  or  timber  work  give  evidence  of  failing. 
Entrances  to  magazines  to  be  kept  revetted  and  in  good  condition  for  ingress  and 
egress. 

2.  All  the  defensive  and  offensive  batteries  are  to  be  examined  twice  in  each 
tour  of  duty,  and  inquiries  made  of  their  commanders  as  to  their  condition.  All 
injuries  by  the  enemy’s  shot,  wear  and  defects  to  platforms,  embrasures,  revetting, 
parapets,  and  traverses,  are  to  be  thoroughly  and  promptly  repaired. 

3.  The  musketry  parapet  in  the  second  and  third  parallels  and  approaches  (where 
they  are  arranged  for  defense)  must  be  kept  in  good  defensive  condition,  i.  e., 
trench  free  from  obstructions,  and  10  feet  wide ; banquette  at  least  2 feet  wide 
and  smooth,  breast-height,  revetted  4 feet  6 inches  high  ; superior  slope  smooth,  and 
having  a slope  of  one  to  ten  outward. 

4.  A material  obstacle,  consisting  of  inclined  palisading,  abatis,  wire  entangle- 
ment, and  floating  booms,  extends  along  the  front  of  the  second  parallel,  from  low 
water  on  the  right  to  the  west  side  of  the  creek  on  the  left.  This  must  be  so  in- 
creased and  kept  in  repair  as  to  constantly  present  throughout  its  length  a formida- 
ble obstacle  to  the  advance  of  the  enemy,  so  that  it  would  be  difficult  to  get  through, 
even  if  there  was  no  fire  defending  it. 

5.  Splinter-proof  shelters,  injured  by  the  enemy’s  projectiles,  must  be  repaired, 
and  at  least  2 feet  of  earth  kept  constantly  on  them. 

6.  The  parapets  of  the  approaches  must  be  kept  (when  other  work  will  permit) 
6£  feet  high  and  3 feet  thick  on  top,  the  trench  inside  being  10  feet  wide  and  free 
from  obstructions. 

7.  Within  three  hours  of  the  close  of  his  tour  of  duty,  each  officer  will  send  to 
this  office  a report,  according  to  the  inclosed  form,f  showing  number  of  men  em- 
ployed, work  completed,  work  begun,  material  used,  material  required,  name  of 
officer  who  relieved  him,  &c.,  making  such  statements  as  regards  the  work  as 
may  prove  useful  or  interesting. 

Soon  after,  the  following  supplementary  instructions  were  added 
to  the  above,  in  the  form  of  a 


CIRCULAR. 

In  order  to  facilitate  the  work  of  the  sap,  the  officers  in  charge  of  that  work  will 
hereafter  relieve  each  other  at  the  same  hours  as  the  officers  in  charge  of  the  other 
engineering  work  on  the  right,  viz,  at  12  o’clock  midnight,  at  8 a.  m.,  and  4 p.  m. 


*See  Note  18,  p.  326. 


f Omitted. 


Chap.  XL.] 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  0. 


293 


The  officers  are  requested  to  be  on  hand  promptly  at  these  hours.  Officers  unfit 
for  duty  will  please  report  the  fact  four  hours  before  their  tour  begins,  that  other 
arrangements  may  be  made. 

Sunday , August  23. — Captain  Suess  went  on  duty  in  the  sap  at  3 
o’clock  this  morning.  He  extended  the  fourth  parallel  to  the  marsh, 
and,  by  means  of  gabions,  a short  distance  out  upon  it.  At  daylight 
the  enemy  opened  on  this  new  work  with  artillery  from  Wagner, 
and  completely  destroyed  it,  knocking  the  gabions  to  pieces,  and 
caving  the  parapet  back  into  the  trench  for  12  yards  in  length.  This 
part  of  the  work  had  to  be  abandoned,  and  as  it  was  not  thought 
advisable  to  start  the  sap-roller  under  the  circumstances,  the  day 
was  spent  in  improving  the  fourth  parallel. 

The  enemy  in  Wagner  have  become  very  expert  in  filling  the 
throats  of  their  embrasures  with  sand-bags  after  each  discharge, 
thus  shielding  the  detachments  serving  the  heavy  guns  from  our 
sharpshooters  and  even  our  artillery. 

Two  emplacements  for  defensive  guns  (Requa  batteries)  are  build- 
ing on  the  left  of  the  fourth  parallel  to-day. 

To-night  Captain  Walker  is  on  duty  in  the  sap.  A small  redan 
was  built  in  front  of  the  left  of  the  fourth  parallel  by  the  flying  sap, 
the  enemy’s  pickets  being  within  25  yards.  This  increased  the  de- 
velopment of  the  parallel,  perfected  its  flanking  arrangements,  and 
gave  cover  in  reverse  against  our  own  fire,  and,  what  was  still  more 
important,  against  the  fire  of  James  Island,  which  is  producing  more 
casualties  * among  our  troops  than  at  any  previous  time,  averaging, 
in  the  special  guard  of  the  advanced  trenches,  10  per  day.  On  one 
day  one  of  these  regiments,  the  Eighty-fifth  Pennsylvania  Volun- 
teers, numbering  300  men,  lost  20  men. 

One  Requa  battery  was  placed  in  position  on  the  left  of  the  fourth 
parallel  this  night.  A return  of  25  yards,  extending  along  the 
marsh,  was  made  from  its  extreme  left  to  protect  that  flank.  A 
light  musketry  parapet,  built  of  gabions  for  the  same  purpose,  has 
already*  been  established  on  a dike  leading  from  near  the  left  of  the 
fourth  parallel  to  the  creek. 

Captain  Pratt  this  night  superintended  moving  sap-rollers  to  the 
left  of  the  fourth  parallel ; also  to  the  same  place  a Coehorn  mortar 
battery,  with  its  platforms  and  ammunition,  from  the  left  of  the 
second  parallel. 

In  addition  to  the  ordinary'  repairs  in  the  second  parallel,  the  para- 
pet of  the  approach  between  it  and  its  obstacle  was  this  night  raised 
by  means  of  a row  of  powder  barrels  filled  with  earth.  These  pow- 
der barrels,  emptied  by  the  firing,  have  also  been  used  to  a consider- 
able extent  in  the  fourth  parallel  for  revetting  and  for  a banquette 
tread.  The  parapet  of  the  third  parallel,  and  of  the  line  of  approach 
immediately  to  its  rear,  was  thoroughly  repaired  and  strengthened. 
Began  the  construction  of  emplacements  for  four  8-inch  siege  mor- 
tars in  rear  of  the  traverse  which  defends  the  right  flank  of  the  third 
parallel,  with  a bomb-proof  magazine  for  the  service  of  the  same ; 
also  to  move  forward  from  the  first  parallel  the  platforms  belonging 
to  this  battery. 

This  evening  the  “ seven  days’  bombardment  of  Sumter,”  which 
began  on  the  17th  instant,  ended  in  thoroughly  demolishing  the 
gorge  wall  of  the  fort,  dismounting  most,  if  not  all,  of  its  guns,  and 
greatly  injuring  its  walls. 


See  Note  18.  326. 


294  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

Monday,  August  24. — From  the  salient  of  the  redan  to  the  end  of 
the  ridge  occupied  by  the  enemy’s  pickets  and  sharpshooters  is  a dis- 
tance of  25  yards.  Intermediate  is  a strip  of  low,  wet  ground,  sub- 
merged at  spring  tides,  which  will  render  it  very  difficult,  if  not 
impossible,  to  continue  the  sap  in  this  direction  under  a severe  fire. 

To-day  last  night’s  work  was  strengthened  and  perfected.  Three 
Coehorn  mortars  were  put  in  battery  in  the  fourth  parallel,  and  a 
bomb-proof  magazine  for  their  service  begun.  This  afternoon  a 
mortar  was  opened  on  our  fourth  parallel  from  Wagner.  Three  sap- 
pers were  wounded  by  it.  This  mortar  proved  to  be  a great  annoy- 
ance. Its  fire  was  directed  on  the  head  of  the  sap,  was  very  accu- 
rate, and  our  sappers  had  no  shelter  from  it.  Six  such  mortars  well 
served  would,  I think,  have  stopped  our  work  at  this  period,  until 
subdued  by  our  superior  fire.  This  night  the  full  sap  was  started 
from  the  salient  of  the  redan,  being  the  prolongation  of  its  left  face. 
It  had  been  carried  forward  but  a few  yards,  when  a severe  rain 
storm  filled  the  trench  with  water,  which  could  not  be  drained  off 
because  the  ground  was  too  low;  the  work,  in  consequence,  made 
very  little  progress.  The  enemy  were  so  near  (not  more  than  20  yards 
distant)  that  it  was  impossible  to  employ  the  flying  sap. 

Captain  Graef,  on  duty  in  the  second  and  third  parallels  to-day, 
reports  : 

The  platform  of  8-inch  Parrott  rifle,  gun  No.  1,  Battery  Brown,  had  settled  in  the 
rear  9 inches,  so  that  the  gunners  were  afraid  to  fire  the  gun.  I raised  it  level.  The 
other  platform  will  have  to  be  raised  in  the  same  manner,  after  a few  more  days’ 
firing. 

This  is  occasioned  by  the  recoil  of  the  gun,  which  causes  the  front 
of  the  platform  to  spring  up.  The  dry  sand  running  under,  pre- 
vents it  from  settling  back  tb  its  original  position.  Captain  Graef 
continued  work  on  the  mortar  battery  in  the  third  parallel.  Lieu- 
tenant Farrand  followed  him,  and  finished  the  battery  and  magazine, 
and  reported  it  ready  for  its  armament  this  evening.  He  also  widened 
the  trench  leading  to  the  third  parallel,  to  admit  the  passage  of  a 
sling-cart.  These  mortars  were  mounted  during,  the  night. 

Lieut.  J.  S.  Baldwin  this  night  built  a causeway  over  the  marsh, 
from  the  boom  across  the  large  creek  on  the  left  of  the  second  paral- 
lel, about  370  feet  in  a northwesterly  direction,  to  the  second  creek. 
A platform  was  built  at  the  farther  end,  and  a light  traverse  for  the 
accommodation  of  a grand-guard  outpost. 

Captain  Pratt’s  detail  completed  the  bomb-proof  magazine  in  the 
fourth  parallel,  and  built  a barbette  emplacement  for  a Requa  bat- 
tery near  the  center  of  the  same.  He  reports  that  “ the  severe  rain 
and  intense  darkness  ” interfered  greatly  with  the  progress  of  the 
work.  One  boat  howitzer  was  mounted  on  the  left  of  the  fourth 
parallel,  making  the  armament  of  this  parallel  three  light  defensive 
guns  and  three  Coehorn  mortars. 

Tuesday,  August  25. — Some  sharpshooters,  who  occupy  pits  just 
in  front  of  the  left  of  the  fourth  parallel,  annoy  us  greatly.  They 
are  on  lower  ground  than  we ; hence  are  enabled  to  see  when  our 
loop-holes  are  darkened  by  the  heads  and  rifles  of  our  sharpshooters. 
In  order  to  flank,  and  thus  dislodge  this  troublesome  enemy,  an  at- 
tempt was  made  this  morning  to  prolong  the  right  face  of  the  redan 
from  the  salient;  but  the  mortar  fire,  and,  what  was  worse,  the  water 
which  constantly  filled  the  trench  as  it  was  dug,  rendered  the  prog- 
ress so  slow  that  the  enemy  had  time  to  protect  his  pits  against  us. 

Experience  now  proves  that  the  sap  cannot  proceed  farther  unless 


Chap.  XL.} 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 


295 


the  artillery  fire  of  Wagner  he  subdued,  or  the  enemy  driven  out  of 
the  ridge  in  which  they  confront  us  so  closely  and  securely.  The 
general  commanding  approves  of  an  effort  being  made  to  drive  them 
out  of  this  ridge  with  mortars  this  evening.  For  this  purpose  the 
three  Coehorns  were  moved  and  mounted  in  the  redan,  in  which  posi- 
tion they  more  nearly  enfiladed  the  ridge  with  their  fire.  During 
the  afternoon  the  heavy  guns  in  the  second  parallel  fired  on  Wagner. 
About  5.30  p.  m.  the  four  8-inch  mortars  in  advance  of  the  second 
parallel,  and  the  three  Coehorn  mortars  above  referred  to,  opened  on 
the  ridge.  At  the  same  time  the  navy  howitzer,  served  by  Ensign 
[James]  Wallace,  U.  S.  Navy,  and  the  Requa  battery  on  the  left  of 
the  fourth  parallel,  fired  to  enfilade  the  reverse  of  the  ridge.  Owing 
to  some  fault  in  the  ammunition  or  service  of  the  8-inch  mortars,  the 
fire  was  very  inefficient.  The  enemy  not  only  remained  in  the  ridge, 
but  were  re-enforced  just  at  dusk,  when  brisk  musketry  firing  took 
place,  which  lasted  for  half  an  hour.  The  two  Requa  batteries  * in 
the  fourth  parallel  took  part  in  this  skirmish.  Although  not  well 
served,  their  firing  was  such  as  to  confirm  my  previous  favorable 
impression  of  the  gun  for  defense  of  earthworks. 

The  fire  from  the  James  Island  batteries  has  been  very  accurate, 
and  much  felt  in  the  fourth  parallel  to-day.  Several  casualties  took 
place  among  the  engineers  and  infantry.  I witnessed  three  successive 
shots  take  effect  among  our  troops.  This  is  surprising,  as  the  enemy 
is  using  smooth-bore  guns,  at  ranges  of  from  3,000  to  4,000  yards. 
Provoked  by  our  shelling  the  ridge,  the  enemy  opened  on  us,  about 
sundown,  the  heaviest  artillery  fire  f yet  directed  on  the  advance, 
which  was  continued  through  the  early  part  of  the  night.  I think 
he  anticipated  an  assault  on  Wagner,  although  that  work  fired  but 
very  little.  Additional  traverses  against  this  enfilading  fire  were 
built  to-night.  The  propriety  of  building  a keep  against  sorties  on 
the  fourth  parallel,  as  was  done  in  the  third,  and  in  accordance  with 
the  original  plan,  \ was  discussed  to-day,  but  the  general  commanding 
did  not  order  it. 

There  was  nothing  to  do  in  the  second  parallel,  its  works  being  in 
good  condition. 

This  has  been  to  me  the  saddest  day  of  the  siege.  Less  has  been 
done  in  existing  works  than  on  any  other ; no  advance  has  been 
made,  nor  does  any  seem  possible.  Something  besides  spades  and 
sharpshooters  will  have  to  be  tried.  The  troops  seem  to  be  resting 
from  the  labor  and  excitement  of  demolishing  Sumter,  and  do  not 
yet  take  much  interest  in  the  operations  against  Wagner. 

The  engineer  officers  of  the  sap  express  the  earnest  wish  that  the 
enemy  be  driven  out  of  the  ridge  with  the  bayonet,  and  that  our 
superior  artillery  fire  be  directed  on  Wagner.  This  would  enable  us 
to  cross  the  very  difficult  ground  immediately  in  our  front,  obtain 
a lodgment  in  the  ridge,  which  is  very  favorable,  and  thus  make  a 
long  stride  toward  the  fort. 

The  embrasures  of  all  the  heavy  guns  on  the  right  and  left  are 
ordered  to  be  arranged  to  embrace  Wagner  in  their  field  of  fire. 

Wednesday,  August  26. — No  work  worthy  of  record  was  done 
during  the  day. 

The  general  commanding  ordered  General  Terry  to  take  and  hold 
the  ridge,  and  placed  the  resources  of  the  command  at  his  disposal 
for  that  purpose.  It  was  accomplished  at  6.30  p.  in.,  by  a brilliant 

* See  Note  16,  p.  324.  f See  Note  18,  p.  326.  % See  p.  283. 


296  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS.  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

charge  of  the  Twenty-fourth  Massachusetts  Volunteers,  Col.  Francis 
A.  Osborn  commanding,  supported  by  the  Third  New  Hampshire  Vol- 
unteers, Captain  Randlett  commanding.  Sixty-seven  prisoners  were 
captured.  They  were  afraid  to  retire  on  account  of  their  own  torpe- 
does,* as  they  informed  us,  and  had  too  little  time,  even  if  there  had 
been  no  torpedoes.  No  works,  excepting  rude  rifle-pits  in  the  excel- 
lent natural  cover  afforded  by  the  ridge,  were  found.  Sand-bags  of 
a superior  quality  had  been  freely  used,  for  loop-holes  and  traverses. 

The  moment  the  ridge  was  gained,  the  work  of  intrenching  was 
begun  under  the  superintendence  of  Captain  Walker.  The  fifth 
parallel  was  opened  from  the  sea  to  the  marsh,  a distance  of  140 
yards,  advantage  being  taken  of  the  enemy’s  pits  on  the  left,  and 
cover  was  rapidly  obtained,  under  the  stimulus  of  a severe  grape 
and  shell  fire  from  Wagner.  The  right  of  this  parallel  is  245  yards 
from  the  fort.  In  this  work  the  Twenty-fourth  Massachusetts  Vol- 
unteers proved  themselves  as  efficient  in  the  use  of  the  shovel  as  they 
had  in  that  of  the  bayonet  a few  moments  before.  From  the  right 
of  this  line  an  approach  was  at  once  opened  by  the  flying  sap.  This 
was  extended  to  the  marsh,  and  later  in  the  night  the  sap  was  con- 
tinued to  the  beach,  within  100  yards  of  the  fort,  by  a second  line 
running  near  the  edge  of  the  marsh.  Not  much  work  was  done  on 
this  last  line,  on  account  of  the  water,  and  lack  of  time  before  day. 
On  it  the  first  torpedoes  * were  found.  One  exploded,  throwing  a 
corporal  of  the  [Third]  U.  S.  Colored  Troops,  of  the  fatigue  detail, 
25  yards,  and  depositing  him,  entirely  naked,  with  his  arm  resting  on 
the  plunger  of  another  torpedo,  which  facts  gave  rise,  on  his  being 
discovered  next  morning,  to  the  absurd  story  that  the  enemy  had 
tied  him  to  the  torpedo  as  a decoy.  I was  standing  20  yards  from 
him  at  the  time  of  the  explosion,  and  Captain  Walker  much  nearer. 
Both  supposed  that  it  was  a shell  from  the  enemy  until  late  in  the 
night,  when  other  torpedoes  were  found. 

The  discovery  of  these  torpedoes  explains  what  has  been,  to  me, 
one  of  the  greatest  mysteries  in  the  defense  of  Wagner,  i.  e.,  the 
fact  that  no  material  obstacle  of  any  amount  could  be  discovered  in 
front  of  the  work,  not  even  after  our  two  almost  successful  assaults. 
Torpedoes  were  the  substitute. 

Positions  were  built  for  two  Requa  batteries,  one  on  the  right,  and 
one  near  the  center  of  the  parallel  on  top  of  the  ridge  ; the  latter  in 
an  advanced  position,  in  order  to  flank  the  line.  An  approach  from 
the  redan  of  the  fourth  to  the  fifth  parallel  was  built  by  the  flying 
sap ; the  work  was  very  difficult,  on  account  of  the  mud  and  water, 
and  was  in  charge  of  Lieutenant  Wilcken. 

Thursday , August  27. — This  day  and  night  were  employed  in 
strengthening  and  perfecting  the  defensive  arrangements  in  the  fifth 
parallel,  and  the  approaches  to  and  from  it.  Completed  two  emplace- 
ments for  Requa  batteries,  which  were  mounted  at  night.  Built 
sand-bag  loop-holes  for  sharpshooters,  and  banquette  tread  for  in- 
fantry. Eight  torpedoes  were  discovered  inside  of  our  advanced  line 
to-day.  In  endeavoring  to  move,  by  means  of  a rope,  one  which 
projected  into  the  ditch,  it  exploded.  These  torpedoes  give  us  con- 
siderable trouble  and  anxiety,  but  they  are  an  excellent  obstacle  to 
prevent  a sortie  by  the  enemy,  who  are  very  much  afraid  of  them. 
Began  this  night  to  convert  a large  cistern  found  in  the  fifth  parallel 
into  a bomb-proof  magazine.  Opened,  by  means  of  the  flying  sap, 


*See  Note  5,  p.  310. 


Chap.  XL.]  OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C.  297 

a second  line  of  approach,  from  the  right  of  the  fourth  to  the  fifth 
parallel,  thus  avoiding  the  mud. 

The  enemy  fired  all  night  from  Wagner  with  their  light  guns  and 
mortars. 

I recommended  to  the  general  commanding  to-day  that — 

The  battery  of  four  8-inch  mortars  now  on  the  right  of  the  third  parallel  be  moved 
forward  to  the  fifth  parallel ; for,  in  its  present  position,  its  fire  endangers  seriously 
our  own  men  in  the  advance.  From  the  fifth  parallel,  being  within  200  yards  of 
Wagner,  it  could  give  the  enemy  very  serious  annoyance,  judging  from  the  effect 
of  his  mortar  fire  on  us,  at  a greater  distance. 

I also  recommended  that — 

Field  guns  be  placed  in  battery  in  the  fifth  parallel,  to  aid  the  mortars  in  keeping 
down  the  light  gun  fire  of  the  fort,  which  has  been  very  annoying  the  past  two 
nights. 

This  was  returned  indorsed  : 

Positions  will  be  prepared  for  the  8-inch  mortars,  and  two  field  guns,  in  the 
fifth  parallel,  but  they  will  not  be  placed  there  until  further  orders. 

Friday , August  z 8. — Continued  improvements  in  the  fifth  parallel. 
Moved  three  Coehorn  mortars  forward  into  it.  Continued  work  on 
bomb-proof  magazine  and  construction  of  traverses  against  James 
Island  fire.  Began  emplacements  for  siege  mortars,  in  compliance 
with  orders. 

Lieut.  J.  S.  Baldwin  reports  that — 

The  torpedoes  with  which  the  enemy  have  obstructed  our  progress  may  be  easily 
rendered  harmless  by  boring  a small  auger-hole  through  the  wood  of  which  they 
are  constructed,  and  pouring  in  a sufficient  quantity  of  water  to  destroy  the  explo- 
sive power  of  the  powder. 

This  was  afterward  practiced. 

Captain  Suess  reports  : 

It  was  intended,  in  compliance  with  instructions,  to  finish  the  most  advanced 
branch  of  the  approach,  but  there  being  full,  clear  moonlight  all  night,  it  was  im- 
possible to  place  the  fatigue  party  in  position.  The  already  existing  parapet  was 
too  low,  and  made  much  worse  yesterday  by  the  heavy  rain,  to  afford  concealment, 
and  the  trench  was  full  of  water,  this  being  a period  of  spring  tides. 

I am  instructed  by  the  general  commanding  to  increase  the  amount 
of  cover  for  troops  in,  and  in  advance  of,  the  fifth  parallel  to  the 
utmost  extent,  in  order  to  allow  a large  force  to  be  massed  there, 
preparatory  to  assaulting  Wagner.  This  will  be  done  by  traverses, 
widening  trenches,  and  additional  boyau. 

Saturday ',  August  29. — Completed  siege  mortar  battery  and  bomb- 
proof service  magazine  in  fifth  parallel.  This  is  the  third  time 
these  peculiar  mortar  platforms  * have  been  laid ; they  are  still  good. 
Built  a splinter-proof  shelter  for  headquarters  and  for  engineer 
service  depot  in  fifth  parallel. 

I ordered  the  sharpshooters  to-day  to  endeavor  to  explode  the  tor- 
pedoes in  advance  of  our  works  by  firing  at  their  plungers.  Hitting 
the  plunger  did  not  explode  them. 

It  was  bright  moonlight  to-night,  and  the  enemy  concentrated  a 
sharp  musketry  and  light  artillery  fire  on  the  party  who  were 
strengthening  the  advanced  line  of  sap  under  Captain  Walker.  The 
fire  destroyed  the  parapet,  and  one  shell  killed  and  wounded  (>  sap- 
pers. The  work  was  discontinued.  Dark  nights,  or  subduing  Wag- 
ner’s artillery  fire,  will  alone  permit  the  work  to  advance. 


*See  Note  II,  p.  319. 


[Chap.  XL. 


298  S.  C.  AND  DA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

A second  bombardment  of  Sumter  began  this  morning,  it  being 
reported  by  the  navy  that  one  or  more  of  its  guns  can  be  served. 

The  enemy’s  batteries  on  Sullivan’s  Island  opened  fire  on  onr  ad- 
vanced works  on  the  right  to-day,  but  with  little  effect. 

In  General  Orders,  No.  70,  headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 
this  date — 

Capt.  C.  B.  Reese,  Corps  of  Engineers,  U.  S.  Army,  is  announced  as  assistant 
and  consulting  engineer  on  the  staff  of  the  brigadier-general  commanding  the  de- 
partment. All  orders  connected  with  the  administration  of  the  engineer  service 
will  be  transmitted  through  him,  and  he  will  have  control  of  the  collection  and 
issue  of  all  engineer  material. 

Sunday , August  30. — The  unfinished  work  of  yesterday  is  in 
progress  to-day.  As  the  moon  shiaes  brightly  to-night,  and  the 
enemy  are  firing  constantly,  no  attempt  was  made  to  advance. 

Lieutenant-Colonel  Purviance,  commanding  Eighty -fifth  Pennsyl- 
vania Volunteers,  was  killed  during  this  tour  of  duty  as  commander 
of  the  special  guard  of  the  advanced  trenches,  by  one  of  our  own 
shells,  which  exploded  prematurely. 

Monday , August  31. — The  cover  for  troops  is  being  increased  in 
front  of  the  fifth  parallel  by  means  of  numerous  boyaus,  having 
high  parapets  directed  perpendicularly  to  the  resultant  of  the 
enemy’s  fire. 

In  order  to  bring  a greater  musketry  fire  on  the  beach  to  defend 
our  right  flank,  a rifle  trench  is  being  built  in  advance  of,  and  par- 
allel to,  the  first  line  of  approach  in  front  of  the  fifth  parallel. 

This  night  being  sufficiently  dark  to  conceal  our  workmen,  the 
advanced  line  of  approach  was  thoroughly  strengthened  throughout 
its  length,  under  the  direction  of  Captain  Suess.  There  was  very 
little  fire.  All  of  the  torpedoes  inside  our  advanced  lines  were  re- 
moved. 

In  compliance  with  instructions  received  through  the  consulting 
engineer,  one  sap-roller  was  placed  at  the  head  of  the  sap,  and  one 
on  the  right  of  the  fifth  parallel  this  night.  The  parapets  through- 
out the  whole  line  of  trenches  are  being  greatly  strengthened.  Turf 
is  being  cut  to  cover  the  service  magazines  in  the  second  parallel. 

The  Third  U.  S.  Colored  Troops,  who  have  been  on  fatigue  duty 
in  the  advanced  trenches  since  the  20th  instant,  were  relieved  to-day 
by  the  Fifty-fourth  Massachusetts  Volunteers  (Colored),  it  being 
desirable  to  have  older  troops  for  the  important  and  hazardous  duty 
required  in  the  advance  at  this  period.  * Infantry  officers  command- 
ing fatigue  details  inform  me  that  it  requires  much  more  effort  to 
make  the  men  work  than  fight  under  the  same  fire. 

The  firing  on  Sumter,  which  was  resumed  yesterday  morning, 
ceased  this  evening.  The  last  gun  that  had  the  appearance  of  being 
fit  for  service  was  dismounted. 

This  night  three  casualties-  occurred  in  the  guard  of  the  advanced 
trenches  from  the  explosion  of  a torpedo,  f over  the  plunger  of  which 
one  of  the  men  crept  in  taking  his  position. 

Tuesday,  September  1. — I wrote  to  Captain  Reese,  consulting  en- 
gineer, this  morning : 

I regret  to  be  obliged  to  report  myself  unfit  for  duty  to-day.  I am  scarcely  sick, 
but,  having  been  on  duty  for  fifty  consecutive  days,  and  the  intervening  fifty  nights 
(excepting  two)  until  12  o’clock,  I am  physically  exhausted,  and  will  require  a 
short  period  of  rest  to  recuperate. 


See  Notes  18  and  19,  pp.  326, 328. 


f See  Note  5,  p.  310. 


Chap.  XL.] 


OPERATION S ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 


299 


Lieut.  Peter  S.  Michie,  U.  S.  Engineers,  assistant  engineer,  Depart- 
ment of  the  South,  was  assigned  temporarily  to  the  direction  of  the 
engineering  operations  on  the  right. 

In  compliance  with  instructions  from  the  general  commanding, 
the  following  record  of  Lieutenant  Michie’s  operations  is  compiled 
from  the  reports  of  superintending  officers  made  to  him,  which  were 
filed  with  similar  ones  made  to  me,  in  this  office. 

This  day  and  night  the  parapet  of  the  approaches  from  the  head  of  the  sap  to  the 
second  parallel  were  strengthened,  the  trenches  cleaned  out,  and  some  revetting 
done.  A small  magazine  for  the  Coehorn  mortars  was  begun  in  the  fifth  parallel. 
Injuries  by  the  enemy’s  shot  to  the  large  magazine  in  the  second  parallel  were  re- 
paired, and  coyering  the  same  with  sod  continued. 

The  enemy  fired  heavily  all  night. 

Wednesday,  September  2. — Continued  work  on  strengthening  para- 
pet in  advance  of  second  parallel  to  the  head  of  the  sap,  sod  covering 
on  magazines  in  second  parallel,  and  repairing  ventilators  to  the 
same.  Repaired  injuries  done  by  the  enemy’s  shot  to  the  mortar 
battery  and  magazine  in  the  fifth  parallel.  Built  traverses  in  the 
approach  in  advance  of  the  fifth  parallel. 

The  sap  was  started  at  7 o’clock  this  evening  by  Captain  Walker. 
He  reports : 

I have  started  the  sap  in  the  new  direction  (deflecting  110  degrees  from  the  last 
approach),  and  succeeded  in  putting  in  about  14  feet,  when  I was  relieved.  Not 
more  than  ten  shovels  full  of  earth  had  been  thrown  before  the  enemy  opened  fire, 
making  the  place  a very  hot  one.  Two  lookouts  were  built  for  sharpshooters.  The 
fascine  parapet  on  the  beach  (on  the  right  of  this  line)  was  raised  three  fascines 
high,  and  at  the  base  laid  ten  fascines  wide.  It  will  require  six  more  fascines,  be- 
sides sand-bags,  to  finish  it. 

A Requa  battery  was  mounted  in  this  position. 

Thursday,  September  3. — The  sap  was  continued  to-day,  but  its 
progress  was  very  slow,  owing  to  the  enemy’s  artillery  fire,  and  that 
of  his  sharpshooters,  who  attained  a position  on  the  left  of  Wagner, 
which  nearly  enfiladed  the  trench. 

Captain  Suess  reports : 

I continued  to  work  on  the  new  sap  by  means  of  the  full  sap,  excepting  that  no 
sap-roller  was  used.  Up  to  4 p.  m.  18  feet  had  been  executed,  while  the  greater  part 
of  the  whole  line  had  been  provided  with  a sand-bag  banquette  and  revetting.  At 
this  time  I was  disabled  by  a rifle-shot  from  Fort  Wagner,  and  had  to  quit  the  place. 

This  shot  came  from  one  of  the  enemy’s  sharpshooters,  and  cut  off 
all  the  fingers  from  the  captain’s  right  hand,  as  he  was  in  the  act  of 
placing  a gabion. 

The  head  of  the  sap  is  now  at  the  narrowest  development  (25  yards) 
and  least  depth  of  earth  (average  of  2 feet)  encountered  in  the  whole 
line  of  approaches.  The  enemy  concentrate  a heavy  fire  of  artil- 
lery and  musketry  on  it  at  the  short  ranges  of  from  100  to  300  yards. 
Destructive  torpedoes,  having  a delicate  explosive  apparatus,  are 
thickly  planted  in  the  path. 

Began,  to-day,  the  construction  of  additional  mortar  platforms* 
in  the  fifth  parallel.  Made  a position  on  the  left  of  the  second  par- 
allel for  the  calcium  light  to  be  used  against  Wagner. 

The  One  hundredth  New  York  Volunteers,  Colonel  Dandy  com- 
manding, Eighty-fifth  Pennsylvania  Volunteers,  Lieutenant-Colo- 
nel Purviance,  recently  commanding,  and  Third  New  Hampshire 
Volunteers,  Capta:  Randlett  commanding,  comprising  the  three 

"Qee  Note  11,  p.  319. 


[Chap.  XL. 


300  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

regiments  of  volunteer  infantry  detailed  on  the  19th  ultimo  as  the 
guard  of  the  advanced  trenches,  were  to-day  relieved  from  this  re- 
sponsible and  hazardous  duty.  Their  aggregate  number  of  casual- 
ties in  this  brief  period  is  105,  or  10  per  cent,  of  the  whole  force.* 
Four-fifths  were  caused  by  the  enemy’s  artillery  fire.  Captain 
Randlett  was  conspicuously  efficient.  The  engineers  will  long  re- 
member these  regiments  as  their  special  guard  during  the  most 
critical  part  of  the  siege;  also  for  their  assistance  in  the  sap,  at  which 
work  a detail  was  constantly  employed. 

Friday,  September  4. — Captain  Walker  reports  : 

During  my  tour  of  duty  this  morning,  the  sap  was  run  25  feet,  when  the  enemy 
opened  upon  us  a very  heavy  fire  of  artillery,  compelling  us  to  stop  the  advance 
and  strengthen  that  which  had  already  been  built.  The  parapet  proved  able  to 
withstand  the  fire,  but  it  was  pretty  well  knocked  out  of  shape. 

Emplacements  were  prepared  on  the  right  of  the  third  parallel  for 
two  10-inch  siege  mortars,  which  were  soon  afterward  mounted  there. 
Magazine  material  for  10-inch  mortars  was  brought  to  the  fifth 
parallel.  Other  work  in  progress  as  yesterday. 

The  parapet  of  the  boyau  built  immediately  in  rear  of  the  fifth 
parallel  formed  parades  for  the  parallel  itself,  thus  protecting  it 
from  our  own  shells.  A boat  expedition  was  sent  against  Battery 
Gregg,  which  was  unsuccessful. 

Saturday,  September  5. — This  morning  the  long-expected,  and,  by 
the  sappers,  anxiously  hoped  for,  bombardment  of  Wagner  by  all 
the  lancl  batteries  and  the  Ironsides  began,  and  with  it  ended  all  the 
difficulties  in  sapping  against  the  work,  for  the  enemy’s  fire,  sharp- 
shooters and  all,  is  completely  subdued,  and  his  distant  batteries  dare 
not  fire  at  our  advance  for  fear  of  injuring  their  friends  in  the  fort. 

In  the  past  two  and  one-half  days,  at  considerable  sacrifice,  not 
more  than  25  yards  of  sap  f have  been  executed,  and  it,  from  its  di- 
rection, brought  us  no  nearer  the  fort.  To-day  more  than  150  yards, 
most  of  it  by  the  flying  sap,f  have  been  built  without  loss  of  life. 
The  head  of  the  sap  is  now  opposite  the  ditch  of  Wagner  ; from  it 
fragments  of  shell  can  be  easily  thrown  by  hand  into  the  work. 

The  trace  of  the  approach  executed  to-day  is  a succession  of  short 
zigzags  made  necessary  by  the  narrow  front.  Captain  Walker  was 
in  charge  of  this  work. 

Magazine  for  the  10-inch  mortars,  in  the  fifth  parallel,  is  completed 
and  in  use.  Fascines  were  carried  forward  for  use  in  the  seaward 
parapet  in  advance  of  the  fifth  parallel. 

During  the  past  two  days,  by  order  of  the  general  commanding,  I 
have  examined  several  prisoners,  and  have  from  them  obtained  ad- 
ditional information,  which  enabled  me  to  draw  a plan  of  Wagner, 
which  was  afterward  found  to  contain  no  material  error.  At  the 
request  of  General  Terry,  20  copies  were  furnished  for  the  officers 
who  were  to  go  in  the  assaulting  column  of  the  7th  instant. 

Sunday,  September  6. — I reported  for  duty  last  night,  and  was  as- 
signed this  morning  to  my  original  work,  by  order  of  the  general 
commanding. 

The  sap  is  progressing  to-day.  One  branch  is  to  pass  to  the  left 
and  the  other  to  the  right  of  the  bastion  of  the  fort,  thus  enveloping  it. 

To-day,  as  yesterday,  men  are  constantly  exposing  themselves 
above  the  parapets  without  drawing  any  fire  from  the  enemy.  In- 
deed, in  the  extreme  front,  there  is  no  dange^  *epting  from  our  own 


*See  Note  18,  p.  326. 


Note  13,  p.  323. 


Chap.  XL.] 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 


301 


fire.  Fragments  of  our  own  shell  fly  back  to  our  trench,  in  one  case 
inflicting  a severe  wound.  The  fort  is  as  silent  as  a natural  sand 
bank,  which,  indeed,  it  much  resembles.  All  the  outside  revetments 
of  the  work,  its  lines  and  surfaces,  are  destroyed  by  our  fire.  It 
looms  over  the  head  of  the  sap,  a huge,  shapeless  sand  bluff. 

The  firing  of  the  Ironsides  is  excellent.  A United  States  flag  is 
kept  constantly  at  the  head  of  the  sap,  that  she  may  direct  her  fire 
so  as  not  to  endanger  us.  Her  shell  strike  the  sea  face  of  the  work 
just  in  advance  of  the  flag,  ricochet  over  the  parapet,  fall,  explode 
very  regularly,  and  search  every  part  of  the  work  that  can  possibly 
be  reached  by  a mortar  fire. 

Standing  between  the  fires,  and  within  a few  yards  of  the  point  of 
striking,  the  opportunity  to  observe  the  effect,  in  the  sand,  of  these 
huge  shells  from  the  smooth-bore  guns  of  the  navy  and  the  rifles  of 
the  army  was  perfect.  The  ricochet  of  the  former  was  Uniform,  and 
landed  nearly  every  one  in  the  fort.  That  of  the  latter  was  irregu- 
lar ; most  of  them  exploded  when  they  struck,  throwing  up  a great 
quantity  of  sand,  which  falls  back  in  its  place ; hence  inflicting  no 
injury  save  what  may  come  from  the  heavy  jar. 

The  right  branch  of  the  sap  has  for  some  time  passed  the  zone  of 
torpedoes  ; * none  were  found  between  the  sea  face  and  the  beach,  but 
the  plungers  of  a number  can  be  seen  in  front  of  the  south  face  of 
the  work  on  our  left. 

In  compliance  with  official  instructions,  the  trenches  have  been 
widened  and  cleaned  out,  the  reversed  side  and  parapets  sloped  and 
formed  into  steps,  and  in  every  way  fitted  to  hold  the  greatest  num- 
ber of  troops,  and  to  *bave  the  egress  the  easiest  possible,  prepara- 
tory to  the  assault  which  is  ordered  to  take  place  at  low  tide  to-mor- 
row morning.  This  work,  which  was  continued  into  the  night,  was 
in  charge  of  Lieutenants  Farr  and  and  Adams. 

Lieutenant  McGuire  had  charge  of  the  sap  a portion  of  the  day. 
He  reports  : 

One  sapper  of  the  engineers  was  killed  and  3 infantry  wounded  by  the  explosion 
of  a torpedo. 

The  whole  of  the  superior  and  the  upper  portion  of  the  exterior 
slopes  of  the  south  face  of  Wagner  were  plainly  seen  this  night  from 
the  effect  of  the  calcium  light  stationed  at  the  left  of  the  second 
parallel.  The  enemy’s  sharpshooters  fired  scattering  shots,  which  is 
unusual  for  the  night  time.  They  also  fired  1 mortar  shell.  Our 
sharpshooters  replied  with  occasional  shots,  and  our  mortars  fired 
on  the  fort  regularly  but  slowly. 

The  sap  was  this  night  in  charge  of  Captain  Walker,  assisted  by 
Captain  Pratt.  The  former  reports  : 

During  this  night  a branch  of  the  sap  was  run  to  the  ditch  of  the  fort,  striking  it 
at  the  salient  angle.  The  right  branch  was  run  parallel  with  the  sea  face  of  the 
fort,  and  nearly  to  the  ditch  of  the  sea  flank  in  that  direction.  About  10  o’clock  I 
passed  over  into  the  ditch  of  the  fort,  and  examined  it  from  the  flanking  guns  on 
the  sea  flank  to  the  flanking  guns  on  the  south  front,  for  the  purpose  of  giving  ac- 
curate information  to  our  storming  party.  I found  on  the  sea  face  of  the  fort  a 
formidable  obstruction,  in  the  shape  of  a fraise  of  sharp-pointed  stakes,  firmly 
planted  in  the  counterscarp  of  the  ditch,  and  presenting  their  points  about  2 feet 
below  the  crest.  Between  the  stakes  a spear,  or  boarding-pike,  was  placed,  evi- 
dently with  the  intention  of  impaling  our  men  upon  their  points.  These  spears  I 
pulled  out,  and  laid  in  the  bottom  of  the  ditch,  to  the  number,  I should  say,  of  two 
hundred.  I then  run  a flying  sap  along  the  crest  of  the  glacis,  throwing  the  earth 
level  with  the  points  of  the  fraise,  thus  providing  means  for  the  storming  party  to 
pass  over  them. 


See  Note  5,  p.  310. 


302  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

Before  the  above-described  operations  were  completed,  a deserter 
came  inside  onr  lines,  and  reported  “Fort  Wagner  evacuated,”  the 
evacuation  having  taken  place  before  midnight.  Possession  was 
taken  of  it  and  of  the  whole  island,  including  Battery  Gregg,  before 
daylight  of  September  7. 

In  this  bombardment,  which  lasted  forty-two  hours,  four  distinct 
lines  of  batteries  were  used,  each  firing  over  those  in  advance  of  it. 
Mortars  were  fired  from  the  fifth,  third,  and  first  parallels,  and  heavy 
rifled  guns  from  the  second  parallel  and  left  batteries.  The  practi- 
cability of  this  method  of  using  guns,  into  which  we  were  forced  by 
our  narrow  front,  was  demonstrated. 

Some  valuable  lives  were  lost  from  the  effect  of  our  own  shell, 
which  exploded  prematurely,  but  no  such  demoralizing  and  damag- 
ing effect  on  the  troops  in  the  advance  was  experienced  as  had  been 
anticipated  by  some. 

Monday,  September  7. — The  following  injuries,  inflicted  on  Fort 
Wagner  by  the  artillery  fire  of  the  past  two  days,  were  observed  this 
morning : 

Of  the  sixteen  pieces  of  ordnance  in  position  which  constituted  the 
armament  of  the  fort  when  it  was  taken,  and  in  which  there  had 
probably  been  no  change  during  the  bombardment,  only  three  were 
wholly  disabled  and  unserviceable  ■ this,  after  forty  hours’  bombard- 
ment, at  short  range,  by  an  army'  and  navy  supplied  with  the  best 
heavy  guns  in  our  service,  manned  by  experienced  artillerists,  and 
during  which  the  army  alone  threw  over  3,000  projectiles  at  the 
work.  Only  a part  of  these  were  directed  at  the  guns  of  the  fort. 

The  most  serious  injury  to  the  material  of  Ifort  Wagner  was  in- 
flicted on  the  most  southerly  of  the  sea-face  traverses,  in  which  was 
situated  a bomb-proof  shelter.  A timber  forming  the  south  upper 
corner  of  the  sheathing  of  this  bomb-proof  shelter  was  struck  by  a 
shot  from  the  land  batteries,  and  considerably  splintered.  To  reach 
this  timber,  at  least  10  feet  of  sand  had  been  penetrated  or  removed 
by  successive  shots.  It  should  be  remarked  that  this  bomb-proof 
shelter,  as  originally  constructed,  was  open  at  its  south  end,  forming, 
with  the  similar  passage-ways  through  the  other  traverses,  a free 
straight  communication  between  the  bomb-proof  shelter  and  the  sea 
face  of  the  work  throughout  their  length. 

This  passage-way  was  probably  closed  up  after  our  lodgment  on 
Morris  Island,  by  the  traverse  which  we  found  at  its  south  end,  to 
protect  it  from  an  enfilading  fire ; hence  may  not  have  been  as 
well  built  as  the  rest  of  the  fort. 

Considerable  earth,  which  covered  the  south  end  of  the  main  bomb- 
proof shelter,  and  the  magazine  just  east  of  it,  was  removed  by  our 
fire.  About  7 feet  was  left,  however,  which  was  enough  to  make 
both  structures  secure  against  a much  longer  continued  fire. 

The  other  injuries  to  the  work  may  be  briefly  enumerated  thus : 
The  regularity  of  all  the  lines  and  surfaces  of  the  exposed  parts  was 
more  or  less  destroyed,  the  superior  slope  of  the  south  face  being 
least  injured.  The  banquette  tread  and  breast-height  revetting  of 
the  north  and  west  faces,  which  were  taken  in  reverse  by  our  fire, 
were  so  completely  destroyed  that  these  parapets  afforded  no  ad- 
vantages over  a natural  sand  bank  for  musketry  defense.  The 
communication  between  the  sea  face  and  bomb-proof  shelter  was 
partially  filled  with  sand,  in  some  places  being  3 feet  deep,  but  it 
was  quite  passable.  The  wooden  banquette  tread  and  steps  leading 
to  it,  which  extended  along  the  south  face  of  the  work,  were  more 


Chap.  XL.]  OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C.  303 

than  half  destroyed  by  our  mortar  shells.  The  palmetto  logs,  which 
formed  the  revetting  of  the  embrasures  in  the  south  front  of  the 
work,  were  considerably  damaged,  and  would  have  required  repairs 
before  being  used. 

The  following  instructions,  given  by  Colonel  Turner,  chief  of 
artillery,  to  the  battery  commanders,  are  interesting,  in  connection 
with  the  above  record  of  injuries  inflicted  by  these  batteries  on  Fort 
Wagner  : 

1.  The  siege  mortars  were  ordered  to  distribute  their  fire  over  the 
whole  work,  exploding  their  shells  just  before  striking. 

2.  The  30-pounder  Parrott  rifles  were  ordered  to  destroy  the  shel- 
ters built  for  sharpshooters,  on  the  south  face  of  the  work. 

3.  The  heavy  guns  were  to  direct  most  of  their  fire  on  the  south 
end  of  the  bomb-proof  shelter,  with  the  intention  of  breaching  it 
below  its  superior  sheeting,  and  thus  to  enfilade  its  interior  with 
our  shells.  A portion  of  the  fire  of  the  heavy  rifled  guns  was  also 
directed  at  the  enemy’s  embrasure  guns. 

The  effect  of  the  navy  fire  was  the  same  as  the  siege  mortars. 

Engineering  improvements  were  commenced  this  morning  in  Fort 
Wagner,  and  the  removal  of  torpedoes  continued,  under  the  super- 
intendence of  Lieutenant  Wilcken,  who,  assisted  by  Corporals  [Carl] 
Beiter  and  [Peter]  Weimer,  Company  D,  New  York  Volunteer  En- 
gineers, has  disarmed,  in  all,  twenty-six  of  these  destructive  arrange- 
ments. 

I was  this  day  relieved  from  active  engineering  duties  in  the  field, 
by  order  of  the  general  commanding. 


NOTES  TO  MAJOR  BROOKS’  JOURNAL. 

Note  No.  1. 

Inclined  Palisading.  (See  Figs.  1,  2,  3,  and  4,  p.  305.) 

This  form  of  obstacle  was  chiefly  depended  upon  as  material  ob- 
struction in  front  of  both  defensive  lines  on  Morris  Island,  i.  e.,  the 
first  and  second  parallels.  Altogether  about  460  yards  were  set.  It 
was  chiefly  made  at  the  engineer  depot,  of  pine  saplings,  from  4 to  7 
inches  in  diameter,  which  had  been  gotten  out  for  bridge  material. 

The  panel  form,  which  was  found  to  be  a great  convenience  in 
transporting  and  setting  the  inclined  palisading,  most  of  which  had 
to  be  done  under  fire,  was  suggested  by  the  general  commanding. 

From  the  above  and  subsequent  experience  is  deduced  the  follow- 
ing : Each  panel  should  contain  four  or  five  poles,  according  to  the 
size  of  the  stuff  used,  care  being  taken  to  leave  no  opening  through 
which  a man’s  body  could  be  forced.  Round  poles  make  better  pali- 
sading than  split  ones.  If  the  former  are  used,  they  should  be  not 
less  than  4 nor  more  than  6 inches  in  diameter  at  the  large  end.  If 
split,  they  should  be  not  less  than  5 nor  more  than  8 inches  in  diam- 
eter at  the  large  end,  and  should  in  no  case  be  split  more  than  once. 
Two-inch  plank  may  be  used  for  cleats,  thereby  making  less  work 
than  split  stuff. 

Where  standing  pine  saplings  are  tolerably  abundant,  a detach- 
ment of  24  skillful  men  will  work  to  the  best  advantage  in  about  the 
following  proportions  : For  every  4 axmen  felling  and  splitting  tim- 


304  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

ber,  12  men  are  required  to  carry  the  stuff  an  average  distance  of  200 
yards  to  the  rendezvous,  4 men  to  saw  and  sharpen  it,  and  4 men  to 
make  the  panels  and  pile  them  up.  This  squad  will  make,  if  tasked, 
sixty  per  day,  which  equals  two  and  a half  per  man  employed.  They 
require  for  this  work  five  felling  axes,  two  hammer  hatchets,  and  a 
large  cross-cut  saw.  One  hundred  and  seventy-five  to  200  pounds  of 
5 or  6 inch  spikes  will  be  used  for  every  100  panels  made. 

Four  men  can  handle  a frame  readily,  even  when  the  stuff  is  green 
and  water-soaked.  Six  panels  made  a load  for  a four-horse  team. 
Two  hundred  men  carried  100  panels  300  yards,  dug  the  trench,  and 
set  them  in  three  hours.  Seventy-five  men  carried  40  panels  100 
yards,  dug  the  trench,  and  set  them  in  fifty  minutes.  Sixty  men 
carried  60  panels  50  yards,  dug  the  trench,  and  set  them  in  one  and 
a half  hours. 

When  made  of  split  stuff,  the  palisading  was  much  stronger  with 
the  bark  side  placed  up,  or  from  the  enemy. 

Toward  the  latter  part  of  the  siege,  this  obstacle  showed  consider- 
able injury  from  the  enemy’s  shot.  Repairs  were  made  by  placing 
abatis  in  the  openings  thus  formed. 

Note  No.  2. 

Wire  Entanglement.  (See  Map,  Plate  III.*) 

This  obstacle  was  made  by  setting  stout  stakes,  3-g-  feet  long,  2 feet 
in  the  ground  and  7 feet  apart,  in  quincunx  order,  and  in  three  lines. 
Around  the  top  of  these  stakes,  at  from  12  to  18  inches  from  the 
ground,  in  notches  prepared  to  receive  it,  No.  12  wire  was  securely 
and  tightly  wound,  and  extended  from  one  to  the  other. 


* To  appear  in  Atlas. 


Chap.  XL.] 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 


305 


306 


S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 


BOOM. 


Fie:.  5. 


PLAN. 


Scale  15  feet  to  1 inch. 


Chap.  XL.] 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 


307 


SEAWARD  DEFENSIVE  BARRICADE  AND 
SURF  BATTERY. 


Scale  of  Plan,  50  feet  to  l inch ; Scale  of  Sections,,  30  feet' to  l inch. 


Fig.  7. 


Fig.  8. 


HORIZONTAL  PROJECTION. 


Fig.  10. 


Fig.  9. 


SECTION  0.N  G H. 


Fig.  11. 


- . 

SECTION  ON  E F. 


REAR  ELEVATION. 


308  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

Each  outside  stake  had  five,  and  each  center  one,  four  wires  from 
it.  When  this  entanglement  was  placed  in  front  of  palisading,  wires 
were  crossed  from  it  to  the  stakes,  leaving  no  place  for  troops  to  form 
or  work  between  the  two. 

This  obstacle  was  rapidly  built,  and  but  little  injured  by  the  en- 
emy’s fire.  From  the  fact  that  our  own  men,  who  knew  of  its  ex- 
istence, were  often  thrown  down  by  it,  I judge  it  would  have  proved 
efficient  had  the  enemy  made  an  assault  on  our  works.  It  is  par- 
ticularly well  adapted  to  localities  like  this,  where  there  is  no  timber 
at  hand  for  other  obstacle. 

Note  No.  3. 

Booms.  (See  Fig.  5,  p.  306.) 

These  were  made  of  the  captured  12-inch  squared  timber  found  at 
the  lumber-yard.  Enough  pieces  to  reach  across  the  creek  were  con- 
nected in  the  manner  shown  in  the  figure. 

The  ends  of  the  boom  were  made  fast  in  the  bank  by  means  of 
chains  and  kedge  anchors,  the  anchors  being  buried  in  the  earth  and 
secured  by  pickets.  Bars  of  iron  spiked  on  the  sides  of  these  tim- 
bers would  have  increased  the  difficulty  of  cutting  the  boom.  This 
precaution  was  not  considered  necessary  in  our  defensive  lines,  on 
account  of  the  strong  fire  that  could  be  brought  on  each  boom. 

Note  No.  4. 

The  Seaward  Defensive  Barricade.  (See  Figs.  6,  7,  8,  9,  10, 

and  11,  p.  307.) 

This  structure,  forming  the  right  of  the  second  parallel,  extended 
across  the  beach  from  high  to  low  water  line.  It  is  built  of  piles 
and  cribbing,  and  has  proved  the  most  durable  defensive  field  work, 
exposed  to  the  action  of  the  waves,  yet  constructed  in  this  department. 

The  crib  work  was  of  round  timber,  from  6 to  12  inches  in  diam- 
eter, laid  on  the  surface  of  the  beach.  The  piles  were  7 inches  in 
diameter,  and  were  easily  worked  by  hand  into  the  quicksand  3 feet 
6 inches,  but  it  was  almost  impossible  to  force  them  any  deeper  by 
this  method.  Rope  lashings  were  chiefly  used  for  fastenings,  as  the 
noise  of  driving  spikes  was  found  to  attract  the  enemy’s  fire. 

The  barricade  consisted  of  34  yards  of  musketry  parapet,  on  each 
flank  of  which  was  a field  gun  battery.  That  on  the  right,  at  the  ex- 
treme low-water  line,  was  called  the  surf  battery,  and  was  arranged 
for  two  field  howitzers  ; that  on  the  left,  at  high-water  line,  was  first 
occupied  by  three  Requa  batteries,  and  afterward  by  boat  howitzers. 
The  total  length  of  the  structure  was  57  yards. 

A brief  description  of  the  surf  battery  will,  in  connection  with 
the  drawings,  explain  the  whole.  Its  foundation  was  a strong  crib, 
32  by  36  feet,  built  of  heavy  logs  fastened  together  with  ropes.  On 
this  was  spiked  a platform  of  heavy  plank,  30  feet  front  by  25  feet 
wide  at  the  bottom,  its  surface  just  above  the  highest  tides.  On  the 
front  of  this  platform  was  built  a sand-bag  parapet  11  feet  wide,  6^ 
feet  high,  and  having  a slope  of  1 to  3 inside  and  2 to  3 outside.  At 
each  flank  of  the  battery  was  built  a light  sand-bag  epaulement, 
containing  a recess  2 by  2 by  3 feet,  for  ammunition. 

The  surf  battery  was  provided  with  three  covered  embrasures  lined 
with  boiler  iron,  two  for  the  left  gun  and  one  for  the  right.  They 
were  so  arranged  as  to  flank  the  second  parallel,  and  defend  all  the 
ground  in  its  front  to  extreme  low  water. 


Chap.  XL.] 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 


309 


TORPEDO  (ENEMY’S). 


Fig.  12. 


ELEVATION. 

Scale  y20  of  Full  Size. 


Fig.  13. 


SECTION. 


310  S.  C.  AND  DA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

Note  No.  5. 

Torpedoes  (enemy’s).  (See  Figs.  12,  13,  14,  15,  and  16,  pp. 

309,  311.) 

More  than  60  torpedoes  were  found  planted  in  the  ground  in  front 
of  Fort  Wagner,  arranged  with  an  apparatus  intended  to  be  ex- 
ploded by  the  tread  of  the  men  forming  an  assaulting  column.  They 
must  have^  been  placed  subsequent  to  the  18th  of  July.  This  obsta- 
cle extended  along  the  whole  south  front  of  the  work,  from  the 
marsh  to  the  beach.  The  torpedoes  were  most  numerous  in  the  nar- 
row front  next  the  beach,  over  which  the  mass  of  an  assaulting 
column  would  have  to  pass.  The  first  ones  discovered  (August  26) 
were  200  yards  from  the  salient  of  the  fort. 

Three  forms  were  found.  The  first,  of  which  there  were  only 
about  20,  consisted  of  a loaded  24-pounder  shell.  In  its  fuse-hole 
was  firmly  fixed  a wooden  plug  having  a small  hole  through  it. 
Extending  into  the  powder  of  the  shell  through  this  hole  was  a fuse 
enlarged  at  its  upper  end  into  a ball  containing  the  explosive  com- 
position, which  rested  on  the  plug.  Over  all,  enveloping  the  shell, 
was  a cylindrical  box  of  thin  tin,  painted  black.  The  bottom  of 
this  box  rested  on  the  cap.  This  arrangement  thus  completed  was 
buried,  fuse-hole  up,  the  explosive  composition  being  even  with  the 
surface  of  the  ground.  A slight  pressure,  as  a footfall,  on  the  bot- 
tom of  the  box,  would  explode  the  shell. 

The  second  form  was  made  of  10-gallon  kegs,  the  ends  of  which 
were  extended  by  conical  additions,  giving  the  whole  the  form  shown 
in  Figs.  12  and  13. 

This  peculiar  shape,  being  the  same  possessed  by  several  floating 
torpedoes  which  were  found,  renders  it  probable  that  those  planted 
in  front  of  Fort  Wagner  were  originally  intended  to  be  used  against 
our  shipping. 

Figs.  12,  13,  14,  15,  and  16,  represent  the  torpedo  and  its  explo- 
sive apparatus  ; a a are  cast-iron  flanges  suited  to  the  curvature  of 
the  outside  of  the  keg  and  carrying  the  collars  b.  These  flanges  are 
fastened  to  the  wooden  staves  by  bolts  and  nuts,  as  represented.  The 
collars,  b,  are  tapped  ten  threads  to  the  inch,  to  receive  a hollow  plug, 
c,  into  which  is  slipped  the  plunger  d,  having  a projection  or  swell 
at  its  base,  e,  and  confined  in  the  bore  of  the  plug  to  prevent  its  fall- 
ing through.  Screwed  into  the  [lower  part  of  the]  plug  is  the  nip- 
ple /,  surmounted  by  a circular  piece  of  wood,  g.  Through  the  nipple 
and  wood  is  inserted  the  paper  tube  h,  containing  the  explosive  ma- 
terial. 

Water  is  excluded  from  around  the  plunger  by  the  stuffing-box 
nut  i,  and  from  the  junction  of  the  plug  c and  the  collar  b by  the 
leather  washer  k. 

The  small  hole  in  the  plunger  is  intended  for  the  insertion  of  a spike 
or  wire  to  keep  its  base  from  contact  with  the  fulminate  until  set  in 
the  ground. 

I is  a rectagular  piece  of  board,  its  ends  resting  on  the  ground  and 
plunger,  to  increase  the  chances  of  explosion.  In  place  of  this  board, 
a cap  having  three  arms  of  iron  (shown  in  Fig.  16)  was  in  a few  in- 
stances substituted ; stepping  on  one  of  the  arms  would  have  the 
same  effect  as  on  the  board. 

The  wooden  torpedoes  were  easily  rendered  harmless  by  pouring 


Chap.  XL.] 


311 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 


EXPLOSIVE  ARRANGEMENT. 


Fig.  14. 


ELEVATION. 


Fig.  15. 


SECTION. 


Scale  \i  of  full  size : 


Fig.  16. 


ARRANGEMENT  SOMETIMES  SUBSTITUTED  FOR  BOARD  l Fig,is. 


312 


S.  C.  AND  DA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  ELA. 


[Chap.  XL. 


water  into  the  powder  through  a small  anger-hole  bored  for  that 
purpose.  Over  30  were  removed  in  this  way. 

The#third  form,  of  which  hut  3 were  found,  consisted  of  1 large 
15-inch  navy  shell,  buried  like  the  small  shell  above  mentioned,  but 
having  the  metallic  explosive  apparatus  like  the  wooden  ones  above 
described. 

At  least  6 torpedoes  exploded  accidentally,  producing  about  twelve 
casualties. 


Note  No.  6 . 

Observations  concerning  the  Location,  Organization,  and 

Administration  of  an  Engineer  Depot,  or  Park,  from  ex- 
perience in  these  Siege  Operations. 

1.  An  engineer  depot  in  the  field  should  be  located  on  or  at  the 
termination  of  the  main  line  of  communication  of  the  army  with  its 
base  of  supplies,  and  should  be  provided  with  such  storehouses  or 
tents,  shops,  wharves,  &c.,  as  are  necessary.  If  not  within  an  ex- 
tended line  of  fortifications,  special  works  should  be  erected  for  its 
defense,  in  which  case  the  depot  detachment  would  form  a part  or 
the  whole  of  the  garrison  of  these  works. 

2.  The  duties  belonging  to  an  engineer  depot  are  to  obtain,  by 
requisition,  manufacture,  or  capture,  engineer  tools,  machines,  and 
materials ; to  preserve,  repair,  and  issue  the  same,  for  use  in  engi- 
neering operations.  It  is  related  to  these  operations  as  the  ordnance 
depot  is  to  those  of  the  artillery. 

3.  It  should  be  under  the  control  of  the  chief  engineer,  and  subject 
only  to  his  orders  and  those  of  the  general  commanding. 

The  commander  of  the  engineer  depot  and  his  assistants  should  be 
engineer  officers.  For  service  at  the  depot  should  be  a permanent 
detail  of  artificers  and  laborers,  a portion,  if  not  all,  being  engineer 
soldiers. 

4.  Stores  for  the  engineer  depot  are  obtained  by  requisition  on  the 
Chief  Engineer  of  the  XL  S.  Army,  at  Washington,  D.  C.  These 
requisitions  are  made  by  the  depot  cofrimander,  and  approved  by  the 
department  chief  engineer. 

At  the  engineer  depot,  or  under  its  control  at  other  more  suitable 
points,  the  manufacture  and  preparation  of  such  siege  material  as 
fascines,  gabions,  sap-rollers,  obstacle  and  shelter  material,  should 
be  constantly  in  progress. 

Sufficient  stores  should  be  kept  constantly  on  hand  to  meet  the 
probable  exigencies  of  the  service. 

In  those  emergencies  in  which  the  quartermaster’s  department 
have  to  turn  over  to  the  engineer  depot,  or  the  reverse,  tools  or  ma- 
terial, the  papers  accompanying  the  transfer  should  indicate  plainly 
the  use  to  which  such  stores  are  to  be  applied,  in  order  that  the  ac- 
counts of  these  two  departments  may  be  adjusted  at  Washington. 

The  engineer  depot  commander  should  have  funds  and  power  to 
purchase  such  stores  as  he  cannot  obtain  of  the  kind  required,  or 
with  sufficient  promptness,  from  other  sources. 

5.  The  books  and  files  of  the  t.igineer  depot  should  constantly 
show  the  amount  of  stores  on  hand  and  their  condition ; the  local- 
ities and  rates  at  which  the  different  kinds  of  engineer  material  are 
being  prepared  and  expended  ; the  accessible  localities  at  which  en- 


Chap.  XL.l 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 


313 


gineer  material  can  be  obtained  ; the  amount  of  stores  issued  to  each 
assistant  or  superintending  engineer  officer,  and  the  purposes  for 
which  they  have  been  used  ; the  amount  and  condition  of  the  engi- 
neer stores  at  each  of  the  service  or  branch  depots. 

Such  additional  books  as  are  retired  by  paragraph  1373,  Revised 
United  States  Army  Regulations,  must  be  kept. 

6.  The  requisitions  of  assistant  or  superintending  engineer  officers 
on  the  depot  commander  for  stores  should  express  definitely  the 
numbers,  quantity,  dimensions,  time  and  place  to  be  delivered,  and 
use,  and  are  filled  on  the  approval  of  the  chief  engineer. 

7.  The  depot  commander  should  expend  all  the  engineer  stores  used, 
lost,  or  destroyed  on  the  works,  which  are  issued  from  his  depot,  and 
make  proper  returns  for  the  same. 

8.  A certain  amount  of  transportation,  as  teams  and  boats,  should 
be  under  such  control  of  the  depot  commander  that  he  can  obtain  it 
at  any  moment,  night  or  day.  Ordinarily  the  transportation  of  en- 
gineer stores  issued  from  the  depot  will  be  under  the  control  of  its 
commander. 

9.  In  different  parts  of  the  works,  branch  or  service  depots  should 
be  established,  at  which  the  tools  and  material  of  a certain  portion 
of  the  field  of  active  operations  are  collected  when  not  in  use,  and 
inventoried,  and  where,  to  a limited  extent,  repairs  and  manufactur- 
ing may  be  done.  Service  depots  should  be  in  charge  of  details  from 
the  permanent  detachment  serving  at  the  depot.  The  chiefs  of  these 
small  depots  should  report  daily  to  the  depot  commander,  and  to  the 
engineer  officer  in  charge  of  the  works  in  which  their  depots  are  lo- 
cated, the  amount  and  condition  of  the  stores  on  hand.  At  least  one 
cart  for  gathering  and  distributing  tools  and  material  should  be 
stationed  at  each  branch  depot. 

Such  depots  were  established  during  the  siege  in  the  second  and 
fifth  parallels,  and  proved  exceedingly  useful. 

10.  In  the  operations  before  Sebastopol,  “nine  special  applica- 
tions of  steam-power,  to  facilitate  the  operations  of  the  siege,”  were 
made  by  the  English  army.  But  for  the  use  of  this  cheap  and  un- 
limited power,  immense  fatigue  details  must  have  been  made  from 
the  ranks  to  have  done  the  work ; in  consequence,  the  English  army 
would  have  been  proportionately  paralyzed,  and  unable  to  perform 
those  military  operations  which  can  only  be  done  by  men. 

In  the  siege  operations  herein  described,  steamers  were  used  for 
transportation  from  the  base  of  supplies.  Steam  saw-mill  sat  Hilton 
Head,  70  miles  distant  by  sea,  furnished,  after  great  delr.y,  a part  of 
the  lumber  used.  A steam  hoisting  apparatus  was  in  use  on  the 
wharf  at  Hilton  Head,  for  unloading  vessels,  and  a steam  floating 
derrick,  the  Dirrigo,  in  Light-House  Inlet,  for  the  same  purpose,  both 
of  which  proved  very  useful.  It  may  also  be  noted  here  that  a 
steam  pile-driver  was  used  in  the  construction  of  the  wharf  at  Hilton 
Head,  early  in  1862;  and  steam-condensing  machines  have  been  used, 
to  a considerable  extent,  for  making  fresh  from  salt  water. 

At  least  one  portable  steam  saw-mill  should  belong  to  an  engineer 
depot  supplying  material  for  a siege. 


i 


314  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

Note  No.  7 . 

List  of  the  various  kinds  of  Instruments,  Tools,  Materials, 
and  Machines  furnished  from  the  Engineer  Depot,  and 
employed  in  the  Siege  Operations  against  the  Defenses  of 
Charleston  Harbor,  1863. 


i.  instruments  and  stationery. 

Instruments. 


Compass,  prismatic. 
Drawing  instruments. 

Field  glass. 

Sextant,  pocket. 

Tape  lines. 

Telescope. 

Stationery. 

Drawing  paper. 

India  ink. 

Note-books. 

Ordinary  stationery. 
Tracing  cloth. 

W ater-colors. 

II.  TOOLS. 

Carpenters’ . 

Sets  of  axes,  broad. 

Sets  of  axes,  felling. 

Sets  of  ax-helves. 

Sets  of  adzes  and  handles. 
Sets  of  chalk. 

Sets  of  chalk  lines. 

Sets  of  hammers. 

Sets  of  hammer  hatchets. 

Sets  of  plumb-bobs. 

Sets  of  rules. 

Sets  of  saws,  hand. 

Sets  of  saws,  cross-cut. 
Sets  of  saws,  pit. 

Sets  of  spirit  levels. 

Sets  of  squares. 

Blacksmiths’. 

Sets  of  anvils. 

Sets  of  bellows. 

Sets  of  drills,  hand. 

Sets  of  drills,  ratchet. 
Sets  of  forge,  portable. 
Sets  of  sledges. 

Masons’  and  bricklayers’. 
Sets  of. 

Tinners’. 

Sets  of. 

Calkers’. 

Sets  of. 
Sailmakers’. 

Sets  of. 

Sappers’. 

Sapping  implements. 
Wheelivrights’. 

Sets  of. 


Chap.  XL.] 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 

Miscellaneous. 


315 


Crowbars. 

Files,  assorted  kinds  and  sizes. 
Gabion  knives. 

Grindstones. 

Handles,  assorted. 

Hatchets. 

Jack-screws, 

Kettles,  tar. 

Lanterns. 

Pickaxes  and  handles. 


Shovels. 

Spades. 

Spirit  levels. 

Tape  lines. 

Top  mauls  and  handles. 
Vises,  coachmakers’. 

Vises,  blacksmiths’. 

Vises,  carpenters’. 

Vises,  screws  and  nuts  for. 
Wheelbarrows. 


III.  MATERIALS. 

Siege  materials. 


Abatis  material. 
Fascines. 

Gabions,  iron  and  wood. 
Hides,  raw. 


Inclined  palisading,  panels. 
Sap-rollers. 

Sand-bags,  gunny  cloth. 
Stakes  or  pickets. 


Ironmongery. 


Anchors. 

Chains,  iron. 

Bolts,  screws. 

Copper,  sheet. 

Bolts,  ring. 

Emery  paper. 

Bolts,  eye. 

Grapnels. 

Bolts,  key,  and  keys. 

Hasps,  iron. 

Hinges,  iron  strap. 

Screws,  wood. 

Hinges,  butt. 

Staples,  iron. 

Iron,  bar. 

Spikes,  wrought. 

Iron,  rod. 

Spikes,  cut. 

Iron,  hoop. 

Soft  solder. 

Iron,  plate. 

Steel  bar,  square. 

Iron,  sheet. 

Steel  bar,  octagonal. 

Iron,  angle. 

Steel  bar,  round. 

Lead,  sheet. 

Steel  bar,  flat. 

Locks. 

Tacks,  iron. 

Locks,  padlocks,  with  extra  keys. 

Tacks,  copper. 

Mauls,  iron. 

Tin,  sheet. 

Fails,  cut. 

Wire,  iron. 

Fails,  wrought. 

Wire,  copper. 

Rivets,  iron. 

Wire,  steel. 

Sandpaper. 

Timber , plank , &c. 


Hemlock. 
Oak,  white. 
Oak,  red. 
Oak,  live. 


Canvas,  cotton. 

Cordage,  hemp,  plain. 
Cordage,  hemp,  tarred. 
Cordage,  manilla,  plain. 


Pine,  white. 

Pine,  yellow. 

Boards,  plank,  scantling,  joists, 
and  timbers. 


Cloth , ropes , &c. 


Cordage,  cotton  chalk  lines. 
Cotton,  in  bale. 

Marline. 

Twine,  sailmakers’,  cotton. 


316 


S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 


[Chap.  XL. 


Benzine. 

Chrome  yellow. 
Lamp-black. 
Lead,  red. 

Lead,  white. 

Oil,  linseed,  raw. 


Paints,  oils,  &c. 

Oil,  linseed;  boiled. 
Oil,  whale. 

Pitch. 

Spirits  of  turpentine. 
Tar. 


IV.  AUXILIARY  MACHINES. 


Floating  steam  derrick  and  steam  hoisting  apparatus  for  unloading 
vessels. 

Steam  saw-mills. 

Steam  pile-drivers. 

Steam  and  hand  pumps. 


V.  MISCELLANEOUS  ARTICLES. 


Buckets,  water,  wooden. 
Buckets,  water,  tin. 
Casks,  empty. 

Coal,  blacksmiths’. 

Coal,  anthracite. 

Fuse,  Gomez’s. 
Gutta-percha,  in  mass. 
Gutta-percha,  in  sheets. 
India-rubber  packing. 


Measures,  dry  and  wet,  sets  of. 
Oars. 

Oil-cans. 

Oil  squirts. 

Oakum. 

Paddles. 

Scales,  weighing. 

Tackle  blocks. 


Note  No.  8. 

Statement  of  the  quantities  of  the  most  important  items  of  engineer  material 
expended  in  the  siege  works  herein  described,  according  to  accounts  kept  at  the 
engineer  depot. 


Articles. 

Quantity. 

Remarks. 

Sand-bags  

46, 175 
12 

For  seaward  barricade,  &c. 

Do. 

Coils  of  rope  

Feet  of  loose  rope  

1,762 

Do. 

Fathoms  of  tar  marline 

400 

Feet  of  timber  joist  

4,510 

For  magazines  and  platforms, 
splinter-proof  shelters,  &c. 

Do. 

Feet  of  boards  and  planks 

12,382 

17 

Feet  of  mining  frames 

Not  used. 

Iron  gabions 

50 

For  embrasures. 

Wattle  gabions 

1,117 

Less  than  half  this  number  used. 

Sap-rollers  

Filled  with  fascines. 

Do 

3 

Filled  with  cotton. 

Fascines  (18  feet)  

26 

Loads  of  abatis  material  

45 

Pickets  (4  feet) 

200 

Bundles  of  stakes 

15 

For  fastening  hides. 

Pounds  of  nails 

86 

Pounds  of  spikes 

890 

Dozens  of  screws 

14 

Coils  of  wire 

13 

For  entanglement. 

Do. 

Feet  of  loose  wire  

890 

Bars  of  iron  

11 

Feet  of  chain  

94 

For  booms,  not  used. 

For  embrasure  linings. 

Do. 

Iron  plates  

14 

Raw  hides  

44 

Empty  casks 

4 

In  service  magazine. 

Chap.  XL.]  OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C.  317 

Note  No.  9. 

Preparation  or  Manufacture  of  Siege  Material. 

I.  Wooden  gabions,  fascines,  sap  fagots,  and  sap-rollers. 

From  August  11  to  September  9,  a detail  of  25  engineers  and  75 
infantry  made,  on  Folly  Island,  1,429  gabions,  3 feet  long  and  2 feet 
in  diameter  ; 11  sap- roller  gabions,  4 feet  in  diameter  and  from  7 to 
9 feet  long;  162  fascines,  9 inches  in  diameter  and  12,  16,  and  18  feet 
long  ; 302  sap  fagots,  9 inches  in  diameter  and  3 feet  long.  Not  more 
than  two-thirds  of  the  gabions  were  expended  in  the  siege. 

The  detachment  above  mentioned  was  subdivided  as  follows  : 

A gabion  party  consisted  of  2 engineers  and  4 infantry,  who  made, 
as  a stint,  7 gabions  per  day. 

A fascine  party  consisted  of  3 engineers  and  9 infantry,  who  made 
12  fascines  18  feet  long,  or  16  of  the  shorter  lengths,  or  24  sap  fagots, 
per  day. 

A sap-roller  party  consisted  of  2 engineers  and  8 infantry,  who 
made  2 sap-roller  gabions,  4 feet  in  diameter  and  7 or  9 feet  long,  in 
three  days. 

Each  squad  got  out  its  own  material,  which  was  tolerably  con- 
venient. 

The  engineers  only  were  instructed  in  the  duty. 

Twenty-eight  gabions,  or  from  8 to  12  fascines,  made  a load  for  a 
four-horse  team. 

II.  Iron  gabions  and  sap-rollers. 

For  each  iron  gabion  there  are  required  44  pounds  of  hoop  iron, 
.058  inch  thick,  and  No.  17  wire  gauge  ; thirty  iron  rivets,  flat- 
headed, 18  inches  in  diameter,  and  No.  7 wire  gauge  ; 8.5  square  feet 
of  pine  boards  ; five  hours’  labor  of  1 skilled  man. 

This  estimate  of  the  amount  of  labor  required  presupposes  its  ap- 
plication in  the  most  advantageous  manner,  which  was  found  to  be 
as  follows,  the  working  party  consisting  of  10  men : 

Four  carpenters  to  prepare  the  stakes. 

Two  smiths  to  make  the  hoops. 

Four  artificers  to  assemble  the  gabion. 

The  dimensions  of  the  web  are  6.84  feet  long  by  3 feet  wide.  The 
stakes  project  from  the  gabion  3 inches,  making  its  total  height  3.25 
feet,  its  diameter  being  2 feet.  The  average  weight  of  iron  gabions 
is  60  pounds.  If  the  hoop  iron  be  of  uniform  thickness,  its  width 
will  not  affect  the  quantity  required.  That  used  in  the  siege  was 
from  1 to  1.5  inches  wide. 

The  approximate  cost  of  the  material  for  an  iron  gabion,  at  present 
prices  (iron  7 cents  per  pound  and  boards  7 cents  per  foot),  is  $4. 

Material  required  for  a sap-roller  9 feet  long  and  4 feet  in  diame- 
ter, made  with  an  iron  gabion  and  fascines,  being  the  kind  chiefly 
used  in  the  approaches  against  Fort  Wagner  : 

Two  hundred  and  seventy-nine  pounds  of  hoop  iron,  .058  inch 
thick,  No.  17  wire  gauge. 

One  hundred  and  thirty  iron  rivets,  flat-headed,  No.  7 iron  gauge. 

Fourteen  stakes,  3 by  1 inches,  and  9 feet  long,  weighing  14  pounds 
each. 

Twenty  fascines,  9 feet  long  and  9 inches  in  diameter,  weighing  83 
pounds  each. 

And  a sufficient  number  of  wedges  to  fasten  them. 

Total  approximate  weight  of  sap-roller,  2,200  pounds. 


318  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

Note  No.  10. 

Sand-Bags. 

In  the  siege  operations  herein  considered,  filled  sand-bags  have 
been  used  for  the  following  purposes  : Revetting  parapets  and  em- 
brasures, forming  loop-holes  for  sharpshooters,  filling  gabions, 
foundations  for  mortar  platforms,  coverings  for  splinter-proofs  and 
magazines,  and  making  banquette  treads  and  traverses.  The  bags 
have  also  been  used  for  transporting  sand  and  shell  by  hand. 

It  is  hard  to  conceive  how  this  siege  could  have  been  conducted 
without  sand-bags.  Forty-six  thousand  one  hundred  and  seventy- 
five,  according  to  the  account  kept  at  the  engineer  depot,  have  been 
expended  on  the  portion  of  the  work  herein  described. 

In  the  construction  of  the  batteries  against  Fort  Pulaski,  which 
were  also  built  of  sand,  but  few  sand-bags  were  used.  Only  a small 
portion  of  that  work,  however,  was  executed  under  fire. 

The  material  of  the  bags  here  used  was  a good  quality  of  gunny 
cloth,  although  rather  light  for  some  of  the  purposes  for  which  the 
bags  were  used.  They  were  sewed  with  cotton  twine.  The  first  lot 
furnished  had  the  chain-stitch  ; the  later  ones,  the  lock-stitch.  The 
latter  is  far  the  best.  Each  bag  contains  .63  of  a square  yard  of 
cloth,  and,  when  finished,  weighs  6-g-  ounces. 

The  dimensions  of  the  filled  sand-bags,  when  laid,  varied  from 
6 by  10  by  24  inches  to  5^by  11  by  23  inches,  and  contained  .85  of  a 
cubic  foot  of  damp  sand,  weighing  about  85  pounds ; hence  32  to  the 
cubic  yard. 

The  bags  were  always  laid  as  headers  and  stretchers,  and  usually 
in  the  English  or  Flemish  bond. 

Our  experience  proves  that  sand-bags  which  are  tied  before  being 
laid  should  not  be  more  than  three-fourths  filled.  If  full,  they  do 
not  lay  as  well,  and  are  more  liable  to  burst  on  becoming  wet  or 
under  great  pressure.  It  is  more  rapid,  but  less  economical,  not  to 
tie  the  bags  at  all,  but  give  the  throat  a twist,  and  turn  it  under  the 
end  of  the  bag  as  each  is  laid. 

Sand-bag  revetting  requires  less  anchoring  to  make  it  stand  than 
any  other.  Of  the  revetting  herein  described,  only  that  of  the 
heavy  guns  was  anchored  by  means  of  wires  and  pickets.  Scarcely 
any  of  the  portions  not  anchored  failed  for  want  of  it.  In  the  siege 
of  Fort  Pulaski,  much  of  the  hurdle  and  fascine  revetting  gave  out 
because  not  properly  anchored.  If  the  sand-bag  revetting  of  a bat- 
tery which  is  being  fought  is  kept  wet,  the  sand  will  not  so  readily 
escape  through  the  rents  in  the  bags,  nor  will  the  bags  burn.  But 
this  dampness  hastens  their  decay. 

At  the  end  of  two  months  the  sand-bags  used  in  revetting  the 
siege  works  herein  described  began  to  show  signs  of  decay ; but  with 
careful  usage,  under  favorable  circumstances,  sand-bags  might  not 
require  replacing  in  twice  the  above  time. 

Abrasion,  the  result  of  serving  guns,  and  from  other  causes,  made 
holes  in  the  bags,  which  allowed  the  dry  sand  to  escape,  thus  de- 
stroying the  revetting.  When  the  interior  space  would  admit,  sand- 
bag revetting  which  had  thus  failed  was  repaired  by  facing  it  with 
a sod  wall. 


Chap.  XL.]  OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C.  319 

Note  No.  11. 

Mortar  Platforms. 

The  siege  mortar  platforms  of  Batteries  O’Rorke  and  Weed,  used 
in  the  first  bombardment  of  Fort  Wagner,  and  those  of  Battery 
Totten,  used  in  the  bombardment  of  Fort  Pulaski,  April  10  and  12, 
1862,  all  showed  evidences  of  failing,  and  required  important  repairs 
after  a few  hours’  firing.  These  platforms  were  made  of  the  deck 
plank,  9 feet  long  by  5 inches  by  3-J  inches,  furnished  by  the  U.  S. 
Ordnance  Department,  and  were  put  down  in  conformity  with  the 
rules  for  laying  these  platforms,  given  in  Heavy  Artillery  Tactics, 
pages  91  and  92,  modified  slightly  by  circumstances  uncontrollable 
in  field  operations. 

I sought  a mortar  platform  for  direct  firing  ^hich  should  be  more 
durable  than  the  above  noted,  and  such  that  there  could  be  used  in 
its  construction  the  heavy  squared  timber  and  plank  captured  on 
Morris  Island.  The  simple  one  shown  in  Fig.  18  [p.  320]  was  made' 
and  put  down  for  the  10-inch  siege  mortars  in  Battery  Weed,  and  a 
similar  one  for  the  8-inch  mortar  of  Battery  Reynolds,  July  21,  the 
only  difference  being  in  the  width  from  center  to  center  of  the  rails  ; 
in  the  10-inch  it  is  28  inches,  in  the  8-inch  22  inches.  The  material 
was  yellow  pine.  The  2-inch  plank  forming  the  foundation  were 
thoroughly  spiked  fast  to  the  rails.  The  platform  is  bedded  with 
the  vertical  plank  to  the  rear,  and  buried  so  that  the  upper  surface 
of  the  rails  is  level  with  the  terre-plein  of  the  battery.  No  pickets 
were  driven  to  stay  it. 

These  platforms  were  used  throughout  the  siege,  with  very  slight 
repairs.  Those  for  the  8-inch  mortars  were  moved  with  the  pieces 
from  the  first  to  the  third,  thence  to  the  fifth,  parallel.  More  than 
500  rounds  were  fired  from  each,  at  ranges  of  from  200  to  1,300  yards. 

Fig.  19  [p.  320]  represents  the  platforms  laid  for  the  10-inch  sea- 
coast  mortars  of  the  battery  at  the  Beacon  House,  never  used.  If 
the  decking  in  this  last  plan  had  been  extended  over  the  whole 
platform,  a mortar  could  be  fired  in  any  direction  from  it.  In  a 
similar  manner,  i.  e. , by  means  of  a decking,  the  rail  siege  platforms 
above  described  could  be  prepared  for  general  firing. 

The  following  rules  relating  to- the  construction  and  use  of  mortar 
platforms  embody  many  of  the  facts  observed  in  the  siege  of  Fort 
Pulaski  and  Wagner,  the  supporting  earth  being  a fine  quartz  sand. 

1.  It  is  indispensable  that  the  parts  comprising  the  platforms  be 
thoroughly  fastened  together  by  means  of  joints  and  spikes  or  screw 
bolts.  The  latter  should  be  used  for  very  long  ranges. 

2.  The  plan  of  the  platform  may  be  varied  somewhat  to  suit  tho 
material  at  hand,  the  amount,  range,  and  direction  of  the  fire.  Large 
constituent  pieces  are  best.  For  siege  mortars,  a platform  contain- 
ing 20  cubic  feet  of  lumber,  and  having  a bearing  on  the  ground  of 
36  square  feet,  is  safe  for  average  circumstances.  Thirty  cubic  feet 
and  54  square  feet  would  be  correspondingly  safe  for  seacoast  mor- 
tars. For  direct  firing  the  platforms  should  be  longest  in  the  direc- 
tion of  the  line  of  fire. 

3.  Pickets  driven  about  platforms  will  not  prevent  them  from 
being  forced  to  the  rear  by  long-continued  firing. 

4.  The  greater  the  weight  of  the  mortar  in  proportion  to  the  weight 
of  its  shell,  the  less  the  injury  to  the  platforms ; hence  the  new 
pattern  mortars  are  least  destructive. 


320 


S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 


[Chap.  XL. 


MORTAR  PLATFORMS, 


SIEGE  MORTAR  PLATFORM.. 

BILL  OF  MATERIAL  USED. 


2 Timbers  6/2 ft.  Long,  12  in.  by  12  in. 
7 Plank  6Mi  Long,  12  in.  by  2 in. 
70  6 inc.h  Spikes. 


Scale  5, feet  to  1 inch. 


Fig.  19. 


10  INCH  SEA  COAST  MORTAR  PLATFORM, 


BILL  OF  MATERIAL  USED. 

4 Timbers  6/2  ft.  Long,  12  in.  by  12  in. 
6'A  Plank  9 ft.  Long,  12  in.  by  2 in. 
6 Deck  Plank  3I/2  in.  by  5 in,  or 
2 Timbers  9 ft.  Long.  5 in.  by  10/2  in. 
16,  10  in.  and  104,  6 in.  Spikes. 


Chap.  XL.] 


321 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 


/ 


IRON  EMBRASURE  LINING. 


ISOMETRICAL  VIEW. 


Scale  2 feet  to  1 inch. 


FRONT  ELEVATION. 


REFERENCE. 

a.  Sole. 

b.  Cheeks. 

C.  Wings. 

d.  Hanging  Doors. 

e.  Sect  for  Ramer  Staff. 

/.  Eye  Bolt  for  insertion  of  Ramerv 
g.  h.,  Hinge  of  Door. 
i.  Angle  Iron. 

Tc.  Lever' for  Opening  Door.' 


21  R R — VOL  XXVIII,  PT  I 


322  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

5.  The  service  of  the  mortar  by  the  artillerist  has  much  to  do  with 
the  wear  of  platforms. 


Note  No.  12. 

Iron  Embrasure  Linings.  (See  Figs.  20,  21,  and  22,  p.  321). 

Gabions,  fascines,  and  hurdle  work,  when  used  for  revetting  the 
cheeks  of  embrasures,  were  found  to  leak  the  fine  dry  sand  used  in 
the  construction  of  our  works,  unless  filled  or  backed  with  sand- 
bags. This  remedy  adds  to  the  expense  and  labor,  and  is,  besides, 
not  very  durable.  Sods  suitable  for  revetting  are  very  scarce  on 
this  coast. 

Sand-bags  alone  lasted  a long  time  in  Battery  Hays,  but  its  guns 
were  fired  at  an  elevation  of  5°  and  upward.  These  high  elevations 
gave  a far  less  injurious  cone  of  blast  than  low  ones.  The  raw  hides 
used  for  lining  sand-bag  embrasures  were  soon  blown  out  (particu- 
larly by  the  Wiard  gun),  in  spite  of  our  efforts  to  make  them  fast  by 
means  of  notched  pickets. 

To  overcome  these  difficulties,  a boiler  or  sheet-iron  casing  or 
lining  was  made  from  iron  plates  obtained  from  the  wreck  of  an  iron 
ship  (a  blockade-runner)  which  came  ashore  at  Light-House  Inlet. 
The  splay,  the  dimensions  of  the  throat,  size  of  cheeks,  length  and 
inclination  of  sole,  and  thickness  of  plates  used,  were  varied  to  suit 
the  case.  For  direct  firing,  the  splay  may  be  25°,  or  even  less. 

To  set  the  casing,  the  genouillere  is  first  finished,  and  the  sole  of 
the  embrasure  given  its  proper  slope.  On  this  sole  is  placed  the  iron 
casing,  its  directrix  having  the  proper  direction.  Sand-bag  mer- 
lons were  built  on  each  side,  to  which  the  lining  was  anchored  by 
means  of  wires  and  crooked  iron  rods  which  were  made  fast  to  its 
cheeks  and  rings. 

The  plates  used  for  the  embrasure  casing  of  gun  No.  1,  Battery 
Rosecrans  (a  100-pounder  Parrott  rifle  fired  at  Sumter  with  an  eleva- 
tion of  9°  35'),  were  one-fourth  of  an  inch  thick,  and  weighed  10.4 
pounds  per  square  foot,  corresponding  with  No.  3,  Birmingham  wire 
gauge.  This  was  the  heaviest  iron  employed.  Of  the  eight  embra- 
sure casings  in  the  second  parallel,  the  above  mentioned  was  the  only 
one  used  against  Sumter,  and  the  only  one  supplied  with  a mantlet. 
This  mantlet  is  of  bullet-proof  iron  plate,  arranged  as  a hanging 
door,  which  closes  the  throat  of  the  embrasure.  In  this  door  is  a cut 
or  slot  for  the  double  purpose  of  allowing  the  rammer  and  sponge 
staves  to  pass  through  when  loading,  and  for  sighting  the  piece.  A 
small  scantling  of  hard  wood,  with  a rope  attached  to  its  upper  end, 
is  made  fast  to  one  side  of  the  door,  and  acts  as  a lever  to  raise  the 
door  when  the  gun  is  fired.  The  swing  bar  of  1-inch  round  iron, 
upon  which  the  hinges  of  the  door  are  hung,  has  a collar  at  each 
end,  to  enable  the  cheeks  of  the  carriage  to  resist  lateral  pressure. 
The  sole  was  given  a counter  slope  of  5°.  The  wings  prevent  the 
casing  from  being  carried  out  by  the  force  of  the  blast. 

The  cheeks  are  fastened  to  the  soles  and  the  wings  to  the  cheeks 
by  being  riveted  to  angle  iron. 

The  satisfactory  results  obtained  from  the  use  of  these  casings  in- 
dicates that  sheet  and  boiler  iron  should  form  part  of  the  siege  ma- 
terial furnished  for  military  operations  in  a sandy  country.  If  thick 
enough,  it  answers  well  for  mantlets.  All  plates  of  this  kind  are 
easily  converted  into  Sibley  stoves  for  the  use  of  an  army  in  winter 
quarters. 


Chap.  XL.]  OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C.  323 

Note  No.  13. 

Sapping. 

Seventeen  hundred  and  twenty-five  yards  of  approach,  including 
parallels  and  boyaus,  were  executed  in  advance  of  the  obstacle  of 
the  second  parallel,  all  of  which  may  be  considered  as  having  been 
exclusively  employed  against  Fort  Wagner.  Of  this,  about  1,250 
yards,  or  three-fourths  of  the  whole,  were  by  the  flying  sap,  in  only  75 
yards  of  which  were  gabions  used.  Over  600  yards  were  arranged  for 
musketry  defense ; the  banquette  slope  only,  however,  being  re- 
vetted. 

The  full  sap  proper  was  not  employed.  About  180  yards  were  ex- 
ecuted by  the  full  sap  without  revetting,  and  300  yards  by  the  half 
full  sap,  mostly  without  revetting.  The  full  sap  without  gabions 
was  advanced  at  the  rate  of  6 or  8 feet  per  hour  under  the  fire  of 
sharpshooters  and  distant  artillery.  The  artillery  fire  of  Fort  Wag- 
ner, when  directed  on  the  sap,  greatly  delayed,  and,  on  several  in- 
stances, stopped  its  progress. 

A sapping  brigade  consisted  of  8 artificers  and  2 non-commissioned 
officers  of  volunteer  engineers,  divided  into  two  squads,  who  alter- 
nated on  duty  at  the  head  of  the  sap.  All  assisted  in  moving  the 
sap-roller,  which  weighed  about  a ton. 

The  roller  was  moved  forward  a few  inches  at  a time,  the  interval 
being  closed  up  to  it  quickly  by  filling  the  gap  with  sand.  The  t rench 
was  dug  4 feet  wide  and  2 feet  deep,  with  no  berme.  The  tools  em- 
ployed were  one  common  short-handled  shovel  for  each  sapper,  two 
sap-hooks,  and  two  strong  levers  12  feet  long.  Axes  were  used  for 
removing  roots  and  timber. 

For  forming  the  top  of  the  parapet,  a drag  shovel,  made  by  bend- 
ing the  blade  of  a common  long-handled  shovel  at  right  angles,  was 
used. 

With  instructed  sappers,  better  tools,  and  light  gabions  (ours 
weighed  60  pounds),  the  full  sap  might  have  progressed  faster 
than  the  modified  form  used. 

Note  No.  14. 

Sharpshooters. 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 
Engineer’s  Office,  Morris  Island,  S.  C.,  August  2,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  Q.  A.  Gillmore, 

Commanding  Department  of  the  South: 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  concerning 
sharpshooters,  for  offensive  and  defensive  operations,  in  the  advanced 
works  under  my  charge: 

The  present  so-called  sharpshooters  are  inefficient.  First,  they  are 
not  good  shots ; second,  their  arms  are  not  in  good  condition  ; third, 
they  are  not  in  sufficient  numbers,  even  if  they  were  efficient ; fourth, 
they  are  not  properly  officered. 

. To  remedy  this,  I recommend  that  all  regimental  and  battalion 
commanders  of  this  command  be  ordered  to  report  with  their  arms, 
to  a suitable  officer  whom  you  may  designate,  8 per  cent,  of  the  line 
officers  and  2 per  cent,  of  the  rank  and  file  of  their  commands  who 


324  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

are  known  to  be  tbe  best  marksmen.  The  qualifications  of  these 
men  shall  then  be  tested  by  target  practice,  each  man  firing  at  least 
5 shots;  one-third  of  the  whole  number  being  the  best  marksmen  are 
then  selected  as  sharpshooters,  to  be  commanded  by  2 officers  selected 
from  the  number  reporting  as  being  the  best  shots.  These  men  to 
be  organized  into  a company,  encamped  by  themselves,  and  provided 
with  the  best  arms  that  can  be  procured. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

T.  B.  BROOKS, 

Captain , Aide-de-Camp,  and  Assistant  Engineer. 

This  communication  was  indorsed  : 

Referred  to  Brigadier-General  Terry,  who  will  make  arrangements  to  organize 
an  efficient  body  of  sharpshooters  (about  50  or  60).  Attention  should  be  given  to 
the  Ballard  rifles  in  Colonel  Montgomery’s  regiment,  and,  if  they  are  the  best  rifles, 
they  should  be  taken  for  this  purpose. 

A corps  of  sharpshooters  was  selected  by  the  test  of  markmanship, 
armed  with  the  Springfield  rifled  musket,  thoroughly  practiced,  and 
proved  themselves  efficient. 

T.  B.  BROOKS, 

Major , and  Aide-de-Camp. 

Note  No.  15. 

Penetration  of  Rifled  Musket-balls  into  various  kinds  of 

Siege  Materials,  ascertained  by  Practice  on  Morris 

Island. 

The  Sharps,  Enfield,  and  Spencer  rifles  were  used  at  distances  of 
from  10  to  15  yards. 


Penetration. 

In  dry  yellow  pine  . . inches. . 2f  to  3£ 

In  green  palmetto  do 7£  to  8£ 

In  a dry  fascine do 8i  to  9| 

In  dry  sand  contained  in  bags do.  . . . 6 to  7 

In  wet  sand  contained  in  bags do 7i  to  8£ 

In  loose  damp  sand do 8 to  14 

In  cotton  packed  in  sand-bags  by  hand do.  . . . 22 


One  cubic  foot  of  the  dry,  fine,  light-colored  quartz  sand  above  re- 
ferred to,  and  chiefly  used  in  the  construction  of  the  siege  works  on 
Morris  Island,  weighs  86  pounds.  It  will,  when  dry,,  absorb  about 
3 gallons  of  water  per  cubic  foot,  will  then  weigh  about  110  pounds, 
and  will  have  diminished  in  bulk  about  one-twentieth. 

T.  B.  BROOKS, 
Major,  and  Aide-de-camp. 

Note  No.  16. 

Billinghurst  and  Requa  Rifle  Battery. 

Five  Requa  rifle  batteries  were  constantly  used  as  defensive  guns 
of  position  in  the  siege  operations  under  my  direction.  As  they  con- 
stituted almost  the  only  artillery  directly  depended  on  for  the  de- 
fense of  the  advanced  trenches,  and  are  not  considered  as  coming 
within  the  artillery  or  ordnance  departments  of  the  siege  (this 
weapon  being  a new  one),  a somewhat  detailed  account  of  it  may  be 
considered  proper  here,  particularly  as  distinguished  officers  of  the 


Chap.  XL.] 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 


325 


army  and  navy  have  reported  favorably  concerning  it,  having  ob- 
served experimental  practice. 

From  these  reports  I extract  the  following  description  : This  rifle 
battery  is  a device  for  multiplying  and  accelerating  infantry  fire 
from  rifle  barrels,  and  appears  in  principle  to  be  a substitute  for  a 
6-pounder  field  gun  whenever  grape  and  canister  are  needed,  and,  to 
the  extent  of  its  range,  case  shot,  over  each  of  which  it  possesses 
greater  precision  and  much  less  liability  to  fail  in  producing  de- 
sirable results. 

It  consists  of  twenty-five  rifle  barrels,  each  24  inches  long,  ar- 
ranged upon  a horizontal  plane  and  held  in  position  upon  a light 
field  carriage  by  an  iron  frame.  Upon  this  frame,  in  the  rear  of  the 
barrels,  is  fitted  a sliding  bar,  worked  by  two  levers  (one  at  each 
side),  by  which  the  cartridges  are  forced  into  the  rear  of  the  cham- 
bers. By  a lever  under  the  frame,  the  barrels  may  be  diverged  so  as 
to  scatter  the  balls  120  yards  in  a distance  of  1,000.  The  weight  of 
the  battery,  complete,  is  1,382  pounds. 

When  served  by  3 men,  the  battery  is  readily  fired  7 volleys,  or 
175  shots,  per  minute.  It  did  not  foul.  Nine  degrees  elevation  gave 
a range  of  1,200  yards,  at  which  distance,  the  barrels  being  diverged, 
the  shot  scattered  into  an  effective  line.  Thirteen  hundred  yards  is 
probably  its  effective  range,  although  2,000  yards  is  claimed  for  it. 
The  axis  of  the  barrels  is  30  inches  above  the  plane  on  which  the 
piece  stands. 

During  the  siege,  four  emplacements  were  constructed  for  the 
Requa  rifle  batteries  in  the  first  parallel,  five  in  the  second,  two  in 
the  third,  five  in  the  fourth,  two  in  the  fifth,  and  one  in  advance  of 
it ; in  all,  nineteen  positions,  built  successively  as  the  approaches  ad- 
vanced. All  these  positions  were  occupied  for  a longer  or  shorter 
time  by  these  batteries.  They  were  located  on  the  flanks  or  in  the 
salient  angles  of  the  works.  About  one-third  were  in  embrasure. 
The  platforms  were  built  of  boards  8 feet  square,  well  nailed  to  five 
sills  of  same  material.  They  were  moved  forward  with  the  pieces. 
These  batteries  constituted,  up  to  the  23d  of  August,  the  only  artil- 
lery in  advance  of  the  second  parallel ; at  that  date  three  Coehorn 
mortars  were  moved  forward  into  the  fourth  parallel. 

On  several  occasions  these  batteries  were  used  against  the  enemy’s 
sharpshooters  and  working  parties,  apparently  with  good  effect.  On 
the  evening  of  August  25,  the  two  batteries  in  the  fourth  parallel 
took  an  active  part  in  a brisk  skirmish.  Three  infantrymen,  who 
were  not  thoroughly  drilled,  served  each  piece.  They  were  fired 
rapidly,  and  apparently  with  good  effect. 

Being  breech-loading,  and  easily  handled,  scarcely  any  exposure 
above  the  parapet  was  required  on  the  part  of  the  gunners.  But  one 
piece  was  disabled  during  the  siege,  and  it  was  quickly  repaired. 

Although  the  defensive  properties  of  the  Requa  rifle  batterv  were 
not  severely  tested  in  the  small  amount  of  service  above  recorded,  I 
feel  quite  satisfied  that  it  is  adapted  to  the  defense  of  earthworks, 
particularly  in  a flat  country  like  this,  where  the  horizontal  line  of 
dispersion  afforded  by  the  fire  of  this  piece  is  more  effective  than  the 
cone  of  dispersion  of  the  howitzer.  It  should  be  noticed  that  the 
angle  of  dispersion  can  be  varied  to  suit  the  case  in  this  battery, 
which  is  not  true  of  the  howitzer. 

These  properties,  together  with  its  small  recoil,  and  its  loading  at 
the  breach,  and  lightness,  are  the  qualities  most  desirable  in  a gun 
for  boat  service. 


[Chap.  XL. 


326  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

Note  No.  17. 

Broad  Wheel  Sling-Carts. 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

Morris  Island,  S.  C.,  July  22,  1863. 
Brig.  Gen.  Q.  A.  Gillmore, 

Commanding  Department : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  state  that  the  labor  of  transporting  heavy 
guns  in  this  department  would  be  greatly  diminished  by  the  use  of 
sling-carts  having  much  broader  tires  and  fellies  than  those  now 
furnished  by  the  Ordnance  Department.  The  roads  here  are  either 
sand  or  mud;  hence  the  utility  of  the  broad  wheel. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

T.  B.  BROOKS, 
Captain,  and  Aide-de-Camp. 

This  was  indorsed  by  General  Gillmore  : 

Approved,  and  strongly  recommended. 

And  sent  to  the  Ordnance  Department  by  Brig.  Gen.  T.  Seymour. 

T.  B.  BROOKS, 
Major,  and  Aide-de-Camp. 

Note  No.  18. 

Working  Parties,  and  Health  of  the  Troops. 

The  total  number  of  soldiers’  day’s  work  of  six  hours  each  expended 
in  the  execution  of  the  work  herein  described  is  23,500.  This  does 
not  include  about  3,900  days’ work  expended  at  the  engineer  depot 
and  elsewhere  in  the  preparation  of  material  employed  in  these  oper- 
ations, only  a small  portion  of  which  was  under  my  direction.  Of 
the  first  number,  5,500  were  by  the  New  York  Volunteer  Engineers, 
and  18,000  by  infantry  troops  from  various  regiments;  9,500,  or  more 
than  half  the  infantry,  were  furnished  from  colored  troops.  About 
two  hundred  and  twenty  tours  of  duty  were  performed  by  the  officers 
of  the  New  York  Volunteer  Engineers  in  the  direction  of  this  labor. 
The  day’s  work  of  the  infantry  soldier  above  mentioned  is  about  one- 
fifth  that  which  is  ordinarily  accomplished  by  a citizen  laborer  on 
civil  works. 

Over  eight-twentieths  of  the  labor  directed  by  me  was  expended 
in  the.  operations  against  Fort  Wagner,  about  seven-twentieths  in 
the  establishment  of  defensive  lines,  and  nearly  five-twentieths  in 
the  erection  of  batteries  against  Fort  Sumter. 

The. approximate  amount  of  labor  actually  expended  on  the  more 
important  works  is  as  follows  : 

Days. 

One  emplacement  for  a siege  piece 40 

One  emplacement  for  a heavy  breaching  gun 100 

One  bomb-proof  magazine 250 

Construction  and  repairs  of  each  yard  of  approach  having  splinter-proof  para- 
pet  2 

A linear  yard  of  narrow  splinter-proof . shelter. 4 

A linear  yard  of  wide  splinter-proof  shelter 8 

To  make  and  set  one  yard  of  inclined  palisading 2 


Chap.  XL.]  OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C.  327 

At  least  three-fourths  of  this  manual  labor  was  simply  shoveling 
sand  ; one-half  the  remainder  was  carrying  engineer  material.  The 
balance  was  employed  in  various  kinds  of  work. 

About  three-fourths  of  this  work  was  executed  during  the  night 
time,  and  at  least  nine-tenths  of  it  under  a fire  of  artillery  or  sharp- 
shooters, or  both.  The  sharpshooters  seldom  fired  during  the  night. 
The  artillery  fire  was  most  severe  during  the  day.  Thirty-five  pro- 
jectiles fired  by  the  enemy  at  our  works  per  hour  was  called  “ heavy 
firing,”  although  sometimes  more  than  double  that  number  were 
thrown. 

In  the  order  of  their  number,  the  projectiles  were  from  smooth- 
bore guns,  mortars,  and  rifled  guns. 

The  James  Island  batteries  were  from  2,000  to  4,000  yards  from 
our  works  ; Fort  Sumter  and  Battery  Gregg  were  respectively  about 
3,500  and  2,100  ; Fort  Wagner  was  from  1,300  to  100  yards. 

The  total  number  of  casualties  in  the  working  parties  and  the 
guard  of  the  advanced  trenches  (not  including  the  main  guard  of 
the  trenches)  during  the  siege,  was  about  150.  When  it  is  con- 
sidered that  on  an  average  over  200  men  were  constantly  engaged  in 
these  duties,  being  under  fire  for  nearly  fifty  days,  the  number  of 
casualties  is  astonishingly  small. 

The  camps  at  which  the  fatigue  parties  were  quartered  and  fed  were, 
in  order  to  be  beyond  the  reach  of  the  enemy’s  fires,  2 miles  from 
the  center  of  the  works  ; hence  the  distance  of  4 miles  had  to  be 
marched  each  tour  of  duty,  which  required  nearly  two  hours,  and 
added  greatly  to  the  labor  of  the  siege. 

This  siege  has  been  conducted  through  the  hottest  part  of  the 
season — July,  August,  and  September — yet  the  troops  have  suffered 
but  little  from  excessive  heat,  on  account  of  the  large  proportion  of 
night  work,  and  the  almost  constant  sea  breeze,  which  was  always 
cool  and  refreshing. 

The  amount  of  sickness  was  great,  the  large  amount  of  duty  being 
the  probable  cause.  On  the  7th  of  August  the  percentage  was  the 
smallest  observed  during  the  siege,  being  18.6.  At  this  date  the  ag- 
gregate garrison  of  Morris  Island  was  9,353,  of  which  1,741  were 
sick.  On  the  17th  of  August,  22.9  per  cent,  of  the  whole  garrison 
were  on  the  sick  list.  This  was  the  most  unhealthy  period  of  the 
siege. 

The  average  strength  of  the  command  on  Morris  Island  during  the 
siege  was,  of  all  arms,  10,678  men,  of  which  the  average  percentage 
sick  was  19.88.  The  number  of  black  troops  varied  from  1,127  to 
1,947. 


Average  percentage  of  sick  in  artillery 6.2 

Average  percentage  of  sick  in  engineers 11. 9 

Average  percentage  of  sick  in  black  infantry 13.9 

Average  percentage  of  sick  in  white  infantry  (excluding  one  brigade) 20. 1 


This  brigade  consisted  of  the  Ninety-seventh  Pennsylvania, 
Twenty-fourth  Massachusetts,  and  Tenth  Connecticut  Volunteers. 
It  averaged  32  per  cent.  sick.  This  was  due  to  the  fact  that  these 
three  regiments  had  been  stationed,  before  moving  to  Morris  Island, 
on  Seabrook  Island,  which  proved  very  unhealthy.  The  engineers 
and  black  infantry  were  employed  exclusively  on  fatigue  duty.  The 
white  infantry  served  as  guard  of  the  trenches,  as  well  as  for  work 
in  the  same. 

Details  from  the  troops  on  Folly  Island  took  part  in  the  opera- 
tions on  Morris  Island. 


328  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

It  was  found  by  experience  that  men  under  these  circumstances 
could  not  work  more  than  one-fourth  the  time.  A greater  amount 
at  once  increased  the  sick  list.  Eight  hours  in  thirty-two,  or  eight 
hours  on  and  twenty-four  off,  was  found  to  be  the  best  arrangement, 
as  it  made  a daily  change  in  the  hours  of  duty  for  those  regiments 
permanently  detailed  for  work. 

The  organization  found  most  advantageous  in  working  a command 
permanently  detailed  for  fatigue  duty,  was  to  divide  its  effective 
force  into  four  equal  detachments,  on  duty  eight  hours  each,  re- 
lieving each  other  at  4 a.  m. , 12  m.,  and  8 p.  m.  The  large  number 
of  extra  troops  employed  in  the  trenches  each  night  were  usually 
changed  daily. 

The  engineer  officers  in  charge  of  the  works  were  divided  into 
corresponding  groups,  four  in  each,  relieving  each  other  at  8 a.  m., 
4 p.  m.,  and  12  midnight,  four  hours  different  from  the  time  of  re- 
lieving the  troops.  This  difference  enabled  the  engineer  officer  to 
carry  the  work  through  the  period  of  relieving  the  fatigue  details. 

One  engineer  officer,  having  from  two  to  four  different  kinds  or 
jobs  of  work  to  superintend,  was  found  to  work  advantageously  in 
the  night,  with  the  help  of  non-commissioned  officers  of  engineers, 
from  100  to  200  men. 

The  working  parties  of  engineers  and  black  infantry  seldom  car- 
ried their  arms  into  the  trenches,  while  the  white  infantry  fatigue 
parties  usually  did. 


Note  No.  19. 

Colored  Troops  for  Work. 

Circular.]  Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

Engineer’s  Office , Morris  Island,  S.  C.,  September  10,  1863. 

As  the  important  experiment  which  will  test  the  fitness  of  the 
American  negro  for  the  duties  of  a soldier  is  now  being  tried,  it  is 
desirable  that  facts  bearing  on  the  question  be  carefully  obser\fed 
and  recorded. 

It  is  probable  that  in  no  military  operations  of  the  war  have  negro 
troops  done  so  large  a proportion,  and  so  important  and  hazardous, 
fatigue  duty,  as  in  the  siege  operations  on  this  island. 

As  you  have  directed  the  operations  of  working  parties  of  both 
white  and  black  troops  here,  I respectfully  ask,  for  the  object  above 
stated,  an  impartial  and  carefully  prepared  answer  to  the  following 
inquiries,  together  with  such  other  statements  as  you  choose  to  make 
bearing  on  the  question : 

I.  Courage,  as  indicated  by  their  behavior  under  fire. 

II.  Skill  and  appreciation  of  their  duties,  referring  to  the  quality 
of  the  work  performed. 

III.  Industry  and  perseverance,  with  reference  to  the  quantity  of 
the  work  performed. 

IV.  If  a certain  work  were  to  be  accomplished  in  the  least  possi- 
ble time,  i.  e. , when  enthusiasm  and  direct  personal  interest  are  neces- 
sary to  attain  the  end,  would  whites  or  blacks  answer  best  ? 

V.  What  is  the  difference,  considering  the  above  points,  between 
colored  troops  recruited  from  the  free  States  and  those  from  the  slave 
States  ? 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

T.  B.  BROOKS, 

Major,  Aide-de-Camp,  and  Assistant  Engineer . 


Chap.  XL.] 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 


329 


Six  replies  to  these  inquiries  were  received  from  engineer  officers 
who  had  been  engaged  in  the  siege,  the  substance  of  which  is  em- 
braced in  the  following  summary. 

Following  the  summary,  two  of  the  replies  are  given  in  full. 

1.  To  the  first  question,  all  answer  that  the  black  is  more  timorous 
than  the  white,  but  is  in  a corresponding  degree  more  docile  and 
obedient,  hence  more  completely  under  the  control  of  his  com- 
mander, and  much  more  influenced  by  his  example. 

2.  All  agree  that  the  black  is  less  skillful  than  the  white  soldier, 
but  still  enough  so  for  most  kinds  of  siege  work. 

3.  The  statements  unanimously  agree  that  the  black  will  do  a 
greater  amount  of  work  than  the  white  soldier,  because  he  labors 
more  constantly. 

4.  The  whites  are  decidedly  superior  in  enthusiasm.  The  blacks 
cannot  be  easily  hurried  in  their  work,  no  matter  what  the  emergency. 

5.  All  agree  that  the  colored  troops  recruited  from  free  States  are 
superior  to  those  recruited  from  slave  States. 

It  may  with  propriety  be  repeated  here,  that  the  average  percent- 
age of  sick  among  the  negro  troops  during  the  siege  was  13.9,  while 
that  of  the  white  infantry  was  20.1  per  cent.  (See  Note  18,  above.) 

The  percentage  of  tours  of  duty  performed  by  the  black,  as  com- 
pared with  the  White,  infantry,  was  as  56  to  41.  But  the  grand-guard 
duty,  which  was  considered  much  more  wearing  than  fatigue,  was 
all  done  by  the  whites. 

The  efficiency  and  health  of  a battalion  depends  so  much  upon  its 
officers,  that,  in  order  to  institute  a fair  comparison,  when  so  small 
a number  of  troops  are  considered,  this  element  should  be  eliminated. 
This  has  not,  however,  been  attempted  in  this  paper. 

ADDENDA. 

Morris  Island,  S.  C., 

September  11,  1863. 

Major  : In  answer  to  your  several  queries  as  per  circular  of  Sep- 
tember 10,  1863,  requesting  my  opinion  as  to  the  relative  merits  of 
white  and  black  troops  for  work  in  the  trenches,  I have  the  honor  to 
make  the  following  replies  : 

I.  Their  courage  as  indicated  by  their  behavior  under  fire. 

I will  say,  in  my  opinion,  their  courage  is  rather  of  the  passive 
than  the  active  kind.  They  will  stay,  endure,  resist,  and  follow,  but 
they  have  not  the  restless,  aggressive  spirit.  I do  not  believe  they 
will  desert  their  officers  in  trying  moments  in  so  great  numbers  as 
the  whites  ; they  have  not  the  will,  audacity,  or  fertility  of  excuse  of 
the  straggling  white,  and  at  the  same  time  they  have  not  the  heroic, 
nervous  energy,  or  vivid  perception  of  the  white,  who  stands  firm 
or  presses  forward. 

I do  not  remember  a single  instance,  in  my  labors  in  the  trenches, 
where  the  black  man  has  skulked  away  from  his  duty,  and  I know 
that  instances  of  that  kind  have  occurred  among  the  whites;  still,  I 
think  that  the  superior  energy  and  intelligence  of  those  remaining, 
considering  that  the  whites  were  the  lesser  number  * by  the  greater 
desertion,  would  more  than  compensate. 

II.  Skill  and  appreciation  of  their  duties,  referring  to  the  quality  of  the  work  done. 

They  have  a fair  share  of  both,  enough  to  make  them  very  useful 
and  efficient,  but  they  have  not  apparently  that  superior  intelligence 


[Chap.  XL. 


‘>30  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

and  skill  that  may  be  found  largely  among  the  non-commissioned 
officers  and  privates  of  the  white  regiments. 

III.  Industry  and  perseverance  with  reference  to  the  quantity  of  the  work  done. 

I think  they  will  do  more  than  the  whites;  they  do  not  have  so 
many  complaints  and  excuses,  but  stick  to  their  work  patiently,  dog- 
gedly, obediently,  and  accomplish  a great  deal,  though  I have  never 
known  them  to  work  with  any  marked  spirit  or  energy.  I should 
liken  the  white  man  to  the  horse  (often  untractable  and  balky) ; the 
black  man  to  the  ox. 

IV.  If  a certain  work  were  to  be  accomplished  in  the  least  possible  time,  i.  e. , 
when  enthusiasm  and  direct  personal  interest  are  necessary  to  attain  the  end,  would 
whites  or  blacks  answer  best  ? 

I cannot  make  up  my  mind  that  it  is  impossible  to  arouse  the 
enthusiasm  of  the  blacks,  for  I have  seen  enough  of  them  to  know 
that  they  are  very  emotional  creatures;  still,  though  they  might 
have  more  dash  than  I have  seen  and  think  possible,  it  is  unques- 
tionable to  my  mind  that  were  the  enthusiasm  and  personal  interest 
of  both  aroused,  the  white  would  far  surpass  the  black. 

It  seems  to  me  that  there  is  a hard,  nervous  organization  at  the 
bottom  of  the  character  of  the  white,  and  a soft,  susceptible  one  at 
the  bottom  of  the  character  of  the  black. 

V.  What  is  the  difference,  considering  the  above  points,  between  colored  troops 
recruited  from  the  free  States,  and  those  from  the  slave  States? 

I should  say  that  the  free  State  men  were  the  best.  They  have 
more  of  the  self-reliance,  and  approximate  nearer  to  the  qualities  of 
the  white  man,  in  respect  to  dash  and  energy,  than  those  from  the 
slave  States. 

Summary. — To  me  they  compare  favorably  with  the  whites ; they 
are  easily  handled,  true  and  obedient ; there  is  less  viciousness 
among  them ; they  are  more  patient ; they  have,  great  cpnstancy. 
The  character  of  the  white,  as  you  know,  runs  to  extremefs ; one  has 
bull-dog  courage,  another  is  a pitiful  cur ; one  is  excessively  vicious, 
another  pure  and  noble.  The  phases  of  the  character  of  the  white 
touches  the  stars  and  descends  to  the  lowest  depths.  The  black 
character  occupies  the  inner  circle.  Their  status  is  mediocrity,  and 
this  uniformity  and  mediocrity,  for  military  fatigue  duty,  I think 
answers  best. 

I am,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOSEPH  WALKER, 
Captain  New  York  Volunteer  Engineers. 

Maj.  T.  B.  Brooks, 

Aide-de-Camp,  and  Asst.  Eng.,  Dept,  of  the  South. 


Morris  Island,  September  16,  1863. 

Maj.  T.  B.  Brooks, 

Assistant  Engineer , Department  of  the  South: 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  state  that  I have  received  from  you  a 
circular  of  inquiry  respecting  the  comparative  merits  of  white  and 
black  soldiers  for  fatigue  duty,  requesting  my  opinion,  as  derived 
from  observation  and  actual  intercourse  with  them,  on  several  speci- 
fied points,  which  I subjoin  with  the  respective  answers. 

I.  Courage,  as  indicated  by  conduct  under  fire. 

I have  found  that  black  troops  manifest  more  timidity  under  fire 
than  white  troops,  but  they  are,  at  the  same  time,  more  obedient  to 


Chap.  XL.]  OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C.  331 

orders,  and  more  under  the  control  of  their  officers,  in  dangerous 
situations,  than  white  soldiers. 

II.  Skill  and  appreciation  of  their  duties,  with  reference  to  the  quality  of  the  work 
performed. 

White  soldiers  are  more  intelligent  and  experienced,  and,  of 
course,  more  skillful,  than  black  ones,  but  they  have  not  generally 
a corresponding  appreciation  of  their  duties.  As  a consequence,  I 
have,  in  most  cases,  found  the  work  as  well  done  by  black  as  by 
white  soldiers. 

III.  Industry  and  perseverance,  with  reference  to  the  amount  of  work  performed. 

White  soldiers  work  with  more  energy  while  they  do  work  than 
black  ones,  but  do  not  work  as  constantly.  Black  soldiers  seldom 
intermit  their  labors,  excepting  by  orders  or  permission.  The  result, 
as  far  as  my  observation  extends,  is,  that  a greater  amount  of  work 
is  usually  accomplished  with  black  than  with  white  soldiers. 

IV.  If  a certain  work  were  to  be  accomplished  in  the  least  possible  time,  when 
enthusiasm  and  direct  personal  interest  are  necessary  to  the  attainment  of  the  end, 
would  whites  or  blacks  answer  best  ? 

Whites.  Because,  though  requiring  more  effort  to  control,  they 
possess  a greater  energy  of  character  and  susceptibility  of  enthusi- 
asm than  the  black  race,  which  can  be  called  into  action  by  an  emer- 
gency or  by  a sufficient  effort  on  the  part  of  their  officers. 

V.  What  is  the  difference,  considering  the  above  points,  between  colored  troops 
recruited  from  the  free  States  and  those  from  the  slave  States  ? 

I have  observed  a decided  difference  in  favor  of  those  recruited 
from  the  free  States. 

The  problem  involved  in  the  foregoing  investigation  is  more  diffi- 
cult of  a solution  than  appears  at  first  sight,  owing  to  the  fact  that 
the  degree  of  efficiency  peculiar  to  any  company  of  troops  depends  so 
much  upon  the  character  of  their  officers,  an  element  that  must 
be  eliminated  from  the  question  in  order  to  ascertain  the  quality  of 
the  material  of  which  the  troops  are  composed. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  FARRAND, 

First  Lieutenant  New  York  Volunteer  Engineers, 

Note  No.  20. 

The  Main  Magazine,  Telegraph  Office,  Lookout,  and  Lat- 
rines in  the  Second  Parallel. 

These  structures,  built  together  for  economy  of  space  and  material, 
are  shown  in  plan  and  section  by  Figs.  23,  24,  and  25  [pp.  332, 
333.]  The  magazine  frame  was  of  heavy  timbers,  sheeted  with 
plank.  Sand-bags  were  used  for  revetting  throughout. 

Note  No.  21. 

Splinter-Proof  Shelters. 

The  splinter-proof  shelters  built  in  the  approaches  (chiefly  in  the 
second  parallel)  for  the  protection  of  the  guard  of  the  trenches  and 
the  garrisons  of  the  batteries,  are  represented  by  sections  and  eleva- 
tions in  Figs.  26,  27,  28,  29,  30,  and  31  [p.  334.] 


832  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MlD.  AND  E.  FLA. 


[Chap.  XL. 


MAIN  MAGAZINE  TELEGRAPH  OFFICE 
LOOKOUT  AND  LATRINE  IN 
SECOND  PARALLEL. 


TO  FT.  WAGNER 

-■=^B 

L 


TELEGRAPH 


LATRINE 


LOOKOUT 


Fig.  23. 


HORIZONTAL  SECTION. 


Moat  Engravino  Co. 


Scale  20  feet  to  l inch. 


Ckap.  XL.J 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 


333 


Fig.  24. 


SECTION  ON  A B. 


Scale  20  feet  to  1 inch. 


Fig.  25. 


SECTION  ON  C D. 


334  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA, 


[Chap.  XL. 


SPLINTER  PROOF  SHELTER. 

USED  IN  APPROACHES. 


Fig.  26. 


Fig.  27. 


SECTION.  ELEVATION. 


■Scale' 10. feet  to  i inch. 


Moujoyravi 


Chap.  XL.J 


335 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 

Pine  poles  cut  on  Folly  Island,  cord  wood  found  near  the  first  par- 
allel, old  lumber  from  the  Beacon  House,  and  sand-bags,  constituted 
the  material  employed  in  the  construction  of  these  shelters. 

The  rectangular  transverse  frame  shown  in  Figs.  28  and  29  is  the 
same  as  the  longitudinal  frame  used  in  the  narrow  shelter  shown  in 
Figs.  30  and  31.  The  material  for  these  frames  was  prepared  at  the 
engineer  depot,  and  put  together  on  the  ground  with  6-inch  spikes. 
Three  hundred  and  ten  linear  yards  of  wide  and  narrow  splinter- 
proof  shelter  were  built  in  advance  of  the  first  parallel,  capable  of 
protecting  about  1,000  men. 

The  surgery  in  the  second  parallel  was  32  feet  long,  10  feet  wide, 
and  5i  feet  high,  and  made  bomb-proof  by  covering  it  with  7 feet 
of  sand.  Its  frames  were  proportionately  strong  to  bear  this  load. 

T.  B.  BROOKS, 

Major , and  Aide-de-Camp. 


No.  6. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Peter  S.  Michie,  U.  S.  Corps  of  Engineers •,  Assist- 
ant Engineer. 

Engineer  Office,  Northern  Dist.,  Dept,  of  the  South, 

Folly  Island , February  1,  1863. 

General  : In  compliance  with  your  request,  “that  I should  send 
in,  as  soon  as  possible,  a detailed  report  of  my  engineering  opera- 
tions in  this  department  previous  to  the  7th  of  September,  1863,”  I 
have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following : 

I reported  for  duty  at  headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 
Hilton  Head,  S.  C.,  on  the  29th  of  June,  1863,  and  was  ordered  to 
report  to  C.  R.  Suter,  first  lieutenant  U.  S.  Engineers,  whom  I relieved 
on  the  1st  of  July,  1863,  of  the  charge  of  the  offensive  batteries 
under  construction  on  the  north  end  of  Folly  Island,  S.  C.  At  this 
time  the  sites  of  all  the  batteries  had  been  selected  (excepting  that  of  a 
small  barbette  battery  of  two  Wiard*  guns,  which  was  established, 
on  the  night  of  the  9th  of  July,  between  the  right  and  left  wings 
of  the  first  line),  and  the  interior  revetments  of  sand-bags  completed. 

The  immediate  supervision  of  the  work  was  under  the  charge  of 
Lieutenant  Wilson,  Fifth  U.  S.  Artillery,  and  Lieutenant  McGuire, 
New  York  Volunteer  Engineers,  both  capable  and  efficient  officers. 
The  work  that  remained  unfinished,  and  which  was  completed  on 
the  night  of  the  9th  of  July,  was  principally  the  clearing  out  and 
revetting  the  embrasures,  laying  platforms  for  some  of  the  mortars, 
building  surgery  and  splinter-proofs,  constructing  a new  road  from 
the  first  to  the  second  line,  and,  on  the  last  night,  cutting  down  the 
trees  and  brush  which  masked  the  batteries  from  the  enemy. 

So  complete  were  the  orders  and  arrangements  of  General  Vogdes, 
that,  notwithstanding  large  fatigue  details  of  from  300  to  1,000  men 
were  engaged  in  erecting  and  arming  batteries  mounting  fifty  guns* 
only  a few  hundred  yards  distant  from  a watchful  enemy,  yet  not 
the  slightest  thing  occurred  to  awaken  their  suspicions. 

During  the  action  of  the  10th  of  July,  I remained  in  the  batteries, 
in  charge  of  the  engineer  party,  and  directed  the  necessary  repairs 
of  embrasures,  &c. 


* Forty-seven  guns. 


336 


S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  ELA. 


[Chap.  XL. 


On  the  night  of  the  11th  of  July,  under  the  orders  of  General  Sey- 
mour, I built  a line  of  rifle-pits  some  20  or  30  yards  beyond  the  posi- 
tion afterward  occujDied  by  the  second  parallel  in  the  approaches  to 
Fort  Wagner. 

On  the  13th,  I placed  two  30-pounder  Parrott  guns  in  position  on 
the  south  bank  of  Saint  Vincent’s  Creek,  near  where  a battery  of  30- 
pounders  was  afterward  built. 

On  the  15th,  I was  directed  to  place  five  10-inch  siege  mortars  in 
position  on  the  right  and  in  front  of  the  Beacon  House.  This  was 
finished  on  the  16th,  and  that  night  the  works  in  advance  were  placed 
under  my  charge.  These  works  had  been  planned  and  almost  finished 
by  my  predecessors,  and  it  only  remained  for  me  to  correct,  as  far 
as  possible,  some  obvious  defects.  The  details  were  worked  to  the 
best  advantage  until  midnight  on  the  17th,  when  a very  severe  rain 
storm,  which  lasted  until  8 or  9 a.  m.  on  the  18th,  compelled  them  to 
withdraw. 

On  the  27th  of  July,  I was  ordered  by  you  to  construct  what  were 
afterward  known  as  the  “left  breaching  batteries  against  Fort  Sum- 
ter.” Their  site  was  on  a sand  ridge,  its  general  direction  making  an 
angle  of  about  35  degrees  with  the  gorge  of  Fort  Sumter,  and  distant 
about  4,200  yards  from  that  work.  A marsh,  covered  with  water  at 
high  tide,  separated  this  from  the  firm  ground  to  the  right.  A dam, 
8 feet  thick,  of  sand  piled  against  a center  wall  of  sand-bags  2 feet 
thick,  was  built  at  the  mouth  of  the  stream  that  entered  the  marsh, 
which  prevented  the  ingress  of  the  tide,  and  allowed  good,  safe,  and 
durable  roads  being  made,  with  but  little  labor,  to  the  rear  of  the 
batteries. 

On  the  27th  of  J uly,  the  interior  crest  of  a sunken  battery  for  five 
100-pounder  Parrott  guns  was  laid  out,  with  arrangements  for  one 
magazine  to  hold  200  rounds  per  gun,  and  a traverse  12  feet  thick  on 
top,  between  each  gun  and  the  one  adjacent.  ^ 

The  position  being  within  range  of  the  enemy’s  batteries  on  James 
Island,  ground  was  broken  at  night,  a detail  of  10  engineers  and  100 
men  being  employed  for  this  purpose.  A small  detail  of  10  engineers 
and  50  men  were  employed  the  next  day,  working  as  much  as  pos- 
sible under  cover,  which,  however,  did  not  prevent  the  enemy  shell- 
ing them. 

July  29,  a detail  of  50  men  worked  all  night,  and,  on  the  30th  and 
31st,  80  and  100  men,  respectively,  for  as  the  work  progressed  more 
men  could  be  used  with  advantage  and  safety. 

On  July  31,  the  interior  revetments  of  the  first,  second,  fourth,  and 
fifth  batteries  were  completed  and  the  excavation  for  the  magazine 
ready  to  receive  the  frames.  Owing  to  a change  of  armament,  work 
was  delayed  from  this  time  by  your  order. 

On  the  4th  of  August,  I was  ordered  to  finish  the  two  batteries 
on  the  right  for  200-pounder  Parrott  guns,  and  build  a magazine 
for  them.  These  were  finished  August  7,  having  embrasures  with 
oblique  directrices,  and  a field  of  fire  from  a little  to  our  left  of 
Fort  Sumter  to  Battery  Bee  on  Sullivan’s  Island,  and  soon  after  one 
200-pounder  was  mounted. 

The  details  for  this  work  from  the  4th  to  the  7th  of  August,  in- 
clusive, were  as  follows  : Fifty  on  the  4th,  100  on  the  5th,  100  on  the 
6th,  in  the  day,  and  200  at  night,  and  150  on  the  7th,  there  being  10 
engineers  with  each  fatigue  party. 

On  August  8,  you  ordered  me  to  prepare  a battery  for  three  addi- 
tional 100-pounder  Parrott  guns,  making  the  whole  breaching  bat- 


Chap.  XL.l  OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C.  337 

tery  consist  of  one  200-pounder  and  four  100-pounder  Parrott  guns. 
From  this  time  forward,  a party  of  150  men  worked  during  the  day, 
and  one  of  100  men  at  night,  with  the  usual  quota  of  engineer  troops. 

On  the  12th  of  August,  you  ordered  that  an  elevated  battery  be 
prepared  for  the  10-inch  rifle  Parrott  gun,  or  300-pounder,  which 
would  be  protected  from  James  Island  rebel  batteries,  and  have  full 
command  of  the  channel  from  a little  to  our  left  of  Fort  Sumter,  sea- 
ward. All  of  the  above  batteries  were  completed,  and  engaged  in 
the  reduction  of  Fort  Sumter  by  the  17th  of  August.  It  should  be 
remarked,  however,  that  as  soon  as  a gun  could  be  used  it  commenced 
firing  at  once  without  waiting  for  the  completion  of  the  battery. 
The  details  were  often  obliged  to  suspend  labor,  during  the  very 
severe  firing  that  the  enemy  directed  against  these  batteries  from 
James  Island  and  Battery  Gregg,  although  ordinarily  their  fire  was 
unheeded.  In  addition  to  the  construction  of  these  batteries,  the 
above  details  were  engaged  in  repairing  traverses,  constructing  new 
magazines  for  the  seven  30-pounder  battery  on  the  right,  in  raising 
and  strengthening  the  parapet,  and  making  new  embrasures  for  the 
200-pounder  gun  battery  in  front  of  the  latter,  and  in  constructing 
and  laying  new  platforms  for  the  two  10-inch  seacoast  mortars  to 
the  left  and  rear. 

The  batteries  (except  that  of  the  300-pounder)  were  full  sunken. 
The  line  of  each  interior  crest  made  an  angle  varying  from  30  degrees 
to  37  degrees  with  the  gorge  of  Fort  Sumter,  depending  upon  the  nat- 
ure of  the  ridge  at  the  different  points.  The  width  of  each  gun  bat- 
tery was  18  feet,  the  traverse  between  being  12  feet  thick  at  top.  The 
interior  revetments  were  of  sand-bags  laid  in  the  usual  manner  of 
headers  and  stretchers,  and  extended  below  the  gun  platform.  The 
embrasures  have  oblique  directrices,  and  were  constructed  at  first  to 
admit  of  firing  only  on  Fort  Sumter,  but,  after  its  reduction,  the  field 
of  fire  was  increased  to  embrace  Fort  Johnson  and  Battery  Gregg, 
and  finally  the  James  Island  batteries  and  Fort  Wagner.  A revet- 
ment of  raw  hides  soaked  and  tightly  pinned  down  was  first  tried  on 
one  of  the  embrasures,  and  although,  on  drying,  it  was  tight  and  ap- 
parently promised  least  resistance  to  the  blast  of  the  gun,  it  proved 
but  a temporary  and  indifferent  revetment  for  guns  of  this  caliber. 
The  gabion  revetment  was  subsequently  used  in  all  the  embrasures. 
The  method  of  anchoring  them  was  to  lay  a piece  of  6-inch  by  8- 
inch  timber  parallel  to  the  cheek,  and  some  3 to  4 feet  back,  hav- 
ing two  stout  anchoring  stakes  6 feet  long  driven  on  the  inner 
side.  Each  gabion,  besides  being  well  picketed  to  the  fascine  upon 
which  it  rested,  was  tied  to  this  timber  by  No.  10  wire,  stoutly 
enough  to  withstand  the  blast,  and  yet  to  give  way  if  struck  by  a 
shot,  without  destroying  the  entire  embrasure. 

The  exterior  slopes  of  the  batteries  were  left  in  the  rough,  no  at- 
tempt being  made  to  finish  them  smoothly,  by  wasting  labor  that 
was  sorely  needed  elsewhere.  A coating  of  marsh  mud,  about  1 
or  2 inches  thick,  was  spread  over  the  exterior  slopes  and  on  the 
tops  of  the  magazines  and  traverses,  which  on  drying  became  a hard 
crust,  and  prevented  the  sand  from  blowing  into  the  faces  of  the 
gunners  and  in  the  muzzles  and  other  parts  of  the  piece  and  car- 
riage ; a precaution  amply  appreciated  by  all  who  served  in  the  bat- 
teries. 

There  were  two  magazines,  one  between  Nos.  2 and  3,  for  the  service 
of  the  two  right  pieces,  and  one  on  the  left  of  No.  5,  for  the  service 
of  the  remaining  three  guns.  The  former  was  10  feet  by  10  feet  by 
22  R R— VOL  XXVIII,  PT  I 


338 


S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 


[Chap.  XL. 


6 feet  high  in  the  clear,  with  a filling  room  4 feet  by  5 feet  by  6 feet 
high  ; the  latter  was  10  feet  by  15  feet  by  6 feet  high,  with  one  re< 
turn  gallery  4 feet  by  6 feet  high.  The  magazine  frames  were  of 
4-inch  by  6-inch  stuff,  placed  2 feet  6 inches  apart,  and  covered  with 
3-inch  plank  and  8 feet  of  sand  on  the  line  of  least  resistance,  and 
for  sheeting  1-inch,  lj-inch  or  2-inch  plank  was  used  as  could  be 
procured. 

Temporary  platforms  for  the  four  100-pounder  guns  were  con- 
structed by  Sergeant  Clark,  New  York  Volunteer  Engineers,  which 
answered  all  requirements,  and  were  uninjured  at  the  close  of  the 
siege. 

The  300-pounder  battery.— Having  no  experience  to  guide  me  in 
the  construction  of  a battery  for  a gun  of  such  a caliber,  and  know- 
ing its  value  in  the  eyes  of  all,  it  is  not  surprising  that  every  pre- 
caution was  taken  to  guard  it  from  every  possible  accident.  Being 
also  unaware  of  the  effects  of  its  discharge  in  reference  to  its  dis- 
turbing influence  on  the  ground  in  its  immediate  vicinity,  and  fearful 
that,  with  such  a mobile  and  shifting  material  as  sand,  the  ordinary 
revetments  would  not  withstand  its  discharge,  great  precautions 
were  taken  to  counteract  every  supposable  effect.  The  dimensions 
of  the  battery  were  as  follows  : 


Height  of  crest  of  parapet  above  tide  mark 

Height  of  crest  of  parapet  above  platform  of  gun 

Height  of  barbette  above  platform 

Thickness  of  parapet  at  top 

Thickness  of  barbette  at  top 

Eadius  of  epaulement  at  base 

Interior  slope,  3 upon  1. 

Distance  of  center  pintle  from  foot  of  interior  slope,  7 feet  3 inches. 


Feet. 

, 20 
. 12 
5 

, 18 
25 

, 12 


The  interior  revetment  was  first  of  sand-bags  2 feet  thick,  against 
which  one  of  marsh  sods  1 foot  thick  was  built,  ^khich  latter  it  was 
found  made  a good  strong  binding  and  durable  revetment.  The  top 
of  the  battery  was  covered  also  with  these  sods,  which,  besides 
keeping  the  sand  from  blowing,  also  prevented  the  rain  from  washing 
it  down.  The  single  cheek  of  the  embrasure  was  revetted  with 
gabions,  and  the  sole  or  barbette  was  laid  with  fascines,  everything 
else  tried  being  unable  to  withstand  the  powerful  blast  of  the  piece. 
For  facility  in  loading,  steps  were  arranged  to  lead  to  a box  or  trough 
in  front  of  the  muzzle,  and  sunk  in  the  parapet,  which  permitted  4 
men  to  stand  while  lifting  the  shell  into  the  piece.  In  constructing 
the  parapet,  the  sand  was  thrown  from  the  ditch  to  the  parapet  by 
relays,  forming  terraces,  which  were  afterward  left  in  that  condition. 

The  magazine  for  this  gun  was  ample  for  its  service,  being  10  feet 
by  15  feet  by  6 feet  high,  and  constructed  like  the  others.  A bomb- 
proof for  the  signal  and  telegraph  operators,  11  feet  square,  was 
built  near  this  magazine  shortly  afterward. 

I must  state  that  great  credit  is  due  Lieutenant  McGuire,  New 
York  Volunteer  Engineers,  for  his  constant  and  unwearied  attention 
to  the  work,  and  of  whose  long  service  and  many  practical  and  use- 
ful ideas  I very  often  availed  myself.  I must  mention  also  Sergeants 
[Lionel]  Anyan  and  [Samuel]  Clark,  Company  A,  of  the  same  regi- 
ment (the  latter  afterward  killed  at  Battery  Gregg),  for  unusual 
energy  and  intelligence  in  the  discharge  of  their  duties. 

From  this  time  until  the  31st  of  August,  I was  engaged  in  simply 
overlooking  the  condition  of  these  batteries,  and  seeing  to  the  repairs 
and  alterations  required. 


Chap.  XL.] 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 


339 


The  following  list  contains  all  the  engineering  material  expended 
in  the  construction  and  repair  of  the  above  batteries,  and  also  in  the 
repair  of  the  30-pounder  batteries  on  their  right,  viz  : 

16,700  sand-bags.  45  fascines,  18  feetlong. 

1,500  feet  3-inch  plank.  6 kegs  nails  and  spikes. 

3.000  feet  2-inch  plank.  1 coil  3-inch  rope. 

2.000  feet  1-inch  plank.  1 coil  wire  (No.  10). 

85  iron  gabions. 

The  trenches  and  works  on  the  right  had  been  heretofore  under 
charge  of  Captain  Brooks,  assistant  engineer  and  aide-de-camp,  and 
whom,  by  order  of  Captain  Reese,  U.  S.  Engineers,  assistant  and 
consulting  engineer,  I relieved  on  the  1st  of  September.  The  sap 
had  at  that  time  reached  about  the  middle  of  the  long  bayou  just  in 
rear  of  the  marsh.  My  instructions  were  clear  and  explicit  to  push 
the  sap  rapidly  as  possible  over  the  narrow  neck  of  sand  between 
the  marsh  and  the  beach — the  probability  of  its  failure  being  ignored 
by  Captain  Reese,  to  whose  energy  and  decision  its  success  is  justly 
due. 

The  details  of  engineers  and  infantry  remained  unchanged,  with 
but  few  exceptions.  The  following  extracts  from  my  daily  reports 
will  show  the  progress  of  the  work. 

September  2. — The  trench  was  carried  as  far  as  the  beach — a branch 
nearly  at  right  angles  being  run,  to  be  used  by  sharpshooters  as  a tem- 
porary flanking  arrangement.  Here,  as  heretofore,  the  sap-roller 
could  not  be  used,  because  of  the  torpedoes  planted  by  the  rebels. 

September  4. — A simple  trench,  making  an  angle  of  about  70  de- 
grees with  the  last,  was  commenced  yesterday  morning,  and  advanced 
1 5 yards  up  to  7 a.  m.  to-day.  The  work  was  delayed  because  of  a heavy 
fire  from  the  enemy  immediately  after  dark.  No  sooner  did  we  ad- 
vance a few  feet  than  a well-directed  shell  would  send  sand  and  sand- 
bags in  every  direction,  and  cause  us  to  commence  anew.  On  the 
left  of  the  8-inch  mortar  battery,  in  the  fifth  parallel,  a battery  of 
three  10-inch  siege  mortars  was  established  last  night.  A position 
for  the  operation  of  the  calcium  light  was  prepared  on  the  left  of  the 
second  parallel.  The  light  was  used  from  7. 30  p.  m.  till  daybreak 
to-day.  An  extra  detail  of  100  men  was  employed  in  widening  and 
strengthening  the  approaches,  all  of  which  below  the  fifth  parallel 
are  now  completed. 

September  5. — The  trench  spoken  of  in  my  last  report  was  carried 
to  within  20  feet  of  the  marsh,  and  is,  altogether,  25  yards  long.  A 
new  trench  at  an  angle  of  60  degrees  with  the  latter  was  commenced 
last  night.  Yesterday  morning  the  enemy  opened  so  effective  afire 
of  artillery  on  the  head  of  the  sap  as  to  stop  its  progress  during  the 
forenoon.  One  torpedo  was  removed,  and  four  others  can  be  seen 
near  the  foot  of  the  slope  of  the  preceding  trench. 

September  6. — Yesterday  the  land  and  naval  batteries  began  the 
bombardment  of  Fort  Wagner,  and,  as  it  was  supposed  the  danger 
would  be  too  great,  no  fatigue  parties  were  sent  up  in  the  trenches. 
Under  orders  of  Captain  Reese,  I went  to  the  front,  and  found  that, 
owing  to  the  extreme  accuracy  of  our  guns,  the  advance  was  the 
safest  part  of  all  the  trenches.  A temporary  brigade  of  sappers  was 
at  once  organized  of  4 colored  soldiers  found  in  the  fifth  parallel, 
while  an  order  was  sent  for  the  engineer  detail.  The  work  was  pushed 
very  rapidly,  and  by  11  p.  m.  180  yards  in  length  of  trench  had  been 
excavated,  which  was  put  in  good  condition  by  morning.  The  head 


340  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

of  the  sap  at  that  time  was  not  more  than  10  or  12  yards  from  the 
(onr)  right  salient  of  Wagner.  Some  six  or  seven  torpedoes  were 
removed  in  the  line  of  the  sap,  and  no  accidents  occurred.  At  noon 
the  leading  sapper  cut  into  the  decayed  bodies  of  the  Union  soldiers 
who  fell  on  the  18th  of  July,  and  who  were  buried  by  the  rebels  in 
pits,  in  front  of  Fort  Wagner. 

September  7. — Yesterday  morning  I was  relieved  by  Captain 
Brooks,  who  reported  for  duty.  But  la§t  night  I was  desired  to  take 
charge  ^during  the  night  again.  The  sap  was  pushed  very  rapidly, 
one  branch,  under  Captain  Walker,  to  the  ditch,  and  the  other,  and 
most  important,  to  the  right  as  far  as  the  sea  flank  of  the  fort,  which 
was  reached  at  about  2 a.  m.  to-day.  The  evacuation  becoming 
known,  labor  was  discontinued,  and  the  parties  sent  to  camp.  It  is 
proper  to  mention 'here  the  fine  behavior  of  the  working  parties, 
alike  commendable  when,  under  the  severest  fire,  they  displayed  the 
coolness  of  veterans,  and  when  under  the  disagreeable  necessity  of 
uncovering  the  graves  of  their  comrades  to  reach  the  goal  for  which 
so  much  had  been  expended. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

PETER  S.  MICHIE, 

First  Lieut.  TJ.  S.  Engineers , and  Asst.  Engr.,  Dept,  of  the  South. 

Maj.  Gen.  Q.  A.  Gillmore, 

Comdg.  Department  of  the  South , and  Chief  Engineer . 


No.  7. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Townsend  L.  Hatfield , Forty-eighth  New  York 
Infantry , Acting  Signal  Officer. 

Morris  Island,  S.  C., 

September  11,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that,  in  compliance  with  orders 
from  you,  I left  my  station  on  Saint  Helena  Island,  and  joined  our 
forces  on  Folly  Island,  July  9,  1863. 

I immediately  reported  to  you  for  orders,  and  received  instructions 
from  you  to  report  to  Brigadier-General  Strong,  commanding  a 
storming  party  about  to  storm  Morris  Island ; that  I reported  to 
General  Strong,  and  was  put  in  command  of  signal  party  on  expe- 
dition, having  Lieutenant  Hickok  for  assistant. 

We  left  Folly  Island  about  11  p.  m.  on  the  9th,  and  arrived  at  our 
place  of  rendezvous  at  daylight  of  the  10th.  Our  batteries  on  Folly 
Island,  and  the  boat  howitzers  accompanying  the  boat  expedition, 
opened  fire  on  the  rebel  batteries  at  daylight,  and,  after  a heavy 
bombardment,  our  boats  were  ordered  to  advance  and  storm  the  isl- 
and. I landed  with  the  first  regiment  (Sixth  Connecticut  Volun- 
teers), and  immediately  ran  to  the  beach  and  opened  communication 
with  our  fleet  of  monitors.  They  had  a 15-inch  gun  trained  on  our 
party,  which  they  were  about  firing,  when  they  perceived  my  flag. 
As  the  gun  was  loaded  with  grape-shot,  my  signals  must  have  saved 
our  party  a heavy  loss.  After  our  forces  had  taken  possession  of 
the  lower  part  of  the  island,  I established  a signal  station  on  Gregg’s 
Hill,  and  opened  communication  with  Folly  Island.  This  station  is 
working  yet. 

At  2 a.  m.  on  the  11th,  was  ordered  by  General  Strong  to  the  front. 
Our  forces  were  about  storming  Fort  Wagner.  At  General  Strong’s 


Chap.  XL.]  OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C.  341 

request,  I sent  Lieutenant  Hickok  forward  with  the  storming  party, 
and  staid  myself  with  the  reserve,  under  Colonel  Putnam.  Our 
assault  was  unsuccessful,  and  we  had  to  retire. 

From  the  11th  to  the  18th,  I did  duty  at  the  right  battery  in  front 
of  Wagner. 

On  the  morning  of  the  18th,  I was  ordered  to  report  to  the  com- 
manding officer  of  the  right  batteries  for  signal  duty,  as  our  forces 
were  expected  to  attack  Fort  Wagner  that  day.  I kept  up  signal 
communication  with  the  Tower  Station  on  Gregg’s  Hill  under  a very 
heavy  fire.  At  6 p.  m.  our  attacking  columns  came  up,  and  I was 
ordered  to  the  front  with  the  advance  regiment,  by  General  Seymour, 
commanding  United  States  forces  on  Morris  Island.  I kept  up  with 
the  advance  regiment  until  I was  wounded  by  a discharge  of  canister 
from  Fort  Wagner.  This  was  within  50  yards  of  the  fort.  Private 
C.  Cotter,  signal  man,  carried  me  to  the  rear,  and  would  not  leave 
me  until  I was  safe. 

Owing  to  my  wound  (a  flesh  one),  I did  not  return  to  duty  for 
three  weeks.  I did  duty  at  the  right  batteries  alternately  for  one 
week,  when  I was  ordered  to  the  left  batteries,  where  I did  duty, 
alternate  days,  until  ordered  to  take  charge  of  telegraph  at  third 
parallel,  in  front  of  Wagner.  I did  this  duty  until  the  6th  day  of 
September,  when  I was  ordered  to  report  to  General  Stevenson,  com- 
manding assaulting  party  on  Forts  Wagner  and  Gregg.  The  rebels 
having  evacuated  both  forts,  I had  no  chance  of  doing  duty  as  a 
signal  officer,  but  assisted  him  as  aide-de-camp. 

I wo  aid  respectfully  mention  the  following  men  for  gallant  and 
meritorious  conduct  while  under  my  command  : 

Sergeant  Littings,  Corporals  Bender,  Maag,  and  Bechtel,  Privates 
IL  Tracy,  Cotter,  Smedes,  and  Moffatt. 

These  men  did  their  duty  well  as  flagmen  in  the  boats  in  Light- 
House  Inlet,  and  in  the  batteries  in  front  of  Wagner.  I make  espe- 
cial mention  of  Corporal  Bender  and  Private  Cotter.  I would  also 
mention  Sergeant  Wolverton,  Privates  Miller,  Ford,  and  George, 
who  did  their  duty  faithfully  as  telegraph  men.  I make  especial 
mention  of  Sergeant  Wolverton,  who,  under  a very  heavy  fire  of  can- 
ister, repaired  the  line,  setting  up  nine  poles  and  repairing  about 
500  yards  of  wire,  which  was  broken  in  three  different  places. 

On  all  occasions,  the  men  displayed  great  coolness  under  fire,  and 
were  always  ready  to  volunteer  for  any  expedition  or  for  any  duty 
that  took  them  under  fire. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

TOWNSEND  L.  HATFIELD, 

First  Lieut.  48 tli  Regt.,  N.  Y.  Vols.,  and  Actg.  Sig.  Officer. 

Lieut.  F.  E.  Town, 

Signal  Officer. 

No.  8. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Peter  H.  Niles , U.  S.  Signal  Corps. 

Signal  Camp  of  Instruction, 

Georgetown,  August  31,  1863. 

Colonel  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of 
operations  connected  with  the  introduction  of  signal  telegraph  trains 
in  the  Department  of  the  S*outh  : 


[Chap.  XL. 


342  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

In  pursuance  of  Special  Orders,  Ho.  112,  Chief  Signal  Officer, 
Signal  Office,  Washington,  D.  C.,  dated  July  16, 1863,  I proceeded  to 
Hew  York  City,  and  assumed  charge  of  two  signal  telegraph  trains. 

July  21. — I obtained  transportation  per  Quartermaster’s  Depart- 
ment, per  steamer  Fulton,  which  sailed  for  Hilton  Head,  and  left 
Hew  York  City  on  the  23d  instant.  I arrived  at  Port  Royal,  July 
27,  and  reported  to  Lieutenant  Town,  chief  signal  officer  of  depart- 
ment. The  officers  being  on  duty  at  Morris  Island,  it  was  deemed 
impracticable  to  relieve  them  for  the  purpose  of  reporting  at  Port 
Royal  for  instruction.  Owing  to  this  reason,  I removed  the  trains 
to  Morris  Island.  I met  with  some  delay,  and  finally  succeeded  in 
accomplishing  this  object,  July  31.  The  difficulty  was  mainly  in- 
ability to  procure  direct  transportation.  I reported  to  General 
Gillmore,  who  expressed  himself  highly  pleased,  and  desired  that 
the  trains  might  be  put  in  immediate  use  at  the  earliest  moment 
practicable. 

July  31. — I commenced  a course  of  instruction  to  Lieutenants 
Dana  and  Cross. 

On  the  1st  and  2d  days  of  August  I consumed  daily  eight  hours 
instructing  the  above-named  officers,  and  at  7 p.  m.  on  the  2d  instant, 
by  written  request  of  Lieutenant  Town,  approved  by  General  Gill- 
more,  I commenced  running  a line  from  headquarters  to  the  ad- 
vanced works  in  front  of  Fort  Wagner,  a distance  of  3 miles.  The 
last  mile  was  run  out  under  a very  heavy  fire  from  Forts  Johnson, 
Gregg,  and  Wagner. 

At  11. 30  p.  m.  I succeeded  in  placing  the  instrument  in  the  splinter- 
proof,  and  opened  communications  with  headquarters. 

August  4. — At  the  request  of  General  Gillmore,  I endeavored  to 
use  a cable  of  the  American  Telegraph  Company  across  Light-House 
Inlet,  but  from  an  escape  which  was  so  great  that  it  could  not  be 
worked  with  any  degree  of  certainty,  I abandoned  it  until  a new 
cable  could  be  obtained. 

August  5. — At  midnight  I commenced  running  a second  line  from 
Light-House  Inlet  to  Stono,  using  7 miles  of  wire.  About  5 miles  of 
this  wire  is  laid  upon  the  marsh  and  is  submerged  at  high  tide.  The 
remainder  is  conducted  upon  lances  or  suspended  on  trees.  The 
object  of  running  in  the  manner  specified  was  to  render  protection 
to  the  wire  as  far  as  possible  and  to  prevent  its  being  tampered 
with,  thus  avoiding  the  necessity  of  using  a guard  to  carry  out  this 
purpose. 

August  6. — At  6 p.  m.  I completed  the  line  and  opened  communi- 
cation. This  line  failed  to  work  for  about  an  hour  at  high  tide,  on 
account  of  an  escape  in  the  submerged  part.  I caused  this  to  be 
repaired,  and  the  line  worked  well.  The  next  day,  some  50  feet  of  the 
line  was  cut  out  by  a picket  of  our  own  troops  (through  ignorance). 
By  order  of  Brigadier-General  Yogdes,  the  whole  picket  was  arrested 
and  since  that  time  (some  two  weeks)  the* line  has  met  with  no  in- 
terruption. 

The  importance  of  this  line  is  obvious,  as  it  connects  headquarters 
in  the  field  with  the  quartermaster’s  department  at  Stono  Inlet.  A 
portion  of  the  line  to  the  front  is  within  range  of  the  enemy’s  sharp- 
shooters, who  have  used  every  means  to  effect  its  destruction,  and 
succeeded  twice  in  cutting  it.  Communication  has  ceased  also  twice 
from  accidental  causes,  by  shells  from  Forts  Johnson  and  Gregg. 

On  the  night  of  August  16,  a shell  from  Fort  Johnson  struck  the 
splinter-proof  in  which  the  instrument  was  placed,  tearing  off  the 


Chap.  XL.] 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 


343 


corner  and  exploded  within,  severely  wounding  Colonel  Howell,  in 
command  of  the  trenches,  and  Sergeant  Emerson,  of  the  signal  corps, 
breaking  the  instrument  and  covering  the  signal  party  with  its 
debris.  Lieutenant  Cross  at  the  time  was  sending  a message  to  Gen- 
eral Gillmore.  I immediately  sent  to  the  front  and  had  the  instru- 
ment removed  from  about  5 feet  of  sand,  &c. , and  commenced  re- 
pairing it.  In  this  I was  successful,  and  had  the  instrument  and  line 
in  working  order  again  at  daybreak,  much  to  the  satisfaction  of 
General  Terry,  who  had  personal  charge  of  the  intrenchments,  and 
who  relied  upon  the  line  as  a medium  for  all  communication  to  the 
front. 

But  6 officers  have  been  instructed,  owing  to  the  urgent  necessity 
that  requires  the  practical  use  of  the  line,  and  I consider  them  to  be 
thoroughly  instructed  in  all  the  minutia  necessary  for  successful 
working  of  the  line.  The  enlisted  men  have  been  instructed  in  mak- 
ing the  necessary  repairs,  &c. 

In  conclusion,  I consider  the  working  of  the  signal  telegraph  line 
in  this  department  a complete  success. 

On  the  17th  instant,  I reported  to  General  Gillmore  that  I had 
completed  my  duties  in  that  department,  and  was  relieved  from  fur- 
ther duty  per  Special  Orders,  No.  486. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

PETER  H.  NILES, 

First  Lieutenant,  Signal  Corps . 

Col.  Albert  J.  Myer, 

Chief  Signal  Officer,  U.  S.  Army,  Washington,  D.  C. 


No.  9. 

Reports  of  Brig.  Gen.  Truman  Seymour,  XJ.  S.  Army,  command- 
ing division. 

Headquarters  U.  S.  Forces, 
Morris  Island,  S.  C.,  November  1,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the  oper- 
ations of  July  10,  against  Morris  Island,  by  the  division  under  my 
command : 

Folly  Island  had  been  occupied  by  our  forces  under  command  of 
Brig.  Gen.  I.  Vogdes  since  early  in  April,  and  under  his  supervision 
extensive  batteries  had  been  constructed  on  the  north  end  of  the 
island,  and  thirty-two  rifled  guns  and  fifteen  mortars,  and  all  the 
requisite  material,  had  been  placed  in  position  with  a skill  and  secrecy 
that  reflect  the  highest  credit  upon  him  and  upon  those  who  more 
immediately  performed  this  labor.  This  artillery  was  commanded 
by  Lieut.  Col.  R.  H.  Jackson,  captain  First  Artillery,  assisted  by 
Capt.  L.  L.  Langdon,  of  the  same  regiment ; Lieut.  J.  P.  Farley, 
U.  S.  Ordnance,  and  by  Maj.  J.  E.  Bailey,  Third  Rhode  Island 
Heavy  Artillery. 

The  south  end  of  Morris  Island  was  protected  by  a number  of  bat- 
teries, generally  containing  a single  gun  of  heavy  caliber,  and  by 
several  mortars,  and  was  held  by  an  adequate  force  of  artillerists, 
supported,  however,  by  only  a small  force  of  infantry.  An  exten- 
sive series  of  rifle-pits  covered  the  rear  of  these  batteries. 

Agreeably  to  instructions  from  Brigadier-General  Gillmore,  the 
brigade  of  General  Strong  was  embarked  (with  the  exception  of  a 


344  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

part  of  the  Forty-eighth  New  York,  under  Colonel  Barton),  in 
launches  and  small  boats,  on  the  night  of  July  9,  at  Campbell’s 
house,  near  the  south  end  of  Folly  Island,  and  moved  up  Folly  River 
to  its  junction  with  Light-House  Inlet,  there  to  await  the  action  of 
our  artillery.  This  column  was  escorted  by  four  naval  launches, 
with  howitzers,  commanded  by  Lieut.  F.  M.  Bunce,  U.  S.  Navy. 

Colonel  Barton’s  Forty-eighth  New  York,  and  two  regiments  of 
General  Yogdes’  brigade,  the  Seventh  New  Hampshire,  Colonel  Put- 
nam, and  One  hundredth  New  York,  Colonel  Dandy,  with  Lieut.  G. 
Y.  Henry’s  battery  (B,  First  Artillery),  six  guns,  were  held  in  reserve 
on  Folly  Island,  ready  to  sustain  the  First  Brigade  ; and  the  entire 
remaining  forces,  the  Sixty-second  Ohio,  Colonel  Pond,  Sixty-seventh 
Ohio,  Colonel  Yoris,  and  Eighty-fifth  Pennsylvania,  Colonel  How- 
ell, were  under  arms  near  the  signal  tower.  All  these  supports  were 
commanded  by  General  Yogdes. 

The  batteries  opened  soon  after  sunrise.  The  enemy,  although  com- 
pletely surprised,  soon  manned  his  guns,  and  replied  with  vigor.  Our 
fire,  at  first  deliberate,  was  gradually  increased  in  rapidity;  the 
howitzers  under  Lieutenant  Bunce  soon  joined,  and  several  monitors 
moved  up  and  shared  at  a later  moment  in  this  powerful  cannonade. 
A few  guns  were  turned  ineffectually  upon  General  Strong’s  column 
when  it  appeared  in  Light-House  Inlet,  and  infantry  came  down  to 
the  rifle-pits,  and  opened  upon  the  boats.  But  that  command  pressed 
gallantty  forward,  and,  protected  by  the  overpowering  influence  of 
our  guns,  disembarked  with  exceeding  quickness,  formed  into  two 
columns,  and  rushed  upon  the  enemy’s  rifle-pits  and  batteries. 

The  boats  were  instantly  sent  across  the  inlet,  and,  still  under  fire, 
the  Forty -eighth  New  York,  Seventh  New  Hampshire,  One  hundredth 
New  York,  and  Lieutenant  Henry’s  guns  were  transferred  to  Morris 
Island  in  the  most  admirable  manner. 

General  Strong’s  brigade  meanwhile  seized  battery  after  battery; 
and  five  colors,  eleven  guns  and  mortars,  with  a considerable  quan- 
tity of  artillery  stores,  camp  and  garrison  equipage,  and  150  pris- 
oners, fell  into  our  hands.  Our  troops  had  now  advanced  to  within 
a short  distance  of  Fort  Wagner,  from  which  and  from  Sumter  a 
brisk  fire  was  opened.  Had  the  monitors  been  thrown  upon  Fort 
Wagner  coincident  with  our  attack  upon  the  south  end  of  the  island, 
that  work  might  probably  now  have  been  carried  without  much  loss; 
but  the  fact  that  its  artillery  fire  was  intact,  and  the  intervening 
ground  without  shelter  ; that  the  heat  was  excessive  and  the  soldiers 
greatly  fatigued,  precluded  the  probability  of  successful  assault, 
which  was  consequently  not  urged. 

For  the  brilliant  vigor  with  which  the  movements  of  his  brigade 
were  conducted,  the  greatest  credit  is  due  to  Brigadier-General 
Strong,  whose  personal  example  was  heroism  itself.  His  report  justly 
praises  his  subordinate  commanders,  and  to  that  I must  refer;  but  I 
must  mention  particularly  the  excellent  conduct  of  Colonel  Chatfield, 
Sixth  Connecticut,  who  led  his  regiment  in  the  advance  up  Morris 
Island  until  its  colors  were  riddled  by  close  artillery  fire  from  Fort 
Wagner. 

To  Brigadier-General  Yogdes,  who  superintended  the  prompt  and 
skillful  passage  of  the  support  across  the  inlet,  much  credit  is  due 
on  this  occasion. 

And  to  Lieutenant-Colonel  Jackson,  his  assistants,  already  named, 
and  the  respective  commanders  of  batteries,  must  be  awarded  no 
small  share  of  the  glory  of  this  day. 


Chap.  XL.]  OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C.  345 

The  services  of  Lieutenant  Bunce,  U.  S.  Navy,  were  valuable,  and 
worthy  of  high  commendation. 

But  the  hearty  devotion  and  cheerful  courage  of  the  soldiers  of 
this  division,  their  patient  labors  in  preparing  for  the  battle,  and  the 
ready  courage  with  which  they  fought  it,  must  after  all  be  given  the 
highest  honors,  and  their  gallant  conduct  in  this  brilliant  action  will 
always  be  to  them,  their  commanders,  and  their  country,  the  source 
of  just  pride. 

Our  loss  was  15  killed — among  whom  was  the  brave  Captain  Lent, 
Forty-eighth  New  York — and  92  wounded,  nearly  all  on  Morris  Island. 

The  reports  of  Brigadier-Generals  Strong  and  Yogdes  and  Lieu- 
tenant-Colonel Jackson  accompany  this. 

Very  respectfully,  colonel,  your  obedient  servant, 

T.  SEYMOUR, 

Brigadier-General , Commanding  Division. 

Lieut.  Col.  E.  W.  Smith, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


Folly  Island,  S.  C., 

November  10,  1863. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the 
operations  of  my  command  on  Morris  Island  from  July  10  to  July 
18,  more  particularly  as  connected  with  the  assault  of  Fort  Wagner 
on  the  last-named  day.  The  rendering  of  this  report  has  been  una- 
voidably delayed  by  the  difficulty  of  procuring  those  of  subordinate 
commanders,  not  a few  of  whom  fell  in  the  assault,  and  of  obtaining 
such  detailed  information  as  was  essential.  Even  now,  some  regi- 
mental reports  have  not  been  received. 

On  the  morning  of  July  10,  Morris  Island,  up  to  the  very  ditch  of 
Fort  Wagner,  had  fallen  under  our  command.  Pickets  had  been 
established  at  600  yards  from  the  work,  and  a ride-pit  constructed 
during  the  evening,  for  their  shelter,  by  Lieutenant  Michie,  U.  S. 
Engineers,  at  a point  extremely  favorable  for  the  complete  command 
of  the  intervening  ground,  and  for  the  establishment  of  batteries 
against  the  fort.  Before  daylight  on  the  11th,  an  assault  had  been 
made  by  Brigadier-General  Strong,  with  his  brigade,  in  accordance 
with  instructions  given  to  him  directly  by  Brigadier-General  Gill- 
more,  which  attack  failed,  from  the  complete  preparation  of  the 
enemy,  due  to  his  pickets  having  been  driven  in  an  hour  previous  to 
the  attempted  surprise.  It  only  remained,  then,  to  make  a more 
powerful  effort,  after  a concentration  of  all  the  artillery  that  the  land 
or  naval  forces  could  bring  to  bear,  or  to  undertake  a siege  by  regu- 
lar approaches. 

The  guns  and  material  at  the  north  end  of  Folly  were  transferred 
to  Morris  Island.  At  points  selected  by  Brigadier-General  Gillmore, 
and  distant  1,300  and  1,700  yards  from  Fort  Wagner,  two  grand  bat- 
teries were  constructed,  under  the  active  supervision  of  Colonel  Ser- 
rell,  First  New  York  Engineers,  and  Major  Brooks,  of  General  Gill- 
more’s  staff,  and  by  the  night  of  July  17,  in  seven  days,  twenty-five 
rifled  guns  (10,  20,  and  30  pounders)  and  fifteen  siege  mortars,  with 
the  large  supplies  required  for  their  service,  were  placed  in  position. 
This  labor  was  performed  under  highly  disadvantageous  circum- 
stances, under  a broiling  sun,  with  frequent  heavy  rains  at  night, 


[Chap.  XL. 


346  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

under  constant  fire  from  the  enemy’s  batteries,  and  at  all  times  with 
very  insufficient  means  of  transportation.  These  difficulties  were 
overcome  by  the  cheerful  constancy  of  the  command.  To  Brig. 
Gen.  I.  Yogdes,  for  prompt  and  skillful  superintendence  of  the 
transfer  of  material  from  Folly  Island ; to  Capt.  L.  L.  Langdon, 
First  Artillery,  for  his  energetic  exertions  in  getting  the  artillery  to 
its  place,  and  to  the  indefatigable  Captain  Mordecai,  U.  S.  Ordnance, 
for  his  perfect  preparation  and  systematizing  of  the  complicated  ord- 
nance supplies,  much  praise  is  due,  and  they  are,  therefore,  strongly 
commended  to  the  favorable  notice  of  the  brigadier-general  com- 
manding the  department. 

On  July  18,  the  batteries  on  the  right  (Reynolds  and  Weed)  were 
commanded  by  Capt.  L.  L.  Langdon,  and  consisted  of  Captain  Bray- 
ton’s  Third  Rhode  Island  Battery,  six  field  rifles ; Battery  E,  Third 
U.  S.  Artillery,  six  10-pounder  Parrotts,  under  Lieutenant  Myrick, 
Third  Artillery  ; two  30-pounder  Parrotts,  under  Lieut.  G.  Y.  Henry, 
First  Artillery  ; five  8-inch  siege  mortars,  under  Lieutenant  Hol- 
brook, Third  Rhode  Island  Artillery,  and  five  10-inch  siege  mortars, 
under  Captain  Comstock,  Third  Rhode  Island  Artillery.  The  bat- 
teries on  the  left  (Hays  and  O’Rorke)  were  commanded  by  Lieut, 
Col.  R.  H.  Jackson,  captain  First  Artillery,  and  contained  seven 
30-pounder  and  four  20-pounder  Parrotts,  served  by  Captains  Shaw’s 
and  Strahan’s  companies  of  the  Third  Rhode  Island  Artillery,  and  a 
portion  of  the  Sixth  [Seventh]  Connecticut,  under  Captain  Gray, 
and  five  10-inch  siege  mortars,  served  by  Captain  Greene’s  company 
of  the  Third  Rhode  Island  Artillery. 

My  instructions  from  Brigadier-General  Gillmore  were  to  open 
fire  at  daybreak,  but  an  excessively  heavy  rain  had  fallen  during 
the  preceding  night,  so  flooding  the  works  and  deranging  our  affairs 
generally  that  it  could  not  be  commenced  untiHafter  9 o’clock.  A 
deliberate  experimental  fire  was  first  directed,  which  gradually  be- 
came as  rapid  as  accuracy  would  allow.  The  monitors,  the  Iron- 
sides, and  other  vessels,  moved  up,  and  from  about  noon  until 
nightfall  the  fort  was  subjected  to  such  a weight  of  artillery  as  had 
probably  never  before  been  turned  upon  a single  point.  The  garri- 
son remained  closely  under  shelter,  returning  only  an  occasional 
gun,  and  there  was  no  evidence,  from  close  personal  observation, 
that  any  material  damage  had  been  done  to  the  artillery  of  the  fort. 
Our  own  guns  were,  in  fact,  too  far  distant  for  accurate  dismounting 
fire,  and  a portion  of  the  right  battery  was  so  far  useless,  from  im- 
proper location,  that  its  gunners  could  not  even  see  the  object  at 
which  they  fired.  Nevertheless,  it  was  presumed  that,  under  such 
intense  fire,  some  demoralization  must  have  been  effected  within. 

About  an  hour  before  sunset,  I received  instructions  from  Briga- 
dier-General Gillmore  to  arrange  for  an  assault.  It  was  suggested 
to  me  that  the  brigade  of  General  Strong  would  suffice,  but  it  was 
finally  understood  that  all  the  force  of  my  command  should  be  held 
r,eady  for  the  work.  The  division  was  accordingly  formed  on  the 
beach  and  moved  to  the  front.  It  consisted  of  three  fine  brigades. 

The  First,  under  Brigadier-General  Strong,  was  composed  of  the 
Forty-eighth  New  York,  Colonel  Barton  ; Seventy-sixth  Pennsyl- 
vania, Capt.  J.  S.  Littell ; Third  New  Hampshire,  Colonel  Jackson  ; 
Sixth  Connecticut,  Colonel  Chatfield  ; Ninth  Maine,  Colonel  Emery; 
and,  temporarily,  the  Fifty-fourth  Massachusetts,  Colonel  Shaw. 

The  Second  Brigade,  under  Colonel  Putnam,  Seventh  New  Hamp- 
shire, consisted  of  the  Seventh  New  Hampshire,  Lieutenant-Colonel 


Chap.  XL]  OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C.  347 

Abbott;  One  hundredth  New  York,  Colonel  Dandy;  Sixty-second 
Ohio,  Colonel  Pond;  and  Sixty-seventh  Ohio,  Colonel  Voris. 

The  Third  Brigade  was  commanded  by  Brigadier-General  Steven- 
son and  consisted  of  four  excellent  regiments. 

General  Strong  was  to  take  the  advance.  I had  informed  him  that 
he  should  be  promptly  supported  if  it  were  necessary.  Colonel  Put- 
nam was  instructed  to  keep  his  brigade  ready  for  following  up  the 
First,  while  General  Stevenson  was  held  in  reserve. 

That  moment  was  chosen  for  moving  forward  when  the  dusk  of 
the  evening  still  permitted  the  troops  to  see  plainly  the  way,  already 
well  known  to  the  First  and  Second  Brigades,  but  was  yet  sufficiently 
indistinct  to  prevent  accurate  firing  by  the  enemy.  Our  troops  were 
to  use  the  bayonet  alone. 

Half  the  ground  to  be  passed  over  was  undulating,  from  small 
sand-hills,  affording  some  shelter,  but  not  so  rough  as  to  prevent  free 
movement  of  troops.  That  part  of  it  next  the  fort  was  quite  smooth 
and  unobstructed  to  the  very  ditch. 

The  Fifty-fourth  Massachusetts,  a colored  regiment  of  excellent 
character,  well  officered,  with  full  ranks,  and  that  had  conducted 
itself  commendably  a few  days  previously  on  James  Island,  was 
placed  in  front. 

Brigade  commanders  were  advised  to  form  in  column  of  deployed 
regiments.  The  Fifty-fourth  Massachusetts  only  being  too  large  to 
admit  this  development,  was  in  two  lines. 

Once  in  advance  of  our  batteries,  a few  encouraging  words  were 
given  to  the  men  and  the  First  Brigade  launched  forward.  It  had 
not  moved  far  before  the  fort,  liberated  somewhat  from  the  pressure 
of  our  fire,  opened  with  rapid  discharges  of  grape  and  canister,  and 
its  parapet  was  lit  by  a living  line  of  musketry.  More  than  half  the 
distance  was  well  passed,  when,  present  myself  with  the  column,  I 
saw  that  to  overcome  such  resistance,  overpowering  force  must  be 
employed.  Major  Plimpton,  Third  New  Hampshire,  my  assistant 
inspector-general,  was  sent  to  order  the  Second  Brigade  forward  at 
once.  To  my  surprise  this  officer  returned  from  Colonel  Putnam, 
stating  that  he  positively  refused  to  move,  with  the  explanation  from 
Colonel  Putnam  that  he  had  received  orders  from  General  Gillmore 
to  remain  where  he  was.  At  this  moment  the  wounded,  and  many 
unhurt  also,  were  coming  thickly  from  the  front,  along  the  beach. 
General  Strong  had  urged  his  command  on  with  great  spirit  and  gal- 
lantry, but  his  losses  had  been  so  severe  that  his  regiments  were 
much  shaken,  and  the  consequent  confusion  was  much  heightened 
by  the  yielding  of  the  leading  regiment,  large  portions  of  which  fell 
harshly  upon  those  in  their  rear.  Fragments  of  each  regiment, 
however — brave  men,  bravely  led — went  eagerly  over  the  ditch, 
mounted  the  parapet  and  struggled  with  the  foe  inside.  But  these 
efforts  were  too  feeble  to  affect  the  contest  materially.  Prompt  sup- 
port was  not  at  hand,  and  the  First  Brigade,  as  a mass,  had  already 
retired,  although  detached  portions,  principally  from  the  Forty- 
eighth  New  York  and  Sixth  Connecticut,  with  the  colors  of  those 
regiments,  still  clung  to  the  fort. 

After  a painful  and  unnecessary  interval,  Colonel  Putnam,  know- 
ing that  I had  expected  him  to  come  up  closely  and  to  take  an  ener- 
getic share  in  the  assault,  had  without  further  orders  moved  his  com- 
mand forward.  This  gallant  brigade  went  steadily  on,  in  spite  of 
much  loss  and  not  a little  falling  to  the  rear,  and,  clearing  rapidly 
the  intervening  space,  came  to  the  aid  of  the  noble  fellows  still  bat- 


348  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

‘tling  on  the  parapet.  By  a combined  and  determined  rush  over  the 
southeast  angle  of  the  fort,  the  enemy  was  driven  from  that  portion 
of  the  work.  Some  hundred  men  were  now  inside,  with  Colonel 
Putnam  at  their  head.  The  bastion-like  space  between  the  bomb- 
proof and  the  parapet  was  fully  in  our  possession.  Some  of  our  offi- 
cers and  men  mounted  the  bomb-proof  itself,  which  completely  com- 
manded the  interior  of  the  fort.  Strong  efforts  were  made  by  the 
enemy  to  drive  our  brave  fellows  out,  but  unsuccessfully,  and  rebel 
officers  and  men  were  captured  and  sent  to  the  rear.  For  more  than 
an  hour  this  position  was  maintained  by  Colonel  Putnam,  assisted 
by  Colonel  Dandy,  One  hundredth  New  York;  Major  Butler,  Sixty- 
seventh  Ohio;  Major  Coan,  Forty-eighth  New  York;  Captain  Klein, 
Sixth  Connecticut,  and  a number  of  other  very  brave  and  devoted 
officers.  And  now  Colonel  Putnam,  while  waiting  patiently  for  ex- 
pected succor,  and  urging  his  men  to  maintain  the  advantage  that 
had  been  gained,  was  shot,  dead,  on  the  parapet,  as  brave  a soldier, 
as  courteous  a gentleman,  as  true  a man  as  ever  walked  beneath  the 
Stars  and  Stripes. 

General  Strong  had  long  since  been  wounded.  Colonel  Chatfield, 
Sixth  Connecticut;  Colonel  Barton,  Forty-eighth  New  York;  and 
Colonel  Shaw,  Fifty-fourth  Massachusetts,  had  fallen,  after  the  most 
gallant  efforts,  in  front  of  their  commands  ; and  during  the  advance 
of  the  Second  Brigade  I had  been  struck  by  a grape-shot  and  was 
compelled  to  retire.  But  I had  previously  sent  Major  Plimpton  to 
order  up  General  Stevenson’s  brigade,  which  order  was  reiterated 
after  my  being  hurt.  You  were  sent  by  General  Gillmore  to  take 
further  command,  and  the  Third  Brigade  had  no  part  in  the  attack. 

Finally  despairing,  after  long  waiting,  of  further  assistance,  the 
senior  officers  at  the  fort  withdrew  our  men  (with  §£ception  of  about 
100,  who  could  not  be  reached,  and  who  were  soon  after  captured), 
and  what  had  been  so  dearly  bought  was  abandoned  to  the  enemy. 

And  the  failure  must  be  ascribed  solely  to  the  unfortunate  delay 
that  hindered  Colonel  Putnam  from  moving  promptly  in  obedience 
to  my  orders,  and  to  his  not  being  supported  after  he  had  essentially 
succeeded  in  the  assault. 

Unsuccessful  as  we  were,  the  highest  praise  is  due  to  those  noble 
men  who  did  their  full  duty  that  night.  Who  can  forget,  while  cour- 
age and  generosity  are  admired  by  man,  that  glorious  soldier,  Strong, 
or  the  heroic  Putnam,  or  Chatfield,  the  beloved,  or  Shaw,  faithful  and 
devoted  unto  death.  Many  more  than  these  deserve  lasting  record, 
of  the  rank  and  file  as  well  as  of  officers,  but  the  loss  of  those  of 
high  command,  and  the  scattering  of  the  many  wounded  who  were 
prominent  actors  in  this  scene,  with  the  difficulty  of  procuring  suffi- 
cient information  otherwise,  compel  me  to  but  a meager  outline.  On 
every  inch  of  the  sands  in  front  of  Fort  Wagner  will  be  forever 
traced  in  undying  glory  the  story  of  the  determination  and  courage 
of  these  men. 

I cannot  close  without  thanking  Lieutenant-Colonel  Jackson  and 
Captain  Langdon,  First  Artillery,  with  the  other  officers  of  that  arm, 
for  their  efficient  and  valuable  services  during  the  day.  Major  Plimp- 
ton, Third  New  Hampshire,  rendered  me  the  most  energetic  assist- 
ance. Lieutenant  Stevens,  Sixth  Connecticut,  one  of  my  aides,  a 
young  man  of  great  promise,  was  killed  at  my  side.  To  Captain 
[Peter  R,.]  Chadwick,  assistant  adjutant-general,  Lieutenant  [Charles 
hi.]  Jackson  and  Lieutenant  Holt,  my  aides,  my  thanks  are  also  due, 
for  good  conduct  and  prompt  action  at  all  times.  Nor  can  I fail  to 


Chap.  XL.] 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 


349 


call  the  attention  of  General  Gillmore  to  the  merits  of  Lieutenant 
Michie,  U.  S.  Engineers,  who  labored  early  and  late,  with  untiring 
zeal,  in  the  preparations  for  this  assault. 

Such  reports  as  I have  been  able  to  obtain  are  herewith  inclosed. 
And  I am,  general,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

T.  SEYMOUR, 

Brigadier- General,  U.  S.  Volunteers . 

Brig.  Gen.  J.  W.  Turner, 

Chief  of  Staff,  Department  of  the  South. 


No.  10. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  Richard  H.  Jackson,  Assistant  Inspector- 
General,  TJ.  S.  Army,  Commanding  Artillery,  July  10. 

Morris  Island,  S.  C., 

July  11,  1863. 

General  : In  accordance  with  verbal  instructions,  I have  the 
honor  to  report  the  part  taken  by  the  batteries  under  my  command 
in  the  action  of  the  10th  instant. 

Agreeably  to  Special  Orders,  No.  174,  dated  Headquarters  U.  S. 
Forces,  Folly  Island,  S.  C.,  July  8,  1863,  I assumed  chief  command 
of  all  the  batteries  on  the  north  end  of  Folly  Island  on  the  9th 
instant,  and  immediately  inspected  and  prepared  them  for  action. 
They  were  constituted  as  follows  : 

First  line.—  Four  3-inch  rifled  guns,  served  by  Captain  Bray  ton’s 
light  company,  Third  Rhode  Island  Artillery ; four  20-pounder  Par- 
rotts, served  by  Captain  Strahan’s  company,  Third  Rhode  Island 
Artillery ; four  30-pounder  Parrotts,  served  by  Company  C,  First 
U.  S.  Artillery  ; eight  30-pounder  Parrotts,  served  by  Captain  Shaw’s 
company.  Third  Rhode  Island  Artillery  ; six  10-pounder  Parrotts, 
served  by  Light  Company  E,  Third  U.  S.  Artillery  ; six  10-inch 
siege  mortars,  served  by  Captain  Greene’s  company,  Third  Rhode 
Island  Artillery  ; four  10-inch  siege  mortars,  served  by  Captain 
Comstock’s  company,  Third  Rhode  Island  Artillery.  Total  first 
line,  twenty-six  rifled  guns  and  ten  mortars. 

Second  line. — Six  Wiard  guns,  served  by  Light  Battery  F,  Third 
New  York  Volunteer  Artillery  ; five  8-inch  siege  mortars,  served  by 
Lieutenant  Holbrook's  company,  Third  Rhode  Island  Artillery. 
Total  second  line,  six  Wiard  guns  and  five  mortars. 

Grand  total,  thirty-two  rifled  guns  and  fifteen  siege  mortars. 

The  duty  in  the  magazines  was  performed  by  skillful  men  detailed 
for  that  purpose  from  Company  C,  First  U.  S.  Artillery.  The  firing 
commenced  at  5 a.  m.  and  lasted  until  about  8 a.  m. , when  the  heights 
and  batteries  of  the  enemy  were  so  gallantly  carried  by  the  infantry 
under  your  command.  The  crushing  effect  of  a concentrated  and 
well-directed  fire  of  artillery,  so  much  in  favor  with  artillery  offi- 
cers, has  never  been  better  illustrated  than  in  this  action. 

The  enemy  at  the  commencement  was  so  bewildered  as  to  be  unable 
to  serve  his  guns  with  effect,  and  the  rain  of  shot  and  shell  from  my 
batteries  was  so  incessant  and  effective  as  to  drive  his  gunners  from 
their  pieces,  killing  and  wounding  many.  His  infantry  were  also 
prevented  from  taking  up  their  position  in  the  strong  rifle-pits  about 
800  yards  in  advance  of  our  batteries,  and  never  attempted  to  occupy 


350 


S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AJSTD  E.  FLA. 


[Chap.  XL. 


them  until  our  troops  were  disembarked  on  Morris  Island,  which 
occurred  about  8 a.  m. 

As  our  infantry  moved  up  the  slopes  of  the  sand  ridges  to  carry 
the  enemy’s  position,  I directed  the  officers  in  command  of  the  10-inch 
mortar  batteries  and  20  and  30  pounder  Parrotts  to  fire  over  the 
head  of  the  leading  column  and  over  the  hills  in  front,  in  order  to 
prevent  the  assembling  of  the  enemy’s  infantry  for  the  purpose  of  op- 
posing our  troops  when  they  would  have  crowned  the  heights.  I am 
happy  to  say  that  the  fire  had  the  desired  effect,  and  not  an  accident 
occurred  from  this  fire  over  the  heads  of  our  own  men.  As  soon  as 
I perceived  the  enemy’s  infantry  preparing  to  oppose  General  Strong’s 
advance,  the  fire  of  eleven  pieces  on  the  left  of  the  first  line  was 
directed  upon  them,  with  good  effect,  and  did  much  to  facilitate  the 
advance. 

During  the  action,  I had  to  cut  away  and  enlarge  many  of  the  em- 
brasures in  order  to  obtain  a larger  field  of  fire.  Lieutenant  Michie, 
of  the  engineer  corps,  performed  this  duty  admirably,  under  the 
enemy’s  fire. 

In  walking  through  the  enemy’s  batteries  and  over  his  position, 
after  the  action,  I was  much  gratified  to  observe  with  how  much 
skill  and  accuracy  both  officers  and  gunners  must  have  directed  the 
fire  of  their  pieces,  from  the  manner  in  which  the  earthworks  were 
torn  to  pieces  and  from  the  number  of  killed  and  wounded  by  shot 
and  shell. 

As  near  as  could  be  ascertained,  the  number  of  projectiles  ex- 
pended during  the  action  was  2,500.  v 

I have  had  only  two  casualties,  severely  woundect.  They  occurred 
in  Captain  Shaw’s  company,  Third  Rhode  Island  Artillery,  from  the 
premature  discharge  of  a piece. 

Capt.  L.  L.  Langdon,  First  Artillery,  and  Lieut.  J.  P.  Farley, 
ordnance  corps,  had  the  immediate  direction  of  the  first  line,  and 
Maj.  J.  E.  Bailey,  Third  Rhode  Island  Artillery,  of  the  second,  and 
performed  their  duty  entirely  to  my  satisfaction ; but  as  all  the 
officers  and  men  behaved  with  so  much  zeal  and  coolness,  I am  un- 
able to  select  any  for  special  commendation.  I desire  to  say,  though, 
that  should  my  services  be  deemed  necessary  in  any  future  opera- 
tions on  Morris  Island  it  will  give  me  great  pleasure  to  command 
the  same  batteries  again. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

R.  H.  JACKSON, 

Capt.  1st  Art.,  Lieut.  Col.,  and  A.  I.  G.,  10 th  Army  Corps . 

Brig.  Gen.  Truman  Seymour, 

Commanding  XJ.  S.  Forces,  Morris  Island. 


No.  11. 

Reports  of  Brig.  Gen.  Israel  Vogdes,  U.  S.  Army . 

Headquarters,  U.  S.  Forces, 

Folly  Island,  S.  C.,  July  17,  1863. 

Colonel  : I beg  leave  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the  oper- 
ations of  the  troops  under  my  command  from  the  time  (12th  of  June) 


Chap.  XL.] 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 


351 


when  General  Gillmore  assumed  command,  to  the  5th  of  July,  when 
I was  relieved  of  command  by  General  Seymour : 

In  the  early  part  of  April  last,  I was  assigned  to  command  of  Folly 
Island.  I immediately  set  about  putting  the  island  in  a state  of  de- 
fense, looking  to  its  being  the  base  of  operations  against  Charles- 
ton. I found  the  island  covered  with  a dense  and  impenetrable  forest 
and  tangled  underwood,  without  roads  of  any  description,  and  im- 
passable, except  by  the  east  and  west  beaches,  at  low  tides. 

I immediately  caused  several  roads  to  be  opened,  the  principal  of 
which  traversed  the  island  through  its  entire  length,  about  10  miles, 
and  several  strong  batteries  to  be  constructed  at  the  south  end,  and 
about  2 miles  from  the  north  end.  These  have  been  reported  to  the 
proper  authorities  from  time  to  time,  and  are  alluded  to  here  only  to 
show  the  state  of  affairs  when  General  Gillmore  assumed  command. 

Immediately  upon  assuming  command,  General  Gillmore  commu- 
nicated to  me  his  intention  of  attacking  Morris  Island,  and,  in  ac- 
cordance with  his  instructions,  I immediately  commenced  operations. 
The  engineering  operations  were  conducted  principally  under  the 
supervision  of  Lieutenants  Suter  and  Michie. 

A two-fold  problem  had  to  be  solved ; first,  to  construct  formi- 
dable batteries  within  800  to  1,200  yards  of  the  enemy ; second,  to 
conceal  them  entirely  from  his  notice.  This  last  was  exceedingly 
difficult,  as  he,  the  enemy,  had  a lookout  near  Secessionville,  which 
overlooked  the  position,  besides  having  a direct  view  from  Morris 
Island.  However,  there  being  a dense  copse  wood  near  the  north 
end,  we  were  afforded  the  means  of  solving  the  second  part  of  the 
problem. 

A few  days  previous  to  commencing  operations,  a steamer,  in  at- 
tempting to  run  the  blockade,  had  run  ashore  on  a spit  of  land  be- 
tween Morris  and  Folly  Islands.  Having  taken  measures  to  secure 
her  cargo,  the  enemy  opened  upon  me  with  a heavy  fire  ; but  deem- 
ing it  of  more  importance  to  secure  the  construction  of  the  batteries, 
I concealed  my  movements  so  as  to  leave  the  impression  that  he  had 
driven  me  from  the  north  end  of  the  island  ; but,  in  the  meantime, 
that  point  was  occupied  by  about  1,000  men,  as  guards  and  laborers, 
who  worked  day  and  night,  notwithstanding  the  heavy  fire,  for  sev- 
eral days.  At  least  2,000  rounds  were  fired  by  the  enemy  without 
our  replying,  or  in  the  least  regarding  it.  I regret  to  state  that 
several  men  lost  their  lives,  and  several  were  wounded.  These  oper- 
ations commenced  on  the  15th  of  June,  and  were  essentially  com- 
pleted by  the  3d  of  July.  During  this  time,  twelve  10-inch,  four  8- 
inch  mortars,  twelve  30-pounder,  four  20-pounder,  ten  10-pounder 
Parrotts,  and  six  12-pounder  Wiard  guns  were  put  in  position  in  re- 
vetted and  embrasured  batteries  ; magazines  and  splinter-proofs  were 
also  constructed. 

Each  piece  was  supplied  with  200  rounds  of  ammunition.  These 
were  carried  to  their  positions  during  the  night,  and  so  effectually 
were  these  movements  concealed  that,  up  to  the  time  of  opening  the 
fire  of  the  batteries,  the  enemy  had  not  the  slightest  idea  of  their 
existence. 

I am  greatly  indebted  to  Colonel  Dandy,  who  commanded  during 
the  construction  of  the  works,  for  the  efficient  discipline  and  order 
which  he  preserved  ; to  Lieutenants  Suter  and  Michie,  engineers,  for 
the  skill  and  industry  displayed  in  selecting  the  position  and  in  the 
construction  of  the  works. 

The  mounting  of  the  guns  and  supplying  the  ammunition  was 


[Chap.  XL. 


352  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA 

intrusted  to  Captain  Mordecai,  of  tlie  ordnance  department.  The 
energy,  perseverance  and  knowledge  displayed  by  this  officer  are  de- 
serving of  the  highest  praise,  and  I beg  leave  to  commend  him  and 
Colonel  Dandy,  Lieutenants  Suter  and  Micliie,  particularly,  to  the 
favorable  consideration  of  the  general  commanding.  The  works  were 
constructed  by  the  First  New  York  Engineers,  detachments  of  the 
First  U.  S.  Artillery,  Third  Rhode  Island  Heavy  Artillery,  Third  New 
York  Artillery,  the  Fourth  New  Hampshire  Volunteers,  One  hun- 
dredth New  York  Volunteers,  Eighty-fifth  Pennsylvania  Volunteers, 
Thirty-ninth  Illinois  Volunteers,  and  Sixty-second  and  Sixty-seventh 
Ohio  Volunteer  Regiments,  all  of  which  displayed  great  coolness 
in  constructing  the  works  under  a galling  fire. 

I regret  to  state,  that,  having  accidentally  lost  my  note-book  dur- 
ing the  change  of  our  headquarters,  I cannot  give  the  detailed  ac- 
count of  the  daily  work.  During  the  period  of  my  command,  I have 
been  greatly  assisted  by  Captain  Payne,  One  hundredth  New  York 
Volunteers,  and  Corporal  [Aaron  D.]  Yocum,  of  the  Sixty-second 
Ohio  Volunteers,  in  collecting  reliable  information  as  to  the  enemy’s 
position,  See.  I take  great  pleasure  in  commending  them  to  the  favor- 
able consideration  of  the  general  commanding. 

I presume  that  my  successor,  General  Seymour,  will  make  a re- 
port of  the  operations  on  the  morning  of  the  10th  instant.  My  bri- 
gade was  ordered  to  be  held  in  reserve.  Three  of  my  regiments, 
however,  participated  in  the  assault — the  Seventh  New  Hampshire 
Volunteers,  One  hundredth  New  York  Volunteers,  and  Sixty-second 
Ohio.  They  were  embarked  under  fire,  and  behaved  with  great 
coolness. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  most  obedient  Servant, 

I.  VOGDES, 

Brigadier- General  of  Volunteers . 

Col.  J.  W.  Turner, 

Chief  of  Staff , Department  of  the  South. 


Headquarters  U.  S.  Forces, 

Folly  Island,  S.  C.,  October  21,  1863. 

General  : In  accordance  with  the  intimation  in  your  note  of  the 
19th,  I beg  leave  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the  operations  of 
the  troops  under  my  command  during  the  attack  on  Morris  Island, 
July  10,  1863 : 

These  troops  having  since  passed  from  under  my  command,  I am 
unable  to  obtain  reports  from  the  several  commanders,  and  will  con- 
sequently have  to  trust  entirely  to  my  memory  for  the  facts. 

The  attack  on  Morris  Island  was  fixed  for  the  morning  of  the  9th 
of  July.  Understanding  from  you  that  you  intended  to  accompany 
the  column  of  General  Strong,  I so  informed  General  Gillmore, 
whereupon  he  directed  me  to  take  command  of  the  batteries  in  Camp 
Seymour,  in  addition  to  the  brigade  under  my  orders.  The  imme- 
diate command  of  these  batteries  was  intrusted  to  Lieutenant-Col- 
onel Jackson,  inspector-general.  The  undergrowth  was  removed  from 
in  front  of  the  embrasures,  and  the  embrasures  opened,  under  the 
direction  of  Lieutenant  McGuire,  of  the  First  New  York  Volunteer 
Engineers. 

As  it  was  somewhat  doubtful  whether  the  attack  would  come  off 


Chap.  XL.] 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 


353 


as  directed,  I suspended  felling  the  trees  which  masked  the  batteries 
until  I could  communicate  with  General  Gillmore,  which  I did  at 
about  3 a.  m.,  and,  by  his  order,  suspended  operations,  replacing  as  far 
as  possible  the  material  that  had  been  removed.  This  was  com- 
pletely accomplished  before  daylight.  The  Seventh  New  Hqjprp- 
shire,  One  hundredth  New  York,  and  parts  of  the  Sixty-second  and 
Sixty-seventh  Ohio,  remained  as  guards  to  the  batteries. 

During  the  9th  and  the  night  of  the  9th,  the  batteries  were  all 
inspected,  all  of  the  artillery  was  at  its  post,  and  the  men  made 
familiar  with  their  duties.  During  the  night  of  the  9th,  General 
Seymour  took  charge  of  the  batteries  in  person,  and  my  command  was 
limited  to  that  of  my  brigade,  consisting  of  the  Seventh  New  Hamp- 
shire, One  hundredth  New  York,  Eighty-fifth  Pennsylvania,  Thirty- 
ninth  Illinois,  Sixty-second  and  Sixty-seventh  Ohio,  and  the  Inde- 
pendent Battalion.  The  One  hundredth  New  York,  Seventh  New 
Hampshire,  Sixty-second  and  Sixty-seventh  Ohio  were  in  the  trenches 
or  within  supporting  distance  during  the  nights  of  the  8th  and  9th, 
and  the  remainder  of  the  brigade,  excepting  such  as  were  on  grand 
guard,  were  bivouacked  in  column  in  front  of  the  entrenched  line 
at  Camp  Howell.  The  batteries  were  opened  just  after  daylight 
on  the  10th.  As  soon  as  the  general  commanding  the  department 
judged  the  proper  moment  for  assault  had  arrived,  General  Sey- 
mour, accompanied  by  myself,  passed  to  the  front  of  the  intrench- 
ments.  A part  of  General  Strong’s  brigade  had  landed  on  the  left; 
a portion  was  passing  down  the  inlet  to  land  on  the  right.  The  en- 
emy’s fire  had  slackened,  but  he  still  continued  to  fire  with  musketry 
and  solid  shot. 

The  boats  containing  General  Strong’s  brigade  were  sent  to  this 
side,  and  the  Seventh  New  Hampshire  and  One  hundredth  New  York 
and  parts  of  the  Sixty-second  and  Sixty-seventh  Ohio  were  embarked, 
under  the  fire  of  the  enemy’s  batteries.  They  behaved  very  gal- 
lantly, and  the  movement  was  performed  quickly  and  in  good  order. 
One  regiment  of  General  Strong’s  brigade  was  first  embarked;  it 
was  immediately  followed  by  the  Seventh  New  Hampshire  and  One 
hundredth  New  York.  Not  more  than  twenty  minutes  elapsed  from 
the  time  the  boats  returned  until  the  troops  had  disembarked,  and 
formed  in  line  of  battle  on  the  opposite  shore.  Great  credit  is  due 
to  the  officers  and  men  of  these  regiments  for  the  gallantry,  prompt- 
ness, and  good  order  in  which  this  movement  was  executed.  It  was 
superintended  by  General  Seymour,  aided  by  myself  and  staff.  The 
Sixty-second  and  Sixty-seventh  Ohio  followed,  as  soon  as  transporta- 
tion could  be  obtained,  in  equally  good  order. 

The  general  commanding,  having  arrived  at  the  front,  passed  over 
to  Morris  Island,  accompanied  by  General  Seymour.  By  the  direc* 
tion  of  the  general  commanding,  I remained  in  command  at  Folly 
Island.  ^ 

I immediately  commenced  dismantling  the  works  at  Camp  Seymour 
and  transporting  the  guns  and  materials,  ordnance  and  engineer- 
ing, to  Morris  Island.  This  was  executed  in  less  than  six  days.  Great 
difficulty  was  experienced  in  making  this  transfer,  owing  to  the  de- 
ficiency both  of  land  and  water  transportation.  I was  ably  seconded 
in  this  duty  by  Major  Campbell,  Eighty-fifth  Pennsylvania,  and  Cap- 
tain Brayton,  Third  Rhode  Island  Artillery.  I beg  leave  to  com- 
mend them  to  your  favorable  consideration. 

I do  not  report  upon  the  construction  of  the  batteries,  as  I have 
made  a report  upon  that  subject  to  the  general  commanding  the  de- 
23  R R — VOL  XXVIII,  PT  I 


354  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 


[Chap.  XL. 


partment.  Nor  have  I alluded  to  the  splendid  service  rendered  by 
them  on  the  morning  of  the  10th,  they  being  more  particularly  un- 
der your  .immediate  direction. 

Very  respectfully,  yours,  &c., 

, I.  VOGDES, 

Brigadier- General . 

Brig.  Gen.  Truman  Seymour. 


No.  12. 

Reports  of  Brig.  Gen.  George  C.  Strong,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding 

brigade. 

Morris  Island,  S.  C., 

July  10,  1863. 

General:  Pursuant  to  instructions  of  yesterday  from  division 
headquarters,  I embarked  during  the  night,  in  row-boats,  at  a point 
near  the  southwestern  extremity  of  Folly  Island,  all  the  infantry  of 
my  brigade,  with  the  exception  of  six  companies  of  the  Forty-eighth 
Regiment,  New  York  Volunteers.  Convoyed  by  four  howitzer 
boats,  supplied  by  the  admiral,  we  proceeded,  at  1 a.  m.  to-day,  up 
Folly  River  and  Folly  Island  Creek,  and  thence  to  a point  in  Light- 
House  Inlet,  1 mile  northwest  from  our  masked  batteries  at  the  north- 
ern extremity  of  Folly  Island.  This  point  of  the  inlet  was  reached 
just  before  daybreak,  and  here  we  awaited  the  result  of  the  bom- 
bardment of  Morris  Island,  commenced  at  5 a.  m.  by  our  batteries. 
Lieutenant-Commander  Bunce  also  opened  fire^from  the  howitzer 
boats,  soon  after,  upon  the  nearest  of  the  enemy’s  works. 

About  6 a.  m. , a line  of  skirmishers  was  seen  approaching  from 
our  rear  in  the  direction  of  Secessionville.  The  flotilla  accordingly 
dropped  down  the  inlet  to  a point  more  exposed  to  the  fire  of  the 
Morris  Island  batteries,  where  we  were  vigorously  assailed  by  them, 
with,  however,  the  loss  of  but  a single  launch. 

At  about  7 a.  m.,  I received  from  General  Gillmore  the  signal  to 
land  and  assault  the  enemy’s  works.  Four  companies  of  the  Seventh 
Connecticut  (the  only  companies  of  that  regiment  attached  to  my 
command),  gallantly  led  by  Lieutenant-Colonel  Rodman,  immedi- 
ately landed  at  the  extremity  of  the  enemy’s  extensive  series  of  rifle- 
pits,  opposite  the  left  of  our  batteries.  They  were  followed  by  the 
four  companies  of  the  Forty-eighth  New  York,  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Green ; the  Ninth  Maine  Regiment,  Colonel  Emery ; the  Third  New 
Hampshire,  Colonel  Jackson;  and  the  Seventy-sixth  Pennsylvania, 
Colonel  Strawbridge. 

This,  the  main  column,  drove  the  enemy’s  infantry  out  of  the  rifle- 
pits,  while  the  Sixth  Connecticut  Regiment,  Colonel  Chatfield,  hav- 
ing passed  along  the  entire  front  of  the  enemy’s  line  and  effected  a 
landing,  was  forming  his  command  on  the  southeasterly  point  of  the 
island,  and  alone  constituted  our  right  column  of  assault. 

The  two  columns  now  moved  forward,  under  a lively  discharge  of 
shell,  grape,  and  canister,  converging  toward  the  works  nearest  the 
southern  extremity  of  the  island,  and  thence  along  its  commanding 
ridge  and  eastern  coast,  capturing  successively  the  eight  batteries, 
of  one  heavy  gun  each,  occupying  the  commanding  points  of  that 
ridge,  besides  two  batteries,  mounting,  together,  three  10-inch  sea- 
coast  mortars.  All  this  ordnance  is  in  serviceable  condition. 


Chap.  XL.]  OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C.  355 

As  soon  as  the  troops  had  disembarked,  the  boats  were  sent  across 
the  inlet  to  the  northern  point  of  Folly  Island,  and  brought  thence 
the  remainder  of  the  Forty-eighth  New  York,  the  One  hundredth 
New  York,  and  the  Seventh  New  Hampshire  Regiment  (the  two  last 
named  being  a portion  of  General  Vogdes’  brigade),  commanded,  re- 
spectively, by  Colonels  Barton,  Dandy,  and  Putnam.  The  prompt- 
ness with  which  this  re-enforcement  was  effected  deserves  special 
mention. 

We  captured  150  prisoners  (including  11  commissioned  officers),  5 
stand  of  colors,  a considerable  quantity  of  camp  equipage  and  am- 
munition, and  several  horses  and  mules. 

We  lost,  of  commissioned  officers,  1 killed  (the  gallant  Captain 
Lent,  Forty-eighth  New  York  Volunteers)  and  1 wounded;  of  non- 
comihissioned  officers  and  privates,  14  killed  and  90  wounded. 

The  head  of  the  column  was  halted  within  musket-range  of  Fort 
Wagner,  situated  near  the  northern  extremity  of  the  island,  to  which 
the  enemy  had  retreated,  and  which  was  not  to-day  assaulted  on  ac- 
count of  the  excessive  heat  of  the  weather,  and  consequent  fatigue 
of  our  troops. 

I believe  that  I cannot  too  highly  commend  the  coolness  and  cour- 
age of  my  officers  and  men  in  the  somewhat  hazardous  operation  of 
landing  in  the  face  of  the  enemy. 

Lieutenant-Commander  Bunce,  U.  S.  Navy,  commanding  the  how- 
itzer boats,  and  Lieutenant  McKenzie,  U.  S.  Navy,  in  charge  of  the 
boats  furnished  from  the  fleet  for  our  transportation,  and  the  officers 
and  men  under  their  respective  commands,  did  most  gallant  and 
valuable  service. 

Lieutenants  Hatfield  and  Hickok,  of  the  signal  corps,  maintained 
constant  and  perfect  communication  between  my  command  and  the 
headquarters  of  the  division  and  of  the  department. 

The  other  officers  of  my  staff,  Captain  [William  W.]  Harral,  aide- 
de-camp  ; Major  Plimpton,  acting  assistant  inspector-general ; Lieu- 
tenant [Alvan  H.]  Libby,  acting  assistant  adjutant-general ; Captain 
[Edward  F.]  Wyman,  acting  brigade  commissary;  Lieutenant  [Frank 
J.]  Magee,  acting  brigade  quartermaster,  and  Surgeon  [Stephen  F.] 
Elliot,  brigade  surgeon,  have  my  thanks  for  untiring  and  effective 
co-operation  from  the  commencement  of  the  embarkation,  and  con- 
spicuous gallantry  during  the  action. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

GEO.  C.  STRONG, 

Brigadier-  General,  Commanding  Forces  on  Morris  Island. 

Brig.  Gen.  Truman  Seymour, 

Comdg.  U . S.  Forces  on  Morris  and  Folly  Islands,  S.  C. 


Headquarters  U.  S.  Forces, 

Morris  Island , S.  C.,  July  11,  1863. 

General  : Pursuant  to  instructions  from  department  headquar- 
ters, a column  of  assault  was  formed  before  daybreak,  this  morn- 
ing, for  an  attack  upon  Fort  Wagner.  This  column  consisted  of 
four  companies  of  the  Seventh  Connecticut  Volunteers,  the  Seventy- 
sixth  Pennsylvania,  and  the  Ninth  Maine  Regiments.  The  Third 
and  Seventh  New  Hampshire  Regiments  formed  the  reserve. 

The  assault  was  made  at  daybreak,  the  Seventh  Connecticut  de- 
ployed in  the  advance,  supported  by  the  Seventy-sixth  Pennsylvania 


35()  S.  0.  AND  a A.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

and  Ninth  Maine,  in  the  order  named,  and  each  in  close  column  of 
divisions. N 

The  leading  battalion  had  received  orders  to  dash  forward  with  a 
shont  when  the  enemy  should  open  fire,  and  the  other  battalions  were 
directed  to  maintain  their  respective  intervals. 

These  orders  were  most  faithfully  observed  by  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Rodman,  of  the  Seventh  Connecticut,  who  led  a portion  of  his  com- 
mand, under  a very  heavy  fire  of  artillery  and  musketry,  to  the  top 
of  the  parapet,  where  two  of  the  enemy’s  gunners  were  bayoneted 
by  his  men. 

But,  unfortunately,  when  the  enemy  opened  simultaneously  along 
his  whole  line,  and  within  a range  of  200  yards,  the  Seventy-sixth 
Pennsylvania  halted  and  lay  down  upon  the  ground.  Though  they 
remained  in  this  position  but  a few  moments,  and  afterward  moved 
gallantly  forward,  some  of  them  even  to  the  ditch,  that  halt  lost  the 
battle,  for  the  interval  was  lost  and  the  Seventh,  unsupported,  were 
driven  from  the  parapet.  The  whole  column,  including  the  Ninth 
Maine,  which  had  reached  the  ditch  on  the  left,  gave  way  and  re- 
treated from  the  field.  We  lost  in  killed,  wounded  and  missing,  8 
commissioned  officers  and  322  non-commissioned  officers  and  privates. 
Lieutenant-Colonel  Rodman,  Seventh  Connecticut  Volunteers,  the 
bravest  of  the  brave,  is  among  the  wounded. 

The  Seventy-sixth  Pennsylvania  Regiment,  heretofore  bearing  the 
reputation  of  a most  gallant  and  thoroughly  disciplined  organization, 
will  have  another  and  early  opportunity  to  efface  the  remembrance 
of  their  involuntary  fault.  The,  causes  of  their  failure,  and  hence 
the  failure  of  the  assault,  were,  first,  the  sudden,  tremendous,  and 
simultaneous  fire  which  all  encountered,  and,  second,  the  absence  of 
their  colonel,  who  was  taken  ill  before  the  column  was  put  in  motion. 
I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

GEO.  C.  STRONG, 
Brigadier-  General,  Commanding. 

Brig.  Gen.  Truman  Seymour, 

Comdg.  TJ.  S.  Forces  on  Morris  and  Folly  Islands,  S.  C. 


No.  13. 


Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  Lorenzo  Meeker,  Sixth  Connecticut  Infantry. 


General : 

* * 


Hilton  Head,  S.  C., 

February  23,  1864. 


Until  the  night  of  July  8 [1863],  the  regiment  performed  fatigue 
and  picket  duty,  when,  preparations  having  been  made  for  an  attack 
on  Morris  Island,  S.  C. , it  embarked  in  small  boats,  and,  under  com- 
mand of  Col.  John  L.  Chatfield,  proceeded  up  Folly  River  to  Pawnee 
Landing.  The  plan  for  a night  attack  having  been  abandoned,  it 
returned  to  camp  early  on  the  morning  of  the  9th.  Again,  on  the 
night  of  July  9,  the  regiment  embarked  in  small  boats  as  before,  ar- 
riving at  Light-House  Inlet,  at  Morris  Island,  about  sunrise  the  next 
morning.  The  batteries  on  the  north  end  of  Folly  Island  opened  fire 
upon  the  enemy’s  batteries  on  Morris  Island,  and  continued  in  rapid 
succession  for  about  two  hours,  when  the  regiment  effected  a landing 


Chap.  XL.] 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  0. 


357 


on  Morris  Island,  under  a heavy  artillery  fire.  Immediately,  it 
formed  in  line  and  gallantly  charged  on  the  rebel  works,  capturing 
battery  after  battery,  and  continuing  the  charge  to  within  rifle  range 
of  Fort  Wagner. 

The  enemy’s  batteries  were  erected  upon  high  sand  banks,  and  as 
their  guns  could  not  be  sufficiently  depressed,  a landing  was  effected, 
and  the  charge  made,  with  but  small  loss;  only  1 killed  and  11  wounded. 
Of  the  twelve  batteries  captured,  nine  were  siege  and  three  mortar. 
About  100  prisoners  were  taken,  together  with  one  garrison  and  one 
battle  flag,  the  latter  inscribed,  “Pocotaligo,  October  22,  1862.”  It 
was  captured  by  Private  Roper  Hounslow,  Company  D,  who  shot  the 
color-bearer  through  the  head,  killing  him  instantly.  The  regiment 
numbered  16  officers  and  about  480  men.  Until  the  18th  of  July,  the 
regiment  bivouacked  at  the  lower  shore  of  the  island,  performing 
fatigue  and  picket  duty.  About  1 p.  m.  on  the  18th,  it  was  ordered 
under  arms,  and,  under  command  of  Col.  John  L.  Chatfield,  advanced 
a short  distance  in  front  of  Craig  Hill  Signal  Station,  as  a support  to 
the  batteries  which  had  opened  fire  upon  the  enemy.  At  5. 30  p.  m.  it 
was  formed  into  line,  and  advanced  toward  the  enemy,  moving  along 
the  .beach,  by  the  right  flank,  until  in  front  of  the  line  of  stockades, 
when  it  was  formed  facing  Fort  Wagner.  About  6. 30  p.  m.  it  formed 
in  column  of  companies,  closed  in  mass,  advanced  upon  the  enemy’s 
works  in  good  order,  crossed  the  moat  and  entered  the  fort  at  the 
southeastern  angle.  The  regiment  held  its  position  in  the  fort  for 
about  three  hours,  when,  as  it  was  found  impossible  to  obtain  re- 
enforcements, orders  were  given  to  retire  as  quietly  as  possible. 

The  conduct  of  both  officers  and  men  in  the  assault  was  meritorious 
in  the  extreme.  Too  much  cannot  be  said  in  their  praise,  for  the  cool 
courage  and  bravery  they  evinced  while  marching  on  to  the  assault, 
through  a most  murderous  fire,  and  for  their  determined  resistance 
while  in  the  fort.  No  act  of  cowardice  or  want  of  courage  was 
noticed  in  any.  The  casualties  of  the  regiment  were  forwarded  to 
you  shortly  after  the  engagement.  While  a portion  of  the  regiment 
was  engaged  on  fatigue  duty,  at  the  front,  on  the  25th  of  July,  5 men 
were  wounded. 

On  the  29th  of  July,  by  orders  from  department  headquarters,  the 
regiment  was  relieved  from  duty  on  Morris  Island  and  ordered  to 
report  to  the  post  commander  at  Hilton  Head,  where  it  arrived  July 
31,  1863. 

* * * * * * * 


I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient 
servant, 


LORENZO  MEEKER, 

Lieut.  Col.,  Comdg.  Sixth  Regiment  Connecticut  Vols. 
Brig.  Gen.  H.  T.  Morse, 

A cljutant-  General , Connecticut. 


No.  14. 

Leport  of  Capt.  Sylvester  H.  Gray,  Seventh  Connecticut  Infantry. 

Camp  Rodman, 

Morris  Island,  S.  C.,Jidy  13,  1863. 
Colonel  : The  two  companies  under  my  command  arrived  at 
Saint  Helena  Island,  S.  C.,  on  the  morning  after  my  leaving  Augus- 
tine, about  7 a.  m. 


358 


S.  C.  AND  GrA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 


[Chap.  XL. 


I reported  to  General  Strong  next  morning,  disembarked,  and 
camped.  Lieutenant  Greene  joined  his  company  the  morning  of  my 
arrival.  On  Sunday  Lieutenant-Colonel  Rodman  arrived,  with  Com- 
panies A and  B,  and  assumed  command  ; on  the  3d  of  July,  just  at 
dark,  received  orders  to  have  two  days’  rations  cooked,  and  camp 
struck,  ready  to  move  by  daylight  on  the  4th. 

On  the  morning  of  the  4th,  was  embarked  on  board  steamer  May- 
flower, with  two  companies  of  the  Seventy -sixth  Pennsylvania.  It 
being  rough  weather,  we  did  not  arrive  off  Stono  until  midnight;  was 
met  by  a dispatch  boat  and  ordered  back  to  Hilton  Head,  to  return 
and  be  off  the  bar  next  night  by  sundown. 

On  the  night  of  the  5th,  we  arrived  at  sundown  and  were  taken  up 
to  Folly  Island  and  disembarked.  After  having  gotten  our  baggage  off 
the  steamer,  she  went  to  sea  before  daylight,  and  we  moved  up  about 
3 miles  and  bivouacked  for  the  night;  being  tired  and  weary  (crowded 
aboard  the  boat  so  long),  the  boys  soon  dropped  into  a sound  sleep, 
and  oh ! such  a sleep.  You  know  from  experience.  Early  in  the 
morning  the  colonel  selected  a camping  ground.  The  ground  being 
staked  out,  the  boys  turned  in  with  a will,  and  soon  had  it  clean, 
and  one  of  the  best  camps  we  ever  had  in  this  department,  not  ex- 
cepting Augustine.  The  water  was  also  the  best.  We  were  camped 
on  the  side  facing  the  ocean,  and  our  parade-ground  the  beach,  and 
the  men  and  officers  enjoyed  a good  bath,  twice  a day ; but  it  was 
too  good  to  be  of  long  duration.  On  the  8th  we  received  orders  to 
have  three  days’  cooked  rations  on  hand,  until  further  orders,  and  at 
sundown  there  came  an  order  to  fall  in.  W e were  assigned  the  post 
of  honor  on  the  right  of  General  Strong’s  brigade,  supported  by 
the  Sixth  Connecticut  Volunteers.  The  brigade  was  formed  and 
marched  across  the  island,  and  the  Seventh  and  Sixth  were  embarked 
on  boats.  There  I ascertained  from  Rodman  that  we  were  to  land 
up  a creek  about  the  center  of  Morris  Island,  were  to  go  down  to- 
ward Folly  Island,  and  the  Sixth  to  throw  a line  across  the  island  to 
keep  the  enemy  from  attacking  us  in  the  rear.  We  were  to  take  and 
spike  all  the  guns,  being,  as  near  as  they  could  ascertain,  six  single- 
gun batteries.  After  the  batteries  were  captured,  the  troops  were 
to  cross  Light-House  Inlet,  in  force ; but  we  were  delayed,  and  did  not 
get  ready  to  start  until  2 a.  m.,  and  so  were  ordered  back;  disembarked 
and  returned  to  camp,  and  once  more  felt  safe  for  twenty-four  hours. 
Each  officer  felt  the  importance  of  the  movement,  and  had  come  to  a 
firm  determination  to  win  or  die  in  the  cause.  Early  in  the  day  of  the 
9th,  we  received  orders  to  be  ready  by  sundown  to  take  a fresh  start. 
To  prevent  any  mistake  in  the  night,  each  officer  and  man  had  on  his 
left  arm  a white  badge,  3 inches  wide,  sewed  on  his  blouse.  The 
plan  was  changed  to  a fair,  stand-up  fight.  General  Strong  was  to 
embark  2,000  men  in  boats  and  take  them  up  Folly  River,  into  Light- 
House  Inlet,  and  at  sunrise  the  batteries  that  had  been  erected  (there 
were  over  forty  guns  and  mortars  in  position)  were  to  open,  and  the 
gunboats  to  engage  the  batteries  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  island. 
The  boats  arrived  with  the  troops  on  time,  preceded  by  eight  boat 
howitzers  from  the  gunboats.  The  first  boat  contained  General 
Strong  and  a staff,  and  then  came  the  Seventh  Battalion.  General 
Gillmore  told  Colonel  Rodman  that  the  generals  had  consulted  and 
come  to  the  conclusion  that  our  battalion  was  the  most  reliable, 
and  could  be  trusted,  and  was  selected  for  that  purpose.  The  batter- 
ies opened  at  daylight,  and  in  a short  time  the  enemy  discovered  the 
boats,  and  they  threw  shell  and  solid  shot,  trying  to  sink  our  boats. 


Chap.  XL.]  OPERATIONS  O'N  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C.  359 

of  which  the  river  was  full.  The  shot  and  shell  struck  and  hurst 
all  around  us,  and  but  one  boat  was  struck — that  contained  some  of 
the  Sixth  Connecticut  Y olunteers — killing  one  and  wounding  one  or 
two.  Rodman  was  now  sent  ashore  to  see  what  he  could  ascertain. 
Lieutenant  Hicks,  Captain  Chamberlain,  and  a part  of  Company  A, 
accompanying  him,  soon  returned.  About  this  time  the  general’s 
boat  got  two  extra  discharges  of  grape.  It  seemed  to  completely 
envelop  it,  yet,  strange,  no  one  was  struck.  Just  at  this  moment 
Rodman  said  to  the  general,  “Let  me  land  my  command  and  take 
that  battery.”  The  general  hesitated  at  first  and  then  said,  “Go.” 
Then  Rodman  stood  in  the  stern  of  his  boat,  and  in  a loud  voice 
gave  the  command,  as  the  boats  were  all  in  line  and  good  order, 
“Seventh  Connecticut,  man  your  oars,  and  follow  me.” 

We  had  previously  detailed  50  men  as  oarsmen,  leaving  us  about 
175  effective  men  and  officers.  At  the  order,  we  all  headed  for  the 
shore,  and,  as  the  boats  struck,  every  man  sprang  as  if  by  instinct,  and 
in  an  instant  were  in  line.  Captain  Chamberlain  sent  forward  skir- 
mishers, under  Lieutenant  Yan  Keuren,  and  we  advanced  rapidly  to 
the  first  line  of  rifle  works ; our  skirmishers  cleared  it  with  a bound, 
and  advanced  to  the  second  line ; our  main  forces  moved  to  the  first 
line ; the  foe  retired,  firing.  Rodman  now  sent  word  back  for  the 
general  to  land  his  whole  forces,  as  we  could  hold  the  line  we  then 
occupied.  Colonel  Rodman  sent  Company  B to  the  left  and  Com- 
pany I to  the  right,  to  engage  the  enemy  at  short  range  and  drive 
them  out,  if  possible,  while  A and  K held  the  line  we  then  occupied. 
After  exchanging  a few  shots,  and  the  brigade  being  now  landed  and 
ready  to  advance,  the  enemy  began  to  give  way,  and  Captain  Bur- 
dick followed  them  close  on  the  left  and  captured  a number  of  pris- 
oners and  one  or  two  secesh  camps.  Lieutenant  Jordan,  with  a de- 
tachment of  Company  I,  pushed  right  up  into  their  batteries  on  our 
right,  and,  not  finding  the  first  gun  in  a working  condition  (it  having 
been  disabled  by  a shot),  he  pushed  forward  to  what  is  now  called 
Battery  Rodman,  in  which  there  was  an  8-inch  seacoast  howitzer, 
and  turned  it  on  the  retreating  foe,  and  burst  several  shells  over  their 
heads  before  they  reached  Fort  Wagner.  Our  boys  now  being 
wearied  out  and  hardly  able  to  drag  one  foot  after  another,  a halt  on 
our  part  was  ordered. 

Our  forces  captured  eight  single-gun  batteries  and  three  mortars, 
and  not  far  from  200  prisoners.  There  are  several  regiments  which 
claim  to  have  captured  this  or  that  battery,  but  the  Seventh  Con- 
necticut Y olunteers  were  the  first  to  land,  the  first  in  their  batteries, 
and  sent  their  card  after  Mr.  Secesh  in  the  shape  of  a few  8-inch 
shells,  from  a gun  which  they  had  just  left  in  good  working  order,  as 
they  rapidly  retreated  under  cover  of  Fort  Wagner.  Others  did 
gather  up  prisoners  and  take  possession  of  batteries  that  were  bagged 
and  isolated  by  Company  B on  the  left,  Captain  Burdick,  as  they 
drove  up  the  main  road,  across  the  island,  to  the  north  side,  entirely 
cutting  off  all  that  were  on  the  lower  side  of  the  island.  All  be- 
haved well,  both  officers  and  men.  All  of  the  officers  of  the  bat- 
talion were  present,  including  Dr.  Porter.  Our  loss  on  the  10th  was 
7 [wounded],  as  follows.* 

We  bivouacked  for  the  night  under  easy  range  of  Fort  Wagner, 
and  but  this  moment  a shell  has  burst  directly  in  front  of  my  tent. 
Their  crack  and  their  pieces  have  a peculiar  kind  of  a whistle,  that 


* Nominal  list  omitted.  See  revised  statement  on  p.  210. 


360  S.  C.  AND  a A.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chat.  XL. 

is  anything  but  pleasant  to  one’s  ear.  For  the  first  night  out  of 
three,  we  lay  down  to  sleep.  About  2. 30  a.  m.  General  Strong  came 

and  called  Colonel out.  Soon  he  returned  and  said,  “Turn 

out,  we  have  a job  on  hand.”  A cold  shudder  came  over  me, 
for  well  I knew  what  it  was.  They  seemed  to  think  that  no  one  but 
our  battalion  could  be  trusted.  The  men  were  soon  out  and  into 
line,  but  rather  slow  to  time,  as  they  were  tired  from  the  former 
day’s  work.  The  programme  was  to  try  to  take  Fort  Wagner  by 
assault.  W e were  to  take  the  lead,  and  to  be  supported  by  the  Sev- 
enty-sixth Pennsylvania  and  Ninth  Maine.  Silently  and  quietly  we 
moved  up  to  the  advance  line  of  our  picket.  Our  pieces  were  loaded 
and  primed,  and  bayonets  fixed.  We  were  then  deployed  into  line 
of  battle  (we  had  191  men  and  officers  all  told),  and  we  reached  and 
crossed  the  neck  of  land  that  approached  the  fort,  our  right  resting 
on  the  beach.  General  Strong  was  there.  He  said  there  were  but 
three  guns  that  looked  this  way.  We  were  deployed  and  ready  for 
the  start.  Our  orders  were  to  move  steadily  forward  until  the 
pickets  fired,  and  then  follow  them  close,  and  rush  for  the  work ; 
and  we  were  promised  ready  support.  General  Strong  gave  the 
order,  “Aim  low,  and  put  your  trust  in  God.  Forward,  the  Sev- 
enth ! ” And  forward  we  went,  not  over  500  yards  from  the  fort 
when  we  started.  We  had  not  proceeded  far  before  the  pickets 
fired,  and  then  we  took  the  double-quick  and,  with  a cheer,  rushed 
for  the  works.  Before  we  reached  the  outer  work,  we  got  a murder- 
ous fire  from  the  riflemen  behind  the  works.  A new  fell ; a check  in 
the  line ; an  encouraging  word  from  the  officers  (they  were  all  there, 
11  in  all ; no  sick  ones) ; and  right  gallantly  we  reached  the  outer 
work.  Over  it  with  a will  we  went,  down  the  opposite  side,  and 
across  the  moat  (there  being  about  1 foot  of  water  in  the  moat),  right 
up  to  the  crest  of  the  parapet,  and  there  we  lay,  anxiously  waiting 
for  our  support  to  come  up  so  far  as  to  make  it  a sure  thing  for  us 
to  rise  up  and  go  over  with  a bound,  our  men,  in  the  meantime, 
busying  themselves  picking  off  sharpshooters  and  gunners.  We  lay 
so  near  the  top  that  one  had  but  to  put  his  head  up  and  gun  across 
the  top  of  the  parapet,  to  kill  his  man.  Many  cases  of  individual 
bravery  I might  here  name,  but  all  did  so  well  it  is  hard  to  select. 
Private  Lyon,  Company  K,  jumped  upon  the  parapet,  thrust  his 
bayonet  into  the  head  of  the  chief  of  a gun  (whom  I have  since  as- 
certained was  a captain,  and  was  killed)  that  was  about  to  be  fired, 
and  fired  his  gun  at  the  same  time.  Corporal  [Giles]  James,  of  Com- 
pany I,  thrust  his  bayonet  into  the  head  of  one  of  ^ the  gunners,  and 
broke  it  off  in  endeavoring  to  pull  it  out ; and  quite  a number  were 
made  to  bite  the  dust  while  we  occupied  this  position.  One  man  on 
my  right,  William  De  Witt,  Company  A — I said  to  him,  “Rise  and 
shoot  that  gunner.”  He  rose  up,  deliberately  took  good  aim,  and 
fired.  A ball,  at  the  same  instant,  hit  him  in  the  forehead,  and  he 
fell  on  the  spot,  with  his  gun  across  the  parapet. 

As  nearly  as  I can  ascertain,  we  were  in  this  position  from  ten  to 
fifteen  minutes  when  both  of  the  regiments  that  were  to  support  us 
broke  and  fled,  leaving  us  to  take  care  of  ourselves  as  best  we  might. 
Wnen  we  first  moved  to  the  right,  and  went  up  on  the  water  front, 
there  were  no  riflemen.  Thus,  for  a time,  we  had  it  all  our  own 
way;  but  it  was  of  short  duration.  As  soon  as  the  regiments  in 
front  broke  and  ran,  they  paid  particular  attention  to  our  case.  They 
threw  hand-grenades  over  the  parapet,  and  soon  sent  men  into  the 
flank  of  a bastion  which  commanded  the  front  upon  which  we  lay. 


Cuap.  XL.] 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 


361 


They  had  us  then  to  great  disadvantage.  The  question  was,  whether 
we  should  surrender  as  prisoners,  attempt  to  carry  the  works  and  be 
entirely  annihilated  (as  they  greatly  outnumbered  us),  or  take  the 
back  track  and  run  the  gauntlet  for  our  lives.  Upon  consulting  the 
colonel,  he  reluctantly  gave  the  order  to  “retreat.”  Lieutenant 
Phillips  exclaimed,  “For  God’s  sake,  don’t  let  us  retreat!”  'As  if 
by  magic,  the  order  was  recalled,  and  although  some  had  started, 
they  returned.  But  the  order  had  to  be  repeated,  and  down  we  went 
across  the  moat  and  over  the  work.  They  had  a perfect  enfilading 
fire  of  small-arms  for  a thousand  yards,  besides  three  pieces  giving 
us  grape  and  canister.  They  fell  on  all  sides  of  me,  and  I alone  of 
the  four  captains  was  spared.  And  out  of  the  191  officers  and  men 
that  marched  out  to  attack  the  foe,  but  88  returned  safe  to  camp ; 
and  ever  let  it  be  said,  to  the  credit  of  the  Seventh  Connecticut  Vol- 
unteers, that  not  one  straggler  could  be  discovered.  Fifteen  min- 
utes after  arriving  in  camp,  roll  was  called,  and  but  1 man  came  in 
after,  and  he  was  delayed  by  assisting  a wounded  comrade  in.  Lieu- 
tenant-Colonel Rodman  was  struck  first  in  the  side,  and  then  in  the 
left  leg.  He  was  wounded  about  150  yards  from  the  fort.  Lieuten- 
ant Greene  went  to  his  assistance  at  the  time  he  received  his  first 
wound,  and  after  going  about  2 rods  he  got  shot  in  the  leg.  I saw 
him  when  he  fell,  but  saw  others  go  to  his  help.  After  I had  gone 
a short  way,  I could  not  bear  the  thought  of  leaving  the  colonel,  and 
I returned  to  his  assistance,  and  did  not  leave  him  until  I saw  him 
safe  in  camp.  Met  General  Strong  coming  off,  and,  with  tears  in  his 
eyes,  he  said  we  had  done  our  whole  duty  and  covered  ourselves  all 
over  with  glory,  and  if  the  support  had  come  to  time  that  we  should 
have  taken  the  works.  And  we  should,  without  a doubt.  But  our 
loss  is  great.  We  had  11  officers  in  our  mess,  now  w~e  have  but  4.  It 
is  hard,  but  such  is  the  fate  of  war.  I think  that  Charleston  must 
surely  fall. 

Our  attack  on  the  10th  was  a perfect  surprise  to  them.  They  had 
but  few  troops  on  this  island.  If  they  had  5,000  infantry  on  here, 
the  natural  defenses  are  of  such  a character  that  we  could  never  have 
taken  it. 

I send  a list  of  casualties.  * 

Whole  number  of  commissioned  officers  and  enlisted  men  who  left 
camp  July  11,  1863,  to  assault  Fort  Wagner,  S.  C.  : 

Commissioned  Enlisted 


officers.  men. 

Company  A 2 58 

Company  B 2 37 

Company  I 2 40 

Company  K 3 50 

Lieutenant-Colonel  Rodman,  commanding  detachment 1 

Lieut.  Ira  E.  Hicks,  acting  adjutant 1 

Total 11  185 

Killed,  wounded,  and  missing 7 97 

Returned  to  camp 4 88 


The  above  is  a fair  and  correct  account. 

SYLVESTER  H.  GRAY, 

Captain  Seventh  Connecticut  Volunteers , Comdg.  Detachment. 

Col.  J.  R.  Hawley. 


Embodied  in  revised  statement,  p.  210. 


302  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

No.  15. 

Report  of  Col.  Edward  N.  Hallowell,  Fifty-fourth  Massachusetts 

( Colored ) Infantry. 

Morris  Island,  S.  C., 

November  7,  1863. 

General  : In  answer  to  yonr  request  that  I furnish  a report  of 
the  part  taken  by  the  Fifty-fourth  Massachusetts  Volunteers  in  the 
late  assault  upon  Fort  Wagner,  I have  to  state  : 

During  the  afternoon  of  the  18th  of  July  last,  the  Fifty-fourth 
Massachusetts  Volunteers,  Col.  R.  G.  Shaw  commanding,  landed 
upon  Morris  Island  and  reported  at  about  6 p.  m.  to  Brig.  Gen.  G.  C. 
Strong.  Colonel  Shaw’s  command  present  consisted  of  a lieutenant- 
colonel  of  the  field,  a surgeon,  adjutant  and  quartermaster  of  the 
staff,  8 captains,  and  11  subaltern  officers  of  the  line  and  600  enlisted 
men.  General  Strong  presented  himself  to  the  regiment  and  in- 
formed the  men  of  the  contemplated  assault  upon  Fort  Wagner  and 
asked  them  if  they  would  lead  it.  They  answered  in  the  affirmative. 
The  regiment  was  then  formed  in  column  by  wing,  at  a point  upon 
the  beach  a short  distance  in  the  advance  of  the  Beacon  House. 
Col.  R.  G.  Shaw  commanded  the  right  wing,  and  Lieut.  Col.  E.  N. 
Hallowell  the  left.  In  this  formation,  as  theVdusk  of  the  evening 
came  on,  the  regiment  advanced  at  quick  time,  leading  the  column  ; 
the  enemy  opened  upon  us  a brisk  fire  ; our  pace  now  gradually 
increased  till  it  became  a run.  Soon  canister  and  musketry  begun 
to  tell  upon  us.  With  Colonel  Shaw  leading,  the  assault  was  com- 
menced. Exposed  to  the  direct  fire  of  canister  and  musketry,  and, 
as  the  ramparts  were  mounted,  to  a like  fire  on  our  flanks,  the  havoc 
made  in  our  ranks  was  very  great.  Upon  leaving  the  ditch  for  the 
parapet,  they  obstinately  contested  with  the  bayonet  our  advance. 
Notwithstanding  these  difficulties,  the  men  succeeded  in  driving  the 
enemy  from  most  of  their  guns,  many  following  the  enemy  into  the 
fort.  It  was  here,  upon  the  crest  of  the  parapet,  that  Colonel  Shaw 
fell ; here  fell  Captains  Russell  and  Simpkins ; here  also  were  most 
of  the  officers  wounded.  The  colors  of  the  regiment  reached  the 
crest,  and  were  there  fought  for  by  the  enemy ; the  State  flag  then 
torn  from  its  staff,  but  the  staff  remains  with  us.  Hand-grenades 
were  now  added  to  the  missiles  directed  against  the  men. 

The  fight  raged  here  for  about  an  hour.  When  compelled  to 
abandon  the  fort,  the  men  formed  a line  about  700  yards  from  the 
fort,  under  the  command  of  Capt.  Luis  F.  Emilio,  the  ninth  captain 
in  the  line.  The  other  captains  were  either  killed  or  wounded. 

The  regiment  then  held  the  front  until  relieved  by  the  Tenth  Con- 
necticut Regiment  at  about  2 a.  m.  of  the  19th.  The  assault  was 
made  upon  the  south  face  of  the  fort.  So  many  of  the  officers  be- 
haved with  marked  coolness  and  bravery,  I cannot  mention  any 
above  the  others.  It  is  due,  however,  to  the  following-named  en- 
listed men  that  they  be  recorded  above  their  fellows  for  special  merit : 
Sergt.  Robert  J.  Simmons,  Company  B ; Sergt.  William  H.  Carney, 
Company  C ; Corpl.  Henry  F.  Peal,  Company  F ; Private  George 
Wilson,  Company  A. 

The  following  is  the  list  of  casualties : Col.  R.  G.  Shaw,  killed ; 
Lieut.  Col.  E.  N.  Hallowell,  wounded  ; Adjt.  G.  W.  James,  wounded; 
Capt.  S.  Willard,  wounded  ; Capt.  C.  J.  Russell,*  missing,  supposed 
killed;  Capt.  W.  H.  Simpkins,*  missing,  supposed  killed;  Capt. 


* They  were  killed. 


Chap.  XL.] 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 


363 


George  Pope,  wounded ; Capt.  E.  L.  Jones,  wounded  ; Capt.  J.  W. 
M.  Appleton,  wounded ; Capt.  O.  E.  Smith,  wounded  ; First  Lieut. 
R.  H.  L.  Jewett,  wounded  ; First  Lieut.  W.  H.  Homans,  wounded ; 
Second  Lieut.  C.  E.  Tucker,  wounded ; Second  Lieut.  J.  A.  Pratt, 
wounded. 

Enlisted  men — killed,  9 ; wounded,  147  ; missing,  100  ; total,  256.  * 
I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  N.  HALLOWELL, 

Colonel , Comdg.  Fifty-fourth  Massachusetts  Volunteers. 

General  Truman  Seymour. 

Commanding  TJ.  S.  Forces , Morris  Island , S.  C. 


No.  16. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  Joseph  C.  Abbott , Seventh  New  Hampshire 

Infantry. 

Morris  Island,  S.  C., 

Avgust  16,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  to  Your  Excellency  the  following 
report  of  the  late  engagement  on  Morris  Island,  S.  C.,  in  which  the 
Seventh  Regiment  New  Hampshire  Volunteers  participated  : 

I shall  describe  only  incidentally  the  topography  of  Folly,  Morris, 
James,  and  other  islands,  all  of  which  are  quite  necessary  to  an 
exact  understanding  of  the  positions  occupied  at  different  times  by 
the  regiment,  as  there  are  numerous  maps  of  Charleston  and  its 
approaches  by  land  and  water  now  published. 

Neither  shall  I detail  the  movements  of  the  troops  only  so  far  as 
to  explain  those  of  this  regiment. 

A little  before  midnight  on  the  17th  of  June  last,  we  landed  upon 
the  south  end  of  Folly  Island,  and  in  the  morning  marched  up  the 
beach  to  within  about  2 miles  of  its  most  extreme  northern  point, 
and  went  into  camp.  From  that  time  until  the  10th  of  July,  we 
were  actively  occupied  either  in  the  day  or  night  on  fatigue  and 
guard  duty  upon  the  batteries  fronting  Light-House  Inlet  and  Mor- 
ris Island. 

On  the  night  of  the  9th,  the  regiment  was  detailed  to  guard  the  just 
mentioned  batteries  against  surprise  by  night,  and  at  3 a.  m.  of  the 
10th  were  ordered  about  a mile  to  the  rear,  to  await  the  opening  of 
the  batteries.  We  formed  in  line  of  brigade  upon  the  beach  in  the 
following  order,  viz  : Forty-eighth  New  York,  One  hundredth  New 
York,  Seventh  New  Hampshire  Volunteers,  Sixty-seventh  Ohio,  and 
Sixty-second  Ohio.  The  brigade  was  then  thrown  into  close  column 
by  division,  and  awaited  the  opening  of  the  batteries.  At  ten  min- 
utes before  5 a.  m.  the  batteries  opened,  while  the  brigade  of  Gen- 
eral Strong  proceeded  to  land  on  Morris  Island. 

The  cannonading  was  incessant  for  about  an  hour  and  a half,  when 
the  rebel  batteries  were  nearly  all  silenced,  and  our  brigade  was  ad- 
vanced to  Light-House  Inlet,  crossed,  and,  while  huzzas  were  bursting 
from  the  victorious  battalions,  and  while  the  Stars  and  Stripes  waved 
from  the  heights,  we  marched  up  the  beach  to  a point  a few  rods 
above  the  lookout,  about  1 mile  from  the  southern  point  of  the  island. 
From  this  point  we  were  still  advanced  to  what  is  known  as  the  Old 
House,  which  is  within  1 mile  of  Fort  Wagner,  the  rebel  stronghold 


But  see  revised  statement,  p.  210. 


364  S.  C.  AND  a A.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

on  the  northern  end  of  the  island,  and  within  range  of  its  guns,  and 
also  those  of  Battery  Gregg  and  Fort  Sumter.  The  regiment  was 
then  halted  under  the  protection  of  the  sand-hills,  and  two  compa- 
nies were  thrown  out  as  picket  to  relieve  a like  number  of  the  Sixth 
Connecticut,  on  the  extreme  front  of  our  lines,  and  within  about  400 
yards  of  Fort  Wagner.  At  dark  of  the  same  day,  the  whole  regi- 
ment was  moved  to  the  reserve  of  the  picket  (about  1,000  yards  from 
Fort  Wagner),  where  they  threw  up  slight  intrenchments  for  their 
protection.  We  were  the  only  regiment  then  at  the  front. 

On  the  morning  of  the  11th  instant  at  about  3 o’clock,  an  attempt 
was  made  to  take  Fort  Wagner  by  assault.  The  assaulting  party  was 
composed  principally  of  General  Strong’s  brigade,  while  the  Seventh 
New  Hampshire  was  a part  of  the  reserve  occupying  a position  very 
near  to  that  which  the  reserve  of  the  picket  had  occupied  during  the 
day.  The  assault  was  unsuccessful.  While  the  broken  columns  of 
the  repulsed  brigade  retreated  through  the  lines  of  the  reserve,  they 
stood  firm  under  a heavy  fire  of  grape,  spherical,  case,  and  solid  shot, 
ready  to  repulse  any  attack  which  the  enemy  might  attempt  upon  the 
retreating  column.  After  the  retreating  column  had  passed,  and  it 
became  evident  the  enemy  did  not  intend  an  attack,  the  Seventh,  with 
the  remainder  of  the  reserve,  withdrew  to  aj  less  exposed  position, 
leaving  four  companies  as  picket. 

During  the  day  of  the  11th,  we  occupied  this  last  position,  but  at 
dark  we  advanced  again  to  the  point  held  the  previous  night,  and 
three  companies  were  ordered  by  Colonel  Putnam  to  advance  as  pick- 
ets. They  accordingly  advanced  a little  beyond  the  point  reached 
the  previous  night,  drove  in  the  enemy’s  pickets,  and  established  our 
lines  near  where  now  is  the  frieze  nearest  to  Fort  Wagner.  This 
point  we  held  until  daylight  on  the  morning  of  the  12th,  when  we 
were  relieved.  During  that  time,  we  erected  the  first  earthworks  at 
the  front,  and  threw  up  intrenchments,  in  which  were  ultimately  our 
most  advanced  batteries.  It  is  certainly  true  that  to  the  steadiness 
and  firmness  of  this  regiment,  thus  for  two  days  and  nights  holding 
the  extreme  front,  the  wearied  army  are  indebted  for  its  repose  after 
great  fatigue  and  desperate  fighting. 

On  the  morning  of  the  12th,  on  being  relieved  at  the  front,  the 
regiment  marched  to  the  rear,  and  encamped  north  of  the  lookout, 
and  two  days  after  (July  14),  removed  still  farther  down,  to  a point 
below  the  lookout.  On  this  day  Colonel  Putnam  assumed  command 
of  the  Second  Brigade,  Seymour’s  division,  and  the  undersigned 
again  took  command  of  the  regiment.  From  this  time  until  the 
18th,  the  regiment  was  subjected  to  heavy  details  for  fatigue,  and  also 
again  held  the  front  for  twenty-four  hours. 

On  the  morning  of  the  18th,  at  9 o^clock,  Putnam’s  brigade  was  put 
in  line  upon  the  broad  beach.  Commencing  at  the  right,  the  brigade 
was  composed  as  follows:  Seventh  New  Hampshire,  One  hundredth 
New  York,  Sixty-seventh  Ohio,  and  the  Sixty-second  Ohio.  At  about 
12  o’clock  our  batteries  and  the  fleet  opened  upon  Fort  . Wagner,  and 
the  cannonade  was  continued,  with  little  cessation,  until  near  sunset, 
when  it  became  evident  that  the  fort  would  not  be  taken  by  bom- 
bardment, and  it  was  determined  to  attempt  it  again  by  assault. 

Strong’s  brigade  was  to  lead,  supported  by  Putnam’s,  with  Steven- 
son’s in  the  rear  as  a reserve.  Each  of  these  brigades  thus  stood 
upon  the  beach  in  close  column,  and  thus,  while  twenty  standards 
opened  their  folds,  and  6,000  bayonets  flashed  in  the  rays  of  the  de- 
parting sun,  they  moved  up  in  solid  mass  toward  the  batteries,  where 


Chap.  XL.] 


365 


OPERATION S ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 

a hundred  pieces  of  artillery  still  continued  to  thunder.  When  the 
head  of  Putnam’s  brigade  was  about  150  yards  south  of  the  Old 
House,  it  deployed,  and  then,  advancing  in  columns  of  battalions  to 
the  batteries,  it  massed  again,  and  thus  advanced  until  it  had  passed 
the  frieze  above  the  batteries,  when  it  again  deployed,  and  in  this 
form  continued  to  advance.  At  about  150  yards  below  the  fort,  the 
order  was  given  to  halt.  In  that  position  the  brigade  remained  about 
fifteen  minutes,  when  the  order  was  again  given  to  advance.  The 
brigade  then  advanced  upon  the  works,  crossed  the  moat,  mounted 
the  parapet  and  made  every  effort  possible  to  capture  it,  but  finally, 
many  officers  having  been  killed  or  wounded,  and  about  1,000  men, 
a retreat  was  ordered,  and  the  broken  regiment  returned  to  their 
camps. 

From  the  time  the  brigades  were  deployed  before  reaching  the 
Old  House  to  their  arrival  at  the  fort,  they  were  under  the  com- 
bined fire  of  Forts  Wagner,  Sumter,  and  Battery  Gregg,  its  severity 
increasing  as  they  advanced,  until,  when  approaching  the  fort,  was 
added  the  fire  of  the  enemy’s  musketry.  During  all  this  advance, 
not  a gun  was  fired  by  us.  The  glacis  and  the  ditch  around  the  fort 
were  swept  by  howitzers.  Perhaps  never  did  any  brigade  on  this 
continent  make  an  advance  over  so  long  a space,  and  under  so  deadly 
a fire,  without  firing  a gun.  It  is  but  justice  to  say  that  a column 
could  hardly  have  been  firmer,  or  a line  more  strong  than  those  of  the 
Seventh  New  Hampshire  during  all  this  advance.  Deploying  twice 
and  massing  once  during  the  advance,  they  did  it  with  a coolness  and 
regularity  hardly  surpassed  by  veterans.  Although  officers  and 
men  fell  at  every  step,  the  line  passed  steadily  on  until  the  standard 
ascended  the  slope  of  the  parapet. 

Below  I give  a list  of  casualties  * of  that  day.  Two  hundred  men 
and  18  officers  fell,  or  were  wounded  or  missing.  It  is  impossible 
for  me  to  speak  here  of  those  who  fell,  in  language  at  the  same  time 
suitable  and  just,  or  of  the  gallant  bearing  of  the  regiment,  without 
seeming  injustice. 

One  name  alone  I place  in  this  report.  Haldimand  Sumner  Put- 
nam, colonel  of  the  Seventh  New  Hampshire  Volunteers,  fell  while 
standing  upon  the  parapet  of  Wagner  urging  on  his  brigade.  He 
was  most  accomplished  in  manners,  and  in  his  profession  learned 
beyond  his  years ; a model  soldier  in  his  figure  and  bearing,  and  of 
courage  that  faltered  at  no  obstacle.  Never  has  a son  of  New  Hamp- 
shire fallen  more  gallantly. 

I close  this  report,  Your  Excellency,  with  this  brief  and,  I hope, 
not  exaggerated  statement  of  the  service  which  one  of  your  regi- 
ments rendered,  within  the  days  mentioned,  to  the  country. 

It  is  gratifying  to  add  that  the  wounded  have  received  careful  at- 
tention, and  it  is  with  much  sadness  that  I recur  to  the  honored  dead. 
I formed  this  brief  summary  to  deposit  in  the  records  of  our  patriotic 
old  Commonwealth,  as  a memorial  which  may  testify  to  its  and  their 
honor  after  still  others  of  us  may  have  found  graves  while  pursuing 
a similar  path  of  duty. 

With  the  highest  respect,  I have  the  honor  to  be,  Your  Excel- 
lency’s most  obedient  servant, 

JOSEPH  C.  ABBOTT, 

Lieut.  Col.  Seventh  New  Hampshire  Volunteers , Comclg . 

Governor  James  A.  Gilmore,  New  Hampshire. 


* Embodied  in  revised  statement,  p.  210. 


366  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

No.  17. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  John  McConihe,  One  hundred  and  sixty - 
ninth  New  York  Infantry 

Folly  Island,  S.  C., 

August  18,  1863. 

Captain  : In  accordance  with  the  within  instructions — which  in- 
structions were  returned  to  yon,  as  per  order  received  last  evening — 
delivered  to  me  by  yon,  I most  respectfully  beg  leave  to  report  that 
I proceeded  up  the  beach  with  the  troops,  consisting  of  Foster’s  bri- 
gade, with  100  men  from  Colonel  Alford’s  brigade,  as  soon  as  they 
were  landed  on  Morris  Island,  and  made  the  necessary  dispositions 
of  them,  in  comformity  with  the  said  instructions. 

Nothing  worthy  of  note  occurred  during  the  night.  With  an 
occasional  shot  during  the  night  and  day  from  Forts  Gregg  and 
Sumter,  and  quite  a heavy  fire  of  shot  and  shell  from  Wagner,  com- 
mencing at  3. 15  a.  m.  and  lasting  until  daylight,  the  hours  rolled  on. 

The  enemy’s  sharpshooters  were  quite  annoying  during  the  day, 
and  it  seemed  impossible  to  drive  them  from  their  shelter.  A force 
of  sharpshooters — I believe  there  are  but  2 within  our  trenches — 
would  undoubtedly  accomplish  much  toward  silencing  the  enemy’s 
sharpshooters. 

During  the  forenoon,  several  teams  entered  and  left  Fort  Wagner 
by  way  of  the  beach,  unmolested  by  us,  as  our  guns  could  not  effect- 
ively be  brought  to  bear  upon  them. 

A large  force  of  the  enemy’s  troops  could  be  plainly  distinguished 
laboring  on  the  south  side,  and  about  200  yards  from  Battery  John- 
son. They  seemed  to  be  engaged  in  building  a new  and  connecting 
earthwork  with  Battery  Johnson. 

Our  casualties  were  1 man — an  artillerist— killed,  he  being  shot 
through  the  head,  while  on  duty,  and  2 wounded  by  the  rebel  sharp- 
shooters ; 2 men  received  slight  injuries  from  the  enemy’s  shells,  and 
1 cannoneer  had  his  right  arm  badly  burned  by  the  premature  dis- 
charge of  one  of  the  Wiard  guns. 

I was  duly  relieved,  and  returned  with  my  command  to  Folly  Isl- 
and last  night. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOHN  McCONIHE, 

Lieutenant- Colonel,  and  Field  Officer  of  the  Trenches . 

Capt.  A.  Terry, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  18. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Thomas  E.  Weber,  Ninety-seventh  Pennsylvania 
Infantry,  Acting  Signal  Officer  on  Folly  Island. 

Folly  Island,  S.  C., 

September  12,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  to  you  that,  on  the  10th  day  of 
June,  1863,  I was  ordered  to  report  on  Folly  Island  for  signal  duty. 
I immediately  reported  with  4 men  to  Lieut.  T.  C.  Vidal,  who  was 


Chap.  XL.] 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 


367 


then  senior  officer  on  the  island.  After  reporting  to  him,  I was  or- 
dered to  the  tower,  which  is  about  1^  miles  from  the  north  end  of 
Folly  Island,  to  relieve  the  officer  there  in  charge  of  that  station.  I 
kept  up  communication  with  headquarters  from  the  ground,  up  to 
the  10th  of  July  (the  morning  our  batteries  on  Little  Folly  opened  on 
the  rebel  works  on  Morris  Island),  when  I was  ordered  to  take  my 
station  on  top  of  tower  (some  125  feet  high)  and  open  communica- 
tion with  General  Gillmore,  who  was  at  the  tower,  and  General 
Strong,  whose  command  was  to  land  on  Morris  Island.  - 

Immediately  after  our  force  had  gotten  possession  of  the  south  end 
of  Morris  Island,  there  was  a station  established,  and  I immediately 
opened  communication  with  it.  The  following  day  there  was  a 
station  established  on  the  south  end  of  Folly  Island,  and  opened  com- 
munication with  me.  The  next  day  I opened  communication  with 
the  forces  on  James  Island  under  command  of  General  Terry,  thus 
having  communication  from  headquarters,  Morris  Island,  to  James 
Island,  to  headquarters,  Folly  Island,  and  to  the  south  end  of  Folly 
Island.  I worked  the  station  until  the  9th  day  of  August,  when  I 
received  orders,  to  report  with  men  and  baggage  to  the  north  end 
of  Folly  Island,  to  open  communication  with  headquarters  Morris 
Island. 

Immediately  upon  arriving,  I opened  communication  with  head- 
quarters Morris  Island,  and  connected  with  the  signal  telegraph  line 
which  runs  to  the  south  end  of  Folly  Island.  The  next  day,  I was 
instructed  in  the  working  of  the  telegraph  machine.  On  the  even- 
ing of  the  16th,  I received  orders  to  report  immediately  to  head- 
quarters chief  signal  officer,  Morris  Island.  Upon  reporting  there, 
I was  ordered  to  report  to  Colonel  Turner,  chief  of  artillery,  next 
morning  at  daylight,  at  the  Beacon  House,  a short  distance  to  the 
rear  of  the  batteries,  at  which  time  the  bombardment  of  Fort  Sum- 
ter commenced.  After  reporting  to  him  for  signal  duty,  I opened 
communication  with  General  Gillmore’s  headquarters,  and  with  the 
batteries  to  our  left.  I kept  up  communication  during  the  day,  when 
at  dark  I was  relieved  and  returned  to  the  station  at  the  north  end 
of  Folly  Island,  where  I have  been  doing  duty  up  to  the  present  time. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

THOMAS  E.  WEBER, 

Second  Lieut.  97th  Pennsylvania  Vols.,  Actg.  Signal  Officer. 

Lieut.  F.  E.  Town, 

Acting  Chief  Signal  Officer , Department  of  the  South. 


No.  19. 

Reports  of  Brig.  Gen.  Roswell  S.  Ripley , C.  S.  Army , commanding 
First  Military  District,  including  operations  July  8- September  22.  * 

Fort  Sumter,  July  10,  1863. 

Captain:  Colonel  Yates  telegraphs  me:  “Batteries  gone.  Col- 
onel Graham  is  fighting  them  with  infantry.  ” Let  three  companies 
of  Charleston  Battalion  come  down  at  once,  if  possible.  Have  a light 
battery  with  a few  horses  sent,  if  you  can.  Hold  some  infantry  in 


* See  also  Ripley  to  Jordan,  August  29,  addenda  to  Beauregard’s  report,  p.  96. 


368  8.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

reserve  in  town  and  have  some  to  be  sent  to  Sullivan’s  Island,  if 
required.  What  news  from  Simonton  ? Lieutenant  [John  S.]  Bee 
killed;  Lieutenant  [J.  J.]  Alston  wounded. 

R.  S.  RIPLEY, 

Brigadier -General,  Commanding. 

Capt.  W.  F.  Nance  : 


Fort  Sumter,  July  10,  1863. 

General  : Firing  from  Morris  Island  and  Sumter  at  enemy’s 
troops  on  Morris  Island.  Will  endeavor  to  arrange  the  torpedoes. 

R.  S.  RIPLEY. 

General  Thomas  Jordan: 


Sumter,  July  10,  1863. 

Our  troops  have  been  driven  back  to  Battery  W agner.  Cumming’s 
Point  Battery  has  opened  on  the  pursuers.  Fort  Sumter  just  open- 
ing. Monitors  are  shelling  Battery  W agner.  I do  not  think  it  well 
to  send  more  troops  to  Morris  Island  immediately,  as  there  are  enough 
there  to  crowd  the  works  we  hold.  Has  General  Hagood  arrived  ? 
Should  any  guns  arrive,  they  had  best  be  put  in  position  in  first 
White  Point  battery. 

R.  S.  RIPLEY, 

Brigadier- General . 

Captain  Nance  (for  General  Jordan). 

[Indorsement.] 

Received  at  10.45  a.  m. 

G.  T.  B.  [BEAUREGARD.] 


Charleston,  S.  C., 

July  10,  1863. 

General  : The  enemy  opened  heavily  on  the  southern  batteries 
of  Morris  Island  at  8 minutes  past  5 o’clock  this  morning,  with  heavy 
and  light  guns.  Our  batteries  replied  slowly.  I am  without  infor- 
mation as  to  the  result  of  this  attack.  Colonel  Rhett  telegraphs 
that  the  monitors  are  in  motion,  looking  as  if  they  were  about  to 
cross  the  bar  to  take  part  in  the  action.  Nelson’s  battalion  is  on  its 
way  down  to  the  island.  Other  troops  as  they  arrive  are  to  report 
to  Colonel  Simonton. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

R.  S.  RIPLEY, 

Brigadier-General,  Commanding . 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan, 

Chief  of  Staff,  &c. 


Fort  Sumter, 

July  11,  1863—1.35  a.  m. 

Have  visited  Battery  Wagner.  Its  guns  are  all  in  order. 
Olmstead’s  battalion  in  position,  but  troops  jaded,  which  regret, 
as  the  enemy,  I am  satisfied,  do  not  intend  to  hold  island  in  force, 


Chap.  XL.] 


369 


i 

OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 


Graham’s  old  camps  have  been  burned  and  destroyed.  Intelligence 
by  a wounded  man,  who  crept  through  marsh.  Have  ordered  Graham 
to  send  out  a force  to  drive  in  their  pickets. 

R.  S.  RIPLEY, 

Brigadier-General. 


Brigadier-General  J ordan, 

Mills  House. 


Fort  Sumter,  July  18,  1863. 

Brigadier-General  Taliaferro  will  soon  be  here  ; will  order  as  soon 
as  I learn  situation  fully  from  him.  There  are  troops  enough  to  hold 
now  on  island;  whether  practicable  to  get  more  there  before  morning, 
doubtful.  The  enemy  made  three  assaults;  badly  repulsed.  One 
hundred  prisoners;  one  lieutenant-colonel  and  one  major.  The  dead 
cannot,  of  course,  be  estimated  at  present.  Our  pickets  are  thrown 
well  to  the  Point. 

R.  S.  RIPLEY, 

Brigadier -General , Commanding. 

Brigadier-General  J ordan. 


Sumter,  July  18,  1863. 

We  still  hold  the  battery,  and  have  been  re-enforced  by  Harrison’s 
regiment.  Pickets  have  been  thrown  far  in  advance,  insomuch  that 
Sumter  has  been  requested  to  cease  firing.  General  Hagood  has 
gone  over  with  his  staff  and  General  Taliaferro  is  expected  to  return; 
more  news  expected  soon. 

. R.  S.  RIPLEY, 

Brigadier-  General. 

General  Jordan. 


Fort  Sumter,  July  18,  1853, 

(Received  12.15  p.  m.) 

The  enemy  have  been  repeatedly  repulsed  from  Battery  Wagner — I 
believe  with  great  loss.  We  have  lost  heavily.  Brigadier-General 
Hagood  arrived  with  Harrison’s  regiment,  and  I doubt  not  has  made 
good  the  battery,  a portion  of  which  the  enemy  had  possession  of. 
Whether  it  will  be  tenable  to-morrow,  I shall  know  in  a short  time. 
I doubt  whether  the  ships  will  stop  shelling,  though  the  land  forces 
will  have  enough  to  do. 

Some  of  our  losses  are  : Lieutenant-Colonel  [J.  C.]  Simkins,  killed; 
Major  [David]  Ramsay,  wounded;  Captain  [William  H.J  Ryan, 
killed;  Lieutenant  [T.  D.]  Waties,  wounded;  Captain  [W.  T.]  Tatom, 
wounded,  and  many  others. 

I have  ordered  the  steamer  Chesterfield  to  report  here,  to  act  when 
I hear  from  Generals  Taliaferro  and  Hagood,  before  moving. 

The  transportation  of  Clingman’s  troops  to  Sullivan’s  Island  I 
fear  will  be  delayed. 

R.  S.  RIPLEY, 

Brigadier-General,  Commanding. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan, 

Chief  of  'Staff. 

24  R R — VOL  XXVIII,  PT  I 


[Chap.  XL. 


370  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 


Headquarters  First  Military  District, 

Charleston , S.  C.,  July  22,  1863. 


General  : I hare  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the 
daily  occurrences  of  my  command,  commencing  on  the  8th  instant, 
on  which  day  the  enemy’s  iron-clad  fleet  appeared  off  the  bar,  and  his 
force  of  transports  at  sea  and  in  the  Stono  River  was  largely  in- 
creased, indicating  the  renewal  of  the  attack  on  the  approaches  of 
the  city  of  Charleston  : 

With  the  limited  force  at  my  command,  such  measures  as  could  be 
taken  to  guard  the  salient  points  of  attack  (the  south  end  of  Morris 
Island  and  James  Island)  were  ordered,  and  directions  given  for  the 
disposition  of  troops  ordered  by  the  commanding  general  for  re- 
enforcements. 

On  the  9th,  the  enemy  landed  a strong  force  on  Battery  Island,  and 
unmasked  works  on  Little  Folly  bearing  upon  our  positions  at  the 
south  end  of  Morris.  The  works  at  that  point  were  from  various 
causes  incomplete,  and  from  want  of  transportation  the  arrival  of 
re-enforcements  was  tardy.  Endeavors  were  made  to  strengthen  our 
position  on  Morris  Island,  but  from  lack  of  force  no  great  improve- 
ment was  accomplished. 

On  the  morning  of  the  10th,  the  enemy  opened  a heavy  fire  upon 
our  positions  from  Little  Folly,  with  from  twenty  to  thirty  long- 
range  guns,  which  he  had  placed  in  battery  during  the  night.  Soon 
after,  four  monitors  took  position  to  the  northeast  of  the  position, 
enfilading  it  and  taking  some  of  the  batteries  in  reverse.  Our  troops 
defending  were  composed  of  the  Twenty-first  South  Carolina  Vol- 
unteers, under  Col.  R.  F.  Graham ; two  companies  [I  and  E]  of  the 
First  South  Carolina  Artillery,  under  Capts.  J.  C.  Mitchel  and  J.  R. 
Macbeth,  and  a detachment  of  the  First  South  Carolina  [Regular" 
Infantry  [Third  Artillery] , under  Capt.  Charles  T.  Haskell,  jr.  (in  al . 
about  700),  with  the  following  artillery,  placed  in  position  in  detachec . 
batteries  along  the  shore  to  command  the  beach  and  the  crossing  from 
Little  Folly,  viz  : Three  8-inch  navy  shell  guns,  two  8-inch  sea-coast 
howitzers,  one  rifled  24-pounder,  one  30-pounder  Parrott,  one  12- 
pounder  Whitworth,  and  three  10-inch  sea-coast  mortars — in  all, 
eleven  pieces.  There  were  on  Morris  Island,  besides,  two  companies 
of  artillery  under  Captains  [C.  E.]  Chichester  and  [John  R.]  Math- 
ewes,  the  garrison  of  Battery  Wagner,  and  one  at  Battery  Gregg 
under  Captain  [Henry  R.]  Lesesne  ; all  the  artillery  under  Lieut. 
Col.  Joseph  A.  Yates,  First  South  Carolina  Artillery. 

After  about  three  hours’  furious  shelling  from  the  enemy,  to  which 
our  guns  steadily  replied,  a large  number  of  barges  filled  with  troops 
came  up  Little  Folly  River,  and,  under  cover  of  their  fire,  succeeded 
in  effecting  a landing  on  Oyster  Point  and  the  main  shore  of  Morris 
Island.  The  enemy  advanced  imm 


force  of  infantry,  and  succeeded 


south  end  of  Morris  Island  and  capturing  the  artillery  above  named, 
with  its  munitions.  This  was  not  effected  without  a severe  struggle, 
in  which  we  lost  294  killed,  wounded,  and  missing,  among  whom  I 
mention  with  especial  regret  the  following  officers:  Captains  [Lang- 
don]  Cheves  and  Haskell  and  Lieutenant  [J.  S.]  Bee,  wdio  had  ren- 
dered important  service  previous  to,  and  behaved  with  distinguished 
gallantry  in,  the  engagement.  The  first  re-enforcements  (Nelson’s 
Seventh  Battalion,  South  Carolina  Volunteers)  arrived  at  the  close  of 
the  action  and  could  only  assist  in  covering  the  retreat,  which  was 


Chajp.  XL.] 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 


371 


made  under  the  flank  fire  of  the  monitors,  to  Battery  Wagner,  where 
our  troops  were  formed  to  resist  farther  advance,  and  the  guns  of 
which  opened  on  the  pursuing  enemy.  Fort  Sumter  and  Battery 
Greggalso  opened  fire  and  put  a stop  to  their  proceedings  for  the  day. 

In  the  evening,  Battery  Wagner  was  re-enforced  by  Colonel  [C. 
H.  ] Olmstead’s  command  of  Georgia  troops  * and  the  garrison  kept 
on  the  alert  for  defending  it  against  an  attack.  This  occurred  at 
dawn  on  the  11th,  when  the  enemy  advanced  upon  the  work  in  two 
columns  and  made  a desperate  assault,  which  was  gallantly  and  de- 
cidedly repulsed,  with  a loss  to  the  enemy  which  may  safely  be  esti- 
mated at  over  800  men.  Our  burying  parties  interred  over  100  inside 
of  our  lines,  and  130  were  taken  prisoners. 

Our  loss  was  1 officer  and  5 privates  killed,  and  1 officer  and  5 pri- 
vates wounded. 

The  enemy  on  land  remained  comparatively  quiet  during  the  day, 
being  engaged  burying  his  dead  and  strengthening  his  position. 
Three  monitors  and  three  wooden  gunboats  engaged  and  bombarded 
the  fort. 

On  the  12th,  Brigadier-General  Hagood  took  command  of  the  posi- 
tions on  James  Island.  Brigadier-General  Taliaferro  was  assigned 
[July  13]  to  the  command  of  the  works  on  Morris  Island.  The 
armament  of  the  fort  was  increased  by  four  12-pounder  howitzers, 
under  Captain  [W.  L.]  De  Pass  and  Lieutenant  [T.  D.]  Waties,  and 
'two  32-pounder  carronades  on  siege  carriages.  The  enemy’s  shot 
took  effect  on  the  steam  scow  Manigault,  lying  at  a partially  con- 
structed battery  at  Vincent’s  Creek,  disabling  the  scow  and  scatter- 
ing the  workmen.  Battery  Wagner  was  shelled  by  the  enemy’s  fleet 
continuously  during  the  day.  One  monitor  took  a position  to  the 
northward,  apparently  to  enfilade  the  rear  of  the  work.  Lieutenant- 
Colonel  Yates  ordered  Battery  Gregg  to  open  rapidly,  which  it  did, 
driving  the  monitor  off,  apparently  severely  injured,  as  she  trans- 
ferred her  crew  at  once  to  one  of  the  gunboats. 

On  the  13th,  under  the  able  supervision  of  Brigadier-General  Tal- 
iaferro, continued  preparations  were  made  against  a renewed  attack. 
The  Twenty-first  South  Carolina  Volunteers  and  two  companies  of 
the  First  South  Carolina  Artillery  were  relieved  by  the  Fifty -first 
North  Carolina  and  a detachment  of  Georgia  artillery,  under  Cap- 
tain [James  T.  ] Buckner.  The  land  operations  of  the  enemy  consisted 
in  erecting  batteries  and  protections,  in  which  they  were  interrupted 
by  the  fire  from  Fort  Sumter  and  Battery  Gregg.  The  gunboats  and 
monitors  kept  up  a continued  shelling  throughout  the  day  with  but 
slight  intermission,  when  they  had  suffered  from  the  fire  of  the  sea 
fronts  of  W agner  and  Gregg.  In  the  evening  the  enemy  succeeded 
in  setting  fire  to  the  wreck  of  the  steam  scow  Manigault,  in  Vin- 
cent’s Creek. 

On  the  14th,  two  regiments,  under  Brigadier-General  A.  H.  Col- 
quitt, arrived,  which  were  sent  to  James  Island  to  re-enforce  Briga- 
dier-General Hagood’s  command.  Brigadier-General  Clingman’s 
command,  consisting  of  the  Eighth,  Thirty-first,  Fifty-first  and 
Sixty-first  North  Carolina  Regiments,  had  arrived  the  previous  day, 
and,  with  the  exception  of  the  Fifty-first,  were  stationed  on  Janies 
Island.  The  enemy’s  wooden  gunboats  shelled  Battery  Wagner  dur- 
ing the  day  at  long  range.  During  the  night,  Brigadier-General 
Taliaferro  threw  out  a party,  150  strong,  under  Major  [James  H.] 


* First  Volunteers,  Georgia,  and  Twelfth  and  Eighteenth  Georgia  Battalions. 


372  S.  C.  AND  a A.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  * [Chap.  XL. 

Rion,  of  the  Seventh  South  Carolina  Battalion,  which  drove  in  the 
enemy’s  pickets  from  his  rifle-pits,  extending  across  the  island  about 
three-quarters  of  a mile  from  Battery  Wagner,  back  upon  his  main 
supports,  inflicting  a considerable  loss,  with  but  small  upon  our  j>art. 

On  the  15th,  the  enemy  landed  troops  in  force  on  Morris  Island, 
and  there  were  indications  of  a renewal  of  the  assault  on  the  fort. 
The  frigate  Ironsides  had  crossed  the  bar  on  the  night  of  the  14th. 
During  the  day,  the  enemy  was  strengtheninghisposition,  our  troops 
being  engaged  in  repairing  damages,  replying  to  the  enemy’s  moni- 
tors and  gunboats,  and  replying  to  the  enemy’s  sharpshooters.  The 
Charleston  Battalion,  under  Lieut.  Col.  P.  C.  Gaillard,  relieved  the 
Seventh  Battalion  and  three  companies  of  the  Twentieth  Regiment 
South  Carolina  Volunteers.  Lieut.  Col.  J.  C.  Simkins,  First  South 
Carolina  [Regular]  Infantry  [Third  Artillery],  relieved  Lieut.  Col. 
J.  A.  Yates  in  command  of  the  artillery  on  Morris  Island,  Captain 
[Warren]  Adams’  company  of  First  South  Carolina  [Regular]  In- 
fantry [Company  H,  Third  Artillery],  relieving.  Captain  Chichester’s 
company  of  artillery.  Brigadier  General  Hagood  made  a reconnais- 
sance of  the  enemy  in  his  front  on  James  Island. 

On  the  morning  of  the  16th,  in  accordance  with  instructions,  Brig- 
adier-General Hagood  advanced  against  the  enemy  from  his  head- 
quarters near  Secession ville,  James  Island,  driving  in  the  enemy’s 
pickets  on  his  left,  and  making  an  advance  against  that  portion  of 
their  force.  Two  columns  made  the  attack — one  led  by  Brig.  Gen.' 
A.  H.  Colquitt  and  the  other  by  Brigadier-General  Hagood  in  per- 
son. The  enemy  was  protected  by  the  fire  of  his  gunboats  in  Stono 
and  Little  Folly  Rivers.  Brigadier-General  Hagood  succeeded  in 
driving  the  enemy  (about  2,000  in  number)  from  James  Island,  and 
inflicting  upon  him  a serious  loss  in  killed  and  wounded,  capturing 
14  negroes  belonging  to  the  Fifty-fourth  Massachusetts  Regiment. 
Hot  the  least  important  of  these  operations  was  the  engagement  with 
the  sloop  of  war  Pawnee  by  two  sections  of  Napoleon  guns  under 
command  of  Lieut.  Col.  Del.  Kemper,  in  which  the  steamer  was  in- 
jured and  forced  to  retire.  General  Hagood’s  loss  was  3 killed,  12 
wounded,  and  3 missing.  The  enemy  withdrew  entirely  from  James 
Island  to  Battery  Island,  when  General  Hagood  advanced  his  pickets, 
and  the  ground  has  been  held  to  the  present  date — July  22.  At 
Battery  Wagner  and  on  Morris  Island  our  troops  continued  their 
works  of  repair,  subject  to  a continued  shelling  from  gunboats  and 
monitors  at  long  range. 

On  the  17th,  the  enemy’s  vessels  all  disappeared  from  the  Stono, 
and  his  troops  were  concentrated  on  Little  Folly  and  Morris  Islands. 
Firing  from  the  enemy’s  fleet  and  land  batteries  was  kept  up  during 
the  day  on  Battery  Wagner,  which  interfered  seriously  with  the 
transportation  to  Cumming’s  Point.  This  has  had  ever  since  to  be 
carried  on  at  night.  On  the  night  of  the  17th,  the  Thirty-first  North 
Carolina  Regiment  relieved  Colonel  Olmstead’s  command  of  Georgia 
troops  and  Captain  [ J.  A.  ] Cowan’s  company  of  the  Twentieth  South 
Carolina  V olunteers. 

The  work  of  repair  and  preparation  was  proceeded  with  during 
the  night,  and  at  daylight  on  the  18th  the  enemy’s  land  and  sea  bat- 
teries opened  a feu  d’enfer  upon  the  devoted  work.  The  practice 
was  rapid  in  the  extreme  from  the  Ironsides,  from  the  monitors,  and 
from  all  the  wooden  gunboats  which,  without  exposing  themselves, 
could  get  the  range.  According  to  Brigadier-General  Taliaferro’s 
estimate,  over  0,000  shot  and  shell  were  thrown-;  but,  as  if  by  the 


Chap.  XL.)  OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  0.  373 

special  interposition  of  Providence,  our  loss  was  slight.  Indications 
of  an  assault  at  dusk  were  apparent,  and  the  guns  of  Sumter  and 
Battery  Gregg  were  in  preparation  to  open  fire  over  Battery  Wagner 
on  the  columns  of  the  enemy.  Brigadier-General  Hagood  was  re- 
lieved from  the  command  of  James  Island,  to  be  in  readiness  to  sup- 
port or  relieve  Brigadier-General  Taliaferro,  and  Colonel  [George 
P.]  Harrison’s  [jr.J  Thirty-second  Regiment  of  Georgians  proceeded 
to  the  re-enforcement  and  relief  of  the  garrison.  While  in  passage, 
the  assault  commenced,  which  was  bravely  met  and  repulsed,  with 
terrific  slaughter  on  the  part  of  the  enemy,  by  the  heroic  garrison 
and  its  commander,  Brigadier-General  Taliaferro,  who  directed  all 
the  operations  until  the  final  repulse. 

In  his  report,  the  details  of  the  assault  and  its  repulse  are  set  forth, 
and  I cannot  do  more  or  better  than  to  second  his  commendations  of 
those  brave  officers  and  men  who  stood  the  tempest  of  shot  and  shell, 
and  sent  back  the  columns  of  the  enemy  from  their  work  with  a loss 
which  may  safely  be  computed  at  about  3,000  in  killed,  wounded,  and 
prisoners.  Brigadier-General  Hagood,  with  Colonel  Harrison’s  regi- 
ment, assisted  in  the  final  repulse  of  a party  who  had  made  a lodg- 
ment in  the  southeastern  salient  of  the  battery. 

The  carnage  of  the  enemy  in  the  confined  space  in  front  of  Battery 
Wagner  was  extreme.  The  ditch  and  glacis  were  encumbered  with 
the  slain  of  all  ranks  and  colors,  for  the  enemy  had  put  the  poor 
negroes,  whom  they  had  forced  into  an  unnatural  service,  in  front, 
to  be,  as  they  were,  slaughtered  indiscriminately.  The  white  colonel 
who  commanded  them  fell,  with  many  officers  of  the  regiment  (the 
Fifty -fourth  Massachusetts),  and  the  colors  under  which  they  were 
sent  to  butchery  by  hypocrisy  and  inhumanity  fell,  draggled  in 
blood  and  sand,  in  the  ditch,  a mournful  memorial  of  the  waste  of 
industry. 

This  result  was  not  accomplished  without  a loss  on  our  part  of 
brave  officers  and  men ; though  of  those  who  in  this  struggle  battled 
for  the  right,  the  proportion  who  fell  was  far  less  than  that  of  their 
enemy.  In  this  engagement,  our  loss  in  killed,  wounded,  and  miss- 
ing was  174.  Among  the  officers  whose  loss  we  have  to  lament,  and 
whose  position  and  services  entitle  them  to  especial  mention,  were 
Lieut.  Col.  J.  C.  Simkins,  of  the  First  South  Carolina  [Regular]  In- 
fantry; Capt.  William  H.  Ryan,  Charleston  Battalion;  Capt.  W.  T. 
Tatom,  First  South  Carolina  [Regular]  Infantry,  who  were  killed, 
and  Maj.  David  Ramsay,  of  the  Charleston  Battalion,  who  was  se- 
verely wounded.  Other  gallant  officers  and  soldiers  fell,  whose  names 
are  mentioned  in  the  reports  of  their  several  commanders,  and  whose 
memories  should  be  cherished  by  a grateful  country. 

While  the  assault  on  Battery  Wagner  was  progressing,  Battery 
Gregg,  under  Captain  Lesesne,  and  the  batteries  of  Fort  Sumter, 
under  Col.  Alfred  Rhett,  kept  up  a continuous  fire  upon  the  ground 
over  which  the  enemy  advanced  until  Brigadier-General  Taliaferro 
advanced  his  pickets  to  the  front,  when  they  ceased,  and  the  narrow 
field  of  battle  was  quiet  for  the  night.  Brigadier-General  Taliaferro, 
who  had  been  in  command  and  on  trench  duty  for  five  days,  was  re- 
lieved in  the  morning  by  Brigadier-General  Hagood. 

This  report  ending  with  the  second  repulse  of  the  enemy  from 
Battery  Wagner,  will  be  continued  from  that  time.  The  operations 
of  the  enemy  from  that  date  within  the  limits  of  my  command  have 
changed  their  character. 

In  closing  it,  I have  the  honor  to  express  my  high  appreciation  of 


S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 


[Chap.  XL. 


<>>71 
tj  ( t 


the  distinguished  services  of  Brigadier-General  Taliaferro,  who  com- 
manded the  troops  in  Battery  Wagner  with  gr$at  ability  and  gal- 
lantry, and  repulsed  the  memorable  assault  of  the  18th,  and  of  the 
excellent  conduct  of  Brigadier-Generals  Hagood  and  Colquitt,  as 
evinced  in  the  attack  on  the  enemy’s  position  on  the  16th.  Besides 
these,  Colonel  Graham,  Twenty-first  South  Carolina  Volunteers; 
Colonels  Oimstead  and  Harrison,  of  the  Georgia  volunteers ; Lieut. 
Col.  P.  C.  Gaillard,  Charleston  Battalion ; Lieutenant-Colonel  Yates, 
Capt.  J.  C.  Mitchel,  Captain  Lesesne,  First  South  Carolina  Artillery  ; 
Captains  Chichester,  Mathewes,  Buckner,  [W.  J.]  Dixon,  and  De 
Pass;  Lieutenant-Colonel  [D.  B.]  Harris,  Captains  [W.  M.]  Ramsey 
and  [R.  H.]  Barnwell,  engineers,  deserve  special  consideration  for 
their  gallant  and  valuable  services. 

The  signal  corps,  under  Lieutenant  [F.]  Markoe,  jr.,  have  been  ac- 
tively employed,  and  that  officer  has  reported  Sergt.  J.  E.  Edgerton 
and  Privates  W.  S.  Lance,  E.  H.  Martin,  W.  D.  Du  Barry,  A.  Grim- 
ball,  and  F.  K.  Huger  for  their  zeal  and  gallantry  in  performing 
their  duties  under  the  heavy  and  continuous  fire  of  the  enemy. 

During  this  period  of  anxiety  and  activity,  the  officers  serving 
upon  the  district  staff  have  performed  their  duties  in  such  manner 
as  to  enable  me  to  rely  with  confidence  upon  their  further  exertions 
during  the  continuance  of  the  contest.  I feel  it  proper  to  refer  with 
special  commendation  to  Capt.  William  F.  Ranee,  assistant  adjutant- 
general,  whom  I have  more  than  once  recommended  for  promotion, 
and  whose  services  become  steadily  more  valuable  as  they  become 
more  arduous. 

I have  also  to  express  my  satisfaction  with  the  manner  in  which 
their  respective  and  laborious  duties  have  been  discharged  by  Majs. 
Motte  A.  Pringle  and  C.  H.  Suber,  quartermasters,  and  Capt.  C.  C. 
Pinckney,  ordnance  officer.  Capt.  B.  H.  Read,  assistant  adjutant- 
general,  and  Lieutenant  [ J.  M.]  Schnierle,  acting  aide-de-camp,  were 
present  and  actively  engaged  in  the  operations  of  the  16th.  Lieuten- 
ants [H.  H.]  Rogers  and  [W.  H.]  Wagner,  aides-de-camp,  have  been 
continuously  employed. 

I have  to  acknowledge  the  services  of  Maj.  J.  Motte  Middleton 
and  Capt.  Thomas  D.  Eason,  upon  my  personal  staff. 

The  limits  of  this  report  are  such  that  it  may  be  that  many  things 
are  omitted  which  should  be  mentioned,  to  the  credit  of  many  meri- 
torious officers,  and  these  I will  endeavor  to  mention  in  a supple- 
ment. 

Accompanying  are  the  reports  of  Col.  R.  F.  Graham,  of  the  action 
of  the  10th  instant  and  of  the  assault  on  the  morning  of  the  11th  ; of 
Brigadier-General  Taliaferro,  of  the  operations  of  the  troops  on 
Morris  Island  from  the  13th  to  the  19th  instant,  inclusive;  of  Briga- 
dier-General Hagood,  of  the  engagement  with  the  enemy’s  picket 
on  James  Island  and  with  the  Pawnee  in  the  Stono  ; of  Lieutenant 
Markoe,  signal  officer,  and  of  all  subordinate  commanders. 

I also  inclose  tabular  lists  of  the  killed,  wounded,  and  missing,* 
and  list  of  prisoners  captured  during  the  period  covered  by  this  re- 
port. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

R.  S.  RIPLEY, 

Brigadier -General,  Commanding. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan, 

Chief  of  Staff. 


* Embodied  in  revised  statement,  p.  406. 


CHAP.  XL.]  OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C.  ' 375 

[Indorsement.] 

Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , S.  C.,  August  1,  1863. 

Respectfully  forwarded  for  the  information  of  the  War  Depart- 
ment. I see  but  little  to  add  to  this  clear  and  full  report  of  recent 
operations  in  this  quarter,  submitted  by  the  commanding  general  of 
the  district,  whose  dispositions  of  troops  and  general  conduct  of  the 
responsible  duties  intrusted  to  him,  I beg  to  commend  to  the  special 
notice  of  His  Excellency  the  President. 

In  connection,  however,  with  this  relation  of  events  between  the 
9th  and  19th  ultimo,  I beg  to  call  attention  to  my  letters  to  the  Sec- 
retary of  War  of  May  10*  and  July  20, f and  one  to  General  Cooper, 
Adjutant  and  Inspector  General,  dated  June  15,  \ as  containing  in- 
formation essential  for  a proper  knowledge  of  the  situation. 

I beg,  also,  to  express  my  high  appreciation  of  the  gallant  conduct 
of  the  officers  and  men  engaged,  especially  those  mentioned  by 
Brigadier-Generals  Ripley  and  Taliaferro,  and  by  subordinate  com- 
manders. 

The  conduct  of  Brigadier-General  Taliaferro  during  the  operations 
of  July  18  and  the  assault  on  Battery  Wagner  that  night  cannot  be 
too  highly  commended.  Lieut.  Col.  D.  B.  Harris,  chief  engineer, 
present  on  that  occasion,  behaved  in  the  emergency  with  conspicuous 
and  characteristic  coolness,  energy,  and  professional  skill.  He  aided 
materially  to  repulse  the  enemy. 

Accompanying  are  the  following  papers,  viz  : Report  of  Brigadier- 
General  Taliaferro  and  subordinate  commanders,  marked  A§  ; report 
of  Col.  R.  F.  Graham  and  subordinate  commanders,  marked  B^[ ; re- 
port of  Lieut.  F.  Markoe,  jr.,  commanding  signal  corps,  marked  C; 
list  of  officers  and  men  captured  by  our  forces  on  Morris  Island, 
marked  D ; papers  relative  to  exchange  of  wounded  prisoners,  marked 
E,  and  list  of  negro  prisoners,  marked  F. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General , Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  1st  Mil.  Dist.,  Dept,  of  S.  C.,  Ga.,  and  Fla., 

Charleston , July  31,  1863. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  on  last  night  the 
Twentieth  South  Carolina  Regiment  was  sent  to  Battery  Wagner,  and 
the  Sixth  Georgia  Regiment  brought  away  with  the  Eighth  North 
Carolina  Regiment,  which  last  was  relieved  the  night  before  by  the 
Fifty -first  North  Carolina  Regiment,  but  was  not  removed  from  Mor- 
ris Island  on  account  of  the  late  hour  of  the  arriVal  of  the  steamer 
at  Cumming’s  Point.  Maj.  F.  F.  Warley  relieved  Captain  Chiches- 
ter as  chief  artillery  officer  of  the  post. 

The  garrison  at  present  consists  of  the  Twentieth  South  Carolina 
Regiment ; Fifty-first  North  Carolina  Regiment ; Company  C,  Lucas’ 
battalion  artillery;  Fifty-fourth  Georgia  Regiment;  Sixty-first  North 
Carolina  Regiment  ; Company  G,  [First]  South  Carolina  Artillery  ; 
30  light  artillerists  from  ]John  F.]  Wheaton’s  battery;  detachment 
of  [Thomas  E.]  Gregg’s  company,  siege  train  for  two  siege  how- 
itzers, and  10  couriers. 

*Of  May  10  and  11.  See  Series  I,  Vol.  XIV,  pp.  932,  933. 
fSee  p.  57.  t See  p.  55.  § No.  23,  p.  415.  ^ No.  22,  p.  413. 


376 


[Chap.  XL. 


S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

At  Cumming’s  Point  there  is  one  company  (C)  of  First  South  Car- 
olina [Regular]  Infantry  [Third  Artillery]. 

Other  reliefs  will  be  made  to-night,  and  it  is  now  so  arranged  that 
in  order  to  relieve  the  garrison  as  often  as  necessary,  less  transporta- 
tion than  heretofore  will  be  required.  * 

I keep  the  garrison  at  Battery  Wagner  as  near  1,200  men  as  pos- 
sible. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

R.  S.  RIPLEY. 

Brigadier - General,  Commanding. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan, 

Chief  of  Staff. 


Headquarters  First  Military  .District, 

Charleston,  August  1,  1863. 

General  : Since  my  report  of  the  22d  [ultimo] , detailing  the 
operations  in  this  command  up  to  the  20th,  inclusive,  the  plan  of 
the  enemy,  as  I then  stated,  seems  to  have  been  changed.  There  has 
been  no  attempt  at  a further  assault  upon  our  works  on  Morris  Isl- 
and. From  the  21st  to  24th  there  has  been  occasional  firing  both 
from  the  enemy’s  fleet  and  land  batteries ; but  his  time  has  been 
chiefly  occupied  in  the  erection  and  completion  of  three  new  batter- 
ies on  that  portion  of  the  island  in  his  possession,  thus  advancing 
his  lines  as  far  as  could  be  $one  with  safety. 

On  the  21st,  the  enemy  sent  in,  by  flag  of  truce,  a communication 
from  General  Gillmore,  with  a request  that  the  officer  commanding 
Battery  Wagner  would  give  to  General  [Israel]  Vogdes,  who  accom- 
panied it,  a personal  interview.  While  Captain  [Carlos]  Tracy,  the 
staff  officer  of  General  Hagood,  then  in  command,  was  bearing  the 
message  brought  by  the  flag  both  the  fleet  and  the  land  batteries 
reopened  their  fire,  and  General  Hagood  very  properly  refused  to 
receive  any  communication  until  an  apology  had  been  made  for  this 
violation  of  the  flag.  A satisfactory  explanation  having  been  offered 
and  accepted,  an  interview  was  had  between  General  Hagood  and 
General  Vogdes,  which  terminated  in  an  arrangement  to  exchange 
the  wounded  prisoners  on  both  sides,  and  10  o’clock  on  the  following 
Friday  appointed  as  the  hour  when  the  transports  from  each  party 
should  effect  the  exchange  at  the  point  from  which  the  fleet  have 
usually  conducted  the  attack  upon  Battery  Wagner. 

On  the  morning  of  the  25th,  the  day  upon  which  the  exchange  was 
to  be  effected,  the  enemy  opened  fire  about  daylight  both  from  the 
fleet  and  land  batteries.  This  fire  was  vigorously  sustained  until 
the  arrival,  about  10  o’clock,  of  the  flag-of- truce  boat  conveying  the 
prisoners,  and  for  a portion  of  that  time  was  equal  in  intensity  to 
the  bombardment  of  the  18th.  Upon  the  arrival  of  the  boat  in  the 
neighborhood  of  the  place  appointed,  the  firing  ceased  and  the  ex- 
change was  regularly  effected,  we  delivering  105  and  receiving  39 
wounded  prisoners.  No  reference  having  been  made  in  the  agree- 
ment to  the  negro  prisoners  of  the  Fifty-fourth  Massachusetts  Regi- 
ment, none  of  them  were  included  in  the  exchange,  a report  of  which 
(by  Colonel  [E.  C.]  Anderson  and  Major  [J.  M.]  Middleton,  the  offi- 
cers appointed  to  conduct  it)  has  already  been  furnished. 


Chap.  XL.]  OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C.  377 

The  fire  of  the  enern^  on  this  morning,  especially  from  one  of  the 
more  advanced  land  batteries,  armed  with  Parrott  guns,  did  serious 
damage  to  Battery  Wagner.  The  remaining  10-inch  columbiad  was 
dismounted  from  the  sea  face  of  the  battery,  and  the  magazines  so 
much  exposed  that  it  became  necessary  to  remove  the  ammunition, 
and  General  Taliaferro  (who  had  previously  relieved  General  Ha- 
good  in  the  command),  anticipating  a renewal  of  the  bombardment 
upon  the  completion  of  the  exchange  of  prisoners,  requested  as  a 
matter  of  prudent  precaution  that  all  necessary  arrangements  should 
be  made  for  the  transfer  of  the  troops  from  the  island  in  case  of 
necessity. 

The  exchange  of  prisoners  was  completed  about  2 o’clock,  when  the 
flag-of-truce  boat  returned.  The  enemy,  however,  did  not  renew  his 
attack,  and  the  time  thus  allowed  was  improved  to  the  utmost  in 
repairing  the  damage  which  had  been  done. 

The  condition  of  the  battery,  as  reported  by  General  Taliaferro, 
was  submitted  to  the  general  commanding,  and  after  full  delibera- 
tion it  was  determined  to  hold  it,  and  instructions  sent  to  General 
Taliaferro  not  to  abandon  the  works  without  express  orders  to  that 
effect. 

From  that  date  to  the  present,  the  bombardment  has  never  been 
renewed,  although  there  has  been  occasional  and  brief  fire  upon  the 
battery  from  the  iron-clads.  In  the  meantime,  the  battery  has  been 
thoroughly  repaired  and  placed  in  a condition  even  superior  to  what 
it  was  in  the  beginning. 

The  enemy  meanwhile  are  busily  at  work  in  improving  their  pres- 
ent works  and  erecting  new  ones,  of  which  our  means  of  observation 
do  not  enable  me  to  give  a detailed  account.  On  our  side,  new  bat- 
teries have  been  erected,  and  the  work  of  completing  them  and 
mounting  the  necessary  armament  actively  pressed,  and  every  effort 
made  to  annoy  the  enemy  by  such  batteries  as  bear  upon  their  work- 
ing parties  and  lines,  an  attempt  in  which,  I have  reason  to  think,  we 
have  been  to  a considerable  extent  successful.  The  condition  of  the 
new  batteries  is  known  to  t'he  commanding  general  and  will  be  men- 
tioned in  the  succeeding  report.  The  garrisons  at  Batteries  Wagner 
and  Gregg  have  been  relieved  as  regularly  as  possible  with  our  means 
of  transportation. 

On  the  22d,  Brigadier-General  Taliaferro  relieved  Brigadier-Gen- 
eral Hagood.  On  the  26th  [25th],  Brigadier-General  Colquitt  re- 
lieved Brigadier- General  Taliaferro.  Brigadier-General  Colquitt 
was  relieved  on  the  28th  by  Brigadier-General  Clingman,  and  the 
last  was  relieved  on  August  1 by  Col.  L.  M.  Keitt. 

The  fire  from  the  land  batteries  of  the  enemy  upon  Batteries  Wag- 
ner and  Gregg  has  been  annoying,  especially  upon  our  communica- 
tion by  steamer  between  Fort  Sumter  and  Cumming’s  Point. 

The  casualties  which  have  occurred  from  July  20  to  31,  inclusive, 
have  been  13  killed  and  49  wounded.  I have  the  honor  to  inclose 
the  returns  and  lists.  * 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

R.  S.  RIPLEY, 

Brigadier - General , Commanding. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan, 

Chief  of  Staff. 

* But  this  included  8 men  of  Lucas’  battalion  included  in  statement  for  July  19- 
28.  See  No.  20. 


378  S.  C.  AND  a A.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  ELA.  [Chap.  XL. 

[Indorsement.]  % 

Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston,  S.  C.,  August  7,  1863. 

Respectfully  forwarded  for  the  information  of  the  War  Depart- 
ment. In  view  of  the  possibility  that  Batteries  Wagner  and  Gregg 
which  are  only  outworks,  mounting,  respectively,  twelve  and  three 
guns,  might  fall  under  the  concentrated  fire  of  the  enemy’s  nu- 
merous and  powerful  land  and  naval  batteries,  I determined,  im- 
mediately after  the  fall  of  the  south  end  of  Morris  Island  into  the 
possession  of  the  enemy,  to  establish  a circle  of  batteries  from  Le- 
gare’s  Point,  on  Schooner  Creek,  James  Island,  to  Battery  Beaure- 
gard, on  Sullivan’s  Island,  so  as  to  concentrate  their  fire  (including 
Forts  Sumter  and  Moultrie)  on  Morris  Island  for  about  half  its  length 
to  Cumming’s  Point,  and  render  that  portion  of  the  island  untenable 
to  the  enemy,  should  he  succeed  in  driving  us  ayyay  from  it.  That 
defensive  system  is  now  being  carried  out  to  the  extent  of  our  avail- 
able means  in  labor  and  heavy  ordnance.  Many  of  the  long-range 
guns  in  Sumter  not  absolutely  required  for  its  defense  have  been  re- 
moved, to  arm  the  new  batteries  under  construction.  The  remaining 
guns  are  being  protected  with  traverses,  merlons,  and  embrasures. 
The  officers’  quarters  on  the  gorge  of  the  fort  (south  face)  have  been 
filled  up  with  wet  cotton  bags  and  sand,  and  a chemise  of  sand-bags 
is  being  added  to  the  scarp  wall  of  the  same  face,  to  extend,  if  prac- 
ticable, from  bottom  to  top.  The  defective  lines  on  James  Island 
are  also  to  be  shortened  by  the  construction  of  a new  line  of  redans 
and  redoubts  from  Secessionville  to  the  Stono  River,  long  since  con- 
templated, but  not  executed  for  want  of  labor.  Herewith  are  papers 
marked  A,*  B,  C,  D,  E,  and  F,  connected  with  the  defense  of  Morris 
Island  during  the  present  attack. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General,  Commanding. 

[Inclosure  B.] 

Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston,  July  15,  1863. 

It  is  reported  Gillmore  will  open  fire  in  morning  and  attempt  assault 
afterward.  Will  be  assisted  by  fleet.  Be  on  watch  and  prepared. 

THOMAS  JORDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff. 

[Indorsement.] 

Send  the  above  dispatch  to  Colonel  Rhett,  Fort  Sumter,  and  Bri- 
gadier-General Taliaferro,  Morris  Island. 

& H.  H.  ROGERS, 

Aide-de-Camp. 

[Inclosure  C.] 

Hdqrs.  1st  Mil.  Dist.,  Dept,  of  S.  C.,  Ga.,  and  Fla., 

Charleston,  S.  C.,  July  19,  1863. 

General  Ripley,  Commanding  Fort  Sumter: 

Do  the  best  that  you  can  to  get  fresh  troops  on  the  island.  Enemy 
possibly  so  punished  that  he  may  give  no  annoyance  early  to-mor- 
row. Make  the  best,  at  least. 

THOMAS  JORDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff. 

* Inclosure  A is  a tracing  from  Coast  Survey  map  of  Morris  Island.  It  will  appear 
in  Atlas. 


Chap.  XL.] 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 

[Inclosure  D.] 


379 


Charleston,  S.  C., 

July  19,  1863 — 1 a.  m. 

Brig.  Gen.  R.  S.  Ripley, 

% Fort  Sumter : 

Morris  Island  must  be  held  at  all  cost  for  the  present.  The  com- 
manding general  directs  Keitt’s  regiment  to  be  thrown  there  to  push 
any  advantage  before  daylight;  also  nearest  other  regiment  or  bat- 
talion— Graham’s  or  Nelson’s,  as  most  expeditiously  moved.  Can- 
not navy  help  with  transportation  ? 

THOMAS  JORDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff. 


Brig.  Gen.  R.  S.  Ripley, 

Fort  Sumter: 


Charleston,  S.  C., 

July  19,  1863 — 1.30  a.  m. 


I advise  you  (without  seeing  General  Beauregard)  to  embark 
Keitt’s  regiment  at  once,  and  throw  it  on  Morris  Island.  I will  see  him. 

THOMAS  JORDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff. 


Charleston,  July  19,  1863—2  p.  m. 
Brig.  Gen.  William  B.  Taliaferro, 

Morris  Island: 

Detailed  telegram  of  events  at  Battery  W agner  wanted  from  General 
Taliaferro.  Re-enforcements  on  way  to  push  advantage,  if  possible. 

THOMAS  JORDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff. 

Charleston,  July  19,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  R.  S.  Ripley, 

Fort  Sumter: 

What  has  Harrison’s  regiment  effected  ? Troops  thrown  on  Morris 
Island  at  once  might  strike  an  effective  blow.  Detailed  report  from 
Battery  Wagner  wanted  up  to  latest  moment. 

THOMAS  JORDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff. 

[Addenda  to  Inclosure  D.] 

Fort  Sumter,  July  19,  1863—6.35  a.  m. 
Brigadier-General  Jordan  : 

Keitt’s  people  have  not  arrived.  Do  send  the  steamer  over  now 
with  Graham’s.  Would  risk  her  positively.  Does  General  Beaure- 
gard order  it  ? 

R.  S.  RIPLEY. 
Fort  Sumter,  July  19,  1863— 6.37  a.  m. 
Brigadier-General  Jordan  : 

The  Sumter  is  here  with  Graham’s  regiment,  but  it  is  broad  day- 
light, and  she  cannot  land  within  2,000  yards  of  the  Ironsides  and 
monitors.  To  send  her  over  would  be  to  trust  to  the  enemy  entirely. 
Shall  I do  it  ? 

R.  S.  RIPLEY, 

Brigadier- General. 


380  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

Fort  Sumter,  July  19,  1863—0.40  a.  m. 
Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan: 

Have  received  the  following  from  General  Hagood  : 

Morris  Island,  July  19. 

General  Ripley  : 

Having  arrived  here  to-night,  riv  knowledge  of  location  is  not  sufficient  to  enable 
me  to  answer  your  inquiry  ; but  Lieutenant-Colonel  Harris,  who  was  here  during 
the  bombardment,  is  of  the  opinion,  if  we  had  3,000  or  4,000  reliable  troops  here 
now,  we  could  drive  the  enemy  off  the  island,  to  make  a move  before  daylight. 
Prisoners  report  four  brigadier-generals  in  front  of  us  and  fifteen  on  Folly  Island. 

JOHNSON  HAGOOD. 

It  will  be  impossible  to  get  3,000  or  4,000  men  over  at  present. 
Keitt  and  Graham  have  not  arrived.  Taliaferro  has  gone  on  to  the 
city.  Enemy’s  fleet  off  Battery  Wagner  in  shelling  position. 

R.  S.  RIPLEY, 

Brigadier-  General. 

Port  Sumter,  July  19,  1863—6.45  a.  m. 
General  Thomas  Jordan  : 

Please  let  me  know  whether  General  Beauregard  desires  me  to 
send  the  Sumter  over.  If  the  risk  is  to  be  taken,  well.  If  not,  she  is 
wanted  elsewhere  for  work.  My  own  opinion  is  that  the  work  and 
communication  must  be  done  at  night  entirely.  Keitt’s  regiment 
not  here,  and  I doubt  whether  transportation  can  be  furnished. 

R.  S.  RIPLEY, 

Brigadier- General. 

Charleston,  S.  C., 

July  19,  1863 — 8 a.  m. 

Brig.  Gen.  R.  S.  Ripley,  Fort  Sumter: 

Dispatch  of  6.45  a.  m.  just  received.  If  risk  be  too  great  in  your 
opinion,  delay  transportation  of  troops  to  Morris  Island  until  prac- 
ticable without  too  great  danger. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 

Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , S.  C.,  July  19,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  R.  S.  Ripley: 

General  : In  reply  to  the  last  paragraph  of  your  communication 
of  the  18th  instant,  in  connection  with  the  general  operations  in  your 
district,  I am  instructed  to  say,  that  in  the  event  you  are  forced  to 
evacuate  the  positions  on  Morris  Island,  your  proposition  to  assign 
Brigadier-General  Hagood  to  the  command  of  James  Island  is  ap- 
proved. Brigadier-General  Taliaferro,  in  that  state  of  affairs,  will 
command  on  Sullivan’s  Island. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

THOMAS  JORDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff. 

[Inclosure  E.] 

Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston,  S.  C.,  July  24,  1863. 

Lieut.  Col.  D.  B.  Harris, 

Chief  Engineer,  Morris  Island : 

Colonel  : Examine  condition  for  resistance  of  Battery  Wagner, 
and  report  in  person  as  soon  as  possible.  Explain  to  General  Talia- 


Chap.  XL.] 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 


381 


ferro  that  we  must  fight  the  fleet  with  sand — that  the  battery  origi- 
nally was  only  meant  to  defend  against  land  approach.  The  battery 
must  be  held  as  long  as  possible  ; even  twenty-four  hours  are  im- 
portant. 

Respectfully,  &c., 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General , Commanding. 

[Inclosure  F.] 

Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston,  S.  C.,  July  24,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  William  B.  Taliaferro, 

Morris  Island : 

(Through  Brig.  Gen.  R.  S.  Ripley. ) 

General  : The  batteries  designed  to  render  Batteries  Wagner  and 
Gregg  untenable  by  enemy  if  reduced  not  being  completed,  it  has 
become  exigent  that  those  last  batteries  should  be  held  to  the  last 
extremity.  Wagner,  being  under  guns  of  Sumter  and  Gregg,  should 
be  held  by  infantry  and  siege  guns  alone  until  its  parapets  and  bomb- 
proofs  are  destroyed  and  no  longer  afford  shelter  against  artillery. 
The  general  regards  it  almost  improbable  that  another  assault  will 
be  attempted.  Furthermore,  the  evacuation  of  Wagner  does  not  nec- 
essarily involve  immediate  abandonment  of  Gregg,  which,  with 
reduced  garrison  and  sharpshooters  filling  the  sand-hills  between  it 
and  Wagner,  may  be  held  for  several  days  longer.  When  obliged  to 
quit  either  work,  the  guns  must  be  thoroughly  disabled  by  spiking, 
knocking  off  trunnions,  cutting  and  burning  carriages  and  bomb- 
proofs,  and  by  blowing  up  the  magazines  and  parapets.  In  view  of 
the  great  improbability  of  an  assault,  may  it  not  be  well  to  reduce 
the  garrison  to  a minimum  to-morrow  morning  just  about  2 o’clock  ? 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

THOMAS  JORDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff. 


Charleston,  S.  C., 

August  2,  1863. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  last  night  the  steamer 
Chesterfield  proceeded  to  Cumming’s  Point,  having  on  board  the 
Charleston  Battalion,  which  was  proceeding  to  the  relief  of  the 
Fifty-fourth  Georgia  Regiment,  and  a quantity  of  ammunition,  and 
a lot  of  sand-bags.  She  arrived,  landed  the  Charleston  Battalion, 
took  on  board  the  sick  and  wounded  of  the  Fifty-fourth  Georgia, 
and  was  proceeding  to  land  her  stores  and  take  the  regiment  onboard, 
then  on  its  way  from  Fort  Wagner,  when  a wooden  gunboat  from 
the  enemy  came  within  range  and  opened  a heavy  fire,  driving  the 
steamer  from  Cumming’s  Point  to  Fort  Sumter.  The  captain  and  mate 
being  ashore,  of  course  the  enemy  having  the  range,  it  being  a bright 
moonlight  night,  and  the  transport  steamer  being  of  the  weakest 
kind,  it  was  imprudent  to  expose  her  again  that  night.  A portion 
of  the  cargo,  which  was  not  landed,  was  sent  down  in  small  boats, 
and  the  attempt  will  be  made  to  receive  the  regiment  to-night  before 
the  moon  rises;  but  I beg  respectfully  to  represent  that  unless  some 
measures  can  be  taken  to  prevent  such  impertinence  on  the  part  of 


[Chap.  XL. 


382  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  EL  A. 

the  enemy,  onr  transportation,  which  is  already  of  the  weakest  kind, 
will  soon  be  cut  up,  and  when  that  is  gone  our  first  requisite  for  car- 
rying out  the  defense  of  Charleston  is  taken  from  us.  My  means 
for  effecting  the  object  are  in  the  guns  of  Sumter,  Moultrie,  Batter- 
ies Gregg  and  Wagner.  Battery  Wagner  is  of  course  crippled,  Bat- 
tery Gregg  is  weak  in  number  and  range  of  its  guns  compared  with 
the  enemy’s  Parrotts,  and  Sumter  and  Moultrie  are  1,200  yards  far- 
ther distant  from  the  enemy  than  the  landing  at  Cumming’s  Point. 
Moreover,  from  the  scarcity  of  our  naval  force  and  its  inactivity,  the 
enemy  infest  the  creeks  and  give  signals  of  our  operations.  The 
necessity  of  some  movable  offensive  means  for  the  prevention  of  this 
annoyance  is  absolute,  in  my  opinion.  k 

One  gun  was  put  in  position  in  Battery  Wagner  last  night,  and  the 
other  is  in  such  a state  that  it  will  be  in  position,  and  in  readiness  for 
service  in  an  hour  or  so  after  dark  to-night,  in  all  probability. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

R.  S.  RIPLEY, 

Brigadier - General . 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan, 

Chief  of  Staff ',  &c. 

[Indorsements.] 

Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , S.  C.,  August  2,  1863. 

Respectfully  referred  to  the  consideration  of  Capt.  J.  R.  Tucker, 
commanding  C.  S.  naval  forces,  Charleston  Harbor,  with  the  remark 
that  I consider  it  vital  to  the  maintenance  of  my  position  on  Morris 
Island  that  at  least  one  of  the  iron-clad  rams  shall  be  stationed 
nightly  to  drive  away  such  vessels  as  disturbed  and  interrupted  our 
means  of  transportation  last  night. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General,  Commanding . 

Respectfully  returned  to  General  Beauregard,  with  the  remark 
that,  after  an  interview  with  General  Ripley,  he  addressed  a letter 
to  General  Jordan  on  the  subject.  I will  be  happy  to  enter  into  his 
views  as  expressed  in  that  letter.  Flag-Officer  [D.  JST.]  Ingraham, 
commanding  station,  Charleston,  has  informed  me  officially  that  he 
has  but  80  tons  of  coal  to  meet  all  demands,  including  the  iron-clads, 
and  has  admonished  me  of  the  necessity  of  economy  in  consumption. 
As  our  object  in  the  expedition  is  secrecy,  I have  suggested  the  pro- 
priety, and  General  Ripley  has  agreed  with  me,  that  it  would  be 
best  for  the  iron-clads  to  remain  inside  of  Fort  Sumter,  ready  to  co- 
operate with  the  army.  As  the  coal  used  by  the  vessels  emits  such  a 
dense  smoke,  the  object,  secrecy,  would  be  foiled. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant. 

J.  R.  TUCKER, 

Flag-Officer,  Commanding  Afloat. 


Charleston,  August  6,  1863. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  the  reliefs  of  the  gar- 
rison of  Battery  Wagner  were  effected  last  night  without  difficulty. 


Chap.  XL.] 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 


383 


The  garrison  yesterday  was — 

1.  Four  companies  Twentieth  South  Carolina  Regiment. 

2.  Twenty-first  South  Carolina  Regiment. 

3.  Charleston  Battalion. 

4.  Nineteenth  Georgia  Regiment. 

5.  Company  A,  Second  South  Carolina  Artillery. 

6.  Company  E,  Charleston  Battalion  (heavy  artillery). 

7.  Detachment  Charleston  siege  train. 

8.  Detachment  Chatham  Light  Artillery. 

The  first,  fourth,  fifth,  sixth,  seventh,  and  eighth  of  these  were 
relieved  last  night  and  others  substituted.  The  garrison  to-day  is — 

1.  Twenty-first  South  Carolina  Regiment  (infantry). 

2.  Charleston  Battalion  (infantry). 

3.  Eighth  North  Carolina  Regiment  (infantry). 

4.  Captain  Chichester’s  company  (artillery). 

5.  Captain  Mathewes’  company  (artillery). 

6.  Detachment  Marion  Artillery. 

7.  Detachment  Charleston  siege  train  (fresh). 

Of  these,  only  the  Charleston  Battalion  will  be  relieved  to-night 
by  an  equivalent  infantry  force.  The  garrison  is  about  1,200  men. 
General  Hagood  relieved  Colonel  Keitt,  commanding,  this  morning 
early,  and  Lieutenant-Colonel  Brown,  of  the  Second  South  Carolina 
Artillery,  relieved  Maj.  F.  F.  Warley,  of  the  same  regiment,  in  charge 
of  the  artillery. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

R.  S.  RIPLEY, 

Brigadier -General,  Commanding. 
Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan, 

Chief  of  Staff,  &c. 


Fort  Sumter,  August  19,  1863—5.30  p.  m. 

General  : Just  intercepted  enemy’s  dispatch  that  he  intends  to 
try  Fort  Sumter.  A heavy  fire  will  come  in  a few  minutes.  Have 
instructed  Butler  to  open  at  once,  at  long  range,  with  all  his  batter- 
ies. We  intend  to  whip  the  admiral. 

R.  S.  RIPLEY. 

Brigadier-General  Jordan,  Chief  of  Staff. 


Sumter,  August  19,  1863 — 6.45  p.  m. 

Colonel  Rhett  sent  up  the  colors,  manned  the  batteries,  fired  two 
long-range  10-inch.  I had  Moultrie  and  other  batteries  in  readiness, 
and  the  fleet  is  going  out. 

The  dispatch  intercepted  was — 

Colonel  T : 

The  admiral  is  going  to  try  Sumter,  and  wants  a brisk  fire  kept  up  until  he  gets  in. 

G , 

General. 

The  fire  is  brisk,  but  he  don’t  appear  to  be  coming  in.  I think  the 
demonstration  has  sent  them  off  for  the  time,  but  have  ordered  bat- 
teries to  be  in  readiness.  Let  Whitney  be  on  hand,  if  I dkm’t  get  up, 
should  anybody  pass. 

R.  S.  RIPLEY, 

Brigadier-  General. 

General  Thomas  Jordan. 


384  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

Headquarters  First  Military  District, 

Charleston,  August  21,  1863. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  report  the  various  operations  for 
the  defense  of  Charleston  against  the  present  attack,  from  August  1, 
on  which  day  Col.  L.  M.  Keitt,  Twentieth  South  Carolina  Volunteers, 
relieved  Brigadier-General  Clingman  in  command  of  Battery  Wag- 
ner : 

The  work  of  repairing  and  strengthening  Battery  Wagner  had  been 
progressed  with  until  the  battery  had  become  quite  as  strong  as  it 
originally  was.  The  commanding  general  having  determined  to  keep 
up  and  increase  the  armament,  spare  carriages  And  chassis  and  one 
10-inch  gun  were  transported  on  the  night  of  July  30  to  Battery 
Wagner,  and  arrangements  made  forgetting  them  in  position.  This 
delicate  and  important  work  was  accomplished,  under  the  direction 
of  Lieutenant-Colonel  [J.  A.]  Yates,  by  Captain  [Francis  H.]  Har- 
leston.  First  South  Carolina  Artillery,  and  Mr.  A.  D.  Lacoste,  with 
Captain  Harleston’s  company  [D],  First  South  Carolina  Artillery, 
assisted  by  heavy  details  from  the  . garrison  of  Battery  Wagner.  The 
enemy  during  the  day  was  principally  employed  on  his  works  of 
attack,  but  kept  up  an  occasional  fire  upon  the  battery,  doing  no 
damage.  In  the  evening,  he  opened  on  the  light-draught  steamer 
Chesterfield,  at  Cumming’s  Point,  driving  her  off,  and  for  the  first 
time  attempting  to  interrupt  our  communication  with  Morris  Island. 

The  Fifty-fourth  Georgia  Regiment  was  relieved  from  Morris  Isl- 
and by  the  Charleston  Battalion.  The  guns  of  Battery  Wagner  were 
generally  silent  during  the  day.  Fort  Sumter  and  Battery  Gregg 
opened  upon  the  enemy  whenever  they  were  observed  at  work  within 
range.  Battery  Simkins,  at  Shell  Point,  kept  up  a steady  fire.  Our 
works  in  process  of  erection  on  James  Island  progressed  steadily, 
and  the  troops  in  that- locality  were  held  in  readiness  for  such  move- 
ments as  might  become  necessary,  under  Brigadier-General  Talia- 
ferro. 

During  the  morning  of  the  2d,  Battery  Simkins  kept  up  its  fire  on 
the  enemy’s  works,  which  did  not  reply  until  about  2 o’clock  in  the 
afternoon,  when  they  opened  sharply  from  the  land  works  and  one 
gunboat,  keeping  up  a fire  during  most  of  the  afternoon,  which  was 
replied  to  by  Batteries  Wagner,  Gregg,  Simkins,  and  Fort  Sumter. 
At  night  the  enemy  again  opened,  with  mortars  and  Parrott  guns, 
toward  Cumming’s  Point,  to  cut  off  the  communication.  No  material 
damage  occurred,  and  in  other  portions  of  this  command  all  was 
quiet. 

The  fire  from  the  enemy’s  batteries  was  kept  up  on  Battery  Wagner 
quite  steadily  during  the  morning  of  the  3d,  having  the  effect  of 
killing  1 man  and  wounding  2 officers  and  12  privates,  most  of  them 
slightly.  Battery  Wagner  replied  but  little  to  the  enemy’s -fire,  th« 
garrison  being  at  work.  The  carriages  for  the  two  10-inch  guns  proved 
to  be  so  badly  fitted  as  to  cause  delay  in  getting  them  ready  for  serv- 
ice. Fort  Sumter  and  the  exterior  batteries  kept  up  a fire  on  the 
enemy’s  advanced  works.  At  night  the  Twentieth  South  Carolina 
Volunteers  and  detachments  of  the  Fifty-first  North  Carolina  Regi- 
ment were  relieved  by  the  Twenty-first  South  Carolina  Volunteers. 
As  the  communication  by  means  of  steamers  was  quite  dangerous, 
the  exchange  was  effected  by  means  of  small  boats,  manned  by  crews 
from  the  navy.  These  performed  their  duty  well,  and  my  thanks 
are  due  to  Flag-Officer  J.  R.  Tucker,  C.  S.  Navy,  and  the  officers  and 
men  of  his  command  for  the  valuable  assistance  rendered. 


Chap.  XL.] 


385 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 

The  4th  passed  very  quietly  on  Morris  Island,  there  being  little 
firing  on  either  side.  Only  the  usual  duties  occurred  in  other  parts 
of  the  command. 

On  the  5th,  the  two  10-inch  guns  and  other  armament  of  Battery 
Wagner  were  in  readiness  for  action.  The  enemy  showing  but  little 
disposition  to  engage  with  his  iron-clads,  the  10-inch  guns  were  kept 
masked  until  such  time  as  he  should  come  to  close  action.  On  land, 
he  was  busy  putting  down  mortar  platforms.  His  fire  was  princi- 
pally from  Coehorn  mortars  at  our  sharpshooters  from  the  Twentieth 
South  Carolina  Volunteers  and  the  Charleston  Battalion,  who,  armed 
with  Whitworth  rifles,  caused  him  serious  annoyance. 

During  the  night,  the  Eighth  North  Carolina  relieved  the  Nine- 
teenth Georgia  and  a detachment  of  the  Twentieth  South  Carolina 
Volunteers;  Captains  [C.  E.]  Chichester’s  and  [J.  R.]  Mathewes’ 
companies  of  artillery  relieved  Captains  [F.  T.]  Miles’  and  [W.  M.] 
Hunter’s.  The  different  detachments  of  artillery  from  light  bat- 
teries and  siege  train  were  also  changed.  This  work  was  accom- 
plished, as  before,  under  the  direction  of  Maj.  Motte  A.  Pringle, 
quartermaster,  with  the  assistance  of  the  navy. 

The  enemy  having  established  an  annoying  picket  guard  at  an 
unfinished  battery  at  the  mouth  of  Vincent’s  Creek,  he  was  attacked 
at  about  9 o’clock  by  a party  from  the  navy  and  from  the  Twenty- 
fifth  South  Carolina  Volunteers,  under  Lieutenant-Commander  A. 
F.  Warley,  of  the  Confederate  States  steamer  Chicora,  Captain  [M. 
H.]  Sellers  commanding  the  land  forces.  The  party  proceeded  in 
four  boats,  guided  by  Mr.  J.  Fraser  Mathewes,  to  the  northern  en- 
trance of  Light-House  Creek,  where  Captain  Sellers  landed  and  pro- 
ceeded against  the  enemy’s  picket.  Lieutenant  Warley,  with  two 
boats,  went  round  to  the  mouth  of  Vincent’s-  Creek  to  cut  off  the 
enemy’s  barges.  A brisk  skirmish  ensued,  which  resulted  in  the 
capture  of  1 boat  with  1 captain  and  10  non-commissioned  officers 
and  privates  of  the  enemy,  of  which  the  captain  and  4 non-commis- 
sioned officers  and  privates  were  wounded,  1 mortally.  The  remain- 
der of  the  enemy’s  party  were  driven  off  in  another  boat,  under  a 
heavy  fire,  which  undoubtedly  caused  them  some  damage.  On  our 
side,  1 private  of  the  Twenty-fifth  South  Carolina  Volunteers  was 
killed. 

Brigadier-General  Hagood  relieved  Colonel  Keitt  in  the  command 
of  our  forces  on  Morris  Island  on  the  6th,  Lieut.  Col.  J.  Welsman 
Brown  relieving'  Major  Warley  in  command  of  the  artillery.  The 
Sixty-first  North  Carolina  Regiment  relieved  the  Charleston  Battalion 
during  the  night.  The  operations  of  the  enemy  were  very  quietly 
conducted.  Throughout  the  command  the  work  of  preparation  went 
on,  Fort  Sumter  and  Battery  Simkins  firing  occasionally  during  the 
day  whenever  the  enemy’s  parties  were  working  within  range. 

A 32-pounder,  rifled,  was  transported  to  and  mounted  on  Battery 
Wagner  during  the  night  of  the  6th,  and  the  works  on  both  sides 
progressed  without  interruption  through  the  7th,  except  from  sharp- 
shooters, of  whom  ours  from  Battery  Wagner  annoyed  the  enemy 
to  a considerable  extent.  At  night,  being  attracted  by  the  commu- 
nication of  a steamer  with  Cumming’s  Point,  the  enemy  sent  up  a 
rocket  from  the  fleet  opposite  Battery  Wagner,  when  his  land  bat- 
teries opened  heavily  on  the  supposed  locality  of  the  steamer,  and 
kept  up  the  fire  until  near  daylight.  It  was  replied  to  by  Fort  Sum- 
ter ana  Battery  Simkins.  No  damage  was  done  to  the  steamer. 

25  R R — VOL  XXVIII,  PT  I 


[Chap.  XL. 


386  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

On  the  8th,  a working  party  of  the  enemy  was  discovered  at  the 
east  of  Black  Island,  either  building  a bridge  or  battery.  It  was 
opened  upon  from  Battery  Haskell,  and  the  work  ceased  for  the  time. 
During  the  day,  the  firing  at  intervals  from  Sumter,  Gregg,  and  Sim- 
kins  was  kept  up  ; but  the  enemy  remained  comparatively  quiet  until 
evening,  when  he  opened  with  mortars  and  Parrott  guns,  princi- 
pally on  Battery  Wagner,  keeping  up  the  cannonade  until  near  5 
o’clock  on  the  morning  of  the  9th.  Fort  Sumter  replied  with  three 
guns  and  two  mortars. 

On  the  9th,  operations  were  continued,  the  enemy  being  greatly 
annoyed  by  our  sharpshooters,  and  occasionally  opening  fire  with 
great  spirit  and  rapidity  to  endeavor  to  dislodge  them.  At  about  5 
o’clock  in  the  afternoon,  the  enemy’s  land  batteries  opened,  shelling 
briskly  from  their  mortars  toward  Battery  Wagner  and  the  landing 
at  Cumming’s  Point.  One  man  was  slightly  wounded  at  Wagner. 
During  the  night  of  the  9th,  the  Eighth  North  Carolina  Regiment 
was  relieved  by  Colonel  Olmstead’s  command  of  Georgia  troops, 
and  tfie  detachment  of  couriers  from  the  Fifth  South  Carolina  Cav- 
alry by  others  of  same  regiment. 

[On  the  10th]  the  enemy  were  very  busily  at  work,  and  although 
Fort  Sumter  and  Battery  Simkins  kept  up  a steady  fire,  they  caused 
him  but  little  interruption,  and  he  succeeded  in  approaching  about 
100  yards  in  advance  of  his  former  position  of  attack.  During  the 
day  he  kept  quiet,  except  firing  from  his  sharpshooters,  which  was 
replied  to  yrith  spirit  and  effect  by  ours,  until,  at  about  5 o’clock  in 
the  afternoon,  his  land  batteries  of  both  mortar  and  Parrott  guns 
opened  briskly.  No  great  damage  was  effected  beyond  knocking  off 
the  wheel  of  a carronade,  which  was  soon  replaced.  Colonel  [George 
P.]  Harrison,  [jr.,]  of  the  Fifty-fourth  [Thirty-second]  Georgia 
Regiment,  relieved  Brigadier-General  Hagood  in  command  of  our 
troops  on  Morris  Island ; but  the  fire  of  the  enemy  interfered  seriously 
with  the  relief  of  the  troops  on  Morris  Island,  he  having  erected  a 
large  Drummond  light  in  a position  to  brightly  illuminate  the  land- 
ing. The  steamers  engaged  in  the  transfer  were  withdrawn  and  the 
relief  discontinued  for  the  night.  Colonel  Olmstead  relieved  Colonel 
[R.  F.]  Graham  in  command  of  Fort  Johnson,  which  was  made  a 
depot  for  the  troops  relieving  the  garrison  of  Morris  Island.  Lieut. 
Col.  J.  A.  Yates  was  assigned  to  the  command  of  the  artillery  at 
Batteries  Simkins  and  Cheves  and  at  Fort  Johnson. 

At  about  7 o’clock  on  the  morning  of  the  11th,  the  enemy’s  land 
batteries  and  monitors  opened  heavily  on  Battery  Wagner,  but  the 
monitors  soon  withdrew.  The  fire  from  the  land  batteries  was,  how- 
ever, kept  up  with  more  or  less  spirit  during  the  day,  and  replied  to 
by  Fort  Sumter,  Batteries  Simkins  and  Gregg.  The  damage  to  our 
works  was  slight.  During  the  night  of  the  11th,  the  relief  of  the 
garrison  by  fresh  troops  was  accomplished,  with  the  assistance  of  the 
boats  of  the  navy.  So  soon  as  it  had  been  finished,  Colonel  Harrison 
opened  fire  upon  the  enemy’s  working  parties  nearest  Battery  Wag- 
ner, interfering  with  and  putting  a stop  for  the  time  to  their  prog- 
ress. Fort  Sumter  and  Battery  Simkins  also  kept  up  a steady  fire 
on  the  approaches.  The  enemy  replied  from  his  land  batteries, 
Parrotts,  and  mortars,  doing  some  damage  to  the  bomb-proofs,  but 
without  inflicting  any  casualties  on  our  side. 

On  the  morning  of  the  12th,  the  enemy  opened  with  200-pounder 
Parrott  shot  and  shell  upon  Fort  Sumter,  from  his  batteries  near  the 
foot  of  Craig’s  Hill,  on  Morris  Island,  a distance  of  about  5,000 


Chap.  XL.] 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 


387 


yards.  Wherever  the  shot  struck  light  masonry,  it  did  serious  dam- 
age; the  heavy  masonry  of  concrete  and  the  revetments  of  sand  were 
not  materially  damaged.  The  fort  was  struck  seventeen  times.  The 
transport  steamer  Hibben,  lying  at  the  wharf  of  Fort  Sumter,  was 
shot  through  her  boiler,  scalding  and  injuring  9 negro  hands  on 
board. 

The  enemy  was  observed  from  Battery  Wagner  building  a work  at 
their  extreme  left.  Colonel  Rhett,  commanding  Fort  Sumter  ; Cap- 
tain [JohnC.]  Mitchel,  commanding  Battery  Simkins,  and  Captain 
[Henry  R.  ] Lesesne,  commanding  Battery  Gregg,  directed  their  fire 
upon  his  parties,  which  were  dispersed  and  the  work  stopped. 

At  dark  Battery  Wagner  opened  on  the  enemy’s  works  immediately 
in  its  front,  with  eight  guns,  and  kept  a steady  fire  at  intervals 
throughout  the  night.  Sumter  and  Simkins  also  kept  up  a steady 
fire,  and  no  progress  in  advance  was  made  by  the  enemy.  His  rear- 
most batteries,  however,  were  in  progress,  and  a continual  reply  was 
kept  to  the  fire  of  Battery  Wagner,  with  shots  at  Battery  Gr^gg,  to 
interrupt  communication.  The  effect  was  to  kill  1 and  wound  4 of 
the  garrison  of  Battery  W agner ; and  I regret  to  add  that  of  the 
latter  Capt.  J.  H.  Gary,  of  Lucas’  battalion  of  artillery,  a gallant  and 
accomplished  young  officer  of  high  promise,  was  mortally  injured. 
He  has  since  died. 

On  the  13th,  the  enemy  several  times  undertook  to  repair  the  dam- 
age to  his  advances,  but  was  repulsed  by  a fire  skillfully  directed 
against  him  from  Battery  Wagner.  Finding  that  it  was  difficult  to 
proceed  with  his  approaches,  he  fell  back  to  his  rear  batteries,  and 
with  his  naval  force  opened  fire  on  Battery  Wagner  and  Battery 
Gregg.  Fort  Sumter  and  Battery  Simkins  replied,  and  the  sharp- 
shooters at  Battery  Wagner  kept  those  of  the  enemy  quiet  during 
the  day.  One  man  was  mortally  wounded  at  Battery  Gregg. 

During  the  afternoon,  the  heavy  Parrott  guns  of  the  enemy  opened 
on  Fort  Sumter,  of  which  several  struck  the  gorge  wall  and  the  re- 
inforce to  the  western  magazine,  injuring  the  brick  work  to  a con- 
siderable extent,  but  not  sufficiently  to  cause  any  serious  apprehension 
of  a speedy  penetration  of  the  defenses  on  that  side.  One,  failing  in 
the  interior  of  the  work,  injured  temporarily  a mortar  platform. 

The  Twelfth  Georgia  Battalion  was  relieved  from  Morris  Island 
during  the  night,  bringing  the  garrison  to  the  strength  of  about 
1,100,  as  ordered  by  the  commanding  general. 

During  the  14th,  the  enemy  remained  remarkably  quiet,  firing  only 
occasionally;  replied  to  by  our  batteries.  At  night  Fort  Sumter  was 
struck  five  times  by  land  batteries  and  once  from  a gunboat,  with 
slight  damage.  Battery  Wagner  opened  fire  first,  at  intervals,  to 
which  the  enemy  replied  with  all  the  guns  which  he  could  bring  to 
bear.  Our  guns  were  allowed  to  remain  quiet  for  a time,  to  permit 
him  to  bring  up  his  working  parties,  when  they  were  reopened  with 
vigor,  putting  a stop  to  his  operations,  and  from  the  reports  of  our 
advanced  pickets  it  is  Relieved  that  serious  loss  was  inflicted  upon 
him.  His  operations  v against  other  points  consisted  only  in  occa- 
sional shots,  which  were  replied  to  from  our  batteries. 

On  the  15th,  the  enemy  fired  occasionally  at  Battery  Wagner,  but 
was  at  work  principally  on  his  long-range  batteries  at  the  southern 
part  of  Morris  Island.  A few  shots  were  directed  at  Fort  Sumter 
during  the  evening.  Col.  L.  M.  Keitt,  of  the  Twentieth  South 
Carolina  Regiment,  relieved  Colonel  Harrison  in  command  of  the 
troops  on  Morris  Island.  The  Twentieth  South  Carolina  Volunteers 


388  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 


[Chap.  XL. 


relieved  the  Fifty-first  North  Carolina  at  Battery  Wagner.  A brisk 
artillery  action  was  kept  up  between  our  batteries  on  Morris  Island 
and  those  of  the  enemy,  and  one  of  the  monitors  threw  several  shells 
at  the  transport  steamer  Sumter.  Battery  Simkins  and  Fort  Sumter 
kept  up  a fire  upon  the  enemy’s  approaches^  During  the  night 
of  the  15th,  the  enemy  kept  up  a vigorous  fire,  both  vertical  and 
direct,  on  Battery  Wagner  and  Battery  »Gregg  until  about  4.30 
on  the  16th,  when  it  ceased.  It  was  replied  to  by  Sumter,  Gregg,  and 
Simkins,  at  intervals.  From  Battery  Wagner  the  fire  was  continu- 
ous and  slow  until  about  2 o’clock  in  the  morning,  when  a general 
discharge  took  place  along  the  whole  front,  causing  interruption  to 
the  advancing  work  of  the  enemy. 

The  enemy’s  batteries  were  unusually  quiet  during  the  16th,  so  far 
as  Wagner  and  Gregg  were  concerned ; but  during  the  afternoon 
he  opened  on  Fort  Sumter,  apparently  to  get  the  range,  firing  48 
shots,  of  which  4 passed  over,  4 or  5 fell  short,  10  struck  inside, 
and  the  remainder  outside  of  the  fort.  Wherever  the  shot  struck 
the  lighter  brick  work  it  did  considerable  damage,  and  disabled 
a 24-pounder  on  the  gorge  by  loosening  the  pintle  through  the 
masonry.  During  the  night,  the  Twenty-first  South  Carolina  Vol- 
unteers relieved  Colonel  Olmstead’s  command  on  Morris  Island. 
The  artillery  commands  and  couriers  were  also  relieved  by  detach- 
ments from  their  respective  regiments  and  battalions  ; and  at  about 
12  o’clock  Battery  Wagner  opened  on  the  enemy,  keeping  up  a con- 
tinuous fire  during  the  night.  Fort  Sumter  and  Battery  Simkins 
also  kept  up  their  practice. 

On  the  morning  of  the  17th,  the  enemy  opened  with  three  200- 
pounder  Parrott  guns  and  one  100-pounder  on  Fort  Sumter,  at  dis- 
tances varying  from  2J  to  3 miles.  This  fire  was  kept  up  with  but 
little  intermission  throughout  the  morning.  At  9.25,  the  Ironsides 
and  six  monitors  came  into  action  against  Fort  Sumter,  Batteries 
W agner  and  Gregg,  directing  their  shots  principally  at  Sumter.  At 
10.45  they  came  within  about  3,000  yards  of  Fort  Sumter,  when 
Colonel  Rhett  opened  his  batteries.  Colonel  \ William]  Butler,  from 
Fort  Moultrie,  had  opened  a few  guns,  but,  a large  force  of  negroes 
being  at  work  on  his  front,  he  was  directed  to  discontinue  his  fire. 

The  Ironsides  and  the  monitors  were  struck  repeatedly,  and  at 
12. 50  the  rapid  firing  ceased,  the  fleet  withdrawing  from  the  contest. 
One  of  the  monitors,  during  the  action,  left  the  squadron  and  steamed 
rapidly  down  the  channel  to  the  wooden  fleet  of  the  enemy,  and  soon 
after  all  their  flags  were  observed  to  be  flying  at  half-mast. 

Six  hundred  and  twelve  shot  and  shell  had  been  fired  at  Fort  Sum- 
ter, of  which  most  struck.  The  casualties  in  the  fort  were  : 1 man 
killed;  Lieut.  John  Middleton,  Lieut.  Julius  M.  Rhett,  Lieutenant 
[John]  Johnson,  engineer,  and  10  privates  slightly  wounded.  The 
fort  was  seriously  injured  on  the  northwest  face.  One  9 -inch  Dahl- 
gren  gun,  three  42-pounders,  and  one  8-inch  columbiad  disabled. 

During  the  afternoon,  the  land  batteries  reopened  their  fire  heavily 
upon  the  fort,  cutting  deeply  into  the  gorge  wall,  and  adding  much 
to  the  damage  of  the  northwestern  face  and  disabling  a 10-inch  co- 
lumbiad. By  night  the  enemy  had  thrown  948  shot,  of  which  445 
struck  outside,  233  inside,  and  270  passed  over.  - 

Battery  Wagner,  which  had  received  it’s  full  share  of  the  enemy’s 
fire,  was  but  little  damaged,  but  sustained  a serious  loss  in  the  death 
of  Capt,  J.  Morris  Wampler,  of  the  engineers,  a gallant  and  accom- 


Chap.  XL.]  OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C.  389 

plished  officer,  who  was  killed  by  a shell  from  the  enemy’s  fleet  while 
faithfully  performing  his  arduous  duties. 

Battery  Cheves  was  opened  on  the  morning  of  the  17th,  at  9 o’clock, 
with  four  8-inch  columbiads  and  four  8-inch  navy  guns  on  ship  car- 
riages. The  fire  was  kept  up  throughout  the  day  with  the  colum- 
biads at  the  enemy’s  works  on  Morris  Island  and  working  parties  in 
the  marsh,  having  the  effect  of  annoying  the  former  and  dispersing 
the  latter.  The  four  8-inch  navy  carriages  were  found  to  be  inade- 
quate to  stand  the  elevation  and  range,  and  dismounted  their  guns 
after  about  an  hour.  They  were  directed  to  be  remounted  on  colum- 
biad  carriages  and  reprepared  for  service  as  speedily  as  possible. 
Battery  Haskell  also  opened  on  the  enemy’s  working  parties  between 
Morris  and  Black  Is!  nds. 

During  the  night  of  the  17th,  the  enemy  remained  comparatively 
quiet.  The  troops  on  Morris  Island  were  resupplied,  and  a large 
quantity  of  ammunition  and  stores  were  removed  from  Fort  Sumter 
to  Sullivan’s  Island. 

Early  on  the  morning  of  the  18th,  the  Ironsides,  two  monitors,  and 
the  enemy’s  land  batteries  opened  upon  Fort  Sumter  and  Battery 
Wagner.  The  battery  and  fort  replied  slowly.  Batteries  Simkins 
and  Cheves  also  opened  upon  the  enemy,  annoying  them  to  a con- 
siderable extent,  but,  on  account  of  the  miserable  quality  of  our 
fuses,  only  by  the  striking  of  the  shells ; but  few  burst.  Before  2 
o’clock  the  Ironsides  and  monitors  retired,  the  land  batteries  alone 
keeping  up  the  cannonade,  with  the  effect  of  causing  the  wall  on  the 
northwest  face  of  Sumter  to  project  and  cutting  well  away  into  the 
gorge. 

During  the  afternoon,  the  Ironsides  and  five  'monitors  took  up  posi- 
tion in  line,  and,  with  the  land  batteries,  kept  up  a heavy  fire,  taking 
the  northwest  face  in  reverse,  disabling  the  remaining  guns  and  two 
10-inch  columbiads  on  the  northeast  face  ; two  guns  remaining  on 
the  west  face  were  also  disabled,  besides  the  7-inch  Brooke  gun  in  the 
southwest  angle.  The  enemy  ceased  his  fire  about  7 p.  m. , having 
thrown  876  shot  and  shell,  of  which  452  struck  outside,  244  inside, 
and  180  went  over.  One  man  was  seriously  and  2 slightly  wounded. 
At  Battery  Wagner  a rifled  gun  and  a 10-inch  columbiad  were  dis- 
abled, but  the  damage  to  the  works  otherwise  was  not  serious.  One 
monitor  of  the  enemy  was  observed  undergoing  repairs  during  the 
night. 

TOn  the  19th,]  the  enemy’s  land  batteries  commenced  firing  at  4.30 
o’clock  in  the  morning,  principally  on  Fort  Sumter,  but  firing  from 
mortars  and  small  guns  on  Battery  Wagner.  By  10  o’clock  the  can- 
nonade on  Sumter  had  become  more  serious  than  hitherto,  damaging 
the  walls  seriously,  killing  1 and  wounding  4.  All  the  gorge  guns 
had  been  rendered  useless,  and  the  first  shot  passed  through  the 
gorge  wall  just  under  the  crown  of  an  arch  west  of  the  main  gate- 
way. The  fire  continued  steadily  during  the  afternoon,  with  its  usual 
effect.  The  western  quarters  of  Fort  Sumter  having  been  demolished, 
the  walls  were  torn  down  by  the  garrison.  One  10-inch  mortar 
mounted  in  the  parade  of  Fort  Sumter  was  dismounted  in  the  after- 
noon. The  width  of  20  feet  of  the  gorge  wall  fell  during  the 
night,  leaving  the  protection  on  that  side  through  the  upper  arches 
only  the  sand  and  cotton  with  which  the  casemates  were  filled.  The 
damage  to  other  parts  of  the  fort  was  in  proportion.  One  man  had 
been  killed  and  4 wounded  at  Fort  Sumter.  The  fort  received  780 
shots — 408  outside,  241  inside,  and  131  over.  The  enemy’s  fleet  made 


[Chap.  XL. 


390  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

a demonstration  of  attacking  during  the  afternoon,  but  having  re- 
ceived a few  shots,  retired. 

At  Battery  Wagner  his  approaches  were  kept  up,  but  being  checked 
by  the  riflemen  and  artillery,  his  progress  w^,s  slow.  During  the 
night,  the  Charleston  Battalion  relieved  the  First  Georgia  Battalion, 
and  a company  of  the  Second  South  Carolina  Artillery  relieved  Cap- 
tain [F.  T.  J Miles’  company  (acting  artillery)  at  Battery  W agner.  The 
garrison  was  otherwise  supplied  and  provisioned.  An  additional  sup- 
ply of  ammunition  was  transported  from  Sumter  to  Sullivan’s  Island. 
Batteries  Cheves  and  Simkins  had  kept  up  their  fire  during  the  day 
and  night  of  the  19th,  receiving  an  occasional  shot  from  the  enemy. 

On  the  20th,  the  enemy  reopened  his  fire  heavily,  principally 
against  Fort  Sumter,  doing,  as  might  be  expected,  more  damage  than 
before.  It  was  steadily  kept  up  throughout  the  day,  and  at  night 
Colonel  Rhett  reported  it  as  the  heaviest  which  had  taken  place. 
Eight  hundred  and  seventy-nine  shots  were  fired,  of  which  408  struck 
outside,  296  inside,  and  175  passed  over.  The  greater  portion  of  the 
gorge  wall  had  fallen  in,  but  the  sand  and  cotton  in  the  rooms  had 
been  revetted  by  the  debris , and  protection  to  a certain  extent  was 
still  afforded.  The  northwest  face  was  clearly  breached  by  the  re- 
verse fire,  and  a casemate  knocked  through.  One  rifled  42-pounder 
on  the  east  and  one  on  the  northeast  face  were  disabled.  Captains 
[A.  S.]  Gaillard  and  [D.  G.]  Fleming  and  1 private  were  slightly 
wounded.  The  enemy  being  observed  advancing  by  sap  on  Battery 
Wagner,  Colonel  Keitt  opened  his  batteries  upon  them,  and,  with  his 
sharpshooters,  succeeded  in  checking  their  progress.  The  Ironsides 
and  monitors  moved  up  to  close  proximity  to  the  fort  and  opened 
a heavy  enfilading  and  direct  fire,  which  caused  him  to  close  his  em- 
brasures. The  damage  to  Battery  Wagner  was  no  greater  than 
usual  upon  that  battery.  Batteries  Simkins,  Cheves,  and  Haskell 
were  in  operation  upon  the  enemy’s  flank  during  the  20th.  Lieuten- 
ant-Colonel Yates  reports  the  practice  as  having  been  much  im- 
proved, and  that  he  had  reason  to  believe  that  two  ammunition 
chests  had  been  blown  up  in  the  enemy’s  trenches,  and  one  gun  dis- 
mounted ; also  that  in  the  afternoon  the  fire  of  the  enemy  had 
become  somewhat  wild  from  the  effect  of  rapid  firing  on  his  pieces 
at  long  range. 

The  report  given  above  contains  the  principal  active  operations  of 
the  defense  and  attack  up  to  the  evening  of  the  20th.  During  the 
time  included  in  it,  our  works  of  preparation  on  the  interior  lines  have 
steadily  progressed.  The  batteries  and  shelters  on  Sullivan’s  Island 
have  advanced  to  completion,  and  the  heavy  guns  and  mortars  which 
have  been  received  and  secured  from  Fort  Sumter  have  been  placed 
in  position,  manned,  and  provided  with  ammunition  as  far  as  possi- 
ble. A strong  front  has  been  made  to  command  the  channel  should 
the  enemy  succeed  in  overpowering  the  brave  defenders  of  Batteries 
Wagner  and  Gregg  and  Fort  Sumter.  Preparations  have  been 
made  for  placing  heavy  batteries  along  the  shores  of  Ashley  River 
from  Fort  Johnson  west,  to  command  the  inner  harbor  and  channels. 
All  batteries  which  would  bear  upon  the  enemy  have  been  served 
with  as  much  vigor  as  circumstances  would  permit,  and  his  attack 
confined  to  as  narrow  limits  as  possible. 

During  this  twenty  days’ progress  of  the  siege,  the  conduct  of  the 
troops  and  their  commanders  has  been  admirable. 

Brigadier-General  Hagood  and  Colonels  Keitt  and  Harrison,  who 
have  commanded  the  advanced  posts  on  Morris  Island  during  the 


Chap.  XL.]  OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C.  391 

periqd  of  this  report,  have  shown  the  qualities  of  constancy,  bravery, 
and  skill  in  the  performance  of  their  trying  and  arduous  duties.  The 
various  officers  attached  to  the  staff  of  these  commanders  have  per- 
formed their  duties  well,  and  I beg  heartily  to  concur  in  the  reports 
of  their  chiefs,  heretofore  transmitted  to  department  headquarters. 

Among  those  who  deserve  especial  mention  for  their  conduct  in  the 
defense  of  the  posts  on  Morris  Island,  are:  Lieutenant- Colonels  Gail- 
lard,  Charleston  Battalion;  [O.  M.]  Dantzler,  Twentieth  South  Caro- 
lina Volunteers,  and  [A.  T.]  Dargan,  Twenty-first  South  Carolina 
Volunteers;  Lieut.  Col.  J.  Welsman  Brown  and  Major  Warley,  Sec- 
ond South  Carolina  Volunteer  Artillery;  and  Captain  Chichester, 
Provisional  Artillery.  The  latter  has  served  several  times  with  dis- 
tinction. 

Captain  [C.  S.  ] Hill,  ordnance  officer,  attached  to  these  headquar- 
ters, having  been  sent  to  Battery  Wagner,  remained  during  a very 
prolonged  tour  of  duty,  which  was  performed  in  such  manner  as  to 
elicit  the  warmest  approval  of  the  different  commanders. 

Maj.  Henry  Bryan  and  Captain  [P.  K.]  Molony,  of  the  adjutant- 
general’s  department,  are  deservedly  commended  by  Colonel  Keitt 
and  Brigadier-General  Hagood. 

Majors  [E.  L.]  Holcombe  and  [R.  S.]  Gage,  commissaries,  and 
Captains  [E.  L.]  Guerard  and  [T.  W.]  Woodward,  quartermasters, 
have  performed  their  duties,  with  their  inefficient  means,  in  such 
manner  as  to  insure  the  supply  of  the  positions  of  which  they  had 
charge. 

The  garrison  of  Port  Sumter,  under  Col.  Alfred  Rhett  and  Maj. 
Ormsby  Blanding,  have  stood  to  the  defense  of  their  castle  with 
untiring  fortitude  and  bravery.  From  the  nature  of  the  structure 
and  the  enemy’s  projectiles,  the  exposure  during  the  period  when 
subjected  to  fire  has  been  great  and  extremely  annoying,  and  yet 
every  duty  of  repair  and  details  has  been  carried  on  without  inter- 
ruption or  undue  delay.  I refer  generally  to  Colonel  Rhett’s  reports 
for  the  mention  of  those  subordinate  officers  who  have  distinguished 
themselves  by  good  conduct;  but  in  this  connection  I would  mention 
the  services  of  Lieut.  John  Johnson,  of  the  engineer  corps,  at  Fort 
Sumter,  before  and  during  the  siege,  as  evincing  high  talent  and 
character  in  his  profession  as  well  as  bravery  and  constancy. 

Captains  Harleston  and  Fleming  deserve  an  especial  mention  for 
their  continued  and  zealous  services. 

The  staff  officers  attached  to  district  headquarters  have  been  con- 
stantly employed.  Capt.  W.  F.  Ranee,  principal  assistant  adjutant- 
general,  who  has  earned  honorable  mention  on  every  occasion  under 
my  command,  and  several  times  been  recommended  for  promotion, 
has  performed  every  duty  to  my  satisfaction.  Maj.  J.  M.  Middleton 
and  Capt.  Ephraim  M.  Seabrook, volunteer  aides-de-camp;  Capt.  C.  C. 
Pinckney,  district  ordnance  officer,  and  Major  Suber,  district  quar- 
termaster, have  been  actively  and  usefully  employed. 

Maj.  Motte  A.  Pringle,  post  quartermaster,  and  especially  in  charge 
of  transportation,  has  been  indefatigable  night  and  day,  with  the 
small  means  at  his  disposal  and  which  he  could  obtain,  in  forward- 
ing stores  and  supplies  and  relieving  troops  during  the  whole  of  this 
period.  In  this  duty  he  has  been  assisted  greatly  by  the  boats  and 
crews  of  the  Confederate  Ravy  under  charge  of  Lieutenants  [W. 
H.]  Ward,  Hasker,  and  Payne. 

I shall  continue  this  report  from  this  date,  and  have  the  honor  to 


392  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 


[Chap.  XL. 


inclose  a report  of  casualties  during  tlie  period  treated  of.  * I also 
send  the  reports  of  Lieut.  John  Johnson,*  engineer  in  charge  of  Fort 
Sumter,  and  a list  of  prisoners  captured. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant,  > 

R.  S.  RIPLEY, 

Brigadier-General , Commanding . 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan, 

Chief  of  Staff , &c. 

[Enclosures.] 

Abstract  from  nominal  list  of  Federal  killed , wounded,  and  prisoners  in  the 
engagement  of  the  morning  of  July  11,  1863,  on  Morris  Island .\ 


Prisoners. 


Command. 

Wounded. 

Not  wounded. 

© 

Officers. 

Men. 

Officers. 

d 

© 

3 

aS 

9 

< 

7th  Connecticut 

1 

5 

3 

43 

52 

9th  Maine 

1 

13 

14 

76th  Pennsylvania 

31 

1 

31 

63 

Total 

1 

36 

5 

87 

129 

[Remarks  on  original.]— Two  officers  and  95  privates  killed  ; % 1 officer  and  36  privates  wounded ; 
5 officers  and  87  privates  prisoners.  Total  killed,  wounded,  and  prisoners,  8 officers  and  218  privates. 


Abstract  from  (iList  of  Abolition  prisoners  captured  near  Charleston,  S.  C.f 

July  11  to  19,  1863. 


Date. 


July  19 
11 
19 
11 
11 
11 
15 
19 
19 
19 
19 


Organization. 

Officers. 

Men. 

Date. 

Organization. 

Officers. 

Men. 

United  States  Navy 

1 

July  15 

48th  New  York  

1 

6th  Connecticut  . . . 

3 

19 

48th  New  York 

33 

6th  Connecticut  . . . 

22 

19 

100th  New  York 

12 

7th  Connecticut  . . . 

3 

42 

19 

62d  Ohio  . . . 

14 

10th  Connecticut 

2 

11 

67th  Ohio 

1 

9th  Maine 

1 

13 

19 

67th  Ohio 

9 

9th  Maine 

2 

19 

55th  Pennsylvania 

1 

9th  Maine 

5 

H 

76th  Pennsylvania 

1 

37 

IKOth  [9]  Mfl.ssnrbnsfttt.s 

1 

3d  New  Hampshire 

1 

1 

Total 

14 

204 

7th  New  Hampshire 

12 

*List  of  casualties  at  Fort  Sumter  August  1-20,  and  Lieutenant  Johnson’s  reports, 
transferred  to  Bombardment  of  Fort  Sumter,  post. 

f Forwarded  by  Brigadier-General  Ripley,  July  11,  1863,  to  headquarters  Depart- 
ment South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida.  Filed  with  this  are  also  nominal  lists, 
first,  of  “wounded  and  sick  Federal  prisoners  captured  on  Morris  Island  [July  9 to 
20],  and  paroled  July  24,  1863,”  and,  second,  of  “wounded  and  sick  Confederate 
prisoners  captured  on  Morris  Island  July  10  and  paroled  July  24,  1863.”  The  totals 
of  first  list  are  as  follows : 6th  Connecticut,  8 men ; 7th  Connecticut.  4 men ; 9th 
Maine,  1 officer  and  3 men ; 3d  New  Hampshire,  1 man : 7th  New  Hampshire,  2 
officers  and  18  men  ; 48th  New  York,  2 officers  and  27  men  ; 100th  New  York,  1 offi- 
cer and  14  men;  62d  Ohio,  7 men;  67th  Ohio,  6 men,  and  76th  Pennsylvania,  11 
men.  Total,  105.  The  totals  of  second  list  show  : 7th  South  Carolina,  5 ; 21st  South 
Carolina,  27 ; 1st  South  Carolina  Battalion,  1,  and  1st  South  Carolina  Artillery,  5. 
Total,  38.  All  enlisted  men. 

X Neither  names  nor  regiments  of  the  killed  given  in  the  original. 


Chap  XL.]  OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C.  393 

Hdqrs.  1st  Mil.  Dist.,  Dept,  of  S.  C.,  Ga.,  and  Fla., 

Charleston , September  22,  1863. 

General  : On  the  morning  of  August  21,  the  enemy  opened 
heavily  against  the  east  face  of  Fort  Sumter  from  his  land  batteries, 
enfilading  it,  and  by  7. 30  had  succeeded  in  disabling  one  10-inch  gun 
and  a rifled  42-pounder.  The  cannonade  was  continued  throughout 
the  day.  Four  hundred  and  sixty-five  shot  and  shell  struck  Fort 
Sumter  outside,  259  inside,  and  219  passed  over — 943  in  all.  The 
effect  was  to  batter  the  eastern  face  heavily,  doing  considerable 
damage,  and  to  disable  the  guns  already  mentioned  (one  8-inch 
columbiad  and  a rifled  42-pounder).  Seven  men  were  wounded  in  the 
fort,  3 dangerously.  In  the  evening,  the  Ironsides  frigate  came 
within  range.  Five  11 -inch  shot  were  fired  at  her,  when  she  with- 
drew. 

Brigadier- General  Hagood  relieved  Colonel  Keitt  in  command 
of  our  troops  on  Morris  Island  at  2 o’clock  on  the  morning  of 
the  21st.  At  2.30  he  opened  fire  on  the  enemy’s  advance,  then  within 
about  450  yards,  to  which  the  enemy  responded  vigorously.  The 
practice  was  kept  up  until  daylight.  During  the  early  part  of  the 
day,  the  enemy’s  land  batteries  were  employed  upon  Fort  Sumter, 
and  fired  but  little  upon  Wagner.  A monitor  and  two  wooden  gun- 
boats during  the  afternoon  opened  upon  the  battery  and  the  troops 
in  the  hills.  This  fire  was  replied  to  by  a 10-inch  gun  from  Wagner 
and  by  Battery  Gregg.  Toward  evening  the  heavy  land  batteries 
commenced  upon  Wagner,  adding  their  annoyance  to  that  of  the 
sharpshooters,  which  had  been  constantly  kept  up  during  the  day. 
At  dusk  a large  force  of  the  enemy  was  observed  approaching,  with 
the  apparent  intention  of  assaulting  the  rifle-pits.  He  was  received 
with  a brisk  fire,  and  General  Hagood,  immediately  re-enforcing  his 
advance,  drove  back  the  assault. 

The  casualties  at  W agner  were  : Capt.  Robert  Pringle,  of  Lucas’ 
battalion  of  artillery  (who  died  nobly  at  his  post),  killed,  and  7 
wounded.  Batteries  Cheves  and  Simkins  kept  up  a continuous  fire 
with  columbiads  and  mortars,  throughout  the  day,  on  the  enemy’s 
advance. 

At  12  o’clock,  the  enemy  sent  a flag  of  truce  to  Battery  Wagner 
with  a communication  to  the  commanding  general.  This  Brigadier- 
General  Hagood  retained,  there  being  no  immediate  communication 
with  the  city  until  the  evening,  when  it  was  delivered  to  the  com- 
manding general,  who  visited  Morris  Island  at  that  time.  * At  about 
2.30  o’clock  on  the  morning  of  the  22d,  an  officer  was  sent  to  Morris 
Island,  returning  the  dispatch  inclosed  to  the  commander  of  the 
enemy’s  forces,  for  signature,  which  had  been  omitted. 

Soon  after  3 o’clock,  the  enemy  opened  from  a new  battery  (con- 
structed in  the  marsh  a little  to  the  west  of  Thomas  Island)  at  long 
range  upon  the  city  of  Charleston,  several  shots  reaching  the  city, 
but  doing  no  damage  whatever  beyond  the  destruction  of  a few 
medical  stores  and  injuring  one  or  two  walls  slightly. 

During  the  night  of  the  21st,  the  Twentieth  South  Carolina  Volun- 
teers was  relieved  from  duty  at  Morris  Island  by  the  Sixty- first 
North  Carolina  Regiment,  and  different  detachments  of  artillery 
were  also  replaced  by  fresh  troops.  Captain  [Alfred  S.]  Gaillard’s 
company  of  artillery  was  relieved  from  Fort  Sumter  and  stationed 

*[Note  on  original.]  It  being  at  night,  with  no  proper  light  at  hand,  the  com- 
munications were  sent  unread  by  the  same  messenger  to  my  headquarters. — G. 
T.  Beauregard,  general  commanding. 


394  S.  C.  AND  GrA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

at  Sullivan’s  Island.  A considerable  quantity  of  artillery  imple- 
ments and  9,700  pounds  of  powder,  with  subsistence  and  other  stores, 
were  also  shipped  from  that  fort  during  the  night. 

The  enemy  opened  heavily  from  his  land  batteries  on  Fort  Sumter, 
at  6 a.  m.  on  the  22d,  directing  his  fire  as  before — principally  at  the 
east  face — and  continued  it  throughout  the  day,  throwing  604  shots, 
of  which  203  struck  outside,  216  struck  inside,  and  185  missed.  The 
effect  during  the  day  was  to  disable  the  remaining  barbette  guns, 
except  one  11  and  one  10  inch  gun  on  the  eastern  face  ; demolish  the 
arches  of  the  northwest  face,  of  which  five  and  the  terre-jilein  fell 
in,  and  scale  the  eastern  face  severely.  One  private  was  wounded. 

While  continuing  the  fire  against  Fort  Sumter,  at  an  early  hour  in 
the  morning,  two  monitors  opened  upon  Battery  Wagner,  shelling 
for  about  two  hours,  when  they  were  replaced  by  the  Ironsides,  and 
she,  again  re-enforced  by  two  other  monitors,  keeping  up  a heavy 
cannonade  until  about  2 o’clock,  when  they  all  withdrew.  They  all 
kept  at  long  range,  but  had  the  effect  of  preventing  a continued  fire 
from  the  battery  on  the  advancing  works  of  the  enemy,  although  it 
was  kept  up  for  about  one  hour  and  a half  during  the  morning. 
The  sharpshooters  recommenced  their  fire  as  soon  as  the  fleet  with- 
drew. Battery  Gregg  returned  the  fire  of  the  monitors  until  they 
were  out  of  range,  when  the  guns  were  turned  upon  the  enemy’s 
stockade  and  advance  works,  to  which  his  land  batteries  replied.  A 
flag  of  truce  was  sent  by  steamer  Spaulding,  with  a communication 
from  the  commanding  general  and  certain  consuls  to  the  enemy, 
during  the  evening.  Batteries  Simkins  and  Cheves  kept  up  a con- 
tinued fire  upon  the  works  of  attack. 

On  the  morning  of  the  23d,  at  about  3.30,  the  enemy’s  iron-clad 
fleet  came  up  the  channel  and  engaged  Fort  Sumter  at  short  dis- 
tances firing  61  shots  (of  which  29  struck  outside,  15  inside,  and  17 
missed),  doing  considerable  damage  to  the  eastern  parapet  and  wall. 
The  fire  was  replied  to  by  the  guns  of  Fort  Sumter  capable  of  serv- 
ice, and  the  proper  signals  having  been  made,  Colonel  [William] 
Butler,  commanding  artillery  on  Sullivan’s  Island,  manned  his  bat- 
teries, and  opened  fire  on  the  nearest  monitor.  A dense  fog  soon  shut 
in,  however,  which  prevented  effective  practice  at  so  small  a mark. 
From  Fort  Moultrie  the  firing  was  only  kept  up  by  throwing  shell,  to 
interrupt  any  reconnaissance  which  the  enemy  might  make  of  the 
obstructions,  until  about  6. 30  a.  m. , when  the  fog  rose  and  the  enemy 
retired  after  receiving  a few  shots. 

At  Battery  W agner  during  the  night  all  the  damages  which  had 
been  done  to  the  battery  were  repaired  ; but,  notwithstanding  a con- 
stant fire  from  the  advanced  pickets,  the  enemy  succeeded  during 
the  night  in  pushing  his  sap  about  40  yards.  At  an  early  hour 
in  the  morning,  however,  General  Hagood  opened  upon  him  with 
three  guns,  and  succeeded  in  interfering  with  his  work  almost  en- 
tirely during  the  day,  and  seriously  injuring  what  had  been  accom- 
plished during  the  night.  The  enemy’s  land  batteries  opened  upon 
Wagner  in  the  morning  and  afternoon,  but  gave  their  heaviest  fire 
during  the  day  to  Sumter.  The  Ironsides  attacked  about  7 o’clock, 
but,  being  replied  to  by  Battery  Gregg  and  the  sea  front  of  Wagner, 
she  retired  after  about  an  hour  and  a half.  One  of  her  boats  (a  fine 
launch)  was  cut  away,  secured  by  volunteers  from  the  garrison,  and 
sent  to  the  city  of  Charleston,  where  it  has  since  been  employed  in 
transport  service.  At  about  12  o’clock,  a flag  of  truce  came  in  from 


Chap.  XL.]  OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C.  395 

the  enemy,  with,  a communication  for  the  commanding  general  and 
foreign  consuls. 

The  casualties  at  Battery  W agner  during  the  day  were  7 wounded, 
among  whom  was  the  gallant  and  distinguished  Lieut.  Col.  P.  C. 
Gaillard,  the  commander  of  the  Charleston  Battalion,  who  lost  his 
left  hand  while  in  the  faithful  and  unflinching  discharge  of  his  duty. 

The  fire  from  the  enemy’s  land  batteries  was  kept  on  Sumter  dur- 
ing the  whole  day,  throwing  633  shot  and  shell,  of  which  282  struck 
outside,  210  inside,  and  141  missed.  The  effect  was  to  disable  the 
10-inch  columbiad  remaining  and  the  three  rifled  42-pounders  in  the 
northern  salient  of  the  second  tier.  The  eastern  face  was  very  badly 
scaled  and  the  parapet  seriously  injured.  The  flag-staff  was  twice 
shot  away,  but  the  flag  each  time  immediately  replaced. 

The  casualties  in  Fort  Sumter  were  7 wounded,  including  Lieuten- 
ants [S.  Cordes]  Boylston,  [Eldred  S.]  Fickling,  and  Scanlan,  se- 
verely, and  Private  [Henry]  Davis,  Company  C,  mortally. 

The  enemy  opened  with  Parrott  guns  on  Fort  Johnson  during  the 
day,  annoying  working  parties  to  some  extent.  Batteries  Cheves 
and  Simkins  kept  up  their  regular  fire  upon  his  land  approaches 
against  Battery  W agner,  and  upon  his  marsh  battery  at  night ; but 
nevertheless,  at  about  midnight  the  enemy  opened  upon  the  city  of 
Charleston  with  a heavy  Parrott  rifled  gun,  and  upon  Battery  Cheves 
with  a mortar.  The  damage,  however,  was  slight,  and  the  rifled 
gun  having  either  burst  or  been  struck  on  its  muzzle  by  a shot  from 
our  batteries,  ceased  its  practice  from  that  time. 

On  the  morning  of  the  24th,  fire  was  opened  upon  Sumter  from  the 
land  batteries,  but  only  150  shots  were  thrown  during  the  day,  hav- 
ing principally  the  effect  of  scaling  and  damaging  the  eastern  scarp, 
making  one  or  two  penetrations  in  the  lower  casemates,  which  were 
speedily  filled  up  with  sand-bags.  Ho  casualties  occurred  at  Sumter., 

At  Battery  Wagner,  the  work  of  repair  and  preparation  went  on 
during  the  day,  and  a mortar  practice  was  kept  up  against  the  en- 
emy’s working  parties.  Direct  fire  was  also  opened  whenever  prac- 
ticable, but  it  was  ordinarily  of  short  continuance,  owing  to  the  sur- 
passing accuracy  of  the'  enemy’s  practice  against  the  embrasures, 
rendering  great  care  necessary  to  preserve  the  pieces.  Sharpshoot- 
ers were  busily  engaged  on  both  sides. 

Batteries  Simkins,  Cheves,  and  Haskell  were  engaged  from  time  to 
time  in  firing  upon  the  enemy’s  advance  during  the  day  and  night. 
The  Nineteenth  Georgia  Regiment  relieved  the  Charleston  Battalion 
during  the  evening  of  the  24th. 

August  25,  the  enemy  had  commenced  building  another  battery  in 
the  marsh  south  of  that  from  which  he  opened  fire  upon  the  city. 
Fire  was  opened  upon  it  from  Simkins  and  Cheves,  but  soon  discon- 
tinued, circumstances  showing  it  to  be  a sham.  The  practice  against 
Fort  Sumter  commenced  about  9.30  o’clock,  and  continued  through- 
out the  25th.  One  hundred  and  seventy-five  shot  and  shell  were 
thrown,  of  which  62  struck  outside  and  36  inside.  The  damage  was 
only  to  increase  the  debris  and  explode  an  ammunition  chest.  There 
were  no  casualties. 

At  Battery  Wagner,  the  enemy  was  unusually  quiet,  firing  but 
few  of  his  land  batteries,  until  about  3 o’clock  in  the  afternoon,  when 
he  opened  an  incessant  fire  from  his  mortars  upon  .the  fort  and  the 
space  between  it  and  the  rifle-pits.  Toward  evening,  he  was  ob- 
served from  the  observatories  in  the  city  to  be  accumulating  forces 
in  his  works  of  attack,  and  orders  were  sent  to  Batteries  Cheves  and 


396  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

Simkins  and  Fort  Moultrie  to  open  upon  them.  Soon  after  dark,  he 
advanced  npon  the  rifle-pits  in  front  of  Wagner,  but  General  Ha- 
good’s  forces  were,  fortunately,  prepared  to  receive'diim.  His  mor- 
tar practice  ceased  and  his  infantry  assaulted  fiercely,  but  the  position 
was  held  with  courage  and  spirit,  and  success  crowned  the  efforts  of 
the  brave  men  of  the  Sixty-first  North  Carolina  and  Fifty-fourth 
Georgia' Regiments,  who  constituted  the  advanced  pickets  and  re- 
serve. -The  latter  regiment  had  been  on  duty  during  the  day  and 
had  just  been  re-enforced  by  the  Sixty -first  going  to  its  relief  under 
Colonel  [W.  S.]  Devane. 

Captain  [A.  S.]  Roberts,  of  the  Fifty-fourth,  a gallant  soldier,  was 
mortally  wounded.  The  casualties  were  5 killed  and  19  wounded. 

Colonel  [George  P.]  Harrison,  [jr. ,]  of  the  Thirty-second  Georgia, 
relieved  Brigadier-General  Hagood  in  command  of  the  forces  on 
Morris  Island,  at  10  o’clock  on  the  evening  of  the  25th,  Lieut.  Col. 
J.  Welsman  Brown  relieving  Major  Warley  as  chief  of  artillery. 

Twelve  thousand  pounds  of  powder,  a large  quantity  of  ammuni- 
tion and  material,  were  transported  from  Fort  Sumter  during  the 
night.  Companies  C and  F,  of  the  First  Regiment  of  Artillery, 
were  transferred  to  the  new  batteries  near  Fort  Johnson,  their  places 
being  supplied  by  150  men  from  Brigadier-General  Colquitt’s 
brigade. 

The  enemy  commenced  against  Fort  Sumter  at  6 a.  m.  on  the  26th, 
but  his  fire  was  inexact  and  slow,  doing  but  little  damage  except  in- 
creasing the  debris.  The  garrison  and  laborers  were  employed  in 
repairing  damages.  A quantity  of  10-inch  shells  were  shipped  dur- 
ing the  night,  with  other  ammunition. 

At  Battery  Wagner,  Colonel  Harrison  kept  up  an  irregular  fire 
during  the  night  of  the  25th,  and  also  during  the  day,  but  several  of 
his  guns  were  badly  damaged  and  his  supply  of  ammunition,  from 
deficiency  of  transportation  and  other  causes,  not  full.  The  enemy 
returned  the  fire  from  a number  of  guns,  generally  giving  four  shots 
to  one,  and  about  the  middle  of  the  afternoon  increased  the  cannonade 
against  Wagner  and  Gregg.  About  5 o’clock  he  concentrated  all  his 
fire  on  Battery  Wagner  and  the  rifle-pits.  Meanwhile,  massing  his 
troops  in  his  works  of  attack  just  before  dark,  he  threw  forward 
an  overwhelming  force  on  the  advanced  pickets,  notwithstanding 
the  fire  of  Batteries  Simkins,  Gregg,  and  Cheves,  and  succeeded  in 
overpowering  them  before  they  could  be  supported,  capturing  the 
greater  number.  He  attempted  to  advance  beyond  the  rifle-pits, 
but  having  exploded  three  torpedoes  and  being  received  by  a warm 
fire  from  Wagner,  his  advance  was  checked  for  the  time. 

The  Sixty-first  N orth  Carolina  Regiment  and  the  artillery  detach- 
Inents  on  duty  at  Morris  Island  were  to  be  relieved  during  the  night 
by  the  Eighth  North  Carolina  and  other  detachments  of  artillery 
from  their  respective  regiments.  Upon  the  enemy’s  attack,  the  re- 
lieving party  was  strengthened  by  the  Twentieth  South  Carolina 
Volunteers,  and  Colonel  Harrison  was  ordered  to  retain  the  troops  to 
be  relieved. 

During  the  night,  the  enemy  had  recourse  again  to  his  regular  ap- 
proaches, and  succeeded  in  making  some  progress.  At  dawn  of  the 
27th,  he  was  opened  upon  by  Battery  Wagner,  which  was  replied  to  by 
the  enemy’s  Parrott  guns,  making  it  impracticable  to  use  our  imper- 
fect artillery  with  good  effect.  The  sharpshooters  were  kept  at 
work,  and  at  dark  the  artillery  was  renewed. 


Chap.  XL.]  OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C.  397 

Brig.  Gen.  A.  H.  Colquitt  relieved  Colonel  Harrison  in  command 
of  the  island  at  12  o’clock  on  the  night  of  the  27th. 

The  enemy’s  operations  against  Fort  Sumter  consisted  only  in 
throwing  4 shots  at  the  flag.  The  garrison  was  employed  in  stop- 
ping breaches  and  embrasures.  During  the  night,  a 9-inch  Dahlgren 
gun  and  a 10-inch  columbiad  were  thrown  from  the  walls,  to  be  trans- 
ported by  a party  under  Mr.  J.  Fraser  Mathewes.  The  Dahlgren 
gun  was  brought  to  the  city,  with  a large  quantity  of  implements 
and  ammunition. 

The  enemy  was  very  quiet  during  the  28th,  throwing  only  6 
shots  at  Sumter.  The  tides  had  apparently  damaged  some  of  his 
works,  which  he  was  engaged  in  repairing.  He  continued  his  ad- 
vance by  his  regular  approaches  on  Morris  Island,  in  which  he  was 
retarded  by  the  artillery  fire  from  Batteries  Gregg,  Simkins,  Cheves, 
and  Haskell,  and  the  infantry  fire  from  Battery  Wagner,  during 
the  day  and  night.  At  Fort  Sumter,  a 9-inch  Dahlgren  gun  was 
thrown  over  the  parapet,  but  badly  injured  in  the  fall.  The  10-inch 
columbiad,  sent  down  the  night  before  with  a large  supply  of  ammu- 
nition, was  shipped.  No  casualties  occurred.  The  Sixty-first  North 
Carolina  Regiment  was  relieved  from  Battery  Wagner. 

No  firing  occurred  against  Sumter  on  the  29th.  During  the  night, 
Company  D,  of  the  First  South  Carolina  Artillery,  was  sent  to 
Charleston,  being  replaced  by  50  men  of  General  Colquitt’s  brigade. 
A 7-inch  Brooke  gun  and  a 42-pounder  (rifled)  were  thrown  from 
the  parapet.  The  Brooke  gun  and  a large  quantity  of  miscellaneous 
ammunition  and  implements  were  shipped. 

On  Morris  Island,  the  enemy  were  engaged  in  strengthening  their 
works,  annoyed  and  retarded  by  the  fire  from  the  batteries  on  James 
Island  and  Fort  Johnson  and  from  Fort  Moultre,  which,  although 
at  a.  great  range,  was  reported  by  General  Colquitt  as  quite  effective. 
The  guns  at  Battery  Wagner  did  good  service.  An  irregular  fire 
was  kept  up  on  both  sides.  No  serious  damage  was  done  to  Wag- 
ner, but  the  9-inch  Dahlgren  gun  at  Battery  Gregg  was  dismounted. 

During  the  evening,  Lieutenant  [James]  Randle,  aide-de-camp  to 
General  Colquitt,  a highly  distinguished  and  meritorious  young  offi- 
cer, received  a very  severe  and  dangerous  wound.  * 

The  Fifty-fourth  Georgia  Regiment  was  relieved,  as  well  as  artil- 
lery detachments,  by  the  Thirty-second  Georgia  and  other  troops, 
during  the  night. 

On  the  morning  of  the  30th,  the  enemy  opened  a rapid  fire  from 
four  guns  on  Fort  Sumter,  wounding  4 men,  throwing  about  the 
debris , and  disabling  the  three  10-inch  columbiads  on  the  sea  face 
which  had  been  repaired.  This  was  kept  up  until  about  5 o’clock 
in  the  afternoon,  and  by  that  time  three  of  the  casemate  arches  on 
the  northeast  face  had  been  demolished,  and  two  breaches  made  in 
the  scarp-wall  of  the  eastern  face,  exposing  the  sand  with  which  the 
arches  were  filled. 

On  Morris  Island  the  enemy  was  quietly  engaged  in  driving  his 
sap,  in  which  he  was  opposed  by  the  James  Island  batteries  and' 
Wagner,  and  attempted  a new  approach  on  the  left,  but  was  com- 
pelled to  desist.  During  the  day,  but  little  firing  took  place,  except 
from  sharpshooters;  but  at  evening  a brisk  mortar  practice  was 
commenced  on  Battery  Wagner,  and  a fire  from  Parrott  guns  on 
Battery  Gregg,  apparently  to  cut  off  supplies  and  the  relieving 
troops.  These  were  sent  down  in  the  steamer  Sumter ; the  naval 


* Died  September  21,  1863. 


398  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

force  being  unable  to  co-operate  with  boats,  and,  the  weather  being 
favorable,  it  was  determined  by  the  quartermaster  in  charge  to 
make  the  attempt  to  communicate  direct.  The  Twenty-seventh  and 
Twenty-eighth  Georgia  Regiments  and  Captain  [J.  D.]  Johnson’s 
company  of  artillery,  with  the  supplies  and  stores  tor  Morris  Island, 
had  been  safely  landed,  and  the  Twentieth  South  Carolina  and 
Twenty-third  Georgia  Regiments  and  Captain  Mathewes’  artillery 
received  on  board  ; so  much  time  had  been  taken  up,  however,  that 
the  tide  had  fallen  so  low  as  to  necessitate  going  by  the  main  chan- 
nel, and,  unfortunately,  the  necessity  had  not  been  provided  against 
by  giving  information  to  and  establishing  a signal  with  the  batter- 
ies on  Sullivan’s  Island  ; the  steamer  had  run  safely  by  the  enemy’s 
fleet  and  was  coming  up  the  channel,  when,  being  observed  from 
Fort  Moultrie,  fire  was  opened  upon  her.  Before  the  officers  in 
charge  had  learned  their  error,  several  shots  took  effect,  sinking  the 
boat  and  causing  the  loss  of  arms  and  equipments.  The  troops  on 
board  were  rescued  by  the  garrison  of  Fort  Sumter,  under  Col. 
Alfred  Rhett,  and  boats  sent  down  by  the  navy.  Eight  men  were 
reported  missing  the  next  morning,  and  it  is  feared  were  drowned. 
Special  reports  have  been  made  to  headquarters  on  this  unfortunate 
occurrence.  * 

August  31,  during  the  night,  in  spite  of  a heavy  fire  frdm  Battery 
Wagner,  the  enemy  continued  strengthening  his  approaches,  reply- 
ing to  our  fire  with  his  mortars.  The  batteries  on  James  Island 
continued  their  practice,  oftentimes  with  good  effect ; but  from  the 
near  approach  of  the  enemy  to  Battery  Wagner  it  was,  at  others, 
quite  dangerous  to  our  own  people,  and  General  Colquitt  directed 
them  by  signal  to  cease.  Occasional  shots  were  thrown  by  the  enemy 
in  the  morning,  and  their  sharpshooters  were  especially  active. 
About  3.30  in  the  afternoon,  four  monitors  came  up  and  commenced* 
firing  at  Battery  Gregg,  Fort  Moultrie,  and  Fort  Sumter,  and  the 
wreck  of  the  steamer  sunk  the  previous  night.  This  was  returned 
by  the  batteries  on  Sullivan’s  Island  and  Battery  Gregg.,  and  the 
monitors  were  repeatedly  struck  from  both  sides.  At  dark  they  with- 
drew. The  fire  upon  Fort  Sumter  was  quite  slack  during  the  day, 
and  did  no  damage.  At  night  the  troops  rescued  from  the  Sumter 
were  transported  to  their  respective  posts,  and  the  shipment  of  stores 
and  ammunition  continued. 

The  enemy  was  engaged  on  his  works  on  Morris  Island  during  the 
night  of  the  31st,  under  a brisk  fire  from  Battery  Wagner  along  his 
front.  He  succeeded  in  advancing  his  lines  but  a short  distance.  At 
daylight  he  opened  with  his  mortars  upon  that  battery,  and  kept  up 
the  bombardment  at  intervals  throughout  the  day.  The  long-range 
land  batteries  opened  early  against  Fort  Sumter  and  kept  up  a regu- 
lar and  destructive  fire,  injuring  the  fort  very  seriously  and  dis- 
abling the  remaining  guns  en  barbette.  The  entire  terre-plein  of  the 
northeastern  face,  with  the  exception  of  two  arches  near  the  eastern 
salient,  fell  in  under  the  fire. 

At  11.40  p.  m.  six  monitors  steamed  up  and  took  positions  varying 
from  800  to  1,500  yards  from  Fort  Sumter,  and  opened  a heavy  can- 
nonade upon  the  eastern  face.  Fort  Moultrie  and  the  batteries 
adjacent  on  Sullivan’s  Island  and  Battery  Gregg  opened  upon  them 
in  return,  striking  them  frequently  and  heavily.  Two  or  three  soon 
retired,  and  remained  at  long  range. 


*See  August  31,  1863. — Sinking  of  C.  S.  transport  Sumter,  etc. 


Chap.  XL.]  OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C.  399 

The  Ironsides  moved  in  at  1.30  on  the  morning  of  the  2d,  and, 
taking  a position  at  from  abont  1,500  to  1,800  yards  from  Sumter, 
opened  her  broadside.  She  was  too  far  from  Moultrie  for  effective 
practice,  which  was  ordered  to  he  kept  up  and  concentrated  on  the 
leading  vessels.  This  was  done  until  4.40  a.  m.,  when  the  fleet  re- 
tired, two  monitors  apparently  injured  and  requiring  assistance. 
Their  fire  had  been  principally  directed  against  Fort  Sumter,  appar- 
ently with  the  intention  of  doing  as  much  damage  as  possible.  This 
was  effected  to  the  extent  of  demolishing  nearly  the  whole  of  the 
eastern  scarp,  but  only  three  casualties  (all  slight  wounds)  took  place 
in  the  fort.  Two  men  of  the  Fifty -first  North  Carolina,  were  killed 
on  Sullivan’s  Island,  by  the  explosion  of  a shell  from  the  fleet. 

The  Twenty -fifth  South  Carolina  Regiment  was  to  have  relieved 
the  Thirty-second  Georgia  and  Eighth  North  Carolina,  on  duty  at 
Morris  Island,  but  owing  to  the  engagement  the  communication  was 
interrupted  and  only  a detachment  effected  a landing. 

While  the  cannonade  was  going  on,  an  occasional  fire  was  kept  up 
on  Battery  W agner,  and  the  enemy  pushed  forward  his  works  of  at- 
tack to  within  about  120  yards  of  the  eastern  salient.  Owing  to  the 
difficulty  of  communication  and  supply,  the  garrison  was  compelled 
to  husband  the  ammunition  for  the  -heavy  guns ; but  a fire  was  kept 
up  to  impede  their  progress  as  much  as  possible.  The  sharpshooters 
on  both  sides  on  Morris  Island  were  busily  employed  in  the  day,  but 
the  batteries  against  Sumter  w^ere  idle  and  the  fleet  were  apparently 
employed  repairing  damages  and  resupplying  their  ammunition. 
The  casualties  at  Wagner  were  1 killed  and  6 wounded. 

At  night  the  movement  of  troops,  attempted  the  previous  evening, 
and  the  supply  of  Morris  Island  were  effected,  and  at  11  p.  m.,  Col. 
L.  M.  Keitt,  of  the  Twentieth  South  Carolina  Volunteers,  relieved 
Brigadier-General  Colquitt  in  the  command  of  that  position. 

The  night  of  the  2d  [September]  passed  quietly  at  Battery  Wagner, 
the  enemy  pressing  forward  his  works,  and  our  own  forces  repairing 
damages  and  planting  torpedoes  to  obstruct  his  progress.  Early  in 
the  morning  of  the  3d,  he  opened  his  mortars  and  continued  the  prac- 
tice throughout  the  day.  The  casualties  for  the  day  were  1 killed  and 
6 wounded. 

A quantity  of  ammunition  and  stores  were  removed  from  Fort 
Sumter  during  the  night  of  the  2d.  The  3d  passed  away  without 
the  enemy’s  firing  upon  that  work,  and  the  garrison  and  hands  were 
employed  in  reliefs.  At  night  the  shipment  of  ordnance  and  stores 
was  continued.  One  10-inch  gun,  one  8-inch,  and  rifled  32-pounder 
were  removed  from  the  berme  of  the  fort  and  transported  to  the  city 
by  Mr.  J.  Fraser  Mathewes.  Lieutenant  Julius  M.  Rhett  succeeded 
in  throwing  from  the  parapet  two  10-inch,  one  42-pounder  (rifled), 
one  8-inch,  one  11-inch,  and  one  32-pounder  rifled  guns  during  the 
nights  of  September  1,  2,  and  3. 

The  night  of  the  3d  passed  with  comparative  quiet,  the  enemy 
working  at  his  approaches  and  pushing  them  forward  with  vigor, 
covered  occasionally  by  his  mortar  practice.  When  morning  dawned 
he  neglected  Fort  Sumter,  but  kept  an  occasional  fire  from  his  land 
batteries  on  Battery  Wagner,  and  kept  his  sharpshooters  busy  in 
sweeping  the  parapet  from  the  captured  rifle-pits.  The  monitor 
fleet  lay  quiet,  apparently  repairing  damages  and  taking  in  ammuni- 
tion. 

About  8 o’clock,  the  Ironsides  opened  fire  on  Battery  Wagner, 
which  was  kept  up  until  about  noon,  when  she  hauled  off  and  regu- 


400  S.  C.  AND  a A.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

lar  mortar  practice  succeeded  throughout  the  day.  The  effect  was 
to  increase  the  casualties  seriously.  These  will  be  found  in  the  re- 
turns accompanying  this  report ; but  the  daily  ^reports  were  from 
this  date  interrupted. 

During  the  afternoon,  Maj.  Frederick  [F.]  Warley,  Second  South 
Carolina  Artillery,  was  seriously  wounded  by  a splinter.  A boat 
being  sent  down  with  an  officer  to  relieve  him,  "was  on  its  return  cap- 
tured, with  himself,  the  coxswain,  and  10  men,  at  about  9 p.  m.,  by 
some  of  the  enemy’s  barges  which  had  pushed  in  under  the  cover  of 
the  darkness.  The  supply  of  Morris  Island  and  the  relief  of  the 
Twenty-eighth  Georgia  Regiment  were,  however,  effected  during  the 
night  without  further  loss. 

Fort  Sumter  having  been  held  through  the  siege  and  cannonade 
by  the  First  South  Carolina  Artillery,  under  Col.  Alfred  Rhett,  until 
its  armament  had  been  disabled,  and  the  services  of  the  artillerymen 
being  elsewhere  required,  the  commanding  general  determined  that 
it  should  be  held  by  infantry.  Several  companies  had  been  before 
relieved  by  troops  from  General  Colquitt’s  brigade,  and  on  the  night 
of  the  4th  the  Charleston  Battalion,  under  Major  [J.  A.]  Blake,  re- 
lieved the  garrison,  Maj.  Stephen  Elliott,  jr.  relieving  Colonel  Rhett 
in  command  of  the  post.  Colonel  Rhett  was  placed  in  command  of 
the  interior  batteries  in  and  about  the  city,  with  Castle  Pinckney 
and  Fort  Ripley. 

The  enemy  kept  up  a continued  fire  on  Wagner  during  the  night 
of  the  4th,  and  pushed  forvgard  his  approaches  to  a close  proximity 
of  the  ditch.  The  shortness  of  his  range  and  the  proximity  of  his 
support  enabled  him  to  inflict  more  injury  on  the  garrison,  a larger 
force  being  necessary  at  the  parapet  to  guard  against  assault. 

Early  on  the  morning  of  the  5th,  the  Ironsides  combined  her  fire 
with  the  enemy’s  land  batteries,  all  concentrated  on  Wagner,  with 
considerable  effect,  the  land  guns  being  directed  against  the  south- 
eastern salient  and  those  of  the  Ironsides  enfilading  the  land  face  and 
curtain  of  the  work.  The  effect  was  to  severely  injure  the  traverses 
and  communications,  to  disable  the  guns  and  equipments  still  more 
effectually,  and  increase  the  list  of  killed  and  wounded  heavily,  it 
amounting  to  over  40  for  the  day  at  W agner  and  Gregg. 

Certain  indications  of  an  attack  on  Cumming’s  Point  during  the 
night  by  boats  having  been  observed,  Colonel  Keitt  was  directed  to 
prepare  to  receive  it,  which  he  did  at  early  dark  by  sending  strong 
parties  to  the  support  of  Battery  Gregg  and  into  the  sand-hills  be- 
tween it  and  Wagner.  While  making  these  preparations,  Captain 
J.  R.]  Haines,  commanding  Twenty-eighth  Georgia,  and  Lieutenant 
R.  A.]  Blum,  of  the  Twenty-fifth  South  Carolina  Volunteers,  were 
killed  by  a mortar  shell.  They  were  both  gallant  and  meritorious 
officers. 

The  enemy  kept  up  a fierce  mortar  practice  on  Wagner,  and  at 
dusk  sent  in  two  monitors,  which  kept  a heavy  fire  on  Battery  Gregg 
and  its  water  approaches  until  about  1 o’clock  on  the  morning  of  the 
6th,  when  they  hauled  off.  Soon  after,  the  attacking  party  mad<e  its 
appearance  in  from  fifteen  to  twenty  barges  by  the  interior  passages, 
coming  from  the  junction  of  Vincent’s  and  Schooner  Creeks.  They 
were  discovered  by  Captain  [H.  R.]  Lesesne,  who  opened  upon  them 
with  10-inch  grape.  Major  [James]  Gardner,  of  the  Twenty-seventh 
Georgia  Regiment,  commanding  the  position,  threw  his  infantry 
forward  and  opened  fire.  The  enemy  was  evidently  surprised  and 
in  confusion,  his  officers  calling  out  not  to  fire,  that  they  were  friends. 


Chap.  XL.] 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 


401 


Finding  his  falsehood  unavailing,  his  parties  pushed  in,  firing  spher- 
ical case  from  their  boat  howitzers. 

Meanwhile  Fort  ™ 1 n d over  and  to  the 


right  of  Battery 


attacking  party 


vigorously.  Two  field  howitzers,  under  Lieutenant  [E.  Wister] 
Macbeth,  were  opened  upon  them,  and,  evidently  much  cut  up,  they 
hauled  off  and  made  the  best  of  their  way  back  to  their  position 
through  the  creeks  and  marshes.  The  enemy’s  calcium  light  had 
been  freely  used  during  the  night  to  light  up  Wagner  and  its  ap- 
proaches, and  after  the  repulse  of  his  boat  party  he  kept  up  a furi- 
ous shelling,  almost  entirely  preventing  work  upon  repairs. 

At  daylight  on  the  6th,  this  was  completely  stopped  by  his  over- 
whelming force  of  sharpshooters.  The  fire  from  the  land  batteries* 
was  kept  up  throughout  the  whole  day,  and  from  time  to  time  the 
whole  iron-clad  fleet  fired  furiously  upon  the  work,  adding  heavily  to 
the  list  of  casualties,  which  for  the  5th  and  6th  amounted  to  over  150. 

Batteries  Wagner  and  Gregg  had  now  been  held  under  a continued 
and  furious  cannonade  by  land  and  sea  for  fifty-seven  days.  Two 
assaults  had  been  signally  and  gloriously  repulsed.  The  enemy  had 
been  forced  to  expend  time,  men,  and  material  most  lavishly  in  ap- 
proaching the  first,  ffiut  at  this  time ' he  was  within  a few  yards  of 
the  salient.  Most  of  the  guns  of  the  fort  were  injured ; transporta- 
tion and  supply  had  become  most  difficult,  with  the  inefficient  means 
at  our  disposal ; the  possibility  of  throwing  heavy  re-enforcements 
in  time  to  resist  an  assault  by  the  enemy’s  overwhelming  forces,  is- 
suing from  his  trenches  only  a few  yards  distant,  out  of  the  ques- 
tion, and  the  practicability  of  keeping  a sufficient  force  on  the  island 
for  the  purpose,  under  the  furious  cannonade  from  land  and  sea 
without  protecting  shelter,  scarcely  less  so.  This  matter  had  been 
some  time  under  consideration  by  the  commanding  general,  and 
after  receiving  reports  concerning  the  state  of  the  works,  and  our 
capabilities  for  re-enforcing  the  garrison,  it  was  determined  not  to 
subject  those  brave  men — the  flower  of  our  force — to  the  desperate 
chances  of  assault.  Orders  were  accordingly  given,  on  the  morning 
of  the  6th,  to  prepare  for  evacuation,  and  the  details  arranged.  A 
fleet  of  transport  steamers  was  to  assemble  between  Forts  Johnson 
and  Sumter,  covered  by  the  iron-clad  steamer  Charleston,  while 
small  boats,  manned  by  officers  and  men  of  the  Palmetto  and  Chicora 
and  details  from  the  army,  were  to  embark  the  forces  from  Cum- 
ming’s  Point.  Instructions  were  sent  for  the  demolition  of  the  arma- 
ment of  both  batteries,  and  for  blowing  up  the  magazines  as  the 
places  were  abandoned.  It  is  to  be  regretted  that  the  last  instruc- 
tions did  not  reach  Morris  Island  earlier,  but  the  communication 
having  been  completely  interrupted  by  the  enemy’s  boat  attack  on 
the  night  of  the  5th,  they  did  not  reach  the  commander  until  the 
evening  of  the  6th,  a short  time  before  the  evacuation  was  to  be 
commenced.  Fort  Moultrie,  Battery  Bee,  Batteries  Simkins,  Cheves, 
and  Haskell  were  all  manned  and  in  readiness  to  open  fire  to  cover 
the  embarkation,  should  the  enemy  have  discovered  the  movements 
and  attempted  to  interfere.  For  the  details  of  the  evacuation,  I beg 
respectfully  to  refer  to  the  able  report  of  Col.  L.  M.  Keitt,  Twen- 
tieth South  Carolina  Volunteers,  and  the  reports  accompanying  it. 

It  commenced  about  9 p.  m.  and  was  concluded  at  about  12.  The 
guns  of  the  batteries  were  spiked  and  implements  generally  de- 
stroyed. Matches  were  fired  to  explode  the  magazines,  but  from 
26  R R — VOL  XXVIII,  PT  I 


[Chap.  XL. 


402  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

some  unfortunate  cause  both  those  at  Wagner  and  Gregg  failed  to 
explode.  j 

The  enemy  threw  his  calcium  light  on  Wagner  during  the  whole 
night,  and  one  of  the  most  furious  bombardments  on  record,  even 
during  this  war,  was  continuously  kept  up  while  the  movements 
were  progressing  ; but  he  did  not  ascertain  the  evacuation  until  the 
last  of  the  boats  were  leaving.  Then  his  guard-boats  discovered  the 
movement  of  our  boats  engaged  in  the  embarkation,  and,  creeping  up 
upon  the  rear,  succeeded  in  cutting  off  and  capturing  three  barges, 
containing  Lieutenant  [Charles  H.]  Hasker  and  boat’s  crew  of  the 
Cliicora  and  soldiers  of  the  army. 

The  enemy  occupied  Battery  Wagner  about  daylight  on  the  7th, 
and  was  opened  upon  by  Batteries  Simkins  and  Cheves  and  Fort 
Moultrie,  with  the  works  adjacent.  Soon  after,  Admiral  Dahlgren, 
commanding  the  enemy’s  fleet,  sent  a demand  to  Maj.  Stephen 
Elliott,  jr.,  commanding  Fort  Sumter,  for  a surrender  of  that  post. 
Major  Elliott  declined,  meantime  referring  the  matter  to  the  head- 
quarters of  the  district.  Under  instructions  from  the  headquarters 
of  the  department,  Admiral  Dahlgren  was  informed  that  he  could 
have  Fort  Sumter  when  he  could  take  and  hold  it.  About  6 p.  m. 
the  Ironsides  and  five  monitors  came  up  the  channel  and  opened  fire 
against  Fort  Sumter  and  the  batteries  on  Sullivan’s  Island,  which 
was  promptly  and  steadily  replied  to  by  our  guns  (until  it  was  too 
dark  to  observe  the  vessels),  with  some  effect.  The  enemy  kept  up 
his  fire  until  about  9 o’clock,  doing  but  little  damage  to  the  works. 
First  Lieut.  E.  A.  Erwin,  First  South  Carolina  Infantry  [Third 
Artillery] , was  killed  at  Battery  Beauregard. 

On  the  morning  of  the  8th,  a monitor,  supposed  to  be  the  W eehaw- 
ken,  was  observed  aground  in  the  channel  leading  to  Cumming’s 
Point,  near  the  shore  of  Morris  Island.  A slow  fire  was  opened  on 
her  from  a trebly-banded  Brooke  gun  and  the  10-inch  columbiads 
from  Sullivan’s  Island,  and  from  such  guns  as  would  bear  from  Fort 
Johnson.  The  endeavor  was  made  to  strike  her  below  her  armor, 
which  was  out  of  water  at  low  tide.  She  was  struck  several  times 
below  the  usual  water  lines,  and  about  9 o’clock  the  Ironsides  and 
five  other  monitors  came  up  to  her  assistance,  engaging  the  forts 
and  batteries  at  distances  varying  from  800  to  1,500  yards,  keeping 
up  a very  heavy  cannonade. 

A shell  from  the  Weehawken  struck  and  disabled  an  8-inch  colum- 
biad  in  Fort  Moultrie,  and,  glancing,  burst  near  a service  magazine, 
which  was  protected  by  a heavy  traverse,  throwing  incendiary  con- 
tents into  the  magazine  and  exploding  it  and  several  shells,  killing 
16  and  wounding  12  men  of  Capt.  R.  Press.  Smith’s  company  (E), 
First  South  Carolina  [Regular]  Infantry  [Third  Artillery].  This 
disaster  interrupted  the  practice  but  little,  for  Captain  [B.  S.]  Bur- 
net’s company  relieved  Captain  Smith’s,  under  a heavy  cannonade, 
and  an  accurate  and  deliberate  fire  was  maintained  against  the 
enemy  from  all  the  batteries  on  the  island,  for  about  five  hours,  when 
the  enemy  withdrew,  evidently  much  cut  up  and  disabled. 

From  personal  observation,  I take  pleasure  in  commending  the 
conduct  and  practice  of  the  officers  and  men  engaged  of  Colonel 
Butler’s  regiment  [Third  South  Carolina  Artillery] . 

The  effect  on  the  iron-clads  I believe  to  have  been  greater  than  on 
April  7,  and  since  the  action  but  one  monitor  has  fired  a gun.  Their 
number  has  been  decreasing,  four  only  being  now  (21st)  in  sight.  Be- 
sides the  casualties  mentioned  from  the  explosion,  3 men  were  killed 


Chap.  XL.] 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 


403 


and  2 officers  (Captain  [G.  A.]  Wardlaw  and  Lieutenant  [D.  B.]  De 
Saussure),  and  14  men  were  wounded  at  Fort  Moultrie. 

Having  met  with,  little  success  in  the  cannonade  on  Sullivan’s 
Island  batteries,  the  enemy’s  naval  commander  next  made  an  attempt 
to  obtain  possession  of  Fort  Sumter,  and  about  1 o’clock  on  the  morn- 
ing of  the  9th  attacked  that  fort  with  a fleet  of  from  thirty  to  forty 
barges.  Major  Elliott  caused  his  fire  to  be  reserved  until  the  enemy 
was  within  a few  yards  of  the  southern  and  eastern  faces,  upon 
which  the  landing  was  attempted.  He  was  then  received  with  a 
close  fire  of  musketry;  hand-grenades,  and  fragments  of  the  epaule- 
ment  were  thrown  over  on  the  heads  of  his  men,  demoralizing  and  com- 
pletely repulsing  him.  The  crews  near  shore  sought  refuge  in  the 
recesses  and  breaches  in  the  scarp,  and  those  at  a distance  turned 
and  pulled  rapidly  away.  The  gunboat  Chicora,  Fort  Moultrie,  and 
the  Sullivan’s  Island  batteries,  and  Fort  Johnson,  opened  a fire,  enfi- 
lading the  faces  of  Fort  Sumter,  as  soon  as  the  signal  was  made, 
cutting  up  the  retreating  barges,  of  which  several  were  seen  floating, 
capsized  and  disabled,  the  next  morning.  Major  Elliott  succeeded  in 
securing  5 boats,  5 stand  of  colors,  12  officers,  and  109  men,  including  2 
officers  and  17  [men]  wounded.  The  prisoners  reported  the  attacking 
force  about  400  strong,  but  it  was  probably  much  larger,  and  the  en- 
emy’s loss  was  undoubtedly  much  heavier  than  that  portion  which  fell 
into  our  hands  and  under  our  observation.  Among  the  captured  colors 
was  a worn  and  torn  garrison  flag,  reported  by  some  of  the  prisoners 
as  being  that  which  Major  [Robert]  Anderson  was  permitted  to  take 
from  the  fort,  on  the  occasion  of  his  being  compelled  to  surrender  in 
April,  1861.  This  had  been  brought  to  hoist  on  the  fort  and  to  be 
made  the  subject  of  boast  had  the  assault  succeeded.  Whether  it 
was  really  the  flag  in  question  or  not,  it  would  doubtless  have  been 
so  announced.  As  the  attempt  was  a disastrous  repulse,  it  has  been 
stated,  I am  informed,  by  certain  officers  of  the  enemy  that  the  flag 
is  not  the  identical  standard;  but  the  evidence  is  such  that  I believe 
that  it  is,  notwithstanding  testimony  coming  from  that  quarter. 
With  the  four  others,  it  has  been  transmitted  to  headquarters.  No 
casualties  occurred  on  our  side. 

Early  in  the  day,  the  commander  of  the  enemy’s  fleet  sent  in  a flag 
of  truce,  to  tender  assistance  to  his  wounded,  and  probably  to  gain 
information,  but  his  offers  were  declined.  During  the  evening  of 
the  9th  and  the  10th,  the  prisoners,  both  whole  and  wounded,  were 
brought  to  the  city,  and  have  since  been  sent  into  the  interior. 

From  the  10th,  active  operations  of  hostility  on  the  part  of  the  en- 
emy have  ceased.  His  working  parties,  however,  have  been  busily 
engaged  upon  Morris  Island,  at  Batteries  Wagner  and  Gregg  and  in- 
termediate points,  and  on  Black  Island,  evidently  preparing  for  a 
prosecution  of  the  siege  by  long-range  fire  upon  Sullivan’s  Island, 
James  Island,  and  the  harbor.  Our  batteries  have  been  kept  in  such 
activity  as  the  necessities  of  the  case  required,  and  the  state  of  our 
ammunition  and  armament  permitted,  with  the  effect  of  retarding 
his  operations. 

The  above  report  has  given  the  principal  events  of  the  siege  from 
August  20  to  the  present  date,  as  they  have  occurred.  For  other 
details,  I have  to  refer  to  the  reports  of  subordinate  commanders, 
heretofore  and  herewith  transmitted  to  the  headquarters  of  the  de- 
partment. During  the  period  of  thirty  days  included  in  the  report, 
the  forces  under  my  command  have  been  increased  by  the  arrival  of 
the  brigades  of  Brigadier-Generals  Evans  and  Anderson,  the  former 


404  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

of  which,  has  been  stationed  in  Christ  Church  Parish,  and  the  latter 
has  re-enforced  Brigadier-General  Taliaferro’s  command  upon  James 
Island. 

The  preparations  for  repulsing  the  attack  of  the  enemy  on  the  city 
by  the  batteries  of  the  interior  lines  have  been  steadily  progressed 
with,  and  the  troops  held  in  readiness  to  meet  the  enemy  at  such 
points  as  he  should  develop  an  attack.  Curtailed  as  we  are  in  trans- 
portation, it  has  been  impossible  to  attempt  the  offensive,  except  by 
artillery,  with  troops  in  force. 

A gallant  endeavor  to  attack  the  Ironsides  was,  however,  made  on 
the  night  of  the  21st  by  Capt.  James  Carlin,  in  charge  of  a steam 
torpedo-boat,  in  which  he  proceeded  down  the  channel  through  the 
enemy’s  fleet,  and  struck  the  frigate.  Unfortunately,  the  current 
and  other  causes  prevented  a direct  collision,  and  having  been  dis- 
covered, the  attempt  was  for  the  time  abandoned,  Captain  Carlin 
making  good  his  retreat  into  the  harbor  under  a heavy  fire  from  the 
Ironsides  and  other  vessels. 

In  closing  the  report,  I have  to  express  my  appreciation  of  the  con- 
duct of  Brigadier-Generals  Hagood  and  Colquitt  and  Colonels  Keitt 
and  Harrison,  who  have  during  this  portion  of  the  siege  commanded 
our  forces  on  Morris  Island.  Generals  Hagood  and  Colquitt,  as  each 
detail  came  round,  accepted  the  arduous  command  with  alacrity  and 
held  their  post  with  constancy  during  their  command. 

Col.  L.  M.  Keitt,  who  relieved  Brigadier-General  Colquitt  toward 
the  termination  of  the  siege,  held  his  command  until  the  last  ex- 
tremity, when  he  was  relieved  by  orders  from  superior  authority,  and 
brought  off  his  troops  with  eminent  success  from  an  insular  position, 
in  the  immediate  proximity  of  an  overwhelming  land  and  naval  force 
of  the  enemy,  under  a mortar  practice  almost  unparalleled  in  its  se- 
verity. 

• Col.  Alfred  Rhett,  commanding  Fort  Sumter,  and  Maj.  Ormsby 
Blanding,  First  South  Carolina  Artillery,  deserve  especial  considera- 
tion for  their  conduct  and  the  manner  in  which  the  post  was  held 
during  the  cannonade  of  Fort  Sumter.  Colonel  Rhett  remained 
until  relieved  and  the  last  artillery  soldier  had  been  detached  from 
the  fort. 

Col.  William  Butler  and  the  officers  and  men  of  his  regiment  have 
performed  their  duties  in  charge  of  the  batteries  on  Sullivan’s  Island 
in  such  a manner  as  to  inspire  confidence  in  their  will  and  ability 
to  repulse  the  future  attacks  which  may  be  made  against  them. 

Lieutenant-Colonel  [J.  A.]  Yates,  Maj.  Edward  Manigault,  Cap- 
tains [ J.  C.  ] Mitchel  and  [ W.  W.  ] Billopp,  commanding  the  batteries 
on  James  Island  bearing  upon  Morris  Island  and  the  enemy’s  ap- 
proaches, have  been  untiring  in  their  efforts. 

The  gallant  conduct  of  Maj.  Stephen  Elliott,  jr.,  commanding  Fort 
Sumter,  and  the  Charleston  Battalion,  under  Maj.  Julius  A.  Blake, 
constituting  the  garrison,  in  repulsing  the  attack  of  the  enemy’s 
barges  on  the  morning  of  the  9th,  is  especially  to  be  commended. 

I must  refer  to  the  reports  of  subordinate  commanders  for  the 
names  of  those  officers  who  have  distinguished  themselves  by  good 
conduct,  which  want  of  space  and  time  prevents  my  mentioning  in 
this,  and  beg  to  express  my  hearty  concurrence  in  their  recommenda- 
tions. 

Brigadier-Generals  Taliaferro  and  Clingman,  in  command  on 
James  Island  and  Sullivan’s  Island,  have  held  their  troops  in  constant 
readiness  for  service,  and  by  prompt  management  of  details  from 


Chap.  XL.] 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 


405 


their  respective  commands,  have  assisted  no  little  in  enabling  the 
service  on  Morris  Island  to  continue  to  the  full  length  of  the  siege. 

I have  to  renew  my  approval  of  the  conduct  of  Capt.  William  F. 
Nance,  principal  assistant  adjutant-general  attached  to  these  head- 
quarters, and  for  the  fourth  time  to  recommend  him  for  promotion, 
long  since  earned  by  faithful  and  devoted  service  as  well  as  gallantry 
in  the  field. 

Capt.  B.  H.  Read,  assistant  adjutant-general;  Lieutenants  [»H. 
H.]  Rogers  and  [W.  H.]  Wagner,  aides-de-camp;  Capt.  E.  M. 
Seabrook,  volunteer  aide-de-camp,  and  Lieutenant  [W.  C.]  Sim- 
mons, C.  S.  Army,  have  all  been  well  and  actively  engaged  during 
this  period. 

Lieuts.  W.  G.  McCabe  and  T.  H.  Smith,  Provisional  Artillery, 
have  been,  during  the  time  mentioned,  on  duty  under  direct  orders 
from  these  headquarters,  and  have  performed  it  to  my  full  satis- 
faction. 

Capt.  C.  C.  Pinckney  and  Lieutenant  [W.  H.]  Seabrook,  ordnance 
officers,  have  fulfilled  their  difficult  duties  to  the  extent  of  the 
material  at  their  disposal. 

Maj.  Motte  A.  Pringle,  post  quartermaster,  upon  whom  the  trying 
and  difficult  duties  of  transportation  have  principally  devolved,  has 
performed  them  with  energy  and  fidelity. 

Maj.  C.  H.  Suber,  district  quartermaster,  and  Maj.  N.  W.  Smith, 
district  paymaster,  have  been  diligent  and  attentive  in  furnishing 
the  supplies  demanded  from  them. 

The  medical  staff  at  the  different  posts  have  distinguished  them- 
selves by  their  attention  to  the  sick  and  wounded.  I refer  to  the  re- 
ports of  subordinate  commanders  and  of  the  chief  medical  officers 
for  the  names  of  those  who  deserve  special  mention  and  considera- 
tion. 

I also  desire  to  acknowledge  the  valuable  services  rendered  by  the 
officers  and  men  of  the  Palmetto  State  and  Chicora,  in  assisting  in 
the  removal  of  the  troops  from  Morris  Island. 

Accompanying  this  report,  I have  the  honor  to  transmit,  in  addi- 
tion to  the  subordinate  reports*  already  sent  forward,  Major  Elliott’s 
report  of  the  repulse  on  the  night  of  the  8th  instant ; the  reports  of 
battery  commanders  and  of  Col.  William  Butler,  commanding 
artillery  on  Sullivan’s  Island,  of  the  action  of  the  8th  instant ; lists 
of  killed,  wounded,  and  missing,  during  the  period  covered  by  this 
report ; list  of  ordnance  on  Morris  Island,  and  special  reports  in  the 
cases  of  Lieutenant  Johnson,  of  the  engineer  corps,  and  Lance-Ser- 
geant [F.  K.]  Huger,  of  the  signal  corps. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient 
servant, 

R.  S.  RIPLEY, 

Brigadier-  General , Commanding. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan, 

Chief  of  Staff. 


* These  documents,  as  far  as  found,  are  inserted  as  reports  on  the  events  to  which 
they  relate. 


406 


S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 


[Chap.  XL. 


No.  20.  J 

Returns  of  Casualties  in  the  Confederate  Forces  on  Morris  Island , 
S.  C.,  July  10-September  7,  1863. 

JULY  10  AND  11.* 


Command. 

Killed. 

Wounded. 

Captured 
or  missing. 

Aggregate. 

J Officers. 

Enlisted  men. 

Officers. 

Enlisted  men. 

Officers. 

Enlisted  men. 

1st  Volunteers,  Georgia 

1 

2 

3 

12th  Georgia  Battalion 

1 

1 

18th  Georgia  Battalion 

4 

1 

3 

8 

1st  South  Carolina  Artillery . 

21 

3 

59 

83 

1st  South  Carolina[Regular] 

1 

1 

9 

1 

12 

Infantry  (or  3d  Artil- 

lery), Company  D. 

7th  South  Carolina  Battalion 

3 

1 

10 

14 

21st  South  Carolina 

"k 

12 

5 

107 

2 

54 

182 

Total 

4 

42 

9 

121 

3 

124 

303 

Remarks. 


July  11,  Capt.  C.  Werner  killed. 

July  11. 

July  11. 

July  10,  Lieut.  John  S.  Bee  mor- 
tally wounded. 

July  10,  Capt.  C.  T.  Haskell,  jr., 
killed. 

July  10. 

July  10,  Lieut.  T.  H.  Dalrymple 
killed. 


JULY  18.+ 


Staff 1 

63d  Georgia  (detachment) 

51st  North  Carolina 1 

1st  South  Carolina  Artillery .... 


2 

5 


8 

47 


Co.  A. 


3 Capt.  P.  H.  Waring  killed. 


68 

5 


Lieut.  G.  W.  Thompson  killed. 
Not  classified  in  report. 


1st  South  Carolina  [Regular]  2 
Infantry  (or  3d  Artil- 
lery.) 

Charleston  Battalion 1 

Palmetto  Battalion,  Co.  G 


7 3 

5 *5 


23 

$38 


3 38 

1 51 

2 


Total 


5 31 


17  I 116 


4 181 


Lieut.  Col.  J.  C.  Simkins  and 
Capt.  W.  T.  Tatom  killed. 

Capt.  William  H.  Ryan  killed. 
Not  classified  in  report. 


JULY  19-23.  § 


32d  Georgia 2 — 1 

1st  South  Carolina  Artillery 1 — 4 

20th  South  Carolina 3 — 7 

21st  South  Carolina 3 

Lucas’  battalion,  Co.  A 8 


Total 


23 


3 

5 

10 

3 

8 


29 


July  20, 1 man  mortally  wounded. 


* Col.  Robert  F.  Graham’s  reports. 

f Compiled  from  inclosures  to  General  Taliaferro’s  report.  His  tabulated  state- 
ment omitted  casualties  in  First  South  Carolina  Artillery  and  Palmetto  Battalion, 
as  reported  by  Captain  De  Pass. 

X Includes  1 officer  wounded  July  19,  and  1 man  wounded  July  17. 

§ Inclosure  to  Hagood’s  report  of  July  23,  but  nominal  list  for  Lucas’  battalion 
substituted  for  his  statement  of  its  losses. 


Chap.  XL.]  OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C.  407 

Returns  of  Casualties  in  the  Confederate  Forces , c See. — Continued. 

JULY  20-31,  INCLUSIVE.* 


Command. 


1st  Volunteers,  Georgia 

12th  Georgia  Battalion 

32d  Georgia  + 

8th  North  Carolina 

61st  North  Carolina 

1st  South  Carolina  Artillery . 

20th  South  Carolina  t 

21st  South  Carolina  + 

Lucas’  battalion 

Mathewes’  artillery 


Total. 


Killed. 


12 


Wounded. 


40 


Captured 
or  missing. 


54 


Remarks. 


July  24  and  26. 
July  26. 

July  20  and  22. 
July  30. 

July  30. 

July  29. 

July  20. 

July  21-26. 
July  24-31. 
July  25. 


- AUGUST  1-204 


Engineers 1 

1st  Volunteers,  Georgia 

12th  Georgia  Battalion 

18th  Georgia  Battalion 

8th  North  Carolina 

51st  North  Carolina ... 

61st  North  Carolina 

1st  South  Carolina  Artillery .... 
2d  South  Carolina  Artillery .... 

20th  South  Carolina 

21st  South  Carolina 

Charleston  Battalion 

Gist  Guard  Artillery 

Lucas’  battalion 1 

Marion  Artillery 

Palmetto  Battalion 

Siege  train  


Total 2 


1 

2 

3 

5 

2 

2 

1 

1 

6 

6 

1 

8 

9 

1 

2 

3 

1 

2 

11 

14 

3 

3 

6 

2 

10 

12 

1 

1 

2 

2 

11 

15 

2 

3 

5 

1 

i 

17 

20 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

2 

3 

18 

5 

80 

105 

Capt.  J.  M.  Wampler  killed  Au- 
gust 17. 


Capt.  J.  H.  Gary  killed. 


AUGUST  17.8 


Battery  Gregg : 

1st  South  Carolina  Artillery 
(Company  H). 

Battery  Wagner : 

Staff 

2 

5 

7 

1 

1 

Capt.  J.  M.  Wampler. 

1st  Volunteers,  Georgia 

1 

1 

(Company  H). 

1st  South  Carolina  Artillery 
(Company  E). 

20th  South  Carolina  (Com- 

3 

3 

1 

4 

5 

panies  A,  C,  and  F) 
Charleston  Battalion  (Com- 

2 

2 

7 

11 

pany  E). 

Lucas’  battalion  (Company 

1 

5 

6 

B). 

Palmetto  Battalion  (Company 

1 

1 

A). 

Total 

1 

6 

4 

24 

35 

*From  inclosures  to  Ripley’s  report  of  August  1. 
f But  see  preceding  statement. 
jFrom  Ripley’s  report  of  August  21. 

§ Inclosure  to  Keitt’s  report  of  August  17.  These  casualties  are  included  in 
statement  for  August  1-20. 


408  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 
Returns  of  Casualties  in  the  Confederate  Forces , &c. — Continued. 
AUGUST  20-SEPTEMBER  6.* 


Command. 

Killed. 

Wounded. 

Captured 
or  missing. 

Officers. 

Enlisted  men. 

Officers. 

Enlisted  men. 

Officers. 

Enlisted  men. 

Staff 

1 

23d  Georgia 

1 

1 

8 

27th  Georgia 

2 

4 

28th  Georgia 

1 

2 

i 

21 

5 

32d  Georgia ...  

1 

7 

54th  Georgia 

1 

5 

9 

8th  North  Carolina 

4 

3 

20 

61st  North  Carolina 

4 

3 

29 

2 

69 

2d  South  Carolina  Artillery . 

2 

2 

7 

1st  South  Carolina  [Regular] 

8 

+18 

Infantry  (Third  Artil- 

lery), Company  A. 

20th  South  Carolina  % 

3 

1 

H 

21st  South  Carolina 

2 

1 

7 

25th  South  Carolina 

2 

11 

9 

110 

3 

Charleston  Battalion 

1 

1 

1 

11 

+6 

Gist  Guard  Artillery 

+1 

Lucas’  battalion 

1 

2 

14 

+2 

Palmetto  Battalion 

1 

1 

14 

Siege  train 

1 

9 

Total 

6 

41 

25 

289 

2 

104 

Remarks. 


< 


1 

10 

6 

30 


8 

15 

27 

107 

11 

26 


August  29. 

August  25-30. 

August  30-September  6. 

August  30-September  5,  Capt. 
J.  R.  Haines  killed  Septem- 
ber 5. 

August  29-September  3. 

August  23-30,  Capt.  A.  S.  Roberts 
killed  August  24. 

August  25-September  3. 

August  21-28. 

August  23-September  7. 

August  30-September  7. 


15 
10 

135 

20 

1 

19 

16 
10 


August  20-30. 

August  20-September  5. 
September  1-7,  Lieuts.  R.  A. Blum 
and  H.  Montgomery,  jr.,  killed. 
August  20-September  7,  Lieut. 

J.  B.  Gardner  killed. 
September  6. 

August  21-27,  Capt.  Robert 
Pringle  killed. 

August  30-September  6. 

August  23-26. 


467 


IN  FIRST  MILITARY  DISTRICT,  JULY  10-SEPTEMBER  6,  INCLUSIVE.§ 


Command. 

Killed. 

Wounded. 

Captured 
or  missing. 

Aggregate. 

Officers  killed. 

Officers. 

Enlisted  men. 

Officers. 

Enlisted  men. 

Officers. 

Enlisted  men. 

Staff 

1 

3 

4 

Capt.  J.  M.  Wampler,  C.  S.  En- 

1st Volunteers,  Georgia 

1 

2 

7 

10 

gineers. 

Capt.  Claus  Werner. 

12th  Georgia  Battalion 

2 

8 

3 

13 

18th  Georgia  Battalion 

i 

6 

14 

23d  Georgia 

2 

1 

8 

11 

27th  Georgia 

2 

4 

6 

28th  Georgia  

1 

2 

i 

21 

25 

Capt.  J.  R.  Haines. 

32d  Georgia 

2 

1 

21 

24 

54th  Georgia 

1 

5 

9 

15 

Capt.  A.  S.  Roberts. 

63d  Georgia 

5 

i 

6 

12 

8th  North  Carolina  . . . 

4 

4 

39 

47 

31st  North  Carolina  . . 

1 

12 

32 

45 

Capt.  A.  B.  Parker. 

51st  North  Carolina  . . . 

1 

16 

5 

55 

77 

Lieut.  G.  W.  Thompson. 

61st  North  Carolina 

6 

3 

32 

4 

72 

117 

1st  South  Carolina  Artillery. 

1 

17 

2 

48 

1 

51 

120 

Lieut.  J.  S.  Bee. 

2d  South  Carolina  Artillery. 

2 

2 

13 

1 

18 

* Inclosure  to  Ripley’s  report  of  September  22. 
f “ Captured  by  the  enemy’s  barges  on  night  of  the  evacuation.” 
j Includes  2 men  killed  and  1 man  wounded  August  30  on  steamer  Sumter. 

§ Compiled  from  nominal  list  submitted  by  General  Ripley  October  4,  1863.  The 
original  list,  however,  omits  the  names  of  Lieut.  Col.  J.  C.  Simkins,  Capts.  C.  T. 
Haskell,  jr.,  and  P.  H.  Waring,  and  Lieuts.  T.  H.  Dalrymple  and  J.  B.  Gardner, 
who  are  elsewhere  reported  as  killed. 


Chap.  XL.]  OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 

Returns  of  Casualties  in  the  Confederate  Forces , &c. — Continued. 
IN  FIRST  MILITARY  DISTRICT,  JULY  10 — SEPTEMBER  6,  INCLUSIVE. 


409 


Command. 

Killed. 

Wounded. 

Captured 
or  missing. 

Aggregate. 

Officers  killed. 

Officers. 

Enlisted  men. 

Officers. 

Enlisted  men. 

Officers. 

Enlisted  men. 

1st  South  Carolina  Infantry 

,1 

9 

3 

29 

1 

21 

64 

Capt.  W.  T.  Tatom. 

(Regulars)  or  Third 
Artillery. 

9nth  Print, h darnl  i n a 

9 

1 

23 

33 

91  ct.  Print, h Harnlina 

4 

1 

10 

15 

#5th  print h C!a,rnlina 

2 

14 

9 

115 

3 

143 

Lieuts.  Robert  A.  Blum  and 

H.  Montgomery,  jr. 

Charleston  Battalion 

1 

12 

9 

61 

1 

1 

85 

Capt.  W.  H.  Ryan. 

q-ist,  Criia.rrl  Artillnry  

3 

1 

6 

10 

Timas’  ha.tta.linn  

2 

3 

1 

32 

38 

Capts.  J.  H.  Gary  and  Robert 

Pringle. 

Marion  Artillery 

1 

1 

Math  Awns’  artillery  

8 

8 

Palmetto  Battalion 

3 

1 

17 

21 

Siege  train 

1 

1 

11 

13 

Cmrswa.in 

1 

1 

Total 

13 

144 

51 

623 

8 

151 

990 

No.  21. 


Reports  of  Maj.  Henry  Bryan,  Assistant  Inspector- General,  C.  S. 

Army. 


Charleston,  August  9,  1863. 

Colonel  : In  accordance  with  your  orders,  I proceeded  last  even- 
ing to  make  a partial  inspection  of  Morris  Island,  and  was  there 
from  early  dark  until  past  midnight,  having  failed  to  get  a boat 
early  from  Sullivan’s  Island. 

Our  forces  there  were  under  Brig.  Gen.  Johnson  Hagood’s  com- 
mand, who  relieved  Colonel  Keitt  on  the  morning  of  the  6th.  I found 
order  and  vigilance  observed,  and  a fair  police  in  Wagner,  but  the 
engineer  work  was  going  on  rather  feebly,  mainly  for  want  of  effect- 
ive labor  and  from  the  continued  mortar  fire  of  the  enemy  against 
Wagner,  which  lasted  until  I left  Cumming’s  Point. 


The  garrison  consisted  of — 


Infantry  : 

Sixty-first  North  Carolina 
Eighth  North  Carolina  . . . 


Effective. 

, 324 
, 393 

717 


Artillery : 

Mathewes’  artillery , 47 

Chichester’s  artillery 48 

Detachment  Company  B,  siege  train,  Captain  Smith 28 

Detachment  Company  E,  First  South  Carolina  Artillery,  Lieutenant 

Alston 17 

Detachment  Company  Marion  Light  Artillery,  Lieutenant  Murdoch  ] '.  32 

Detachment  Captain  Lesesne’s  First  South  Carolina  Artillery  at  Bat- 
tery Gregg 68 


Cavalry  (couriers) 


240 

11 


Total 


968 


410  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

I could  see  nothing  of  the  personnel  of  the  infantry,  except  the 
sentinels  in  front,  who  exercised  a good  lookout,  and  a working  party, 
which,  though  slow,  seemed  doing  fairly  for  men  under  mortar  fire, 
a shell  coming  at  least  every  three  to  four  minutes.  They  reported 
40  rounds  of  cartridges  in  the  cartridge-boxes.  Disposition  : Sixty- 
first  North  Carolina  guarded  sea  face  and  left  salient  ; Eighth 
North  Carolina  the  remainder  of  land  front  and  right  flank  on  the 
creek. 


Details  from  Sixty-first  North  Carolina  picket  in  advance  100 

Picket  in  rear,  two-thirds  on  sea  beach  and  one-third  on  marsh 100 

In  quartermaster’s,  commissary,  and  ordnance  departments 48 

Second  engineer  relief  at  Wagner,  beginning  at  midnight 76 

Aggregate  effective 324 

Eighth  North  Carolina,  first  engineer  relief,  ending  at  midnight,  at  Wagner. . . 75 

Engineer  detail  for  the2  night  at  Gregg 75 

On  guard 60 

Resting  on  their  posts  on  land  front,  this  regiment  having  worked  several 
nights 183 

Aggregate  effective 393 


The  fatigue  detail  at  Cumming’s  Point  are  ordered  to  stack  arms 
there  and  support  Battery  Gregg,  when  necessary. 

Artillery. — At  Battery  Gregg,  Captain  Lesesne  reported  his  battery 
of  3 heavy  guns  in  effective  condition,  but  wanted  cartridges  for  the 
9-inch  Dahlgren.  On  my  arrival  in  Charleston,  3 a.  m.  to-day,  I 
notified  the  district  ordnance  officer’s  clerk  that  130  cartridges  and  one 
quadrant  were  needed  for  this  battery,  and  sundry  articles  for  Bat- 
tery Wagner,  as  specified  by  Captain  Hill. 

A 10-inch  mortar  was  being  placed  in  position  at  Cumming’s  Point 
by  Captain  Harleston,  First  South  Carolina  Artillery,  who  has  done 
valuable  service  in  the  ordnance  department.  He  could  not  give  me 
any  information  as  to  implements,  equipments,  &c.,  but  I presume 
that  the  mortar  is  now  ready  for  service. 

The  two  field  howitzers  were  reported  effective,  but  have  been  now 
loaded  for  some  time.  I recommend  that  they  be  reloaded,  and  dis- 
mounted during  the  day,  like  those  at  Wagner.  The  right  wheel 
of  one  of  the  limbers  was  disabled  yesterday  by  a piece  of  shell  and 
ought  to  be  replaced  if  the  commanding  general  desires  that  the  lim- 
bers should  be  ready  to  move. 

Flank  curtain. — At  Battery  Wagner,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Brown, 
Second  South  Carolina  Artillery,  commanding;  from  left  to  right; 
two  field  howitzers  on  left  flank  ; in  good  order ; no  spare  sponge ; 
the  left  howitzer  cannot  trail  sufficiently  to  the  left  to  fire  well  into 
the  moat ; Lieutenant  Murdoch  in  charge. 

One  8-inch  sea-coast  howitzer,  in  good  order,  worked  by  Mathewes’ 
artillery.  The  revetment  of  parapet  was  being  changed  in  front  so 
as  to  give  wider  field  of  fire. 

Sea  face. — Two  10-inch  columbiads,  in  good  order,  in  charge  of 
Lieutenant  Alston,  First  South  Carolina  Artillery.  One  32-pounder 
rifle  gun  in  charge  of  Captain  Smith.  This  gun  is  reported  in  good 
order,  excepting  the  vent,  which  I found  unserviceable.  I could 
thrust  the  priming- wire  down  about  7 inches  when  it  was  stopped  by 
iron.  A gunner’s  gimlet  could  not  open  it,  but  a vent  drill  was 
expected  from  Charleston  (which  reached  Cumming’s  Point  as  I left), 
which  would  bore  it  out. 


Chap.  XL.]  OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C.  411 

That  this  gun  should  have  been  thus  practically  spiked  for  two 
days  without  attracting  the  attention  of  Colonel  Yates,  who  put  it 
up,  or  the  artillerist  in  charge,  is  not  creditable. 

Left  salient. — One  8-inch  siege  howitzer  and  one  42-pounder  car- 
ronade,  in  good  order,  in  charge  of  Captain  Smith’s  siege  train. 

Curtain  of  land  face—  Two  8-inch  navy  shell  guns  and  two  32- 
pounder  navy  guns,  Mathewes’  artillery  ; all  in  good  order,  excepting 
the  tongue  of  the  chassis  of  the  8-inch  navy  gun  to  the  right.  This 
was  struck  behind  the  end  of  the  rails  by  a shell,  and  much  splin- 
tered. Splinters  will  be  cut  off  and  the  same  tongue  continued  to  be 
used  though  weak.  It  would  be  well  to  cut  out  the  splintered  part 
and  let  in  a new  piece  of  wood  with  bolts. 

Left  flank  of  right  half  bastion. — Two  32-pounder  carronades, 
one  8-inch  siege  howitzer ; in  serviceable  order  ; Gist  Guards  in 
charge.  One  32-pounder  carronade  at  right  gorge  overlooking  creek, 
in  charge  of  Gist  Guards,  reported  serviceable,  but  the  elevating 
screw  does  not  fit  well.  One  10-inch  light  sea-coast  mortar,  in  ad- 
vanced angle  of  right  half  bastion,  in  charge  of  Gist  Guards.  This 
is  on  an  inferior  old-fashioned  bed.  There  is  a slight  split  in  its 
right  cheek  and  a very  bad  split  in  the  upper  section  of  left  cheek. 

I recommend  that  this  last  section  be  taken  out  and  sent  to  the 
arsenal  and  another  made  there  by  the  pattern  thus  provided,  to  re- 
place it.  The  right  cheek  could  be  then  strengthened  by  a bolt,  and 
the  mortar  used  for  slow  firing.  This  is  Colonel  Brown’s  opinion. 
In  the  meantime,  another  carriage  should  be  supplied. 

Ordnance. — I found  Capt.  Charles  S.  Hill,  chief  ordnance  officer, 
assisted  at  Battery  Wagner  by* Lieutenant  [S.  A.]  Ashe.  Captain 
Hill’s  magazines  were  well  arranged,  particularly  those  on  the  sea 
face,  which  would  pass  well  in  peace  time. 

No.  3 on  land  face  was  more  crowded.  Captain  Hill  has  thus  done 
good  service  in  bringing  order  out  of  partial  confusion,  and  has  been 
ably  assisted  by  Acting  Ordnance  Sergeant  Leathe.  Captain  Hill  has 
not  yet  taken  any  reliable  inventory  of  stores  in  the  fort,  but  re- 
ported as  follows  of  Battery  Wagner  : 

Large  surplus  of  canister  and  grape  ; good  supply  of  10-inch  shot  and  shell,  but 
more  ought  to  be  prepared  and  continually  supplied  as  used.  Good  supply  of  car- 
tridges, fuses,  and  small-arms  ammunition.  Good  friction  tubes  are  needed ; 32- 
pounder  shell  are  much  needed  and  have  been  repeatedly  asked  for.  The  8-inch 
guns  are  fairly  supplied.  Many  lost  stores  were  found  in  cleaning  out  magazines. 
One  brass  quadrant,  one  fuse  saw,  and  more  oil  are  needed. 

I recommend  that  Captain  Hill,  and  all  succeeding  ordnance  offi- 
cers, be  required  to  furnish  accurate  returns  of  stores  on  hand,  as  it 
can  certainly  be  done  if  decent  ordnance  sergeants  are  provided 
them.  He  should  have  an  agent  at  Cumming’s  Point,  to  regulate  and 
report  the  debarkation  and  shipment  of  all  ordnance  stores. 

Engineers. — Mr.  [William]  Hume,  at  Wagner,  seemed  active, 
but  his  labor  insufficient.  General  Hagood  has  directed  his  chief  at- 
tention to  the  repair  and  erection  of  infantry  banquettes  to  the  front 
and  rear  parapet.  The  left  columbiad  chamber  had  been  strength- 
ened and  the  damages  of  yesterday’s  shelling  repaired. 

Mr.  [William]  Tennent  [jr.  ] , in  charge  of  Cumming’s  Point,  re- 
pairing damages,  seemed  wearied  out,  and  said  the  labor  furnished 
him  had  been  generally  insufficient,  the  soldiers  often  working 
badly,  particularly  the  Nineteenth  Georgia,  during  Colonel  Keitt’s 
command.  I do  not  think  that  Colonel  Keitt  was  informed  of  it. 


412  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AN)D  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

If  the  commanding  general  expects  much  work  done  rapidly  under 
present  system,  he  will  be  much  disappointed. 

Commissary  department. — I heard  no  complaint.  Major  [E.  L.] 
Holcombe,  at  Cumming’s  Point,  is  in  charge,  and  Acting  Sergeant 
Bond  has  the  stores  at  Battery  Wagner  in  good  order.  This  man 
deserves  credit  for  long  and  valuable  services  at  Battery  Wagner,  re- 
fusing to  be  relieved. 

Quartermaster's  department. — Capt.  E.  L.  Guerard,  assistant  quar- 
termaster at  Cumming’s  Point,  in  charge/  is  an  efficient  officer.  He 
has  three  two-horse  wagons  employed,  which  can  haul  about  600 
pounds  each. 

Medical  department. — The  surgeon  of  hospital  at  Battery  Wag- 
ner reports  assorted  medicines  needed.  A box  with  medicines  for 
this  hospital  was  robbed  on  the  way  of  nearly  everything.  Supply 
otherwise  fair. 

Incidents. — The  enemy  have  a telegraph  line  and  plank  road  in 
front  of  Battery  Wagner.  Captain  Lesesne  reports  that  the  enemy 
from  the  land  opened  on  Battery  Gregg  at  4.30  p.  m.  with  a 200- 
pounder  Parrott,  about  3,100  yards  off,  throwing  a bolt  of  truncated 
cone  shape,  which  tore  the  work  badly  wherever  it  struck. 

General  Hagood,  informed  me  that  he  could  not  use  his  land  guns 
last  evening  because  he  could  not  fire  their  loads  of  grape  without 
endangering  his  pickets.  On  careful  examination,  however,  I found 
that  one  8-inch  siege  howitzer,  one  32-pounder  gun,  and  one  8-inch 
shell  gun  could  be  used  with  shell. 

General  Hagood,  and  Colonel  Brown  and  Captain  Molony,  of  his 
staff,  gave  me  every  facility. 

Respectfully  submitted.  * 

HENRY  BRYAN, 

Assistant  Inspector- General, 

Colonel  Roman, 

Assistant  Inspector-General. 

P.  S. — The  smooth  32  replaced  by  rifled  32,  not  mounted. 

[Indorsements.] 

Note. — This  report  was  read  to  General  Ripley  and  Captain  Nance, 
who  took  notes  and  was  ordered  by  General  R.  to  have  all  deficien- 
cies supplied  and  defects  corrected  as  indicated. 

T.  J.  [Jordan.] 

August  10,  1863. 

Colonel  Roman  will  have  a subsequent  inspection  made,  to  see 
whether  matters  have  amended. 

T.  J.  [Jordan.] 

Charleston,  August  24,  1863. 

Colonel  : I beg  leave  to  inform  you  that  I have  been  told  that 
there  is  some  demoralization  among  the  troops  on  Morris  Island. 

I am  inclined  to  think  that  this  proceeds  from  a feeling  that  Sum- 
ter will  fall  and  their  retreat  will  be  cut  off.  If  this  supposition  be 
correct  the  tone  of  these  troops  would  probably  be  improved  by  an 
assurance  that  preparations  had  been  made  to  remove  them  when- 
ever an  evacuation  would  be  proper.* 

* Prepare  a short  address  to  the  troops  in  Sumter  and  Morris  Island. 

G.  T.  B.  [Beauregard.] 


Chap.  XL.] 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 


413 


I would  respectfully  recommend  that  another  field  howitzer  be 
sent  to  Battery  Wagner  to  be  kept  near  the  commissary  building 
and  used  to  sweep  the  beach  in  case  of  an  assault  at  low  tide.  The 
2 howitzers  now  on  the  flank  curtain  would  probably  direct  their 
fire  on  moat  and  toward  the  angle  of  the  front  salient.  * 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

HENRY  BRYAN, 

Major,  and  Assistant  Inspector- General. 

Lieut.  Col.  A.  Roman. 


No.  22. 

Reports  of  Col.  Robert  F.  Graham,  Twenty-First  South  Carolina 
Infantry,  commanding  on  Morris  Island,  July  10-14. 

Morris  Island,  July  12,  1863. 

(Received  8.50  p.  m.) 

The  enemy  are  rapidly  removing  their  artillery  from  Little  Folly 
to  Morris  Island. 

R.  F.  GRAHAM. 

Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  Fort  Johnson, 

July  18,1863. 

Captain  : I beg  leave  to  submit  the  report  of  the  engagement  on 
Friday,  the  10th  instant,  by  which  the  Abolitionists  gained  posses- 
sion of  the  works  on  Morris  Island  south  of  Battery  Wagner. 

I was  aware  that  an  attack  was  shortly  to  be  made  on  Morris  Island, 
by  the  unmasking  of  extensive  works  on  Little  Folly  Island  on  Thurs- 
day morning,  and  also  by  the  arrival  of  four  iron-clad  monitors  off 
the  bar,  which  was  reported  to  district  headquarters,  and  re-enforce- 
ments asked  for. 

On  Friday,  the  10th  instant,  the  engagement  began  by  the  batteries 
on  Little  Folly  Island  opening  with  a terrific  fire  before  sunrise  on  the 
works  at  the  south  end  of  Morris  Island,  and  soon  after  by  the  iron- 
clads from  the  sea  on  the  left,  and  several  barges  with  howitzers  in 
Light-House  Creek,  on  the  right.  The  fire  was  gallantly  replied  to 
by  the  artillerists,  under  the  immediate  command  of  Captain  [J.  C.] 
Mitchel.  The  infantry  force  was  immediately  formed  and  put  in 
position  to  resist  a landing  at  Oyster  Point,  and  placed  under  the 
command  of  Major  [George  W.]  Mclver,  Twenty-first  South  Caro- 
lina Volunteers.  This  force  consisted  of  the  Twenty-first  South 
Carolina  Volunteers,  numbering  about  400  men,  and  a detachment 
of  Company  D,  First  South  Carolina  [Regular]  Infantry  [Third 
Artillery],  numbering  about  40  men,  under  the  command  of  Cap- 
tain [C.  T.]  Haskell  [jr.]. 


*Two  additional  howitzers  were  ordered  after  my  last  tour  of  inspection. 
Have  they  been  sent? 

G.  T.  B.  [Beauregard.] 


[Chap.  XL. 


414  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  A^D  E.  FLA. 

About  one  hour  and  a half  after  the  engagement  commenced,  the 
enemy  landed,  undercover  of  their  fire,  at  Oyster  Point,  between  2,000 
and  3,000  strong,  and  a destructive  fire  was  directed  against  them  by 
our  batteries.  They  were  promptly  met  by  the  infantry  force  under 
Major  Mclver,  and  held  in  check  until  alike  force  was  landed  in  front 
of  the  batteries,  under  cover  of  the  bank  of  the  creek,  the  tide  being 
low.  At  this  time  a portion  of  Nelson’s  battalion  came  up.  I hurried 
them  to  the  support  of  the  batteries.  They  did  not  get  in  position, 
however,  for  the  front  line  of  our  works  was  in  the  possession  of  the 
enemy,  and  one-half  of  the  force  under  the  command  of  Major  Mc- 
lver was  either  killed  or  wounded,  and  more  than  half  of  the  officers. 
I then  ordered  the  whole  force  to  retire,  which  they  did  in  order, 
firing  as  they  retreated.  When  about  half  way  back  to  Battery 
Wagner,  the  rest  of  Nelson’s  battalion  came  up.  I had  them  formed 
in  line  of  battle  to  cover  the  retreat.  The  iron  monitors  followed  us 
along  the  channel,  pouring  into  us  a fire  of  shell  and  grape.  When 
the  exhausted  and  wounded  had  got  sufficiently  to  the  rear,  I then 
ordered  the  whole  to  retire  to  Battery  Wagner. 

The  Twenty-first  South  Carolina  Volunteers  lost  in  killed,  wounded, 
and  missing,  183.  Captain  Haskell’s  company  lost  12.  The  artillery 
command  lost  100.* 

Of  the  whole  command,  I must  say  that  they  fought  bravely  and 
well.  Many  individual  acts  of  gallantry  could  be  mentioned,  but 
where  all  did  well  it  would  be  invidious  to  report  them.  I cannot, 
however,  fail  to  mention  the  gallant  conduct  of  Capt.  W.  E.  Stoney, 
acting  assistant  adjutant-general  to  the  command. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

R.  F.  GRAHAM, 

Colonel  Twenty-first  South  Carolina  Volunteers,  Comdg. 

Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  Fort  Johnson, 

July  18,  1863. 

Captain  : I beg  leave  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the  assault 
made  by  the  enemy  on  Battery  Wagner  on  the  morning  of  the  11th 
instant : 

My  command  consisted  of  the  Twenty-first  South  Carolina  Volun- 
teers, about  200  men,  under  the  command  of  Major  Mclver;  Seventh 
South  Carolina  Battalion,  about  300  men,  under  the  command  of 
Major  [J.  H.]  Rion;  four  companies  First  (Volunteers)  Georgia, 
Colonel  [C.  H.]  Olmstead;  four  companies  Twelfth  Georgia  Bat- 
talion, Lieutenant-Colonel  [H.  E).]  Capers,  and  three  companies 
Eighteenth  Georgia  Battalion,  Major  [W.  S.]  Basinger,  the  three 
detachments  numbering  about  500  men,  all  under  the  command  of 
Colonel  Olmstead ; a detachment  of  Company  D,  First  South  Caro- 
lina [Regular]  Infantry  [Third  Artillery] , numbering  20  men,  under 
the  command  of  Lieutenant  [J.  Moultrie]  Horlbeck.  The  artil- 
lery force  consisted  of  Companies  E,  I,  and  H,  First  South  Carolina 
Artillery,  numbering  about  70  men,  under  the  command  of  Captain 
Mitchel ; the  Gist  Guard,  Captain  [C.  E.]  Chichester  ; the  Mathewes 
Artillery,  Captain  [J.  R.]  Mathewes,  numbering  100  men,  all  under 
the  command  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Yates. 


See  p.  406. 


<?hap.  XL.]  OPERATION S ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C.  415 

The  whole  garrison  remained  under  arms  during  the  night,  and  a 
picket  force  of  150  men,  under  the  command  of  Major  Rion,  was 
sent  in  advance  of  the  battery.  Fearing  an  attack  at  daylight,  I 
had  the  garrison  aroused  and  put  in  position.  The  First  Georgia, 
Eighteenth  Battalion,  and  detachment  First  South  Carolina  [Regu- 
lar] Infantry  [Third  Artillery],  were  placed  on  the  left,  the  Twenty- 
first  South  Carolina  Volunteers  in  the  center,  and  the  Twelfth 
Georgia  Battalion  and  Seventh  South  Carolina  Battalion  on  the 
right. 

At  the  dawn  of  day,  the  pickets  warned  us  of  the  approach  of  the 
enemy.  Three  volleys  were  fired  into  the  approaching  enemy,  and 
the  whole  picket  force  retired  into  the  fort  without  loss.  The  enemy 
advanced  in  two  columns,  one  on  the  beach  and  the  other  on  the 
island.  I allowed  them  to  get  within  a short  distance  of  the  works, 
and  gave  the  word  “ Fire.”  A few  of  the  front  line  reached  the  para- 
pet. The  rest  fled  in  confusion,  and  when  the  smoke  cleared  away 
they  were  out  of  sight.  Those  who  reached  the  parapet  never  re- 
turned. 

I sent  out  a party  who  returned  with  over  130  prisoners.  Ninety- 
seven  were  left  dead  in  front  of  the  battery.  We  buried  over  100. 
The  burying  party  was  driven  in  by  the  sharpshooters  of  the  enemy 
when  they  attempted  to  go  beyond  the  mound  in  front  of  the  battery. 
Many  of  their  killed  still  lay  beyond  that  point,  so  I cannot  properly 
estimate  their  loss. 

My  loss  was  1 officer  killed  and  5 privates,  1 officer  wounded  and  5 
privates,  all  from  the  Georgia  troops.  * 

The  whole  garrison  stood  to  their  posts  firmly,  without  flinching. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

R.  F.  GRAHAM, 

Colonel  Twenty-first  South  Carolina  Volunteers , Comdg. 

Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  23. 

Reports  of  Brig.  Gen.  William  B.  Taliaferro , C.  S.  Army , com- 
manding on  Morris  Island,  July  14-19  and  22-26,  and  after- 
ward on  James  Island. 

Headquarters  Morris  Island, 

July  14,  1863 — 2 p.  m. 

General  : I have  assumed  command  at  this  point. 

Colonel  Graham  reports  the  enemy  at  work,  throwing  up  works  for 
siege  guns  on  a line  with  Hospital  Hill,  out  of  effective  range  of  our 
guns. 

They  (the  enemy)  have  not  opened  with  heavy  guns  to-day.  Two 
guns  are  reported  in  position  on  Gregg’s  Hill,  and  mortar  batteries  at 
the  foot  of  the  hill.  The  enemy’s  sharpshooters  have  advanced  very 
near  our  works  and  killed  1 man,  with  a rifle.  I will  drive  them  off 
to-night  and  throw  up  rifle-pits.  I am  greatly  in  need  of  couriers. 
Will  you  send  some  cavalry  to  relieve  the  party  now  here,  say,  15 
men  (mounted)  ? I have  not  had  time  to  examine  into  the  engineer, 


*Seep.  406. 


[Chap.  XL. 


416  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  A^ND  E.  FLA. 


quartermaster,  or  subsistence  departments  yet.  I will  make  all  the 
details  I can ; think  it  very  important  to  erect  traverses  to  protect 
from  fire  from  Black  Island.  Bomb-proof  is  reported  not  mortar- 
proof.  Traverses  much  needed  at  Battery  Gregg.  Will  you  direct 
the  colonel  commanding  at  Sumter  to  open  whenever  practicable 
upon  the  enemy’s  works  and  working  parties  ? 

Gunboats  now  opening.  Lieutenant  Horlbeck  is  ordered  away, 
and  his  boats  will  be  taken  off.  It  is  important  that  I should  have 
some  boats  at  Cumming’s  Point.  Will  you  permit  me  to  retain  their 
boats  ? Send  order. 


General  Ripley, 

Commanding . 


WM.  B.  TALIAFERRO, 

Brigadier-  General. 


Morris  Island,  July  14,  1863—9.30  p.  m. 
Shelling  over  for  to-day.  Firing  entirely  from  the  boats.  Ro  dam- 
age done  the  fort  or  men  by  shells.  One  man  killed  by  sharp- 
shooters. 

TALIAFERRO, 

Brigadier-  General. 

Brig.  Gen.  R.  S.  Ripley, 

Commanding,  &c. 


[Via]  Fort  Sumter,  July  16,  1863—3.45  p.  m. 
Rifle  (32-pounder)  burst  at  1 o’clock  this  afternoon,  destroying  car- 
riage. 

Monitor  fleet  with  gunboat  coming  in.  One  monitor  engaged; 
range  too  great  for  10-inch  to  be  very  effective  ; won’t  waste  ammu- 
nition. Can  heavy  gun  be  replaced  ? Want  also  gin  and  block. 

W.  B.  T.  [TALIAFERRO.] 

Capt.  W.  F.  Rance, 

Assistant  Adjutant-General. 


July  21,  1863. 

Captain:  I have  the  honor  to  report,  for  the  information  of  the 
brigadier-general  commanding  the  District  of  South  Carolina,  the 
operations  of  the  troops  of  my  command  on  Morris  Island  during 
the  week  commencing  Monday,  13th  instant,  and  particularly  the 
occurrences  of  Saturday,  the  18th  instant,  which  terminated  in  a 
most  decisive  and  overwhelming  repulse  of  the  enemy. 

On  Monday,  the  13th  instant,  I made  such  an  inspection  of  parts 
of  the  island  as  the  limited  means  at  my  disposal  offered,  and  on 
Tuesday  morning  relieved  Colonel  Graham  of  the  command  of  the 
troops,  including  the  garrisons  of  Forts  Wagner  and  Gregg.  I found 
that  the  Abolitionists  occupied  the  island  in  force  from  the  southern 
part  to  Gregg’s  Hill,  upon  which  they  were  already  erecting  batteries, 
and  had  constructed  a signal  station;  that  they  had  thrown  forward 
their  skirmishers  to  a point  indicated  by  a single  Palmetto  tree  (one 
mile  and  a quarter  to  their  front,  and  about  three-quarters  of  a mile 
from  Fort  Wagner),  at  which  last  post  the  undulating  and  successive 


Chap.  XL.] 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 


417 


ranges  of  sand-liills  shielded  them  and  their  operations  from  our 
view.  In  the  course  of  the  morning,  their  riflemen  gave  us  some  an- 
noyance, and  during  the  day  the  wooden  vessels  of  their  fleet,  aided 
by  one  turreted  iron-clad,  attacked  our  works,  throwing  some  300 
heavy  shell  and  shot.  I determined  to  make  a slight  reconnaissance 
at  night  to  feel  the  enemy  and  to  add  to  the  confidence  of  the  garri- 
son, and  ordered  a party,  consisting  of  150  men  from  various  com- 
mands, under  Major  Rion,  of  Nelson’s  South  Carolina  battalion 
to  push  forward,  drive  in  the  enemy’s  pickets,  and  feel  its  way 
until  it  encountered  a heavy  supporting  force.  This  duty  was  gal- 
lantly and  well  performed.  Major  Rion  pushed  the  pickets  and  the 
first  reserve  back  upon  a reserve  brigade  in  such  disorder  that  the 
latter  fired  upon  their  retreating  companions,  inflicting  a heavy  loss 
in  addition  to  the  punishment  already  inflicted  by  Major  Rion.  I 
established  rifle-pits  some  200  yards  outside  the  work  (the  nearest 
practicable  point),  and  made  such  dispositions  for  holding  the  post 
against  assaults  (by  assigning  each  command  its  particular  position, 
&c.)  as  were  necessary. 

On  Wednesday,  Thursday,  and  Friday  the  bomoardment  was 
kept  up  from  the  fleet  from  10  until  5 [o’clock]  each  day,  the  average 
number  of  projectiles  thrown  at  the  work  being  300  daily,  the  casu- 
alties being  few,  and  the  damage  to  the  fort  inappreciable,  our  work 
having  been  directed  up  to  this  time  not  in  repairs,  but  to  improve- 
ments at  Forts  Wagner  and  Gregg.  During  these  three  days,  the 
enemy,  under  cover  of  the  sand-hills,  erected  batteries  on  land,  the 
nearest  being  about  three-quarters  of  a mile  off:,  and  others  extend- 
ing from  Gregg’s  Hill  to  the  left,  and  distant  about  If  miles  from 
Fort  Wagner.  These  batteries  were  gradually  unmasked,  and  were, 
with  the  exception  of  the  first,  entirely  without  range  of  our  guns. 

On  Saturday,  the  18th  instant,  at  8.15  a.  m.,  the  enemy  having 
disclosed  his  land  batteries,  brought  up  to  their  support  his  entire 
fleet,  consisting  of  the  Ironsides,  flag-ship,  five  monitors,  and  a large 
number  of  wooden  steam  gunships.  With  this  immense  circle  of 
fire  by  land  and  sea,  .he  poured  for  eleven  hours,  without  cessation 
or  intermission,  a storm  of  shot  and  shell  upon  Fort  Wagner  which 
is  perhaps  unequaled  in  history.  My  estimate  is  that  not  less  than 
9,000  solid  shot  and  shell  of  all  sizes,  from  15-inch  down  ward,  were 
hurled  during  this  period  at  the  work.  The  estimate  of  others  is 
very  much  greater. 

The  garrison  of  the  fort  on  this  day  consisted  of  the  Charleston 
Battalion,  Lieutenant-Colonel  [P.  C.]  Gaillard,  whose  position  ex- 
tended from  the  sally-port  in  Light-House  Inlet  Creek,  on  the  right, 
to  the  left,  until  it  rested  on  Colonel  McKethan’s  regiment,  Fifty- 
first  North  Carolina  Troops,  which  extended  to  the  gun-chamber 
opposite  the  bomb-proof  door,  at  which  point  and  extending  along 
the  face  of  the  work  to  the  left  to  the  sally-port  next  Fort  Gregg, 
the  Thirty-first  North  Carolina  Troops,  Lieutenant-Colonel  [C.  W.] 
Knight,  occupied  the  work.  Thes%  positions  for  the  infantry  were 
verified  by  frequent  inspections,  and  the  several  commands  were  re- 
quired to  sleep  in  position,  and  each  man  was  instructed  as  to  the 
exact  point  which  he  should  occupy,  and  which  in  any  moment  of 
confusion  he  would  be  required  to  gain  and  hold.  In  addition  to 
this,  a small  portion  of  the  Thirty-first  North  Carolina  Troops  were 
held  as  a reserve  in  the  parade,  and  a part  occupied  the  parapet  just 
to  the  right  of  the  sally-port. 

27  R R— VOL  XXVIII.  PT  I 


418  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

On  the  outside  of  the  fort,  two  companies  of  the  Charleston  Bat-; 
talion  held  the  sand-hills  along  the  beach  and  the  face  extending 
from  the  sally-port  to  the  sea  beach.  The  artillerists  occupied  the 
several  gun-chambers,  and  two  light  field  pieces  were  placed  in  bat-' 
tery  outside  of  the  fort,  on  the  traverse  near  the  sally-port.  The  artil- 
lery command  consisted  of  Captains  [W.  T.]  Tatom  and  [Warren] 
Adams,  First  South  Carolina  [Regular]  Infantry  [Third  Artil- 
lery] ; [J.  T.]  Buckner  and  [W.  J.]  Dixon,  Sixty -third  Georgia 
Heavy  Artillery,  and  Captain  De  Pass,  commanding  light  artillery, 
all  under  the  general  command  of  Lieutentant-Colonel  [J.  C.]  Sim- 
kins,  chief  of  artillery. 

The  infantry,  excepting  the  Charleston  Battalion,  and  the  artillery, 
excepting  the  gun  detachments,  were  placed,  shortly  after  the  shelling 
commenced,  under  cover  of  the  bomb-proofs.  The  first-named  bat- 
talion, with  a heroic  intrepidity  never  surpassed,  animated  by  the 
splendid  example  of  their  field  officers  (Lieutenant-Colonel  Gaillard 
and  Major  [David]  Ramsay),  had  no  protection  except  such  as  the 
parapet  afforded  them,  yet  maintained  their  position  without  flinch- 
ing during  the  entire  day.  The  10-inch  gun  was  fired  at  intervals  oi 
ten  to  fifteen  minutes  against  the  iron-clads,  and  the  heavy  guns  or 
the  land  face  whenever  the  working  parties  or  cannoneers  of  the  enemj 
on  the  land  showed  themselves  within  range.  The  mortar,  in  charg* 
of  Captain  Tatom,  was  fired  every  half  hour. 

The  casualties  during  the  day  of  the  bombardment  did  not  exceec 
8 killed  and  20  wounded.  . 

About  2 o’clock,  the  flag  halyards  were  cut  and  the  Confederate  flag 
blew  over  into  the  fort.  " Instantly  Major  Ramsay,  Charleston  Bat! 
talion;  Lieutenant  [William  E.]  Readick,  Sixty-third  Georgia  (ar 
tillery);  Sergeant  Shelton  and  Private  Flinn,  Charleston  Battalion 
sprang  forward  and.  replaced  it  on  the  ramparts,  while  at  the  same 
time  Captain  [R.  H.]  Barnwell,  of  the  engineers,  dashed  out,  seizec 
a battle-flag,  and  erected  it  by  the  side  of  the  garrison  flag.  Thi 
flag  was  subsequently  shot  away,  and  replaced  by  Private  Gilliland 
Charleston  Battalion. 

As  night  approached,  the  increased  severity  of  the  bombardmen 
plainly  indicated  that  an  assault  would  be  made,  and  orders  wer< 
issued  to  the  commands  to  prepare  to  man  the  ramparts.  At  <.4 
o’clock  the  lines  of  the  enemy  were  seen  advancing,  and  the  bom 
bardment  slackened  to  an  occasional  shell  from  the  ships  and  th 
land  batteries.  As  the  enemy  advanced,  they  were  met  by  a showe 
of  grape  and  canister  from  our  guns,  and  a terrible  fire  of  musketrj 
from  the  Charleston  Battalion  and  the  Fifty-first  North  Carolina 
These  two  commands  gallantly  maintained  their  position  and  drov 
the  enemy  back  quickly  from  their  front,  with  immense  slaughter 
111  the  meantime,  on  the  left  of  the  work,  the  Thirty-first  Nortli 
Carolina  could  not  be  induced  to  occupy  their  position,  and  inglori 
ously  deserted  the  ramparts,  when,  no  resistance  being  offered  at  thij 
point,  the  advance  of  the  eftemy,  pushing  forward,  entered  the  ditc. 
and  ascended  the  work  at  the  extreme  left  salient  of  the  land  face,  an 
occupied  it.  I at  once  directed  Lieutenant-Colonel  Gaillard  to  kee 
up  a severe  enfilading  fire  to  his  left,  and  directed  the  field  pieces  o 
the  left  of  the  fort  outside  of  the  sally-port  to  direct  their  fire  to  th 
right,  so  as  to  sweep  the  ditch  and  exterior  slope  of  that  part  of  th 
work  thus  occupied,  and  thus,  at  the  same  time,  prevented  the  enem 
from  being  supported  at  that  point,  and  cut  off  all  hope  of  his  escap(j 
The  main  body  of  the  enemy,  after  a brief  attempt  to  pass  over  th 


Chap.  XL.] 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 


419 


field  of  fire,  retreated  under  the  fire  of  our  artillery  and  the  shells  of 
Fort  Sumter,  and  must  have  suffered  heavily  as  long  as  they  were 
within  the  range  of  our  guns. 

Colonel  Harris,  of  the  engineers,  to  whose  skill  I am  much  in- 
debted, and  whose  coolness  and  gallantry  were  most  conspicuous 
during  the  previous  day,  placed  a howitzer  on  the  right  of  the  fort 
outside  the  beach,  and  co-operated  with  the  guns  on  the  left. 

Thinking  it  advisable  to  dislodge  the  enemy  at  once,  before  they 
had  time  to  communicate  their  temporary  success,  I called  for  volun- 
teers to  dislodge  them.  This  call  was  promptly  met  by  Major  [ J.  R.  ] 
McDonald,  Fifty-first  North  Carolina  Troops,  and  by  Captain  Ryan, 
Charleston  Battalion.  I selected  Captain  Ryan’s. company,  and  di- 
rected them  to  charge  the  enemy  in  the  salient.  This  work  they  ad- 
vanced to  with  great  spirit,  but,  unfortunately,  Captain  Ryan  was 
killed  at  the  moment  of  the  advance,  and  his  men  hesitated  and  the 
opportunity  was  lost.  Whenever  the  enemy  showed  themselves,  a 
sharp  fire  was  kept  up  upon  them  by  the  Fifty-first  North  Carolina, 
and  after  considerable  injury  thus  inflicted,  a party  of  the  Thirty- 
second  Georgia  Regiment  having  been  sent  along  the  parapet  to  the 
left  and  on  the  top  of  the  magazine  to  approach  their  rear,  they  sur- 
rendered. In  front  of  the  fort,  the  scene  of  carnage  is  indescribable. 
The  repulse  was  overwhelming,  and  the  loss  to  the  enemy  could  not 
have  been  less  than  2,000,  in  killed,  wounded,  and  prisoners — perhaps 
much  more. 

Our  loss  I estimate  at  50  killed  and  150  wounded,  but  will  forward 
an  exact  return. 

The  assailants  consisted  of  troops  from  Connecticut,  Pennsylva- 
nia, New  Hampshire,  Ohio,  and  New  York,  and  the  Fifty-fourth 
Massachusetts  (negro)  Regiment  (under  Colonel  [R.  G.]  Shaw,  who 
was  killed),  under  the  command  of  Brigadier-General  Strong.  The 
supports  were  commanded  by  Brigadier-General  Terry.  I will  here- 
after make  a supplementary  report  * and  give  such  details  as  may  be 
required. 

As  to  the  damage  done  to  the  work  and  guns,  I have  the  honor  to 
refer  you  to  the  reports  of  the  engineer  officer  and  chief  of  artillery, 
which  will  be  forwarded.  I will  remark  this  : While  the  injury  done 
to  the  work  is  considerable,  it  is  much  less  than  could  have  been  ex- 
pected, and  the  damage  to  the  guns,  it  is  hoped,  may  be  repaired  in  a 
short  time. 

In  conclusion,  while  I feel  it  my  duty  to  mention  the  disgraceful 
conduct  of  the  Thirty-first  North  Carolina  Troops,  I am  proud  to 
bear  testimony  to  the  efficiency  and  gallantry  of  the  other  troops. 
Colonel  McKethan’s  regiment,  Fifty-first  North  Carolina  Troops,  re- 
deemed the  reputation  of  the  Thirty-first  Regiment.  They  gallantly 
sought  their  position,  under  a heavy  shelling,  and  maintained  it  dur- 
ing the  action.  Colonel  McKethan,  Lieutenant-Colonel  [C.  B.]  Hob- 
son, and  Major  McDonald  are  the  field  officers  of  this  regiment,  and 
deserve  especial  mention. 

The  Charleston  Battalion  distinguished  themselves  not  only  by 
their  gallantry,  but  by  their  discipline  and  the  cool  performance  of 
their  duty,  and  obedience  to  orders  under  the  excitement  and  confu- 
sion always  incident  to  a night  attack. 

Lieutenant-Colonel  Gaillard  and  the  brave  Major  Ramsay,  who,  I 
regret,  to  say,  were  severely  wounded,  deserve  the  highest  expression 


* Not  found. 


J 


420 


S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 


[Chap.  XL. 


of  commendation  for  their  conduct  during  the  bombardment  and  the  ! 

ab^iulh  rtiHer^  peliaved  throughout  the  day  with  remarkable  cour- i 
age.  Lieutenant-Colonel  Simkins  had  a most  severe  duty  to  perform  ■ 
during  the  day,  in  directing  the  operations  of  the  artillery.  This,! 
unflinchingly  and  admirably,  he  performed,  and,  after  the  enemy  s , 
heavy  guns  had  ceased,  he  mounted  the  parapet  and  encouraged  the 
infantry.  There,  on  the  ramparts  in  the  front,  this  admirable  soldier 
and  accomplished  gentleman  sealed  his  devotion  to  our  cause  by  an 
early  but  most  heroic  death.  . . 

Captains  Buckner  and  Dixon,  Sixty-tlnrd  Georgia,  and  Captain 
Adams,  First  South  Carolina  Infantry  [Third  Artillery]  deserve 
especial  mention ; but  I desire  to  bring  most  conspicuously  to  the 
notice  of  the  brigadier-general  commanding  the  name  of  Lieutenant 
[J.  H.]  Powe,  whose  coolness,  skill,  and  gallantry  were  unsurpassed. 
I regret  to  say  he  was  severely  wounded. 

I would  also  especially  mention  Lieutenant  [T.  D.J  Waties,  com- 
manding the  field  pieces  on  the  left  of  the  work,  who  was  conspicu- 
ous for  his  gallantry,  and  who  was  severely  wounded  ; and  the  skill, 
coolness,  and  gallantry  of  Captain  De  Pass,  who  assumed  command 
of  his  pieces  after  his  fall.  These  pieces  rendered  most  important 

service.  _ _ 

I have  doubtless  omitted  the  names  of  many  officers  whose  gal- 
lantry should  be  recorded,  and  shall  in  a subsequent  report  endeavor 

to  do  -justice  to  all.  _ . . ^ , r T i 

I must,  in  conclusion,  mention  the  good  conduct  ot  Sergeant  [J  ohn 
R 1 Williams,  of  Lieutenant  Powe’s  company,  and  Corporal  Conne- 
way,  of  Twenty-second  Georgia  Battalion,  who  greatly  distinguished 
tlioiiisolvos 

To  the  officers  of  my  personal  staff,  I am  Tinker  obligations. 

I lament  to  record  the  death  of  the  gallant  Capt.  [P.  EL]  Whring, 
acting  aide-de-camp,  and  the  wounding  of  Captain  [H.  D.  D.J 
Twiggs,  assistant  inspector-general,  and  Captain  [W.  L.J  btoney, 
aide-de-camp,  who  were  stricken  down,  nobly  discharging  their  duty 
To  Captain  [W.  T.]  Taliaferro,  assistant  adjutant-general ; Lieu- 
tenants [E.]  Mazyck  and  [H.  C.]  Cunningham,  ordnance  officers, 
and  [Richard  K.j  Meade,  aide-de-camp,  and  to  Surgeon  [J.  C.J 
Habersham,  Major  [E.  L.J  Holcombe,  and  Captain  [Thomas  A. 
Burke,  I tender  my  thanks  for  their  aid,  &c.,  during  the  course  ol 

would  especially  mention  Captain  [R.  H.]  Barnwell,  of  the  En 


S' The  ^commands  of  Colonel  [C.  H.]  Olmstead Lieutenant-Colone 
[H.  D.l  Capers,  Major  [G.  M.]  Hanvey.  and  Major  [W.  b.J  Bas 
inger ; of  Lieutenant-Colonel  [P.  H.]  Nelson  and  Lieutenant-Col 
onel  rO.  M.  1 Dantzler ; and  the  artillery,  under  the  admirable  man 
agement  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  [Joseph  A.]  Yates,  with  such  officers 
as  Captains  [J.  R.]  Mathewes  and  [C.  E.]  Chichester  deserve  grea 
credit  for  their  bravery  and  zeal,  in  the  early  part  of  the  week. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  °o©«ieiit  servant? 

WM.  B.  TALlAJp  fiKKU,  J 
Brigadier -General, 


Captain  [W.  P.]  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant-General. 


Chap.  XL.] 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 


421 


Morris  Island, 

July  23,  1863.— 7.45  p.  m. 

Captain  : No  gun  was  fired  on  either  side  to-day.  I did, not  open 
because  of  the  importance  of  working.  The  enemy  have  been  very 
busy  at  work  all  day  erecting  batteries  by  Graham's  house.  They 
are  throwing  up  traverses  to  shield  them  from  the  James  Island 
batteries. 


WM.  B.  TALIAFERRO,' 

Brigadier-  General. 

Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Morris  Island, 

July  24,  1863.— 11.45  a.  m. 

General  : The  enemy’s  land  batteries  are  so  near  that  they  will 
soon  dismount  our  land-face  guns.  The  10-inch  gun  is  disabled.  I 
'think  the  garrison  should  be  withdrawn  to-night.  Will  you  pro- 
vide boats?  When? 

TALIAFERRO. 

General  R.  S.  Ripley. 


Extracts  from  daily  reports * of  Brig.  Gen.  William  B.  Talia- 
ferro, C.  S.  Army , commanding  on  James  Island , August  1 -Sep- 
tember 8,  1863. 

August  1,  9 p.  m. — All  the  guns  that  have  been  ordered  from  the 
lines  on  James  Island  have  been  put  in  position  on  the  eastern  front. 
We  are  ready  for  other  guns  that  are  to  be  sent  to  Battery  Haskell. 

August  3,  4.40  p.  m. — No  changes  on  part  of  the  enemy  in  front. 
No  demonstrations  of  landing  on  this  island.  General  Hagood, 
commanding  east  lines,  reports  : Battery  Haskell  wanting  cartridges 
for  8-inch  gun;  two  mortars  not  effectively  mounted;  place  ready  for 
two  other  mortars  and  another  columbiad. 

Battery  Cheves,  one  gun  being  mounted  and  battery  ready  for  bal- 
ance. Traverse  circles  and  carriages  and  some  guns  not  arrived. 

James  Battery,  one  gun  ready  to  be  mounted. 

Battery  Simkins  all  right,  except  scarcity  of  shells. 

Enemy  have  been  at  work  in  marsh  between  Morris  and  Black 
Islands.  Cannot  tell  object. 

August  4. — I have  spent  several  days,  in  company  with  General 
Hagood,  in  making  minute  reconnaissances  of  this  island. 

I have  the  honor  to  report,  for  the  information  of  the  brigadier- 
general  commanding,  that  as  a result  I have  come  to  the  conclusion 
that  when  the  enemy  again  appear  upon  this  island  they  will  en- 
deavor to  force  their  way  through  to  the  eastern  lines  at  a point 
known  as  the  Artillery  Cross-Roads,  or  from  that  point  to  the  point 
called  Freer’s  Cross-Roads. 

I found  that  General  Hagood  had  determined  to  meet  them  at 
those  points,  and,  if  necessary,  to  retire  upon  the  reserve  line  of 
works.  The  line,  therefore,  from  Freer’s  Cross-Roads  to  the  Ar- 
tillery Cross-Roads,  and  bending  then  around  toward  Battery  Reid, 

* Dated  at  Royal’s  house,  and  addressed  to  Capt.  William  F.  Nance,  assistant 
adjutant-general. 


J 


422  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

may  be  called  the  exterior  line  of  defense.  The  several  conditions 
of  topography  and  the  command  of  the  country  by  the  works  of 
Secession  ville  induce  me  to  believe  that  the  salient  of  our  line  at  the 
Artillery  Cross-Roads  will  be  the  point  of  attack. 

In  this  view,  I have  directed  the  field  work  at  the  Artillery  Cross- 
Roads  to  be  strengthened  and  a new  work  for  field  guns  to  be  erected 
at  a point  of  wood  intermediate  between  the  Artillery  Cross-Roads 
and  Battery  Reid,  and  that  rifle-pits  and  works  for  an  infantry  sup- 
port be  also  constructed,  and  the  ditch  connecting  Freer’s  Cross- 
Roads  with  the  Artillery  Cross-Roads  be  improved,  and  embrasures 
cut  for  light  guns,  and  where  such  embrasures  have  been  cut  -that 
they  should  be  improved.  I have  also  directed  the  engineer  to  level 
the  ditch  banks,  and  fell  such  timber  as  interferes  with  the  range  of 
our  guns,  and  such  as  will  impede  the  approach  of  the  enemy  in 
front  of  this  line. 

I have  to  report  that  the  interior  line  is  in  bad  condition  and  much 
in  want  of  improvement.  There  are  no  magazines,  and  the  arma- 
ment is  of  inferior  character.  I am  of  opinion  that  an  additional 
work  should  be  added  upon  the  right  of  the  first  redoubt. 

The  western  lines  extend  from  the  bridge  across  New  Town  Cut  to 
Fort  Pemberton.  They  consist  of  works  along  the  creek  running 
some  half  mile  to  a redoubt.  At  that  point,  the  line  stretches  back 
to  about  a right  angle,  and  consists  of  a system  of  salienfs  connected 
by  long  curtains  very  slightly  constructed ; the  works  little  or  no 
protection  to  the  cannoneers,  and  the  armament  is  of  the  poorest  de- 
scription. 

This  part  of  the  line  runs  parallel  with  the  Stono  River  and  ter- 
minates on  Wappoo  Cut. 

Between  this  terminus  and  Fort  Pemberton,  a distance  of  about  a 
fourth  of  a mile,  there  are  a redan  and  two  redoubts  imperfectly 
armed  and  in  very  bad  condition.  I regard  this  line,  the  western  line, 
as  very  weak  and  altogether  too  long. 

The  communications  of  the  eastern  and  western  lines  with  Charles- 
ton are  by  two  bridges  across  Wappoo  Cut,  near  McLeod’s  residence, 
except  such  imperfect  communication  as  could  be  maintained  by 
water  across  the  Ashley  River. 

It  seems  to  me  manifest  that  if  the  western  lines  were  forced,  and 
the  enemy  established  near  McLeod’s,  the  eastern  lines  would  have 
to  be  abandoned,  as  they  would  be  turned  and  cut  off  from  com- 
munication, and  that,  therefore,  an  effort  will  most  likely  be  made 
to  carry  the  western  lines. 

The  New  Town  Cut,  over  which  the  enemy  would  have  to  advance 
to  attack  these  lines,  is  in  an  insignificant  run,  easily  bridged,  and 
causewayed  at  points  beyond  the  range  of  the  lines  of  Fort  Pember- 
ton, and  the  approach  of  the  enemy  can  be  made  under  cover  of  the 
woods. 

The  flank  defenses  of  this  line  consist  of  Fort  Pemberton  and  the 
redoubts  near  it  on  the  right,  and  the  redoubt  on  the  left  of  the 
line  of  salient  and  curtains,  which  latter  redoubt  mounts  but  one 
gun  to  the  front  of  the  line. 

At  Fort  Pemberton,  only  three  guns  bear  on  the  land  side,  and  I 
think  it  important  to  transfer  the  guns  from  the  water  battery  on 
the  right,  four  in  number,  to  the  interior  of  tjie  fort,  so  as  to  give  the 
work  a much  increased  command  of  the  land  approaches. 

.1  have  directed  the  engineer  officer,  as  speedily  as  possible  to  im- 
prove all  the  works  along  this  line,  to  fell  the  woods  in  front  of  the 


Cuap.  XL.]  OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C.  428 

line  as  far  as  practicable,  in  order  to  open  up  the  country  to  command 
of  Fort  Pemberton,  and  to  connect  that  fort  by  works  for  infantry 
with  the  redoubts  to  its  left,  and  the  redoubts  with  a line  running 
parallel  to  the  Stono,  shortening  the  line  about  a fourth  of  a mile. 

Having  stated  the  general  condition  of  the  defenses,  1 beg  par- 
ticularly to  call  the  attention  of  the  brigadier-general  commanding 
the  district  to  the  fact  of  the  entirely  inadequate  force  on  this  island 
for  its  defense. 

On  the  eastern  lines,  I have  at  Secessionville  218  artillerists,  375 
infantry;  on  the  advance  lines,  571  infantry,  including  all  pickets, 
and  one  light  battery  ; at  Batteries  Haskell  and  Byan,  224  artillerists’ 
with  a support  of  276  infantry,  and  two  companies  of  siege  train! 
with  four  12-pounder  rifles  ; at  Fort  Johnson,  I have  1,229  infantry 
and  226  artillerists ; at  Battery  Glover,  69  artillerists. 

On  the  interior  lines,  I have  224  artillerists,  and  in  reserve,  152 
light  artillerists,  with  ten  pieces,  330  infantry  and  132  cavalry. 

On  the  western  lines,  at  this  time  there  is  no  infantry  support 
whatever,  and  those  lines  are  manned  by  one  small  battalion  of  artil- 
lery, exclusive  of  the  garrison  of  Fort  Pemberton,  and  a reserve  of 
two  companies  of  siege  train. 

The  communications  between  the  eastern  and  western  lines  are  by 
bridges  by  New  Town  Cut ; one  bridge  is  entirely  without  the  lines, 
and  the  other,  by  Hill’s  Bluff,  in  bad  repair,  and  the  distance  is  some 
4 miles  by  the  road  to  re-enforce  from  one  line  to  the  other.  The 
bridge  at  Secessionville  is  badly  located,  it  being  thrown  across  a 
peninsula,  and  it  will  thus  require  one  regiment,  at  least,  say  500 
men,  to  hold  the  work  constructed  for  the  defense  of  the  bridge,  and 
by  which  alone  re-enforcements  can  reach  that  garrison,  in  addition 
to  the  troops  now  on  the  eastern  advance  lines. 

I regard  it  important  to  add  2,700  infantry  and  two  companies  of 
cavalry  in  addition  to  the  troops  (all  artillery)  on  the  western  lines. 
I think  it  important  to  add  300  infantry,  and  for  a general  reserve 
common  to  both  lines,  I think  it  necessary  to  have  (to  be  held  about 
Dill’s  Bluff)  not  less  than  3,000  infantry. 

In  conclusion,  I have  respectfully  to  ask  the  brigadier-general 
commanding  the  district  will  assign  me  a chief  of  artillery,  a compe- 
tent and  experienced  officer,  and  would  ask  that  Captain  Bamsey,  of 
the  Engineers,  be  ordered  to  report  to  me  for  permanent  duty.  And 
I most  particularly  ask  that  he  will  order  to  report  to  me,  as  imme- 
diately necessary  for  mere  picket  duty  and  some  show  of  defense  in 
certain  emergency,  at  least  two  regiments  of  infantry  for  service  on 
western  lines. 


[Indorsements.] 


Hdqrs.  1st  Mil.  Dist.  Dept.,  S.  C.,  Ga.  and  Fla., 

| Charleston,  August  5,  1863. 

Bespectfully  forwarded  for  information  and  consideration  of  the 
general  commanding. 


B.  S.  BIPLEY, 

Brigadier - General,  Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston,  S.  C.,  August  7,  1863. 

The  present  defensive  lines  on  James  Island  are  so  defective  that 
4 would  not  be  judicious  to  expend  much  time  and  labor  on  them  ; 


424  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

hence  Lieutenailt-Colonel  Harris,  chief  engineer,  has  been  instructed 
to  commence,  as  soon  as  practicable,  a new  defensive  line  of  four 
redans  or  redoubts  (one-half  to  three-fourths  of  a mile  apart)  from 
Secessionvilie  to  Dill’s  residence,  on  the  Stono ; the  first  work  for  3 
guns,  the  second  for* four  guns,  the  third  (on  Stono)  for  six  guns, 
and  the  fourth  (also  on  Stono)  for  four  guns,  their  armament  to 
come  from  the  present  lines  and  such  guns  as  can  be  spared  from 
Sumter  or  other  forts. 

Those  new  works  will  be  made,  as  soon  as  practicable,  into  detached 
redoubts,  connected  together  with  cremaillere  lines. 

The  lower  work  on  the  Stono  should  be  heavily  armed  and  the 
navigation  of  the  river  must  be  obstructed  with  a large  quantity  of 
torpedoes,  from  half  to  one  and  a half  miles  befow  the  fort. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General,  Commanding. 

[P.  S.] — Send  a copy  of  this  indorsement  to  Brigadier-Generals 
Ripley  and  Taliaferro,  the  latter  to  show  his  copy  to  Brigadier-Gen- 
eral Hagood  when  he  returns  from  Morris  Island. 

August  10,  11.45  a.  m. — Major  [John  V.]  Glover  reports  that  he 
dispersed  the  enemy’s  working  party  between  Black  and  Morris 
Islands  after  4 shots  from  10-pounder  Parrott  gun. 

August  16,  10.15  p.  m. — I will  direct  [Edward]  Manigault  to  open 
upon  the  work  in  the  marsh.  Shall  I yet  open  upon  the  enemy’s 
batteries  from  Haskell  and  Ryan  and  the  first  redoubt  ? I had 
orders  not  to  fire  without  orders  from  your  headquarters. 

August  20,  8.45  p.  m. — The  guns  at  Haskell  can  command  Marsh 
Battery,  and  I have  directed  fire  to  be  opened  on  it  whenever  the  en- 
emy is  seen,  or  at  night.  They  are  not  visible  to-day,  and  no  work  is 
done~excepting  at  night.  They  are  fired  at  then. 

August  22,  2 p.  m. — I will  send  to  Haskell  and  inquire  if  effect  of 
fire  on  Wagner  could  be  ascertained.  Have  a staff  officer  there  now. 
Major  Manigault  and  Colonel  Yates  think  the  fire  on  the  city  was 
from  the  Marsh  Battery.  I have  directed  that  it  be  played  on  as 
much  as  practicable,  but  our  8-inch  at  Haskell  cannot  be  traversed  to 
bear  on  it.  I have  brought  up  a 20-pounder  Parrott.  The  guns 
at  Cheves  have  good  play  upon  it,  and  Yates  had  better  be  ordered  to 
destroy  the  work,  if  possible.  * 

August  22,  6.40  p.  m.— No  particular  effect  produced  by  enemy’s 
fire  on  Wagner  to-day,  as  far  as  could  be  ascertained  from  Battery 
Haskell.  The  fire  reported  nothing  like  so  heavy  as  on  Monday. 
Rifled  4. 62-inch  gun  burst  this  evening  at  Haskell,  and  mortar  beds 
damaged  and  useless.  Hit  the  Marsh  Battery  several  times  to-day. 

8.25  p.  m. — Since  receiving  your  telegram,  I have  ordered  our  bat- 
teries to  cease  firing  unless  the  enemy’s  guns  open  fire.  Telegraph 
me  when  to  reopen  fire. 

August  23,  12.45. — My  only  battery  which  can  fire  on  the  Marsh 
Battery  is  Haskell.  I will  open  with  every  available  gun  punctually 
at  10  to-night.  Did  you  send  order  to  Yates,  or  must  I ? Answer. 
Shall  I cut  away  the  mortars  so  as  to  bring  in  play  the  8-inch  gun  ? 
Major  Glover,  commanding  at  Haskell,  reports  that  no  one  has  yet 
seen  the  Marsh  Battery  fire  and  he  believes  the  guns  are  not  mounted 
there  yet. 

* Yates  lias  been  ordered  to  do  all  he  can  with  it. — Nance,  assistant  adjutant- 
General. 


Chap.  XL.]  OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C.  425 

August  25,  12.50  p.  m. — Major  Glover  reports  another  marsh  bat- 
tery, west  of  the  old  one,  in  course  of  construction.  I will  endeavor 
to  interrupt  the  work  and  destroy  it.  It  may  be  that  it  is  part  of  a 
system  extending  to  Black  Island.  If  so,  as  our  guns  at  Haskell 
cannot  bear  o^i  new  battery  or  Black  Island,  it  is  important  to  have 
additional  and  heavy  guns  at  Ryan  and  Redoubt  No.  1.  I have  sent 
for  Colonel  [A.  J.  j Gonzales  to  report  to  me  the  number  and  kind 
needed,  and  will  forward  report  immediately. 

August  27. — I have  the  honor  to  submit  for  the  information  of  the 
brigadier-general  commanding,  a brief  statement  of  the  condition  of 
affairs  on  this  island,  and  to  make  certain  suggestions,  to  which  I 
invite  his  attention. 

When  I first  assumed  command  here,  my  attention  was  chiefly  di- 
rected to  the  condition  of  the  defenses  covering  an  attack  from  the 
southern  end  of  the  island  by  approaches  from  the  Stono  River,  and 
I submitted  a report  of  the  condition  of  the  lines,  exterior  and  in- 
terior, calling  attention  to  their  great  length,  as  well  as  to  certain 
points  of  weakness ; to  the  insufficient  communications,  and  the  con- 
sequent necessity  of  a large  command  to  occupy  them,  &c. 

Since  this  report  was  forwarded,  the  commanding  general  has  di- 
rected that  a new  line  of  defenses,  with  the  right  resting  on  the  Stono, 
below  Dill’s,  and  the  left  at  Fort  Lamar  (Secessionville),  shall  be  con- 
structed, thus  greatly  shortening  the  lines,  merging  what  is  called 
the  western  in  the  eastern  lines,  rendering  the  commun  cations  se- 
cure and  complete,  and  requiring  a much  smaller  force  to  hold  and 
defend  them. 

Orders  were  issued  to  the  engineers  to  push  these  lines  ; to  abandon 
all  improvement  of  the  old  lines,  directing  their  entire  labor  to  the 
completion  of  the  new  lines. 

The  only  difficulty  about  this  was  that  the  enemy  might  land  on 
the  Stono  before  the  new  lines  were  completed,  and  before  the  im- 
provements pf  the  old  lines  could  be  made.  I have,  to  the  extent 
that  I was  able  with  the  limited  number  of  tools  at  my  command, 
endeavored  to  remedy  this  by  working  details  of  soldiers  on  the  old 
lines. 

Until  the  new  lines  are  completed,  the  dispositions  of  the  troops 
must  be  made  with  reference  to  the  old,  and  I will,  for  the  informa- 
tion of  the  brigadier-general,  and  for  his  better  understanding  of  my 
subsequent  suggestions,  state  their  present  disposition. 

Cavalry  pickets  and  vedettes  are  thrown  down  the  Stono  to  the 
extreme  southern  end  of  the  island,  a heavy  infantry  picket  force 
below  Grimball’s,  on  the  Stono,  to  Secessionville,  and,  for  the  purpose 
of  protecting  the  new  works  from  being  observed  in  any  gunboat 
reconnaissance,  a picket  of  five  pieces  of  artillery  (four  Blakely 
and  one  10-pounder  Parrott  gun),  supported  by  two  companies  of 
infantry,  has  been  established  in  a masked  battery  not  far  above 
Grimball’s.  To  maintain  these  pickets,  and  as  reserves  to  support 
them,  I have  established,  with  a battery  of  light  pieces,  the  Thirty- 
second  Georgia  Regiment  and  one  battalion  of  the  Twenty-fifth 
South  Carolina  on  the  exterior  lines,  from  Freer’s  Cross-Roads  to 
Artillery  Cross-Roads,  under  the  general  charge  of  Colonel  Simonton, 
and  I do  not  think  a smaller  force  could  be  made  to  answer  the  pur- 
pose. On  the  western  lines,  the  works  are  manned  by  companies  of 
Lieutenant-Colonel  White’s  battalion,  but  the  force  is  inadequate, 
and  Fort  Pemberton  by  Lucas’  battalion.  Impressed  with  the  weak- 
ness of  these  lines,  and  especially  of  the  salient  angle  in  the  lines 


[Chap.  XL. 


426  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

next  the  New  Town  Cut  Bridge,  I ordered,  as  soon  as  three  regiments 
of  Brigadier-General  Colquitt’s  brigade  reported  to  me,  that  two  of 
them  should  be  encamped  liear  that  angle,  and  the  other  near  a point 
equidistant  from  Fort  Pemberton,  on  the  right,  and  the  salient.  In 
the  event  of  the  reappearance  of  the  enemy  on  the  island,  this  would 
be  the  smallest  force  that  could  be  relied  on  to  hold  them  in  check, 
in  event  of  an  attack,  until  they  were  re-enforced,  and  inadequate 
for  a prolonged  resistance.  One  of  these  regiments  has  been  ordered 
to,  and  now  is  at,  Battery  Wagner,  and  your  order  to  me  to  hold  two 
regiments  subject  to  the  purpose  of  being  readily  and  rapidly  moved 
into  Charleston,  forbids  me  from  using  them  (now  that  the  enemy 
has  no  lodgment  on  the  island)  at  any  other  point,  as  the  locality 
satisfies  the  condition  of  your  order. 

At  Secessionville,  liable  to  attack  by  land  and  by  a force  in  barges, 
and  suddenly,  I have  thought  it  prudent  to  keep  at  least  one  infantry 
regiment  as  a support,  and  to  support  the  batteries  on  the  line  from 
Secessionville  to  Haskell,  viz,  Bedoubt  No.  1,  Ryan,  and  Haskell ; and 
to  picket  the  marsh  and  creeks  between  these  points,  one  battalion  of 
the  Twenty-fifth  South  Carolina  (Major  Glover),  re-enforced  each 
night  by  four  companies  from  the  reserve  regiments,  is  used,  and  is 
the  least  force  that  can  be  relied  on. 

At  Fort  Johnson,  and  for  the  line  from  Battery  Cheves  to  Battery 
Glover,  the  troops  returned  from  Morris  Island  to  recruit,  generally 
consisting  of  two  small  regiments,  have  to  be  relied  on  for  guard 
and  picket  duties  and  to  support  the  batteries. 

The  artillery  force  on  this  part  of  the  line  is  ample.  As  a reserve 
to  re-enforce  any  part  of  the  island,  I have  but  two  regiments,  lo- 
cated near  the  road  from  Fort  Johnson  to  Battery  Haskell,  and  so 
disposed  as  to  re-enforce,  though  at  some  distance  from  the  first 
nearer  point,  any  menaced  point  along  the  line.  I have  no  appre- 
hension of  any  immediate  demonstration  of  the  enemy  upon  the 
southern  end  of  the  island,  and  hope  time  will  be  afforded  us  to  con- 
struct the  works  of  the  new  line,  now  in  progress ; but  still  it  is  im- 
portant to  watch  and  guard  against  any  sudden  demonstration,  and 
the  troops  now  employed  on  that  duty  cannot  well  be  diminished. 

My  impression  is  that  the  portion  of  James  Island  now  most  to 
be  regarded,  and  upon  which  a demonstration  is  most  likely  to  be 
made,  is  the  eastern  line,  from  Secessionville  to  Fort  Johnson.  This 
face  of  the  island  is  immediately  opposite  Light-House  Inlet.  Black 
and  Morris  Islands,  and  the  guns  of  the  enemy  at  long  range,  com- 
mand this  island  as  far  back  as  James  Island  Creek. 

It  is  true  that  this  face  is  separated  from  these  positions  of  the 
enemy  by  marshes,  but  these  marshes  are  penetrated  by  creeks  navi- 
gable by  steamers,  and  easily  approached  by  barges. 

The  works  at  Secessionville  and  the  intermediate  batteries  com- 
mand these  creeks,  and  I have  little  apprehension  of  attempts  to 
land  in  the  day  ; but  after  a heavy  bombardment,  designed  for  the  pur- 
pose of  driving  our  troops  back  from  the  margin  of  the  creeks  and 
marshes,  a bold  attempt  might  be  made  to  land  in  barges  at  points 
from  Secessionville  to  Fort  Johnson,  and  if  not  successfully  repelled, 
the  whole  system  of  works  would  be  turned,  including  all  our  harbor 
defenses  along  the  Ashley  River. 

In  view  of  these  facts,  I have  the  honor  to  suggest  that  Light- 
House  Inlet  Creek,  and  the  creek  leading  from  our  works  toward 
Black  and  Morris  Islands,  be  obstructed  by  torpedoes ; that  traverses 
be  thrown  up  to  protect  infantry,  as  well  as  artillerists  at  the  batteries, 


Chap.  XL.] 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 


427 


if  bomb-proofs  are  not  practicable,  owing  to  the  pressure  at  this  time  ; 
that  covered  ways  be  constructed  from  the  camps  of  the  infantry 
supports  to  the  batteries,  and  that  the  camps  of  the  supports,  as  well 
as  the  regiments  held  in  reserve,  be  protected  by  traverses  from  a fire 
of  the  enemy  from  Morris  or  Black  Island ; that  a line  of  rifle-pits 
be  constructed  from  the  wharf  at  Fort  Johnson  to,  or  nearly  to,  Bat- 
tery Cheves,  along  the  margin  of  the  marsh,  and  that  a covered  way, 
sufficient  to  protect  the  horses  of  a light  battery,  be  constructed  from 
the  camps  of  the  Fort  Johnson  support  to  the  point  of  the  island 
commanding  directly  the  strip  of  sand  known  as  Shell  Point. 

A landing  is  practicable  on  this  neck  of  land,  and,  whilst  the  Cheves 
Battery  commands  it  in  the  day,  at  night  it  would  be  difficult  to  bring 
the  guns  from  this  point  to  play  upon  it. 

It  is  proper  to  state  that  the  guns  of  Fort  Johnson  cannot  be  trav- 
ersed so  as  to  bear  south  of  Battery  Gregg,  and  have  no  command 
of  this  beach,  being  designed  for  the  defense  of  the  harbor. 

A light  battery,  having  direct  fire  along  this  line  of  beach,  with 
another,  enfilading  from  a point  nearer  the  present  position  of  the 
Brooke  gun,  and  supported  by  infantry  in  rifle-pits,  would,  I think, 
be  able  to  repulse  any  number  who  could  land  upon  this  point,  and 
I regard  it  of  the  greatest  consequence  that  these  works  should  be 
executed  without  delay.  I would  also  urge  that,  if  possible,  bomb- 
proofs  for  the  artillerists,  and  at  least  one  regiment  of  infantry,  be 
erected  at  Fort  Johnson. 

I would,  in  connection  with  this  line,  call  the  attention  of  the  briga- 
dier-general commanding  to  the  importance  of  adding  (if  consistent 
with  the  ability  of  the  ordnance  department  to  furnish  them)  additional 
guns  to  Batteries  Haskell  and  Ryan.  It  has  been  expected  that  guns 
taken  from  Fort  Sumter  would  be  mounted  at  these  points,  but  it 
has  not  been  done.  Major  Manigault,  commanding  at  these  works, 
urges  the  addition  of  one  8-inch  gun  and  one  rifled  24-pounder  at  Bat- 
tery Haskell,  and  an  8-inch  sea-coast  howitzer  at  Battery  Ryan,  Point 
of  Pines.  I have  directed  that  some  of  the  guns  of  the  siege  train  be 
transferred  from  the  western  lines  to  this  battery.  On  this  subject 
attention  is  called  to  the  report  of  Colonel  Gonzales,  chief  of  artillery. 

I would  also  respectfully  urge  upon  the  consideration  of  the  briga- 
dier-general commanding  the  importance'of  increasing  the  number  of 
ordnance  officers  on  this  island.  It  is  impossible  that  one  officer  can 
attend  to  the  duties  of  this  department.  I would  respectfully  suggest 
that  an  ordnance  officer  be  ordered  to  report  to  Colonel  Olmstead, 
commanding  at  Fort  Johnson,  to  discharge  the  various  duties  of  his 
department  within  the  Fort  Johnson  command — that  is,  the  artillery 
command  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Yates — drawing  his  supplies  direct 
from  Charleston,  and  establishing  his  depot  at  Fort  Johnson,  or 
near  it  ; that  an  ordnance  officer  be  directed  to  report  to  the  officer 
commanding  the  eastern  lines,  for  service  connected  with  the  heavy 
artillery  on  those  lines,  exclusive  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Yates’  com- 
mand. I will  assign  to  the  duty  of  providing  ordnance  stores,  &c., 
to  the  light  batteries  on  the  island,  and  to  the  infantry,  Lieutenant 
Cunningham,  brigade  ordnance  officer ; and  to  the  western  lines, 
the  ordnance  officer  of  Brigadier-General  Colquitt’s  brigade.  In  this 
way,  the  duties  will  be  subdivided  and  simplified,  and  the  work  ac- 
complished much  more  speedily. 

I would  also  call  the  attention  of  the  brigadier-general  command- 
ing to  the  propriety  of  establishing  a depot  for  forage  and  quarter- 
masters stores  generally,  as  well  as  a depot  of  subsistence  stores  on 


J 


428  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

the  main  land,  some  few  miles  above  Charleston,  so  that,  should  any 
accident  befall  our  communications  with  the  city,  the  island  might 
be  supplied  above  the  bridges  from  the  mainland,  near  Fort  Pem- 
berton. 

I have  ordered  these  depots  to  be  established,  and  ask  the  approval 
of  the  brigadier-general  commanding. 

I have  received  orders  from  the  general  commanding  to  keep  on 
hand  15  days’  rations  on  this  island.  I had  already  taken  steps  to 
secure  this  object. 

In  conclusion,  I beg  leave  to  submit  for  the  consideration  of  the 
brigadier-general  commanding,  a recapitulation  of  the  views  con- 
tained in  this  communication. 

First.  For  protecting  the  troops  and  adding  to  the  defenses  of  the 
eastern  face  of  the  island. 

Second.  To  obstructing  the  creek,  &c.,  with  torpedoes. 

Third.  To  the  supply  of  additional  guns  for  the  works. 

Fourth.  To  the  subdivision  of  the  duties  of  ordnance  officers  and 
of  additional  officer. 

Fifth.  To  the  establishment  of  depots  for  supplying  the  quarter- 
master and  commissary  stores  on  the  mainland. 

September^.  3.15  p.  m. — This  morning  the  Pawnee  and  another 
steamer  came  up  the  Stono.  I was  near  GrimbaH’s  at  the  time. 
They  stopped  at  Legareville  and  have  not  advanced  higher.  They 
are  out  of  range  of  our  masked  battery. 

7.20.  Gunboats  returned  down  Stono,  and  before  leaving  fired  at 
Battery  Pringle,  1 shot  striking.  They  also  fired  on  John's  Island. 
Did  not  come  within  range  of  our  masked  battery,  and  did  not  ap- 
pear to  see  it. 

September  8.  5 p.  m. — Attacked  the  enemy’s  pickets  on  Battery 
Island  last  night.  Drove  them  off,  and  destroyed  the  bridge  and 
landing,  so  cannot  get  to  Horse  Island. 


No.  24. 

Reports  of  Brig.  Gen.  Johnson  Hagood,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding 
on  James  Island,  July  10-18,  and  on  Morris  Island,  Jidy  19-22, 
and  August  6-10,  and  21-25. 

Secessionville,  July  11,  1863 — 10.25  p.  m. 
Captain  : I think  we  have  every  reason  to  feel  certain  of  an  at- 
tack, both  from  the  Stono  and  from  bays  in  rear,  before  or  by  daylight. 
I fear  a landing  in  force  at  Legare’s  Point.  Send  me  more  troops  at 
once,  if  possible.  I deem  it  very  urgent.  Send  them  to  the  neigh- 
borhood of  Royal’s  house. 

JOHNSON  HAGOOD, 

Brigadier-  General. 

Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  First  Military  District. 

[Indorsement.] 

Respectfully  forwarded  [to  department  headquarters]  with  the 
remark  that  four  strong  companies  * have  been  ordered  to  the  sup- 

* Three  companies  of  the  Charleston  Battalion  (Lieut.  Col.  P.  C.  Gaillard,)  and 
detachment  of  the  Sixty-third  Georgia  Infantry  (Capt.  James  T.  Buckner). 


Chap.  XL.] 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 


429 


port  of  General  Hagood,  and  that  the  troops  from  Savannah  will 
also  be  dispatched  to  James  Island,  upon  their  arrival.  In  the  ab- 
sence and  by  command  of  Brigadier-General  Ripley. 

WM.  F.  NANCE, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Secessionville,  July  12,  1863—9.25  a.  m. 

Captain  : Everything  remarkably  quiet  last  night  and  this*morn- 
ing  to  date.  Will  send  fuller  dispatch  in  a short  time.  I want  an 
active  engineer  officer  immediately.  In  front  of  the  western  lines 
[it]  is  so  overgrown  as  to  make  them  almost  untenable.  Can  do 
that  with  soldiers.  Absolutely  necessary,  in  my  opinion,  to  fortify 
at  once  and  strongly,  Legares  Point,  Mellichamps,  &c.  The  whole 
island  can  be  made  untenable  by  a lodgment  there.  Must  have 
strong  negro  force,  and  a clever  engineer,  if  this  is  to  be  done  in  time. 
Georgia  troops  not  arrived. 

JOHNSON  HAGOOD, 

Brigadier-  General , Commanding . 

Captain  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

[Indorsement.] 

Hdqrs.  First  Mil.  Dist.,  Dept.  S.  C.,  Ga.,  and  Fla., 

Charleston , July  12,  1863. 

Respectfully  forwarded,  and  attention  called  to  the  remarks  of 
General  Hagood.  * 

R.  S.  RIPLEY, 

Brigadier-  General , Commanding. 


Secessionville,  July  13,  1863. 

Captain:  No  change  in  the  last  twenty-four  hours.  Exploded  7 
or  8 shell  on  Black  Island,  from  Legares  place,  with  a 12-pounder, 
rifled.  Elicited  no  reply.  But  few  men  visible  on  the  island. 

JOHNSON  HAGOOD, 

Brigadier- General. 

Captain  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant-General. 


Secessionville,  July  13,  1863—7.15  p.  m. 
Captain  : The  lookout  reports  that  the  enemy  on  Morris  Island 
are  being  largely  re-enforced  from  Folly  Island.  A number  of  pieces 
of  light  artillery  have  been  already  landed. 

JOHNSON  HAGOOD, 

Brigadier-  General. 

Captain  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters,  James  Island, 

July  13,  1863. 

I beg  leave  respectfully  to  repeat  my  suggestion,  made  by  telegraph 
yesterday,  that  our  lines  on  this  island  be  extended  from  their  pres- 
ent eastern  terminus  to  the  rear  along  the  water  front  as  far  as  Le- 


[Chap.  XL. 


430  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

gare’s  Point.  The  enemy  are  threatening  ns  in  that  direction,  and 
a lodgment  effected  there  in  force  will  turn  our  present  position 
behind  the  lines  and  necessitate  the  abandonment  of  the  island,  or 
putting  its  fate  upon  a battle  in  the  open  field,  without  the  aid  of 
inti  enchments.  To  do  this,  I must  have  negro  or  other  extra  labor 
and  an  energetic  engineer  immediately.  I cannot  bring  this  matter 
too  forcibly  to  the  attention  of  the  commanding  general. 

Very  respectfully, 

JOHNSON  HAGOOD, 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 

Captain  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant-General. 

[Indorsement.] 

Copy  made  and  sent  to  Governor  Bonham,  City  Hall. 

T.  J.  [JORDAN.] 


Morris  Island, 

July  21,  1863—7.20  a.  m. 

General  : Our  steamer  Sumter  is  reported  to  be  aground.  I have 
taken  the  occasion  to  send  in  flag  in  relation  to  prisoners.  Have  not 
heard  from  it  yet.  Repairs  of  earthworks  partly  made.  Graham 
did  not  arrive  till  3.40  p.  m.  Guns  have  not  come  at  all.  Five 
casualties,  one  fatal,  last  night.  No  officers  among  them. 

JOHNSON  HAGOOD, 

Brigadier-  General . 

Brigadier-General  Ripley. 


[Via]  Fort  Sumter, 

July  21,  1863 — 9.30p.  m. 

General  : No  casualty  to-day.  Damage  slight.  Please  send  me  a 
few  Whitworth  rifles;  these  sharpshooters  have  them,  and  annoy  me 
much.  Enemy  apologized  for  breach  of  truce  to-day;  mistake,  and 
Gillmore  agreed  to  my  proposals;  made  others,  &c.  My  aide,  Cap- 
tain Tracy,  will  carry  your  written  dispatch  to-night,  and  give  verbal 
details.  Peronneau’s  negro  is  still  in  arrest  at  Cumming’s  Point;  will 
send  him  up  to-night;  also  Captain  [W.  H.  ] Peronneau.  One  man  in 
Adams’  company  deserted.  I know  this.  Two  others  were  believed 
missing  when  Adams  was  relieved.  Buckner  was  relieved  night  be- 
fore last.  He  himself  on  sick  list. 

JOHNSON  HAGOOD, 

Brigadier-  General. 

Brigadier-General  Ripley. 


Morris  Island, 

July  22,  1863 — 8.30  a.  m. 

General  : No  shelling  last  night.  Damages  repaired,  but  [not]  as 
thoroughly  as  desirable.  Stockade  made  partially  in  ditch.  No  axes 
near  here. 


Chap.  XL.]  OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C.  431 

* 

I kept  200  men,  that  I might  have  otherwise  worked,  waiting  all 
night  at  Cumming’s  Point  for  guns. 

They  did  not  come.  I worked  all  night  every  man  not  on  guard, 
and  20  negroes  with  proper  tools  would  have  done  as  much  work 
in  the  same  time.  They  are  broken  down  ; so  are  the  2 men  from 
engineer  department  here.  Please  relieve  these  last  with  2 active 
men.  Can’t  you  send  an  active  ordnance  officer  to  assist  mine  ? 
Short  turns  of  duty  here  by  troops  I consider  very  desirable.  Block 
and  fall  of  gin  not  here.  Send  Whitworth  rifles,  and  men  used  to 
them,  if  possible.  Send  me  any  letters  addressed  to  your  care. 

HAGOOD, 
Brigadier-  General. 

Brigadier-General  Ripley. 


Headquarters  Fort  Wagner,  July  23,  1863. 
Captain  : In  pursuance  of  General  Orders,  No.  27,  district  head- 
quarters, I beg  leave  to  make  the  following  report,  upon  turning 
over  my  command  to  General  Taliaferro  : 

The  effective  force  upon  Morris  Island  is  : 


» Locality. 

Artillery. 

Infantry. 

Total. 

Fort  Gregg  

73 

171 

120 

1,080 

193 

1,251 

Fort  Wagner  

[Total] 

244 

1,200 

1,444 

Of  these,  the  infantry  are  tolerably  fresh,  all  but  260  having  ar- 
rived at  the  post  just  before  my  departure,  and  had  lost  but  one 
night’s  sleep.  Of  the  artillery,  Peronneau  and  Gary  should  be  re- 
lieved to-night ; they  are  worn  out. 

I append  a list  of  killed  and  wounded  during  my  tour  of  duty,* 
as  also  reports  from  my  ordnance  officer  and  chief  of  artillery. 

It  is  proper  to  observe  that  all  the  casualties  reported  occurred  in 
the  first  day’s  bombardment,  after  my  taking  command.  None  oc- 
curred afterward.  This  was  due  to  some  extent,  perhaps,  to  the 
fact  that  the  first  day’s  bombardment  was  the  heaviest.  But  I at- 
tribute it  chiefly  to  my  having  reduced  the  garrison  in  the  day  time. 
I found  that  about  500  men  could  be  tolerably  protected  behind 
portions  of  the  parapet  not  enfiladed,  and  in  the  bomb-proofs.  The 
balance  of  the  force,  every  morning  at  daybreak,  I withdrew  to  the 
sand-hills,  300  yards  in  rear  of  the  fort,  and  held  them  there  until 
night,  With  orders  to  move  at  double-quick  to  the  fort  whenever 
they  heard  musketry  fire,  or  had  other  intimation  of  an  assault  being 
made.  Five  hundred  men  were  deemed  sufficent  to  hold  in  check 
any  assault,  however  formidable,  for  a sufficient  time  to  allow  the 
reserve  from  the  sand-hills  to  come  up. 

I am,  captain,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOHNSON  HAGOOD, 
Brigadier-  General,  Commanding. 

Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


* See  p.  406. 


432 


S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 


[Chap.  XL. 


[Inclosure.] 

Charleston,  July  23,  1863. 

Captain  [P.  K.]  Molony, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General : 

Captain:  T'e  following  is  a statement  of  the  condition  of  the 
armament  of  Battery  Wagner  this  morning,  when  I was  relieved  of 
the  command  of  the  artillery  on  Morris  Island  : 

One  10-inch  columbiad,  in  good  order. 

One  smooth-bore  32-pounder,  in  good  order. 

One  carronade,  42-pounder,  in  good  order. 

Two  naval  8-inch  shell  guns,  in  good  order. 

Three  32-pounder  carronades,  in  good  order. 

One  10-inch  mortar,  in  good  order. 

(The  carriage  of  the  columbiad  was  struck  yesterday,  hut  only 
slightly  injured.  The  elevating  screw  of  on^of  the  8-inch  shell 
guns  is  seriously  defective.  The  mortar  bed  is  indifferent,  though 
not  unserviceable.) 

Two  32-pounder  siege  howitzers,  in  good  order. 

Two  12-pounder  bronze  howitzers,  in  good  order. 

Respectfully,  captain,  your  obedient  servant, 

DEL.  KEMPER, 

Lieutenant- Colonel,  and  Chief  of  Artillery. 


Headquarters  Morris  Island, 

July  25,  1863 — 1 p.  m. 

General  : Been  firing  one  hour  and  forty-five  minutes.  The  10- 
inch  gun  only  we  can  use;  am  firing  it  only  every  twenty  minutes, 
both  on  account  of  its  unserviceable  condition  and  want  of  ammuni- 
tion, for  which  I have  been  telegraphing.  We  now  have  but  13  car- 
tridges for  that  gun.  Have  enough  for  front  face  during  an  assault, 
but  not  to  supply  land  battery.  It  is,  moreover,  out  of  effective 
range  of  our  very  inferior  guns.  Only  six  casualties  so  far.  All  in 
entry  to  bomb-proof.  Two  monitors  and  land  battery  firing  on  us. 
Men  and  officers  cheerful,  and  I think  wrill  repel  an  assault  if  made 
to-day  or  nigjit.  Send  re-enforcements  by  early  dark  to  Cumming’s 
Point ; also,  as  a mere  matter  of  precaution,  to-night  and  whenever 
we  are  attacked,  means  of  transportation  from  island  should  be  held 
in  immediate  readiness.  Our  artillery  is  so  unserviceable  that  it  is 
disheartening.  Can’t  you  give  us  a good  armament,  or  at  least  im- 
. prove  the  present? 

1. 15  p.  m. — Monitors  retired;  land  battery  firing;  213  rounds  thrown 
by  enemy  up  to  this  time. 

JOHNSON  HAGOOD, 
Brigadier-  General,  Commanding. 

Brigadier-General  Ripley. 


[Indorsement.] 

Headquarters  Military  District  of  Charleston, 

July  25,  1863. 

Respectfully  forwarded.  The  siege  howitzers  have  been  ordered. 
Graham’s  regiment  goes  down  to-night  at  dark.  All  ammunition 
has  been  ordered,  and  Maj.  C.  K.  Huger  goes  down  in  charge. 


CnAP.  XL.] 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 


433 


Much  ammunition  is  there,  but  from  the  frequent  changes  of  officers 
and  the  confusion  incident  to  bombardment,  it  cannot  be  found. 
Lieutenant  Mazyck  has  been  ordered  to  go  down  to-night , to  inform 
and  show  his  successor  the  ammunition  sent  and  what  is  there  which 
they  do  not  know  of.  One  great  defect  is  that  they  have  not  screwed 
up  their  gunholts  since  the  attack  commenced.  In  my  letter  to  Gen- 
eral Hagood,  by  Colonel  Harris,  this  is  mentioned,  and  I hope  will 
he  repaired  to-night.  Our  great  enemy  now  is  the  Ironsides,  and 
she  is  comparatively  unapproachable  without  naval  force. 

R.  S.  RIPLEY, 

Brigadier-  General. 


Secessionville  July  28,  1863. 

Captain  : I want  at  least  two  more  companies  of  cavalry,  three 
better;  when  enemy  land  can  dispense  with  them.  Please  bring  it 
to  attention  department  headquarters,  if  necessary.  Send  them  at 
once. 

JOHNSON  HAGOOD, 

Brigadier-  General. 


Capt.  W.  P.  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Secessionville,  July  28, 1863 — 10.30  p.  m. 
Major  Manigault  has  just  reported  that  late  this  evening  the  en- 
emy were  discovered  in  considerable  numbers  working  on  Black 
Island. 

JOHNSON  HAGOOD, 
Brigadier-  General,  Commanding. 

Captain  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters,  Morris  Island, 

Battery  Wagner,  August  7,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  the  following  as  the  journal  of  the 
siege  of  this  place  for  the  last  twenty-four  hours,  commencing  at  9 
o’clock  last  evening : 

A 32-pounder  rifled  and  handed  gun  was  put  in  position  on  the  sea 
front,  during  the  night,  in  the  place  of  a smooth-bore  32-pounder. 
Enemy  opened  fire  this  morning,  about  an  hour  after  daylight,  with 
a howitzer  from  one  of  his  land  batteries,  and  apparently  directed  at 
the  gun-chamber  of  the  piece  just  mounted.  This  fire  soon  ceased. 

9 a.  m.  Enemy  fired  a few  shot  from  his  land  batteries. 

12  m.  Flag  of  truce  from  fleet,  with  sealed  communications  for 
General  Beauregard. 

5.30.  A gunboat  shelled  the  battery  briskly,  aiming  apparently  at 
the  sand-bags  masking  the  guns  recently  put  in  position. 

6 p.  m.  Enemy’s  fire  ceased.  No  return  fire.  Gunboat  estimated 
at  1,400  yards  from  battery.  Everything  quiet  on  enemy’s  side  at 
dusk.  Casualties  of  yesterday,  not  hitherto  reported  by  me,  3 
wounded;  one  of  these  accidentally.  No  casualties  to-day.  From 
the  great  fatigue  of  my  men  yesterday,  very  little  work  was  gotten 
28  R R — VOL  XXVIII,  PT  I 


434  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

out  of  them  last  niglit.  The  banquette  on  the  rear  front  has  not 
been  begun. 

The  infantry  force  on  the  island  is  1,037;  the  artillery  force  on  the 
island  is  239. 

No  tiring  on  Battery  Gregg  was  made  during  the  last  night,  nor 
any  this  morning  until  about  10  a.  m.,  when  the  enemy’s  battery  to 
the  right  of  Gregg’s  Hill  opened  apparently  on  the  Sullivan’s  Island 
steamer,  all  the  shots  falling  short.  This  afternoon  the  same  battery 
fired  at  same  object,  with  same  result. 

At  5.30  p.  m.,  a wooden  gunboat  fired  a few  shot,  all  falling  short 
of  Battery  Gregg. 

Our  sharpshooters  from  Battery  Wagner  have  been  actively  em- 
ployed all  day,  and  seem  to  annoy  the  enemy,  eliciting  at  intervals 
the  usual  reply  of  howitzer  shells. 

Respectfully  submitted. 

JOHNSON  HAGOOD, 
Brigadier-  General , Commanding . 

Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant-General. 


Report  of  effective  strength  of  command  on  Morris  Island , August  7,  1863. 


Troops. 


Infantry  : 

8th  North  Carolina 

61st  North  Carolina 

21st  South  Carolina 

Total 

Artillery  : 

Alston’s  detachment 

Chichester  [Gist  Guard]  Artillery 

Lesesne’s  company  (H),  First  South  Carolina  Artillery 

Marion  Artillery  (detachment) 

Mathewes’  artillery 

Siege  train  (Smith’s  detachment) 

Total 

Grand  total 


Officers. 

Men. 

Aggregate. 

31 

362 

393 

21 

326 

347 

20 

277 

297 

72 

965 

1,037 

1 

1 

14 

15 

2 

46 

48 

4 

65 

69 

2 

30 

32 

2 

46 

48 

1 

26 

27 

12 

227 

239 

84 

1,192 

1,276 

Captain  Lesesne’s  company,  and  1 commissioned  officer  and  15  men 
of  the  Marion  Artillery,  are  at  Fort  Gregg ; the  Sixty -first  North 
Carolina  Volunteers  are  in  the  sand-hills  between  Batteries  Gregg 
and  Wagner  ; the  rest  of  the  command  garrisons  Battery  Wagner. 

JOHNSON  HAGOOD, 

Brigadier- General. 


[Indorsements.] 

IIdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston,  August  8,  1863. 

Respectfully  referred  to  the  particular  attention  of  Brigadier. 
General  Ripley. 

By  command  of  General  Beauregard. 

« CLIFTON  H.  SMITH, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General . 


Chap.  XL.] 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 


435 


Hdqrs.  First  Mil.  Dist.,  Dept,  of  S.  C.,  Ga.  and  Fla., 

Charleston,  August  9,  1803. 

Respectfully  returned. 

The  Twenty-first  South  Carolina  Volunteers  was  withdrawn  from 
Battery  Wagner  last  night.  To-night  the  Eighth  North  Carolina 
will  be  relieved  by  Colonel  Olmstead’s  command,  which  will  leave 
the  garrison  a little  more  than  1,000,  but  as  nearly  as  possible  with- 
out dividing  commands. 

The  couriers  will  also  be  relieved  by  an  equal  number  from  Fifth 
South  Carolina  Cavalry. 

R.  S.  RIPLEY, 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 


Headquarters  Morris  Island, 

Battery  Wagner,  August  8,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  the  following  as  the  journal  of  the 
siege  of  this  place,  from  9 p.  m.  last  evening : 

About  12.30  p.  m.  a rocket  was  sent  up  by  the  enemy,  from  a po- 
sition in  the  harbor  to  the  right  in  front  of  Fort  Sumter,  and  lights 
were  at  the  same  time  and  place  exhibited ; instantly  the  enemy’s 
land  batteries  opened  on  Cumming’s  Point,  and  this  fire  was  contin- 
ued until  after  2 a.  m.  About  9 a.  m.  a few  shots  were  fired  toward 
Cumming’s  Point.  About  4.30  three  of  enemy’s  gunboats  opened 
fire  at  this  place  and  at  Battery  Gregg,  and  a little  later  the  enemy’s 
land  batteries  opened  briskly  on  this  place.  It  was  discovered  at 
this  time  that  the  rifled  and  banded  gun  recently  put  up  was  ob- 
structed by  some  metallic  substance.  I at  once  telegraphed  for  an 
expert  and  tools  to  remedy  the  difficulty. 

6.30.  After  firing  with  the  land  batteries  nearly  three  hundred  times 
to  the  hour,  the  gunboats  retired.  The  land  battery  of  enemy  on  their 
extreme  right  on  the  beach  have  continued  firing  mortar  shells  very 
briskly.  The  firing  of  last  night  on  Battery  Gregg  was  from  three 
guns  placed  to  the  right  of  Gregg’s  Hill.  The  firing  was  rapid  for 
about  an  hour,  and  then  slow.  Battery  Gregg  replied  to  the  fire  upon 
it  this  morning  for  about  a half  hour,  when  firing  on  both  sides 
ceased.  The  fuses  there  are  reported  as  defective.  At  12  m.  a 
working  party  of  the  enemy  was  discovered  from  Battery  Gregg  in 
the  marsh  between  Black  and  Morris  Islands.  One  9-inch  shell  was 
fired  at  it  from  Battery  Gregg,  but  the  enemy  was  found  to  be  out  of 
range.  Three  9-inch  shells  were  fired  at  the  Parrott  gun  battery,  to 
the  right  of  Gregg’s  Hill.  The  shells  burst  well.  Battery  Gregg 
replied  to  the  firing  of  this  evening  with  one  10-inch  columbiad  and 
9-inch  Dahlgren.  No  casualties  at  Battery  Gregg  to-day.  Two 
wounded  at  Battery  Wagner  to-day,  and  1 killed.  Eight-inch  naval 
gun  on  land  front  had  tongue  of  chassis  injured  by  enemy’s  fire. 
Effective  strength  of  command : Infantry,  717 ; artillery,  240 ; cav- 
alry, 11 ; total,  968. 

The  journal  of  this  post  for  the  day  before  yesterday  was  sent  up 
by  Captain  Stoney,  aide-de-camp  of  General  Ripley’s  staff,  who  had 
just  brought  dispatches  from  General  Ripley.  The  journal  of  yes- 
terday was  sent  up  this  morning  by  Dr.  [Thomas  S.  ] Grimke,  assist- 
ant surgeon,  no  opportunity  having  offered  sooner.  The  steamboat 
last  night,  for  Cumming’s  Point  departed  before  I was  informed  of 
her  arrival. 


436 


S.  C.  A ND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 


[Chap.  XL. 


No  material  damage  done  to  this  fort  by  fire  of  to-day. 
Respectfully  submitted. 

JOHNSON  HAGOOD, 

Brigadier - General , Comm  anding. 


Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  Morris  Island, 
Battery  Wagner,  August  9,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  the  following  journal  of  the  siege 
of  this  place  for  last  twenty-four  hours,  commencing  at  8 p.  m.  yes- 
terday : 

The  fire  of  the  enemy  all  last  night  was  heavy  and  rapid  for  night 
firing,  and,  from  his  land  battery  on  the  beach  on  his  right,  directed 
almost  entirely  at  this  post,  on  an  average  of  a shot  at  least  every  five 
minutes.  This  firing  ceased  about  5 a.  m.,  and  howitzer  firing  only 
replied  to  our  sharpshooters  from  the  ramparts.  The  officer  in  com- 
mand of  our  advance  pickets  reports  the  enemy  as  working  hard  last 
night  until  about  2 a.  m. ; teamsters  hauling,  and  axes  cutting,  and 
calls  for  sods.  The  fire  of  the  sharpshooters  from  this  battery  seems 
to  annoy  the  enemy,  who  occasionally  fire  with  great  spirit  to  dis- 
lodge them,  but  ineffectually.  At  5 p.  m.  the  land  batteries  opened 
fire  and  are  now  shelling  briskly  from  their  mortars. 

There  was  1 man  slightly  wounded  in  this  place  to-day.  At  Bat- 
tery Gregg,  from  7 o’clock  last  night  to  7 o’clock  this  evening,  there 
have  been  no  casualties.  At  5 p.  m. , Battery  Gregg  opened  fire  at 
enemy  from  9-inch  gun.  The  fire  was  not  returned;  ours  soon  ceased. 
I would  remark  in  addition  that  several  of  the  sentinels  on  beach  be- 
tween here  and  Cumming’s  Point  fired  about  2 a.  m.  at  a small  boat. 

Effective  strength : 


Infantry 663 

Artillery 248 

Cavalry 11 

Total 922 


Respectfully  submitted. 


JOHNSON  HAGOOD,  ' 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 


Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


Headquarters  Morris  Island, 
Battery  Wagner,  August  10,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  the  following  journal  of  the  siege 
of  this  place  from  8 o’clock  last  evening  : 

The  enemy  did  no  firing  last  night,  but  by  the  report  of  the  pickets 
were  busily  engaged  in  working,  and  very  little  annoyed  by  the  fire 
from  Fort  Sumter  and  Battery  Simkins,  which  continued  all  night. 
During  the  last  night,  the  enemy  advanced  a parallel,  by  zigzag  and 


Chap.  XL.] 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 


437 


by  connecting  their  heads,  about  100  yards,  and  are  now  about  GOO 
yards  from  these  works,  though  with  no  guns  apparently  as  yet 
mounted  in  their  advanced  position. 

4 p.  m.  No  firing  by  enemy  up  to  this  time,  excepting  from  sharp- 
shooters ; ours  lire  with  great  spirit  and  believed  effect. 

5 p.  m.  The  enemy’s  land  batteries  have  opened  briskly.  The 
wheel  of  the  32-pounder  carronade,  having  been  knocked  to  pieces,  has 
been  replaced  by  a wheel  from  a gun  some  time  since  dismounted. 

8 p.  m.  Fire  from  enemy’s  batteries  still  going  on  slowly.  Battery 
Gregg  replying.  Colonel  Harrison  arrived  with  orders  to  relieve  me. 
Effective  strength  same  as  yesterday. 

Three  casualties  to-day — too  slight  to  go  to  hospital. 

General  report  will  be  made  to-morrow. 

Respectfully  submitted. 

JOHNSON  HAGOOD, 
Brigadier-  General , Commanding. 

Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant-General. 


Headquarters  Forces,  Morris  Island, 

Battery  Wagner,  August  21,  1863. 

General  : This  morning  at  2 o’clock  I relieved  Colonel  Keitt  in 
command  of  this  post. 

The  reports  of  the  chief  of  artillery  and  engineer  in  charge  will 
show  in  detail  the  condition  of  this  fort,  as  they  are  herewith  sent.* 
It  will  suffice  to  say,  in  general  terms,  that  the  defensive  powers  of  the 
fort  are  not  materially  impaired,  and  its  armament,  such  as  it  is,  is  in 
fair  condition.  I find,  however,  the  10-inch  gun,  which  has  heretofore 
done  such  good  service,  disabled  beyond  the  means  of  repair  at  hand, 
and  the  banded  rifle  on  the  sea  face  has  been  disabled  and  replaced 
by  a smooth  32-pounder. 

Our  means  of  reply  to  the  fleet  are  therefore  limited  to  one  10-inch 
gun. 

There  are  some  deficiencies  in  the  supply  of  ordnance,  which  will 
be  brought  to  the  attention  of  the  department  by  the  proper  officer. 
His  report  is  also  inclosed. 

There  are  but  about  two  and  a half  days’  rations  on  the  island. 

Without  at  least  ten  days’  supply,  it  will  be  difficult  to  obey  the 
standing  order  to  defend  the  fort  to  the  last  extremity,  should  com- 
munication with  the  city  be  destroyed. 

This  matter  was  brought  to  your  attention  this  morning  at  2.20,  by 
telegraph. 

The  enemy  have  pushed  their  approaches  to  within  450  yards  of 
the  fort,  and  are  steadily  and  rapidly  pushing  on. 

The  only  means  of  retarding  their  progress  at  our  disposal  is  night 
fire  from  the  artillery  of  ihe  land  face,  and  sharpshooters  (about  100) 
during  the  day.  Both  so  far  have  done,  I am  informed,  but  little  to 
retard  them.  They  are  pushing  their  sap,  with  a roller  at  the  head. 
Day  fire  has  also  been  used  to  some  extent  from  the  land  face.  This, 
however,  is  very  much  controlled  by  tne  superiority  of  the  enemy’s 
fire. 


*For  Captain  Gregorie’s  reports  of  this  dtte,  thus  referred  to,  see  No.  28,  p.  502, 
post. 


438  S.  C.  AND  GrA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

Having  thus  briefly  brought  to  your  attention  the  condition  of 
Fort  Wagner  upon  my  taking  command,  I beg  leave  to  submit  the 
journal  of  operations  from  my  arrival  to  8 p.  m.  this  day  : 

At  2.30  a.  m.,  opened  fire  on  the  enemy’s  advanced  works  from  the 
8-inch  sea-coast  howitzer  on  curtain  outside  of  rear  gorge,  the  8-inch 
siege  howitzer  on  salient,  the  8-inch  naval  gun  and  the  32-pounder  on 
land  face.  The  enemy  responded  promptly  and  with  great  vigor. 
The  fire  was  continued  by  us  until  daylight.  The  fire  of  the  enemy 
ceased  soon  after  ours. 

At  an  early  hour,  the  enemy  opened  a rapid  fire  at  Battery  Gregg 
and  Fort  Sumter.  At  9.30  o’clock  a portion  of  their  fire  was  directed 
against  Battery  Wagner. 

At  about  10  a.  m.,  we  opened  fire  from  the  8-inch  siege  howitzer 
upon  the  advanced  working  parties  of  the  enemy. 

The  fire  on  part  of  enemy’s  sharpshooters  increased  in  rapidity. 

Flag  of  truce  from  the  enemy  at  12  m. 

A monitor  passed  Battery  Wagner,  and  opened  fire  at  Fort  Sum- 
ter, Battery  Gregg  replying. 

At  2.30  o’clock,  opened  fire  from  8-inch  sea-coast  howitzer:  fired  3 
shots  at  troops  on  beach.  At  3.30  p.  m.,  opened  fire  from  8-inch 
shell  gun  on  land  face  on  the  advanced  lines  of  the  enemy. 

At  4.15  p.  m.,  two  wooden  gunboats  opened  fire  on  us,  to  which  we 
replied  with  a few  shots  from  the  10-inch  columbiad.  The  heavy 
land  batteries  opened  upon  us  later  in  the  afternoon,  the  Ironsides 
also  participating.  The  fire  became  very  severe,  and  continued  until 
dusk.  Shortly  after  the  fire  ceased,  our  riflemen  in  the  pits  com- 
menced a rapid  fire.  They  were  immediately  re-enforced,  and  defeated 
the  efforts  of  the  enemy  to  get  possession  of  the  pits. 

I regret  to  have  to  announce  the  death  of  Captain  Pringle,  of 
Lucas’  battalion.  He  died  at  his  post,  nobly  discharging  his  duties. 

I inclose  list  of  casualties  and  report  from  Battery  Gregg.* 

Respectfully  submitted. 

JOHNSON  HAGOOD, 

Brigadier-General , Commanding. 

Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


* Not  identified. 


Chap.  XL.] 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  0. 
[Inclosure.] 


439 


Office  of  Assistant  Adjutant-General, 

Morris  Island,  August  21,  1863. 

Brigadier-General  Hagood, 

Commanding  on  Morris  Island : 

General  : I beg  leave  to  submit  the  following  report  of  effective 
[strength]  of  command  on  Morris  Island  : 


Command. 


Infantry : 

20th  Regiment  South  Carolina  Volunteers 

21st  Regiment  South  Carolina  Volunteers 

Charleston  Battalion 

Total 

Artillery : 

Lesesne’s  company 

Detachment  Company  A,  Palmetto  Battalion  Light  Artillery  . . . 

Company  B,  Lucas’  battalion 

Company  H,  Second  Regiment,  Artillery 

Company  C,  Siege  Train 

Detachment  Company  K,  1st  Regiment  South  Carolina  Artillery. 

Total . 

Cavalry : 

Detachment  Company  D,  5th  Regiment  Cavalry 

Sharpshooters : 

Detachment  8th  North  Carolina  Volunteers 

Grand  total 


Commissioned  offi- 

cers. 

Non-commissioned 

officers. 

Privates. 

Total. 

23 

31 

250 

304 

14 

38 

211 

263 

12 

32 

183 

227 

49 

101 

644 

794 

2 

5 

43 

50 

2 

4 

25 

31 

2 

6 

46 

54 

4 

9 

47 

60 

1 

3 

27 

31 

1 

1 

12 

14 

12 

28 

200 

240 

1 

9 

10 

1 

1 

12 

14 

62 

131 

865 

1,058 

Respectfully, 


P.  K.  MOLONY. 


Battery  Wagner, 

August  22,  1863. 

Captain  : Immediately  after  nightfall  on  yesterday,  I repaired  the 
damage  done  the  8-inch  howitzer  on  the  salient,  by  appropriating  a 
wheel  of  a disabled  limber. 

The  enemy  fired  but  little  during  the  night ; there  was  no  firing  on 
our  side,  owing  to  the  amount  of  work  to  be  done  by  fatigue  parties, 
which  consumed  the  night. 

At  an  early  hour,  two  monitors  came  abreast  of  Battery  Wagner 
and  opened  fire,  which  was  kept  up  for  about  two  hours,  when  they 
withdrew. 

About  an  hour  after  their  withdrawal,  the  Ironsides  took  position 
opposite  Battery  Wagner,  and  commenced  a rapid  fire,  which  she  con- 
tinued for  nearly  two  hours,  when  she  was  joined  by  two  monitors, 
which  engaged  in  the  bombardment. 

At  2 p.  m.  they  all  withdrew.  Fire  was  opened  by  us,  from  the 
8-inch  shell  gun  and  a 32-pounder  from  the  land  face,  upon  the  ad- 
vanced works  of  the  enemy,  about  6 a.  m.,  which  was  continued  at 


440  8.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 


[Chap.  XL. 


short  intervals  for  one  hour  and  a half.  We  did  not  return  the  fire 
from  the  Ironsides  and  monitors,  as  it  was  not  deemed  ad vi sable  to 
engage  them  at  such  long  range.  The  fire  from  the  fleet,  enfilading 
the  land  face  and  proving  destructive,  compelled  us  to  cease  firing. 
As  soon  as  the  vessels  withdrew,  the  sharpshooters  resumed  their 
work. 

Last  night,  as  briefly  mentioned  in  yesterday’s  journal,  an  attempt 
was  made  to  seize  by  assault  our  rifle-pits,  and  the  enemy  succeeded 
in  establishing  themselves  within  20  yards  of  them  before  we  could 
re-enforce  our  men.  The  re-enforcements,  however,  under  Lieut. 
Col.  O.  M.  Dantzler,  Twentieth  Regiment  South  Carolina  Volunteers, 
drove  their  line  back,  and  held  nearly  our  original  vedette  stations 
during  the  night.  It  is  but  simple  justice  to  mention  the  decision 
and  promptitude  with  which  Colonel  Dantzler  accomplished  his  pur- 
pose, as  well  as  to  acknowledge  the  unfailing  zeal  and  gallantry  with 
which  he  has  served  at  this  post  during  his  whole  tour  of  duty  here. 
The  colonel  was  shot  through  the  breast  of  his  coat  while  pushing 
forward  his  vedettes. 

The  enemy’s  sap  was  advanced  during  last  night  to  McMillan’s 
burned  house,  and  I regret  to  say  that  our  fire  to-day  appears  to  have 
produced  no  other  effect  than  to  prevent  much  visible  progress  being 
made  either  forward  or  in  completion  of  last  night’s  work.  It  was 
in  an  imperfect  state,  and  made  of  gabions  and  sand-bags,  and  I had 
hoped  by  our  fire  to  have  knocked  so  much  of  it  to  pieces.  A flag 
of  truce  was  sent  out  at  dawn  to  deliver  a communication  from  Gen- 
eral Beauregard  to  General  Gillmore. 

The  damage  to  the  fort  will  require  all  night  to  repair,  and,  con- 
sequently, I do  not  propose  to  inaugurate  night  fire  from  the  fort,  but 
I have  strengthened  the  force  in  the  rifle-pits,  and  propose  to  retard 
the  enemy’s  work  with  infantry  fire  from  these,  as  far  as  practicable. 

Casualties,  25,  of  which  4 killed. 

Effective  strength  : 


Infantry 816 

Artillery 251 

Sh  arpshooters 15 

Cavalry 11 


Aggregate 1,093 


Commissary  reports  about  seven  days’  rations.  They  are  being 
issued  to  the  troops. 

From  the  manner  in  which  the  enemy’s  sap  is  being  pushed,  there  is 
imminent  danger  of  their  flanking  to-night  or  to-morrow  our  chain 
of  rifle-pits,  and  forcing  their  abandonment. 

My  engineer  has  not  been  able  to  suggest  a counter  move.  This 
appears  to  me  to  be  a matter  of  great  importance.  Cannot  the  chief 
engineer  come  over  to-night  ? 

The  report  from  Battery  Gregg  is  herewith  sent.  * 

Very  respectfully  submitted. 

JOHNSON  HAGOOD, 
Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 

Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 

*See  Gilchrist’s  report  of  August  22,  No.  48,  p.548,  post. 


Chap.  XL.] 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 


441 


Battery  Wagner, 

August  23,  I8G3. 

Captain  : The  enemy  during  the  last  night  succeeded,  notwith- 
standing the  constant  fire  of  our  pickets,  in  extending  their  works 
about  40  yards.  At  as  early  an  hour  this  morning  as  the  fog  would 
permit,  we  opened  fire  from  an  8-inch  shell  gun,  a 32-pounder  and  a 
42-pounder  carronade  from  our  land  face.  This  fire  was  continued  at 
intervals  during  the  day.  We  succeeded  in  destroying  the  work  of 
the  night  almost  entirely.  The  land  batteries  of  the  enemy  replied 
in  the  morning  and  again  during  the  afternoon. 

A little  after  7 a.  m.  the  Ironsides  opened  fire.  We  replied  slowly 
with  our  10-inch  columbiad,  and,  with  the  assistance  of  Battery  Gregg, 
succeeded  in  forcing  her  to  retire  in  an  hour  and  a quarter.  She  was 
frequently  struck.  One  of  her  boats  was  disengaged  and  fell  into 
our  hands. 

A flag  of  truce  from  the  enemy  was  met  about  12  m.,  with  com- 
munications for  commanding  general  and  certain  consuls. 

During  the  night  all  damages  done  the  battery,  none  of  which 
were  serious,  were  repaired. 

The  enemy  has  been  busy  during  the  day  repairing  damages  done 
his  lines  by  our  fire,  and  strengthening  his  advanced  lines. 

The  carriages  of  both  8-inch  shell  guns  are  almost  disabled  and 
can  only  be  used  in  case  of  emergency.  For  one,  both  carriage  and 
chassis  are  needed;  for  the  other,  a carriage  and  tongue  of  chassis. 
These  are  very  important  guns. 

We  are  much  retarded  in  our  operations  ror  want  of  32-pounaer 
shell  and  solid  shot,  for  which  frequent  requisitions  have  been  made. 

Casualties,  7 wounded,  two  of  which  were  in  the  rifle-pits,  by  a 
shell  from  Battery  Simkins. 

I regret  to  report  among  the  wounded  the  gallant  Lieutenant-Col- 
onel Gaillard,  of  the  Charleston  Battalion.  His  hand  and  wrist  were 
so  shattered  by  a shell  as  to  render  amputation  necessary.  The  loss 
of  the  services  of  so  efficient  and  brave  a man  at  this  crisis  is  a seri- 
ous calamity. 

I shall  endeavor  to-night  to  do  some  work  upon  the  right  flank  of 
the  rifle-pits,  to  meet  the  threatening  approach  of  the  enemy’s  sap  at 
that  point. 

I would  have  been  glad,  however,  had  some  engineer  officer  ot  ex- 
perience (if  not  the  chief,  as  requested  last  night)  been  sent  down  to- 
day. The  engineer  officer  here  has  been  unable  to  suggest  anything. 

Effective  strength  as  reported  yesterday,  with  exception  of  a few 
sick  sent  off,  and  casualties.  Among  the  sick  is  Lieutenant  [ J ohn 
A.]  Keith,  Lucas’  battalion.  Another  lieutenant  should  be  sent,  as 
it  leaves  important  guns  in  charge  of  non-commissioned  officers. 

Respectfully  submitted. 

JOHNSON  HAGOOD, 

Brigadier - General , Commanding. 

Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 

[P.  S.] — A separate  statement  relative  to  flag  of  truce  communi- 
cations sent.* 

Report  from  Battery  Gregg  inclosed,  f 


*See  “ Correspondence,  etc.,  ’ Part  II. 
f See  Gilchrist’s  report  of  August  23,  No.  48,  p.  548,  post. 


442  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

Battery  Wagner,  August  24,  1863. 

Captain  : The  fire  opened  on  the  enemy’s  advanced  lines,  commenced 
on  yesterday  from  one  of  the  8-inch  shell  guns  and  the  remaining 
serviceable  8-inch  siege  howitzer,  was  continued  throughout  the 
night  from  the  latter,  the  former  having  been  greatly  disabled  by  the 
recoil. 

At  daylight  it  was  apparent  that  the  enemy  had  worked  diligently 
under  our  fire.  He  had  not  only  repaired  damages,  but  had  greatly 
strengthened  his  work  of  the  night  before.  This  morning  the  fire 
from  the  8-inch  howitzer  was  continued  under  heavy  fire  from  three 
30-pounder  Parrott  guns,  about  800  yards  distant,  and  a 200-pounder 
battery,  until  the  howitzer  was  dismounted  and  ruined  by  a 200- 
pounder  bolt  striking  it  full  on  the  face. 

I beg  leave  here  to  make  honorable  mention  of  Lieutenant  [F.  C.] 
Lucas  and  a detachment  from  Captain  [T.  B.]  Hayne’s  company, 
Lucas’  battalion,  for  the  gallant  manner  in  which,  under  a fire  of 
great  rapidity  and  almost  unprecedented  precision,  they  repaired  to 
this  piece  and  fought  it  for  the  encouragement  of  some  of  those  to 
whose  charge  it  had  been  committed. 

Many  of  Captain  [W.  H.]  Kennady’s  company  of  Second  Regi- 
ment Artillery  could  not  be  induced  to  man  the  piece.  Those  who 
did  their  duty  were  wearied  by  the  labors  of  the  night  before. 
Under  these  circumstances,  the  officers  and  men  mentioned  repaired 
to  the  gun  and  fought  most  gallantly  until  the  piece  was  dismounted. 
I regret  to  say  that  3 of  this  detachment  were  wounded ; their  names 
will  be  reported. 

After  the  loss  of  the  8-inch  howitzer,  I ordered  efforts  to  be  made 
to  work  the  mortar  in  the  right  bastion  of  the  battery,  which  has 
long  been  silent  on  account  of  its  unserviceable  condition.  I also 
ordered  the  42-pounder  carronade  in  the  salient  to  be  moved  to  the  posi- 
tion formerly  occupied  by  the  8-inch  howitzer,  disabled  some  days 
ago.  Fire  was  opened  from  the  mortar  with  great  effect.  The  work- 
ing parties  and  many  of  the  enemy’s  riflemen  were  driven  from  their 
position.  This  fire,  which  has  been  constantly  kept  up  during  the 
day,  will  be  continued. 

The  42-pounder  carronade  has  not  been  fired,  owing  to  prudential 
motives,  but  will  unite  in  the  fire  to-night. 

Lieutenant  [W.  E.]  Erwin,  with  a detachment  of  Company  K,  First 
Regiment  Artillery,  who  were  in  charge  of  the  10-inch  columbiad, 
volunteered  for  service  of  the  mortar,  and  deserve  praise  for  their 
gallant  services. 

They  also  exhibited  much  coolness  on  yesterday  while  engaging 
the  Ironsides. 

The  enemy’s  battery  above  referred  to  has  replied  constantly  to 
the  mortar,  but  has  accomplished  nothing. 

I deem  it  my  duty  to  say  that  the  efficiency  of  the  battery  is  much 
decreased  by  the  habitual  disregard  or  inability  to  fill  the  requisi- 
tions of  the  chief  of  artillery  and  ordnance  officer. 

The  32-pounder  guns  and  howitzers  are  worthless  at  this  time, 
owing  to  the  want  of  shell  and  shot.  It  would  be  wiser  to  remove 
them,  under  the  circumstances,  and  give  us  smaller  and  less  valuable 
ordnance,  with  a full  supply  of  ordnance  stores,  for  protection  against 
assault.  The  8-inch  shell  guns  will  stand  but  little  service  in  their 
present  condition,  and  are  saved  for  emergencies. 

Exposed  as  we  are  to  almost  continual  firing  from  the  enemy’s 
heaviest  guns,  a mechanic  should  be  frequently  sent  to  inspect  and 


Chap.  XL.] 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 


443 


repair  the  gun  carriages  ; in  no  other  way  can  the  efficiency  of  the 
ordnance  be  maintained. 

The  necessary  repairs  to-night  can  with  difficulty  he  made  in  con- 
sequence of  the  want  of  sand-hags,  which  have  been  repeatedly 
required  for  in  the  last  two  days.  Colonel  Harris,  chief  engineer, 
visited  the  post  last  night  and  approved  the  plan  adopted  for  meet- 
ing the  enemy’s  attempt  at  flanking,  by  sap,  our  rifle-pits.  That  work 
(extremely  important,  in  my  opinion)  cannot  go  on  efficiently  to-night 
on  account  of  the  absence  of  sand-bags.  In  connection  with  this 
work,  my  thanks  are  due  to  Captain  [Edward]  Mallett,  Sixty-first 
North  Carolina,  for  valuable  suggestions  and  superintendence. 

Yesterday  Sergeant  Ehbrenstein,  of  the  same  regiment,  volun- 
teered and  succeeded  in  remounting  a gun  for  which  it  was  thought 
we  would  be  compelled  to  use  a gin,  and  consequently  have  to  wait 
for  night.  He  is  a valuable  man,  and  has  been  ordered  to  report 
temporarily  to  the  engineer  for  duty  with  him. 

Casualties  to-day,  5 wounded  ; 1 killed  is  included  in  to-day’s  re- 
port. He  was  reported  wounded  yesterday  in  the  pits  by  a shell 
from  Simkins,  but  was,  in  fact,  killed. 

The  same  battery  threw  fragments  from  two  of  its  shell  into  this 
fort  again  to-day.  I respectfully  request  that  steps  be  taken  to  stop 
this  thing. 

Effective  strength,  935. 

Respectfully  submitted. 

JOHNSON  HAGOOD, 

Brigadier-  General , Commanding . 

Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Battery  Wagner, 

August  24,  1863. 

Captain:  Owing  to  the  want -of  sand-bags,  of  which  we  are 
much  in  need,  the  repairs  on  the  parapets  have  been  much  retarded. 
The  line  of  rifle-pits  has  been  extended  in  a northwestward  direc- 
tion ; but  this  work  could  not  be  expedited  as  we  wish  in  consequence 
of  absence  of  sand-bags.  The  direction  of  the  line  of  the  rifle-pits 
of  the  enemy  has  been  changed,  making  the  distance  between  the 
two  opposing  lines  greater.  A strong  line  for  our  rifle-pits  is  now 
being  worked  upon  across  a marsh,  which  renders  our  position  much 
stronger ; but  owing  to  absence  of  sand-bags  to  form  bases  as  initial 
points,  the  work  is  attended  with  danger,  and  we  make  slow  progress. 

The  southwest  flank  of  Battery  Wagner  has  been  repaired  along 
the  whole  line,  but  not  perfectly  ; the  plank  revetments  have  been 
braced  and  steps  for  infantry  more  strongly  secured.  A new  plat- 
form has  been  made  for  a 6-pounder  howitzer,  brass,  and  the  gun 
mounted  on  the  land  face.  Coverings  of  loose  sand  have  been  placed 
over  the  bomb-proof  near  headquarters,  which  had  been  weakened 
by  shell  from  the  enemy ; but  not  effectually,  owing  to  the  great 
want  of  sand-bags  and  material  for  transporting  earth;  hand  barrows 
have  been  made,  but  for  want  of  proper  lumber  not  as  many  as  are 
required.  There  exists  great  need  of  timber  for  the  purpose  of  erect- 
ing platforms  or  repairing  injuries. 

The  engineer  department  is  very  much  cramped  by  the  want  of 
carpenters’  tools  and  an  engineer’s  level. 

A ditch  has  been  begun  between  the  line  of  the  enemy’s  pickets 
and  ours. 


[Chap.  XL. 


444  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

Covering  is  needed  upon  the  tops  of  all  the  bomb-proofs,  owing  to 
the  action  of  the  wind  and  shot,  and  unless  sand-bags  are  immediately 
sent  the  delay  will  result  injuriously.  The  fire  of  the  10-inch  mor- 
tar, to  which  allusion  was  made  by  me  on  yesterday,  was  continued 
during  the  night ; fire  was  also  opened  from  the  42-pounder  carronade 
on  salient,  and  was  kept  up  till  morning,  when  the  embrasure  was 
closed  to  mask  the  gun  fronrthe  enemy.  The  mortar  firing  was  con- 
tinued during  the  day.  In  the  afternoon,  fire  was  opened  from  the 
carronade  upon  the  advanced  working  parties  of  the  enemy.  This 
fire  we  had  quickly  to  discontinue  to  save  the  piece  from  being  dis- 
mounted by  the  enemy’s  fire,  which  is  surprisingly  accurate. 

Up  to  3 p.  m.  the  enemy  were  unusually  quiet  to-day;  but  few  of 
his  land  batteries  had  been  used.  Pretty  constant  fire  had  been  kept 
up  upon  the  position  of  our  mortar,  but  without  effect.  The  use  of 
the  mortar  has  tended  greatly  to  annoy  and  retard  the  enemy.  I 
hope  a full  supply  of  10-inch  shell  will  be  kept  here;  we  have*  now 
but  few  left. 

The  sharpshooters  have  been  busily  engaged  on  both  sides  during 
the  day. 

Shortly  after  7 p.  m. , the  picket  for  relief  having  been  but  a short 
time  out,  a rapid  fire  of  small-arms  began.  The  enemy’s  fire  from 
mortars,  which  had  been  incessant  for  several  hours,  the  shells  gen- 
erally falling  in  front  of  or  behind  the  battery,  ceased,  in  a great 
measure,  and,  as  the  fire  of  small-arms  increased  in  rapidity,  abated 
almost  entirely.  The  fight  continued  until  8. 30  p.  m.  Our  position 
was  held  with  indomitable  courage,  and  success  crowned  the  efforts 
of  the  gallant  troops  engaged — the  Sixty-first  North  Carolina  and 
the  Fifty-fourth  Georgia  Regiments.  The  latter  constituted  the  day 
picket  and  had  just  been  re-enforced  by  the  former,  under  the  com- 
mand of  Col.  W.  S.  Devane,  Captain  Mallett  acting  as  major. 

I regret  to  have  to  announce  that  Captain  Roberts,  of  the  Fifty- 
fourth  Georgia  Regiment,  is  reported  mortally  wounded  while  nobly 
discharging  his  duties.  His  loss  is  severe,  alike  to  his  command  and 
country.  Casualties,  5 killed,  19  wounded.  Four  of  these  were 
wounded  by  a shell  from  Mitchel’s  battery.  It  is  proper  to  state, 
however,  that  the  fire  from  this  battery  last  night  was  generally  ac- 
curate and  very  serviceable.  Some  of  the  shells  were  thrown  ex- 
ceedingly wild.  One  that  did  not  explode  I saw  fall  in  the  parade  of 
Battery  Wagner. 

I feel  it  a duty  that  I owe  to  the  service  to  call  the  attention  of  the 
brigadier-general  commanding  to  the  perilous  delay  in  supplying 
Battery  Wagner  with  ordnance  stores  and  with  engineer  materials, 
as  well  as  to  the  miserably  inefficient  transportation  system  in  opera- 
tion. If  Battery  W agner  falls,  it  will  be  largely  due  to  these  causes. 

In  concluding  my  report  of  five  days  and  six  nights  of  almost  in- 
cessant battle  at  this  post,  I must  be  permitted  to  express  my  grate- 
ful thanks  to  my  adjutant,  Captain  Molony ; to  my  aides,  Captain 
Tracy  and  Lieutenant  [B. ] Martin;  to  my  chief  of  artillery,  Major 
Warley;  to  Major  Champneys  (the  engineer  at  the  post  for  the  last 
three  days),  and  to  Captain  Hill,  ordnance  officer,  for  their  efficient 
services  in  their  several  departments.  I was  relieved  at  10  p.  m., 
25th,  by  Colonel  Harrison. 

Respectfully  submitted. 

JOHNSON  HAGOOD, 
Brigadier-  General , Commanding. 

Capt.  W.  F.  Nance,  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Chap.  XL.] 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 
[Indorsement.] 


445 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston,  August  27,  1863. 

Respectfully  referred  for  attention  Col.  D.  B.  Harris,  who  will 
please  return  these  papers. 

By  command  of  General  Beauregard  : 

J E.  KEARNY, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Morris  Island,  August  25,  1863. 

(Received  1 p.  m.) 

Enemy  attacked  our  rifle-pits  in  large  force  and  were  repulsed. 
Our  casualties  are  some  25  killed  and  wounded. 

HAGOOD. 

Captain  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


No.  25. 

Reports  of  Brig.  Gen.  A.  H.  Colquitt,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding 
on  Morris  Island,  July  26-28,  and  August  27 -September  2. 

Morris  Island,  July  26,  1863. 

General  : By  relieving  Colonel  Olmstead’s  command  with  the 
Sixth  Georgia,  the  garrison  will  be  reduced  to  about  1,000.  It  should 
be  increased  to  1,200.  A detachment  from  Captain  De  Pass’  com- 
pany of  artillery  is  ordered  off,  24  men.  Their  place  should  be  filled. 
Can  you  send  a field  officer  of  artillery  to  act  as  chief,  a good  man  ? 
It  will  relieve  us  of  embarrassment  about  rank. 

Respectfully, 

A.  H.  COLQUITT, 

Brigadier-  General. 

General  Ripley, 

Commanding . 


Morris  Island,  July  27,  1863—12.45  a.  m. 
The  enemy  are  at  work.  The  firing  from  Sumter  should  continue, 
and  frequent ; it  is  effective.  Firing  from  Shell  Point  falls  short. 

COLQUITT. 


General. 


Captain  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Morris  Island,  July  27,  1863. 

Captain  : The  enemy  have  been  busily  engaged,  day  and  night, 
upon  works  in  our  front.  This  morning  they  opened  with  two  mor- 
tars, for  twenty  or  thirty  minutes,  their  shells  falling  within  the 
battery.  They  have  been  remarkably  silent,  and  my  impression  is, 
that  they  will  open  the  bombardment  as  soon  as  their  land  batteries 


[Chap.  XL. 


446  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 


are  ready.  With  fire  from  these  and  gunboats,  they  expect  to  crush 
us.  I would  suggest  that  when  they  begin  the  attack,  every  avail- 
able gun  in  our  several  batteries  should  be  opened  upon  them,  and 
efforts  be  particularly  directed  to  keep  the  gunboats  from  having  an 
enfilade  fire.  Though  our  fire  should  do  no  great  damage,  it  will  cre- 
ate agitation  in  our  adversaries  and  prevent  them  from  firing  with 
deliberation.  f 

2d.  While  I shall  hold  out  as  long  as  possible,  it  is  well  to  have 
an  eye  to  the  rear  in  case  of  disaster.  The  embarking  of  troops  at 
Cumming’s  Point  is  a slow  operation.  Everything  necessary  for 
this  purpose  should  be  understood  and  in  readiness,  as  I think  it  will 
be,  so  that,  between  the  blundering  and  delay  of  quartermasters  and 
steamboat  captains,  no  disaster  may  occur.  I should  like  to  have  a 
boat  at  Cumming’s  Point,  manned  for  my  use.  I do  not  think  it  dis- 
creet to  commit  every  communication  to  signals  and  telegraphs,  and 
cannot  be  explicit.  As  it  is  now,  I am  at  a loss  to  know  how  or  by 
whom  this  will  reach  you. 

3d.  The  garrison  is  hard  worked  with  the  present  force ; 1,200 
men  should  be  the  minimum ; 150  are  kept  at  Cumming’s  for  fatigue 
and  other  objects,  and  the  garrison  is  diminished  to  that  extent. 

Pardon  the  liberty  of  making  these  suggestions. 

Respectfully, 


Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


A.  H.  COLQUITT, 

Brigadier-  General. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  July  30,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the  facts 
connected  with  my  command  on  Morris  Island  : 

In  obedience  to  an  order  from  district  headquarters,  I proceeded 
to  the  island  on  the  morning  of  the  26th  of  July,  1863,  and  relieved 
Brigadier-General  Taliaferro,  then  in  command  at  that  place.  The 
day  passed  off  quietly.  Monday  morning  [July  27],  at  daylight, 
the  enemy  commenced  firing  and  threw  about  50  shells  from  their 
mortar  battery  near  Graham’s  house  at  Fort  Wagner.  Fortunately 
no  one  was  hurt.  During  the  day,  a fire  at  intervals  was  kept  up  from 
Sumter  and  Shell  Mound  on  the  enemy  at  work  on  their  batteries  on 
the  island.  The  enemy  replied  occasionally  from  a land  battery, 
directing  their  fire  upon  Shell  Mound.  But  few  shots  were  fired  at 
Wagner.  In  the  evening,  near  3 o’clock,  a communication  from 
General  Beauregard  to  General  Gillmore,  commanding  Federal 
forces,  was  sent  out  under  flag  of  truce  from  Fort  Wagner.  Lieut. 
Col.  A.  T.  Dargan,  Twenty-first  South  Carolina  Volunteers,  was  the 
bearer  of  the  communication  from  our  lines,  and  the  major  of  the 
Ninth  Maine  received  it  on  the  part  of  the  Federals. 

During  the  existence  of  the  flag  of  truce,  a torpedo  in  front  of  our 
works  was  exploded  and  2 men  killed  by  it,  members  of  Captain 
Pringle’s  company  of  artillery.  Everything  was  quiet  during  the 
night.  Tuesday  [July  28]  morning  at  daylight,  the  enemy  opened 
as  usual  with  their  mortars,  and  threw  about  50  shells  at  the  fort,  in- 
juring no  one.  Shots  were  fired  occasionally  during  the  day  from 
Sumter  and  Shell  Mound  on  the  enemy  at  work  on  their  land  batteries. 
Between  10  and  11  o’clock  the  enemy  opened  a brisk  fire  with  their 


i 


Chap.  XL.] 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 


447 


land  batteries  upon  the  fort,  and  two  of  the  monitors  moved  around 
and  commenced  firing  with  15-inch  shell.  The  firing  continued  until 
about  2 o’clock.  We  replied  for  some  time  with  the  10-inch  gun  on 
the  water  face,  which  was  finally  disabled  by  a shot  from  the  enemy. 
No  one  was  hurt  during  this  firing,  and  the  injury  inflicted  upon  the 
fort  was  easily  repaired  during  the  night.  About  12  o’clock  on  Tues- 
day night,  a considerable  body  of  troops  was  discovered  some  distance 
in  front  of  the  enemy’s  works,  and  was  supposed  to  be  a fatigue  party 
sent  out  to  commence  an  advanced  work.  I ordered  the  guns  oil  the 
land  face  of  Fort  Wagner  to  be  opened  upon  them,  and  after  a few 
rounds  the  bands  dispersed,  and  did  not  again  appear.  From  this 
time  until  after  daylight,  the  enemy  kept  up  a brisk  fire  from  their 
mortar  battery,  and  considerably  annoyed  our  fatigue  parties, 
although  their  shells  inflicted  no  serious  injury.  At  daylight  [July 
29],  Brigadier-General  Clingman  arrived  and  relieved  me  of  the  com- 
mand of  the  island.  Just  as  General  Clingman  assumed  command, 
there  were  2 men  killed  by  the  enemy’s  shells,  one  of  the  Sixth  Georgia 
Regiment,  and  the  other  of  the  Eighth  North  Carolina.  Their  names 
I did  not  learn. 

Respectfully, 

A.  H.  COLQUITT, 

Brigadier-  General. 

Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant-General. 


[Morris  Island,  August  29,  1863.] 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of 
operations  during  last  night  and  to-day  : 

The  enemy  remained  very  quiet  during  the  night,  there  being  little 
or  no  firing  from  their  sharpshooters  or  batteries.  They  commenced 
no  new  work,  but  were  engaged  in  strengthening  their  lines  already 
begun.  The  fire  from  our  batteries  on  James  Island  was  irregular, 
sometimes  verv  effective.  The  guns  at  Fort  Wagner  did  good  serv- 
ice, greatly  disturbing  the  enemy  at  tlieir  work.  During  the  day, 
an  irregular  fire  has  been  kept  up  on  both  sides.  The  9-inch  Dahl- 
gren  at  Fort  Gregg  was  dismounted  this  morning  by  a shot  from  the 
enemy’s  land  battery. 

No  serious  damage  has  been  done  at  Fort  Wagner. 

The  disposition  of  troops  is  the  same  as  last  reported,  except  that 
the  Twenty-third  Georgia  is  in  position  at  the  works  in  the  place  of 
the  Fifty-fourth  Georgia,  which  has  been  sent  to  Fort  Gregg  to  be 
in  readiness  to  take  the  boat  for  Fort  Johnson  to-night. 

Inclosed  you  will  find  a report  of  the  casualties  since  last  report.  * 

Lieutenant  Randle,  my  aide-de-camp,  received  this  evening  a 
dangerous  and,  I fear,  fatal  wound.  He  has  been  distinguished  for 
his  coolness  and  gallantry  upon  many  bloody  battle-fields.  I shall 
greatly  lament  his  loss. 

Respectfully  submitted. 

A.  H.  COLQUITT, 

Brigadier-  General. 

Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

• Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


*Not  found. 


448  S.  C.  AND  DA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 


[Chat.  XL. 


[Inclosure.] 


Headquarters  Morris  Island, 

August  29,  1863. 

Report  of  effective  strength  of  forces  : 


Command. 

Commissioned  offi- 

cers. 

Non-commissioned 

officers. 

Privates. 

Total. 

54th  Georgia,  Lieutenant-Colonel  [Morgan]  Rawls 

14 

26 

198 

238 

23d  Georgia,  Major  [M.  R.]  Ballenger 

26 

62 

220 

308 

8th  North  Carolina,  Major  [E.  C.]  Yellowley 

23 

45 

222 

290 

20th  South  Carolina,  Lieutenant-Colonel  [0.  M.]  Dantzler 

24 

39 

244 

307 

Total 

87 

172 

884 

1 143 

Chatham  Artillery,  Lieutenant  [T.  A.]  Askew 

2 

5 

25 

32 

Company  F,  2d  South  Carolina  Artillery,  Captain  [T.  K.]  Legare 

2 

4 

65 

71 

Captain  [S.  Porcher]  Smith 

3 

5 

50 

58 

Total 

n 

14 

140 

161 

Couriers,  5th  South  Carolina  Cavalry,  Sergeant  Huger 

— 

1 

10 

11 

Sharpshooters,  Lieutenant  [J.  E.]  Dugger 

1 

1 

11 

13 

24 

Grand  total 

95 

188 

1,045 

1,328 

Headquarters  Morris  Island,  August  30, 1863. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the 
operations  during  last  night  and  to-day  : 

As  usual,  the  enemy  were  quiet  during  the  night,  and  were  busily 
engaged  in  trying  to  complete  their  works,  in  which  they  were  greatly 
disturbed  by  the  fire  from  Fort  Wagner,  assisted  by  the  batteries  on 
Janies  Island.  They  attempted  to  advance  a sap  on  the  left  of  the 
fort,  but  were  soon  compelled  to  leave  the  work.  During  the  morn- 
ing, there  was  little  firing  o/i  the  part  of  the  enemy  excepting  from 
their  sharpshooters,  who  are  very  vigilant.  This  evening  they 
opened  a brisk  fire  from  their  mortars  on  Fort  Wagner  and  upon 
Fort  Gregg,  with  their  Parrott  guns.  Ho  serious  damage  was  done  to 
the  work,  but  there  were  a good  many  men  wounded  by  their  shells. 

The  firing  from  the  James  Island  batteries  was  sometimes  effect- 
ive ; at  other  times  the  shell  went  over  or  fell  short  of  the  enemy’s 
works.  The  fire  from  Fort  Moultrie  was  well  directed. 

Below  you  will  find  a report  of  the  shots  fired  from  Fort  Wagner. 

The  disposition  of  the  troops  is  as  follows  : 

Thirty-second  Georgia  and  Eighth  North  Carolina,  around  the 
works  at  Wagner;  Twentieth  South  Carolina  and  Twenty- third 
Georgia  in  reserve  and  along  the  sand-hills  in  readiness  to  be  relieved. 

Early  this  morning,  the  enemy  kept  up  a brisk  fire  for  about  an 
hour  upon  Fort  Sumter  with  their  heavy  guns. 

Respectfully  submitted. 

A.  H.  COLQUITT, 

Brigadier-  General. 

Capt.  W.  F.  Nance,  Assistant  Adjutant- Genedl. 

P.  S. — Four  or  5 men  slightly  wounded  at  Fort  Gregg  this  evening, 
whose  names  we  have  not  learned;  they  belonged  to  the  Thirty-sec- 
ond Georgia. 


Chap  XL.]  OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C.  449 

[Inclosure  No.  1.] 

Report  of  shots  fired  from  Fort  Wagner. 

Spherical  case,  99  ; canister  53 — 12-pounder  howitzer. 

Shell,  27  ; canister,  1 ; grape,  1— 32-pounder  smooth-bore. 

Shell,  20—32-pounder  smooth-bore. 

[Inclosure  No.  2.] 

Report  of  effective  strength  of  command. 


Command. 

Commissioned  offi- 

cers. 

Non-commissioned 

officers. 

Privates. 

Total. 

32d  Georgia,  Lieutenant-Colonel  [W.  H.]  Pruden 

20 

50 

375 

445 

23d  Georgia,  Major  Ballenger 

28 

67 

220 

315 

20th  South  Carolina,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Dantzler 

21 

31 

230 

282 

8th  North  Carolina,  Major  Yellowley 

23 

44 

220 

287 

Total  

92 

192 

1,045 

1,329 

Chatham  Artillery,  Lieutenant  Askew 

1 

5 

25 

31 

Company  F,  2d  South  Carolina  Artillery,  Captain  Legare 

2 

4 

60 

66 

Captain  [S.  Porcher]  Smith’s  company  of  artillery 

2 

5 

48 

55 

Total  

5 

14 

133 

152 

Couriers  Sergeant  Huger  

1 

9 

10 

Sharpshooters,  Lieutenant  [W.  D.]  Woodbery 

1 

2 

15 

18 

Total 

1 

3 

24 

28 

Grand  total 

98 

219 

1,202 

1,519 

[Inclosure  No.  3.] 

Battery  Wagner,  August  30,  1863. 

Brigadier-General  Colquitt, 

Commanding  Post: 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  report  the  following  casualties 
of  this  instant  : 


RECAPITULATION. 


Officers  and  men. 


Officers  

Enlisted  men 

Total  .. 


Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JAMES  D.  MORGAN, 
Senior  Surgeon  of  Post. 


29  R R VOL  XXVIII,  PT  I 


[Chap.  XL. 


450  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

Headquarters  Morris  Island, 

August  31,  1863. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  make  the  following  report  of  oper- 
ations during  the  last  twenty-four  hours  : 

Last  night  the  enemy  were  again  busily  engaged,  in  spite  of  a heavy 
fire  from  us,  in  strengthening  their  works.  So  far  as  can  be  seen,  no 
new  works  were  commenced  hear  the  fort.  Their  sharpshooters  were 
active  part  of  the  night  and  they  replied  to  our  fire  regularly  with 
their  mortars. 

The  fire  from  the  guns  at  Fort  Wagner  was  effective  and  was  kept 
up  all  the  night. 

The  batteries  on  James  Island  threw  so  many  of  their  shells  over 
the  fort  that  I telegraphed  them  to  cease  firing. 

This  morning  they  (batteries  on  James  Island)  commenced  firing 
again,  and  killed  2 men  in  Fort  Wagner.  Things  were  quiet  during 
the  morning  ; only  occasional  shots  from  the  enemy’s  batteries,  and 
a brisk  fire  from  their  sharpshooters.  This  evening,  about  3.30 
o’clock,  four  monitors  moved  up  and  commenced  firing  at  Fort  Gregg, 
Sullivan’s  Island,  and  the  wreck  of  the  boat  Sumter.  The  guns  at 
Fort  Gregg  replied,  firing  about  40  shots,  some  of  which  were  seen 
to  take  effect  upon  the  monitors. 

The  batteries  on  Sullivan’s  Island  assisted  in  the  fight. 

No  damage  reported  at  Fort  Gregg. 

Captain  Smith,  commanding  at  Fort  Gregg,  reports  that  the 
steamer  Sumter  left  that  post  at  about  2 o’clock  this  morning,  loaded 
with  troops : Twentieth  South  Carolina,  Twenty-third  Georgia,  and 
Captain  Mathewes’  artillery  company.  A very  few  moments  after, 
the  batteries  on  Sullivan’s  Island  opened  fire  on  her.  He  imme- 
diately caused  a dispatch  to  be  sent  to  Colonel  Butler,  informing  him 
that  it  was  the  Sumter,  and  also  one  to  yourself,  stating  that  the 
steamer  was  in  great  danger,  and  asking  for  a steamer  to  assist. 
The  steamer  was  subjected  to  a tremendous  fire,  and  is  now  a wreck 
near  Sullivan’s  Island.  I have  not  been  able  to  get  a very  definite 
account  of  the  amount  of  loss  sustained  by  the  troops  on  board. 

The  Thirty-second  Georgia  and  Eighth  North  Carolina  Regiments 
occupy  the  works  at  Fort  W agner.  The  Twenty-seventh  and  Twenty- 
eighth  Georgia  Regiments  came  in  last  night,  and  are  in  reserve. 

The  mortar  at  Fort  Gregg  could  not  be  brought  down  and  mounted 
for  want  of  a bed;  two  have  been  sent  over,  neither  of  which  could 
be  used.  We  are  waiting  for  another. 

Respectfully  submitted. 

A.  H.  COLQUITT, 

Brigadier-  General. 

Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


[Inclosure  No.  1.] 

Number  of  shots  fired  from  Fort  Wagnel*  in  last  twenty-four 
hours  : 

Ten-inch  mortar,  40  shells ; 10-inch  columbiad,  4 shells  fired  at 
the  monitors  ; 8-inch  sea-coast  howitzer,  30  shells  and  8 grape  ; 32- 
pounder  smooth-bore,  19  shells,  1 grape,  1 canister  ; 12-pounder  how^ 
iteer,  brass,  6$  spherical  case?  44  shells,  8 canister, 


Chap.  XL.]  OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C.  451 

[Inclosure  No.  2.] 

Report  of  effective  strength  of  command. 


Command. 

• 

Commissioned  offi- 

cers. 

N on-commissioned 

officers. 

Privates. 

Total. 

32d  Georgia,  Lieutenant- Colonel  Pruden 

8th  North  Carolina,  Lieutenant-Colonel  [J.  M.]  Whitson 

26 

48 

370 

4:34 

22 

42 

223 

287 

28th  Georgia,  Captain  [W.  P.]  Crawford 

24 

58 

146 

228 

27th  Georgia,  Major  [James]  Gardner 

27 

. 42 

155 

224 

Totcil  

99 

190 

894 

1,183 

Captain  Smith’s  company  of  artillery 

Company  F,  Second  South  Carolina  Artillery,  Captain  Legare 

Chatham  Artillery,  Lieutenant  Askew 

2 

5 

45 

52 

2 

4 

57 

63 

1 

5 

23 

29 

Company  E,  Palmetto  Battalion,  Light  Artillery,  Captain  [J.  D.]  John- 

1 

10 

40 

51 

Total  

6 

24 

165 

195 

Couriers,  Sergeant  Huger 

1 

9 

10 

Sharpshooters,  Lieutenant  Woodbery 

1 

2 

13 

16 

Total 

1 

3 

22 

26 

Grand  total 

106 

217 

1,081 

1,404 

Headquarters  Morris  Island, 

• September  1,  1863. 

Captain  : The  enemy  were  quiet  again  last  night  and  busily  en 
gaged  on  their  works.  Under  cover  of  the  darkness,  they  succeeded 
in  advancing  their  lines  a short  distance.  A brisk  fire  was  kept  up 
from  Wagner  all  night  upon  the  front  of  the  works,  where  the  enemy 
were  engaged.  At  daylight,  the  enemy  opened  fire  upon  Wagner 
with  their  mortars,  and  have  been  keeping  up  a fire  at  intervals  dur- 
ing the  day. 

They  also  commenced  fire  on  Sumter  with  their  heavy  land  bat- 
teries, which  was  continued  until  this  evening.  The  chief  of  artil- 
lery reports  that  the  32-pounder  howitzer  in  the  salient  is  still  dis- 
abled. 

Wheels  were  sent  over  for  the  carriage,  but  unfortunately  did  not 
fit.  More  wheels  should  be  sent  immediately,  as  the  gun  is  a very 
important  one.  The  two  8-inch  shell  guns  on  the  land  face  are  also 
partially  disabled.  From  the  guns  and  howitzers,  203  shots  were  fired 
in  the  last  twenty-four  hours,  and  from  the  mortars,  61  shells. 

The  disposition  of  the  troops  is  the  same  as  in  last  report. 

Respectfully  submitted. 

A.  H.  COLQUITT, 

Brigadier - General. 

Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


452  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

[Inclosure.] 

Report  of  effective  strength  of  command. 


Command. 

t 

r 

Commissioned  offi- 

cers. 

N on-  qpmmissioned 

officers. 

Privates. 

Total. 

32d  Georgia,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Pruden 

26 

48 

369 

443 

8th  North  Carolina,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Whitson 

22 

41 

320 

383 

28th  Georgia,  Captain  Crawford 

24 

58 

144 

226 

27th  Georgia,  Major  Gardner 

27 

42 

150 

219 

Total 

99 

189 

983 

1,271 

Captain  Smith’s  company  of  artillery 

2 

4 

50 

56 

Company  F,  Second  South  Carolina  Artillery,  Captain  Legare 

2 

4 

57 

63 

Chatham  Artillery,  Lieutenant  Askew 

1 

5 

23 

29 

Captain  Johnson’s  company  of  artillery 

1 

10 

40 

51 

Total 

6 

23 

170 

199 

Couriers,  Sergeant  Huger 

1 

9 

10 

Sharpshooters,  Lieutenant  Woodbery 

1 

2 

13 

16 

Total 

1 

3 

22 

26 

Grand  total 

106 

215 

1,175 

1,496 

Headquarters  Morris  Island, 

September  2,  1863. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  report  the  following  operations  dur- 
ing the  last  twenty-four  hours  : 

The  enemy  fired  upon  Wagner  occasionally  last  night  with  their 
mortar  batteries,  and  were  busy  working  on  their  lines  in  front  of 
Fort  Wagner.  They  strengthened  their  advanced  line,  which  is  now 
a strong  work,  and  reaches  within  80  or  100  yards  of  the  salient. 
Our  batteries  kept  up  a brisk  fire,  to  impede  their  progress  as  much 
as  possible.  Owing  to  the  great  difficulty  in  obtaining  supplies  of 
ammunition  from  the  city,  we  were  compelled  to  slacken  our  fire. 
About  11.30  o’clock  in  the  night,  six  monitors  and  the  Ironsides 
moved  around  and  commenced  fire  upon  Sumter,  throwing  a few 
shots  at  Fort  Gregg.  Some  of  the  monitors  approached  within  800 
yards  of  Sumter.  The  batteries  on  Sullivan’s  Island  and  the  guns 
at  Gregg  returned  fire,  but  with  what  effect  we  could  not  tell.  The 
engagement  was  kept  up  until  daylight,  when  the  fleet  moved  off. 
Only  a part  of  three  companies  of  the  Eutaw  Regiment  succeeded 
in  landing  at  Fort  Gregg  last  night.  A detachment  of  artillerists 
and  the  relief  of  couriers  have  also  arrived.  The  other  troops  or- 
dered to  the  island  were  prevented  from  landing  by  the  firing  of  the 
monitors. 

The  Eighth  North  Carolina  and  Thirty-second  Georgia  Regiments 
occupy  the  works  at  Wagner.  The  Twenty-seventh  Georgia  is  on 
the  beach,  and  the  Twenty-eighth  Georgia  and  the  detachment  of 
the  Eutaw  Regiment  are  in  reserve.  Chief  of  artillery  reports  182 
shots  fired  since  last  report. 

Respectfully  submitted. 

A.  H.  COLQUITT. 


Chap.  XL.] 


OPERATION S ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 


453 


Wagner,  11  p.  m. 

Colonel  Keitt  has  arrived  and  relieved  me  of  the  command  of 
Morris  Island. 

A.  H.  COLQUITT, 

Brigadier-  General . 

Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

[Inclosure.] 

Report  of  effective  strength  of  command. 


Command. 

Commissioned  offi- 

cers. 

N on-commissioned 

officers. 

Privates. 

Total. 

32d  Georgia,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Pruden 

26 

48 

360 

434 

8th  North  Carolina,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Whitson 

22 

40 

300 

362 

28th  Georgia,  Captain  Crawford 

23 

57 

133 

213 

27th  Georgia,  Major  Gardner 

27 

42 

145 

214 

Eutaw  Regiment,  Lieutenant-Colonel  [J.  G.]  Pressley 

8 

14 

81 

103 

Total  

106 

201 

1,019 

1,326 

Captain  Smith’s  company  of  artillery 

2 

4 

50 

56 

Company  F,  Second  South  Carolina  Artillery,  Captain  Legare 

2 

4 

55 

61 

Chatham  Artillery,  Lieutenant  Askew 

1 

5 

23 

29 

Company  E,  Palmetto  Battalion,  Captain  Johnson 

1 

10 

38 

49 

Total  

6 

23 

166 

195 

Courier,  Sergeant  Huger 

2 

18 

20 

Sharpshooters,  Lieutenant  Woodbery 

1 

2 

22 

25 

Total 

1 

4 

40 

45 

Grand  total  . . .- 

113 

228 

1,225 

17566 

No.  26. 

Reports  of  Col.  Lawrence  M.  Keitt,  Twentieth  South  Carolina  In- 
fantry, commanding  on  Morris  Island,  August  1-6,  15-21,  and  Sep- 
tember 2-7. 

Sullivan’s  Island, 

July  11,  1863 — 9.10  p.  m. 

Captain  : I have  just  returned  from  Morris  Island.  The  enemy, 
I think,  will  use  mortars,  and  there  is  no  sufficient  protection.  I 
would  suggest  bomb-proofs,  at  once,  and  a -few  heavy  guns  on  sea 
face  to  keep  off  wooden  ships ; light  artillery  on  land  face  to  repel  as- 
sault. Heavy  guns  would  probably  be  dismounted.  A few  mortars, 
large  numbers  of  sand-bags,  and  some  re-enforcements  will  make  it 
safe.  * 

Respectfully, 

LAWRENCE  M.  KEITT, 

Colonel,  Commanding. 


Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


454  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 


[Chap.  XL. 


Sullivan’s  Island,  July  15,  1863. 
Captain  : The  following  dispatch  has  just  been  sent  from  the 
enemy’s  fleet : 

General  Gillmore  : 

General:  Will  you  begin  to-morrow,  as  you  intended,  and  at  what  time  will 
you  begin  firing,  and  when  will  the  assault  be  made  ? I wish  the  vessels  to  open 
fire  as  soon  as  the  batteries.  Please  answer  immediately,  as  I wish  to  complete  my 
arrangements. 

D.  [DAHLGREN.] 

This  is  reliable  and  we  could  not  get  answer  from  Gillmore. 

LAWRENCE  M.  KEITT, 

Colonel. 

Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant-General. 


Sullivan’s  Island,  July  18,  1863. 

“ Colonel  Rhett: 

“The  following  message  has  just  been  intercepted  from  the  enemy, 
to  wit : 

An  assault  is  ordered  at  dusk.  Husband  your  ammunition  so  as  to  deliver  a 
rapid  fire  the  last  half  hour. 

“TURNER.” 

LAWRENCE  M.  KEITT. 

(Repeated  by  Maj.  0.  Blanding  to  Captain  Nance.) 


Headquarters  Battery  Wagner, 

August  1,  1863 — 6 p.  m. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  on  my  arrival  this  morn- 
ing * I found  the  following  garrison  at  this  battery  : 


Infantry : 

54th  Georgia,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Rawls,  present,  about 388 

51st  North  Carolina,  Colonel  [Hector]  McKethan,  present,  about 474 

20th  South  Carolina,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Dantzler,  present,  about 460 

19th  Georgia,  Colonel  [A.  J.]  Hutchins,  present,  about - 260 

Artillery  : 

Company  A,  Second  South  Carolina,  Capt.  W.  M.  Hunter 70 

Company  E,  Charleston  Battalion,  Captain  [F.  T.]  Miles 46 

Detachment  Chatham  Artillery,  Lieut.  T.  A.  Askew 29 

Detachment  Company  C,  Siege  Train,  Capt.  Thomas  E.  Gregg 26 


Total 1,753 


These  numbers  are  approximative,  and  about  150  are  more  or  less 
sick. 

The  Fifty-fourth  Georgia  was  stationed  to-day  in  the  sand-hills,  in 
reserve,  and  is  in  readiness  to  leave  on  the  arrival  of  the  Charleston 
Battalion,  which  will  furnish  labor  at  Cumming’s  Point  and  guard 
the  beach  to-night.  The  Nineteenth  Georgia  furnishes  the  picket 
and  reserve  in  the  fort  to-night,  and  the  Fifty-first  North  Carolina 

*When,  according  to  Ripley’s  report  of  August  2 (p.  384),  he  relieved  Clingman 
in  command. 


455 


Chap.  XL.]  OPERATION’S  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 

and  Twentieth  South.  Carolina  man  the  lines  and  furnish  engineer 
and  ordnance  fatigues.  (Two  companies  of  Nineteenth  Georgia  are  on 
James  Island.) 

Shelling  began  about  8.30  a.  m.,  and  lasted,  say,  half  an  hour, 
doing  no  harm  save  a slight  injury  to  the  front  transom  of  the  8-inch 
shell  gun,  which  can  still  be  used. 

At  10.45  a.  m.  Private  [Malcolm]  Galbraith,  Company  D,  Fifty- 
first  North  Carolina,  was  slightly  wounded  in  side  and  knee  by  sharp- 
shooters of  the  enemy.  Private  [William  F.]  Rowe,  Company  A, 
Fifty-first  North  Carolina,  was  slightly  wounded  by  mortar  shell, 
early  this  morning,  before  my  arrival. 

At  a quarter  before  1 p.  m.  the  enemy  opened  fire  with  large  Par- 
rott gun  from  a small  wooden  gunboat  1 to  li  miles  off,  and  kept  it 
up  slowly  till  about  4.30  p.  m.,  without  injury.  All  is  now  quiet. 

The  men  were  sent  to  the  bomb-proofs  about  8.30  a.  m.,  a portion 
being  allotted  to  each  regiment.  It  is,  however,  very  difficult  to 
protect  them.  Most  of  the  Twentieth  South  Carolina  had  to  be  sent 
to  the  sand-hills,  with  the  Fifty-fourth  Georgia,  and  scattered  about 
the  fort. 

Please  send  down  some  writing  paper,  and  at  least  six  lanterns  for 
the  bomb-proofs. 

The  columbiad  carriages  are  reported  as  altered,  and  likely  to  fit. 
Every  effort  will  be  made  to  get  the  guns  up  to-night. 

The  enemy  are  strengthening  heavily  their  works  in  our  front. 

LAWRENCE  M.  KEITT, 

Colonel , Commanding. 

Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

[Indorsements.] 

Hdqrs.  1st  Mil.  Dist.,  Dept,  of  S.  C.,  Ga.,  and  Fla., 

Charleston,  August  2,  1863. 

Respectfully  forwarded.  The  increase  of  the  garrison  at  Battery 
Wagner  as  represented  in  the  within  report  was  purely  accidental, 
and  will  be  reduced  to  the  maximum  of  1,200  men  to-night. 

R.  S.  RIPLEY, 

Brigadier-General,  Commanding. 

Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston,  August  2,  1863. 

The  commanding  general  desires  a copy  of  this  excellent  report 
to  be  furnished  to  the  commander  of  Morris  Island,  with  orders  to 
furnish  one  of  similar  character  and  tenor  daily. 

THOMAS  JORDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff. 

Headquarters  Battery  Wagner, 

August  2,  1863 — 2 p.  m. 

Captain  : I had  the  honor  yesterday  to  report  affairs  up  to  6 p. 
The  early  evening  was  quiet.  Details  were  made  early.  The  ei 
had  made  one  large  hole  in  the  south  end  of  the  bomb-proof 
torn  the  land  parapet  somewhat,  which  was  repaired  by  1 a.  m 
the  2d.  Col.  J.  A.  Yates  was  supplied  with  250  men,  and,  on  thearri 
of  the  Charleston  Battalion,  fresh  men  were  detailed  from  it  for  him. 


456 


S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 


[Chap.  XL. 


About  9 p.  m.  or  sooner,  the  enemy  sent  up  a signal  rocket  from 
the  marsh  or  creek  far  to  our  right,  and  immediately  opened  fire  on 
steamer  Chesterfield  at  Cumming’s  Point,  just  landing  the  Charleston 
Battalion,  and  shortly  two  monitors,  and  perhaps  a gunboat,  opened 
fire  in  the  same  direction.  The  result  was  that  the  steamer’s  crew 
carried  her  off  precipitately,  leaving  the  captain  on  shore,  and  leav- 
ing the  Fifty-fourth  Georgia^which  should  have  been  taken. 

I hear  of  no  injury  to  the  steamer,  and  no  casualty  occurred  at  Cum- 
ming’s Point,  though  the  enemy  had  the  range  well,  and  fired  their 
Parrott  guns  rapidly.  Their  fire  lasted  upward  of  an  hour  and  a 
half,  and  distracted  our  working  parties;  many  shots  being  also  fired 
at  Battery  Wagner. 

By  2 o’clock  this  morning,  the  10-inch  columbiad  was  remounted 
and  the  chassis  and  carriage  for  another  columbiad  placed  in  position. 
The  columbiad  also  was,  with  much  effort,  dragged  up  to  the  parapet, 
and  there  masked  with  sand-bags,  Colonel  Yates  deeming  it  imprac- 
ticable to  mount  it  before  daylight.  He  ceased  work  at  2 a.m.,  and 
said  it  was  necessary  to  return  the  portion  of  Fort  Sumter  garrison 
with  him.  He  asked  for  100  men  at  dark  to-night,  who  will  be 
taken  from  the  Charleston  Battalion. 

The  enemy  opened  with  mortars  at  4.30  a.  m.  to-day,  but  soon 
ceased.  Police  and  engineer  parties  were  formed,  but  the  enemy 
opened  a slow  fire  from  the  land,  about  8 a.  m. , which  soon  suspended 
working.  Our  sharpshooters  being  re-enforced  by  7 men  from  the 
Charleston  Battalion,  provoked  a sharp  return  from  the  enemy’s, 
and  Minie  balls  have  been  whizzing  all  about.  Our  sharpshooters 
claim  to  have  shot  down  two  of  the  enemy’s.  Between  11.30  and  12 
o’clock  Maj.  F.  F.  Warley,  by  my  order,  opened  on  the  enemy’s  near 
battery  and  sharpshooters,  with  three  8-inch  shell  guns ; one  siege 
howitzer ; one  sea-coast  howitzer  and  one  8-inch  shell  gun,  and  on 
their  palisade,  with  a 32-pounder  (shot).  Our  shell  burst  well,  and  the 
men  stood  gallantly  to  their  guns,  but  the  enemy  gave  at  least  two 
shots  to  our  one,  striking  our  embrasures,  &c.,  resulting  in  a contu- 
sion on  the  thigh  of  Private  [O.  H.]  Kingman,  Company  E,  Charles- 
ton Battalion.  I ceased  our  fire  in  thirty  or  forty  minutes,  and  soon 
the  enemy  slackened  their  rapid  fire,  but  still  fired  often.  A good 
many  shots  were  thrown  from  a gunboat,  which  has  now  ceased. 

Private  [Simeon  B.]  Edge,  Company  D,  Fifty-first  North  Caro- 
lina, has  just  been  brought  in,  with  left  knee  torn  by  a shell,  and 
amputation  is  in  progress. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

LAWRENCE  M.  KEITT, 

Colonel,  Commanding. 


Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


P.  S. — It  is  very  difficult  to  shelter  the  large  garrison  here. 


Headquarters  Battery  Wagner, 

August  2,  1863 — 11  p.  m. 

Captain  : Since  writing  to  you  at  2 p.  m.,  when  the  shelling  was 
slowly  progressing,  numerous  injuries  were  occasioned  by  bursting 
of  two  large  shell  from  land  batteries.  Just  before  3 o’clock,  one 


Chap.  XL.] 


OPERATION S ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 


457 


burst  in  gun-chamber  on  sea  face  occupied  by  Lieut.  J.  T.  Willis,  of 
Company  A,  Second  South  Carolina  Artillery,  wounding  him  and  6 
men  slightly.  Another  burst  in  the  commissary  house  in  rear,  where 
several  men  had  imprudently  collected,  killing  1 and  wounding  6 or  7. 

Inclosed  is  surgeon’s  list.  * The  shelling  stopped  toward  sunset, 
and  our  repairs  and  ordnance  details  have  been  going  on.  The  Fifty- 
fourth  Georgia  and  best  part  of  Fifty-first  North  Carolina  went  in 
the  steamer  to-night. 

Damage  to  battery  has  been  comparatively  small,  but  new  pro- 
tections are  required. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

LAWRENCE  M.  KEITT, 

Colonel , Commanding. 


Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  Battery  Wagner, 

August  3,  1863 — 11  a.  m. 

Captain  : I beg  leave  to  correct  an  error  in  my  report  of  last  night 
in  regard  to  the  casualties  of  the  day.  Private  G.  McMillan,  Com- 
pany D,  Fifty-first  North  Carolina,  was  wounded  early  in  the  after- 
noon by  the  same  shell  which  crushed  the  left  knee  of  Private  Edge, 
Company  D,  Fifty-first  North  Carolina.  This  regiment  was  sta- 
tioned under  the  shelter  of  the  parapet  on  the  right  of  the  land  front. 
Toward  4 p.  m.  the  firing  appeared  to  have  ceased,  and  a feeling  of 
false  security  induced  a squad  of  men  to  gather  in  the  shade  of  the 
old  commissary  building,  when  a gunboat  fired  twice  in  quick  suc- 
cession, and  one  shell,  thought  to  be  an  8-inch  Parrott,  struck  the 
uprights  and  burst,  scattering  splinters,  resulting  in  the  instant  death 
of  Private  C.  McLean,  Company  K,  Nineteenth  Georgia,  shattering 
the  right  foot  of  John  Raney,  Company  K,  Nineteenth  Georgia,  in- 
flicting severe  cuts  on  Private  Williams,  Company  B,  Charleston 
Battalion,  and  wounding,  more  or  less  slightly,  the  following : 

Lieut.  J.  R.  Elliott,  Company  G,  Nineteenth  Georgia;  Lieut.  J. 
T.  Willis,  Company  A,  Second  South  Carolina  Artillery;  Private 
J.  F.  Knight,  Company  — , Twenty-first  South  Carolina  Regiment ; 
Private  J.  M.  Taylor,  Company  K,  Nineteenth  Georgia;  Private 
J.  A.  Nix,  Company  K,  Nineteenth  Georgia,  and  Privates  [J.  R.J 
Hutson,  [H.  D.]  Lee,  [John]  Hart,  [J.  J.]  Tyler,  [ J.  R.]  Roby,  and 
[J.  E.]  Jowers,  of  Company  A,  Second  South  Carolina  Artillery — 
say,  1 killed  and  13  wounded.  Of  these,  Privates  Jowers  and  Hart, 
Second  South  Carolina  Artillery,  have  been  since  returned  to  duty, 
and  also  Private  Nix,  of  Nineteenth  Georgia — 3. 

Chief  Surgeon  [A.  S.]  Salley  was  about  this  time  relieved,  and 
Surgeon  [Samuel  B.]  Morisey  waiving  rank,  Surgeon  [S.  P.  ] John- 
son, of  Nineteenth  Georgia,  became  chief  surgeon,  and  has  proved 
very  efficient.  Under  his  care,  the  hospital  is  much  improved,  and 
requisition  made  for  many  articles  required.  There  has  been  a 
painful  deficiency  of  almost  every  convenience. 

Last  night,  the  Fifty-fourth  Georgia  left  and  also  most  of  the 
Fifty -first  North  Carolina  Regiment.  Colonel  McKethan,  Fifty-first 
North  Carolina,  was  instructed  to  leave  200  men,  say  100  forefront 


* Not  found. 


458  S.  C.  *AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

picket  and  100  for  fatigue  duty,  at  Cumming’s  Point.  The  picket 
101  was  duly  sent  out,  under  Major  McDonald,  but  Colonel  Mc- 
Kethan  left  only  36  men  at  Cumming’s  Point  for  the  fatigue.  There 
was  some  bungling  about  sthis,  which  deranged  my  plans  to  that 
extent. 

The  Twentieth  South  Carolina  manned  the  sea  face  and  left  of 
land  face.  The  Nineteenth  Georgia  manned  right  of  land  face. 
These  two  commands  supplied  the  engineer,  Lieutenant  [R.  M.j 
Stiles,  with  a detail  of  150  men  from  dark  till  2 a.  m.  Damages  were 
repaired,  and  the  traverse  in  parade  worked  upon. 

Lieutenant-Colonel  Gaillard,  commanding  Charleston  Battalion, 
kept  one  company  at  Cumming’s  Point,  one  company  in  the  sand- 
hills, and  furnished  three  companies  to  Captain  Harleston,  to  move 
the  new  10-inch  gun  to  its  proper  chamber  and  mount  it.  Captain 
Harleston  got  the  gun  mounted  before  1 a.  m.  to-day,  secured  the 
gin  and  left.  All  seemed  well  with  the  two  columbiads  up,  but  the 
artillery  officers  found  one  defect  after  another  in  the  ordnance,  and 
kept  at  work  until  full  daylight.  This  was  very  disheartening,  as 
being  a matter  of  frequent  recurrence.  The  artillery  got  the  old 
columbiad  in  order  by  daylight,  but  the  new  columbiad  had  truck 
handspikes  which  did  not  fit  the  axles,  no  pawl,  and  a wretched 
vent  about  half  the  size  of  a friction  tube.  In  addition,  the  chassis 
could  not  be  traversed.  The  handspikes  were  exchanged  at  Fort 
Sumter,  a pawl  taken  from  a disabled  carriage,  and  the  vent  bored 
out  with  a gimlet.  The  carriage  does  not  yet  traverse,  but  that  can 
probably  be  fixed  by  or  before  night-time.  I have  not  been  disturbed 
by  the  fire  of  the  enemy,  excepting  the  sharpshooters,  since  last  even- 
ing. My  columbiads  are  well  masked.  This  morning  the  Nineteenth 
Georgia  was  stationed  in  the  sand-hills,  sending  a fatigue  party  of 
50  men  to  report  to  Captain  [C.  W.]  Parker,  First  South  Carolina 
Artillery,  commanding  at  Cumming’s  Point. 

The  Charleston  Battalion  has  been  ordered  into  Battery  Wagner, 
and  will  furnish  the  picket  for  to-night.  Our  sharpshooters  knocked 
off  a mounted  man  of  the  enemy  this  morning.  I send  you,  by  the 
first  opportunity,  a lot  of  various  muskets  and  rifles  picked  up  lying 
loose  in  this  battery.  All  require  cleaning  and  some  repairs.  Please 
send  plenty  of  fresh  water  and  no  fresh  meat. 

Very  respectfully, 

LAWRENCE  M.  KEITT, 

Colonel,  Commanding. 

Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

[P.  S.] — Captain  Gregg’s  and  Lieutenant  Askew’s  artillery  de- 
tachments expect  relief. 


Headquarters  Battery  Wagner, 

August  4,  1863 — 12  m. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  the  progress  of  affairs  at  this  post 
up  to  7 p.  m.  yesterday. 

The  remainder  of  the  Fifty-first  North  Carolina  Regiment  was 
sent  off.  The  Twenty-first  South  Carolina,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Dar- 
gan  commanding,  reported  for  duty  before  9 p.  m.,  and  soon  after, 
Major  Pringle,  assistant  quartermaster,  reported  in  person  that  he 
was  prepared  to  move  the  Twentieth  Regiment  South  Carolina 


Chap.  XL.] 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 


459 


Volunteers  in  small  boats.  Six  companies  of  that  regiment  were 
sent  off.  Lieutenant-Colonel  Dantzler,  whose  services  have  been 
extremely  valuable,  remained  with  the  four  companies,  most  of 
whom  were  on  guard.  The  Charleston  Battalion  held  the  right 
front.  The  Twenty-first  South  Carolina  Regiment,  relieving  the 
Twentieth  Regiment,  manned  the  left. 

The  usual  engineer  detail  of  150  men  were  supplied  to  Lieutenant 
Stiles,  changed  at  midnight,  and  worked  until  nearly  4 a.  m.  The 
Nineteenth  Georgia  furnished  engineer  detail  of  100,  and  full  guard 
for  Cumming’s  Point,  and  picketed  the  sand-hills.  Soon  after  the 
steamer  touched  at  Cumming’s  Point,  about  8 p.  m. , a rocket  was 
sent  up  by  the  enemy,  probably  from  a boat  in  one  of  the  creeks  to 
the  right  and  rear  of  Battery  W agner. 

The  enemy’s  land  batteries  immediately  opened  fire  on  Cumming’s 
Point,  when  the  steamer  left  hurriedly.  Soon  after  the  firing,  Gen- 
eral Beauregard  and  staff  visited  this  battery  and  made  a partial  in- 
spection. In  accordance  with  orders  from  district  headquarters,  the 
32-pounder  on  sea  face  was  dismounted  by  Captain  Chichester  early 
in  the  evening,  but  finding  that  no  gun  had  arrived  at  Cumming’s 
Point,  I had  it  remounted  soon  after  midnight.  Lieutenant  Mazyck, 
ordnance  officer,  had  a detail  working  until  near  daylight  at  new 
•columbiad,  and  was  zealously  assisted  by  the  gun  detachment  under 
Captain  Miles,  Company  E,  Charleston  Battalion. 

The  mortar  battery  at  Shell  Point  overshot  Morris  Island  on  the 
last  part  of  the  night. 

The  early  part  of  this  morning  passed  quietly,  and  the  police  of 
the  battery  was  still  more  improved.  Just  before  9 a.  m.,  one  of  the 
enemy’s  land  batteries  exchanged  shots  with  Battery  Gregg.  About 
10.15  a.  m.,  one  monitor,  and  soon  after  one  gunboat,  also  opened  fire 
on  Battery  Gregg  and  the  sand-hills  in  front,  and  kept  it  up  until  soon 
after  11  a.  m.  This  monitor  approached  within  a distance  estimated 
from  about  1,100  to  1,400  yards.  At  11  a.  m.,  Major  Warley,  chief 
of  artillery,  reported  his  columbiads  ready  to  open  fire.  I had  just 
given  the  order  to  unmask  them,  when  Lieutenant  Mazyck,  ordnance 
officer,  suggested,  through  Major  Bryan,  assistant  adjutant-general, 
that  the  Yates  traversing  apparatus  on  new  columbiad  was  incom- 
plete, and  it  was  important  to  gain  time  and  put  it  in  thorough  order. 
I therefore  countermanded  the  order  to  open  fire,  and  the  monitor 
soon  hauled  off.  The  traverse  circle  of  new  columbiad  was  never 
laid  level  and  should  be  properly  adjusted  by  competent  workmen. 
There  are  no  adequate  means  of  doing  so  here. 

I desire  to  record  the  valuable  services  of  Privates  J.  M.  Leathe  and 
John  H.  Bond,  of  Captain  Chichester’s  company,  who  have  con- 
ducted, as  acting  sergeants,  the  practical  operations  of  the  commis- 
sary department  at  this  battery.  Private  Leathe  has  also  been  useful 
in  the  ordnance  department.  Both  these  privates  remained  on  the 
island  after  their  company  had  been  relieved. 

I would  respectfully  call  attention  to  the  miserable  condition  of 
the  10-inch  mortar  bed.  It  might  have  done  valuable  service  if  in 
pr  er  condition. 


The  enemy  were  working  behind  their  advance  stockade  last  night, 
but  their  operations  could  not  be  seen  by  our  pickets,  who  could, 
however,  hear  distinctly  the  voices  of  their  teamsters  while  driving. 
The  spirited  firing  of  the  sharpshooters  detailed  from  the  Charleston 
Battalion  has  annoyed  the  enemy  and  checked  the  operations  of 
their  sharpshooters  very  much.  One  of  the  enemy  fell  this  morning, 


[Chap.  XL. 


4G0 


S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 


supposed  to  have  been  killed  by  our  sharpshooters.  The  parapet  in 
front  of  new  10-inch  columbiad  was  raised  and  strengthened  last 
night,  and  the  traverse  in  parade  is  more  than  half  finished.  I beg 
leave  to  call  attention  to  inclosed  paper  relating  to  the  condition  of 
the  battery.  * 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

LAWRENCE  M.  KEITT, 

Colonel , Commanding. 

Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

[Indorsement.] 


1.  Those  10-inch  columbiads  ought  not  to  be  unmasked  until  the 
monitors  get  quite  close  to  the  battery. 

2.  The  traverse  circle  of  one  of  the  10-inch  columbiads  should  be 
properly  relaid  at  once,  as  well  as  the  bed  of  that  mortar.  Give  the 
order  at  once,  and  order  an  inspector  to  see  that  it  is  done. 

G.  T.  B.  [BEAUREGARD], 

General,  Commanding. 


Headquarters  Battery  Wagner, 

August  5,  1863 — 11  a.  m. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  our  sharpshooters  on 
yesterday  afternoon  killed  one  of  the  enemy’s  sharpshooters  and 
wounded  another.  Our  sharpshooting  seems  to  annoy  the  enemy 
very  much.  Last  night  the  Twenty-first  South  Carolina  Volun- 
teer Regiment,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Dargan,  furnished  the  detail  of 
100  men  for  picket  duty,  under  the  command  of  Captain  [H.  ] Le 
Gette.  He  reports  that  he  heard  the  saws  of  the  enemy  and  a great 
deal  of  hallooing,  as  if  they  were  moving  guns,  and  also  that  the  en- 
emy stopped  working  during  the  attack  on  their  boat  picket  by  our 
forces.  He  reports  that  he  stationed  his  advance  picket  20  yards  in 
advance  of  the  usual  position  for  an  advanced  line  of  pickets. 

The  usual  details  for  engineer,  commissary,  quartermaster,  garri- 
son guards,  and  ordnance  duty  were  furnished  from  the  forces  on 
the  island  under  my  command. 

Engineer  Department. — Lieutenant  Stiles,  engineer  in  charge  at 
Battery  Wagner,  reports  that  traverse  near  sally-port  on  creek  is 
nearly  completed;  that  he  would  have  completed*  it,  but  the  enemy 
commenced  shelling  and  he  did  not  wish  to  expose  the  men.  He  re- 
enforced Magazine  No.  2,  on  sea  face,  built  merlon  on  right  of  32- 
pounder  carronade  (first  gun  on  right  of  Magazine  No.  3,  land  face). 
I directed  the  engineer  to  explore  the  facilities  for  constructing  a 
covered  way  between  Batteries  Wagner  and  Gregg,  and  call  atten- 
tion to  his  report,  inclosed  and  marked  A.  f He  also  repaired  the 
left  flanking  positions  in  front  of  sally-port  on  beach. 

Chief  of  Artillery. — Remarks  that  the  mortar  on  land  face  has  had 
its  bed  repaired ; that  the  platform  has  sunR  a little,  and  asks  that  a 
new  one  be  sent  down.  Traverse  circle  of  the  32-pounder,  reported 
on  yesterday  as  being  rotten,  has  been  repaired.  The  columbiads  are 
both  ready  for  action.  He  begs  that  articles  required  for  yesterday 
be  furnished  at  once. 


*Not  identified. 


f Not  found. 


Chap.  XL.]  OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C.  461 

Ordnance  Department. — Lieutenant  Mazyck,  ordnance  officer,  re- 
ports everything  in  his  department  working  well,  and  asks  that  arti- 
cles required  for  yesterday  be  furnished  at  once,  as  they  are  much 
needed.  He  also  asks  that  an  ordnance  sergeant  he  appointed  for 
the  island,  and  also  that  competent  men  be  placed  permanently  in  the 
magazines. 

Medical  Department. — Senior  Surgeon  Johnson  calls  attention  to 
the  want  of  ventilation  in  the  bomb-proof  and  hospital,  and  begs  that 
a medical  inspector  he  sent  to  inspect  the  said  place.  There  are  no 
sick  in  the  hospital,  with  the  exception  of  Maj.  H.  Bryan,  assistant 
adjutant-general.  Major  Bryan’s  illness  arises  from  exhaustion,  and 
I hope  is  only  temporary.  In  the  interval,  Lieutenant  Schnierle  is 
acting  as  assistant  adjutant-general. 

Position  of  forces  last  night.— A detachment  of  Captain  Hunter’s 
company  (A),  Second  Regiment  Artillery ; Captain  Miles’  company 
(E),  Charleston  Battalion  (detachment) ; detachment  Company  C, 
Siege  Train,  Captain  Gregg  commanding,  manned  the  artillery  on 
the  land  face,  supported  on  the  right  by  Charleston  Battalion,  Lieu- 
tenant-Colonel Gaillard,  and  on  left  by  detachment  of  Twenty-first 
Regiment,  South  Carolina  Volunteers,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Dargan 
commanding. 

On  the  sea  face,  two  detachments  of  Captain  Hunter’s  company  (A), 
Second  Regiment  Artillery;  detachment  Captain  Miles’  company  (E), 
Charleston  Battalion,  manned  the  artillery,  supported  by  second  de- 
tachment Twenty-first  South  Carolina  Volunteers.  Four  companies 
Twentieth  Regiment  South  Carolina  Volunteers,  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Dantzler  commanding,  in  reserve  in  the  parade  ; Nineteenth  Georgia 
Regiment,  Col.  A.  J.  Hutchins,  was  stationed  in  the  sand-hills  be- 
tween Batteries  Wagner  and  Gregg,  picketing  the  beach,  guarding 
the  boat  at  Cumming’s  Point,  supporting  Battery  Gregg,  and  furnish- 
ing fatigue  party  at  that  battery  ; Capt.  C.  W.  Parker,  Company  C, 
First  South  Carolina  Regular  Artillery,  garrisoned  Battery  Gregg. 

Commissary  and  Quartermaster  Departments. — The  above-men- 
tioned departments  are  in  good  condition  and  well  managed. 

Incidents  of  the  last  twenty-four  hours  : 

At  10  p.  m. , heavy  firing  of  musketry  was  heard  on  the  right  of 
Battery  Wagner.  Since,  learned  that  Lieutenant  Warley,  C.  S. 
Navy,  attacked  and  captured  enemy’s  boat  pickets.  About  11  p.  mc 
three  monitors  were  discovered  opposite  Battery  W agner,  within  easy 
sight  from  the  battery,  and  above  them,  in  the  direction  of  Cum- 
ming’s Point,  three  barges  filled  with  men  and  lying  at  anchor  were 
observed.  About  daylight,  the  monitors  and  barges  went  toward 
the  bar.  Everything  quiet  after  11  p.  m.  until  5.30  o’clock  this 
morning,  when  our  sharpshooters  opened  a galling  fire  on  the  enemy ; 
they  immediately  replied  with  sharpshooters  and  a battery  of  24- 
pounder  Coehorn  mortars.  This  battery  is  situated  within  20  steps 
of  a chimney  on  the  left  of  their  line  ; the  spot  is  known  as  Sagling’s 
house ; the  distance  is  supposed  to  be  100  yards,  judging  only  from 
sight.  The  enemy  can  be  plainly  seen  from  this  battery  carrying  on 
their  work  on  the  extreme  left  of  their  lines,  apparently  working  in 
the  marsh. 

No  casualties  on  our  side  to-day.  Enemy’s  shell  annoy  our  men 
very  much.  In  two  hours  they  fired,  according  to  report  of  Lieu- 
tenant [N.  A.  ] Easterling  (who  was  detailed  to  count  the  shots  of  the 
enemy),  15  shell  an  hour. 

I beg  leave  respectfully  to  call  your  attention  to  the  request  of 


462  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 


[Chap.  XL. 


Lieutenant  Mazyck,  ordnance  officer,  asking  for  an  ordnance  sergeant 
for  the  island.  I recommend  for  appointment  to  fill  that  position 
Private  John  M.  Leathe,  of  Captain  Chichester’s  artillery  company. 
He  has  behaved  with  gallantry  ever  since  the  bombardment  of  this 
island,  and  when  his  company  was  relieved  he  volunteered  to  remain, 
and  has  been  of  great  use  both  in  the  ordnance  and  commissary  de- 
partments. He  is  active,  energetic,  and  intelligent.  I do  not  think 
that  the  appointment  could  be  given  to  a worthier  person. 

Captain  [John  O.]  Heriot,  assistant  commissary  of  subsistence, 
Provisional  Army  C.  S.,  has  just  been  relieved  by  Capt.  Thomas  E. 
Stanley,  assistant  commissary  of  subsistence,  Provisional  Army,  C.  S. 

Inclosed  I forward  report  of  inspection  by  Lieutenant  Mazyck, 
ordnance  officer,  of  mortar  and  bed.*  Lieutenant  [J.  J.]  Alston, 
company  E,  First  South  Carolina  Artillery,  reported  for  duty,  with 
a detachment  of  14  men  at  11  p.  m.,  and  has  rendered  great  assist- 
ance. 

Report  closed  at  12.45  p.  m. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

LAWRENCE  M.  KEITT, 

Colonel,  Commanding. 

Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

Assistarit  Adjutant-General. 


[Indorsement.] 

August  7,  1863. 

Order  all  necessary  facilities  for  the  construction  of  the  covered 
way  from  Gregg  to  Wagner,  already  ordered  from  these  head- 
quarters. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General,  Commanding. 


Headquarters  Battery  Wagner, 

August  6,  1863. — 5 a.  m. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  I have  been  duly  re- 
lieved by  Brig.  Gen.  Johnson  Hagood,  and  that  the  changes  and 
reliefs  called  for  in  the  special  orders  of  to-day  from  district  head- 
quarters have  been  carried  out. 

My  last  report  was  up  to  2.30  p.  m.  yesterday,  since  which  nothing 
of  importance  has  occurred.  Major  Bryan,  assistant  adjutant-gen- 
eral, soon  returned  to  duty.  The  engineer,  Lieutenant  Stiles,  called 
for  a working  party  at  4. 30  p.  m.  to  finish  the  traverse  in  parade. 
A few  shell  being  thrown  by  the  enemy  at  5 p.  m.,  most  of  the  work 
was  postponed  until  8 p.  m.,  when  the  traverse  was  pressed  on  and 
a palisade  put  up  on  the  beach  to  cover  the  left  flanking  curtain. 
The  lower  part  of  this  palisade  did  not  stand  well,  and  must  be  re- 
built with  stronger  stakes. 

After  dark,  Lieutenant  Alston,  with  a small  detachment  of  First 
South  Carolina  Artillery,  was  put  in  charge  of  the  two  columbiads. 
Soon  after  dark,  the  enemy  opened  slowly  on  Cumming’s  Point  from 
the  land,  and  threw  7 or  8 shells  from  a gunboat  of  the  fleet,  some  of 
which  fell  close  in  rear  of  Battery  Wagner. 

The  land  fire  did  not  continue  long,  but  resulted  in  one  casualty  at 
Cumming’s  Point — Private  Hogan,  of  the  Charleston  Battalion,  los- 
ing one  leg  from  a splinter. 


* Not  found 


Chap.  XL.]  OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C.  463 

Between  9 and  10  p.  m.  the  reliefs  commenced  arriving.  The 
Mathewes  Artillery,  Gist  Guards,  detachments  of  Captain  Smith’s 
company,  Siege  Train,  and  Marion  Artillery,  were  placed  in  position 
by  Major  Warley.  The  Nineteenth  Georgia  being  relieved,  its  place 
was  taken  by  the  Eighth  North  Carolina  (in  the  sand-hills),  Colonel 
Shaw,  who  was  called  on  to  supply  the  engineers  at  Battery  Wag- 
ner with  150  men  from  midnight  until  3 a.  m.,  and  the  engineer  at 
Cumming’s  Point  with  all  the  remainder  of  the  regiment,  after 
guarding  the  sand-hills.  In  an  hour  or  two  after  the  moon  rose, 
a movement  of  boats  was  indistinctly  visible  at  sea,  and  several 
shots  fired  from  the  direction  of  the  enemy’s  fleet.  This  has  since 
proved  to  have  been  a reconnaissance  by  the  C.  S.  steamer  Juno, 
which  captured  a heavily  armed  launch  of  the  U.  S.  steamer  Pow- 
hatan. 

During  the  afternoon,  a small  sail-boat,  bearing  English  colors, 
passed  up  main  ship  channel,  and  there  being  no  appearance  of  bad 
faith,  I allowed  her  to  proceed  to  Fort  Sumter. 

In  the  early  part  of  the  night,  my  attention  was  called  to  the  en- 
emy’s fatigue  parties  in  our  front.  The  dim  twinkle  of  lights  could 
be  occasionally  seen,  and  the  sound  of  the  hammer  and  ax,  as  if 
laying  platforms,  &c.,  was  plainly  heard.  At  dusk,  their  pickets 
were  reported  to  me  as  taking  position  at  their  line  of  stockades, 
with  a regiment  moving  to  the  left  flank  of  their  rear  batteries. 

About  midnight,  I sent  to  the  quartermaster  at  Cumming’s  Point, 
in  charge  of  6 men  of  the  Twenty-first  South  Carolina,  a row-boat, 
which  had  been  secured  the  night  before  by  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Dantzler  from  an  advanced  anchorage  in  Vincent’s  Creek.  It  may 
be  easily  put  in  order. 

Yesterday  I sent  to  the  quartermaster  at  Cumming’s  Point,  for 
transportation  to  you,  a lot  of  infantry  accouterments,  found  mold- 
ing in  one  of  the  magazines,  supposed  to  be  enough  for  one  company. 

Last  evening  a regiment  of  the  enemy  was  observed  by  Sergeant 
Gardner,  of  the  sharpshooters,  to  be  double-quicking  from  Gregg’s 
Hill  toward  the  south  end  of  island. 

August  6,  1863.  About  3 a.  m.  this  morning,  General  Hagood  ar- 
rived with  his  chief  of  artillery,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Brown,  the 
latter  receiving  full  explanations  from  Major  Warley. 

Yesterday  Lieutenant  Mazyck  was  by  my  order  saving  all  the 
valuable  iron  work  of  disabled  carriages,  to  be  sent  to  Charleston. 

On  the  beach  at  Cumming’s  Point  is  a lot  of  the  enemy’s  shell, 
picked  up  by  the  soldiers,  awaiting  transportation.  An  active  and 
experienced  officer  or  civilian  is  needed  to  take  charge  of  the  boat 
transportation  at  Cumming’s  Point,  equally  to  move  the  freight  and 
take  care  of  the  boats. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

LAWRENCE  M.  KEITT. 

Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

[Indorsement.] 

Hdqrs.  First  Mil.  Dist.,  Dept.  S.  C.,  Ga.,  and  Fla., 

Charleston , August  6,  1863. 

Respectfully  forwarded,  with  the  remark  that  all  the  suggestions 
of  this  report  have  been  ordered. 

R,  S.  RIPLEY, 

Brigadier-  Geneml,  Q 'commanding , 


464  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

Headquarters  Sullivan’s  Island, 

August  8,  1863. 

Sir  : In  concluding  the  journal  of  events  which  occurred  while  I 
was  in  command  on  Morris  Island,  I would  respectfully  remark,  that 
I leave  our  works  there  much  stronger  than  they  were  on  my  arrival ; 
and,  that  I responded  promptly  to  every  call  of  engineer  and  ord- 
nance officers  for  working  parties  at  Battery  Wagner,  and,  with 
trifling  exceptions,  at  Cumming’s  Point  also.  It  has  not  been  in  my 
power  to  constantly  overlook  the  work  at  the  latter  place,  and  I am 
not  at  all  satisfied  with  its  progress.  A large  bomb-proof  for  the 
protection  of  working  parties  and  stores  is  much  needed  there. 

While  our  own  works  have  been  much  increased  in  strength,  it  is 
apprehended  that  the  works  of  the  enemy,  in  our  front,  have  been 
strengthened  to  an  equal  extent.  The  enemy  appear  to  work  with 
industry  and  great  caution.  I have  been  compelled  generally  to  re- 
main quiet ; so  as  not  to  draw  their  fire  on  my  working  parties.  The 
experimental  fire  which  I opened  from  the  land  face  of  Battery 
Wagner,  about  midday  on  the  2d  instant,  proved  that  the  enemy 
could  concentrate  a well-directed  fire,  and  from  a wide  field,  upon  my 
embrasures,  dismounting  some  of  the  guns,  almost  certainly,  in  a 
long-continued  fight.  It  is  also  in  the  power  of  the  enemy  to  keep 
up  an  annoying  fire,  through  their  sharpshooters,  -on  the  embrasures. 
The  enemy’s  sharpshooters  have  been  decidedly  checked,  though  not 
driven  off  by  our  own  sharpshooters,  who  use  Whitworth  rifles. 

In  this  connection,  I would  respectfully  advise  that  we  should 
bring  to  bear  upon  the  enemy’s  near  works  as  much  vertical  fire  as 
possible  from  small  mortars  and  howitzers,  which  might  be  fired 
without  greatly  exposing  the  men  or  guns.  Cannot  the  8-inch  siege 
howitzer,  with  reduced  charges,  and  at  a considerable  elevation,  be 
used  as  a substitute  for  a mortar  ? I beg  that  this  may  be  carefully 
tested. 

' In  connection  with  this  vertical  fire,  our  8-inch  shell  guns  and  32- 
pounders  might  open  at  any  favorable  moment,  for  a limited  time. 
From  the  limited  supply  of  ammunition,  I was  restrained  from  keep - 
iny  up  any  contest  with  the  enemy. 

The  enemy  use  sand-bags  freely,  protect  themselves  carefully  as 
they  proceed,  and  must  advance  if  not  interrupted.  They  have  no 
large  number  of  guns  visible.  Only  eleven  could  be  seen  in  an  ob- 
servation on  the  afternoon  of  the  4th  instant.  Of  these,  three  were 
large  barbette  guns  on  the  sand-hills.  I was  not  able  to  form  any 
estimate  of  the  number  of  their  mortars. 

With  trifling  exceptions,  I had  good  reason  to  be  satisfied  with  the 
spirit  and  conduct  of  the  officers  and  men  under  my  command  on 
Morris  Island. 

Lieutenant-Colonel  Dantzler,  in  addition  to  commanding  the 
Twentieth  Regiment  South  Carolina  Volunteers  with  ability,  often 
assisted  my  adjutant-general  in  having  the  enceinte  and  rear  of  the 
battery  properly  policed — no  small  matter,  when  meat,  transported  at 
no  small  cost  from  Charleston,  had  sometimes  to  be  buried  as  a 
nuisance. 

Lieutenant-Colonel  Gaillard,  of  the  Charleston  Battalion,  remained 
habitually  with  his  men,  and  exercised,  each  night,  the  greatest  vigi- 
lance. I beg  to  say  the  same  also  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Dargan,  of 
Twenty -first  South  Carolina  Volunteers. 

The  artillery,  commanded  by  Major  Warley,  Second  South  Caro- 
lina Artillery,  remained  habitually  at  their  guns,  and  gave  me  entire 


Chap.  XL.] 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 


465 


satisfaction.  Major  Warley  was  very  zealous — visiting  his  guns,  at- 
tending to  many  repairs,  and  answering  promptly  all  calls  upon  him. 
It  was  a matter  of  regret  to  me  that  he  failed  to  discover  with  suf- 
ficient promptness  some  of  the  defects  in  the  columbiads,  but  no  man 
could  have  worked  harder  to  remedy  them. 

Captain  Miles,  Company  E,  Charleston  Battalion,  rendered  good 
service,  and  Captain  Gregg,  of  the  Siege  Train,  and  Lieutenant 
Askew,  of  Chatham  Light  Artillery,  were  particularly  attentive  to 
their  duties. 

I regret  to  mention  that  the  Nineteenth  Georgia  Regiment  did 
not  display  the  high  discipline  which  its  brilliant  achievements  on 
so  many  fields  in  the  past  warranted  me  to  expect,  and  that  its 
colonel  commanding  betrayed  too  much  negligence.  As  I disliked 
to  interrupt  the  general  harmony  of  the  command,  I adopted  no 
stringent  measures,  and  am  happy  to  say  that  no  evil  resulted,  ex- 
cepting the  wounding  of  a few  members  of  this  regiment  in  the  com- 
missary house,  where  they  had  no  business  to  be,  excepting  the  two 
on  guard. 

Captain  [W.  F.]  Hamilton  and  Lieutenant  [Benjamin]  Yarbor- 
ough, of  this  regiment,  gave  entire  satisfaction  when  in  charge  of 
the  advanced  picket. 

To  Surg.  Samuel  P.  Johnson,  of  the  Nineteenth  Georgia,  who 
acted  as  chief  surgeon  during  the  latter  part  of  my  command,  I 
am  much  indebted  for  introducing  more  order  into  the  hospital 
arrangements,  and  for  his  unvarying  attention  to  all  his  duties. 

Lieutenants  Ashe  and  Mazyck,  of  the  ordnance  department,  worked 
hard  and  rendered  much  service,  though  the  long  existing  confusion 
of  that  department  was  not  entirely  rectified  during  my  administra- 
tion. 

Captain  Chichester  reported  as  assistant  chief  of  artillery  for  about 
two  days,  and  rendered  good  service  in  the  artillery  and  ordnance. 
This  officer  has  done  valuable  and  gallant  service  on  Morris  Island, 
and  his  commission  as  captain  is  one  of  the  oldest  in  the  service.  I 
therefore  recommend  that  he  he  appointed  major  of  artillery  Provis- 
ional Army  C.  S.,  and  assigned  to  duty  as  chief  ordnance  officer  for 
Morris  Island. 

I have  already  mentioned  the  valuable  services  of  Privates  Leathe 
and  Bond,  of  the  Gist  Guards,  in  the  commissary  department.  Leathe 
has  been  appointed  ordnance  sergeant,  and  I would  respectfully  sug- 
gest, that,  if  Major  Guerin  deems  it  compatible  with  the  regulations 
of  his  department,  Private  John  Bond  he  placed  in  charge  of  the 
conduct  of  the  subsistence  on  Morris  Island , giving  him  such  clerks 
and  assistants  as  may  he  needed. 

Captains  Guerard  and  [Thomas  W.]  Woodward,  of  the  quarter- 
master’s department,  were  attentive  to  their  duties.  Major  Bryan, 
of  the  department  staff,  acted  as  my  adjutant-general,  and  gave 
me  the  most  entire  satisfaction.  His  energy,  industry,  tact,  and 
unwearied  diligence  infused  greater  efficiency  into  every  portion  of 
the  command.  Captain  Schnierle,  of  the  district  staff,  acted  as  my 
aide-de-camp,  and  my  thanks  are  due  to  him  for  the  zeal  and  energy 
with  which  he  discharged  his  duties. 

I request  that  means  betaken  to  pay  the  members  of  the  Fifty -fourth 
Georgia  Regiment,  and  others , who  have  gathered  the  enemy’s  shot 
and  shell  lying  about  Morris  Island,  the  reward  promised. 

Should  the  enemy  ever  effect  a secret  or  sudden  landing  between 
30  R R — VOL  XXVIII,  PT  I 


lUU 


S.  C.  AND  DA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 


[Chap.  XL. 


Batteries  Gregg  and  Wagner,  and  the  garrison  of  Wagner  have  to 
change  front  to  rear  to  repel  an  assault,  there  would  be  no  artillery- 
protecting  this  new  front. 

To  guard  against  this  contingency , I would  recommend  that  two 
additional  howitzers  he  sent  to  Battery  Wagner  to  protect  its  rear, 
and  also  replace  those  on  the  left  flanking  curtain,  should  they  be- 
come disabled. 

It  might  be  well  also  to  have  a mountain  howitzer  on  our  picket 
line,  to  be  kept  in  a pit  during  the  day  and  mounted  after  dark. 

I directed  the  assistant  engineer  to  examine  the  facilities  for  con- 
structing a covered  way  between  Batteries  Wagner  and  Gregg,  and 
would  respectfully  call  attention  to  his  report. 

I directed  him  also  to  explore  the  practicability  of  laying  down 
pipe  beneath  the  surface  of  the  ground , for  the  conveyance  of  water 
from  the  wells  in  the  sand-hills  to  Battery  Wagner.  He  reported  it 
to  me  as  practicable,  and  I ordered  a ivritten  report  to  be  made  out 
and  sent  up  to  district  headquarters. 

I respectfully  call  attention  to  it.  In  this  way,  a sufficient  supply  of 
water  might  be  continuously  had  in  the  parade  ground  of  the  fort, 
and  in  the  bomb-proofs,  by  sinking  casks  in  them  to  hold  the  water. 
This  would  prevent  straggling  among  the  men,  in  search  of  water, 
during  a long  continued  bombardment,  and  would  promote  both  the 
health  and  comfort  of  the  garrison. 

I would  also  respectfully  recommend  that  no  more  fresh  beef,  just 
cooked , be  issued  as  rations  to  the  garrison.  In  almost  every  instance 
such  beef  has  been  tainted  and  unfit  for  use.  If  rations  of  beef  must 
be  ultimately  used,  I would  recommend  that  the  beef  be  salted  and 
cured,  and  then  cooked  and  issued  as  rations.  In  the  meantime,  it 
were  better  to  issue  rations  of  bacon. 

I beg  leave  to  add,  as  I omitted  it  in  its  proper  place,  that  Captain 
Heriot,  of  the  commissary  department,  discharged  his  duties  with 
zeal  and  fidelity. 

I am,  captain,  very  respectfully, 

LAWRENCE  M.  KEITT, 

Colonel,  Commanding. 

Captain  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

[Indorsement.] 

Paragraphs  marked  [in  italics]  are  approved. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


Headquarters  Battery  Wagner, 

August  15  1863 — 10.30  p.  m. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  I arrived  here  about  7 
p.  m.,  and  relieved  Colonel  Harrison  as  soon  as  he  had  shown  me  the 
position  of  the  troops  and  the  condition  and  plans  of  the  artillery. 

Inclosed  is  a list  of  the  garrison  which  I found  on  my  arrival. 

The  Fifty-first  North  Carolina  Regiment  has  just.been  relieved  by 
the  Twentieth  South  Carolina  Y olunteers,  with  348  aggregate  effect- 
ive. I regret  to  have  to  report  Private  [J.W.]  Smoke,  Company  B, 
of  this  regiment,  had  his  head  blown  off  by  a Parrott  shell,  as  they 
were  entering  the  battery,  and  Private  Manly  Boykin,  of  Company 
G,  was  wounded  in  the  head  by  same  shell. 

About  9 o’clock,  I had  a bolt  fired  from  the  rifled  gun  at  a monitor 


Chap.  XL.] 


467 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 


which  had  drawn  up  near  this  island  in  rear  of  Wagner,  which  caused 
her  to  move  off.  About  an  hour  since,  I opened  by  battery  from  the 
land  face,  with  intention  to  keep  up  a slow  fire,  but  the  movement  of 
troops  has  temporarily  interrupted  it. 

The  enemy  responded  almost  immediately  to  my  fire,  and  has  since 
kept  it  up  briskly  to  present  moment,  11.30  p.  m.,  which  suspends 
all  engineer  work. 

My  picket  in  front  was  drawn  in  previous  to  opening  fire. 

About  9 o’clock,  a small  boat  floated  from  the  enemy’s  side  down 
Vincent’s  Creek  toward  the  harbor;  fired  on  by  my  pickets,  without 
any  return. 

Notice  was  promptly  given  to  Battery  Gregg.  This  shows  the 
necessity  of  a picket-boat  in  Vincent’s  Creek  near  this  battery,  and 
I beg  that  one  be  stationed  there  hereafter  every  night. 

Sand-bags  are  much  wanted  at  Battery  Wagner,  and  20-penny 
nails  or  large  spikes  for  the  bomb-proof  frame  at  Battery  Gregg. 

Captain  Chichester  reported  all  the  guns  here  in  working  order. 

The  mortar  is  fired,  but  of  course  accuracy  cannot  be  attained.  It 
will  be  fired  until  it  breaks  down. 

A 32-pounder  will  be  mounted  in  the  left  salient  as  soon  as  a chas- 
sis is  received  for  it. 

The  mortar  bed  at  Battery  Gregg  is  cracked  open  in  both  cheeks 
from  top  to  bottom,  and  I recommend  that  it  be  sent  to  the  arsenal 
for  repair,  and  a new  bed  be  supplied  at  once. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

LAWRENCE  M.  KEITT, 

Colonel , Commanding. 

x Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant-General. 

P.  S. — The  enemy  threw  up  a rocket  from  the  sea  in  our  rear,  be- 
tween 10  and  11,  and  2 columbiad  shots  were  fired  in  their  direction. 

[Inclosure.] 


Report  of  effective  strength  of  troops  on  Morris  Island , August  15, 1868,  for  duty. 


Command. 


Infantry : 

51st  North  Carolina  (Colonel  McKethan) 

1st  Volunteers  Georgia  (detachment,  Captain  [A.  C.]  Davenport). 

12th  Georgia  Battalion  (Major  [G.  M.]  Hanvey) 

18th  Georgia  Battalion  (Major  Basinger) 

Sharpshooters 

Artillery : 

Company  H,  First  South  Carolina  Artillery  (Lieutenant  [J.  R.] 

Pringle) 

Detachment  First  South  Carolina  Artillery  (Lieutenant  Alston) 

Company  C,  Siege  Train  (Lieutenant  [Charles  E.]  Gregg) 

Company  A,  Lucas’  battalion  (Lieutenant  [W.  G.]  Ogier) 

Company  G,  Second  South  Carolina  Artillery 

Detachment  Georgia,  Chatham  Artillery  (Lieutenant  [Samuel  B.] 

Palmer) 

Cavalry  couriers 

Total 


Officers.  _ 

Non-commissioned 

officers. 

Privates.- 

Total. 

Aggregate. 

23 

351 

351 

374 

9 

26 

125 

151 

160 

14 

27 

143 

170 

184 

8 

16 

95 

111 

119 

1 

19 

19 

20 

3 

64 

64 

67 

2 

3 

12 

15 

17 

1 

5 

21 

26 

27 

3 

5 

56 

61 

64 

2 

65 

1 

4 

26 

30 

31 

1 

11 

11 

11 

65 

87 

923 

978 

1,158 

GEO.  M.  BLOUNT, 

Adjutant,  dtc.,  Morris  Island. 


468 


[Chap.  XL. 


S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 


Headquarters  Battery  Wagner, 

August  16,  1863 — 9 a.  m. 

Captain  : My  last  report  was  up  to  11.30  p.  m.  on  the  15th,  at 
which  time  the  enemy  were  keeping  up  a vigorous  fire,  both  vertical 
and  horizontal. 

This  fire  continued  on  both  sides,  sometimes  less  rapid,  until  4. 30 
a.  m.  to-day,  when  firing  ceased  on  both  sides.  The  fire  of  the 
enemy’s  rifled  guns  (frequently  firing  shrapnel),  was  generally  good, 
but,  excepting  the  two  casualties  reported  last  night,  in  Twentieth 
Regiment  South  Carolina  Volunteers,  no  harm  was  done  by  it. 

Their  mortar  fire  was  poor  until  about  2.30  a.  m.  (their  shell  falling 
mostly  in  rear  of  this  battery  and  on  the  beach),  but  at  this  time 
their  fleet  seemed  to  direct  their  fire  by  signal,  and  it  became  more 
accurate.  Two  men  were  wounded  by  it,  viz : Private  John  Smith, 
Company  A,  Eighteenth  Georgia  Battalion,  slight  wound  in  hand; 
Private  Patsey  Bannon,  Company  E,  First  South  Carolina  Artillery, 
severe  contusion  in  both  thighs.  Between  11.30  p.  m.  and  2 a.  m., 
our  fire  was  continuous  and  slow.  About  2 o’clock,  a general  dis- 
charge took  place  along  our  whole  front,  and  shortly  after  this,  the 
sound  of  the  bugle  was  heard  from  the  enemy’s  lines,  and  reported 
by  a messenger  from  the  picket  in  rifle-pits.  The  enemy  fired  no 
guns  from  the  immediate  vicinity  of  their  stockade,  but  seemed  to 
be  at  work  on  or  near  the  beach. 

Notwithstanding  the  rapid  fire  of  the  enemy  last  night,  Captain 
Wampler,  the  engineer  in  charge,  reports  that  the  damage  to  this 
work  was  very  trifling,  and  can  be  easily  repaired.  He  did  no  work 
last  night,  but  is  working  50  men  this  morning  at  the  infantry  ban- 
quettes on  the  west  face. 

He  has  no  detailed  instructions  about  the  erection  of  a new  bomb- 
proof in  this  battery,  and  no  timber  for  it.  I beg  that  definite  in- 
structions be  given  to  him  forthwith,  and  that  the  necessary  timbers 
be  sent  at  once  to  Cumming’s  Point,  and  rafted  up  Vincent’s  Creek 
to  Battery  Wagner. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

LAWRENCE  M.  KEITT, 

Colonel,  Commanding. 

Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

P.  S. — Please  request  Major  Pringle  to  have  the  wooden  water- 
tank  for  Cumming’s  Point  sent  down  to-night,  with  a workman  to 
put  it  up.  All  quiet  this  morning. 

Send  whitewash  brush  for  hospital. 


Headquarters  Battery  Wagner, 

August  16,  1863. — 5 p.  m. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  report,  since  my  last  up  to  9 a.  m., 
that  the  day  has  so  far  passed  very  quietly,  the  usual  firing  of  sharp- 
shooters on  both  sides  going  on  briskly. 

No  artillery  fire  from  the  enemy  has  been  directed  against  this 
battery,  and  I have  no  casualties  to  report. 

I have  the  honor  to  inclose  morning  report  and  Captain  Chiches- 
ter’s report*  of  last  night’s  firing,  with  his  views  on  certain  disposi- 
tions  of  guns,  an  answer  to  which  is  respectfully  solicited. 


*See  No.  31,  p.  511. 


Chap.  XL.] 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 


469 


Captain  Wampler,  engineer  in  charge,  has  been  working  about  50 
men  all  day  at  the  infantry  banquette  to  west  and  rear  parapet  of 
Fort  Wagner,  and  will  to-night,  as  far  as  firing  permits,  place  the 
spiked  plank  in  the  moat,  put  up  sharpshooter  protections  on  center 
and  right,  and  repair  the  parapet  (now  falling  in)  to  old  10-inch 
columbiad. 

Captain  Hill,  ordnance  officer,  has  been  moving  a barbette  car- 
riage into  the  battery,  and  moving  out  the  8-inch  columbiad  chassis, 
formerly  used  for  the  32-pounder,  rifled,  which  burst. 

Am  endeavoring  to  push  on  all  work,  but  the  want  of  bomb-proof 
frames  at  Wagner,  and  of  proper  nails  or  spikes  at  Gregg  prevents 
me  from  materially  strengthening  these  batteries.  Sand-bags  are 
still  wanted. 

Battery  Cheves  opened  early  in  the  forenoon,  directing  her  shots 
at  the  large  battery  which  the  enemy  have  been  pressing  on  at 
Thomas  Island.  The  shots  which  were  noticed  fell  short. 

About  2.30  p.  m.  a work  of  the  enemy’s  was  observed  and  reported 
on  the  high  marsh,  between  Black  Island  and  Legare’s  Point,  prob- 
ably 2 miles  from  Battery  Wagner.  It  is  incomplete,  but  men  were 
passing  on  the  marsh  near  it. 

Lieutenant  [F.  J.]  Moses  reported  about  3.30  p.  m.,  and  was  as- 
signed to  duty  at  Battery  Gregg,  with  special  instructions  to  receive 
and  forward  ordnance  stores. 

While  much  regretting  to  lose  Captain  Hill’s  valuable  services,  in 
justice  to  him  I have  been  induced  to  call  attention  to  the  fact  that 
he  was  expecting  further  orders  from  district  headquarters. 

Battery  Wagner  has  been  policed  by  Colonel  Dantzler,  and  Battery 
Gregg  by  Major  Hanvey,  Twelfth  Georgia  Battalion,  who  have  been 
working  to-day  with  diligence. 

Yerv  respectfully,  &c., 

LAWRENCE  M.  KEITT, 

Colonel,  Commanding. 

Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  Battery  Wagner, 

August  17,  1863—12.30  a.  m. 

Captain  : I had  the  honor  to  report  events  here  up  to  5 p.  m.,  since 
which  hour  there  has  been  no  casualty  and  very  little  firing. 

I inclose  observations  of  the  lookout  officer  this  afternoon.*  Ac- 
cording to  instructions,  I held  the  Georgia  battalions  in  readiness  to 
be  relieved,  but  when,  at  last,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Dargan  reported 
with  only  250  men,  I was  obliged  to  retain  the  First  Georgia,  in 
order  to  maintain  an  effective  garrison,  sending  off  the  Twelfth  and 
Eighteenth  Georgia  Battalions  and  all  the  artillery,  excepting  Lieu- 
tenant Alston’s  detachment  at  the  columbiads. 

No  notice  was  received  that  Colonel  Dargan  was  coming.  His 
command  came  without  rations,  and  he  reports  the  short  notice  re- 
ceived by  him  as  the  reason  for  this. 

To-night  the  Twentieth  South  Carolina  mans  the  land  front,  and 
150  men  of  the  Twenty-first  South  Carolina  the  sea  face  and  left 
curtain.  Lieutenant-Colonel  Dargan,  with  remainder  of  this  regi- 


* Not  found. 


[Chap.  XL. 


470  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

ment  and  the  First  Georgia,  commands  Cumming’s  Point  and  the 
sand-hills.  Owing  to  the  long  delay  in  relieving  troops,  I did  not 
open  on  the  enemy  until  11.45  p.  m.,  calling  in  my  picket  (save  33  in 
the  rifle-pits),  and  opening  about  half  an  hour  afterward  a steady 
fire  of  one  gun  every  three  minutes,  the  enemy  replying  oftener. 

To-morrow  night  I propose  to  use  my  field  pieces  with  spherical 
case,  and  am  very  anxious  to  use  spherical  case  from  the  8-inch  siege 
howitzer. 

Please  send  all  that  can  be  had  from  the  siege  train  on  James 
Island,  as  I think  they  would  be  very  effective  on  the  enemy’s  work- 
ing parties. 

The  spiked  plank  were  not  laid  in  the  moat  to-night,  in  consequence 
of  a doubt  as  to  torpedoes  having  been  planted  there  and  the  possi- 
bility of  thus  exploding  them. 

I trust  that  proper  materials  and  instructions  will  be  supplied  to 
the  engineers  here  to  execute  defensive  works,  particularly  bomb- 
proofs. 

1.30  a.  m.  The  firing  continues,  our  part  under  the  direction  of 
Captain  Chichester,  who,  though  unwell,  remains  at  his  post ; the 
enemy’s  fire  more  frequent. 

Please  have  two  or  more  iron  tanks  from  the  floating  battery  sent 
to  Battery  Wagner.  (See  the  inclosed  note  of  Captain  Tucker,*  who 
had  them  examined.)  If  the  quartermaster  requires  assistance  in 
moving  them,  probably  Captain  Tucker  would  give  a helping  hand, 
through  Captain  Rutledge. 

If  no  reliefs  are  made  to-morrow  night,  I will  open  fire  early. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

LAWRENCE  M.  KEITT, 

. Colonel , Commanding. 

Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  Battery  Wagner, 

August  17,  1863 — 9 p.  m. 

Captain  : I had  the  honor  last  night  to  forward  report  up  to  1.30 
a.  pi.  this  morning,  when  slow  firing  was  going  on  from  our  land 
face,  which  continued  up  to  4. 30  a.  m. 

The  enemy  responded  with  a vigorous  mortar  fire,  ceasing  about 
the  same  time  as  ours. 

At  5 a.  m.  they  opened  a severe  fire  of  Parrott  guns  from  their  works 
on  Morris  Island,  to  our  right,  ceasing  just  before  6.  There  were  no 
casualties  reported  from  this  fire,  and  no  material  damage  done. 

Just  after  6 a.  m.  a monitor,  and  then  the  Ironsides,  were  seen  draw- 
ing up,  and,  according  to  the  views  of  the  commanding  general,  were 
allowed  to  come  in  close.  An  action  with  these  and  other  monitors 
commenced  about  half  past  6,  Lieutenant  Alston’s  detachment 
manning  the  two  columbiads,  and  a squad  of  Company  B,  Lucas’ 
battalion,  manning  the  rifled  32-pounder,  directed  mostly  by  Captain 
[Robert]  Pringle  and  sometimes  by  Lieutenant  [E.  B.]  Colhoun. 
Lieutenant  Alston  acted  as  gunner  for  right  columbiad,  directing  his 
fire  on  left  and  nearest  monitor,  distant  about  600  yards.  Sergeant 
[D.  H.]  Welch,  Company  E,  First  Artillery,  directed  the  fire  of  left 
columbiad  against  the  Ironsides,  distant  about  700  to  800  yards. 


*Not  found. 


Chap.  XL.]  OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C.  471 

It  was  impracticable  to  train  the  right  columbiad  on  the  Iron- 
sides. 

Captain  Pringle,  Company  B,  Lucas’  battalion,  directed  the  fire  of 
the  rifle  gun  against  the  left  and  nearest  monitor,  she  being  about 
200  yards  nearer  than  the  Ironsides,  for  about  an  hour,  and  then 
against  another  monitor,  which  came  in  still  nearer  on  the  right,  for 
about  another  hour,  when  I directed  the  men  to  leave  their  guns. 
These  monitors  threw  canister  and  shrapnel  frequently,  causing 
great  annoyance  to  the  cannoneers. 

Captain  Pringle  fired  over  40  bolts  from  his  gun,  with  little  effect 
at  first,  but  thinks  he  struck  with  one  shot  out  of  every  three  during 
the  last  two-thirds  of  his  firing.  During  this  firing,  Captain  Wamp- 
ler, of  the  Engineers,  rendered  gallant  and  effective  service  in  repair- 
ing traverse  circle  to  this  gun. 

After  Lieutenant  Alston  had  fired  about  5 shots  from  the  right 
columbiad,  the  monitor  came  in  so  close — within  500  yards — that  he 
was  unable  to  depress  the  gun  sufficiently  to  strike  the  turret,  though 
he  fired  some  6 shots  over  it  in  very  good  line. 

Toward  the  last  of  our  firing  (which  lasted  about  two  hours  and 
ten  minutes),  the  monitor,  which  had  been  receiving  Lieutenant 
Alston’s  fire,  drew  off  to  the  fleet,  apparently  injured,  and  his  fire  was 
transferred  to  the  next  monitor  to  the  right. 

Lieutenant  Alston  fought  his  gun  all  through  our  firing,  only 
interrupted  by  temporary  disabling  of  one  of  his  eccentric  wheels. 
Sergeant  Welch  handled  his  gun  well,  and  is  reported  to  have 
struck  the  Ironsides  several  times.  His  detachment  was  relieved, 
being  worn  out,  at  about  a quarter  before  8,  with  detachment  from 
Company  E,  Charleston  Battalion,  under  Captain  Miles.  They  had 
been  at  their  gun  about  ten  minutes,  when  a shell  burst  among 
them,, wounding  or  stunning  every  man  and  thus  stripping  the 
gun-chamber.  Lieutenant  Alston  had  no  men  for  it,  and,  indeed, 
had  been  assisted  by  3 or  4 men  of  Pringle’s  company. 

Captain  Miles,  being  stunned  and  very  weak,  looked  after  his  man- 
gled men  in  the  hospital,  and  Lieutenant  Palmer,  Company  E, 
Charleston  Battalion,  who  had  been  assisting  Captain  Chichester  for 
an  hour,  as  adjutant,  was  soon  after  ordered  to  get  a detachment  and 
take  charge  of  the  gun,  which  he  failed  to  do,  but  finally  a detach- 
ment was  supplied  under  Lieutenant  [J.  W.]  Axson,  who  received  a 
slight  contusion  in  the  knee  before  the  gun  was  loaded.  They  only 
fired  it  once,  about  8.40  a.  m.,  when,  with  the  advice  of  Captain  Chi- 
chester, my  chief  of  artillery,  all  the  cannoneers  on  the  sea  face  were 
called  off  to  the  passages  and  bomb-proofs,  as  their  exposure  was 
greater  than  any  attainable  result  would,  justify.  Six  monitors  came 
up,  and  certainly  five  of  them  were  firing  on  this  battery  at  once, 
coming  as  near  as  they  pleased.  Various  land  batteries  of  the  en- 
emy, including  their  strong  w~ork  in  rear  of  the  stockade,  kept  up  a 
brisk  fire,  but  I do  not  think  that  many  casualties  resulted  from  it. 

Just  before  9 a.  m.  my  acting  aide,  Lieut.  John  D.  Hopkins,  Com- 
pany G,  First  Georgia,  carried  an  order  to  Captain  Davenport,  com- 
manding First  Georgia,  in  the  sand-hills,  to  detail  three  gun  detach- 
ments from  his  command,  and  led  them  up;  one  man  being  killed  by 
shrapnel  in  execution  of  this  order.  They  reported,  under  Lieutenant 
[H.  A.]  Elkins,  before  10  a.  m.,  too  late  to  take  part  in  morning 
fight,  and  were  put  in  charge  of  left  columbiad. 

At  9.20  parapet  in  front  of  left  columbiad  was  badly  damaged,  and 
Captain  Wampler  soon  after  took  measures  to  strengthen  it. 


472 


S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 


[Chap.  XL. 


Captain  Wampler  and  Major  Bryan  examined  magazines  and  re- 
ported them  safe.  Five  monitors  deployed  in  line. 

At  9.45  the  firing  slackened  a short  time,  the  monitors  drawing  off 
toward  the  south,  the  Ironsides  stationary.  At  10.15  two  monitors 
moved  to  left  of  this  battery,  and  soon  a very  heavy  fire  opened. 

Just  before  11  a.  m.  Capt.  J.  M.  Wampler,  chief  engineer,  was 
killed,  while  writing  at  headquarters,  by  a fragment  of  a shell  cut- 
ting his  spine.  I greatly  deplore  the  loss  of  this  gallant  man. 

At  11.05  a.  m.  an  ammunition  chest  was  exploded  by  enemy’s 
shell  at  the  field  guns,  and  some  12-pounder  shrapnel  and  shell  de- 
stroyed; at  11.45  six  monitors  deployed,  two  to  the  left  and  four  to 
front  and  extreme  right. 

At  12.15  all  the  monitors,  excepting  one,  moving  to  the  south  ; but 
one  drew  near  and  fired  occasionally,  and  about  half  past  12  all  firing 
ceased;  the  monitors  and  Ironsides  hauled  off  from  a mile  to  one  and 
three-quarters.  The  men  were  turned  out  of  the  bomb-proof  to  eat, 
and  get  fresh  air.  At  a little  after  1 p.  m.  the  enemy  opened  a mortar 
fire  (not  good),  which  ceased  at  2.30  p.  m. 

At  3.45  one  monitor  approached  battery  and  opened  fire,  soon 
joined  by  another,  about  4 p.  m. ; returned  by  our  two  columbiads 
and  one  rifled  gun.  Unfortunately,  the  rifled  gun  was  spiked  in  at- 
tempting to  load  it,  from  the  priming  wire  having  been  carelessly 
left  in  the  vent  and  broken  off  flush  in  trying  to  draw  it  out.  At 
4. 10  a large  hole  was  torn  in  parapet  in  front  of  the  north  columbiad, 
but  Lieutenant  Alston  continued  fighting  it  with  an  infantry  detail, 
shoveling  away  the  sand ; finally  the  Yates  traversing  gear  got  out 
of  order. 

At  4.40  a 15-inch  shell  burst  under  the  chassis  of  left  columbiad, 
tearing  the  chassis  badly,  injuring  the  Yates  traversing  gear,  and  tear- 
ing the  platform  slightly. 

Fortunately  only  one  man  of  the  detachment  was  injured,  and  he 
slightly.  They  were  from  First  Georgia,  Lieutenant  Elkins  in  charge, 
and  behaved  gallantly. 

4. 45  p.  m.  Our  fire  ceased  about  this  time,  but  the  enemy’s  fire 
from  two  monitors,  at  close  range,  continued  till  nearly  6 o’clock,  since 
which  time  all  has  been  quiet. 

August  18,  3 a.  m.  All  quiet,  garrison  very  much  exhausted,  re- 
pairing damages. 

Captain  Gregorie  has  reported  as  engineer. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

LAWRENCE  M.  KEITT, 

Colonel , Commanding. 


Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  Battery  Wagner, 

August  18,  1863 — 5 p.  m. 

Captain  : I sent  you  by  Colonel  Harris  last  night  a report  of  yes- 
terday’s action. 

The  night  passed  quietly.  I kept  my  artillery  quiet  to  avoid 
drawing  the  enemy’s  fire  on  my  working  parties,  which  were  en- 
gaged during  the  entire  night  filling  the  large  holes  and  furrows 
upon  the  sea-face,  and  in  repairing  part  of  the  damages  to  land-face 
magazine.  Though  carried  on  continuously  till  daylight,  the  work 


Chap.  XL.]  OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C.  473 

was  imperfectly  done,  and  will  require  that  a large  party  be  employed 
at  it  to-night,  thus  again  preventing  the  fire  of  our  land  guns. 

The  men  were  greatly  fatigued  last  night,  and  it  was  difficult  to 
keep  any  but  the  willing  men  at  work. 

Lieutenant  [W.  E.]  Erwin  reported  last  night,  with  13  men,  and 
relieved  Lieutenant  Alston,  whose  devotion  to  his  duty  has  been 
worthy  of  all  praise.  Sergeant  Welch,  of  Alston’s  old  squad,  was 
detained  as  ordnance  sergeant  and  artificer. 

He  was  quite  willing  to  stay,  and  has  done  good  service.  Captain 
Gregorie  reported  as  chief  engineer  at  1.30  a.  m.  to-day,  and,  after 
conferring  with  Colonel  Harris,  took  charge  of  work,  he  and  his 
assistants,  Gillon  and  Stewart,  working  all  night. 

At  a few  minutes  before  5 o’clock,  one  monitor  moved  up  in  front 
of  the  fort,  and  opened  with  a few  shots.  The  Ironsides,  shortly  after- 
ward, and  another  monitor  followed,  taking  position  as  follows  : 

The  Ironsides  nearly  abreast  the  fort,  one  monitor  a short  distance 
to  her  left,  but  200  or  300  yards  nearer  in,  and  the  other  still  farther 
to  her  left  and  beyond  the  buoy.  Some  time  was  occupied  by  them 
in  getting  into  position,  and  at  7 o’clock  they  anchored  and  opened 
fire  sharply.  The  fire  was  replied  to  briskly  by  our  columbiad  and 
rifled  gun  for  a half  hour,  but  was  afterward  slackened,  in  view  of 
the  shortness  of  ammunition.  The  enemy  also  afterward  fired  with 
more  deliberation,  and  directed  their  shots  chiefly  toward  the  rifled 
gun,  which  they  struck  with  a shell  at  9 o’clock,  shivering  the  car- 
riage and  breaking  the  trunnion  of  the  piece.  The  columbiad  con- 
tinued its  fire,  at  intervals  of  about  ten  minutes,  until  about  11  o’clock, 
when  the  fleet  slowly  withdrew. 

The  rifled  gun  was  well  served  throughout  the  engagement,  or 
until  this  gun  was  disabled,  by  Lieutenant  Colhoun  and  his  detach- 
ment, and  the  columbiad  by  Lieutenant  Erwin,  who  was  very  faith- 
ful in  the  discharge  of  his  duties,  continuing  at  his  post  without 
relief  until  the  fleet  had  withdrawn. 

The  monitor  against  which  our  fire  was  directed  was  struck 
fairly  not  less  than  five  times,  and  it  was  soon  after  receiving  the 
last  shot  she  moved  off,  soon  followed  by  the  other. 

Five  wooden  gunboats  joined  in  the  engagement,  making,  with  the 
iron-clads,  an  enfilade  fire,  but  their  shots  had  no  important  effect. 

They  continued  to  fire  more  or  less  briskly  until  12.30,  when,  the 
wind  rising,  they  all  withdrew.  Since  then,  this  post  has  been  quiet, 
though  the  enemy’s  fire  has  been  directed  all  day  against  Sumter. 
Some  firing  was  done  by  their  land  batteries  against  us,  but  their 
shell  burst  in  our  rear. 

The  carriage  of  32-pounder  No.  — was  struck  by  fragment  of  shell 
on  trunnion  plate,  and  considerably  injured,  the  fragment  having 
penetrated  the  top  of  the  upright.  It  can  probably  be  used  for  some 
time. 

The  following  are  the  only  casualties  : 

Lieut.  J.  D.  Ford,  Company  B,  Lucas’  battalion,  South  Carolina 
Artillery,  contusion  of  the  hip,  slight ; and  Private  H.  M.  Hughes, 
Company  E,  Charleston  Battalion,  hand  badly  cut  by  fragment  of 
shell ; since  amputated. 

Having  received  no  instructions  to  the  contrary,  I am  preparing  to 
remount  the  smooth-bore  32-pounder  belonging  to  the  sea  face  on  the 
left  salient  of  land  face,  using  the  chassis  formerly  belonging  to  it, 
on  which  the  rifled  32-pounder  was  mounted.  All  this  depends,  how- 
ever, upon  the  enemy’s  fire  to-night. 


474  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 


[Chap.  XL. 


Captain  Gregorie  is  preparing  a traverse  to  protect  it  from  the  sea 
fire  of  the  enemy. 

He  put  up  a small  traverse  on  the  parapet  of  columbiad  while  a 
hot  fire  was  going  on. 

Captain  Pringle  has  been  exceedingly  energetic,  as  chief  of  artil- 
tery,  and  our  fire  this  morning  was  well  directed. 

Both  guns  were  fired  at  an  elevation  of  2°. 

The  monitor  was  seen  to  move  quickly  forward  at  the  flash  of  our 

funs.  If  no  other  rifled  gun  is  to  be  sent  here,  please  direct  what 
isposition  shall  be  made  of  the  rifled  shell  at  Cumming’s  Point,  and 
the  few  here.  A 10-inch  columbiad  chassis  should  be  hurried  for- 
ward. When  can  I expect  it  ? Ten-inch  shot  are  badly  needed  at 
Battery  Gregg. 

The  Twentieth  and  Twenty-first  South  Carolina  Regiments  man 
this  battery  and  furnish  fatigues. 

The  First  Georgia  pickets  part  of  the  beach,  and  awaits  relief  at 
Cumming’s  Point,  being  very  much  exhausted. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

LAWRENCE  M.  KEITT, 

Colonel,  Commanding. 

Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  Battery  Wagner, 

August  19,  1863. 

Captain  : I reported  yesterday  evening  the  events  of  the  day  up 
to  about  5 p.  m. 

Just  before  this  time,  the  enemy,  annoyed  by  our  sharpshooters, 
fired  small  Parrott  guns  at  their  positions,  lasting  a short  time,  and 
at  6.30  p.  m.  they  opened  a fire  of  small  mortars,  lasting  about  an 
hour. 

The  men  who  had  been  in  the  rifle-pits  in  front  during  the  day  re- 
ported the  death  oi  Private  Ellerbee  Braddock,  Company  D,  Twenty- 
first  South  Carolina  V olunteers ; killed  by  shot  in  the  head  from 
enemy’s  sharpshooters. 

At  9 p.  m.  our  picket  in  front  reported  that  the  enemy  showed  no 
disposition  to  advance,  but  were  working  busily,  apparently  driving 
stakes  in  their  old  position. 

The  First  Georgia  was  at  Cumming’s  Point,  awaiting  relief,  and 
furnished  30  men  for  beach  picket.  The  Twentieth  South  Caro- 
lina furnished  30  men  for  beach  picket,  the  garrison  guard  64,  and 
front  picket  of  100.  The  Twenty -first  South  Carolina  furnished  two 
fatigue  parties  of  100  each  for  the  engineer,  working  all  night ; no 
fire  on  either  side.  The  sea  face  was  worked  over,  and  traverses 
placed  on  parapets  of  its  right  and  center  chambers,  to  guard  against 
left-oblique  fire  of  the  monitors,  such  as  destroyed  the  rifled  gun. 

A commencement  was  made  toward  placing  the  old  smooth-bore 
32-pounder  in  the  salient,  but  I finally  determined,  with  the  advice  of 
my  artillery  and  engineer  officers,  to  mount  it  where  it  stood,  in  place 
of  the  now  worthless  rifled  gun.  I hope  to  do  so  to-night.  The  chassis 
was,  therefore,  replaced  by  Captain  Pringle.  The  chief  difficulty 
feared  was  the  large  amount  of  labor  and  sand-bags  required  to  make 
a traverse  to  protect  this  gun  in  the  salient. 

A cool  and  high  wind  prevailed  yesterday,  driving  sand  about,  to 
the  great  discomfort  of  our  men. 


Chap.  XL .] 


475 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 


This  morning,  the  enemy  at  5 a.  m.  opened  comparatively  a slow 
mortar  fire  on  this  battery  and  rapid  fire  against  Fort  Sumter  from 
various  land  batteries,  including  that  one  in  our  front. 

Captain  Chichester,  who  is  still  too  unwell  for  active  duty,  ob- 
served a large  transport  ashore  on  large  sand  bank  running  out  from 
south  end  of  Morris  Island,  and  afterward  two  large  barges  high 
up  Vincent’s  Creek. 

Captain  Pringle  is  still  acting  chief  of  artillery.  At  8.30  a.  m.  the 
Ironsides  drew  up  to  about  1,500  yards  of  this  battery,  and  drew  up 
a little  closer  about  11  a.  m.,  but  quiet.  The  monitors  remained  about 
2i  miles  off. 

The  enemy’s  shelling  slacked  about  quarter  to  9,  and  has  since  been 
very  irregular  and  slow,  doing  no  harm  up  to  about  1.30  to  2 p.  m., 
when  it  ceased. 

At  1.10  p.  m.  to-day,  the  Ironsides,  which  had  been  lying  broad- 
side to  us,  opened  fire,  evidently  to  dismount  the  columbiad,  and 
though  their  fire  toward  the  last  was  rapid  and  pretty  accurate,  no 
damage  was  done,  and  it  ceased  about  a quarter  after  2 p.  m. 

The  parapet  and  the  top  of  bomb-proof  just  to  the  right  and  left 
of  my  headquarters  were  struck  repeatedly. 

I made  an  effort  to  cause  a diverson  this  morning  in  favor  of 
Fort  Sumter,  by  directing  the  fire  of  Battery  Gregg  upon  the  en- 
emy’s Morris  Island  batteries,  but  Lieutenant  Pringle  found  that  the 
fire  which  the  enemy  then  turned  upon  him  was  more  than  his  bat- 
tery could  well  stand,  and  soon  ceased. 

A detailed  report  on  this  matter  and  the  condition  of  Battery 
Gregg,  by  my  chief  of  artillery,  will  be  sent  you  with  this,  and  I 
urge  that  a new  10-inch  carriage  be  sent,  as  advised  by  him.* 

The  enemy’s  sappers  have  been  throwing  an  earthwork  to-day  just 
in  front  of  their  most  advanced  stockade,  working  slowly,  and  pro- 
tecting themselves  as  they  advance,  being  out  of  sight. 

At  5 p.  m.  the  enemy’s  monitor  fleet  commenced  to  approach  this 
battery.  One  went  as  far  as  the  buoy  and  turned  back.  I was  in- 
formed at  the  same  time  that  the  sling-cart  at  Battery  Gregg  had 
been  disabled,  one  wheel  badly  wounded.  Another  sling-cart,  or 
a new  wheel  for  the  present  cart  must  be  sent ; without  this,  it  may 
be  impossible  to  use  a new  10-inch  chassis,  if  you  send  one. 

At  5.30  p.  m.  the  monitor  fleet  commenced  to  draw  off. 

In  my  account  of  the  action  yesterday,  I omitted  to  make  honor- 
able mention  of  Sergeant  [William]  Satterfield,  of  Company  B, 
Lucas’  battalion,  who  acted  as  gunner  for  the  rifled  32-pounder,  and 
of  Sergeant  [Robert]  Swanston,  Company  K,  First  South  Carolina 
[Artillery],  gunner  of  the  columbiad.  Both  deserve  credit,  and  the 
former  is  highly  commended  by  Captain  Pringle. 

The  isolated  condition  of  this  island  is  hardly  deserved  by  those 
who  are  defending  it. 

For  nearly  forty  hours  there  has  not  been  any  small  boat  even  com- 
municating with  Cumming’s  Point.  I have  no  means  of  forwarding 
my  reports  to  you,  and  will  send  my  quartermaster,  if  possible,  to 
suggest  facilities. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

LAWRENCE  M.  KEITT, 

Colonel , Commanding. 


Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant-General. 


* See  No.  47  ; report  of  Capt.  Robert  Pringle,  p.  545. 


[Chap.  XL. 


476  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

P.  S.—  Private  H.  Mehrtens,  Company  G,  First  Volunteers, 
Georgia  Regiment,  while  at  Battery  Gregg  this  morning,  had  his 
leg  shot  off,  and  died  in  forty  minutes. 

No  other  casualties  to-day. 


August  19,  1863— p.  m. 

The  enemy  pushed  forward  a rifle-pit  to-day  50  yards  in  advance 
of  their  last  stockade,  working  with  sappers. 

They  fired  upon  our  pickets  to-night,  while  being  posted,  hut  they 
hold  their  ground. 

LAWRENCE  M.  KEITT, 

Colonel,  Commanding. 

Captain  Nance. 


Headquarters  Battery  Wagner, 

August  20,  1863. 

Captain  : I had  the  honor  yesterday  of  reporting  affairs  to  you 
up  to  7 p.  m. 

The  picket  in  the  rifle-pit  reported  that  they  had  during  the  day 
fired  upon  two  suspicious  men  dressed  in  brownish-gray,  without 
arms,  in  the  marsh  about  500  yards  off. 

In  posting  the  new  picket,  the  enemy  fired  some  20  shots  on  them, 
very  slightly  wounding  Lieutenant  [W.  J.]  Altmon,  Company  I, 
Twenty-first  South  Carolina,  who,  however,  remained  on  duty  and 
held  his  ground. 

The  enemy  were  quiet  during  the  night,  but  doubtless  worked  on. 
I furnished  sufficient  men  to  Captain  Gregorie,  engineer,  who  worked 
on  until  3. 15  a.  m. , repairing  sea  face  and  south  magazine  (A),  also  em- 
brasures on  southwest  bastion. 

I opened  no  fire,  as  I wished  to  press  on  the  engineer  work,  and 
about  lip.  m.  Major  Pringle,  assistant  quartermaster,  called  at  Bat- 
tery Wagner  and  urged  that  the  debarkation  of  the  stores  from 
steamer  Chesterfield,  going  on  with  the  assistance  of  the  navy,  should 
proceed  uninterrupted.  I therefore  waited  to  hear  that  the  stores 
were  landed,  but  Captain  Guerard,  assistant  quartermaster,  could  not 
finish  this  until  3 a.  m. , and  when  his  report  came  it  was  too  late  to 
open. 

Company  H,  Second  South  Carolina  Artillery,  Captain  Kennady, 
reported  about  10.30  p.  m.  and  relieved  Captain  Miles’  company, 
Charleston  Battalion.  The  Charleston  Battalion  relieved  the  First 
Georgia  Regiment,  throwing  out  beach  pickets  and  furnishing  fatigue 
at  Cumming’s  Point.  Lieutenant  Stiles  reported  for  engineer  duty 
at  Battery  Gregg,  and  Mr.  Stewart,  assistant  engineer  of  this  battery, 
left,  but  the  relief  for  him  never  came. 

This  morning  at  an  early  hour,  the  enemy  directed  a mortar  fire 
upon  the  sand-hills  for  nearly  an  hour,  evidently  to  worry  our  troops, 
as  they  even  fired  from  the  fleet  afterward  at  2 officers,  bathing. 

About  11  a.  m.  several  of  the  enemy’s  wooden  gunboats  opened 
on  this  battery,  at  long  range,  the  shots  mostly  striking  to  the  rear. 

The  enemy’s  sappers  were  observed  to  continue  their  work,  push- 
ing on  under  cover,  and  at  midday  were  estimated  at  probably  600 
yards  from  our  work,  and  have  been  since  advancing. 


Chap.  XL.] 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 


477 


Last  night  Major  War  ley  reported  as  chief  of  artillery,  hut  being 
unwell,  Captain  Pringle  was  - continued  on  duty,  and  this  afternoon 
Major  Warley  took  charge,  and  assigned  Captain  Pringle  to  duty  as 
liis  assistant.  Captain  Pringle  has  exhibited  strict  attention  to  his 
duty.  To  interrupt  enemy’s  work,  I had  a fire  opened  at  1.05  p.  m. 
with  three  guns,  which  ended  at  1.30  p.  m.,  in  consequence  of  a fire 
from  the  Ironsides,  which  had  been  lying  broadside  to  us  to-day, 
about  1,500  yards  off  ; this  fire  being  too  severe  on  our  gunners, 
taken  in  connection  with  the  heavy  fire  elicited  from  enemy’s  land 
batteries  and  sharpshooters. 

One  11-inch  shell  exploded  in  rear  part  of  chamber  of  32-pounder 
on  land  curtain,  slightly  wounding  Corporal  [James]  McKin,  Lucas’ 
battalion,  who  will  return  to  duty. 

The  Ironsides  ceased  fire  about  3 p.  m.,  after  pounding  away  heavily 
on  both  sides  of  my  headquarters.  The  fire  of  the  wooden  gunboats 
continued  about  an  hour  or  so  longer. 

The  latter  part  of  the  afternoon  has  been  quiet. 

I will  make  sand-bag  protection  in  the  rifle-pits  to-night  for  the 
picket  to-morrow,  and  hope  to  open  a brisk  fire  of  riflemen  from  this 
battery. 

My  sharpshooters  have  done  little  to-day,  being  worn  out  by  long 
service.  I hope  to  open  an  artillery  fire  about  midnight  on  enemy’s 
works.  To  open  sooner  would  interfere  with  engineer  work. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

LAWRENCE  M.  KEITT, 

Colonel,  Commanding . 


Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


P.  S. — Sergeant  [Robert  C.]  Rogers,  of  Company  C,  Siege  Train, 
received  flesh  wound  in  his  side. 


Headquarters  Morris  Island, 
Battery  Wagner,  August  21,  1863 — 2 a.  m. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  I have  just  been  relieved 
by  Brigadier-General  Hagood,  and  have  turned  over  this  battery, 
with  the  pickets  drawn  in  and  land  guns  ready  to  open  on  enemy’s 
advanced  lines.  I sent  last  evening,  by  Captain  Chichester,  a report 
of  affairs  up  to  7 p.  m. 

I omitted  to  mention  in  this  that  the  carriages  of  one  of  the  12- 
pounder  howitzers  at  Cumming’s  Point  has  been  entirely  disabled, 
the  right  wheel  being  broken  and  the  axle  bent  by  the  enemy’s  shot. 
A new  carriage  is  required  without  delay. 

The  mortar  bed  required  at  Battery  Gregg  has  not  been  landed, 
and  a new  carriage,  as  already  reported,  is  needed  for  one  of  the 
columbiads. 

The  guns  on  the  sea  face  of  Battery  Wagner  are — 

First.  One  smooth-bore  32-pounder,  intended  to  rake  the  beach  and 
part  of  enemy’s  stockade,  and  protected  by  a traverse  on  the  left 
from  the  enfilading  fire  of  the  enemy,  which  destroyed  the  rifled  gun. 

Second.  Ten-inch  columbiad  in  working  order,  with  about  50  solid 
shot.  The  traversing  gear  gets  out  of  order  easily,  and  without  it 
the  gun  cannot  easily  be  moved  on  the  inequalities  of  the  traverse 
circle. 

Third.  The  old  10-inch  columbiad  useless  for  want  of  a new 
chassis. 


[Chap.  XL. 


478  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

The  land  guns  can  all  be  fixed,  though  two  barbette  carriages  on 
the  curtain  are  badly  hurt. 

The  magazines  are  well  protected,  and  though  there  has  been  some 
sand  knocked  and  blown  oft  the  top  of  the  bomb-proof,  that  is  also 
safe. 

The  most  imminent  danger  to  Battery  Wagner  is  from  the  enemy’s 
approaches  by  their  skillful  engineer  troops,  who,  by  means  of  a 
very  large  gabion  or  sap-roller,  pushed  obliquely  in  front  of  them, 
work  in  the  day  time,  and  threaten  to  gain  the  rifle-pits  on  the  sand 
ridge  in  our  front.  This  gained,  they  could  erect  breaching  batteries, 
knock  down  the  parapet  of  the  land  curtain,  and,  by  a sudden  rush, 
storm  the  battery. 

Feeling  the  inadequacy  of  the  means  at  my  command  to  prevent 
this  (although  I might  check  it  from  time  to  time),  I applied  yester- 
day to  Lieutenant  Markoe,  signal  officer,  to  open  communication 
between  Battery  Wagner  and  Shell  Point,  so  that  I might  direct  the 
fire  of  the  Shell  Point  (Simkins’)  battery  upon  these  approaches. 

Lieutenant  Markoe  reported  during  the  night,  and  promised  to 
open  the  communication  this  morning.  A safe  place  for  the  operator 
at  Wagner  was  selected  by  my  engineer. 

Much  could  be  done  by  Sumter  to  drive  back  the  enemy,  but  I 
presume  that  Colonel  Rhett  would  not  wish  to  draw  the  fire  of  the 
enemy  upon  his  sea-face  guns. 

My  Whitworth  rifle  sharpshooters  were  comparatively  inactive 
yesterday.  I had  intended  to  give  special  attention  to  them  to-day, 
and  made  arrangements  to  have  a large  number  of  Enfield  rifles 
firing  upon  the  sap-roller. 

There  is  plenty  of  powder,  grape,  and  cannister  at  Battery  Wag- 
ner, but  the  supply  of  8-inch  and  32-pounder  shell  has  been  totally 
inadequate.  In  addition  to  this  32-pounder  shell  have  been  sent  down, 
sabots  larger  than  the  caliber  of  the  gun. 

I was  informed  an  hour  since  of  the  arrival  of  more  8-inch  shell 
at  Cumming’s  Point. 

There  are  no  important  incidents  since  my  last  report. 

The  picket  in  front  (detailed  from  Twentieth  South  Carolina)  went 
out  early  and  took  position  as  usual,  increasing  the  advance  to  30. 
The  enemy  afterward  deployed  a much  larger  number,  estimated  at 
200  men,  40  to  50  yards  in  front  of  them,  but  kept  quiet. 

The  engineer  party  (from  Twenty-first  South  Carolina)  repaired 
the  holes  in  sea  face,  &c. , made  by  Ironsides  in  the  morning,  placed 
spiked  plank  in  the  moat  and  put  sand-bag  revetment  (in  place  of 
plank  which  was  falling  in)  on  the  left  of  Magazine  A,  land  face. 
I have  no  report  of  work  done  at  Cumming’s  Point. 

The  sharpshooters  from  Eighth  North  Carolina  reported,  and  re- 
lieved those  of  Twenty-first  South  Carolina.  At  1 a.  m.  to-day,  a 
sentinel  reported  that  a rocket  had  been  sent  up  and  three  guns  from 
enemy’s  fleet,  he  thought  from  the  Ironsides. 

Captain  Chichester’s  services  have  been  very  valuable,  and  he  re- 
mained one  day  as  a volunteer,  when  relieved  by  Major  Warley, 
though  hardly  able  to  walk,  from  exhaustion. 

I am,  very  respectfully, 

LAWRENCE  M.  KEITT, 

Colonel,  Commanding. 

Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Chap.  XL.] 


479 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 

Llnclosure.] 

Battery  Wagner,  Ordnance  Department, 

August  21,  1863. 

Capt.  P.  K.  Molony, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General  : 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  report  the  arrival  of  300  8-inch  shell 
at  Cumming’s  Point  last  night,  an  adequate  supply  for  five  days. 

The  last  32-pounder  shell  has  been  fired,  and  though  earnest  and 
repeated  appeals  have  been  made  to  avoid  this  emergency,  it  has 
been  without  avail. 

The  last  supply  sent  was  useless,  on  account  of  sabot  being  6.6- 
inch  instead  of  6. 4.  Other  sabots  are  required  to  obviate  the  diffi- 
culty. 

Double-barrel  shotguns  have  been  sent  down,  for  land  assault,  but 
with  loose  shot  and  powder.  As  many  cartridges  as  possible  have 
been  made  up,  but  want  of  paper  and  cord  require  that  they  be  made 
at  the  arsenal  or  that  powder  pouches  be  furnished. 

Ample  supply  of  9 and  10  inch  and  42-pounder  shot  and  shell.  A 
quantity  of  12-pounder  howitzer  shrapnel  and  spherical  case  required; 
canister  and  grape  for  8-inch  and  32-pounders,  large  surplus,  also  of 
small  ammunition.  Paper  friction  tubes  proved  worthless. 

I have  the  honor  to  remain,  captain,  your  obedient  servant, 

CHAS.  S.  HILL, 

Captain  Artillery,  and  Ordnance  Officer . 


Headquarters  Battery  Wagner, 
Morris  Island.  September  3,  1863 — 9 p.  m. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  I arrived  here  last  night 
about  11.30  p.  m.  and  relieved  General  Colquitt,  who  left  with  his 
staff  (including  ordnance  officer)  this  morning. 

The  Twenty-fifth  South  Carolina  arrived  and  relieved  the  Eighth 
North  Carolina,  which  left.  The  Thirty-second  Georgia  were  also  re- 
lieved, but  the  steamer  did  not  wait  for  them,  the  last  barge  leaving 
Battery  Gregg  about  3 a.  m.  Hunter’s  company  (A)  relieved  [Thomas 
K.]  Legard’s,  company  (F),  Second  South  Carolina  Artillery,  and 
Kanapaux  Light  Artillery  relieved  detachment  of  Chatham  Artil- 
lery. Inclosed  morning  reports  will  show  the  garrison  I found  here 
when  the  reliefs  were  completed.  Capt.  T.  B.  Lee,  engineer  in 
charge,  worked  50  men  raising  the  left  of  the  curtain  (land  side). 
He  also  superintended  putting  up  some  sand-bag  protection  for 
riflemen.  Captain  [M.  M.]  Gray  planted  a lot  of  torpedoes  in  front 
of  this  battery,  during  which  one  of  his  men,  Thomas  McNall, 
crawled  upon  a torpedo  and  exploded  it,  inflicting  a very  dangerous 
wound.  The  night  passed  quietly,  the  enemy  made  no  demonstra- 
tion ; they  were  observed  working  at  their  approaches  about  3 a.  m. 

This  morning  the  enemy  fired  mortars  occasionally,  from  an  early 
hour,  but  at  10.30  a.  m.  increased  it  suddenly  for  awhile,  and  one 
shell  falling  near  the  flanking  curtain,  killed  1 and  wounded  3 
slightly.  (See  surgeon’s  list  inclosed.)*  This  fire  slackened  soon  and 
was  renewed  at  intervals  during  the  day.  No  firing  against  Battery 
Gregg.  Engineer  work  went  on  during  the  day  by  fits  and  starts, 
raising  flank  defenses  on  the  left,  to  protect  against  a rush  of  the 
enemy  by  the  beach,  and  making  ramps  for  the  field  guns. 


* Not  found. 


480 


S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 


[Chap.  XL. 


The  enemy  opened  briskly  with  their  mortars  at  dark,  wounding 
3 men  (see  list*),  1 severely,  2 very  slight. 

The  engineer  here  has  100  men  working  to-night,  and  more  will 
be  given  if  asked  for.  Lieutenant  Moses  is  mounting  the  Dahlgren 
gun  at  Gregg,  and  Stiles  has  50  soldiers  in  addition  to  100  negroes. 
I keep  the  lines  manned  during  the  night  notwithstanding  the  shell- 
ing. Colonel  Harris  called  this  evening  and  took  a memorandum 
of  my  wants.  Under  his  recommendation,  I will  move  up  the  re- 
maining field  piece  from  Cumming’s  Point  to-morrow. 

Captain  Johnson,  Palmetto  Battalion  Light  Artillery,  reports  his 
company  worn  down  by  continuous  service  at  Shell  Point  and  Mor- 
ris Island.  Please  send  a strong  and  efficient  company  to  relieve  him. 
Two  monitors  (hulls  painted  red)  lay  off  this  battery  to-day,  about 
1,500  yards  off,  watching  our  movements. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

LAWRENCE  M.  KEITT, 

Colonel , Commanding. 

Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant-General. 

[Indorsement.] 

Respectfully  forwarded.  Most  of  the  suggestions  of  Colonel  Keitt, 
and  some  of  his  wants  were  supplied  before  the  reception  of  this  re- 
port. The  remainder  are  ordered. 

R.  S.  RIPLEY, 

Brigadier-  General , Commanding , 

[Inclosure.] 

Field  report  of  forces  on  Morris  Island,  commanded  by  Col.  L.  M.  Keitt . Septem- 
ber 3,  1863. 


Regiment. 


25th  South  Carolina 

27th  Georgia 

28th  Georgia 

32d  Georgia 

Artillery 

Total 


For  duty. 

Sick. 

Effective  total. 

Total. 

Aggregate. 

Commissioned  offi- 
cers. 

Non-commissioned 

officers. 

Privates. 

Commissioned  offi- 
cers. 

N on-commissioned 
officers. 

Privates. 

36 

68 

423 

1 

3 

491 

495 

531 

24 

38 

151 

i 

2 

5 

189 

196 

221 

23 

53 

136 

1 

3 

12 

189 

205 

228 

23 

37 

294 

331 

354 

11 

187 

5 

192 

197 

208 

117 

196 

1,191 

2 

6 

25 

1,392 

1,093 

1,542 

Note  on  original.— The  32d  Georgia  are  merely  awaiting  transportation. 


LAWRENCE  M.  KEITT, 

Colonel , Commanding. 


Headquarters  Battery  Wagner, 

September  5,  1863 — 4 a.  m. 

Captain:  I sent  last  evening  by  Major  Warley  my  report  up  to 
9 p.  m.  The  enemy  have  been  quiet  during  the  night.  I opened  on 


*Not  found. 


Chap.  XL.]  OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C.  481 

their  works  during  the  early  part  of  the  night  with  five  guns  and 
the  mortar,  with  a deplorable  small  supply  of  powder,  and  kept  up 
the  fire  until  about  11  p.  m.,  when  I received  the  following  dispatch  : 

Colonel  Keitt  : 

Three  regiments  of  infantry  are  said  to  be  advancing  on  Wagner. 

H.  H.  ROGERS, 

Aide-de-Camp. 

In  consequence  of  this,  I immediately  suspended  fire,  loading  all 
the  guns  with  grape  and  canister  and  putting  a]l  the  infantry  in 
position  at  the  parapets,  where  they  remained  about  two  hours.  I 
then  allowed  one-half  to  sleep  until  3.30  a.  m.,  when  the  whole  gar- 
rison was  again  roused  up.  I had  the  mortar  and  12-pounder  how- 
itzer and  sea-coast  howitzer  on  flank  then  fired,  at  4 a.  m.  The  enemy 
immediately  replied  to  the  fire  of  the  sea-coast  howitzer  by  a shot 
from  the  large  Parrott  gun  on  their  stockade  battery,  which  struck 
in  front,  throwing  sand  over  the  detachment.  The  gun  was  immedi- 
ately masked,  for  fear  of  its  being  dismounted. 

At  4. 30  a.  m.  the  6nemy  opened  a mortar  fire  on  this  battery. 

Between  500  and  600  pounds  of  powder  arrived  last  night;  1,000 
pounds  are  much  needed  and  should  be  sent  at  once.  I needed  an- 
other water-boat  and  a small  four  or  two  oared  dispatch-boat  (with 
oars,  &c.)  for  the  post  at  Battery  Gregg.  Do  send  them  to-day. 

The  Twenty-fifth  South  Carolina  will  man  them.  I send  this  by 
Ordnance  Sergeant  Leathe,  who  can  give  further  information  about 
ordnance  stores,  &c.,  and  who  is  charged  to  have  two  truck  hand- 
spikes repaired  for  10-inch  columbiads.  Please  afford  him  all  facil- 
ities. 

Captain  Johnson’s  company  of  Palmetto  Battalion  Light  Artillery 
must  be  relieved  to-day.  Send  two  reserved  companies  of  artillery 
and  some  information  as  to  the  use  of  hand-grenades. 

Very  respectfully,  &c., 

LAWKENCE  M.  KEITT, 

Colonel , Commanding. 

Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  Battery  Wagner, 

September  5,  1863 — 6 a.  m. 

Captain  : I sent  you  by  Sergeant  Leathe  this  morning  a report  of 
affairs  up  to  4.30  a.  m.,  and  now  commence  journal  for  the  day. 

At  that  time  the  enemy  had  opened  a mortar  fire  on  this  battery. 

The  dawning  revealed  a United  States  flag  planted  on  the  en- 
emy’s work,  300  to  400  yards  in  front,  this  morning,  and  their  main 
line  strengthened,  with  probably  a small  advancement  of  the  parallel 
which  they  have  to  run  from  about  the  termination  of  their  main  ap- 
proach. Our  riflemen  opened  early,  and  a field  piece  fired  2 shots, 
but  the  enemy  opened  slowly  just  before  5 with  large  Parrott  guns, 
first  at  flank  curtain  and  then  at  center  curtain,  with  a few  shots  at 
the  elevated  points  used  by  our  sharpshooters.  The  Ironsides  soon 
drew  up  to  about  1,500  yards  at,  say,  5.20  a.  m. ; opened  fire  rapidly. 
I ordered  one-fourth  the  infantry  to  remain  on  the  lines,  balance  to 
seek  shelter  in  the  bomb-proof  and  passages.  A few  minutes  ago  1 
man  (Private  J.  P.  Worsham,  [Joseph  C.]  Burgess’  company, 
31  R R— VOL  XXVIII,  PT  I 


482  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  EL  A. 


[Chap.  XL. 


Twenty-fifth  South  Carolina  Volunteers)  was  killed  and  1 wounded, 
on  the  flank  curtain. 

8.30  a.  m.  The  bombardment  of  the  Ironsides  terminated  at  7.45; 
combined  with  the  land  fire  was  rapid  and  fatal  in  its  effects,  falling 
heavily  upon  the  Twenty-fifth  South  Carolina  Volunteers.  The 
principal  damage  was  done  by  a shell  exploding  in  the  entrance  to 
the  parade  between  the  sally-port  and  the  passage  opposite,  throwing 
fragments  into  the  crowd  in  the  passage  (between  Magazine  C and 
bomb-proof),  wounding  a large  number  and  creating  a general 
stampede  for  the  bomb-proof,  which  I was  obliged  to  check.  In- 
closed are  rough  lists  of  casualties  up  to  this  hour.  * The  Ironsides 
knocked  down  a large  lot  of  sand  from  the  traverse  above  the  head- 
quarters passage,  and  the  continual  fire  of  rifled  guns  is  shaking  down 
more.  The  exit  to  the  rear  is  nearly  blocked  up,  but  I have  a detail 
working  to  replace.  There  has  been  a heavy  rifled  gun  fire  upon  the 
south  end  of  bomb-proof,  knocking  away  half  the  traverse  in  front  of 
the  stairs  leading  to  the  left  salient  from  the  bomb-proof  and  Maga- 
zine B. 

I have  assigned  Captain  Lesesne  to  the  command  of  Battery  Gregg. 
Captain  Huguenin  ranks  him  and  remains  chief  of  artillery. 

The  9-inch  Dahlgren  was  not  mounted  last  night,  in  spite  of  my 
efforts.  The  enemy  appear  determined  to  keep  a heavy  fire  against 
this  battery.  I will  send  the  slightly  wounded  to  the  sand-hills. 
This  bombardment  is  probably  a preliminary  to  an  assault  or  an  at- 
tempt to  penetrate  bomb-proof  and  magazine  by  continual  displace- 
ment of  sand. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

LAWRENCE  M.  KEITT, 

Colonel,  Commanding . 


Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


[P.  S.] — Send  candles. 


Morris  Island,  via  Fort  Johnson,  September  5,  1863. 

(Received  September  6 — 12.45  a.  m.) 

I had  about  900,  and  not  1,400,  men.  About  100  of  these  to-day 
were  killed  and  wounded.  The  parapet  of  salient  is  bddly  breached. 
The  whole  fort  is  much  weakened.  A repetition  to-morrow  of  to- 
day’s fire  will  make  the  fort  almost  a ruin.  The  mortar  fire  is  still 
very  heavy  and  fatal,  and  no  important  work  can  be  done. 

Is  it  desirable  to  sacrifice  the  garrison  ? To  continue  to  hold  it  is 
to  do  so.  Captain  [T.  B.]  Lee,  the  engineer,  has  read  this  and  agrees. 
Act  promptly  and  answer  at  once. 

LAWRENCE  M.  KEITT. 

Colonel,  Commanding. 

Captain  Nance,  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

Morris  Island, 
September  6.  1863—3. 15  p.  m. 

Will  boats  be  here  to-night  for  garrison  ? If  so,  at  what  time  ? 
And  if  our  sacrifice  be  of  benefit,  I am  ready.  Let  it  be  said  so,  and 
I will  storm  the  enemy’s  works  at  once,  or  lose  every  man  here. 


*Not  found. 


Chap.  XL.] 


483 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 

The  enemy  are  within  50  yards  of  ns,  and  before  day  dawns  we 
should  assault  him  if  we  remain  here.  Answer  positively  and  at 
once.  Assistant  Engineer  Stiles  has  just  inspected  the  fort ; he 
says  it  is  untenable. 

LAWRENCE  M.  KEITT, 

Colonel , Commanding. 

Captain  Nance. 


Charleston,  S.  C., 

September  7,  1863. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  make  the  following  report  of  the 
evacuation  of  Morris  Island,  including  Batteries  W agner  and  Gregg, 
by  the  troops  under  my  command,  on  the  night  of  the  6th  instant : 

This  step  was  authorized  by  a dispatch  sent  by  signals  from  dis- 
trict headquarters,  and  received  by  me  between  4 and  5 p.  m. , and 
directed  in  detail  by  a special  order  from  department  headquarters, 
which  was  received  from  Captain  [W.  G.]  McCabe,  of  General 
Ripley’s  staff,  at  dark,  and  was  necessitated  from  the  untenable  con- 
dition of  Battery  Wagner,  the  greatly  exhausted  condition  of  the 
garrison,  and  constant  artillery  and  sharpshooting  fire  of  the  enemy, 
which  prevented  repairs.  The  gradual  approaches  of  the  enemy  had 
passed  the  front  of  the  battery,  and  the  termination  of  their  sap 
was  not  over  50  yards  from  the  parapet  of  the  sea  face,  enabling 
them  to  throw  a mass  of  troops  upon  this  flank  when  our  men  were 
mostly  in  the  bomb-proofs,  where  I was  forced  to  keep  them  by  the 
unceasing  fire  of  mortars  and  rifled  guns  on  land,  with  an  enfilading 
fire  from  the  fleet  during  most  of  the  day.  The  salient  on  the  left 
of  the  battery  had  been  swept  by  such  a terrible  cross-fire  as  to 
breach  the  parapet  and  throw  it  into  irregular  shapes,  rendering 
the  ascent  from  the  moat  easy,  and  moreover,  men  could  not  be  kept 
there  during  this  cross-fire  without  the  certainty  of  most  of  them 
being  wounded  or  stunned.  This  salient  is  the  part  of  the  work 
gained  by  the  enemy  in  the  assault  of  July  18. 

As  soon  as  the  evacuation  was  authorized,  I gave  detailed  instruc- 
tions to  the  regimental  commanders,  viz,  Lieut.  Col.  John  G.  Press- 
ley,  commanding  Twenty-fifth  South  Carolina  Volunteers;  Maj. 
James  Gardner,  commanding  Twenty-seventh  Georgia  Volunteers ; 
Capt.  W.  P.  Crawford,  commanding  Twenty-eighth  Georgia  Vol- 
unteers, for  the  gradual  movement  of  their  men  to  Cumming’s  Point, 
so  as  to  keep  up  an  effective  front  to  the  enemy,  and  insure  silence 
and  promptness.  They  expressed  their  hearty  approval,  believing 
an  evacuation  necessary  to  prevent  a useless  sacrifice  of  men.  The 
men  went  down  as  if  for  special  duty,  and  though  the  most  intelli- 
gent knew  the  fact,  nearly  all  went  off  as  if  going  to  be  relieved. 

Captain  Huguenin,  chief  of  artillery,  was  promptly  notified  of 
the  steps  to  be  taken,  and  made  his  arrangements  with  my  sanc- 
tion for  the  removal  of  the  artillery,  and  the  written  orders  when 
received  were  submitted  to  him  for  his  guidance.  He  was  intrusted 
with  the  delicate  duty  of  bringing  up  the  extreme  rear  and  firing  the 
only  magazine  which  contained  powder,  Lieutenant  Mazyck,  ord- 
nance officer,  being  ordered  to  assist  him.  His  report,  with  Lieu- 
tenant Mazyck’s,  is  inclosed,  marked  A,  and  is  referred  to  as  an 
important  portion  of  this  report.  * 


*See  No.  43,  p.  536. 


484  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

At  dark,  I sent  to  Capt.  H.  R.  Lesesne,  who  was  commanding-  Bat- 
tery Gregg,  an  order  to  prepare  to  blow  np  liis  magazine  and  render 
his  gnus  unserviceable,  directing  him  to  confer  with  Capt.  F.  D.  Lee, 
of  the  engineers,  who  had  read  the  orders.  I had  no  copy  of  the 
detailed  order,  which  came  late,  to  give  him,  which  was  thus  not 
communicated  to  him.  I refer  you  to  his  report,  marked  B,  for  par- 
ticulars. * 

To  anticipate  the  possibility  of  a pursuit  by  the  enemy  while  re- 
treating from  Wagner,  I ordered  Lieut.  Robert  M.  Stiles,  chief  en- 
gineer at  Battery  Gregg,  to  construct  a rifle-pit  across  the  island  at 
a narrow  point  about  a quarter  of  a mile  in  advance  of  Battery 
Gregg.  This  was  accomplished  by  him  after  dark,  while  under  mor- 
tar fire,  with  a force  of  77  negroes  in  his  charge.  He  also  cut  away 
most  of  the  earth  covering  of  the  magazine  on  the  side  toward  our 
James  Island  batteries,  then  sent  his  negroes  off  to  Fort  Johnson, 
using  a large  flat  left  at  Cumming’s  Point  for  that  purpose. 

Owing  to  the  necessity  of  protecting  the  already  reduced  garrison, 
I had,  early  on  the  morning  of  the  6th  instant,  made  the  following 
disposition  of  my  troops : The  Twenty-seventh  Georgia  Regiment, 
effective  total  175  men,  commanded  by  Major  Gardner,  a gallant 
and  intelligent  officer,  were  in  the  sand-hills,  well  protected  in  pits 
dug  there,  the  hillocks  being  natural  traverses.  Fifty  men  of  the 
Twenty-eighth  Georgia,  under  Captain  [M.  ] Adams,  who  had  picketed 
the  beach  during  the  night,  were  also  there  ; the  remainder  of  the 
regiment,  numbering  130  effectives,  were  assigned  to  the  extreme 
right  of  Battery  W agner  ; about  45  kept  out  on  the  lines  and  the  re- 
mainder in  the  bomb-proof.  The  Twenty-fifth  South  Carolina  (Eu- 
taw)  Regiment,  which  had  been  terribly  reduced  by  casualties  and 
sickness,  during  the  day  and  night  preceding,  to  an  effective  total  of 
about  365  men,  manned  the  left  and  center  of  the  battery,  keeping 
only  a guard  of  each  company  on  its  respective  position  of  the  lines, 
the  remainder  in  the  bomb-proof.  Two  companies  of  this  regiment 
were  sent  to  the  sand-hills  for  protection  and  to  make  room  in  the 
bomb-proof,  where  several  men  had  fainted  on  the  5th  from  excessive 
heat  and  foul  air.  Major  Gardner  was  ordered  to  cover  the  retreat 
with  the  Twenty-seventh  Georgia  in  case  of  pursuit  by  the  enemy  ; 
in  the  meantime,  to  picket  the  beach  at  dark  and  hold  his  reserve  in 
readiness  to  support  Battery  Wagner. 

At  early  dark,  I ordered  Lieutenant-Colonel  Pressley,  commanding 
Twenty-fifth  South  Carolina,  a very  intelligent  and  reliable  officer,  to 
detail  four  companies  (about  100  men)  to  take  a field  piece  from  the 
left  curtain  to  Cujnming’s  Point  and  embark  on  the  first  boats.  Half 
an  hour  after,  Captain  Crawford,  commanding  Twenty-seventh 
Georgia  Volunteers,  was  ordei^d  to  move  a howitzer  from  the  right 
of  Wagner  to  the  rifle-pit  near  Gregg,  place  the  piece  in  position 
there,  collect  his  regiment,  form  line  of  battle  in  rifle-pits,  and,  when 
notified  that  transportation  was  ready,  to  send  a company  at  a time 
to  embark.  Major  Gardner  was  ordered  to  man  the  rifle-pits  when 
Captain  Crawford  had  left.  Lieutenant-Colonel  Pressley  was  ordered 
to  extend  his  lines  and  cover  the  line  manned  by  the  Twenty-eighth 
Georgia  as  soon  as  that  regiment  started,  which  was  promptly  done 
by  him.  I will  here  remark  that  all  this  night,  as  on  the  previous 
night,  the  enemy  threw  a strong  calcium  light  on  the  front  of  Bat- 
tery Wagner. 


*See  No.  39,  p.  531. 


Chap.  XL.] 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 


485 


About  9 p.  m.,  being  informed  that  transportation  was  ready,  the 
embarkation  commenced,  and  went  on  briskly  and  quietly  until  all 
had  been  embarked  except  the  rear  guard,  which  was  commanded 
by  Capt.  T.  A.  Huguenin,  numbering  35  men — 25  men  of  the  First 
South  Carolina  [Regular]  Infantry  (Company  A),  and  10  men  of  the 
Twenty-fifth  South  Carolina  Volunteers,  under  command  of  Lieu- 
tenants [F.  B.]  Brown  and  [R.  M.  ] Taft. 

At  about  11  p.  m.  I turned  over  the  command  of  Battery  Wagner 
to  Captain  Huguenin,  and  ordering  my  adjutant-general,  Maj.  H. 
Bryan  (a  member  of  General  Beauregard’s  staff,  who  had  volunteered 
for  special  duty  on  Morris  Island)  to  accompany  me,  I proceeded 
toward  Cumming’s  Point.  At  the  rifle-pits  I received  information 
that  more  transportion  was  ready,  and  I immediately  ordered  Major 
Gardner  to  embark  his  regiment  and  to  take  with  him  the  12-pounder 
howitzer,  which  he  did,  but  could  not  bring  it  off  the  island. 

The  transportation,  under  the  direction  of  Maj.  M.  A.  Pringle, 
post  quartermaster  in  Charleston,  was  admirably  managed.  Lieu- 
tenant-Colonel Dantzler,  Twentieth  South  Carolina  Volunteers, 
having  been  specially  detailed  by  General  Ripley  to  superintend 
the  transportation,  under  his  spirited  and  excellent  management,  it 
succeeded  perfectly. 

When  the  infantry  were  all  embarked,  I directed  Captain  [C.  E.] 
Kanapaux,  commanding  light  artillery,  to  spike  his  three  howitzers 
and  embark  his  command.  Captain  Lesesne  was  then  ordered 
to  spike  the  guns  of  Battery  Gregg  and  embark  his  men.  The 
rear  guard  from  Wagner,  coming  up  at  this  time,  were  embarked. 
I had  ordered  Captain  Huguenin  down,  sending  word  by  Private 
John  A.  Stewart,  Gist  Guards — the  cavalry  couriers  having  left  with- 
out permission.  There  was  no  light  kept  at  Gregg,  so  I could  not 
well  note  the  hour.  With  two  or  three  boats,  I now  anxiqusly  waited 
for  Captain  Huguenin’s  party.  Finally,  perceiving  that  the  enemy’s 
barges  from  Vincent’s  Creek  were  attacking  our  boats  with  musketry, 
I ordered  the  safety  fuse  to  the  magazine  of  Battery  Gregg  to  be 
lighted  ; it  was  lit.  The  firing  then  ceased.  As  I desired  the  explo- 
sions at  both  batteries  to  be  simultaneous,  as  ordered,  I ordered 
Captain  Lesesne  to  extinguish  the  fuse,  intending  to  relight  it  or 
apply  another  fuse,  when  Captains  Huguenin  and  Pinckney  and 
Lieutenant  Mazyck,  who  were  the  only  persons  who  had  not  yet 
come  to  the  point,  arrived.  Major  Holcombe,  who  had  lighted  the 
fuse,  immediately  attempted  to  extinguish  it.  He  informed  me  from 
the  parapet  of  the  battery  that  it  would  be  difficult  to  cut  it  in  twain, 
and  that  it  was  burning  brightly.  At  that  moment  the  absent  party 
arrived,  and  I directed  him  not  to  interfere  with  the  fuse,  which 
was  then  burning  brightly. 

About  1.30  a.  m.,  with  the  rear  guard  of  my  command,  I embarked, 
thus  successfully  withdrawing  from  Morris  Island,  and  my  responsi- 
bility ended.  As  we  started  off,  the  Yankee  barges  directed  their 
musketry  fire  upon  us,  causing  the  bullets  to  whiz  around  us,  but 
doing  no  harm. 

Bearing  toward  Fort  Sumter,  I proceeded  to  flag-steamer  Charles- 
ton, and  notified  Captain  [ J.  R.  ] Tucker  that  the  evacuation  of  Mor- 
ris Island  was  accomplished,  and  requested  him  to  give  the  rocket 
signal  to  our  batteries. 

. I then  proceeded  to  district  headquarters  and  repeated  the  informa- 
tion, arriving  3 a.  m.  on  the  7th. 

During  the  day  and  evening  of  the  Gth,  Captain  [J.  E.]  Adger,  the 


486  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

efficient  post  quartermaster,  kept  liis  only  wagon  moving  the  wounded 
from  Wagner  to  Gregg,  under  the  direction  of  Chief  Surg.  William 
C.  Ravenel.  Strange  to  say,  none  were  hurt  by  the  enemy’s  fire, 
which  from  time  to  time  swept  across  the  road.  Of  course  the 
wounded  were  embarked  first. 

Dr.  Ravenel  performed  his  arduous  duties  with  alacrity  and  zeal, 
showing  every  kindness  to  the  wounded  and  stunned,  who  poured 
in  from  sunrise  on  the  5th  till  the  evening  of  the  6th.  He  left  about 
10.30,  leading  his  ambulance  corps. 

I am  happy  to  state  that  the  majority  of  the  wounds  were  slight, 
though  disabling  the  men  for  the  time. 

The  guns  in  the  batteries  were  spiked,  and  the  implements  generally 
destroyed ; equipments  mostly  carried  off.  The  magazines  were  not 
blown  up,  owing  to  the  faulty  character  of  the  safety-fuses  used  for 
the  purpose,  which  were  ignited — that  at  Battery  Wagner  by  Cap- 
tain Huguenin,  assisted  by  Captain  Pinckney,  district  ordnance  offi- 
cer, and  that  of  Battery  Gregg  by  Major  Holcombe,  under  Captain 
Lesesne’s  instructions  and  the  supervision  of  Captain  F.  D.  Lee,  and 
Lieutenant  Stiles,  of  the  Engineers. 

The  enemy  were  within  30  steps  of  the  front  of  Battery  Wagner, 
the  voices  of  their  sappers  could  be  distinctly  heard.  Any  attempt  to 
break  off  the  trunnion  or  shatter  the  carriage  of  a gun  would  have 
been  distinctly  heard  and  our  movements  discovered.  Besides,  the 
gun-cliambers  had  been  filled  with  loose  sand  displaced  by  the  enemy’s 
shot,  and  the  guns  could  not  be  managed.  I attempted  to  move 
the  sand,  but  my  working  parties  were  broken  up  as  soon  as  put  to 
work.  The  enemy  had  planted  heavy  mortars  within  100  yards  of 
the  battery,  and  they  could  and  did  throw  their  shells  into  any  desig- 
nated spot.  They  could  hear  the  movements  of  a party  at  work 
along  the  line,  and  would  kill,  wound,  or  disperse  the  men.  Prop- 
erty had  to  be  destroyed  within  30  steps  of  the  enemy,  and  while 
they  could  hear  the  voices  of  our  men  in  this  close  proximity  to 
them,  the  whole  garrison  had  to  be  removed.  Their  land  batteries 
and  fleet  swept  every  inch  of  ground  between  Batteries  Wagner  and 
Gregg,  and  any  suspicion  of  our  movements  compromised,  if  it  did 
not  destroy,  the  safety  of  the  garrison.  All  the  guns  were  effectu- 
ally spiked. 

At  Battery  Gregg  everything  was  destroyed  but  the  two  10-inch 
guns.  They  were  prepared  for  bursting  when  the  last  party  em- 
barked. Before  this  party  arrived,  the  enemy’s  barges  fired  upon  ours 
transporting  our  troops,  and  also  turned  their  fire  upon  us. 

An  attempt  had  been  made  by  the  enemy  in  barges  the  preceding 
night  to  assail  and  capture  Battery  Gregg.  The  number  of  their 
barges  then  in  easy  range  could  not  be  ascertained. 

I was  informed  by  the  engineer  captain  (Lee)  that  the  explosion  of 
the  magazine  would  destroy  the  guns.  The  fuse  was  lighted,  burned 
well,  and  no  doubt  was  entertained  of  its  igniting  the  magazine. 

The  rear  guard  from  Battery  Wagner  had  embarked  under  fire 
from  the  enemy’s  barges.  These  barges,  I am  convinced,  gave  the 
enemy  the  information  of  the  withdrawal  of  our  garrison. 

The  guns  of  Battery  Gregg  were  spiked. 

My  chief  exertion  Avas  to  save  my  men,  whose  future  services  will, 
I trust,  be  worth  much  more  to  the  Confederacy  than  what  I failed 
to  destroy  to  the  enemy.  Had  instructions  been  sent  to  me  earlier, 
more  might  have  been  done. 

Lieutenant  Stiles,  assistant  engineer,  stationed  at  Battery  Gregg, 


Chap.  XL.]  OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C.  487 

at  my  request  had  come  up  to  Battery  W agner  in  tlie  morning.  U pon 
examination,  he  expressed  to  me  a doubt  whether  there  was  powder 
enough  in  the  magazine  to  blow  it  up.  I should  state  at  this  point 
that  I had  sent  on  Friday  for  an  additional  supply  of  powder,  send- 
ing the  requisition  and  my  report  as  to  the  state  of  the  garrison 
and  of  the  day’s  proceedings  by  Major  Warley,  chief  of  artillery, 
who  was  wounded,  and  returned  to  the  city  in  a small  boat  sent  for 
the  purpose.  This  boat  was  captured  by  the  enemy’s  barges,  and  my 
report  either  taken,  or  destroyed  by  Major  Warley.  Of  this  capture 
I had  no  knowledge  until  Saturday  night.  The  blowing  up  of  the 
magazines  was  intrusted  by  me  to  brave  and  intelligent  officers,  who 
I think  did  their  best  to  effect  it.  (See  Huguenin’s  and  Lesesne’s  re- 
ports, marked  A and  B.)  The  chief  ordnance  officer  of  the  district 
came  to  Morris  Island  apparently  to  look  after  this,  and  was  given 
every  facility  he  asked  for. 

I did  not  attempt  to  destroy  the  bomb-proof  at  Wagner  because, 
after  consulting  with  Captain  Lee,  of  the  Engineers,  I deemed  it  im- 
practicable from  the  small  quantity  of  combustible  material  at  my 
disposal,  and  because  any  smoke  would  at  once  inform  the  enemy  and 
stimulate  him  to  pursue  us  by  land  and  water.  It  must  be  remem- 
bered that  the  sand  above  the  bomb-proof  was  considerably  saturated 
with  water,  which  dripped  through  in  several  places. 

To  Captain  Huguenin,  chief  of  artillery ; Major  Bryan,  assistant 
adjutant-general ; Lieutenant-Colonel  Pressley,  commanding  Twenty- 
fifth  South  Carolina  Volunteers,  and  Lieutenant-Colonel  Dantzler, 
superintending  embarkation,  I am  chiefly  indebted  for  the  success 
of  the  evacuation. 

My  thanks  are  due  Mr.  J.  F.  Mathewes,  engineer  corps,  for  the 
use  of  his  boat  and  crew  for  moving  troops  and  bringing  me  off  at 
the  last. 

Captain  [J.  R.]  Haines  and  Lieutenants  [H.]  Montgomery,  [jr. ,] 
and  [R.  A.J  Blum,  of  the  Twenty-fifth  South  Carolina  Volunteers, 
three  valuable  officers,  were  killed  at  their  posts  of  duty  during  the 
last  of  the  siege.  Let  their  names  be  honored. 

I desire  to  record  the  faithful  services  of  Privates  [J.  M.]  Leathe, 
[J.  A.]  Stewart,  and  [John  H.]  Bond,  of  tlffi  Gist  Guards,  South 
Carolina  Volunteers,  who  have  remained  voluntarily  on  duty  at  Bat- 
tery Wagner  almost  the  entire  siege,  always  attentive  and  cool  under 
fire.  Stewart  would  make  an  excellent  commissary  and  Leathe  a 
practical  and  hard-working  ordnance  officer. 

Lieut.  R.  M.  Stiles,  engineer  corps,  creditably  performed  the  duties 
assigned  to  him.  Lieutenant  [Robert  S.]  Millar,  Company  A,  Second 
South  Carolina  Artillery,  was  distinguished  for  courage  and  for  his 
cheerfulness,  which  was  not  diminished  by  a slight  wound  on  the 
knee  and  by  being  stunned  for  half  an  hour. 

To  Major  Bryan,  of  General  Beauregard’s  staff,  who  volunteered 
as  my  adjutant-general,  I am  under  the  greatest  obligations.  Al- 
though at  the  time  I was  ordered  to  Morris  Island  to  assume  com- 
mand of  the  forces  there,  he  had  a furlough  to  visit  his  father  in 
Georgia,  who  was  very  ill,  he  promptly  waived  it  and  volunteered 
to  go  with  me.  His  tact,  coolness,  experience,  courage,  and  untiring 
industry  were  of  the  greatest  service  to  me  during  the  night  and  the 
day.  His  vigilance  extended  to  every  department  and  perpetually 
sought  out  means  of  increasing  our  resources  and  deficiencies. 

In  spite  of  severe  indisposition,  for  several  days  I have  made  every 
exertion  to  meet  the  very  unusual  responsibilities  imposed  upon  me. 


[Chap.  XL. 


488 


S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 


Taking  all  circumstances  into  consideration,  I trust  that  this  will 
not  compare  unfavorably  on  the  part  of  the  garrison  with  any  other 
retreat  made  during  this  war. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

LAWRENCE  M.  KEITT, 

Colonel,  Commanding. 

Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

A.  A . G.,  1st  Mil.  Dist.,  Dept.  S.  C.,  Ga.,  and  Fla. 

[Indorsement.] 


Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston,  S.  C.,  September  19,  1863. 

Had  this  evacuation  been  conducted  in  strict  compliance  with 
detailed  orders,  it  would  be  one  of  the  most  memorable  in  history, 
and  after  all,  may  be  regarded  as  a signal  success  and  highly  credit- 
able to  the  commanding  officer  and  all  officers  and  men  who  partici- 
pated in  it.  Subjected  to  a terrible  fire,  and  beleaguered  almost  to 
the  very  ditch  of  the  work,  by  an  enterprising,  watchful  adversary, 
yet  the  entire  garrison  was  withdrawn  in  safety.  The  coolness  and 
discipline  which  characterized  this  operation,  and  through  which  an 
efficient  command  has  been  saved  to  the  country  for  future  use,  are 
deemed  worthy  of  notice  and  commendation  by  the  War  Depart- 
ment, especially  when  taken  in  connection  with  their  stout  defense 
of  Morris  Island  for  four  days  preceding  the  evacuation,  together 
with  the  limited  and  imperfect  means  of  water  transportation  at 
command. 

One  of  the  reasons  assigned  for  not  bursting  the  guns,  blowing  up 
the  magazines  and  bomb-proofs  in  Batteries  W agner  and  Gregg — that 
is,  an  alleged  want  of  time  after  the  order  to  evacuate  had  reached 
Morris  Island — calls,  however,  for  remarks  from  these  headquarters. 
It  had  been  a standing  order  for  several  weeks  previous  to  the  evac- 
uation that  in  such  an  event  all  guns,  magazines,  bomb-proofs,  &c., 
should  be  thoroughly  destroyed,  and,  with  that  view,  time  fuses  had 
been  tested,  and,  with  rat-tail  files,  were  provided  for  both  works. 
Further,  the  written  special  instructions  of  Brigadier-General  Ripley, 
prescribing  measures  and  means  for  the  complete  destruction  of  these 
works  and  of  their  armaments  at  the  proper  time,  and  the  detailed 
orders  directing  and  regulating  the  evacuation  of  Morris  Island,  were 
received  by  the  comm  nding  officers  at  dark  on  the  6th  instant  (about 
6 p.  m.).  The  last  detachment  of  his  command  did  not  quit  the  island 
until  after  1 a.  m.  on  the  7th  instant;  hence,  there  were  seven  hours 
for  the  completion  of  all  necessary  arrangements.  I am,  therefore, 
unable  to  admit  that  there  was  any  lack  of  time  for  the  thorough 
execution  of  the  work  of  destruction  ordered.  It  is  not  explained 
why  the  time  fuses  failed  to  explode  the  powder  left  in  the  maga- 
zines. They  were  seen  burning  brightly  when  last  observed,  and  it 
is  therefore  probable  that  either  before  or  while  the  fire  was  being  ap- 
plied the  ends  in  contact  with  the  powder  were  accidentallv  detached. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General,  Commanding. 


Charleston,  September  18,  1863. 
Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  my 
command  on  Morris  Island  during  September  5 and  6,  previous  to 
the  evacuation : 

On  the  5th  instant,  about  5.15  a.  m.,  the  Ironsides  opened  a heavy 


Chap.  XL.] 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 


489 


fire  on  Battery  Wagner,  combining  witli  the  enemy’s  land  and  mor- 
tar batteries,  which  had  opened  nearly  half  an  hour  sooner.  At  the 
first  shot  from  the  Ironsides,  nearly  all  the  infantry  were  hurried  to 
the  bomb-proof,  leaving  light  detachments  to  guard  the  parapet  and 
act  as  sharpshooters.  Full  detachments  of  artillery  were  kept  at  the 
guns  on  the  land  front.  The  fire  of  the  Ironsides  proved  very  de- 
structive and  had  a rather  depressing  effect  on  many  of  the  garrison, 
to  whom  it  was  a novelty.  It  ceased  for  awhile  at  7.45  a.  m.,  but 
was  renewed  at  about  8.30  a.  m.,  and  continued  briskly  until  nearly 
3 p.  m.  Even  after  that,  she  fired  occasionally  during  the  afternoon. 
She  was  assisted  during  part  of  the  morning  by  one  monitor.  As 
the  Ironsides  lay  some  1,400  yards  off,  with  the  monitors  in  easy  sup- 
porting distance,  I deemed  it  our  policy  simply  to  endure  this  bom- 
bardment, keeping  prepared  to  meet  an  assault.  Bacon  and  crackers 
were  taken,  under  fire,  from  the  commissary  depot  to  the  sally-port, 
and  the  men  directed  to  help  themselves.  The  tent-cloth  covering 
to  the  commissary  stores  was  fired  by  a shell,  but  extinguished  by 
J.  A.  Stewart,  commissary  sergeant,  assisted  by  Major  Bryan.  Two 
wagon-loads  of  cartridges  in  boxes  were  brought  up  from  Cum- 
ming’s  Point,  under  the  hottest  fire,  and  safely  stored  in  the  maga- 
zine, though  one  of  the  mules  was  killed  while  this  was  going  on. 
The  enemy’s  fire  of  100  and  200  pounder  Parrott  guns  was  prin- 
cipally directed  against  the  left  salient  of  the  battery,  the  prolon- 
gation of  the  line  passing  over  my  headquarters.  It  first  began  to 
to  tell  heavily  on  the  traverse  (marked  D on  the  accompanying  plan* 
of  Battery  Wagner)  in  front  of  the  stairs  leading  from  the  salient 
to  the  passage  below  between  the  bomb-proof  and  the  magazine. 
In  a few  hours  this  fire  knocked  down  the  traverse,  filling  up  the 
stairway  with  its  debris , and  thus  cutting  off  all  communication 
with  the  salient  except  through  the  parade.  Capt.  T.  B.  Lee,  engi- 
neer in  charge,  considered  it  unadvisable  to  attempt  to  prevent  the 
filling  up  of  the  stairway  mentioned.  Lieutenant  [H.]  Montgomery, 
[jr. ,]  Twenty-fifth  South  Carolina,  was  killed,  in  the  passage,  by  a 
fragment  of  shell,  during  this  transition. 

The  enemy’s  fire  of  rifled  guns  was  next  observed  to  tell  most  par- 
ticularly upon  the  parapet  on  the  right  of  the  salient  mentioned, 
and  on  the  end  of  the  bomb-proof  in  line  with  it.  The  gradual  effect 
during  the  day  was  to  knock  this  parapet  out  of  shape  with  at  least 
one  breach,  and  to  throw  sand  from  it  forward  upon  the  bomb-proof. 
In  its  turn,  the  bomb-proof  was  plowed  with  deep  furrows  at  its  end, 
and  much  sand  thrown  forward,  a considerable  quantity  falling  in 
rear  of  the  chamber  of  32-pounder  gun  on  sea  face.  Another  effect 
of  the  frequent  jar  of  land  and  sea  fire  was  to  throw  down  portions  of 
the  sand  covering  the  galleries  (marked  E,  F,  and  G in  plan*)  which 
connect  the  magazines  on  the  sea  face  with  the  bomb-proof.  This 
threatened  to  choke  up  the  two  galleries  toward  the  sally-port,  and, 
in  spite  of  the  engineer  in  charge,  did  choke  up  the  entrance  lead- 
ing from  32-pounder  gun  chamber  to  the  gallery  nearest  the  salient. 
Thus,  to  get  to  the  southeast  magazine  (B)  it  became  necessary  to  go 
through  the  bomb-proof,  and  most  of  the  powder  in  this  magazine 
was  moved  out  as  a precaution. 

When  the  Ironsides  ceased  fire,  about  3 p.  m.,  I ordered  a portion 
of  the  men  out  of  the  bomb  proof,  as  two  or  three  had  fainted,  and 
others  were  likely  to  lose  their  strength  from  the  heat  and  close  air. 


* Not  found. 


[Chap.  XL. 


490  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

The  hospital  harl  become  so  crowded  that  I ordered  Senior  Surgeon 
Ravenel  to  establish  a depot  for  the  sick  and  slightly  wounded  in 
the  sand-hills,  and  to  send  all  such  there  from  time  to  time,  which 
was  done. 

About  11  a.  m.,  the  left  10-inch  columbiaa  was  entirely  .disabled, 
being  struck  by  a projectile  which  knocked  off  the  right  trunnion  and 
shattered  the  carriage. 

In  the  afternoon,  the  elevating  screw  of  the  32-pounder  on  sea  face 
was  struck  and  so  badly  bent  that  it  could  not  stand  over  one  or  two 
shots  more.  Under  cover  of  this  artillery  and  sharpshooting  fire,  the 
enemy  steadily  pushed  on  his  approaches  and  knocked  away  most  of 
the  sand-bag  protections  intended  to  cover  our  sharpshooters. 

About  4.30  p.  m.  dispatches  from  General  Ripley  directed  me  to 
prepare  for  an  attack  on  Cumming’s  Point  during  the  night.  I im- 
mediately sent  my  adjutant-general  to  order  Major  Gardner,  whose 
regiment  (the  Twenty- seventh  Georgia)  was  supporting  Cumming’s 
Point,  to  assemble  his  regiment  there  at  early  dark,  and  make  dispo- 
sitions to  repel  a boat  attack,  consulting  with  the  engineer  in  charge, 
Lieutenant  Stiles.  At  dark  I sent  him  two  field  howitzers,  with  de- 
tachments from  Kanapaux’s  light  artillery  and  70  men  from  Twenty- 
fifth  South  Carolina,  as  a support  to  his  forces.  The  beach  was  pick- 
eted by  50  men  from  Twenty-eighth  Georgia.  As  the  detachment  of 
50  men  from  Twenty-eighth  Georgia  was  starting  from  Wagner,  Cap- 
tain Haines,  commanding,  and  Lieutenant  Blum,  of  Twenty-fifth 
South  Carolina,  standing  by  him,  were  killed  by  a mortar  shell. 
This  was  a sad  loss,  but  Captain  Adams  was  detailed  to  supply  Cap- 
tain Haines’  place,  and  the  detachment  proceeded.  This  mortar  fire 
continued  briskly' through  the  night,  directed  mainly  upon  the  left 
of  the  battery  and  roads  leading  to  the  rear.  The  fire  of  rifled  guns 
slackened  in  the  last  part  of  the  night,  but  was  also  kept  up. 

So  many  men  were  killed,  wounded,  and  stunned  in  the  left  salient 
that  I finally  left  a guard  there  of  20  men,  with  supports  at  short  dis- 
tance. I inclose  list  * of  the  casualties  during  the  day  and  early  part 
of  the  night,  marked  A. 

At  10  p.  m.  Major  Gardner  wrote  me  that  after  putting  his  men 
(234  in  all)  in  position  at  and  near  Cumming’s  Point,  he  found  the 
iorce  too  small;  “but  I shall  hold  the  place  if  it  is  a possibility.” 
Deeming  it  unwise  to  weaken  Wagner  further,  I relied  upon  the 
unyielding  courage  of  Major  Gardner  and  his  men  to  hold  the  point, 
and  was  fully  justified. 

About  midnight,  the  enemy  came  up  in  some  fifteen  to  twenty 
barges  from  Light-House  Creek,  gliding  noiselessly  along  with  muf- 
fled oars.  Capt.  H.  R.  Lesesne,  commanding  Battery  Gregg,  first 
observed  them,  and  the  whole  force  was  put  rapidly  in  position,  and 
opened  fire  on  them  as  they  came  to  about  175  yards  from  our  bat- 
tery. They  seemed  much  confused  at  this  prompt  fire,  calling  out, 
“Don’t  shoot,  we  are  friends.”  Finding  this  useless,  they  pushed 
on,  firing  shell  and  shrapnel  from  their  boat  howitzers,  with  some 
musketry  fire.  Their  commanding  officer’s  order  of  “ Forward,  men  !” 
was  several  times  heard,  but  disheartened  by  our  vigorous  reception 
when  they  had  reasonably  expected  to  surprise  us,  they  hurried 
off  in  about  twenty  minutes  after  the  affair  began.  Captain  Lesesne 
twice  fired  into  them  with  one  10-inch  columbiad,  double  charged 
with  canister,  and  thinks  he  did  considerable  execution,  though,  un- 
fortunately, he  wounded  several  of  our  men  at  the  same  time. 


* Not  found. 


Chap.  XL.]  OPERATIONS  O N MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C.  491 

The  field  howitzers  were  temporarily  commanded  by  Lieutenant 
[E.  W.]  Macbeth,  Company  A,  First  South  Carolina  [Regular]  In- 
fantry, and,  under  his  judicious  handling,  were  the  principal  means 
of  driving  off  the  barges. 

Lieut.  Robert  M.  Stiles,  Engineer  Corps,  showed  gallantry  and 
judgment  during  the  affair,  assisting  Major  Gardner  in  his  disposi- 
tions. 

Few  of  the  barges  came  nearer  than  80  yards,  though  about  3 
men  landed  from  one  on  the  sand-spit  above,  returning  quickly. 

The  surgeon’s  report  of  casualties  is  inclosed,  marked  B.  * 

I cannot  be  too  thankful  for  the  warning  which  enabled  me  to  re- 
pel this  insidious  attack.  While  it  was  going  on,  the  enemy  shelled 
the  sally-port  and  rear  of  Battery  Wagner  furiously. 

Throughout  the  night,  the  enemy’s  calcium  light  threw  its  bright, 
silvery  rays  upon  our  front. 

My  usual  artillery  fire  was  suspended,  in  the  hope  that  the  enemy 
would  likewise  cease  and  my  engineer  work  go  on. 

Capt.  T.  B.  Lee,  engineer  in  charge  at  Battery  Wagner,  seemed 
powerless  to  arrest  its  destruction,  although  his  attention  was  fre- 
quently called  and  he  doubtless  reflected  carefully.  He  made  an  ef- 
fort to  repair  the  bomb-proof  just  before  day,  but  at  the  earliest 
dawn  the  sharpshooters  drove  off  his  party.  He  had  no  assistant. 
Mr.  Freer,  a worthy  old  gentleman,  had  been  sent  to  him,  but  con- 
fessed his  total  ignorance  of  engineering,  and  stuck  to  headquarters. 

Two  alarms  were  given  during  the  night,  but  found  to  proceed 
from  reconnoitering  parties  of  the  enemy. 

September  6 dawned  with  gloomy  prospects.  The  enemy’s  ap- 
proach along  the  beach  had  reached  a point  parallel  to  the  angle  of 
the  left  salient,  and  the  effect  of  their  continued  fire  upon  our  unre- 
paired damages  was  certain.  My  first  step  was  to  shelter  the  men. 
The  50  men  of  Twenty-eighth  Georgia  on  picket  were  ordered  to  stay 
in  the  sand-hills,  and  two  companies  of  Twenty-fifth  South  Carolina 
sent  there.  Most  of  the  remainder  of  the  Twenty-eighth  Georgia  were 
put  on  their  line,  which  was  comparatively  safe,  and  all  the  Twenty- 
fifth  South  Carolina  ordered  to  the  bomb-proof  except  a few  necessary 
guards.  The  chief  surgeon  and  quartermaster  were  ordered  to  carry 
wounded  throughout  the  day  to  Cumming’s  Point,  regardless  of  fire. 

Our  policy  was  uncertain,  General  Beauregard  having  telegraphed 
just  before  day : 

Repair  works.  * * * I will  determine  to-day  what  measures  to  adopt. 

I was  fully  impressed  with  the  necessity  for  an  evacuation,  and  in 
the  course  of  the  day  privately  informed  my  regimental  command- 
ers of  my  views  and  received  their  hearty  concurrence.  I notified 
them  that  secrecy  was  required,  and  that  Major  Gardner  should 
cover  the  retreat,  if  one  was  ordered. 

The  enemy’s  land  fire  was  kept  up  steadily  through  the  day,  but 
not  so  furiously  as  the  day  before.  Their  fleet  assisted  at  irregular 
intervals.  Between  6 and  7 a.  m.  the  Ironsides  and  six  monitors 
were  deployed  in  front  of  Wagner  and  the  fire  from  them  for  about 
an  hour  was  terrific.  It  then  diminished,  and  during  the  remainder 
of  the  day  was  principally  kept  up  by  the  Ironsides.  During  the 
severest  fire,  at  Lieutenant- Colonel  Pressley’s  request,  I withdrew 
every  man  from  the  salient,  observing  it  from  other  points. 

Early  in  the  afternoon,  Colonel  Harris,  chief  engineer,  inspected 


*Not  found. 


49 2 S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 


[Chap.  XL. 


the  work,  bringing  Capt.  F.  D.  Lee  to  relieve  Capt.  T.  B.  Lee,  and  di- 
rected that  the  advanced  portion  of  the  salient  should  be  cut  off  bv 
an  interior  line  across  the  gorge,  uniting  it  with  the  parade.  After 
his  departure,  Capt.  F.  D.  Lee  inspected  the  point  indicated  and  pro- 
nounced it  impracticable  to  work  men  there  under  the  existing  fire. 
Soon  after,  a dispatch  from  General  Ripley  authorizing  an  evacua- 
tion set  the  matter  at  rest. 

Lieutenant  Stiles  was  ordered  to  send  off  the  negroes  as  soon  as 
the  rifle-pit  in  front  of  Gregg  was  completed  and  his  plan  approved 
for  weakening  the  side  of  Gregg’s  magazine  toward  Battery  Simkins. 

About  midday,  a 32-pounder  gun  on  center  curtain  was  rendered 
unserviceable,  and  the  sea-coast  howitzer  on  flank  curtain  much 
weakened. 

The  enemy  pushed  on  their  works  all  day  until  nearly  opposite 
the  32-pounder  gun  chamber  on  sea  face.  The  fire  of  our  sharp- 
shooters on  the  left  was  slacker  than  any  previous  day,  owing  to  the 
loss  of  sand-bag  protections  and  diminished  confidence  of  our  men. 

Further  particulars  will  be  found  in  my  account  of  the  evacuation. 

I inclose  surgeon’s  list*  of  casualties  for  the  6th  (C)  and  the  report 
of  my  chief  of  artillery,  marked  D.  f 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

LAWRENCE  M.  KEITT, 

Colonel , Commanding. 

Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  First  Military  District. 


No.  27. 

Reports  of  Col.  George  P.  Harrison,  jr. , Thirty -second  Georgia  In- 
fantry, commanding  on  Morris  Island,  August  10-15,  and  25-27. 

Headquarters  Morris  Island, 
Battery  Wagner,  August  11,  1863. 
Captain:  I have  the  honor  to  report  that,  pursuant  to  Special 
Orders,  No.  274,  from  district  headquarters,  I relieved  Brigadier- 
General  Hagood  in  command  of  this  island  at  7 p.  m.  yesterday, 
the  10th  instant. 

I found  the  following  troops  on  the  island : 


Infantry  : 

8th  North  Carolina,  Colonel  Shaw,  present,  about 396 

61st  North  Carolina,  Major  Harding,  present,  about 355 

Artillery : 

Detachment  South  Carolina  Siege  Train,  Captain  Smith 29 

Chichester’s  company  Light  Artillery,  First  Lieutenant  Gilchrist 51 

Detachment  First  Regiment  South  Carolina  Artillery,  Lieutenant  [W.  H.] 

Grimball 

Company  H.  First  South  Carolina  Artillery,  Captain  Lesesne 70 

Marion  Artillery,  Lieutenant  Murdoch 32 

Mathewes  Artillery,  Captain  Mathewes 46 

Cavalry  : 

Deta  hment  Fifth  South  Carolina  Regiment,  Sergeant  Chandler 11 


1,007 


About  175  of  the  above  number  are  more  or  less  sick 175 

Total 832 


*Not  found. 


f See  No.  31,  p.  511. 


Chap.  XL.]  OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C.  493 

I found  tlie  enemy  shelling  the  island  from  Battery  Gregg  to  W ag- 
ner,  on  my  arrival.  About  or  a little  after  dark,  their  Parrott  guns 
ceased  firing,  but  their  mortars  continued  during  the  night. 

General  Hagood  had  made  preparation  to  open  fire  on  the  enemy’s 
working  party  in  front  of  Wagner,  at  8 p.  m.  yesterday.  I deter- 
mined to  carry  out  this  programme,  but  was  prevented  by  receiving 
a dispatch  from  Fort  Johnson,  just  about  the  time  I was  ready  to 
open  fire,  that  troops  for  this  point  were  on  transport  and  ready  to 
leave. 

Finding  my  garrison  very  much  fatigued  and  worn  out,  I thought 
best  not  to  draw  fire  of  the  Abolitionists  till  my  relief  had  been  per- 
fected. At  12.30  o’clock  the  relief  had  not  yet  arrived,  and  as  I 
could  hear  nothing  from  them,  I directed  Captain  Chichester,  chief 
of  artillery,  to  open  fire  on  the  enemy  then  at  work  in  our  front, 
which  he  promptly  did  with  eight  guns,  throwing  mostly  shell  and 
grape,  with  an  occasional  solid  shot,  averaging  about  one  gun  every 
minute  and  a half.  The  shells  were  mostly  3"  fuses,  with  an  oc- 
casional 5",  and  the  entire  practice  was  unusually  good,  the  shells 
bursting  low  and  immediately  over  the  different  working  parties 
and  batteries  from  the  front  beach  to  the  back  creeks,  rendering 
it  impossible  for  the  enemy  to  do  any  labor  while  the  firing  con- 
tinued. At  3 o’clock,  the  moon  arose  showing  both  to  the  land  bat- 
teries and  two  monitors,  lying  in  our  front,  the  position  of  our 
battery,  whereupon  I ordered  the  firing  to  cease  (this  was  recom- 
mended by  Captain  Chichester). 

The  enemy’s  land  batteries  opened  with  two  monitors  and  three 
rifled  Parrott  guns,  at  first  firing  wildly  but  gradually  getting  our 
range,  until  tlie  firing  became  very  accurate.  At  daylight  they  had 
acquired  the  exact  range,  throwing  their  mortar  shells  into  the  dif- 
ferent gun-chambers  and  galleries  of  the  bomb-proof. 

At  3. 30  oclock,  one  of  the  monitors  lying  in  front  opened  fire  on  us. 
I returned  with  one  10-inch  columbiaxl,  and  the  rifled  32-pounder  con- 
tinued for  thirty  minutes,  when  the  monitor  having  been  struck 
seven  times  moved  out  of  range. 

Captain  Chichester  now  ceased  firing,  when  I ordered  the  guns 
again  masked.  The  enemy  continued  the  fire  from  their  land  bat- 
teries for  about  two  hours  longer,  doing  no  damage.  During  the 
engagement  Private  George  Egleston,  Gist  Guard  (Captain  Chiches- 
ter), was  mortally  wounded  while  at  his  gun — since  dead — and  Pri- 
vate P.  Elder,  Marion  Artillery  (Captain  Parker),  was  slightly 
wounded. 

I would  respectfully  call  attention  to  the  necessity  of  strengthen- 
ing the  rear  of  this  work  against  an  assault  by  erecting  traverses 
and  placing  guns  in  position. 

I find  the  ordnance  department  in  good  condition  here.  Captain 
Hill,  ordnance  officer,  has  everything  in  its  place,  and  is  unceasing 
in  his  efforts  to  keep  his  department  in  proper  order.  Some  pro- 
jectiles are  needed,  for  which  Captain  Hill  has  made  requisition. 

The  enemy  kept  quiet  during  the  day  (after  ceasing  fire  this  morn- 
ing), until  5.15  p.  m.,  when  they  opened  from  their  land  batteries 
(mortars  and  Parrotts)  and  have  continued  a brisk  fire  until  the 
present  time,  7 p.  m. ; it  is  still  going  on. 

Battery  Gregg  joined  in  the  fire  on  the  enemy  last  night,  and  an- 
noys them  whenever  she  can. 

Private  Washington  I.  Smith,  Gist  Guard,  mortally;  Private 
John  L.  Patrick,  Gist  Guard,  severely;  Sergt.  Casper  Unfug,  Gist 


[Chap.  XL. 


494  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

Guard,  severely ; Private  J.  C.  A.  Holt,  Company  B,  Siege  Train, 
severely  ; Private  Levi  Gerrald,  Company  B,  Siege  Train,  severely  ; 
were  wounded  by  a mortar  shell  while  I was  writing  the  preceding 
paragraph. 

Respectfully  submitted. 

GEO.  P.  HARRISON,  Jr., 

Colonel , Commanding. 

Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Battery  Wagner,  August  12,  1863—6.30  p.  m. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  my  command  was  re- 
lieved last  night,  and  that  the  following  now  constitutes  my  garrison: 


Infantry  : 

Part  of  First  Volunteers,  Georgia,  Captain  Davenport,  about 173 

12th  Georgia  Battalion,  Maj.  G.  M.  Hanvey,  about 207 

18th  Georgia  Battalion,  Maj.  W.  S.  Basinger,  about 138 

51st  North  Carolina  Regiment,  Colonel  McKethan,  about 426 

Artillery : 

Company  H,  First  South  Carolina  Artillery,  Captain  Lesesne,  about 68 

Company  C,  South  Carolina  Siege  Train,  Lieutenant  Gregg,  about 28 

Detachment  Chatham  (Georgia)  Artillery,  Lieutenant  Palmer,  about 29 

Company  A,  Lucas’  battalion.  South  Carolina  Artillery,  Captain  Gary, 

about t 65 

Company  E,  First  South  Carolina  Artillery,  Lieutenant  Alston,  about. . . 14 

Company  G,  Second  South  Carolina  Artillery,  Captain  [G.  W.]  Stallings 

about 66 

Cavalry  : 

Detachment  Fifth  South  Carolina  Cavalry,  Corporal  Mitchell,  about 11 

Sharpshooters — From  Eighth  North  Carolina  Regiment,  Lieutenant  Dugger, 
about 20 


Total 1,245 


The  fire  from  the  enemy,  which  was  progressing  at  the  terminus 
of  my  last  report,  continued  till  about  dark,  when  it  ceased,  with  no 
further  casualties  on  our  side. 

Owing  to  the  change  of  garrison  last  night,  I was  prevented  from 
opening  fire  on  the  enemy’s  working  parties  until  about  3 o’clock  this 
morning,  which  I continued  till  daylight  with  as  good  success  as  the 
night  previous,  though  the  enemy  did  considerable  work  (very  near 
us)  before  I opened  fire.  He  returned  fire  from  his  land  batteries 
with  Parrott  guns  and  mortars  until  about  6 o’clock  this  morning, 
doing  some  damage  to  our  bomb-proofs,  but  accompanied  with  no 
casualties  on  our  side.  All  damages  have  been  repaired  during  the 
day,  and  the  work  is  in  better  condition  than  yesterday. 

This  morning  I observed  large  parties  of  the  enemy  working  on  a 
battery  on  their  extreme  left.  I informed  Colonel  Rhett,  command- 
ing Fort  Sumter,  of  the  fact,  asking  him  to  inform  Captain  Mitchel. 
I ordered  Captain  Lesesne,  commanding  Battery  Gregg,  to  open  on 
them,  which  he  did  (after  considerable  delay  for  want  of  proper 
shell),  with  great  accuracy,  bursting  several  shells  in  their  midst 
and  dispersing  them.  My  sharpshooters,  under  Lieutenant  Dugger, 
Eighth  North  Carolina  Regiment,  do  good  work,  though  the  Yankees 
are  very  shy  and  seldom  ever  show  their  heads. 


Chap.  XL.] 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 


495 


No  exchange  of  shots  between  this  battery  and  enemy  since  morn- 
ing. Gregg  is  still  firing  occasionally.  No  casualties  during  the 
day. 

Respectfully  submitted. 

GEO.  P.  HARRISON,  Jr., 

Colonel , Commanding . 

Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant-General. 


Battery  Wagner,  August  13,  1863. 
Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  report  the  following  as  my  effective 
strength : 


Infantry : 

51st  North  Carolina,  Colonel  McKethan,  about 371 

Detachment  First  Georgia,  Captain  Davenport,  about 155 

18th  Georgia  Battalion,  Major  Basinger,  about 135 

12th  Georgia  Battalion,  Major  Hanvey,  about  176 

Sharpshooters,  Lieutenant  Woodbery,  about 20 

Artillery  : 

Company  H,  First  South  Carolina  Artillery,  Captain  Lesesne,  about 68 

Detachment  First  South  Carolina,  Lieutenant  Grimball,  about 14 

Company  C,  Siege  Train,  Lieutenant  Gregg,  about 28 

Company  A,  Lucas’  battalion,  Lieutenant  Ogier,  about 63 

Detachment  Chatham  (Georgia)  Artillery,  Lieutenant  Palmer,  about 31 

Company  G,  Second  South  Carolina  Artillery,  Captain  Stallings,  about . . 65 

Cavalry,  couriers,  about 11 


Total 1,137 

At  dusk  last  evening,  I opened  fire  on  the  enemy’s  works  immedi- 
ately in  our  front,  with  eight  guns,  preserving  five  minute  intervals 
between  each  gun,  and  thus  continued  until  daylight  this  morning. 
I succeeded  in  preventing  the  enemy  from  working  on  their  advance 
works,  and  considerably  damaged  their  stockade  and  works  nearest 
us.  They  returned  our  fire  during  the  night  with  six  or  more 
mortars,  and  with  shell  and  shrapnel  from  two  or  more  Parrott  guns. 
Their  firing  was  very  good,  though  we  had  only  1 killed  and  4 wounded 
during  the  night,  which  are  as  follows  : 

Private  J.  H.  Cassiday,  Company  G,  First  Volunteers,  Georgia 
Regiment,  killed  ; Capt.  J.  H.  Gary,  Company  A,  Lucas’  battalion, 
severely  wounded  ; Private  Isaac  Campbell,  Company  G,  First  Vol- 
unteers, Georgia  Regiment,  slightly  wounded  ; Private  B.  D.  Elliott, 
Company  A,  Lucas’  battalion,  slightly  wounded  ; Private  John  Col- 
lins, Company  A,  Twelfth  Georgia  Battalion,  slightly  wounded. 

Several  times  during  the  day  the  enemy  have  attempted  to  repair 
the  damage  done  their  works  by  our  fire  last  night,  but  each  time 
I dispersed  them  by  a shell  from  our  sea-coast  howitzer. 

They  opened  fire  on  us  about  15  minutes  before  10  o’clock  this 
morning,  from  a mortar  boat  lying  alongside  the  Ironsides.  From 
this  and  their  land  mortars,  they  have  shelled  us  slowly  until  this 
time,  the  fire  now  being  much  slower  than  during  most  of  the  day. 
Considerable  activity  has  been  going  on  in  the  enemy’s  fleet  this 
afternoon;  some  twenty  barges  took  a load  of  troops  from  this  island 
(lower  end)  to  a large  vessel  lying  seaward  from  the  island. 

No  material  damage  has  been  done  the  battery  by  the  enemy  since 
last  report.  I keep  the  engineers  at  work,  and  repair  about  as  rapidly 
as  the  enemy  injure  us.  An  almost  constant  fire  has  been  kept  up 
by  our  sharpshooters  and  those  of  the  enemy,  but  with  little  or  no 


[Chap.  XL. 


496  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

effect  on  either  side,  other  than  to  keep  the  enemy  at  a distance 
(during  the  day).  W e had  but  one  man  injured  during  the  fire  to-day, 
viz.  Private  Green  B.  Smallwood,  Company  A,  Twelfth  Georgia 
Battalion,  severely  wounded. 

Battery  Gregg  is  badly  in  need  of  shell.  Please  have  them  fur- 
nished at  once. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

GEO.  P.  HARRISON,  Jr., 

Colonel , Commanding. 

Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Battery  Wagner,  August  14,  1863 — 7 p.  m. 
Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  report  the  following  as  the  effective 
strength  of  my  command  : 


Infantry  : 

51st  North  Carolina,  Colonel  McKethan,  about 880 

1st  Volunteers,  Georgia,  Captain  Davenport,  about 155 

12th  Georgia  Battalion,  Major  Hanvey,  about 172 

18th  Georgia  Battalion,  Major  Basinger,  about 120 

Sharpshooters,  Twenty-first  South  Carolina,  Lieutenant  Woodbery, 

about 20 

Artillery  : 

Company  H,  First  South  Carolina  Artillery,  Captain  Lesesne,  about 68 

Detachment  First  South  Carolina  Artillery,  Lieutenant  Grimball,  about.  16 

Company  C,  South  Carolina  Siege  Train,  Lieutenant  Gregg,  about 27 

Company  A,  Lucas’  battalion,  Lieutenant  Ogier,  about 66 

Detachment  Chatham  (Georgia)  Artillery,  Lieutenant  Palmer,  about 31 

Company  G,  Second  South  Carolina  Artillery,  Captain  Stallings,  about. . 65 

Cavalry,  couriers,  about 11 


Total 1,131 


At  9.30  p.  m.  last  evening  I opened  fire  on  the  enemy’s  lines  in 
front  of  us,  and  continued  it  until  4. 30  this  morning,  at  an  interval 
of  thirty  minutes  between  each  gun.  Daylight  this  morning  ex- 
hibited the  fact  that  our  fire  kept  the  enemy  from  working  on  his 
fortifications  in  our  front. 

The  enemy  returned . our  fire  with  about  three  shots  to  our  one, 
using  mostly  his  Parrott  guns.  About  11  o’clock  this  morning,  three 
wooden  gunboats  approached  this  battery  and  opened  fire  on  Fort 
Sumter  with  Parrott  guns  at  long  range.  I opened  on  them  with 
32-pounder  rifled  gun ; fired  3 shots,  which  fell  short,  but  the  boats 
ceased  fire  and  moved  off,  although  they  were  already  out  of  our 
range.  The  enemy  shelled  this  place  from  two  mortar-boats  for 
about  two  hours  this  morning,  doing  no  damage.  I would  respect- 
fully ask  that  ordnance  and  other  requisitions  be  more  promptly 
fillecl  than  is  being  done  at  present.  On  this  account,  I could  use  only 
four  guns  last  night,  but  am  ready  to  use  the  whole  battery  to-night. 

Steady  and  rapid  firing  has  been  kept  up  all  to-day  between  sharp- 
shooters of  enemy  and  ours,  resulting  in  wounding  1 man  on  our 
side  viz,  Private  John  A.  Hartness,  Company  A,  Lucas’  battalion, 
arm  broken. 

Respectfully  submitted. 

GEO.  P.  HARRISON,  Jr., 

Colonel , Commanding . 

Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant-General . 


Chap.  XL.] 


497 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 

[Indorsement.] 

Hdqrs.  First  Mil.  Dist.,  Dept.  S.  C.,  Ga.,  and  Fla., 

Charleston , August  15,  1863. 

Respectfully  forwarded.  Orders  given  with  regard  to  ordnance. 

R.  S.  RIPLEY, 

Brigadier-General,  Commanding . 


Headquarters  Morris  Island,  S.  C., 

Battery  Wagner,  August  15,  1863. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  report  the  following  as  the  effective 
strength  of  my  command  to-day  : 


Infantry : 

51st  North  Carolina,  Colonel  McKethan,  about 374 

1st  Georgia  (detachment),  Captain  Davenport,  about 160 

12th  Georgia  Battalion,  Major  Hanvey,  about 184 

18th  Georgia  Battalion,  Major  Basinger,  about 119 

Sharpshooters,  -Lieutenant  Woodbery,  about 20 

Artillery : 

Company  H,  1st  South  Carolina  Volunteers,  Lieutenant  Pringle,  about 67 

Detachment  1st  South  Carolina,  Lieutenant  Alston,  about 16 

Company  C,  South  Carolina  Siege  Train,  Lieutenant  Gregg,  about 27 

Company  A,  Lucas’  battalion,  Lieutenant  Ogier,  about 64 

Company  G,  2d  South  Carolina,  Lieutenant  [George  P.]  Bush,  about 64 

Detachment  Chatham  (Georgia)  Artillery,  Lieutenant  Palmer,  about 31 

Detachment  of  cavalry  (couriers) , about 11 

Total 1,137 


In  accordance  with  my  nsnal  practice,  I opened  fire  on  the  enemy’s 
work  in  our  front  with  seven  guns  and  one  mortar,  which  I con- 
tinued till  daylight,  preserving  intervals  of  about  five  minutes  be- 
tween each  gun,  and  occasionally  firing  by  battery,  and  then  ceasing 
for  awhile,  in  order  to  bring  out  the  enemy’s  working  parties  and 
then  fire  rapidly  upon  them.  I found  this  to  work  well,  as  my  pickets 
report  many  shrieks  from  the  enemy’s  wounded. 

To-day  the  enemy  have  been  busily  engaged  working  on  a large 
battery  on  their  left,  situated  on  what  (I  think)  is  called  Thomas 
Island.  I have  been  using  the  mortar  at  this  place  and  9-inch  gun 
at  Battery  Gregg  on  them  during  the  day.  Whenever  a gun  would 
fire  they  would  run  and  hide  themselves  until  the  shell  had  exploded, 
and  then  resume  their  work.  I think  if  the  different  batteries  in 
reach  of  this  work  would  keep  up  a continuous  fire  on  it,  their  work 
would  be  very  much  impeded,  if  not  entirely  checked.  The  enemy 
have  been  quite  quiet  both  on  land  and  sea  to-day,  occasionally  firing 
a Parrott  gun  at  this  place ; later  this  afternoon  they  have  kept  up 
a considerable  fire  on  Battery  Gregg.  At  the  latter  place,  Private 
Henry  A.  Carter,  Company  H,  First  Volunteers,  Georgia  Regiment, 
had  his  right  leg  shot  off  this  afternoon. 

I have  kept  large  fatigue  parties  at  work  during  my  whole  tour  of 
duty  here,  and,  by  the  assistance  of  the  engineers,  have  improved  the 
condition  of  affairs  very  much.  I have  erected  banquette  treads  on 
the  front  face  wherever  they  could  be  put,  and  repaired  those  which 
were  injured.  I have  also  very  nearly  completed  banquettes  on  the 
32  R R— VOL  XXVIII,  PT  I 


498  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

rear  face  of  the  fort,  where  heretofore  it  would  have  been  almost  im- 
possible to  use  infantry.  I have  the  honor  to  report  that,  from  the 
time  I assumej  command  here,  until  8 p.  m.  this  day,  when  I was  re- 
lieved by  Colonel  Keitt,  I have  prevented  the  enemy  not  only  from 
approaching  nearer  to  this  battery,  but  from  improving  his  works 
in  range  of  our  guns ; this  I did  by  firing  upon  him  every  night  and 
during  the  day,  whenever  he  attempted  to  work. 

In  concluding  my  report,  I would  respectfully  call  attention  to 
Captain  Hill,  chief  of  ordnance,  and  Captain  Chichester,  chief  of 
artillery,  under  my  command,  as  officers  who  have  discharged  their 
duties  in  a most  efficient  and  satisfactory  manner.  The  garrison 
accounted  for  on  this  report  have  all  discharged  their  duties  in  a sat- 
isfactory manner. 

Respectfully  submitted. 

GEO.  P.  HARRISON,  Jr., 

Colonel , Commanding. 

Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Battery  Wagner, 

August  26,  1863 — p.  m. 

Sir  : The  enemy,  by  overwhelming  force,  have  captured  our  rifle- 
pits  and  most  of  our  pickets.  They  advanced  some  distance  this  side 
the  pits,  but  I have  driven  them  back. 

Most  of  the  guns  on  our  land  face  have  been  so  badly  damaged 
that  my  chief  of  artillery  assures  me  they  can  fire  but  a few  more 
rounds  without  danger  of  being  dismounted,  hence  I am  firing  on 
enemy  with  but  a few  guns,  reserving  these  for  an  assault. 

From  the  best  information  I can  get,  the  enemy  immediately  in 
our  front  are  about  2,000  strong,  with  infantry  and  light  artillery. 
Hence  it  will  take  a strong  force  to  regain  the  pits.  I consider  the 
pits  of  utmost  importance  to  the  safety  of  this  work,  but  as  my  com- 
mand is  too  small  to  assume  the  offensive,  I respectfully  ask  for  in- 
structions. 

I shall  fight  to  the  bitter  end,  unless  I receive  other  instructions. 
I need  artillerymen  badly. 

Very  respectfully, 

GEO.  P.  HARRISON,  Jr., 

Colonel,  Commanding. 

Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant-General. 

[Indprsement.] 

August  29, 1863. 

Let  General  Ripley  furnish  all  that  may  be  required  to  hold  Wag- 
ner long  as  practicable. 

5 r G.  T.  B,  [BEAUREGARD], 

General,  Commanding. 


Chap.  XL.] 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 


499 


Headquarters  Morris  Island, 
Battery  Wagner , August  26,  1863 — 10  p.  m. 
Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  I arrived  here  about 
2 o’clock  last  evening  and  relieved  Brigadier-General  Hagood.  I 
found  the  following  troops  on  the  island  : 


Infantry : 

54th  Georgia,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Rawls,  present,  about 340 

61st  North  Carolina,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Devane,  present,  about 263 

Charleston  Battalion,  Captain  Blake,  present,  about 208 

Sharpshooters,  Lieutenant  Dugger,  present,  about 13 


Total 824 


Artillery : 

Company  H,  Second  South  Carolina,  Captain  Kennady,  present,  about. . 46 

Company  C,  Lucas’  battalion,  Captain  [T.  B.]  Hayne,  present,  about 76 

Gist  Guard,  Lieutenant  Gilchrist,  present,  about. 36 

Detachment  Marion  Artillery,  Lieutenant  [M.  L.]  Wilkins,  present,  about . 32 

Detachment  Company  B,  South  Carolina,  Siege  Train,  Captain  [A.  J.] 

Hartley,  present,  about 14 

Detachment  Company  K,  First  South  Carolina  Artillery,  Lieutenant 
Erwin 13 


Total 217 


Cavalry : „ , 

Detachment  Fifth  South  Carolina  Cavalry,  couriers,  present,  about 10 

Grand  total 1, 051 


The  Charleston  Battalion  was  relieved  last  night  by  the  T wenty- 
third  Georgia  Regiment. 

On  assuming  command  here,  I found  that  the  two  8-inch  siege 
howitzers  had  been  dismounted,  and  one  ruined,  and  that  four  other 
guns  on  land  face  were  in  very  poor  condition,  leaving  but  three 
guns  on  said  face  in  good  order. 

Only  one  of  the  10-inch  columbiads  I found  in  good  order.  Owing 
to  the  want  of  carriages,  &c.,  the  condition  of  the  guns  remains  the 
same  at  this  time. 

I kept  up  an  irregular  fire  on  the  enemy  arriving  last  night  and 
to-day,  with  one  mortar,  and  such  guns  as  prudence  would  permit 
during  last  night. 

The  enemy  returned  the  fire  with  a variety  of  guns  from  his  land 
batteries,  generally  giving  us  three  or  four  shots  for  one.  About 
the  middle  of  this  afternoon,  the  enemy’s  fire  on  this  place  and  Bat- 
tery Gregg  became  quite  warm,  and  about  an  hour  before  sunset 
they  concentrated  their  whole  fire  on  this  work  and  our  rifle-pits  in 
front.  This  fire  was  not  only  exceedingly  rapid,  but  very  accurate, 
the  enemy  using  every  variety  of  projectiles.  This  fire  continued 
about  half  an  hour,  when  I discovered  that  my  pickets  had  opened 
from  the  rifle-pits.  This  was  immediately  followed  by  volley  after  vol- 
ley of  musketry  for  about  five  minutes,  when  it  partially  ceased.  As 
soon  as  it  commenced,  however,  I ordered  the  night  pickets,  consist- 
ing of  175  men,  to  form  immediately,  to  march  to  the  support  of  the 
pits  (this  picket  generally  relieves  and  supports  the  pits  at  dark,  it  was 
then  not  yet  sundown).  I soon  discovered  that  the  partial  cessation 
of  musketry  above  alluded  to  was  owing  to  the  fact  that  the  enemy 
had  overwhelmed  and  captured  a portion  of  our  pits  to  the  right, 
being  distant  from  theirs  only  about  30  yards.  Our  pits  on  the  left 
held  out  but  a few  moments  longer;  in  fact,  in  ten  minutes  from  the 


500  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

fire  of  the  first  musketry  the  enemy  were  in  possession  of  our  pits. 
From  two  officers  and  a number  of  men  who  escaped  from  the  rifle- 
pits,  I ascertained  that  the  enemy’s  attacking  party  were  at  least 
1,500  men,  while  our  picket  consisted  of  86  men  from  the  Sixty-first 
North  Carolina  Troops,  under  command  of  First  Lieut.  William 
Ramsey,  who  was  among  those  who  made  their  escape. 

Our  pickets  were  so  soon  overwhelmed  that  I can  say  but  little  of 
their  resistance,  but  think  they  did  their  duty  well. 

Owing  to  strength  of  enemy,  I refrained  from  attacking  him  with 
infantry,  but  am  keeping  up  an  artillery  fire  on  him  both  from  here 
and  Gregg. 

Casualties  during  the  day,  4 killed,  26  wounded,  and  79  missing. 
The  report  of  the  surgeon  is  inclosed  herewith.* 

I remain,  sir,  very  respectfully, 

GEO.  P.  HARRISON,  Jr., 

Colonel , Commanding. 

Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

[P.  S.] — The  enemy  exploded  three  torpedoes  to-night. 


Headquarters  Morris  Island, 
Battery  Wagner,  August  27,  1863 — 10  p.  m. 
Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the 
effective  force  of  this  command  and  of  the  operations  during  the 
past  twenty-four  hours : 


Infantry : 

54th  Georgia,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Rawls 265 

23d  Georgia,  Major  Ballenger 327 

20th  South  Carolina,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Dantzler 310 

61st  North  Carolina,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Devane 184 

8th  North  Carolina,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Whitson 295 

Artillery: 

Detachment  Chatham  (Georgia)  Artillery,  Lieutenant  Askew 31 

Detachment  Company  F,  Second  South  Carolina  Artillery,  Captain  Le- 

gare 71 

Mathewes’  artillery 23 

Gist  Guard 17 

Cavalry:  Detachment  5th  South  Carolina  Cavalry,  Sergeant  Huger 10 

Sharpshooters,  detachment  8th  North  Carolina,  Lieutenant  Dugger 13 


Total 1,546 


During  last  night  I kept  up  a fire  from  one  8-inch  sea-coast  how- 
itzer and  two  12-pounder  brass  howitzers  at  irregular  intervals  upon 
the  forking  parties  of  the  enemy. 

At  early  dawn  I discovered  that  they  had  advanced  their  line  to 
within  about  350  yards  of  the  fort.  During  the  greater  part  of  the 
day  1 have  fired  upon  their  advance  from  one  8-inch  sea-coast  how- 
itzer, but  an  accurate  and  concentrated  fire  from  their  Parrott  guns 
rendered  the  chambers  almost  untenable,  and  I was  compelled  to 
cease. 

Since  morning  they  have  advanced  about  50  yards  nearer  by  means 
of  their  sappers,  and  at  dark  this  evening  a sharp  fire  of  musketry 
from  the  epaulements  ran  in  their  working  parties.  I opened  at 


*Not  found, 


Chap.  XL.]  OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C.  501 

dark  with,  the  sea-coast  howitzer  and  three  12-pounder  howitzers,  and 
intend  annoying  them  during  the  night  as  much  as  possible. 

I would  suggest  that  a constant  tire  from  the  James  Island  batter- 
ies would  assist  us  greatly,  although  the  few  shell  they  have  thrown 
to-day  have  had  rather  too  much  range  and  are  directed  a little  too 
much  to  the  left,  which  I have  telegraphed  them  repeatedly. 

For  want  of  10-inch  mortar  shell  and  a detachment  for  this  mortar, 
I have  not  been  able  to  use  this  piece  since  yesterday,  at  all. 

I omitted  to  state  that  the  enemy  fired  several  shell  (Parrott)  into 
the  commissary  storehouse,  doing  a good  deal  of  damage,  and  I have 
directed  the  provisions  removed  ; about  1,500  rations  were  destroyed. 

About  200  rounds  of  12-pounder  howitzer  shell  are  much  needed, 
filled  and  without  fuses. 

The  enemy  exploded  one  torpedo  to-night.  The  casualties  to-day 
are  9 wounded. 

I remain,  sir,  very  respectfully, 

GEO.  P.  HARRISON,  Jr., 

Colonel,  Commanding . 

Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

[P.  S.  ] — I would  further  state  that  the  re-enforcements  sent  me  last 
night  arrived  as  follows:  The  Eighth  North  Carolina  about  midnight, 
and  the  Twentieth  South  Carolina  some  twenty  minutes  before  day- 
light. 

From  observations  made  by  myself  and  Captain  Champneys,  chief 
engineer  of  the  post,  together  with  the  reports  of  scouting  parties 
and  such  of  our  men  as  escaped  from  the  rifle-pits,  I became  satis- 
fied that  the  enemy  were  too  strong  to  justify  an  attack  on  our  part. 
My  decision  in  this  matter  was  also  strongly  influenced  by  the  want 
of  information  relative  to  the  position  of  the  torpedoes  in  our  front, 
and  from  the  fact  that  an  advance  on  our  part  would  have  to  be 
made  by  the  flank,  until  within  a very  few  paces  of  the  enemy,  and 
our  line  formed  not  only  under  easy  fire  of  his  infantry,  but  from 
several  pieces  of  light  artillery,  which  I knew  he  had  in  position. 
About  12  o’clock  to-night,  Brigadier-General  Colquitt  relieved  me  in 
command  of  the  island. 


ADDENDA. 

Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston,  S.  C.,  August  29,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  R.  S.  Ripley, 

Commanding  First  Military  District: 

General  : On  a review  of  the  reports  of  operations  on  Morris 
Island  made  by  Colonel  Harrison  on  26th  and  27th  instant,  the  com- 
manding general  directs  as  follows  : 

Everything  must  be  furnished,  and  nothing  practicable  be  left  un- 
done, necessary  or  calculated  to  preserve  our  possession  of  Battery 
Wagner  to  the  last  possible  moment. 

A constant  fire  from  the  James  Island  batteries  on  the  advanced 
positions  of  the  enemy  should  be  maintained  ; and,  to  insure  greater 
accuracy,  the  commander  at  Battery  Wagner  should  communicate, 
by  signal,  the  effect  of  each  shot,  and  thus  correct  any  miscalcula- 
tion in  range  or  time  of  fuse.  The  commanders  of  the  batteries  on 


502  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

J ames  Island  must  be  instructed  to  observe  closely  and  obey  strictly 
any  information  so  communicated. 

A detachment  must  be  sent  to  work  the  10-inch  mortar,  and  every 
effort  made  to  keep  it  provided  with  a sufficient  supply  of  shell, 
which  is  represented  as  being  now  deficient. 

About  200  rounds  of  12-pounder  howitzer  shell,  filled,  but  without 
fuses,  are  much  needed  at  Wagner,  and  must  be  furnished  as  soon 
& s practicable. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

THOMAS  JORDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff. 

Hdqrs.  First  Mil.  Dist.,  Dept.  S.  C.,  Ga.,  and  Fla., 

Charleston , August  29,  1863. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  yours 
of  this  date,  touching  the  defense  of  Battery  Wagner,  and  to  reply 
that  every  practicable  effort  has  been  and  will  continue  to  be  made 
to  preserve  our  possession  of  that  fort.  A constant  fire  has  been 
ordered  to  be  kept  up  from  the  James  Island  batteries,  and  communi- 
cation kept  up  between  Battery  W agner  and  those  batteries,  to  regu- 
late the  fire.  Upon  the  application  of  the  commanding  officer,  two 
days  ago  a picked  company  of  artillerists  was  sent  down  to  furnish 
details  for  the  mortar.  The  howitzer  shell  have  been  required  for,  but 
there  are  none  at  the  arsenal ; every  effort  is  being  made  to  get  them. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

R.  S.  RIPLEY, 

Brigadier-General,  Commanding. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan, 

Chief  of  Staff  and  Assistant  Adjutant-General. 

[Memorandum.] 

General  Jordan  : 

Call  Colonel  Waddy’s  attention  to  the  want  of  these  howitzer 
shells.  Let  him  get  them  forthwith,  if  possible. 

G.  T.  B.  [BEAUREGARD], 

General,  Commanding. 


No.  28. 

Reports  of  Capt.  J.  W.  Gregorie,  C.  S.  Corps  of  Engineers. 

Battery  Wagner,  August  21,  1863. 

Captain  : The  enemy  are  advancing  against  this  work  by  a heavy 
sap,  and  have  progressed  100  yards  in  the  last  twenty-four  hours. 
They  work  steadily  all  day,  having  such  a large  sap-roller  that  it  is 
impossible  for  our  sharpshooters  to  see  the  sappers.  The  distance 
from  their  advance  sap  to  the  fort  is  not  over  450  yards.  They  will 
reach  the  sand-hill  occupied  by  our  picket  in  four  or  five  days. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  captain,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient 
servant, 

J.  W.  GREGORIE, 

Captain  of  Engineers,  in  Charge  Defenses  Morris  Island. 

Capt.  P.  K.  Molony, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Chap.  XL.] 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 


503 


Battery  Wagner,  August  21,  1863. 

I have  tlie  honor  to  make  the  following  report  as  to  the  present 
condition  of  Battery  Wagner  : 

The  parapets  of  this  work  are  in  as  good  condition  to-day  as  at  any 
time  since  I have  been  on  duty  at  the  post.  I consider  all  the  maga- 
zines and  bomb-proofs  secure  from  direct  or  vertical  fire,  the  guns 
all  in  working  condition,  with  the  exception  of  10-inch  columbiad  in 
northernmost  chamber.  It  requires  a working  party  of  200  men,  every 
night,  and  1,000  sand-bags  to  keep  the  fort  up  to  its  present  standard. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  captain,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient 
servant, 

J.  W.  GREGORIE, 

Captain  of  Engineers , in  Charge  Defenses  Morris  Island . 

Capt.  P.  K.  Molony, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Battery  Wagner,  August  22,  1863. 

Captain  : The  engineer  works  were  pushed  forward  last  night 
with  100  men. 

I repaired  sea  face,  which  was  sadly  torn  up  by  the  Ironsides,  also 
traverse  over  southeast  magazine,  which  was  nearly  cut  through ; 
repaired  embrasure  on  salient,  and  erected  merlons  for  the  protec- 
tion of  the  men  at  the  guns.  Commenced  on  traverse  before  the 
door  of  southwest  magazine. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  captain,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient 
servant, 

J.  W.  GREGORIE, 

Captain  of  Engineers . 

Captain  Molony, 

Assistant  Adjutant-General. 

[Indorsement.] 

August  22,  1863—7.40  a.  m. 

Captain  Nance  : 

It  took  the  whole  night  to  do  the  above  work,  no  firing  could 
therefore  be  had  from  our  land  face.  Pickets  fighting  all  night. 

This  morning  the  enemy’s  sappers  have  reached  McMillans’  house 
(burned). 

JOHNSON  HAGOOD, 

Brigadier-  General. 


No.  29. 

Report  of  Capt.  J.  T.  Champneys , C.  S.  Corps  of  Engineers. 

Charleston,  S.  C.,  September  1,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  make  the  following  report  in  connection 
with  my  official  position  at  Battery  W agner  during  the  time  I was 
there  on  duty — from  the  night  of  Sunday,  August  23,  to  that  of  Sun- 
day, the  30th.  Owing  to  the  loss  of  my  journal  and  of  the  notes 
taken  upon  the  ground,  by  the  sinking  of  the  steamer  Sumter,  I am 


[Chap.  XL. 


504  S.  C.  AND  DA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  PLA. 

unable  to  give  in  detail  the  duty  performed  each  day  as  accurately 
as  I could  otherwise;  nevertheless  the  following  report  is  correct  in 
the  main  as  to  date  and  material : 

Sunday,  August  23,  at  night,  arrived,  accompanied  by  Colonel 
Harris,  chief  engineer  at  Battery  Wagner,  Brigadier-General  Ha- 
good  in  command.  I,  accompanied  by  Lieutenant  Gregorie,  one  of 
the  engineers  whom  I found  in  charge,  went  partially  over  the  work. 
The  enemy  was  quiet.  There  was  no  firing  but  that  of  an  occasional 
shot  from  our  pickets  and  from  two  of  our  guns. 

Monday,  August  24,  I made  an  early  survey  of  the  work,  and  then 
ordered  a detail  of  100  men  for  fatigue  duty.  They  reported  at  8 
o’clock,  and  I continued  to  work  them  through  the  day  until  5 p.m., 
when  they  were  relieved.  My  attention  during  the  day  was  directed 
to  the  repair  of  those  portions  of  the  work  which  had  been  previ- 
ously injured  by  the  shells  of  the  gunboats,  and  lying  within  the  fort. 
I repaired  the  injury  done  to  the  sides  of  Magazine  No.  3,  and  also 
the  interior  slopes  of  the  bases  of  the  merlons.  Not  having  sand- 
bags, I was  forced  to  work  to  great  disadvantage  from  the  scarcity 
of  shovels. 

Observing  that  the  timbers  of  the  covering  of  the  bomb-proof  of 
the  hospital  upon  the  exterior  or  sea  face  were,  from  the  effect  of 
the  shot  of  the  enemy’s  gunboats  and  from  the  action  of  the  wind, 
exposed,  I immediately  filled  it  up  to  its  original  slope  with  earth.  No 
revetment  could  be  made  for  the  want  of  sand-bags.  For  these  I 
telegraphed  to  Major  Echols,  Chief  of  Engineer  Bureau.  I found  no 
carpenters’  tools  but  a few  axes,  almost  useless  for  want  of  a grind- 
stone. 

From  such  observations  as  I could  make  from  time  to  time  during 
the  day,  I discovered  the  rifle-pits  of  the  enemy  to  be  about  600  yards 
off;  our  own  about  450,  the  two  upon  our  right  approaching  within 
45  yards  of  each  other. 

At  daylight  the  firing  of  the  enemy  began  with  that  of  artillery 
and  sharpshooters.  The  latter  annoyed  us  much.  During  the  day, 
the  firing  of  artillery  was  kept  up  upon  both  sides,  and  but  slowly, 
until  about  4. 30  p.  m. , when  it  became  heavy  upon  the  part  of  the 
enemy.  Previous  to  this  hour,  they  had  fired  at  us  not  more  than  40 
shots  from  their  200-pounder  Parrott  guns,  and  about  80  from 
those  of  smaller  caliber.  From  this  hour  till  about  6. 30  o’clock,  as 
many  as  120  shots  were  fired.  Their  object  appeared  to  be  to  dis- 
mount an  8-inch  sea-coast  howitzer  upon  our  sea  face  and  to  prevent 
re-enforcements  coming  up  from  the  sand-hills,  where  the  regiment 
not  upon  duty  were  ordered  to  remain  during  the  day,  protected  by 
the  high  hills  of  sand,  and  from  Battery  Gregg,  and  to  conceal  their 
own  re-enforcements’  approach.  During  the  day,  they  shelled  our 
rifle-pits  with  mortars. 

I ordered  100  men  for  fatigue  duty,  and  placing  them  at  work  after 
the  firing  had  ceased,  went  out  with  the  relief  picket  guard  to  our 
rifle-pits.  With  mynight  glass  I examined  attentively  the  position 
of  both  of  the  respective  lines  and  rifle-pits.  The  night  was  clear 
and  the  moon  bright,  so  that  I had  an  excellent  opportunity  afforded 
for  my  object.  I this  night  changed  the  direction  of  our  rifle-pits, 
and  instead  of  continuing  them  farther  in  that  line  began  with  80 
men  to  erect  a small  covered  way  from  a point  at  the  end  of  our  rifle- 
pits  to  another  near  the  causeway,  leading  from  the  sally-port  upon 
our  extreme  right  and  directly  under  the  wall  of  the  fort.  Return- 
ing, I continued  the  repairs  upon  the  parapet  of  the  land  face.  Much 


505 


Chap.  XL.]  OPE&ATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 

of  this  was  of  slight  injury.  Having  no  sand-bags,  I worked  to  dis- 
advantage. 

We  fired  slowly  through  the  night  with  artillery,  and  annoyed  the 
enemy  with  sharpshooters.  They  did  not  return  our  fire,  and  our 
men  exposed  themselves  freely  upon  the  bomb-proofs  without  draw- 
ing the  fire  of  the  sharpshooters. 

The  firing  from  our  James  Island  batteries  was,  upon  the  whole, 
good,  although  many  shots  fell  short  and  many  shells  exploded  in 
the  water  beyond  the  enemy’s  line.  Some  shells  from  Shell  Point 
fell  between  the  fort  and  our  pickets,  and  many  exploded  over  them. 

Twenty  transports  are  in  sight  to-day,  with  the  Ironsides  and  gun- 
boats. 

From  observations  of  the  positions,  relatively,  of  Batteries  Wag- 
ner and  Gregg,  I think,  as  no  covered  way  has  been  built  between 
them,  that  as  the  high  sand-hills  along  the  road  and  near  the  beach 
afford,  where  they  are  continuous,  much  protection  from  the  sea 
fire,  a connection  of  equal  height  should  be  immediately  erected  at 
such  places  where  breaks  in  their  chain  occur.  I would  also,  after 
this  has  been  done,  advise  the  same  thing  to  be  carried  into  effect 
upon  the  land  side,  as  a protection  from  the  shells  of  the  batteries  of 
the  enemy  adjacent. 

Tuesday,  August  25,  at  4 o’clock,  I relieved  the  fatigue  party  of 
100  who  had  been  working  within  the  fort.  I called  for  another 
detail  of  100,  who  reported  at  8 o’clock.  With  the  day,  began  the 
fire  of  the  enemy  with  both  artillery  and  sharpshooters.  I built 
a platform  on  the  land  face  to  the  left  of  the  8-inch  mortar  for  a 
12-pounder  howitzer,  and  made  a ramp.  I found  much  difficulty  in 
obtaining  material.  I removed  the  heavy  2-inch  plank  from  the 
banquette , forming  steps  for  the  infantry,  and  used  it,  substituting 
plank  of  lighter  material.  I securely  nailed  and  braced  these  steps, 
and  also  braced  the  revetment  of  wood  which,  along  the  land  face, 
had  in  more  than  one  place  yielded  and  bulged  in,  from  the  fact 
that  the  earth  had  been  removed  from  the  base.  This,  I to-day  re- 
placed along  the  entire  base  of  the  parapet.  I find  much  splintered 
wood  and  shattered  timber  lying  about  the  parade  and  in  the  fort 
generally.  There  appears  to  be  no  inspector-general’s  department 
at  this  post,  whose  presence  might  be  beneficial  in  the  removal  of 
such  obstacles.  I also  notice  quite  a number  of  shell  and  shot  lying 
all  about,  which,  if  collected  and  sent  to  the  arsenal,  would  be  of 
use.  The  number  of  shots  from  the  enemy  to-day  was  about  the 
same  as  yesterday  until  about  4. 30  o’clock,  when  the  cannonade  be- 
came very  heavy. 

At  5 p.  m.  I relieved  the  fatigue  party.  About  the  time  that  the 
picket  guard  started  to  relieve  those  in  the  pits,  the  enemy  made  a 
furious  assault  upon  our  rifle-pits.  Captain  [E.]  Mallett,  of  the 
North  Carolina  troops,  being  in  command  of  the  relief,  arrived  at 
the  right  time  to  repel  it  and  a subsequent  one.  The  firing  lasted 
for  two  hours.  Not  having  sand-bags,  I had  made  during  the  day 
fifty  hand-barrows,  and  with  these,  after  the  assault  upon  our  rifle- 
pits,  I put  the  men  to  work  carrying  the  earth  from  the  sand-hills  at 
or  near  the  rifle-pits  to  the  marsh.  I also  began  a ditch  leading  from 
it  to  the  creek  on  our  right.  I went  backward  and  forward  through 
the  night  from  the  fort  to  the  rifle-pits,  and  hastened  up  the  work. 
W e were  several  times  to-night  fired  upon  by  the  enemy’s  pickets, 
some  of  whom  had  left  their  rifle-pits,  and  it  being  low  water,  had 
placed  themselves  in  the  marsh. 


[Cfup,  XL. 


5 Of)  S.  C.  AND  DA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

At  4 a.  m.  I relieved  the  fatigue  party.  The  firing  from  our  bat- 
teries was  not  as  effective  to-night.  The  enemy  kept  quiet,  return- 
ing  no  fire.  They  have  increased  the  strength  of  their  rifle-pits. 
General  Hagood  was  to-night  relieved  by  Colonel  Harrison. 

W ednesday,  26th.  The  day  began  with  the  usual  fire  of  the  enemy. 
I think  I noticed  a new  battery  of  the  enemy  about  900  yards  off  to 
our  right,  and  in  line  with  our  rifle-pits  and  in  continuation  of  theirs. 
It  appears  to  be  in  a clump  of  green  trees  over  the  marsh.  They  have 
worked  hard  during  the  night,  notwithstanding  our  fire,  and  their 
line  of  rifle-pits  begins  to  assume  larger  proportions.  A detail  of  100 
men  reported  at  8 o’clock.  I placed  steps  or  treads  in  all  of  the  gun- 
chambers,  which  were  not  there  before,  and  capable  of  holding  6 
men  in  each.  I also  cast  earth  over  the  parapet  and  did  what  work 
I could  within  the  parade,  screened  from  the  observation  of  the 
sharpshooters.  In  view  of  the  enemy’s  mounting  heavy  Parrott 
guns  in  the  battery  I alluded  to  in  the  trees  upon  our  right  over  the 
marsh,  thereby  enfilading  our  right  and  rear,  it  would,  I think,  be 
advisable  to  erect  a traverse  in  rear  of  the  hospital,  for  the  work  at 
this  point  appears  to  render  such  precautions  necessary. 

The  enemy  fired,  as  usual,  until  about  3.30  p.  m.,  when  they  dropped 
mortar  shells  and  fired  continuously  from  their  large  and  small 
Parrott  guns  and  from  a Wiard  gun  at  the  rate  of  from  5 to  7 
shots  a minute,  when  at  about  6.30,  and  before  we  had  relieved  or 
re-enforced  the  picket,  they  made  a successful  assault  upon  our  rifle- 
pits,  carrying  them  in  five  minutes.  Seventy  odd  of  our  men  were 
captured  and  but  few  escaped.  Their  advance  from  their  rifle-pits 
was  heavy  and  quick.  Their  reserve  showed  themselves,  but  did  not 
advance.  My  hand-barrows  and  twenty-three  shovels  were  captured, 
having  been  left  at  the  rifle-pits.  The  injury  done  to  the  covering 
of  the  bomb-proofs  and  parapets  by  the  heavy  bombardment  was 
slight,  and  repaired  that  night.  I observed  that  the  heavy  bolts 
from  the  200-pounder  Parrott  gun,  when  they  struck  our  works  full, 
did  not  penetrate  far.  Occasionally  they  would  fall  back  or  over  the 
parapet.  Colonel  Harrison  appeared  anxious  to  recapture  the  pits, 
but  was  dissuaded  from  an  attempt  by  a consultation  with  his  officers. 

Two  thousand  seven  hundred  sand-bags  arrived  to-day  and  were 
all  filled  and  placed  in  position.  The  revetment  of  the  slope  of  the 
bomb-proof  of  the  hospital  was  finished  with  them ; also  that  of  the 
Magazine  No.  3. 

I find  it  almost  impossible  to  obtain  a given  amount  of  work  out 
of  the  fatigue  parties.  The  men  appear  to  be  exhausted  at  the  time 
they  report  for  duty.  Many  sleep  upon  it,  and  slip  away  even  under 
the  immediate  command  of  their  officers.  Their  discipline  is  bad. 
I would  advise  a constant  working  party  of  100  negroes  to  be  kept 
at  work  at  this  fort — 50  at  night  and  50  in  the  day.  They  may  in 
the  day-time,  when  not  upon  duty,  be  kept  at  the  sand-hills  between 
the  batteries,  with  but  little  danger,  comparatively. 

Mr.  Hyatt,  an  overseer,  arrived  to-day.  I have  kept  the  man 
Baker,  who  accompanied  me  to  the  battery,  constantly  at  work  over- 
seeing the  repairs  in  detached  places. 

I will  allude  to  the  extreme  want  of  all  police  regulations  here. 
The  bomb-proofs  are  becoming  quite  unpleasant,  and  the  premises  in 
the  neighborhood  of  the  commissary  building  very  offensive.  An 
inspector-general  would  find  great  scope  for  the  exercise  of  his  duties. 
At  4 o’clock  I relieved  the  fatigue  party. 

Thursday,  27th,  a detail  of  100  men  reported  at  8 o’clock.  More 


Chap.  XL.]  OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C.  507 

sand-bags  arriving  (3,000),  I filled  and  left  them  at  various  points  sub- 
ject for  the  duty  of  the  night. 

The  fire  of  the  enemy  to-day  was  as  usual  as  to  number  of  shots 
and  time.  They  made  great  advance  in  their  work  last  night.  They 
strengthened  our  original  line  of  rifle-pits,  and  mounted  a gun  upon 
an  angle  on  our  left  in  them.  Their  line  is  now  carried  out  to  the 
beach. 

Their  sharpshooters  are  very  active  to-day.  They  fired  through  the 
embrasures  and  killed  a gunner  at  his  post. 

Y esterday  they  struck  full  three  times  an  8-inch  howitzer  on  our 
land  face,  breaking  and  driving  it  some  distance  into  the  parade.  The 
carriage  also  was  destroyed.  This  was  done  with  bolts  from  the 
200-pounder  -Parrott.  Their  fire  is  very  accurate.  When  annoyed 
by  our  sharpshooters,  the  firing  from  the  Wiard  and  small  Parrott 
guns  is  quick  and  effective,  striking  off  at  almost  every  shot  the 
sand-bags  which  form  their  protection  and  from  behind  which  they 
aim. 

The  firing  from  our  batteries  on  James  Island  is  sometimes  very 
defective. 

Colonel  Harris,  chief  engineer,  came,  bringing  with  him  assistants 
(Messrs.  [Thomas  M.j  Healy  and  Poget).  I went  over  the  work  with 
Colonel  Harris. 

To-night  I filled  up  pits  formed  by  shots  on  the  outside  of  our  em- 
brasures, carried  the  traverses  up  higher,  and  placed  more  earth  on 
the  bomb-proofs.  The  fatigue  men  were  relieved  at  4 o’clock. 

Friday,  28th,  detail  of  100  for  fatigue  duty  reported  at  8 o’clock 
and  were  relieved  at  5 p.  m.  I filled  up  sand-bags  and  left  them  as 
yesterday — at  various  points  ready  for  the  night.  I built  a new  mor- 
tar bed  and  threw  up  a traverse;  this  to  left  of  the  8-inch  mortar  in 
position  and  on  the  same  face. 

I had  three  carpenters  detailed  for  duty  in  the  engineer  depart- 
ment. It  would  be  advisable  to  have  carpenters  and  men  who  could 
act  as  overseers  permanently  detailed  and  stationed  here.  At  pres- 
ent little  work  of  this  kind  can  be  done,  owing  to  the  difficulty  of 
obtaining  suitable  men,  and  the  time  occupied  in  reporting  when  a 
detail  of  this  kind  is  made  from  day  to  day,  and  also  to  the  general 
incompetency  of  the  men  for  such  duty. 

The  tools  and  50  shovels  arrived  to-day.  A grindstone  is  wanted. 

The  embrasures  of  palmetto  logs  should  be  removed  and  sand-bags 
substituted.  The  effect  of  the  shot  of  the  200-pounder  Parrott  gun 
upon  them  causes  them  to  fly  from  position. 

The  fire  of  the  enemy  was,  as  usual,  severe  at  about  4 p.  m.  This 
was  co  cover  the  mounting  of  a gun  near  the  beach  in  their  lines,  upon 
our  left.  They  now  have  four  mortars  and  a new  battery  mounted 
since  my  arrival,  and  their  line  of  zigzags  extends  to  150  yards  of 
our  left  face. 

A man  to-day  was  killed  by  one  of  our  sharpshooters  firing  with 
buckshot. 

To-night  I built  a flank  or  parapet  outside  of  our  sally-port  on  the 
sea  face,  extending  from  the  end  of  our  work  to  the  sand-hills  be- 
yond. This  is  to  relieve  us  from  the  fire  of  infantry  in  view  of  an 
assault  from  the  beach  and  left.  This  may  be  built  up  higher. 

Saturday,  29th.  Began  and  worked  during  the  day  in  the  same 
manner,  and  at  night  finished  the  traverse  in  front  of  Magazine  No. 
2,  and  filled  all  the  inequalities  upon  all  parapets  and  bomb-proofs, 
so  that,  with  the  exception  of  the  covering  over  the  sally-port  on 


S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FtA.  [Chap.  XL. 

the  sea  face  (which  is  rather  slight),  the  traverse  in  front  of  the  32- 
pounder  at  the  right  sally-port,  and  that  in  the  rear  of  the  hospital, 
the  work  is  in  good  order. 

Captain  [T.  B.]  Lee,  of  the  Engineers,  arrived  and  relieved  me.  I 
accompanied  him  over  the  works. 

Sunday,  30th.  Worked  as  usual  all  day,  and  came  off  at  night  on 
hoard  the  steamer  Sumter. 

I noticed,  upon  more  than  one  occasion,  many  of  the  enemy  in  rear 
of  a house  within  their  lines  in  our  front.  They  pass  beyond  it,  and 
apparently  are  at  work,  occasionally  transporting  something  heavy. 
They  may  be  possibly  removing  material  to  ? point  on  the  creek 
which  flows  into  their  line,  passing  by  the  right  wall  of  Wagner  and 
coming  into  the  bay  in  the  vicinity  of  Battery  Gregg.  They  may  use 
this  creek  to  flank  Battery  W agner  or  attack  it  in  rear.  A number  of 
barges  may  noiselessly  come  down  it,  upon  a dark  night,  and,  until 
they  are  immediately  under  the  walls  of  the  fort,  cannot  be  observed. 
A large  barge  was  picked  up  in  it  a few  days  since.  It  was  capable  of 
holding  50  men.  They  may  possibly  be  collecting  or  putting  them  to- 
gether at  a point  upon  this  creek,  both  wide  and  deep.  To  defend 
this  point  against  an  advance,  we  have  in  the  salient  one  42-pounder 
carronade,  and  at  the  sally-port  on  the  right,  immediately  upon  the 
banks  of  the  creek,  a 32-pounder.  This  face  is  otherwise  undefended. 
This  32-pounder  is  immediately  in  advance  of  the  sally-port  and  is 
wholly  unprotected  by  traverse  or  ramp,  and  exposed  to  the  fire  of 
the  battery  of  the  enemy  recently  erected  in  the  trees  over  the  marsh. 

Since  my  advent  at  Battery  Wagner,  the  enemy  have  mounted,  I 
think,  in  all  seven  guns  upon  new  works. 

It  would  be  advisable  to  build  immediately  a small  bomb-proof  for 
the  commissary  department,  in  which  provisions  could  be  stored  for 
time  of  siege.  At  present  only  two  days’  rations  are  received  at  a 
time  at  Battery  Wagner,  and  if  the  enemy  are  successful  in  a flank 
movement  upon  Battery  Gregg,  Wagner  would  have  but  little  in 
time  of  need. 

Water  of  an  inferior  quality  can  be  obtained  by  digging  in  the 
sand  for  it.  Many  rations  were  destroyed  by  a shell  of  the  enemy 
on  Wednesday. 

From  Battery  Gregg  I observed  the  brilliant  calcium  (or  Drum- 
mond) light  of  the  enemy.  It  shed  a ray  across  the  water  to  the 
batteries  on  James  Island,  and  was  distinctly  visible  upon  the 
steamer  at  Battery  Gregg. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  T.  CHAMPNEYS, 
Captain  of  Engineers. 

Major  [W.  H.]  Echols, 

Chief  Engineer  South  Carolina,  Engineer  Bureau. 


No.  30. 

Report  of  Mr.  William  Tennent,  Jr.,  Assistant  Engineer  C.  S. 

Service. 

Charleston,  August  13,  1863. 
Colonel  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report : 

On  2d  instant  I received  orders  at  Mellichamp’s,  James  Island,  at 
4 p.  m.  to  repair  to  Battery  Gregg,  Morris  Island,  and  relieve  Mr. 


Chap.  XL.] 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 


509 


E.  J.  White.  I arrived  at  said  point  at  8 p.  m.  on  the  same  evening, 
and  took  charge.  Five  shovels  and  15  wheelbarrows  were  all  the 
tools  turned  over  to  me.  Verbal  instructions  were  extended  to 
strengthen  with  earth  the  covering  of  T-iron  over  gun-chamber  No. 
2,  to  be  used  as  a bomb-proof,  and  to  repair  damages,  generally,  made 
by  the  enemy.  Of  material,  I collected  during  my  tour  15  shovels 
and  500  sand-bags  from  the  neighboring  sand-hills.  All  engineer 
property  I then  immediately  put  under  guard,  and  upon  being  re- 
lieved by  Lieutenant  [Alexander]  Gillon  I turned  over  the  same, 
under  guard,  together  with  full  and  definite  instructions  received 
from  Mr.  White  and  yourself  during  your  visits  in  my  tour  of  duty. 
These  instructions,  besides  being  personally  explained,  were  written 
out.  During  my  tour  of  nine  days,  from  the  evening  of  the  2d  to  the 
evening  of  the  11th,  I made  two  daily  requisitions  on  assistant  adju- 
tant-general for  working  parties  of  100  each.  These  working  parties 
were  never  regularly  furnished.  Four  of  my  requisitions  were  never 
complied  with  for  day  work,  and  five  for  night  work,  making  nine 
in  all,  and  showing  an  estimate  of  one-half  lost  in  time  and  labor. 
This  failure  to  meet  my  demands,  I was  informed  by  assistant  adju- 
tant-general, resulted  from  insufficiency  in  numbers  and  exhausted 
condition  of  troops  on  duty  on  the  island.  The  work  completed  in 
my  tour  was  revetting  of  chamber  with  sand-bags  for  10-inch  mor- 
tar ; also  the  infantry  parapet  adjoining,  with  gabions  of  rice  tierces 
topped  with  sand-bags;  the  covering  of  gun-chamber  No.  2,  with 
4 feet  of  sand,  and  repairing  of  slight  damages  generally.  I would 
here  call  your  attention  to  slow  process  of  covering  gun-chamber  No. 
2,  thereby  explaining  why  not  sooner  finished.  There  is  but  one  step- 
ladder  to  Battery  Gregg,  the  height  is  17  feet.  The  relief  parties 
have  never  been  over  37,  and  the  bags  conveying  the  sand  cannot 
be  more  than  half  filled,  on  account  of  the  height  of  the  re-enforce. 

The  following  are  observations  from  my  daily  journal  from  3d  to 
10th,  inclusive : 

On  3d,  4th,  5th,  and  6th,  the  fire  of  the  enemy  in  the  morning 
averaged  some  8 solid  shots  from  Parrott  battery  at  the  Pines,  evi- 
dently intended  for  Gregg,  but  mostly  falling  short  from  50  to  100 
yards.  On  corresponding  evenings,  the  same  fires  averaged  some  15 
rifle  shells,  the  range  being  changed  so  as  to  intercept  communication 
between  Sumter  and  Cumming’s  Point.  Only  one  casualty  in  this 
period — a private’s  leg  lost.  Our  reply  to  the  enemy  up  to  the  6th 
was  only  an  occasional  one  with  solid  shot,  averaging  4 per  day. 
This  arose  from  a want  of  shells  for  the  9-inch  Dahlgren. 

On  3d,  at  8.30  p.  m.,  witnessed  signal  rocket  of  enemy  from  Black 
Island  Creek. 

On  4th,  at  4 a.  m.,  the  Passaic  and  Battery  Gregg  exchanged  4 
shots,  one  of  the  former  (an  11-inch  shell)  bounding  on  the  parapet 
and  rolling  gently  into  columbiad  chamber  No.  2 without  exploding. 
This  columbiad  was  then  in  action  under  Lieutenant  [George  E.] 
Hayns worth,  First  Regiment  South  Carolina  Artillery.  On  the  4th, 
at  9 p.  m.,  heard  report  and  witnessed  flash  of  musketry  in  Black 
Island  Creek,  which  resulted  in  capturing  enemy’s  signal  boat. 

On  evening  of  5th,  was  attracted  by  a flash  and  report  of  a gun  in 
harbor  off  Gregg ; proved  to  be  the  J uno  capturing  another  of  the 
enemy’s  signal  boats. 

On  the  6th,  the  Parrott  battery  made  4 line  shots  for  steamer 
working  on  harbor  obstructions  ; 3 fell  short  and  the  fourth  passed 
beyond  and  to  the  rear  of  her  stern, 


[Chap.  XL. 


510  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

On  7th,  the  same  was  tried  on  steamer  passing  to  Sumter,  but  not 
so  successfully,  all  shots  falling  far  short.  At  5 p.  m.  on  this  day,  a 
mortar-boat  took  position  off  Wagner  and  shelled  our  troops  in  sand- 
hills for  some  thirty  minutes.  Previous  to  this,  a flag-of-truce  boat 
had  communicated  with  General  Hagood  at  Wagner.  At  11  p.  m. 
the  Parrott  battery  opened  on  us  with  unusual  rapidity,  with  a range 
for  the  Point  Landing.  This  fire  was  kept  up  some  three  hours  longer 
than  on  any  previous  occasion.  Their  signal  for  commencing  fire 
was  a rocket  thrown  from  the  harbor  opposite  Battery  Gregg.  The 
steamer  had,  however,  already  left  the  point,  and  their  signal  was 
occasioned  by  a lighted  lantern  on  beach,  collecting  ordnance  stores. 

On  the  8th  instant,  observed  distinctly  with  glasses  men  evidently 
laying  platforms  in  marsh  midway  between  Morris  and  Black  Isl- 
ands. The  9-inch  Dahlgren  was  tried  at  highest  elevation,  but  could 
not  reach  them.  At  2 p.  m.  5 shells  were  fired  from  Dahlgren — 3 
exploding  over  the  enemy’s  advanced  batteries  and  2 just  in  advance 
of  our  gun.  At  4 p.  m.  enemy  engaged  Battery  Gregg  with  three 
mortar-boats,  firing  shell  and  200-pounder  Parrott  shot.  Shells  all 
burst  short ; Parrott  shots  mostly  passed  over.  Two  of  the  Par- 
rott shots  struck  the  battery — one  carrying  away  southeast  corner 
of  traverse  over  magazine,  the  other  the  step-ladder  leading  up  to 
the  rampart.  The  firing  was  rapid  and  continuous  till  sundown,  and 
the  -enemy  in  this  short  engagement  expended  some  220  shell  and 
shot.  The  most  advanced  battery  of  the  enemy  at  the  same  time 
shelled  the  sand-hills  between  the  forts.  Lieutenant  [T.  G.J  Dar- 
gan,  First  Regiment  South  Carolina  Artillery,  replied  to  this  last 
fire,  with  excellent  effect.  Judging  from  what  I could  discern  with 
glasses,  he  is  a superior  artillerist  and  deserves  commendation  for 
the  precision  with  which  he  burst  his  shells  over  the  enemy’s  bat- 
teries. One  10-inch  columbiad  was  brought  into  action  during  this 
engagement,  but  after  the  fourth  fire,  the  enemy’s  vessels  proving 
to  be  out  of  range,  our  reply  was  directed  with  the  9-inch  Dahlgren 
exclusively  against  the  land  batteries  of  the  enemy. 

The  morning  of  the  9th  was  very  sultry  and  quiet.  At  4. 30  p.  m. 
11  shells  were  thrown  from  the  9-inch  Dahlgren  at  the  enemy’s 
advanced  works,  some  taking  effect  and  some  falling  short.  This 
was  replied  to  by  a few  shots  from  the  enemy’s  Parrott  batteries,  all 
passing  over  Battery  Gregg. 

At  3 a.  m.  on  the  morning  of  the  10th,  Forts  Sumter,  Wagner, 
Gregg,  and  Simkins  opened  fire  on  the  enemy’s  advanced  working 
parties  and  drove  them  to  their  original  line  behind  palisades.  The 
remainder  of  this  day  was  passed  in  quiet  inactiveness  until  5 p.  m., 
when  we  exchanged  some  13  shots  from  the  9-inch  Dahlgren  with 
the  enemy’s  batteries.  Captain  Lesesne  opened  fire  from  this  point 
with  the  10-inch  mortar  at  6 p.  m.  Of  the  shots  fired  by  the  enemy’s 
Parrott  battery  on  this  afternoon,  one  struck  the  traverse  over  the 
magazine,  another  passed  through  Lieutenant  Dargan’s  tent,  and  a 
third  through  signal-house,  carrying  away  half  the  chimney.  On  this 

evening,  enemy  lit  up  their  calcium  light  at Hill.  This  day 

closing  my  tour  of  duty,  my  observations  ended  with  the  evening. 

Respectfully, 

WM.  TENNENT,  Jr., 

Assistant  Engineer \ 

Colonel  [D.  B.]  Harris, 

Chief  Engineer  Departments 


Chap.  XL.] 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 
No.  31. 


511 


Reports  of  Capt.  C.  E.  Chichester,  Gist  Guard,  Artillery,  Chief 

of  Artillery,  &c. 

Charleston,  S.  C.,  July  31,  1863. 

Captain  : I desire  respectfully  to  present  the  following  report : 

Saturday,  July  25,  1863. — Having  procured  an  order  relieving  my 
company  for  a time  from  Battery  Wagner,  but  feeling  the  deepest 
interest  in  the  successful  defense  of  the  battery,  I asked  and  received 
permission  from  the  general  commanding  to  remain  at  the  battery 
until  relieved,  and  render  such  assistance  and  advice  to  the  chief  of 
artillery  as  my  knowledge  of  everything  connected  with  the  battery 
might  dictate.  I also  received  from  the  general  a supply  of  safety- 
fuses  and  files,  with  full  instructions  as  to  their  use,  should  occasion 
require.  I arrived  at  Battery  Wagner  about  9 p.  m.  and  reported  to 
Lieutenant-Colonel  Yates  for  special  duty. 

Sunday,  July  26. — Was  sent  for  at  7 a.  m.  by  General  Taliaferro, 
who  informed  me  that  he  desired  me  to  occupy  the  position  of  chief 
of  artillery  in  place  of  Col.  J.  A.  Yates,  who  was  compelled  to  re- 
turn to  the  city  on  account  of  illness.  I accepted  the  position,  and 
proceeded  at  once  to  carry  out  all  requisite  orders.  The  first  matter 
of  importance  to  which  I turned  my  attention  was  to  move  the  dis- 
mounted 32-pounder  smooth-bore  from  its  chamber  on  the  sea  face 
to  a chamber  on  the  land  face,  occupied  by  an  8-inch  sea-coast  how- 
itzer, also  dismounted.  My  reasons  for  making  this  change  were 
that  I had  no  carriage  suitable  for  remounting  the  howitzer,  but  had 
one  which  would  do  for  the  32-pounder  smooth-bore,  also  because 
I was  desirous  of  cleaning  out  the  chamber  on  the  sea  face  prepara- 
tory to  laying  a platform  for  another  10-inch  columbiad,  which  I 
hoped  to  get  soon.  Succeeded,  by  my  own  personal  superintendence, 
in  getting  the  32-pounder  to  its  place,  its  chassis  and  carriage  in  posi- 
tion, and  the  gin  put  together  and  laid  over  the  trail,  thus  having 
every  thing  ready  to  raise  the  gin  at  dark  and  mount  the  guns  be- 
fore midnight.  Capt.  R.  Pringle,  commanding  company — Lucas’ 
battalion — raised  a question  of  rank  between  himself  and  myself  and 
reported  to  General  Taliaferro  that  he  was  entitled  to  the  position  of 
chief  of  artillery,  as  he  was  the  ranking  officer.  General  Taliaferro, 
being  desirous  of  making  no  changes,  informed  Captain  Pringle  that 
he  considered  me  as  acting  on  his  staff,  and  consequently  the  ques- 
tion of  rank  did  not  apply.  In  the  afternoon,  General  Colquitt  ar- 
rived to  relieve  General  Taliaferro.  In  turning  over  the  command, 
this  matter  of  rank  was  again  brought  up,  and  I was  called  away 
from  my  labors  on  the  gun  to  make  my  statement.  I informed  the 
generals  that  I was  mustered  into  Confederate  service  on  the  12th 
of  September,  1861,  from  which  date  to  the  present  I have  been  in 
constant  service  and  have  received  pay  as  captain  from  the  Confed- 
erate Government  and  not  from  the  State  authorities;  that  my  pres- 
ent company  had  been  mustered  into  Confederate  service  on  April 
2,  1862,  but  that  it  had  been  decided  by  competent  authority  that  I 
should  date  from  September  12,  1861.  They  desired  me  to  continue 
the  duties  of  chief  of  artillery  as  a staff  officer,  and  they  would  refer 
the  matter  to  the  general  commanding  the  district  for  his  decision. 
After  getting  the  32-pounder  all  ready  for  mounting,  I proceeded  to 
lay  the  platform  in  chamber  No.  2,  sea  face,  for  the  new  columbiad, 
aud  succeeded  in  getting  it  ready  before  dark,  whereupon  I tele- 


512  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

graphed  the  fact  to  yon,  and  requested  that  a gun  might  be  sent. 
The  answer  to  my  dispatch  was,  “ Are  yon  sure  the  platform  is 
ready  ? Look  again  and  see.”  Not  understanding  the  meaning  of 
the  answer,  I made  no  reply.  As  soon  as  it  became  dark  enough,  I 
raised  the  gin  and  quickly  mounted  the  32-pounder  to  its  position, 
having  it  all  ready  for  action  by  12  o’clock,  and  sent  the  gin  to  Cum- 
ming’s  Point,  where  it  was  required  for  moving  a 10-inch  columbiad. 
I moved  from  the  chamber  in  which  I mounted  the  32-pounder  an 
8-inch  siege  howitzer  to  a platform  on  the  right  flank  of  the  work, 
taking  therefrom  a 32-pounder  carronade,  which  I placed  in  one  of 
the  flank  embrasures,  in  place  of  a similar  one  dismounted  the  day 
previous  by  a shell  from  one  of  the  monitors.  I also  at  dark  started 
a large  fatigue  party  to  throwing  up  a platform  in  rear  of  the  cur- 
tain on  the  left  flank  of  the  work,  upon  which  I determined  to  re- 
mount the  8-inch  sea-coast  howitzer,  its  carriage  having  arrived,  and 
thereby  strengthen  the  defense  of  the  ditch  and  sea  face  of  the  work, 
which  had  heretofore  been  inadequately  protected  by  two  12-pounder 
howitzers.  I also  during  the  night  assisted  the  engineer  in  super- 
intending several  working  parties  on  different  parts  of  the  work. 
At  2.30  a.  m.  the  working  parties  being  nearly  all  relieved,  by  order 
of  General  Colquitt,  I opened  fire  with  one  8-inch  shell  gun,  firing 
5 shells  at  intervals  of  a half  hour,  but,  owing  to  defective  fuses,  all 
failed  to  explode.  I also  fired  1 shell  from  the  10-inch  sea-coast  mor- 
tar, but  it  also  failed  to  explode.  (I  would  respectfully  call  attention 
to  the  condition  of  this  mortar  and  its  bed,  and  would  suggest  that 
it  be  put  in  order  at  once,  as  it  can  be  made  very  effective  against  the 
enemy’s  works).  I also  fired  6 shells  from  the  32-pounder  smooth- 
bore, 4 of  which  exploded  immediately  over  the  enemy’s  working 
parties.  I continued  this  firing  until  daylight,  at  which  time  the 
enemy  commenced  a vigorous  shelling  from  their  mortars. 

Monday,  July  27. — I succeeded,  by  again  giving  my  personal  super- 
intendence, in  completing  the  platform  on  the  flank  curtain  for  the 
8-inch  sea-coast  howitzer,  moved  the  gin  to  the  platform,  and 
put  the  chassis  and  carriage  in  position  ready  for  mounting.  Tele- 
graphed for  relief  for  the  artillery  command.  Also  telegraphed 
again  for  a columbiad  for  the  finished  platform.  Assisted  the  engi- 
neer in  repairs  in  different  portions  of  the  work,  especially  at  the 
sally-ports,  which  had  been  broken  in  by  a mortar  shell.  Two  of 
Captain  Pringle's  men  were  blown  up  and  killed  by  a torpedo  in  front 
of  the  battery,  whither  they  had  gone  during  the  cessation  of  firing 
while  flags  of  truce  were  passing.  They  had  been  warned,  and  were 
called  to  and  ordered  to  come  in.  They  demonstrated  that  torpedoes 
will  explode,  when  our  own  men  step  on  them.  Not  being  able  to 
get  the  gin,  was  unable  to  mount  the  8-inch  howitzer,  after  dark,  as 
I expected.  Worked  all  night  in  assisting  the  engineer  in  necessary 
repairs,  upon  different  parts  of  the  work,  feeling  it  my  duty  to  give 
my  assistance  wherever  necessary  work  is  required,  even  though  it 
be  not  in  my  own  department,  and  regret  to  see  that  some  others  in 
authority  are  not  actuated  by  the  same  motives.  Captain  Ramsey, 
engineer  in  chief,  was  relieved  to-night  by  Captain  Gregorie.  I re- 
gretted to  see  Captain  Ramsey  leave,  as  his  energy  and  perseverance 
have  had  much  to  do  in  keeping  the  work  in  as  thorough  a state  of 
repair  as  it  is.  His  labors  have  been  untiring. 

Tuesday,  July  28. — The  enemy  commenced  shelling  from  their 
mortars  at  4.30  o’clock,  with  great  rapidity  and  accuracy.  One  .shell 
buried  itself  under  the  platform,  of  one  of  the  8-inch  shell  guns  and  ex- 


Chap.  XL.]  OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C.  513 

ploded,  tearing  up  the  platform,  but  not  injuring  the  gun.  Set  men 
to  work  at  once,  repairing  the  damage,  and  had  the  gun  all  ready  by 
12  m.  At  10.30,  the  enemy  opened  with  two  monitors  and  one  wooden 
gunboat,  and  at  12  o’clock  two  additional  monitors  came  up.  Their 
shelling  was  exceedingly  rapid  and  accurate.  I ordered  the  10-inch 
columbiad  to  return  the  fire  at  intervals  of  fifteen  minutes.  We 
fired  3 shots,  striking  one  monitor  once,  but  just  when  about  to  fire 
the  fourth  time,  a 15-inch  shell  exploded  under  the  gun,  demolishing 
the  carriage  and  dismounting  the  gun.  One  man  was  wounded.  The 
dismounting  of  this  gun  leaves  the  sea  face  with  only  one  gun,  viz, 
one  32-pounder  smooth-bore,  though  had  another  10-inch  columbiad 
been  promptly  sent  on  the  receipt  of  my  first  telegram,  it  could  have 
been  in  position  now,  and  the  temporary  loss  of  No.  1 would  not 
have  been  felt  so  much.  Having  succeeded  in  getting  the  gin  ready, 
after  dark  I mounted  the  8-inch  howitzer,  and  by  12  o’clock  had  it 
ready  for  action.  By  this  arrangement,  I have  added  two  excellent 
guns  to  the  land  face,  which,  when  1 took  charge,  were  lying  dis- 
mounted. While  one  party  was  at  work  mounting  the  gun,  I set 
another  to  digging  out  and  revetting  the  embrasure.  After  getting 
the  howitzer  ready  for  action,  I shipped  the  gin  to  the  chamber  of 
the  10-inch  columbiad  for  the  purpose  of  remounting  it  upon  a spare 
carriage,  which  I had  on  hand.  At  12  o’clock,  was  called  off  by  Gen- 
eral Colquitt,  and  by  his  orders  commenced  shelling  the  enemy’s 
working  parties,  which  were  distinctly  visible  in  the  moonlight. 
About  100  were  working  on  the  beach,  apparently  dragging  logs  out 
of  the  water,  whereupon  I loaded  the  42-pounder  carronade  with 
grape,  sighted  it  myself,  and  fired  it  into  them.  Great  confusion 
was  visible,  men  falling,  others  running  and  crying  out.  I also  threw 
several  shrapnel  from  one  of  the  8-inch  siege  howitzers,  which  re- 
sulted, from  the  report  of  the  officer  of  our  picket,  in  a general  scat- 
tering of  workmen,  horses,  and  teams.  Threw  a number  of  shell  in 
different  parts  of  their  works,  and  put  an  effectual  stop  to  their 
working  for  the  night.  At  2 o’clock,  returned  to  the  10-inch  colum- 
biad and  recommenced  work.  Put  up  the  gin  and  swung  the  gun, 
but  found  she  was  slightly  jammed  in  the  debris  of  the  broken  car- 
riage. Set  men  to  work  cutting  away  the  pieces.  Enemy  com- 
menced shelling  from  their  mortars,  vigorously,  which  gave  me  much 
trouble  in  keeping  the  working  party  together.  One  shell  fell  into 
the  chamber,  where  17  men  were  at  work,  and  one  up  the  gin,  reev- 
ing the  fall.  The  shell  exploded  between  the  feet  of  the  gin  and  the 
chassis,  but,  miraculously,  no  one  was  injured.  Continued,  notwith- 
standing all  these  drawbacks,  to  work  at  the  gun  until  one-half  hour 
before  daylight,  when,  finding  that  we  still  had  several  hours’  work 
to  do,  and  not  wishing  to  have  daylight  catch  us  with  the  gin  up,  I 
was  reluctantly  compelled  to  desist  from  the  attempt  for  the  night, 
and  order  the  gin  taken  down.  Was  up  again  the  entire  night  (mak- 
ing the  third)  superintending  the  parties  engaged  in  mounting  the 
two  guns,  as  well  as  those  preparing  the  embrasure  for  the  howitzer 
and  repairing  damage  on  the  sea  face,  also  the  two  hours’  firing  men- 
tioned above,  and  daylight  found  me  completely  exhausted  physically. 
About  daylight  Brigadier-General  Clingman  relieved  Brigadier-Gen- 
eral Colquitt. 

Wednesday , July  29. — The  enemy’s  shelling  was  again  vigorous 
for  several  hours  this  morning,  killing  1 man  and  wounding  several. 
The  Ironsides  and  two  monitors  came  up,  and  kept  an  almost  contin- 
uous fire  during  the  entire  day,  making  it  impossible  to  perform  any 
33  R R— VOL  XXVIII,  PT  I 


514  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

labor  even  inside  the  battery.  The  most  unfortunate  event  of  the 
day  was  the  bursting  of  a mortar  shell  in  the  10-inch  columbiad 
chamber,  which  destroyed  the  spare  carriage  I intended  to  place 
under  the  gin  to-night,  also  injuring  the  pry  pole  of  the  gin.  I 
immediately  telegraphed  for  another  carriage  and  pry  pole.  Exam- 
ined the  battery  after  the  shelling  ceased,  and  found  the  injury  to 
have  been  but  slight,  requiring  but  a few  hours’  work  to  repair.  I 
felt  to-day  completely  worn  out,  and  was  compelled  to  lie  upon  my 
back  all  day,  and  telegraphed  for  twenty-four  hours’  leave  of  absence, 
for  rest.  Was  unable  to  assist  during  the  early  part  of  the  night  in 
hurrying  up  the  repairs,  which,  I am  sorry  to  say,  progress  very 
slowly  and  imperfectly  under  the  present  chief  engineer,  who  does 
not  spend  the  entire  night  upon  the  parapet,  as  Captain  Ramsey  did, 
but  passes  most  of  the  night  in  sleep.  During  the  night,  a detach- 
ment from  siege  train  under  Captain  Gregg,  arrived,  which  I placed 
in  position  where  a previous  detachment  was.  A detachment  of  the 
Chatham  Artillery  also  arrived,  to  whom  I gave  the  two  field  how- 
itzers at  Cumming’s  Point,  and  the  two  on  the  curtain  in  front  of 
the  battery.  Found,  while  placing  these  detachments  in  their  posi- 
tions, that  the  working  parties  were  doing  but  little,  there  being  no 
engineer  to  oversee  them,  and  I again  worked  with  them  until  day- 
light. 

Thursday , July  30. — Enemy  again  opened  a little  before  daylight 
from  their  mortars.  I discovered  that  they  had  progressed  consider- 
ably during  the  night  with  their  approaches,  and  were  still  working, 
whereupon  I opened  with  five  guns,  throwing  shell,  and  effectually 
stopped  their  working  parties  and  drove  them  off,  and  also  interfered 
with  their  mortar  shelling  so  much  as  to  cause  them  to  stop  entirely. 
During  the  morning,  they  opened  with  Coehorn  mortars,  throwing 
a shell  about  the  size  of  a 32-pounder  from  a distance  of  about  500 
yards  in  front  of  the  battery.  The  Ironsides  and  one  monitor  ap- 
proached at  10.30  o’clock,  and  opened  a heavy  shelling  upon  the  in- 
fantry lying  behind  the  sand-hills,  resulting  in  the  killing  of  4 and 
wounding  of  8 or  9.  At  4 p:  m.  one  monitor  came  up  alone  and 
again  shelled  the  sand-hills.  As  she  lay  about  1,000  yards  in  front 
of  the  battery,  I opened  upon  her  with  the  only  remaining  gun  on 
the  sea  face,  a 32-pounder  smooth-bore,  firing  about  12  shots  at  her, 
hitting  her  several  times  and  causing  her  to  move  off.  Received 
word  that  there  would  be  a spare  carriage  on  the  steamboat  for  the 
10-inch  columbiad,  and  also  an  additional  10-inch  columbiad,  with 
chassis  and  carriage,  to  go  upon  the  platform,  which  had  been  ready 
for  several  days.  Although  scarcely  able  to  hold  my  head  up,  I was 
so  delighted  with  the  good  news  that  I commenced  making  the  most 
vigorous  preparation  to  receive  and  mount  them,  procuring  suffi- 
cient details  of  men  to  perform  the  labor,  getting  together  all  por- 
tions of  the  gin,  the  sling-cart,  ropes,  and  skids.  At  dark  I mounted 
a courier’s  horse  and  rode  to  Cumming’s  Point.  On  the  arrival  of 
the  steamer,  I did  everything  I could  to  expedite  the  work,  suggesting 
to  Colonel  Yates  to  send  up  the  spare  carriage  first,  and  while  we 
were  mounting  that  gun,  the  other  gun  with  its  carriage  could  be 
sent  up.  The  colonel  agreed  to  my  suggestion,  and  having  seen  the 
carriage  started,  Captain  Harleston  and  I rode  back  to  Battery  Wag- 
ner and  commenced  preparations  for  mounting  the  gun.  We  put  up 
the  gin,  reeved  the  blocks,  and  commenced  raising  the  gun.  when  the 
hook  of  the  block  straightened  out  and  broke,  rendering  all  other 
attempts  to-night  impossible.  We  then  took  down  the  gin  ajid  put 


Chap.  XL.]  OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C.  515 

the  working  force  at  getting  up  the  other  chassis  and  carriage,  which, 
while  we  were  working  at  the  gin,  had  been  brought  from  Cum- 
ming’s  Point.  Finding  we  had  not  men  enough,  at  1.30  o’clock  I 
ordered  out  50  of  the  artillerists  and  got  50  more  men  from  the 
Fifty-fourth  Georgia,  and,  with  the  assistance  of  these  100  extra  men, 
succeeded  in  drawing  the  chassis  up  on  the  parapet,  and  along  to  the 
chamber  in  which  it  was  to  be  mounted.  During  the  night,  Major 
Warley  arrived  and  relieved  me  as  chief  of  artillery.  I accompa- 
nied him  around  the  battery,  making  him  familiar  with  the  work 
and  the  ordnance,  and  extended  all  orders  and  instructions  in 
operation.  At  3 o’clock,  in  company  with  Captain  Harleston,  I 
left  the  battery  and  walked  to  Cumming’s  Point,  where  the  steamer 
Sumter  was  waiting  to  convey  us  to  Fort  Sumter  and  the  city.  I 
reached  the  city  at  4. 30  o’clock,  and  now  that  the  eft' ort  of  a strong 
will  was  no  longer  required  to  keep  in  operation  the  physical  powers, 
I found  myself  sinking  under  my  recent  severe  labors.  With  the 
utmost  difficulty  I reached  my  home,  in  a perfectly  prostrate  condi- 
dition,  and  was  kept  from  fainting  away  solely  by  the  vigorous  ap- 
lication  of  water  and  stimulant;  was  finally  carried  to  bed,  where  rest 
and  quiet  will  speedily  restore  me  sufficiently  to  enable  me  to  return 
to  the  battery. 

I have  the  honor  to  remain,  your  obedient  servant, 

C.  E.  CHICHESTER, 
Captain,  No.  64,  Church  Street,  Charleston. 

Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Battery  Wagner,  August  16,  1863 — 12  m. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  I ordered  our  mortars  to  open  * 
yesterday  afternoon  upon  a large  force  of  the  enemy  engaged  in 
erecting  a battery  on  Thomas  Island,  and  kept  up  the  fire  steadily 
until  dark.  I noticed  that  at  every  discharge  of  our  mortars,  as  well 
as  from  those  in  Sumter,  Gregg,  and  Shell  Point,  the  working  par- 
ties, consisting  almost  entirely  of  negroes,  dropped  all  their  working 
implements  and  ran  for  the  ditches,  showing  that  if  a steady  fire 
could  be  kept  upon  them  their  work  could  be  greatly  retarded. 

Owing  to  the  movement  of  troops  anticipated  in  the  early  part  of 
the  night,  I did  not  commence  firing  upon  the  enemy’s  works  in  our 
front  until  9.30  o’clock.  A monitor  was  discovered  about  8.30  o’clock 
lying  immediately  in  front  of  our  battery.  I fired  2 shots  and  1 shell 
at  her  from  our  rifled  32-pounder,  striking  her,  I think,  once,  as  she 
moved  her  position  immediately.  I noticed  about  the  same  time 
several  flashes  were  seen  from  a vessel  to  the  left  of  our  battery, 
which  were  shells  fired  from  another  monitor  at  our  boats  at  Cum- 
ming’s Point.  I immediately  fired  2 shells  from  our  10-inch  colum- 
biad  in  the  direction,  and  was  answered  by  a like  number  from  the 
monitor. 

I would  again  respectfully  urge  that  some  effort  be  made  to  place 
our  iron-clad  boat  at  anchor,  some  distance  in  front  of  Fort  Sumter 
every  night,  and  keep  the  monitors  from  penetrating  so  far  into 
the  harbor.  They  not  only  fire  upon  our  boats  at  Cumming’s 
Point,  but  signalize  by  rocket,  their  land  batteries,  which  also  open 
upon  our  boats.  The  monitors,  furthermore,  by  signals  correct  the 


[Chap.  XL. 


516  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  ELa. 


ranges  of  the  enemy’s  mortars  during  the  night  and  make  their  fire 
much  more  effective  than  it  would  otherwise  be,  and  from  their  posi- 
tion are  able  to  fire  directly  into  our  rear. 

Owing  to  the  difficulty  of  getting  ordnance  stores  from  the  city, 
and  fearing  consequently  that  we  may  run  short  of  certain  articles, 
I was  compelled  to  fire  quite  slowly  during  the  night.  This  cause, 
together  with  the  delay  occasioned  in  the  early  part  of  the  night, 
enabled  the  enemy  to  do  some  work  in  our  front,  in  the  shape  of  a 
light  abatis,  being  the  first  work  they  have  been  able  to  do  since  last 
Sunday  night  one  week  ago. 

I would  respectfully  recommend  that  the  movement  of  troops  from 
Fort  Sumter  to  Cumming’s  Point  be  delayed  until  a later  hour  of  the 
night;  that  our  battery  open  vigorously  at  dusk,  continuing  for  two 
or  three  hours,  then  cease  for  an  hour,  during  which  the  movement 
can  be  made,  as  the  enemy  cease  firing  when  we  do.  Such  an  arrange- 
ment would  enable  us  to  keep  them  from  working  in  the  early  part 
of  the  night,  and  probably  so  annoy  them  as  to  prevent  their  doing 
any  work. 

I would  respectfully  report  that  the  platform  is  all  ready  for  mount- 
ing the  32-pounder  smooth-bore  on  the  land  face  in  the  salient  angle, 
and  we  are  only  waiting  for  the  chassis  to  accomplish  it.  The  posi- 
tion which  this  gun  will  occupy,  being  a very  prominent  one,  and  as 
the  flare  of  the  embrasure  and  the  size  of  the  traverse  circle  gives 
it  a large  range,  and  will  enable  it  to  bear  upon  the  enemy’s  works 
upon  our  extreme  right,  which  no  other  gun  in  our  battery  now  does, 
I would  respectfully  suggest  that  one  of  the  8-inch  shell  guns  be 
taken  from  the  chambers  on  the  land  face  and  placed  in  the  salient, 
and  the  32-pounder  smooth-bore  be  put  into  its  place. 

I would  also  suggest  that  the  42-pounder  carronade,  now  used  for 
flank  defense,  be  removed  to  the  extreme  right  face  of  this  work, 
where  it  can  be  advantageously  used  to  the  front  upon  the  enemy’s 
working  parties  with  shell  and  grape.  It  can  be  replaced  by  a small 
howitzer. 

I have  two  casualties  to  report  among  the  artillery  forces.  One 
man  slightly  and  one  seriously  wounded. 

The  following  is  a report  of  the  number  of  shell  fired  since  my 
last  report : 

Mortar,  32  shell ; No  2,  8-inch  siege  howitzer,  6 shell ; No.  5, 
8-inch  naval,  5 shell;  No.  6,  32-pounder  smooth-bore,  9 shell;  No. 
7,  32-pounder  smooth-bore,  9 shell ; No.  8,  8-inch,  naval,  8 shell; 
No.  10,  8-inch  siege  howfitzer,  6 shell ; No.  11,  32-pounder,  rifled,  1 
shell,  2 shot;  No.  13,  10-inch  columbiad,  2 shell;  No.  14,  8-inch  sea- 
coast  howitzer,  8 shell.  Total,  86  shell,  2 shot. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

C.  E.  CHICHESTER, 
Captain,  Chief  of  Artillery . 


Major  Bryan, 

Assistant  Adjutant-General. 


[Indorsements.] 

I respectfully  indorse  the  suggestions  of  the  chief  of  artillery, 
within  made,  and  further  suggest  that  the  proposed  bomb-proof 
chamber  on  the  right  of  the  fort  be  pushed  forward  at  once. 

J.  M.  WAMPLER, 
Captain  of  Engineers,  in  charge , 


Chap.  XL.] 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  TSLANI),  S.  C. 


517 


Headquarters  Battery  Wagner, 

August  16,  1863. 

Respectfully  forwarded,  with  a recommendation  that  the  change 
of  guns  be  at  once  approved.  The  other  suggestions  are  also  com- 
mended to  favorable  consideration. 

LAWRENCE  M.  KEITT, 

Colonel , Commanding. 

Battery  Wagner, 

August  17,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  our  battery  opened  fire  again 
last  night  about  12  o’clock  upon  the  enemy’s  works  in  our  front,  with 
seven  guns,  and  kept  up  a steady  fire  until  4.30  o’clock  this  morning. 
The  enemy  replied  with  mortar  shell,  continuing  until  we  ceased 
firing.  At  5 o’clock  this  morning  they  opened  upon  us  quite  rapidly 
with  their  Parrott  guns,  from  batteries  on  Thomas  Island,  firing  at 
the  rate  of  6 discharges-  per  minute.  The  position  which  these  bat- 
teries occupy,  gives  them  a direct  or  slightly  oblique  fire  upon  our 
land  face  as  well  as  a fire  upon  the  rear  of  our  gun-chambers  on  the 
sea  face. 

This  will  enable  them  to  drive  our  gunners  from  their  guns  while 
firing  seaward. 

As  much  material  has  been  knocked  and  blown  away  from  the  tops 
of  the  bomb-proofs  and  traverses,  making  the  guns  much  more  ex- 
posed than  formerly,  I would  respectfully  suggest  that  the  traverses 
be  made  thicker  and  at  least  4 additional  feet  of  sand  be  placed  on 
top. 

I would  respectfully  report  that  the  enemy  are  erecting  another 
about  battery  in  the  marsh,  between  Black  Island  and  Legare’s  Point, 
2,500  yards  from  this  battery,  which,  if  allowed  to  be  finished,  will 
have  a complete  enfilade  fire  upon  our  land  battery,  and  a direct 
fire  into  the  rear  of  our  sea  guns,  as  well  as  bomb-proof,  Magazine 
A,  and  the  entire  parade  of  the  battery. 

The  above  suggestion  relative  to  heightening  the  bomb-proof  trav- 
erses, &c.,  will  apply  with  equal  force  to  this  battery. 

I would  also  recommend  that  the  low  flank  curtain  connecting  the 
land  face  of  the  salient  with  the  re-entering  angle  of  the  land  face, 
be  raised  to  the  height  of  the  other  portions  of  the  work  and  that 
efforts  be  made  to  procure  a good  gun  to  be  mounted  in  the  angle, 
where  it  would  not  only  answer  as  a flank  defense  to  the  moat,  but 
would  have  a large  field  of  fire,  bearing  upon  the  batteries  upon 
Thomas  Island. 

I would  also  report  that  I have  examined  the  dismounted  32- 
pounder  carronade  lying  in  the  battery,  and  find  that  the  only  in- 
juries are  the  breaking  of  the  trunnion  and  a portion  of  the  champs 
of  the  muzzle.  As  the  bore  and  chamber  are  still  serviceable,  I 
would  respectfully  recommend  that  the  engineers  be  instructed  to 
prepare  a platform  and  support  of  heavy  timbers,  and  place  the  piece 
upon  it  at  an  angle  of  about  45°,  and  that  it  be  used  as  a mortar 
against  the  enemy’s  forces. 

I have  no  casualties  to  report  in  the  artillery  forces  since  my  last, 
and  none  of  the  guns  or  platforms  have  been  injured  by  the  enemy’s 
bombardment,  except  the  8-inch  naval  shell  gun,  No.  5,  which  was 
struck  by  a Parrott  shot  and  disabled  by  the  breaking  of  the  trun- 
nion bed.  The  artillery  garrison  was  relieved  last  night  by  the  fol- 


[Chap.  XL. 


518  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

lowing  companies:  Company  B,  Lucas’ battalion,  Captain  Pringle; 
Company  E,  Charleston  Battalion,  Captain  Miles;  detachment  from 
Company  C,  Siege  Train,  Captain  Gregg  and  a detachment  from 
Company  A,  Palmetto  Battalion  Light  Artillery,  Lieutenant  [James 
F.]  Furman  commanding. 

The  following  is  a statement  of  the  number  of  shell  fired  last 
night : 

No.  2,  8-inch  siege  howitzer,  7 shell ; No.  5,  8-inch  naval  shell,  10 
shell ; No.  6,  32-pounder  smooth-bore,  8 shell ; No.  7,  32-pounder 
smooth-bore,  6 shell;  No.  8,  8-inch  naval,  11  shell;  No.  10,  8-inch 
siege  howitzer,  8 shell ; No.  14,  8-inch  sea-coast  howitzer,  11  shell. 
Total,  61  shell. 

Respectfully  submitted. 

C.  E.  CHICHESTER, 

Captain , Chief  of  Artillery. 

Maj.  H.  Bryan, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  32. 

Report  of  Maj.  F.  F.  Warley,  Second  South  Carolina  Artillery , 

Chief  of  Artillery. 

Headquarters  East  Lines,  James  Island, 

August  6,  1863. 

Major  : According  to  instructions  from  you,  I ask  leave  to  sub- 
mit the  following  report : 

On  the  night  of  the  30th  ultimo,  I relieved  Captain  Chichester  as 
chief  of  artillery  at  Battery  Wagner,  and  was  in  turn  relieved  by 
Lieut.  Col.  J.  Welsman  Brown,  Second  Regiment  South  Carolina 
Artillery,  this  morning.  During  my  tour  of  duty  two  10-inch  co- 
lumbiads  were  mounted  on  the  sea  face  of  the  battery.  After  much 
labor,  these  guns  were  gotten  in  fighting  condition  on  the  5th  instant. 

On  the  3d  instant,  I received  orders  to  dismount  the  32-pounder 
on  the  sea  face  and  to  leave  the  carriage  and  chassis  in  position.  I 
did  so,  but  no  gun  being  sent  to  replace  it,  I had  it  remounted  dur- 
ing the  night.  I left  it  in  position.  The  carriages  of  several  of  the 
guns  on  the  land  face  had  been  slightly  injured  by  the  enemy’s  fire. 
These  injuries  I had  repaired  and  am  happy  to  say,  that,  when  re- 
lieved, all  the  guns  on  this  face  were  in  fighting  order. 

The  mortar  on  the  extreme  right  of  the  battery  had  suffered  some 
injury  to  its  bed;  this  was  repaired  as  well  as  possible.  Its  fire  would 
not  now,  I think,  be  accurate,  and  I desire  to  repeat  my  recommenda- 
tion, that  a new  bed  be  supplied. 

The  ordnance  department  at  the  battery  is  conducted  amid  much 
confusion,  owing , I think,  to  the  frequent  changes  of  ordnance  offi- 
cers. I would  recommend  that  the  duties  of  the  position  be  assigned 
to  three  efficient  officers , who  shall  relieve  each  other  at  short  inter- 
vals. I would  also  make  the  same  recommendation  as  to  the  chief  of 
artillery. 

There  should  at  once  be  sent  to  the  battery  a full  supply  of  such 
things  as  thumb-stalls,  priming  wires,  gunners’ . gimlets,  lanyards , 
hreech  sights,  gunners’  levels,  &c. 

I think  the  enemy  are  placing  in  position  to  our  front  a large  num- 
ber of  mortars,  and  will  soon  be  able,  by  continual  firing,  to  keep  our 


Chap.  XL.] 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 


519 


working  party  from  the  parapet.  I would  recommend  that  morta  rs 
from  Sumter  be  placed  in  position  in  the  battery,  or  at  different  points 
in  rear  of  it  [about  Cumming’s  Point]. 

I have  no  further  recommendations  to  make,  or  particulars  to 
submit. 

I am,  major,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

F.  F.  WARLEY, 

Mayor,  Second  Regiment  South  Carolina  Artillery . 

Major  Bryan, 

A ssistant  A.  dj utant-  General. 

[Indorsement.] 

Call  attention  of  district  commander  to  paragraphs  marked  [m 
italics].  If  mortars  cannot  be  used  to  advantage  in  Sumter,  they 
had  better  be  sent  to  Cumming’s  Point  at  once. 

a.  T.  B.  [BEAUREGARD], 

General,  Commanding. 


Battery  Wagner, 
Morris  Island,  August  21,  1863. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  make  the  following  report  of  the 
guns  in  position  at  this  post : 

No.  1,  32-pounder  carronade,  at  western  gorge,  in  good  working 
order. 

No.  2,  8-inch  siege  howitzer,  on  land  face,  in  good  working  order. 

No.  3,  32-pounder  carronade,  on  land  face,  in  good  working  order. 

No.  4,  32-pounder  carronade,  on  land  face,  in  good  working  order. 

No.  5,  8-inch  naval  shell  gun,  on  land  face,  carriage  very  much 
injured  by  fragment  of  shell,  but  can  be  worked  in  assault. 

No.  6,  32-pounder  smooth-bore,  on  land  face,  carriage  much  injured 
by  fragment  of  shell,  but  can  be  worked  in  an  assault. 

No.  7,  32-pounder  smooth-bore,  on  land  face,  in  good  working 
order* 

No.  8,  8-inch  naval  shell  gun,  on  land  face,  in  good  working  order. 

No.  9,  42-pounder  carronade,  on  land  face,  in  good  working  order. 

No.  10,  8-inch  siege  howitzer,  on  land  face  in  salient,  good  work- 
ing order. 

No.  11,  32-pounder  smooth-bore,  on  sea  face,  to  bear  upon  the  beach, 
in  good  working  order. 

No.  12,  10-inch  columbiad,  on  sea  face,  in  good  working  order. 

No.  13,  10-inch  columbiad,  on  sea  face,  unserviceable,  chassis  dis- 
abled by  bursting  of  a 15-inch  shell. 

No.  14,  8-inch  sea-coast  howitzer,  on  curtain  outside  of  rear  gorge, 
bearing  on  the  land,  in  good  working  order. 

In  addition  to  the  above,  there  is  a 10-inch  sea-coast  mortar,  on 
land  curtain  near  western  gorge,  in  working  order;  also  two  12- 
pounder  brass  howitzers  on  curtain  outside  the  rear  gorge,  bearing 
on  the  beach.  I would  further  state  that  the  rifled  32-pounder  on  the 
sea  face  was  dismounted  on  the  morning  of  the  19th,  and  the  left 
trunnion  broken  off. 

I am,  captain,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

F.  F.  WARLEY, 

Chief  of  Artillery. 

Captain  Molony, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


520 


S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 


[Chap.  XL. 


Battery  Wagner,  September  3,  1863. 

Major  : During  the  past  night  the  enemy  has  been  unusually 
quiet,  only  firing  an  occasional  shell  at  this  battery.  The  fire  was 
kept  up,  from  six  of  our  guns  and  the  mortar,  on  the  enemy’s  lines 
during  the  night. 

The  works  of  the  enemy  have  not  been  advanced,  but  they  have 
materially  strengthened  their  position. 

The  two  8-inch  shell  guns  on  the  land  face  can  only  be  used  in  an 
emergency,  in  consequence  of  injuries  to  their  carriages,  which  have 
been  frequently  reported. 

The  columbiads  are  in  fighting  order;  the  chassis  of  one  is  badly  in- 
jured and  will,  I think,  break  down  if  fired  for  any  length  of  time. 

I am,  major,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

F.  F.  WARLEY, 


Maj.  Henry  Bryan, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Chief  of  Artillery. 


Morning  report  of  effective  force  of  artillery  on  Morris  Island,  September  3, 1863. 


Locality  and  command. 


T} 

<X> 

a . 
o g 

x a; 
w O 

se 

C o 


At  Battery  Gregg : 

Company  E,  1st  South  Carolina  [Regular]  Infantry  (acting  as  artillery),  Captain  [R. 

Press.]  Smith,  jr 

Kanapaux  Artillery 

Total 

At  Battery  Wagner  : 

Kanapaux  Artillery 

Company  E,  1st  South  Carolina  Infantry,  Captain  Smith 

Company  E,  Palmetto  Battalion  Light  Artillery,  Captain  Johnson 

Company  A,  2d  South  Carolina  Artillery,  Captain  Hunter 

Total 

Grand  total 


2 


2 

1 

2 

4 


11 


28 

8 


36 

23 

51 

46 


156 


192 


Number  of  shots  fired  during  the  night,  168. 

Respectfully  submitted, 

F.  F.  WARLEY, 

Chief  of  Artillery. 

[P.  S.] — Five  sick  not  included  in  the  above. 


No.  33. 

Report  of  Capt.  C.  C.  Pinckney , C.  S.  Artillery,  Ordnance  Officer , 
First  Military  District. 

Hdqrs.  First  Military  Dist.  of  S.  C.,  Ord.  Dept., 

Charleston,  September  8,  1863. 

General  : In  obedience  to  your  instructions,  I have  the  honor  to 
submit  the  following  statement  of  what  passed  under  my  observa- 
tion at  Battery  Wagner  on  the  night  of  the  evacuation  of  that  post. 
On  the  evening  of  that  day  I took  down  some  spikes,  slow-match 


Chap.  XL.]  OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C.  521 

safety  fuse,  sledges,  &c.,  to  Morris  Island.  I went  at  once  to  Bat- 
tery Wagner,  taking  the  spikes  in  my  hand.  I had  made  requisition 
for  rat-tail  files  in  August  last,  but  had  received  none.  These  were 
intended  as  substitutes.  I found  Captain  Huguenin  with  the  ord- 
nance officer,  Lieutenant  Mazyck,  arranging  the  safety  fuse  pre- 
viously sent,  and  gave  them  my  assistance.  The  splicing  was  care- 
fully done,  the  ends  of  the  fuse  split  and  pinned.  Captain  Huguenin 
stated  that  he  had  tried  several  pieces  of  the  fuse,  but  I repeated 
the  experiment  and  found  it  burned  perfectly  well.  When  the 
main  body  of  the  garrison  was  withdrawn,  I remained  to  assist  in 
the  final  dispositions.  The  proper  time  having  elapsed,  Lieuten- 
ant Mazyck,  assisted  by  Lieutenant  [James  A.]  Ross,  Twenty-fifth 
South  Carolina  Volunteers,  was  left  to  lay  the  fuse,  and  I,  accom- 
panied by  Captain  Huguenin,  to  spike  the  guns.  Here  we  encount- 
ered great  difficulty.  The  vents  of  most  of  the  pieces  were  greatly 
enlarged.  In  many  cases  the  spikes  dropped  loosely  in,  and  we  were 
obliged  to  use  two  and  sometimes  three  of  them.  We  could  have 
remedied  this  in  a measure  had  it  been  practicable  to  drive  them 
tightly  and  hammer  the  edges  of  the  orifice  over  them,  but  Captain 
Huguenin’s  order  enforced  the  most  perfect  quiet,  and  the  necessity 
was  sufficiently  obvious.  We  obviated  the  difficulty  as  well  as  it 
was  possible  by  bundling  up  a haversack  and  hammering  through 
that,  but  it  could  not  be  thoroughly  effective.  Having  thus  spiked 
each  piece  in  succession,  excepting  the  10-inch  columbiad,  Captain 
Huguenin  arranged  a lanyard  for  firing  this  gun,  the  wheels  being 
in  gear,  and  we  returned  to  the  magazine.  The  cartridges  (a  large 
number)  were  piled  up  against  one  wall  and  the  fuse,  inserted  in  one 
of  them,  going  down  to  the  bottom,  and  carefully  trained  out  of  the 
door  and  along  the  side  of  the  covered  way,  to  avoid  the  feet  of  any 
passers  by.  We  then  waited  the  courier  from  Colonel  Keitt;  Lieu- 
tenant Ross  and  myself,  by  Captain  Huguenin’s  orders,  joining  the 
lookouts  in  firing  an  occasional  rifle  from  the  parapet,  to  keep  up 
a show  of  occupation.  The  courier  came.  Lieutenant  Ross  then 
took  the  lanyard  and  Captain  Huguenin  ordered,  “The  last  gun 
from  Battery  Wagner,  fire  !”  But  the  primer  failed.  Another  gave 
no  better  result.  We  then  primed  with  powder  from  a Whitworth 
rifle  cartridge,  but  the  piece  could  not  be  fired.  We  then  got  out 
one  of  the  two  spikes  from  the  32-pounder,  but  the  other  prevented 
the  passage  of  the  flame.  So  much  time  was  now  consumed  that 
Captain  Huguenin  thought  best  to  abandon  the  attempt.  He  lit  the 
fuse,  all  of  us  watching  to  see  that  it  was  burning  correctly.  We 
then  abandoned  Battery  Wagner.  Great  was  our  disappointment 
as  we  looked  in  vain  during  our  passage  to  the  city  for  the  expected 
explosion.  Possibly  a fragment  of  shell  may  have  cut  the  fuse  before 
it  burned  to  the  door.  I can  think  of  no  other  accident ; no  precau- 
tion was  omitted. 

Though  not  officially  present,  I trust  I may  be  allowed  as  a spec- 
tator to  bear  witness  to  the  coolness,  judgment,  and  fidelity  of  Cap- 
tain Huguenin  and  the  officers  under  him  in  the  discharge  of  the 
delicate  task  confided  to  them. 

I have  the  honor,  general,  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient 
servant, 

C.  C.  PINCKNEY, 

Captain  Artillery , and  Ordnance  Officer  1st  Mil.  Dist.,  S.  C, 

Brig.  Gen.  R.  S.  Ripley, 

Commanding  First  Military  District , South  Carolina. 


522 


S.  C.  AND  DA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 
No.  34. 


[Chap.  XL. 


Reports  of  Lieut.  Edmund  Mazyck,  C.  S.  Artillery,  Ordnance 
Officer,  Battery  Wagner. 

Charleston,  September  6,  1863. 

Captain  : In  accordance  with  yonr  instructions,  I have  the  honor 
to  make  the  following  [report]  of  the  amount  of  ordnance  stores  in 
Battery  Wagner  at  the  time  of  its  evacuation.  I regret  that  this 
report  cannot  he  given  in  exact  numbers,  the  reasons  for  this  I will 
hereafter  explain : 

The  armament  consisted  of  thirteen  guns,  including  shell  guns, 
howitzers,  columbiads,  and  mortars.  Of  shot,  shell,  &c. , the  f (Slow- 
ing is  an  approximate : 10-inch  shot,  about  20;  10-inch  shell,  about 
100 ; 10-inch  grape,  about  40;  10-inch  canister,  about  40;  8-inch  shell, 
about  115  ; 8-inch  canister,  about  280  ; 8-inch  grape,  about  200  ; 32- 
pounder  shot,  about  100  ; 32-pounder  canister,  about  150;  32-pounder 
grape,  about  100;  32-pounder  shell,  about  100  ; 12-pounder  shrapnel, 
about  100 ; 12-pounder  shell,  about  50,  and  12-pounder  canister, 
about  120.  There  were  other  articles  in  the  magazine,  such  as  car- 
tridge-bags and  necessary  implements,  but  of  course  the  supply  was 
quite  limited,  as  we  are  all  aware  that  the  consumption  of  articles 
was  enormous  and  the  means  of  supply  extremely  limited.  I en- 
deavored to  save  as  many  articles  as  possible,  and  sent  to  Cumming’s 
Point  to  be  transported  to  the  city  about  50  rifles  and  double-barrel 
shotguns  ; also  1,500  assorted  fuses  and  as  many  friction- tubes.  All 
of  these  articles,  I hope,  will  arrive. 

I regret  not  being  able  to  give  a more  exact  account  of  the  stores, 
but  for  prudential  reasons  all  my  accounts  and  papers  had  to  be 
destroyed.  I shall  endeavor  to  think  over  the  matter,  and  if  neces- 
sary add  any  articles  which  may  be  herein  omitted.  The  short  time 
allowed  for  making  my  report  has  also  interfered. 

I have  been  unable  to  see  Lieutenant  [W.  W.]  Revely  and  obtain 
from  him  an  account  of  such  stores  as  he  had,  as  ordnance  officer,  at 
Battery  Gregg. 

With  much  respect,  I am,  your  obedient,  &c., 

EDMUND  MAZYCK, 
Lieutenant  Artillery,  and  Ordnance  Officer. 

Capt.  T.  A.  Huguenin, 

Chief  of  Artillery,  Morris  Island. 

[Indorsement.] 


There  was  a considerable  quantity^  of  projectiles  at  Cumming’s 
Point  not  hauled  up,  of  which  I could  get  no  report. 

HENRY  BRYAN, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Chap.  XL.J 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 


523 


ADDENDA. 


List  of  ordnance  left  on  Morris  Island  on  the  night  of  its  evacuation,  September 

6,  1863. 


Kind  of  gun. 

Number. 

Remarks. 

BATTERY  WAGNER. 

10-inch  columbiad 

2 

One  dismounted  and  broken;  one  serviceable. 

10-inch  moi'tar 

1 

Serviceable. 

8-inch  shell  gun 

2 

Do. 

8-inch  siege  howitzer  

2 

One  dismounted  and  broken  to  pieces;  one 
injured  by  shell,  and  carriage  disabled. 

8-inch  sea-coast  howitzer 

1 

Serviceable. 

32-pounder  smooth-bore 

o 

Do. 

42-pounder  carronade 

1 

Do. 

8-inch  siege  mortar,  brass 

1 

Spiked  with  friction  tubes  two  days  before 
evacuation. 

32-pounder  carronade 

3 

Serviceable. 

12-pounder  howitzer 

2 

Do. 

Total 

17 

BATTERY  GREGG. 

10-kich  columbiad 

2 

One  carriage  injured  and  the  other  serviceable. 

9- inch  Dahlgren 

1 

Serviceable. 

10-inch  sea-coast  mortar 

1 

Do. 

12-pounder  howitzer 

2 

Do. 

Total 

6 

No.  35. 

Report  of  Capt.  M.  M.  Gray,  in  charge  of  Torpedo  Service. 

Charleston,  S.  C.,  August  12,  1863. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  report  the  state  of  my  work  from 
the  10th  of  July  to  date. 

On  the  11th  July,  I placed  57  shells  of  Rains’  pattern  at  a distance 
of  from  5 to  20  yards  in  front  of  Battery  Wagner.  I examined  them 
after  the  assault  of  the  17th  July,  and  found  20  of  them  exploded, 
many  of  them  by  the  enemy’s  shells ; others  I found  damaged  by  the 
heavy  rains  previous  to  that  date.  I then  made  others,  water-proof, 
and  of  a much  larger  size,  3 15-inch  shells  containing  12  pounds  and 
44  33  to  40  pounds  of  powder  each,  making  47  shells,  which  are  placed 
at  a distance  of  from  20  to  250  yards  in  front  of  Battery  W agner. 

On  the  night  of  the  9th  instant,  I undertook  to  place  torpedoes  at 
the  mouth  of  Schooner  Creek  and  near  Marsh  Battery,  but  found  it 
impracticable,  as  the  enemy  had  possession  of  the  battery  and  were 
at  work.  I made  another  attempt  on  the  10th  instant,  and  succeeded 
in  putting  down  three,  when  I was  discovered  by  the  enemy,  was 
compelled  to  leave,  and  was  pursued  as  far  as  the  telegraph  posts. 

I have  on  hand,  for  land  service,  39;  for  ship-channel,  28;  for  Light- 
House  Inlet,  30;  in  course  of  construction  and  near  completion,  50; 
making  total,  147  torpedoes.  I have  also  on  hand  44  submarine 
shells  of  Rains’  pattern,  which  will  be  ready  for  use  by  the  20th 
instant. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

M.  M.  GRAY, 

Captain,  in  charge  of  Submarine  Batteries . 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan, 

Chief  of  Staff. 


[Chap.  XL. 


5?4  So  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

No.  36. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  Charles  W.  Knight , Thirty-first  North  Caro- 
lina Infantry. 

Hdqrs.  31st  Regiment  North  Carolina  Troops, 

Sullivan’s  Island,  S.  C.,  July  20,  1863. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  make  the  following  report  of  the 
part  taken  in  the  fight  of  Saturday,  July  18,  1863,  by  this  regiment 
at  Battery  Wagner : 

The  line  occupied  by  my  regiment  extended  from  the  second  gun 
from  the  bomb-proof  to  where  the  gun  was  dismounted,  part  of  the 
line  from  the  sally-port  on  the  right  to  the  right  of  Colonel  Mc- 
Kethan’s  command.  The  working  parties  from  Cumming’s  Point 
were  engaged  outside  the  sally-port  main  entrance. 

Owing  to  not  being  able  to  get  my  men  in  position  where  the 
bursted  gun  was,  we  were  repulsed;  afterward  made  a charge  upon 
them  and  were  again  repulsed.  The  number  of  men  that  made  the 
charge  was  20.  The  working  party  from  Cumming’s  Point  got  in 
position  in  time  to  repulse  the  enemy  at  the  main  entrance. 

The  following  are  the  casualties  : 


Officers  and  men. 

Killed. 

Wounded. 

Missing. 

i 

EH 

Commissioned  officers  

1 

30 

1 

38 

Enlist, od  man  

7 

1 

Total  

7 

31 

1 

39 

Captain  [Allen  B.]  Parker  fell,  dangerously  wounded,  in  rallying 
the  men  of  Company  I.  It  is  useless  to  mention  any  officer  or  man 
when  all  were  acting  coolly  and  bravely. 

Respectfully  submitted. 

CHAS.  W.  KNIGHT, 

Lieutenant-  Colonel,  Commanding . 

Captain  [W.  T.]  Taliaferro, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  37. 

Report  of  Col.  Hector  McKethan,  Fifty-first  North  Carolina  In- 
fantry. 

Sullivan’s  Island,  S.  C.,  July  20,  1863. 
Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  report  the  following  statement  of 
casualties  and  conduct  of  the  Fifty -first  Regiment  North  Carolina 
Troops  in  the  action  at  Fort  Wagner  on  the  18th  instant : 


Officers  and  men. 

1 Killed. 

1 

Wounded. 

Total. 

Commissioned  officers 

1 

5 

6 

Enlisted  men  

15 

47 

62 

Total  

16 

52 

68 

Chap.  XL.] 


525 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 

Before  detailing  the  particulars  of  the  affair,  I ought,  perhaps,  to 
state  that  I arrived  at  Battery  Wagner  on  Monday,  July  13,  and 
reported  to  Colonel  Graham,  and  by  him  my  men  were  immedi- 
ately placed  in  position  to  defend  the  works,  and  was  informed  that 
in  the  event  of  an  assault  I would  be  held  strictly  responsible  for, 
and  expected  to  defend  successfully,  my  own  line.  From  this  date  to 
the  assault,  on  the  night  of  the  18th,  most  of  my  men  had  been  con- 
stantly on  duty  day  and  night,  and  were  completely  worn  down  with 
fatigue,  having  slept  but  little  for  six  nights,  many  of  them  having 
fainted  from  excessive  heat  in  the  bomb-proof  during  the  day. 

My  line  extended  from  near  the  sally-port  on  the  right.  "My  left 
rested  near  the  bomb-proof  immediately  in  front  of  the  commissary 
building.  The  same  line  assigned  me  by  Colonel  Graham  was  ap- 
proved by  you,  and  I continued  to  hold  it.  This  line  was  unbroken 
during  the  entire  fight,  and  was  successfully  defended  from  three 
separate  assaults  made  on  it  by  the  enemy,  and  their  wounded  and 
dead  is  the  surest  evidence  of  the  precision  with  which  we  fired. 

The  first  assault  was  made  about  8 p.  m.  Some  minutes  before 
that  time  my  entire  line  was  occupied,  and  from  my  line  was  the  first 
infantry  firing  done.  The  enemy  was  three  times  repulsed  from  the 
front  of  my  line,  but  in  the  meantime  had  effected  a lodgment  on 
our  works  near  the  burst  rifled  gun,  40  yards  to  my  left.  I then 
directed  my  fire  to  rake  the  ditch  and  the  outer  portion  of  the  work 
at  that  point,  and  am  convinced  that  our  fire  must  have  been  very 
destructive.  By  this  time,  but  one  of  the  three  guns  stationed  on  the 
platform  immediately  in  rear  of  the  flag-staff  was  in  condition  to  be 
fired.  So  few  of  the  artillerymen  were  left  that  it  became  necessary 
for  me  to  detail  a portion  of  my  men  to  assist  in  manning  the  gun, 
which,  under  charge  of  Corporal  Conner,  of  the  artillery,  continued 
to  fire  on  the  enemy  with  effect  so  long  as  the  action  continued. 

You  will  remember  that  before  the  enemy  were  near  enough  to  be 
fired  on  by  the  infantry,  I called  your  attention  to  the  fact  that  I and 
Lieutenant-Colonel  [C.  B.]  Hobson  had  examined  the  full  length  of 
my  line  and  found  the  companies  ready  and  in  proper  position,  and 
fired  on  the  enemy  as  soon  as  they  came  in  range. 

At  the  time  the  order  was  given  for  the  men  to  leave  the  bomb- 
proof and  occupy  the  lines,  the  shelling  was  most  terrific,  and  I am 
informed  some  confusion  followed.  While  the  shelling  continued,  I 
succeeded  in  manning  my  lines,  commencing  on  the  right,  and  by 
the  time  it  had  ceased,  as  before  stated,  I reported  to  you.  By  this 
time  the  confusion  caused  by  the  shelling  had  ceased,  and  a very 
large  portion  of  my  officers  and  men  were  at  their  post.  I am  unable 
to  state  whether  or  not  any  of  my  men  skulked  in  the  bomb-proof, 
as  I left  it  and  went  to  the  right  of  my  line  as  soon  as  the  order  was 
given.  From  the  number  of  each  company  I found  in  position,  I 
am  of  the  opinion  that  the  skulkers  were  but  few. 

The  action  continued  until  11.30  p.  m.,  when  the  firing  ceased. 

Considering  the  extent  of  my  line  (more  than  half  of  the  front 
attacked  by  the  enemy),  I am  of  the  opinion  that  my  officers  and  men 
acted  well,  and  my  heavy  loss  is  an  evidence  of  the  readiness  with 
which  the  men  exposed  themselves.  Where  so  many  did  well,  it  is 
impossible  to  mention  all  who  deserve  to  be ; but  I cannot  refrain 
from  mentioning  the  names  of  Capt.  E.  Southerland  and  Lieut.  W. 
H.  Littlejohn,  of  Company  A,  both  of  whom  were  severely  wounded. 
Lieu!  G.  W.  Thompson,  Company  E,  was  killed  while  nobly  dis- 
charging his  duty  at  the  head  or  his  company.  Lieut.  John  D. 


526  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

Malloy,  Company  D,  acted  with  conspicuous  coolness  and  bravery, 
and  was  severely  wounded  in  the  neck  near  the  close  of  the  action. 
Lieut.  W.  F.  Murphy,  Company  K,  acted  well  during  the  engage- 
ment. Capt.  W.  It.  Bell,  Company  B,  was  among  the  first  to  get 
his  men  in  position  when  the  order  was  given.  He  and  his  entire 
company  fought  well.  The  conduct  of  many  of  the  non-commis- 
sioned officers  and  men  attracted  my  attention. 

I will  mention  here  that  Lieutenant-Colonel  Hobson  and  Adjutant 
[J.  R.]  Latta  rendered  me  valuable  service  during  the  action,  and 
did  much  to  get  the  men  promptly  in  position,  and  remained  at  their 
post  faithfully  during  the  action. 

I am,  with  great  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  McKETHAN, 

Colonel  Fifty -first  Regiment  North  Carolina  Troops. 

Captain  [W.  T.]  Taliaferro, 

Assistant  Adjutant-General. 


No.  38. 

Reports  of  Lieut.  Col.  Joseph  A.  Yates,  First  South  Carolina 

Artillery. 

Morris  Island,  S.  C.,  July  9,  1863. 

(Received  11.10  a.  m.) 

General:  Heavy  works  unmasked  on  Little  Folly  last  night; 
enemy  strongly  re-enforced  on  Big  Folly,  also  Little  Folly.  Four 
monitors  outside  the  bar.  I think  an  attack  on  this  island  immi- 
nent. Reconnaissance  made  last  night  found  enemy’s  barges  tied 
to  the  piles  in  creek  approaching  Little  Folly. 

^ JOSEPH  A.  YATES, 

Lieutenant-  Colonel. 

Brig.  Gen.  R.  S.  Ripley. 


General  : Send  more 
gone. 


Morris  Island, 

July  10,  1863—7.30  a.  m. 
re-enforcements  immediately,  or  we  are 


JOSEPH  A.  YATES, 

Lieutenant-  Colonel . 


Brigadier-General  Ripley. 


[Indorsement.] 


Received  at  8. 15  a.  m. 


G.  T.  B.  [BEAUREGARD.] 


Charleston,  July  17,  1863. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  on  the  morning  of  Friday 
(10th),  at  5 o’clock,  the  enemy  opened  a heavy  and  concentrated  fire 


Chap.  XL.]  OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C.  527 

from  Little  Folly  upon  our  batteries  at  south  end  of  Morris  Island. 
After  shelling  heavily  about  an  hour,  four  monitors  took  position  to 
the  eastward  of  south  point  Morris  Island,  and  opened  a heavy  fire, 
enfilading  us  completely  on  our  left.  At  the  same  time,  a large  num- 
ber of  barges  filled  w ith  troops  were  seen  proceeding  from  Little 
Folly  River  and  up  the  inlet  toward  our  batteries.  These  boats 
opened  a terrific  fire  from  their  howitzers,  thus  enfilading  us  on  the 
right.  To  this  fire  our  batteries  were  completely  exposed,  being  en- 
tirely unprotected  on  that  side.  After  a continuous  bombardment 
of  an  hour  and  a half  longer,  during  which  time  these  barges  con- 
tinued slowly  to  advance  toward  Oyster  Point,  they  there  effected  a 
landing,  disembarking  about  three  regiments.  At  the  same  time,  I 
discovered  a large  number  of  barges  proceeding  directly  from  Little 
Folly  Island  toward  and  in  front  of  our  batteries.  I found  that 
these  barges  had  landed  about  three  regiments  more,  who  advanced 
directly  upon  our  batteries. 

Finding  my  works  completely  flanked  on  our  right  by  the  column 
which  landed  at  Oyster  Point,  and  finding  our  infantry  were  being 
driven  back,  I sent  an  order  by  my  adjutant,  Lieutenant  [ W.  C.] 
Simmons,  to  Captain  [ J.  C.  ] Mitchel  to  prepare  to  make  good  his 
retreat.  Lieutenant  Simmons  found  it  impossible  to  reach  Cap- 
tain Mitchel  without  falling  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy,  and  that 
Captain  Mitchel  was  already  retreating.  He  delivered  the  order  to 
Lieutenant  [Henry  W.]  Frost,  it  being  evident  that  our  batteries 
were  lost. 

I immediately  sent  an  order  to  Captain  Chichester  to  be  prepared 
to  open  fire  upon  the  head  of  the  advancing  column  of  the  enemy 
as  soon  as  the  rear  of  our  column  had  passed  within  range  of  our 
guns,  which  order  was  promptly  obeyed,  completely  checking  the 
advance  of  the  enemy  for  that  day. 

I take  pleasure  in  stating  that  Captain  Mitchel,  and  officers  and 
men  under  his  immediate  command,  behaved  with  the  greatest  gal- 
lantry, and  did  not  abandon  their  works  until  already  three  of  their 
guns  had  been  disabled  and  some  of  their  officers  and  many  of  their 
men  had  been  killed,  wounded,  and  taken  prisoners  while  working 
their  guns ; also,  in  mentioning  that  the  officers  acting  on  my  staff — 
Captain  Ford,  Lieutenant  Simmons,  Lieutenant  [W.  H.]  Grimball, 
Lieutenant  Mazyck,  ordnance  officer — behaved  with  great  coolness, 
discharging  their  duties  most  energetically  under  a most  terrific  fire. 

I regret  to  have  to  report  the  following  loss : 

Captain  [J.  R.]  Macbeth,  slightly  wounded  and  taken  prisoner; 
Lieutenant  [J.  S.]  Bee,  feared  mortally  wounded  and  taken  prisoner; 
Lieutenant  [ J.  G.  ] Heyward,  wounded  and  taken  prisoner ; Captain 
[C.  T.]  Haskell,  [jr.,]  with  a detachment  of  infantry  under  my  coip- 
mand,  killed. 

Company  I,  First  Regiment  Artillery  : Killed,  wounded,  and  miss- 
ing, 38. 

Company  E,  First  Regiment  Artillery  : Killed,  wounded,  and  miss- 
ing, 42. 

Captain  Haskelhs  detachment  First  Infantry  (regulars) : Killed, 
wounded,  and  taken  prisoners,  10.  Also  the  loss  of  9 guns,  camp 
equipage,  &c. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOSEPH  A.  YATES, 
Lieutenant-  Colonel , Commanding . 


Capt.  Wt  F.  Nance. 


528 


S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 


Fort  Sumter,  July  20,  1863. 

Captain  : I send  list  as  nearly  correct  as  it  is  possible  at  present 
to  get : 

Company  E,  First  Artillery : Captain  Macbeth  slightly  wounded 
and  taken  prisoner;  prisoners,  14;  killed,  7;  wounded,  in  hospital, 
21.  Total,  42. 

Company  I,  First  Artillery : Lieutenant  Bee,  wounded  and  taken 
prisoner;  Lieutenant  Heyward,  taken  prisoner;  prisoners,  30; 
wounded,  in  hospital,  8.  Tjotal,  38. 

Detachment  Company  H,  First  Artillery:  Prisoners,  15;  wounded,  9. 

Detachment  Company  D,  First  Infantry  [regulars] : Captain  Has- 
kell, [jr.,]  killed;  killed,  wounded,  and  missing,  11. 

JOSEPH  A.  YATES, 

Lieutenant- Colonel,  &c. 

Captain  [W.  F.]  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant-General. 


Extracts  from  daily  reports  * of  Lieut.  Col.  Joseph  A.  Yates , First 

South  Carolina  Artillery , commanding  artillery  forces  at  Fort 

Johnson,  August  lS-September  7,  1863. 

August  18,  12.35  p.  m. — The  enemy’s  fire  this  morning  at  Sumter, 
though  heavy,  is  not  accurate.  I believe  that  Batteries  Simkins  and 
Cheves  are  annoying  them  very  much.  One  8-inch  shell  gun  re- 
mounted. Send  me  carriages  for  the  other  three;  also  some  fuses 
that  will  burst.  I have  not  been  able  to  burst  one  to-day. 

August  20,  2 p.  m. — From  our  batteries  to-day  we  have  blown  up 
two  ammunition  chests  of  the  enemy,  and  the  report  from  Battery 
Wagner  is  that  we  dismounted  one  of  their  guns.  Certainly,  she  has 
ceased  firing. 

5.40  p.  m. — Our  shooting  is  very  good.  I think  the  enemy’s  guns 
are  becoming  very  much  injured  by  such  rapid  firing  at  high  eleva- 
tions. Their  projectiles  tumble  very  much  now,  in  their  flight: 
Many  of  them  go  only  about  two-thirds  of  the  way. 

August  21,  2 p.  m. — At  present  we  have  not  three  reliefs  for  our 
guns,  which  are  firing  night  and  day.  Would  like  to  have  enough 
men  for  three  reliefs.  I think  that  one  of  the  enemy’s  heavy  guns 
has  just  bursted. 

August  22,  8 a.  m. — Only  three  guns  in  all  can  bear  upon  the 
Marsh  Battery.  I am  cutting  away  some  of  the  traverses,  so  as  to 
bring  more  on  it.  The  gun  is  in  close  embrasure  and  I think  will  be 
haVd  to  injure,  but  we  will  do  our  best  presently. 

10  a.  m. — The  enemy  opened  upon  the  city  from  Marsh  Battery 
with  rifle  gun  and  upon  Battery  Cheves  with  mortars,  at  12  o’clock 
last  night.  All  of  the  batteries  on  this  island  which  could  bear  were 
opened  at  10  p.  m.  and  continued  firing  during  the  night.  With 
what  effect  I cannot  say.  This  battery  is  quite  small  and  at  long 
range,  consequently,  the  firing  is  uncertain. 

3.29  p.  m. — I cannot  judge  of  the  effect  of  the  fire  on  Battery  Wag-* 
ner.  We  have  been  firing  heavily  on  Marsh  Battery;  struck  it  often, 
but  with  no  apparent  effect.  The  embrasure  is  closed  up  with  sand- 
bags. Could  see  but  one  man  about  the  battery. 


*Addressed  to  Capt.  W.  F.  Nance,  assistant  adjutant-general. 


Chap.  XL.] 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 


529 


August  24,  9 a.  m. — The  enemy  opened  fire  upon  this  point  at 
8 a.  m.  yesterday,  and  continued  at  intervals  during  the  morning. 
In  accordance  with  orders,  I opened  on  the  enemy’s  Marsli  Battery 
with  all  my  available  force  at  10  p.  m.  At  about  11  o’clock  he 
replied  with  Parrott  guns  and  a mortar.  The  former  [firing]  on  the 
city,  the  latter  on  Battery  Cheves.  No  casualties  among  the  artil- 
lerymen. 

August  25,  11.20. — I fired  yesterday  upon  enemy's  advanced  works 
on  Morris  Island  and  at  Marsh  Battery  from  all  guns  bearing  upon 
these  positions. 

11.30  a.  m. — The  enemy  commenced  building  another  Marsh  Bat- 
tery last  night,  similar  to  the  one  completed  and  to  southward  of  it. 
They  are  not  working  on  it  to-day.  The  attention  of  the  command- 
ing general  is  respectfully  called  to  the  fact  that  these  batteries  will 
have  exactly  a reverse  fire  on  all  the  batteries  at  or  near  Fort  J ohn- 
son.* 

August  28,  8 p.  m. — General  Colquitt  reports  our  shells  falling 
just  right. 

September  1. — One  of  the  Brooke  guns  was  removed  immediately 
on  reception  of  the  order,  three  days  ago,  and  mounted  near  the  tower. 

September  6.— The  lights  are  fixed.  The  7-inch  Brooke  gun  car- 
riage is  here  on  the  ground.  No  platform  has  been  laid  on  Battery 
Wampler.  There  is  a chamber  ready  in  Martello  Tower.  Had  she 
better  be  mounted  there,  so  as  to  have  her  ready  for  action  ? f 

September  8,  7.30  a.  m. — The  8-inch  columbiad  exploded  last  night. 
No  one  hurt.  This  gun  had  been  fired  about  twelve  hundred  times 
since  she  has  been  mounted  at  Shell  Point,  and  very  often  before,  at 
Sumter. 


Headquarters  Fort  Johnson, 

November  27,  1863. 

Colonel  : Your  communication  of  the  26th  instant,  making  in- 
quiries connected  with  the  movements  of  the  enemy  on  Folly  and 
Morris  Islands,  ending  in  the  events  of  the  10th  of  July,  1863,  has 
just  reached  me,  and,  by  your  request,  I answer  the  questions  pro- 
posed, in  detail: 

Answer  to  question  No.  1.  There  was  no  movement  of  note  in  the 
enemy’s  fleet  until,  I think,  about  the  6th  of  July,  when  four  moni- 
tors and  one  light  ship  arrived  off  the  bar.  We  could  notice  no 
movement  of  the  enemy  on  Folly  Island  from  Morris  Island,  but,  in 
obedience  to  instructions,  we  shelled  Little  Folly  Island  frequently 
throughout  day  and  night.  On  the  morning  of  the  9th  of  July,  we 
noticed  that  some  of  the  underbrush  on  Little  Folly  had  been  cleaned 
away  during  the  night  previous,  and  could  indistinctly  discern  the 
outlines  of  what  we  took  to  be  batteries  or  breastworks ; also  the 
number  of  tents  on  Big  Folly  Island  greatly  increased.  Colonel 
Graham,  the  commanding  officer  of  Morris  Island,  being  absent,  I 
immediately  sent  to  Brigadier-General  Ripley,  commanding  the  dis- 
trict, the  following  telegram,  as  near  as  I can  recollect : 

The  enemy  have  unmasked  batteries  on  Little  Folly,  and  have  been  strongly  re- 
enforced on  Big  Folly.  An  attack  on  this  point  imminent.  Send  re-enforcements. 


* Rear  traverses  must  be  used. — G.  T.  B. 
f Yes.  Put  it  in  position  temporarily. — G.  T.  B. 

34  R R— VOL  XXVIII,  PT  I 


[Chap.  XL 


530  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

Answer  to  question  No.  2.  We  could  not  see  any  movements  of  tlie 
enemy  on  and  about  Folly  Island. 

Answer  to  question  No.  3.  I do  not  know  the  strength  of  the 
enemy’s  forces  on  Folly  Island,  nor  can  I form  any  idea. 

Answer  to  question  No.  4.  The  attack  was  made  with  artillery  and 
infantry.  They  opened  fire  on  our  batteries  from  Little  Folly  with 
forty-three  guns  and  mortars ; also  from  four  monitors  on  our  left 
flank,  and  with  howitzers  from  barges  on  our  right  flank,  they  being 
in  Folly  Inlet.  They  shelled  rapidly  for  about  one  hour  and  a half, 
and,  under  cover  of  this  heavy  fire,  landed  from  barges,  which  came 
out  of  a creek  to  the  westward  of  Little  Folly,  and  on  our  right, 
upon  Shell  Point,  about  three  regiments  of  infantry,  and  from  other 
barges,  which  came  directly  across  the  inlet,  and  on  our  front,  about 
three  regiments  more.  The  last-mentioned  body  of  troops  advanced 
in  line  directly  up  to  our  batteries,  while  those  that  landed  at  Shell 
Point  endeavored  to  flank  our  batteries  by  the  right.  They  con- 
tin  aed  shelling  heavily  until  these  troops  had  all  landed. 

Answer  to  question  No.  5.  The  forces  on  Morris  Island  consisted 
of  Graham’s  regiment  of  infantry,  I think  about  350  strong,  and  a 
detachment  of  40  men,  Captain  Haskell,  First  South  Carolina  Artil- 
lery. The  artillery  consisted  of  about  130  artillerists  at  the  batteries 
at  the  south  end  of  Morris  Island;  at  Battery  Wagner,  two  small 
companies  of  artillery,  about  85  effective  men ; at  Cumming’s  Point, 
a detachment  of  about  40  men  ; making  in  all  about  255  artillerists, 
as  well  as  I can  recollect,  under  my  command.  The  batteries  at  the 
south  end  were  under  the  immediate  command  of  Captain  Mitchel, 
First  South  Carolina  (Regular)  Artillery. 

Battery  Wagner  was  under  the  immediate  command  of  Captain 
Chichester;  Cumming’s  Point  under  the  immediate  command  of 
Captain  Lesesne,  First  South  Carolina  Artillery.  All  the  forces 
were  under  the  immediate  command  of  Colonel  Graham,  Twenty- 
first  Regiment  South  Carolina  Volunteers.  Re-enforcements,  con- 
sisting of  Nelson’s  battalion,  I presume  about  250  to  300  strong, 
arrived  at  Cumming’s  Point  about  the  same  time  the  enemy  landed 
at  Shell  Point,  on  the  opposite  end  of  the  island.  They  were  then 
obliged  to  double-quick  a distance  of  3 miles  over  very  heavy  roads, 
and,  consequently,  were  rendered  almost  ineffective  when  they  met 
the  enemy. 

Answer  to  question  No.  6.  The  attack  of  the  enemy  by  infantry 
was,  to  a certain  extent,  a surprise,  but  the  artillery  attack  was  an- 
ticipated. The  reason  why  I say  the  infantry  attack  was  a surprise 
is,  we  had  been  informed  frequently  that  the  enemy’s  force  on  Folly 
Island  was  quite  small,  and  had  been,  a few  days  before,  decreased. 
Upon  this  information  I immediately  applied  to  the  general  com- 
manding district  for  permission  to  form  an  expedition  for  the  pur- 
pose of  attacking  the  enemy  on  Folly  Island.  Such  permission  was 
granted,  the  expedition  formed,  and  did  actually  start,  but  the 
weather  was  so  unfavorable,  and  the  surf  so  high  that  several  of  our 
boats  were  swamped,  and  we  were  compelled  to  abandon  it  at  that 
time.  This  was  attempted  on  the  nights  of  the  7th  and  8th  of  July. 

Answer  to  question  No.  7.  The  enemy  landed  at  Shell  Point  and 
upon  the  beach  directly  in  front  of  our  batteries,  at  about  7 o’clock. 

Answer  to  question  No.  8.  The  artillery  were  all  fighting  their 
guns.  The  infantry  I am  not  able  to  say  the  exact  disposition  of,  as 
I was  not  in  command. 

Answer  to  question  No.  9.  The  artillery  was  very  badly  supported, 


Chap.  XL.] 


OPERATIONS  OJNT  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 


531 


to  a very  great  extent  owing  to  the  small  force  of  infantry  and  there 
being  no  line  of  defense  to  assist  them  in  repelling  so  large  a force. 

Answer  to  question  No.  10.  The  column  that  landed  moved  up  to 
Shell  Point  by  a flank,  and  on  arriving  at  the  head  of  this  neck  of 
land  they  deployed  to  the  left  and  advanced  in  line  as  well  as  the 
topography  of  the  ground  would  admit  of. 

Answer  to  question  No.  11.  I do  not  recollect  the  hour,  but  suppose 
it  was  about  8 o’clock  when  our  troops  commenced  falling  back.  I 
do  not  know  by  whose  order,  but  believe  they  were  driven  back  by 
overpowering  numbers. 

Answer  to  question  No.  12.  The  enemy  followed  up  our  retreat  as 
far  as  Graham’s  headquarters,  the  monitors  also  keeping  close  along 
the  shore  and  firing  upon  us.  As  soon  as  the  enemy  arrived  as  far 
as  Graham’s  headquarters,  Captain  Chichester  opened  from  Battery 
Wagner  on  them,  in  obedience  to  previous  instructions  from  me, 
which  fire  checked  their  advance.  They,  however,  threw  out  skir- 
mishers, who  advanced  to  within  easy  rifle-range  of  the  battery. 

Answer  to  question  No.  13.  The  enemy  opened  on  us  with  their 
artillery  from  Little  Folly  Island,  directly  in  front  of  our  batteries; 
on  our  left  flank  with  four  monitors,  on  our  right  flank  from  how- 
itzers in  barges,  which  were  in  Folly  Inlet. 

The  above  statements  are  made  entirely  from  memory  and  con- 
sequently there  may  be  discrepancies  as  to  numbers  and  time,  but,  I 
believe,  generally,  the  statements  are  correct.  Hoping  that  they 
may  be  verified  by  the  statements  of  other  officers,  I have  the  honor 
to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOSEPH  A.  YATES, 

Lieutenant- Colonel  First  South  Carolina  Artillery . 

Lieut.  Col.  A.  Roman, 

Assistant  Inspector -General. 


No.  39. 

Report  of  Capt.  H.  JR.  Lesesne,  First  South  Carolina  Artillery. 

Charleston,  September  7,  1863. 

Major  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  in  obedience  to  orders 
received  from  Colonel  Keitt  I went  to  Battery  Gregg  on  the  morn- 
ing of  the  5th  instant,  and  took  command  of  the  post.  The  bat- 
tery was  shelled  heavily  during  the  day  by  the  enemy’s  land  bat- 
teries, and  for  a part  of  the  day  by  the  Ironsides,  causing  consider- 
able injury  to  the  work  and  a number  of  casualties.  I am  not  able 
to  state  the  exact  number.  Information  having  been  received  that 
the  enemy  intended  an  attack  by  water  on  the  battery,  I had  the 

funs  of  the  battery  trained  on  the  most  probable  points  of  attack, 
ouble-loaded  with  canister,  one  10-inch  columbiad  bearing  on  the 
beach  in  front  and  one  on  the  extreme  point  in  rear.  Two  12-pounder 
howitzers  were  placed  on  the  beach  to  the  right  of  the  work,  run- 
ning from  the  right  of  Battery  Gregg  to  the  beach.  The  artillery 
was  supported  by  Major  Gardner,  commanding  the  Twenty-seventh 
Georgia. 

About  1.30  a.  m.  the  enemy  advanced  upon  the  point  in  about 
twenty  boats  ; when  within  100  yards  of  the  beach  I opened  upon 


532  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

them  with  the  10-inch  gun,  followed  by  the  howitzers.  The  infantry 
commenced  firing  shortly  afterward.  The  enemy  returned  the  fire 
with  their  boat  howitzers  and  musketry.  A few  succeeded  in  land- 
ing, but  quickly  returned  to  their  boats.  After  the  fire  had  been 
kept  up  for  about  fifteen  minutes,  the  whole  force  returned. 

Our  casualties  were  1 man  mortally,  and  about  5 slightly,  wounded. 
The  enemy’s  loss  is  not  known,  but  it  is  supposed  to  have  been  heavy. 

The  fire  of  the  enemy  was  kept  up  steadily  on  the  6th  until  even- 
ing, material  damage  being  done  to  the  work.  Casualties,  7. 

Having  received  orders  about  7. 30  p.  m.  to  hold  myself  in  readi- 
ness to  evacuate  the  work,  spike  the  guns,  and  blow  it  up,  with  the 
assistance  of  Captain  [F.  D.]  Lee  and  Lieutenant  Stiles,  of  the  en- 
gineers, I laid  the  safety  match  in  loose  powder  in  the  magazine, 
running  it  out  to  the  parapet  of  the  work.  The  match  was  laid 
on  planks,  so  as  to  prevent  any  moisture  from  reaching  it.  The 
men  composing  the  garrison  of  the  battery  were  embarked  immedi- 
ately after  the  last  of  the  Twenty-seventh  Georgia.  On  receiving 
orders  from  Colonel  Keitt,  I spiked  the  two  10-inch  guns,  breaking 
the  spikes  flush  off  with  the  guns ; had  the  field  pieces  spiked  and 
thrown  overboard,  with  all  their  ammunition,  and  directed  Major 
Holcombe,  commissary  of  subsistence,  who  had  volunteered  to  assist 
me,  to  light  the  match.  The  match  went  out  at  first,  but  on  being 
lighted  again  burned  well.  On  Colonel  Keitt’s  countermanding  the 
order  for  lighting  it  was  found  impossible  to  extinguish  it,  and  it 
could  not  be  cut  with  the  knife  which  we  had.  This  was  but  a few 
minutes  before  we  left  the  point,  and  it  was  then  within  the  door- 
way of  the  magazine  and  burning  freely.  I omitted  to  mention  that 
the  match  was  cut  off  to  burn  about  fifteen  minutes,  it  burning  a 
foot  in  fifteen  seconds. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

HENRY  R.  LESESNE, 
Captain  First  South  Carolina  Artillery. 

Maj.  Henry  Bryan, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 

[Indorsement.] 

In  repelling  the  boat  attack,  on  night  of  the  5th,  the  field  howitzers 
were  commanded  by  Lieutenant  [E.  W.]  Macbeth,  Company  A,  First 
South  Carolina  [Regular]  Infantry  [Third  Artillery],  who  handled 
them  with  gallantry  and  skill. 

H.  BRYAN, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  40. 

Report  of  Lieut.  T.  George  Dargan,  First  South  Carolina  Artillery. 

Battery  Gregg,  August  16,  1863. 
Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  inclose  the  following  extract  from 
daily  journal  at  this  post : 

On  the  loth,  about  25  shell  thrown  from  9-inch  gun  on  right  of 
battery,  to  annoy  working  party  of  the  enemy  at  large  battery  west 
of  Craig’s  Hill.  Shell  burst  well,  frequently  interrupting  working 


Chap.  XL.]  OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C.  533 

party.  At  4. 30  p.  m.  1 was  obliged  to  cease  fire,  fuses  of  the  proper 
length  being  exhausted. 

Enemy  unusually  quiet  until  afternoon,  when  he  opened  fire  from 
Parrott  guns  and  mortars  below  Craig’s  Hill.  Our  battery  unin- 
jured ; only  one  casualty  in  Twelfth  Georgia  Battalion,  leg  carried 
off  by  shell.  Enemy  ceased  firing  about  dark. 

At  11  p.  m.  picket  at  mouth  of  Vincent’s  Creek  opened  fire  on  small 
boat  apparently  drifting  out  to  sea. 

At  12  o’clock  picket  again  opened  fire  on  small  boat  as  before. 
They  report  that  the  boat  returned  fire  with  small  arms,  continuing 
its  outward  course  around  Cumming’s  Point.  It  was  impossible  to 
open  from  the  battery,  owing  to  the  darkness  of  the  night.  I think 
the  boats  were  from  the  enemy,  for  the  purpose  of  watching  trans- 
portation, and  signaling  the  fleet  when  to  open  fire.  Since  11.30 
p.  m.  a rocket  was  thrown  up,  apparently  from  small  boat,  monitors 
immediately  opening  fire  upon  the  point.  Battery  did  not  reply, 
owing  to  extreme  darkness  of  the  night.  Fleet  ceased  firing  after  a 
few  rounds. 

To-day,  16th,  enemy  quiet,  not  firing  until  dark,  when  a few  shell 
were  thrown  from  Parrott  gun  battery  at  the  foot  of  Craig’s  Hill. 

At  1 p.  m.  7 rounds  fired  from  9-inch  gun  on  right  of  battery,  for 
the  purpose  of  testing  fuses,  when  fire  ceased,  owing  to  failure  of  the 
fuses;  not  having  good  fuses  of  proper  length,  no  further  firing  from 
battery  to-dajA 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

T.  GEO.  DARGAN, 
Lieutenant , Commanding  Battery. 

Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

[Indorsement.] 

Respectfully  forwarded.  I regret  that  Lieutenant  Dargan  did  not 
have  his  shell  properly  fused.  I have  used  every  effort  to  secure 
proper  fuses,  and  Captain  Hill  promises  that  the  defect  will  be  reme- 
died at  once. 

LAWRENCE  M.  KEITT, 

Colonel , Commanding. 


No.  41. 

Reports  of  Lieut.  James  R.  Pringle , First  South  Carolina  Ar- 
tillery. 

Battery  Gregg,  August  18,  1863. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  forward  extract  from  daily  journal: 

7.50  a.  m.  Three  monitors  and  Ironsides  take  the  old  position  of 
yesterday.  One  monitor  steams  up  to  1,500  or  1,800  yards  of  this 
post.  After  the  men  had  breakfasted,  ordered  one  of  10-inch  colum- 
biads  to  open  at  intervals  of  ten  minutes  on  her.  First  shot  struck 
on  parapet,  but  being  only  a shell  filled  with  sand  was  shivered  to 
atoms,  without  effecting  any  material  injury.  She  was  struck  some 
three  or  four  times.  I ordered  the  9-inch  to  open  likewise  at  long 
intervals.  At  the  end  of  two  hours,  finding  she  was  shifting  her 
position  continually,  and  becoming  short  of  ammunition,  I ceased 


534  S.  C.  AKD  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  M|D.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

firing.  The  monitor  returned  our  fire  slowly  for  a short  time  and 
then  ceased.  No  injury  to  men  or*  battery.  In  yesterday’s  bom- 
bardment, during  the  heaviest  time  of  fire  our  flag  was  shot  away, 
when  Sergeant  [Wil  iam]  Armstrong,  of  Company  H,  First  Artil- 
lery, mounted  the  traverse  and  replaced  it. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  &c. , 

JAS.  R.  PRINGLE, 
Lieutenant , Commanding  Post. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan, 

Chief  of  Staff. 


Battery  Gregg,  August  19,  1863. 

Major  : I have  discovered  this  morning  a battery  just  this  side 
of  Black  Island,  in  the  marsh,  and  about  500  yards  to  the  other  side 
of  the  steamer  Manigault.  I would  respectfully  apply  for  informa- 
tion to  know  whether  it  is  ours  or  the  enemy’s  work.  I have  not  yet 
opened  fire  on  it,  as  the  Shell  Point  batteries  have  not  taken  notice 
of  it,  and  for  that  reason  I am  uncertain  whose  battery  it  is. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JAS.  R.  PRINGLE, 

Lieutenant , Commanding. 

Major  Bryan, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


[Indorsements.] 


Battery  Wagner,  August  19,  1863. 

The  battery  alluded  to  in  the  within  communication  is  located  at 
about  3,000  yards  from  Battery  Gregg,  and  should  be  opened  upon 
by  any  guns  that  can  be  brought  to  bear  upon  it.  The  location  of 
this  battery  is  one  of  great  danger  to  this  post,  as  the  enemy  will  be 
enabled  to  enfilade  our  land  face  and  drive  the  gunners  from  the  sea 
face  also,  if  the  work  is  allowed  to  be  completed  ; considerable  prog- 
ress has  already  been  made  on  the  work. 

Respectfully  submitted. 

ROBT.  PRINGLE, 

Captain , and  Chief  of  Artillery. 

Respectfully  forwarded,  and  attention  called  to  the  indorsement 
of  my  acting  chief  of  artillery.  Lieutenant  Pringle  has  been  ordered 
to  destroy  or  check  this  battery,  if  practicable,  with  his  guns.  I 
had  supposed  that  the  James  Island  batteries  would  prevent  this 
work,  and  beg  leave  to  repeat  my  request  that  their  fire  be  directed 
against  it. 

LAWRENCE  M.  KEITT, 

Colonel , Commanding. 

P.  S. — It  is  impracticable  for  Battery  Gregg  to  fire  on  it. 


Battery  Gregg,  August  19,  1863. 
General  : I have  the  honor  to  make  the  following  daily  report : 
At  9 a.  m.  I commenced  fire  on  a battery  that  had  been  discov- 
ered early  in  the  morning  in  the  marsh  near  Black  Island,  but  not 


Chap.  XL.] 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 


535 


having  fuses  of  sufficient  length,  the  battery  being  2,050  yards  from 
this  point,  I ceased,  and  turned  my  9-inch  and  10-inch  guns  on  the 
batteries  on  Morris  Island  that  were  playing  on  Sumter.  The  enemy 
vigorously  and  quickly  answered  my  fire,  for  one  gun  giving  from 
six  to  eight  in  return,  firing  with  great  precision.  My  shells  at  this 
range  were  likewise  bad,  bursting  either  not  at  all  or  at  the  muzzle 
of  the  gun.  The  enemy  threw  one  100-pounder  Parrott  into  the  en- 
trance of  the  bomb-proof,  the  only  place  of  protection  for  my  unen- 
gaged men,  causin  $ a part  of  it  to  cave  in,  and  playing  pretty  great 
havoc  with  it. 

At  12  ml.  the  battery  was  visited  by  the  chief  of  artillery,  who, 
seeing  how  wretched  our  fuses  were,  and  the  damage  done  to  the 
battery,  ordered  me  to  cease  fire  with  the  9-inch  Dahlgren,  as  it 
drew  the  enemy’s  fire  directly  on  the  bomb-proof.  He  likewise  or- 
dered firing  to  cease  with  the  10-inch  gun,  as  our  injury  to  the  enemy 
was  not  great,  and  the  carriage  was  so  shattered  from  Monday’s 
bombardment  that  a few  more  rounds  would  have  dismounted  it. 
The  injury  to  our  bomb-proof  is  quite  severe,  the  traverse  of  our 
magazines  a little  injured.  No  men  in  this  command  have,  however, 
suffered  to-day. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JAS.  R.  PRINGLE, 

First  Lieutenant , Commanding  Post. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan, 

Chief  of  Staff. 


No.  42. 

Report  of  Capt.  Warren  Adams,  Third  South  Carolina  Artillery. 

Battery  Bee, 

Sullivan’s  Island,  July  21,  1863. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor,  most  respectfully,  to  make  the  fol- 
lowing report  of  the  part  borne  by  Companies  H and  I,  First  Regi- 
ment South  Carolina  (Regular)  Infantry,  in  the  engagement  of  Sat- 
urday, the  18th  instant : 

All  of  the  artillery  of  Fort  Wagner  which  was  engaged  during 
the  bombardment  of  the  eneiPy  was  manned  and  fought  by  detach- 
ments from  these  two  companies,  with  the  exception  of  two  guns  on 
the  land  face  on  the  right  of  the  8-inch  navy  gun.  The  mortar  bat- 
tery, the  10-inch  columbiad,  and  one  32-pounder  were  manned  by 
detachments  from  Company  I,  under  the  command  of  Capt.  W.  T. 
Tatom,  First  Lieut.  Jacob  Youngblood,  and  Second  Lieut.  Edward 
Mathewes,  all  of  same  company.  One  42-pounder  howitzer,  one 
8-inch  navy  gun,  and  one  32-pounder  smooth-bore  were  manned  by 
detachments  from  Company  H,  under  the  command  of  Capt.  War- 
ren Adams,  First  Lieut.  J.  H.  Powe,  and  Second  Lieut.  Waddy  T. 
Means,  all  of  same  company.  Second  Lieut.  John  G.  K.  Gourdin, 
of  my  company  (H),  was  assigned  to  duty  as  assistant  in  the  ord- 
nance department,  where  he  rendered  very  efficient  service. 

Two  of  the  guns  of  my  battery  could  only  be  effective  against  an 
infantry  assault,  but  they  were  fired  at  intervals  during  the  day  to 
show  the  enemy  the  spirit  of  the  troops  in  charge  of  them. 


[Chap.  XL. 


536  S.  C.  AND  G A.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

The  8-inch  navy  gun,  commanded  in  person  by  Lieut.  James  H. 
Powe,  was  gallantly  fought  and  did  effective  service  on  the  enemy’s 
land  batteries  and  fortifications. 

In  the  afternoon,  two  guns  on  the  land  face  on  the  right  of  the 
8-inch  navy  gun  were  manned  by  detachments  from  my  company. 
Only  one  of  the  guns,  however,  was  in  a fighting  condition  ; conse- 
quently one  of  the  detachments  was  ordered  to  Report  to  the  com- 
pany. The  other  gun  was  fired  only  once,  when  its  carriage  was 
shattered  severely  by  a projectile  from  the  enemy’s  land  batteries. 
The  gun  carriage,  in  my  opinion,  was  so  seriously  damaged  that 
another  one  of  its  own  shots  would  have  dismounted  it,  and  the  de- 
tachment was  consequently  withdrawn. 

In  the  afternoon,  Lieutenant  Powe  and  most  of  his  detachment 
were  wounded,  and  Lieutenant  Gourdin  being  the  only  officer  of  my 
company  unhurt,  was  ordered  to  command  the  8-inch  navy  gun, 
which  he  gallantly  fought  and  held  during  the  remainder  of  the  en- 
gagement. 

The  10-inch  mortar  was  commanded  in  person  by  Captain  Tatom  ; 
the  10-inch  columbiad  by  Lieutenant  Youngblood,  and  the  32-pounder 
smooth-bore  by  Lieutenant  Mathewes,  all  of  Company  I.  The  32- 
pounder  was  disabled  and  the  detachment  withdrawn.  Lieutenant 
Mathewes  assisted  Lieutenant  Youngblood  in  the  management  of 
the  10-inch  columbiad.  The  two  companies  also  took  part  in  the 
night  assault. 

It  was  in  the  night  when  Captain  Tatom,  at  the  head  of  a few  of 
his  men  charging  on  the  enemy,  was  killed  on  the  parapet. 

Our  men  of  the  two  companies  behaved  bravely,  showing  a strong 
devotion  to  their  country’s  cause. 

Inclosed  you  will  find  a list*  of  the  casualties  of  the  two  compa- 
nies. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

WARREN  ADAMS, 

Capt.  Co.  H,  1st  S.  C.  Inf.,  Comdg.  Detachment  1st  Inf. 

Capt.  H.  C.  Cunningham. 

P.  S. — Our  command  has  been  designated  as  the  First  South  Caro- 
lina Artillery,  and  sometimes  as  the  Second  South  Carolina  Artillery, 
which  is  provoking,  not  only  to  the  officers  in  command  of  the  two 
companies,  but  to  the  officers  of  the  entire  regiment.  Our  compa- 
nies belong  to  the  First  Regiment  South  Carolina  (Regular)  Infantry,  f 


No.  43. 

Reports  of  Capt.  Thomas  A.  Huguenin,  Third  South  Carolina 

Artillery. 

Battery  Wagner,  September  4,  1863. 
Captain  : I have  the  honor,  most  respectfully,  to  submit  the 
following  plan  for  the  consideration  of  the  proper  authorities  : 

As  chief  of  artillery  of  this  post,  I have  noticed,  with  deep  regret, 
that  our  present  efforts  to  retard,  if  not  finally  stop  the  advance  of 


* Not  found,  but  see  p.  406. 

f Known  at  C.  S.  War  Department  as  the  3d  South  Carolina  Artillery. 


Chap.  XL.] 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  0. 


537 


the  enemy  upon  this  battery  by  their  approaches,  has  been  appa- 
rently almost  fruitless.  I am  induced  to  offer  the  following  plan  of 
operations,  believing  that  it  is  practicable  and  will  result  in  mate- 
rially retarding  their  progress,  if  not  in  their  complete  overthrow. 

The  fire  which  is  now  directed  upon  them,  artillery  and  sharp- 
shooters, is  apparently  in  a great  degree  harmless,  and  I propose  to 
throw  forward  on  the  right  flank  of  Battery  Wagner  beyond  the 
ditch  a covered  way  and  gun  chamber,  by  means  of  sand-bags.  This 
chamber  when  finished  is  expected  to  be  supplied  with  a 12-pounder 
howitzer.  This  gun  will  be  then  in  position  to  rake  the  advance  * 
approach  of  the  enemy,  and  put  a complete  stop  to  their  work. 

I think  the  proposed  work  can  be  done  by  a skillful  and  energetic 
engineer  in  one  night ; then  the  next  morning  it  is  expected  to  take 
them  by  surprise  and  rake  the  ditch.  Several  rounds  can  be  fired 
before  the  enemy  will  be  able  to  get  the  range  and  direction.  When 
the  enemy  has  done  this,  the  gun  can  be  dismounted  and  covered 
with  sand-bags,  to  be  used  again  as  soon  as  the  fire  is  not  too  an- 
noying. 

Major  Bryan,  assistant  adjutant-general,  and  myself  visited  the 
outside  of  the  ditch  on  the  extreme  right  to-night.  We  think  that  a 
suitable  position  for  this  work  can  be  found  beyond  the  ditch. 

If  it  is  thought  that  the  enemy  would  discover  us  when  at  work, 
a feint  could  be  made  upon  the  extreme  left  flank,  by  means  of  a 
sortie,  and  while  the  enemy  is  thus  distracted,  our  work  can  be 
pushed  vigorously  to  completion. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

T.  A.  HUGUEN1N, 

Captain  1st  S.  C.  [ Regular ] Inf.,  Actg.  Chief  of  Artillery. 

[Indorsements.] 

Respectfully  forwarded.  It  is  hoped  that  this  plan  would  be  suc- 
cessful, if  tried.  At  present  the  enemy’s  advance  upon  this  work, 
unless  some  additional  measures  are  taken  to  check  it,  is  a mere 
question  of  time.  The  weight  of  metal  at  the  disposition  of  the 
commander  of  this  battery  will  not  prevent  their  approaches  from 
being  pushed  up  to  the  very  moat,  in  a time  very  short.  The  present 
engineer  is  unwilling  to  adopt  this  scheme,  which  would  require  a 
more  active  man  than  Captain  [T.  B.  ] Lee. 

LAWRENCE  M.  KEITT, 

Colonel , Commanding. 

Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , 8.  C.,  September  6,  1863. 

Respectfully  referred  to  Lieutenant-Colonel  Harris  for  his  imme- 
diate consideration.  Every  exertion  should  be  made  to  retard,  if 
possible,  the  advance  of  the  enemy  to  the  site  of  Battery  Wagner. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General , Commanding . 

Office  Chief  Engineer,  September  7,  1863. 

Respectfully  returned,  with  the  remark  that  Captain  Lee’s  rejec- 
tion of  the  proposed  scheme  is  approved,  and  that  I do  not  thinli  he 
merits  the  implied  rebuke  in  the  foregoing  indorsement  of  the  col- 
onel commanding. 

D.  B.  HARRIS, 

Chief  Engineer , 


538  S.  C.  AND  a A.  COASTS,  AND  TN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

Charleston,  S.  C., 

September  7 , 1863. 

Major  : I have  the  honor  to  make  the  following  report  of  the  du- 
ties assigned  to  me  when  evacuating  Morris  Island  last  night : 

As  soon  as  orders  were  received  for  the  evacuation,  I was  in- 
trusted by  Colonel  Keitt  to  command  the  rear  guard,  with  the  fol- 
lowing instructions : To  hold  Battery  Wagner,  with  a forlorn  hope 
of  35  men,  until  he  had  embarked  the  remainder  of  the  garrison  at 
Cumming’s  Point,  when  he  would  send  me  word  to  that  effect,  and 
I would  then  withdraw  my  men  with  as  little  delay  and  noise  as 
possible,  after  destroying  the  guns  and  laying  a slow-match  to  the 
magazine.  The  orders  detailing  the  manner  of  evacuation  and  de- 
struction of  property  did  not  arrive  until  some  time  after  dark.  Im- 
mediately upon  the  receipt  of  the  orders,  I commenced  preparations. 
The  inclosed  paper,  marked  A,  was  presented  to  Colonel  Keitt  and 
approved. 

About  8 p.  m.  the  10-inch  mortar  was  fired,  and  firing  kept  up 
until  a short  time  before  the  final  evacuation.  I then  relieved  Cap- 
tain [J.  D.]  Johnson’s,  a portion  of  Captain  [W.  M.]  Hunter’s,  and 
a portion  of  Captain  [C.  E.]  Kanapaux’s  companies,  who  immedi- 
ately commenced  the  retreat.  I then  visited  the  batteries  that  were 
not  manned,  and  commenced  the  destruction  of  such  implements  as 
my  limited  time  would  permit. 

At  11  p.  m.  my  support,  under  command  of  Lieutenant-Colonel 
[J.  G.]  Pressley,  withdrew,  together  with  the  guard.  I then  posted 
my  artillery,  who  were  now  firing  at  long  intervals,  as  sharpshooters 
along  the  whole  fort,  with  orders  to  keep  up  as  continuous  a fire  of 
small-arms  as  is  usual  at  Battery  Wagner  during  the  night,  the 
enemy  all  this  time  keeping  up  a furious  bombardment  from  mor- 
tars and  rifled  guns. 

At  11.30  p.  m.  I ordered  the  relief  of  Lieutenant  Millar’s  and  Cap- 
tain Kanapaux’s  detachments.  The  whole  garrison  of  the  fort  then 
consisted  of  25  men  of  Company  A,  First  South  Carolina  Infantry 
(regulars),  and  10  men  from  the  Twenty-fifth  South  Carolina  Volun- 
teers. The  firing  of  our  sharpshooters  was  increased,  in  order  to 
deceive  the  enemy  as  to  our  movements. 

At  12. 30,  or  near  about  that  time,  I commenced  relieving  the  rear 
guard,  commencing  on  the  right,  and,  with  Captain  Pinckney ^ care- 
fully spiking  every  gun  except  the  10-inch  columbiad,  which  was 
double-charged  and  prepared  for  bursting.  By  the  time  this  was 
done  and  the  rear  guard  was  ready  to  move,  a courier  arrived  from 
Cumming’s  Point,  with  orders  from  Colonel  Keitt  to  complete  the 
evacuation,  as  the  troops  had  all  left  and  transportation  for  the  rear 
guard  ready.  I immediately  withdrew  my  sharpshooters  from  the 
parapet,  and  started  the  rear  guard  to  Cumming’s  Point.  Captain 
Pinckney,  ordnance  officer,  First  Military  District;  Lieutenant 
Mazyck,  ordnance  officer,  Battery  Wagner;  Lieutenant  [James  A.] 
Boss,  Twenty-fifth  South  Carolina  Volunteers,  and  Ordnance  Ser- 
geant Leathe  and  myself,  alone  remained  to  lay  the  slow-match, 
which  had  been  prepared  in  the  early  part  of  the  night.  In  about 
five  minutes  the  train  was  fixed,  and  the  10-inch  columbiad  was 
attempted  to  be  fired.  Four  friction-tubes  failed,  and  powder  was 
gotten  from  the  magazine  and  the  vent  primed  as  well  as  possible. 
The  implements  having  been  destroyed,  ■ according  to  instructions 
from  district  headquarters,  again  it  was  attempted  and  failed. 


Chap.  XL.]  OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C.  539 

Preparations  were  then  made  to  burst  the  32-pounder,  which  burst- 
ing of  a gun  was  the  signal  to  Colonel  Keitt  that  the  evacuation 
was  completed.  But  this  failed  also,  after  several  attempts.  The 
rear  guard  had  then  been  gone  fifteen  or  twenty  minutes,  and  the 
enemy  having  slackened  their  fire  a little  upon  Wagner  and  com- 
menced firing  on  Cumming’s  Point  and  between  the  two  batteries, 
I thought  that  perhaps  they  had  discovered  our  intentions,  and, 
knowing  that  Colonel  Keitt  and  the  remainder  of  the  garrison  at 
Battery  Gregg  and  the  rear  guard  would  be  waiting  for  me,  I,  in 
order  to  preserve  them  from  danger,  abandoned  the  idea  of  bursting 
the  10-inch  columbiad,  and  immediately,  with  my  own  hands,  ap- 
plied the  match  to  the  safety  fuse.  It  ignited,  and  I remained  and 
saw  it  burning  for  fifteen  or  twenty  seconds,  apparently  fairly  and 
successfully  ignited.  Believing  that  I had  done  everything  that 
could  possibly  be  done,  I commenced  my  retreat,  arriving  at  Bat- 
tery Gregg  during  the  fire  of  the  mortars  and  rifled  guns  on  Morris 
Island  and  the  firing  of  small-arms  from  the  enemy’s  boats  near 
that  point. 

In  justice  to  myself,  I desire  to  state  I had  taken  command  of  the 
artillery  at  Battery  Wagner  under  a heavy  bombardment,  which  con- 
tinued until  after  I left,  and,  therefore,  my  duties  in  the  batteries  were 
such  as  to  prevent  my  giving  the  proper  attention  to  every  matter 
of  detail,  as  I would  have  done  under  other  circumstances.  I feared 
the  slow-match  would  not  answer,  and  I applied  to  Colonel  Keitt  to 
be  permitted  to  set  fire  to  the  bomb-proof  with  three  barrels  of  resin, 
but  he  refused,  upon  the  ground  that  the  instructions  stated  dis- 
tinctly that  the  fire  was  to  be  communicated  by  slow-match,  and 
upon  the  advice  of  the  engineer  officer  that  the  smoke  and  fire  would 
make  known  our  intentions  to  the  enemy. 

In  conclusion,  I am  happy  to  state  that  the  rear  guard  behaved 
with  perfect  coolness.  They  were  marched  from  Battery  Wagner, 
in  perfect  order,  by  the  second  officer  of  the  guard.  Lieutenant  [F.  B.] 
Brown,  Twenty-fifth  South  Carolina  Volunteers. 

From  the  continued  firing  of  the  enemy,  I am  inclined  to  believe 
that  the  enemy  did  not  discover  that  the  evacuation  had  taken  place 
until  the  last  boat-load  had  reached  Fort  Sumter. 

Inclosed  you  will  find  a copy  of  Lieutenant  Mazyck’s  (ordnance 
officer)  report,  to  whom  I am  much  indebted  for  his  valuable 
services.  * 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

T.  A.  HUGUENIN, 

Cctpt.  1st  S.  C.  [ Regular ] Inf.  [3 d Art.],  Chief  of  Artillery. 

Maj.  Henry  Bryan, 

Assistant  Adjutant-General. 

[Inclosure  A.] 

Plan  of  operations  of  the  rear  guard  in  the  evacuation  of  Battery 

Wagner. 

Force  employed  : Detachment  of  Company  A,  First  South  Caro- 
lina Infantry,  Lieutenant  Wardlaw,  25  men;  detachment  of  Hun- 
ter’s artillery,  Lieutenant  Millar,  20  men;  detachment  of  Kanapaux’s 
artillery,  Captain  Kanapaux,  8 men;  detachment  of  Twenty-fifth 

*See  No.  34,  p.  522. 


540  S.  0.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 


[Chai\  XL. 


South  Carolina  Volunteers,  Lieutenant  Brown,  10  men.  Total,  G3 
men. 

Upon  the  withdrawal  of  my  support  under  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Pressley,  Hunter’s  and  Kanapaux’s  artillery  will  be  also  with- 
drawn, Captain  Kanapaux  falling  back  upon  the  rifle-pits  and  assist- 
ing in  serving  the  artillery  there  stationed.  He  will  not  fire  until 
certain  the  forlorn  hope  under  my  command  has  reached  him,  and 
receives  the  command  to  fire  from  proper  authority.  As  soon  as 
Colonel  Pressley  has  had  time  to  pass  the  rifle-pits,  the  remainder  of 
the  garrison  will  be  withdrawn  as  quietly  as  possible,  the  precise  time 
to  be  fixed  to-night.  Up  to  the  time  of  withdrawal  of  the  troops,  a 
fire  will  be  kept  up  by  the  10-inch  mortar  and  right  carronade,  and 
sharpshooters  posted  in  the  chambers  on  the  left  flank.  Fire  will  not 
be  opened  until  after  the  support  has  taken  its  position,  except  an 
occasional  mortar  fire  and  perhaps  carronade. 

Respectfully  submitted. 

T.  A.  HUGUENIN, 

Capt.  1st  S.  C.  [ Regular ] Inf.  [3 d Art.],  Chief  of  Artillery. 


Charleston,  September  7,  1863. 

Major  : I have  the  honor  to  make  the  following  report  of  the 
operations  of  the  artillery  at  Battery  Wagner  while  under  my  com- 
mand : 

On  September  4,  while  in  command  of  Battery  Gregg,  in  pursuance 
to  orders,  I reported  at  Battery  Wagner  as  chief  of  artillery.  As 
soon  as  I arrived,  I mac^e  a minute  inspection  of  all  the  artillery,  ord- 
nance, and  ordnance  stores.  I found  the  artillery  troops  much  ex- 
hausted, some  companies  having  been  necessarily  at  the  guns  for 
several  days  and  nights.  The  guns  were  all  in  fighting  condition, 
excepting  one  8-inch  shell  gun  and  one  10-inch  columbiad.  The 
8-inch  was  fixed  that  day,  but  the  10-inch  could  not  be  fixed  so  as 
to  fire  any  length  of  time,  as  the  chassis  had  been  nearly  cut  in  two 
by  a shot. 

During  the  afternoon,  the  engineer  reported  that  the  enemy  had 
recommenced  their  work  at  the  approaches,  and  I ordered  a brisk 
fire  to  be  opened  upon  the  trenches  by  all  the  guns  that  would  bear. 
This  was  kept  up  until  next  morning  just  after  daylight,  when  the 
enemy  opened  on  us  from  a battery  of  four  rifled  guns,  five  mortars, 
and  from  the  Ironsides,  at  the  rate  of  from  5 to  7 shot  and  shell  per 
minute.  This  fire  was  so  accurate  that,  after  an  inspection  with  you 
of  all  the  batteries,  I reported  to  Colonel  Keitt  that  if  we  continued 
our  fire  the  enemy  would  dismount  our  guns,  and  therefore  we  would 
not  be  able  to  repel  an  assault.  He  sanctioned  this,  and  I had  the 
embrasures  filled  with  sand-bags.  The  detachments  were,  however, 
kept  at  the  guns  under  as  much  cover  as  possible.  The  bombard- 
ment continued  without  intermission  during  the  day,  cutting  away 
the  parapet  of  the  salient  angle,  wounding  many  of  the  cannoneers, 
and  cutting  up  the  gun  carriages  on  the  land  curtain  and  the  curtain 
next  to  the  beach. 

In  consequence  of  a portion  of  the  garrison  having  been  sent  to 
repel  an  attack  upon  Battery  Gregg,  the  usual  night  fire  was  reduced 
to  mortar  firing,  which  continued  throughout  the  night  and  at  inter- 
vals on  the  6th.  The  fire  of  the  enemy  was  slackened  a little  during 


Chap.  XL.]  OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C.  541 

the  night,  and  on  the  morning  of  the  6th  it  was  renewed  with  in- 
creased vigor. 

By  this  time  the  artillery  was  greatly  reduced  by  wounds  and 
deaths,  and  what  remained  were  nearly  exhausted  ; still  they  stood 
gallantly  to  the  guns,  although  not  able  to  reply. 

On  the  afternoon  of  the  5th,  one  10-inch  columbiad  was  disabled 
by  a shot  from  the  Ironsides,  which  knocked  off  the  right  trunnion 
where  it  joined  with  the  rimbas. 

On  the  afternoon  of  the  6th,  the  approach  of  the  enemy  was  so 
near  (30  or  40  yards)  that  but  two  guns  could  bear  upon  the  head  of 
the  sap.  One  of  these  guns  (the  8-inch  sea-coast  howitzer)  had  the 
chassis  so  much  weakened  that  it  would  hardly  have  stood  more  than 
one  or  two  shots. 

The  other  events  connected  with  the  artillery  portion  of  the  garri- 
son are  detailed  in  my  report  of  the  evacuation. 

The  artillery  troops  consisted  of  the  following  companies  : Detach- 
ment Company  A,  First  South  [Regular]  Carolina  Infantry,  Lieu- 
tenant Wardlaw ; Company  A,  Second  Regiment  Artillery,  Captain 
Hunter;  Company  E,  Palmetto  Battalion  Light  Artillery,  Captain 
Johnson;  Kanapaux’s  light  artillery,  Captain  Kanapaux. 

The  officers  and  soldiers  behaved  in  a manner  worthy  of  praise, 
with  one  exception,  which  was  in  the  case  of  Lieutenant  [W.  D.] 
Scarborough,  Company  E,  Palmetto  Battalion  Light  Artillery,  who 
left  his  gun  with  his  detachment  without  orders. 

Special  notice  is  due  to  Lieut.  R.  S.  Millar,  Second  Artillery,  for 
his  coolness  and  strict  discharge  of  duty.  Also  to  Lieut.  J.  L.  Ward- 
law,  Company  A,  First  South  Carolina  [Regular]  Infantry. 

Early  in  the  afternoon  of  the  5th  the  32-pounder  on  the  sea  face 
was  rendered  partly  unserviceable  by  a shot^  striking  the  elevating 
screw. 

I write  this  report  when  in  a state  of  much  exhaustion,  being  com- 
pelled to  return  to  duty  at  once  on  Sullivan’s  Island,  and  I hope  the 
colonel  commanding  will  excuse  it. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

T.  A.  HUGUENIN, 
Captain,  and  Chief  of  Artillery. 

Maj.  Henry  Bryan, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  44. 

Report  of  Maj.  James  H.  Rion,  Seventh  South  Carolina  Battalion. 

Battery  Wagner, 
Morris  Island,  July  15,  1863. 

Captain  : In  pursuance  of  orders  from  Brigadier-General  Taliaferro, 
commanding  Morris  Island,  I advanced  last  night  about  12  p.  m. 
upon  the  enemy’s  line  upon  this  island,  having  with  me  150  men  from 
the  Fifty-first  North  Carolina  Volunteers,  Twelfth  Georgia  Battalion, 
Eighteenth  Georgia  Battalion,  Twentieth  South  Carolina  Volunteers, 
and  Seventh  Sputh  Carolina  Battalion.  When  the  line  of  skirmish- 
ers arrived  within  150  yards  of  the  boat-house  (three-quarters  of  a 
mile  distant),  the  advanced  picket  of  the  enemy  fired  upon  them. 
This  advanced  picket  was  at  once  driven  in?  and,  upon  my  right  wing 


542  S.  C.  A ND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 


[Chap.  XL. 


advancing  rapidly  , it  was  fired  into  by  men  in  a rifle-trench,  extending 
across  the  island,  at  the  boat-house,  just  on  this  side  of  the  grave 
yard.  This  is  three-quarters  of  a mile  from  this  battery.  We  re- 
turned the  fire  from  both  wings  (the  left  50  yards  in  rear  of  right 
en  echelon),  and  advanced  upon  the  trench,  when  the  enemy  re- 
treated out  of  it.  When  the  right  was  within  10  or  15  yards  of  the 
trench,  a very  heavy  fire  from  about  1,000  men  was  opened  upon 
us  from  a line  some  100  yards  in  rear  of  the  trench. 

After  examining  the  trench  (a  very  strong  rifle-pit  extending  from 
the  beach  to  the  marsh,  250  yards),  and  finding  that  the  line  would 
not  advance  in  face  of  the  fire,  which  illuminated  all  the  ground  in 
front  and  was  very  heavy,  I withdrew  the  line,  bringing  off  the 
wounded  we  found  and  one  of  the  enemy’s  advanced  pickets,  whom 
we  had  captured.  Afterward  we  took  another  prisoner,  whom  I 
had  sent  through  my  lines  when  advancing  against  the  rifle-trencli. 

Light  pieces  (about  12-pounders)  were  fired  from  Vinegar  Hill, 
some  300  yards  in  rear  of  the  rifle-trench,  and  a very  heavy  gun  was 
fired  from  Gregg’s  Hill,  about  2 miles  from  this  battery. 

Upon  finding  that  some  men  were  missing,  I returned  with  my 
command  toward  the  enemy’s  position,  and  brought  to  the  rear 
some  more  wounded  without  being  fired  upon  from  the  rifle-trench. 
Upon  learning  that  one  of  the  Seventh  South  Carolina  Battalion  was 
subsequently  discovered  to  be  missing,  I again  returned,  with  20  men 
from  that  battalion,  and  found  the  wounded  man  near  the  trench,  and 
brought  him  off  without  receiving  a shot  from  the  rifle-trench,  which 
evidently  had  been  abandoned. 

Our  loss  was  11  wounded  (1  since  dead)  and  3 missing.  Of  the 
wounded,  1 was  mortal,  2 severe,  and  8 slight. 

The  enemy’s  loss  in  killed  and  wounded,  judging  from  the  bodies 
I saw  in  the  trench,  must  have  been  as  many  as  40.  We  also  took, 
as  ordered  by  the  brigadier-general  commanding,  2 prisoners. 

This  report  is  very  hurried,  and  consequently  disconnected.  You 
will  please,  however,  submit  it  for  the  consideration  of  the  brigadier- 
general  commanding. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JAMES  H.  RION, 

Major  7th  South  Carolina  Batt.,  Comdg.  Attacking  Party. 

Captain  [W.  E.]  S t one  y, 

Assistant  Adjutant - General. 


Table  of  our  loss. 


Wounded. 

51st  North  Carolina  Regiment 3 

12th  Georgia  Battalion 5 

18th  Georgia  Battalion 1 

20th  South  Carolina  Regiment *1 

7th  South  Carolina  Battalion 1 


Missing. 

3 


Total 


11  3 


[Indorsement.] 

Headquarters  Morris  Island,  July  15,  1863. 
Respectfully  forwarded  for  the  information  of  the  brigadier-gen- 
eral commanding  district,  with  the  remark  that  I ordered  this  party 


* Since  dead. 


Chap.  XL.] 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 


543 


out  to  discover  the  position  of  the  enemy,  and  for  that  object  to  push 
as  far  as  was  safe.  There  was  a picket  support  of  150  men  in  rear, 
and  rifle-pits  had  been  constructed  200  yards  in  advance  of  the  fort, 
making  the  experiment  perfectly  safe.  I think  the  loss  of  the  enemy 
perhaps  greater  than  stated  by  Major  Rion,  as  a very  heavy  volley 
was  fired  upon  the  retiring  Abolitionists  by  a large  force  of  their  own 
men.  The  prisoners  represent  that  a number  of  guns  and  some  three 
mortars  have  been  placed  in  position  near  Gregg’s  H ill ; that  they 
commenced  moving  the  guns  on  Friday  last.  No  intelligence  could 
be  obtained  of  the  strength  of  the  enemy.  The  very  large  picket 
force  indicates  that  they  had  been  looking  for  an  attack. 

WM.  B.  TALIAFERRO, 

Brigadier-  General. 


adpenda. 

Headquarters  Outposts  Sullivan’s  Island, 

^ September  27,  1863. 

Captain  : In  reply  to  circular  from  headquarters  First  Military 
District,  I have  the  honor  to  state  that  Colonel  Nelson’s  Seventh 
Battalion  South  Carolina  Volunteers  is  the  only  portion  of  this  com- 
mand which  was  at  Battery  Wagner.  Their  ’ colors  were  captured 
by  the  enemy  in  the  assault  of  the  10th  of  July,  near  the  south  end 
of  the  island,  and  before  they  had  fallen  back  to  Wagner,  but  were 
not  left  in  that  work. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

R.  H.  ANDERSON, 
Colonel , Commanding. 

Captain  [Edward]  White, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


i 


No.  45. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  P.  C.  Gaillard , Charleston  Battalion. 

Charleston,  S.  C.,  July  20,  1863. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  under  orders  from  dis- 
trict headquarters,  I reported  for  duty  at  Battery  Wagner  on  Wednes- 
day evening,  the  15th  instant,  with  five  companies  of  my  battalion. 
I have  no  remarks  to  make  upon  any  of  the  occurrences  of  the  gar- 
rison, so  far  as  my  command  is  concerned,  until  Saturday,  the  18th. 

On  that  day  the  enemy  commenced  between  7 and  8 a.  m.  a heavy 
bombardment  from  their  fleet  in  the  channel  and  from  the  land  bat- 
teries erected  by  them  across  Morris  Island.  The  bombardment  was 
kept  up  unremittingly  until  between  7 and  8 p.  m.  It  may  be  proper 
here  to  state  that  for  two  or  three  hours  in  the  afternoon  it  was  most 
furious  in  its  character.  My  command  was  exposed  to  its  fury  the 
whole  day,  never  having  left  its  position,  and  it  is  with  pride  I say 
it  was  not  demoralized  in  consequence  of  its  exposure.  Soon  after 
dusk,  a violent  assault  was  made  upon  the  garrison  by  a strong  force 
of  infantry,  which  was  repulsed  by  the  garrison.  Two  of  my  com- 
panies (A  and  B)  had  been  detached  from  my  command  and  posted 
outside  the  garrison  near  the  sally-port  at  the  northeast  portion  of 


544  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  ah. 

the  works.  Of  the  operations  of  these  two  companies  I cannot  speak, 
as  I was  posted  at  the  southwest  portion  of  the  work  and  remote  from 
their  position. 

I herewith  submit  report*  from  Captain  Blake,  who  commanded. 
The  three  companies  (C,  D,  and  F)  under  my  immediate  command 
met  the  infantry  assault  with  great  coolness  and  deliberation.  This 
assault  was  repulsed  in  a short  time,  when  I directed  my  men  to 
cease  firing ; nor  was  it  requisite  to  open  fire  with  them  again.  Soon 
after  I had  ceased  firing,  Brigadier-General  Taliaferro  in  person 
called  upon  me  for  a portion  of  my  command  to  occupy  one  of  the 
batteries  on  the  sea  face,  which  was  then  occupied  by  the  enemy. 
Major  [David]  Ramsay  was  leading  this  detachment,  when  it  was 
fired  into,  as  is  supposed,  by  some  of  our  own  troops,  wounding  the 
major  and  several  others  and  killing  2. 

My  officers  and  men  behaved  with  admirable  coolness  throughout 
the  whole  affair,  and  it  is  impossible  to  particularize  when  all  behaved 
well.  I cannot  omit,  however,  to  mention  the  gallant  bearing  of 
Capt.  W.  H.  Ryan,  of  Company  C,  who  fell  while  leading  a charge 
upon  the  battery  occupied  by  the  enemy. 

I would  also  state  that  Sergeant  [William]  Shelton,  of  Company 
C,  and  Private  John  Flynn,  of  Company  F,  tied  the  garrison  flag  to 
a temporary  staff  and  set  it  up  on  the  parapet,  when  the  flag  fell  from 
the  cutting  of  the  halyards,  and  this,  too,  under  a severe  fire. 

I would  also  mention  the  conduct  of  Private  [A.]  Gilliland,  of 
Company  D,  who,  at  a later  hour  and  under  a severe  fire,  set  up  a 
battle-flag  which  had  been  raised  upon  the  parapet  when  the  flag  fell, 
and  which  was  thrown  down  by  the  explosion  of  a shell  in  its  vicinity. 

Inclosed  I submit  a list  of  casualties,  f 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

P.  C.  GAILLARD, 
Lieutenant- Colonel,  Commanding. 

Captain  [W.  T.]  Taliaferro, 

Assistant  Adjutant-General. 


No.  46. 

Report  of  Capt.  Julius  A.  Blake,  Charleston  Battalion. 

Charleston,  July  20,  1863. 

Colonel  : At  your  request,  I have  the  honor  to  report  the  part 
taken  by  Companies  A and  B,  of  your  battalion,  in  the  action  of  the 
18th  instant  at  Battery  Wagner. 

The  position  assigned  us,  as  you  are  aware,  was  outside  the  fort, 
and  to  guard  the  left  gorge  and  sally-port.  Here  we  remained  dur- 
ing the  early  part  of  the  engagement  and  until  one  of  the  monitors 
passed  so  far  up  the  channel  as  to  enfilade  our  position,  killing  1 man 
in  Company  B and  striking  several  slightly  in  both  companies.  I 
then  received  an  order  to  allow  the  men  to  seek  the  best  protection 
they  could  find.  Some  sought  it  in  the  bomb-proofs,  others  with 
myself  under  the  left  curtain  of  the  fort.  Our  first  position  was 
soon  after  completely  torn  up  by  shell,  &c.  Upon  the  approach  of 


*See  No.  46,  following. 


fSee  p.  406. 


Chap.  XL.] 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 


545 


the  enemy’s  infantry,  Company  B,  Lieutenant  [A.  H.]  Masterman 
commanding  (Captain  [Thomas  Y.]  Simons  being  officer  of  the  day, 
and  Lieutenant  [William]  Clarkson  wounded),  and  my  own  com- 
pany (A),  formed  at  the  parapet  of  the  left  curtain  to  support  the 
howitzers  and  defend  that  flank,  where  we  remained  during  the  en- 
tire infantry  engagement.  Our  position  was  a very  advantageous 
one,  enabling  us  to  enfilade  the  ditch  and  parapet  of  the  work  proper, 
as  well  as  to  fire  upon  the  column  advancing  upon  the  beach.  The 
right  attacking  column  was,  I think,  by  our  fire  and  that  of  the 
splendidly-served  howitzers,  under  Lieutenant  [T.  D.]  Waties,  First 
South  Carolina  Artillery  (regulars)  (after  his  wound  under  Captain 
De  Pass),  made  to  oblique  to  their  left  and  toward  your  position,  sub- 
jecting them  to  a severe  cross-fire,  causing  their  subsequent  retreat. 

Without  particularizing,  I take  pride  and  pleasure  in  reporting 
that  the  officers  and  men  under  my  command  fought  with  great 
spirit  and  energy  and  did  their  duty  well.  The  list  of  casualties  has 
already  been  furnished. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

JULIUS  A.  BLAKE, 
Captain  Company  A,  Charleston  Battalion. 

Lieut.  Col.  P.  C.  Gaillard, 

Commanding  Charleston  Battalion. 

P.  S.— Late  in  the  engagement  I was  re-enforced  by  one  of  the  com- 
panies of  the  North  Carolina  regiments. 


No.  47. 

Reports  of  Capt.  Robert  Pringle , Lucas>  Artillery  Battalion. 

Battery  Wagner, 
Morris  Island,  August  18,  1863. 

Major  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  none  of  the  guns  upon 
the  land  face  have  been  injured  to-day,  excepting  one  of  the  smooth- 
bore 32-pounders.  A fragment  of  shell  struck  the  carriage  just 
below  the  trunnion  plate,  going  entirely  through  the  cheek,  thereby 
materially  weakening  the  carriage,  but  not  otherwise  damaging  the 
piece.  „ 

At  9 o’clock  this  morning,  after  firing  about  20  shots  from  the 
rifled  32-pounder  at  one  of  the  monitors,  this  gun  was  struck  by  a 
15-inch  shell  from  a monitor  that  had  got  in  an  enfilading  position 
just  on  the  left  trunnion,  and  was  dismounted,  the  trunnion  being 
broken  off,  and  the  carriage  completely  disabled.  The  chassis  was 
uninjured.  The  right  10-inch  columbiad  is  in  fighting  condition, 
and  was  worked  with  effect  against  the  monitors  this  morning. 

The  left  10-inch  columbiad  is  still  disabled  and  unfit  for  use,  no 
chassis  having  arrived  to  replace  the  one  disabled  yesterday. 

I am,  major,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

ROBERT  PRINGLE, 
Captain,  and  Chief  of  Artillery, 

Major  Bryan, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

35  R R — VOL  XXVIII,  FT  I 


546  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 


[Chap.  XL. 


Battery  Wagner, 
Morris  Island , August  19,  1863. 

Major  : Pursuant  to  instructions  received  from  you,  I proceeded 
to  Battery  Gregg,  and  have  the  honor  to  report  that  when  I arrived 
Lieutenant  Pringle  was  firing  on  the  enemy’s  batteries  that  play 
upon  Fort  Sumter,  with  very  indifferent  success,  as  his  fuses  were 
imperfect  and  only  7 inches  in  length.  I ordered  him  to  train  his 
9-inch  gun  on  the  battery  now  being  erected  by  the  enemy  in  the 
marsh  between  the  wreck  of  the  steamer  Manigault  and  Black 
Island,  but  before  the  order  was  executed  a Parrott  shell  (100- 
pounder)  entered  the  chamber  of  this  gun  and  went  into  the  bomb- 
proof. Lieutenant  Pringle  tells  me  that  this  is  the  second  time  that 
the  same  thing  occurred.  The  effect  of  this  shot  was  most  serious 
to  the  bomb-proof,  breaking  a heavy  piece  of  timber  and  making  a 
large  hole. 

Believing  that  firing  on  the  Marsh  Battery  would  only  draw  a 
fire  on  the  front,  I deemed  it  prudent,  in  the  condition  of  the  bomb- 
proof, to  countermand  the  order.  From  the  position  of  this  bat- 
tery, the  9 -inch  gun  would  be  exposed  to  an  enfilade  fire  from  the 
enemy’s  land  batteries,  mounting  30-pounder  Parrott  guns.  Lieu- 
tenant Pringle  reports  that  for  every  gun  he  fired  the  enemy  replied 
with  six  or  eight  with  great  accuracy.  In  addition,  the  engineer 
reported  that  if  the  fire  of  the  enemy  was  drawn  upon  the  battery, 
the  bomb-proof — the  only  protection  to  the  men  not  engaged  in 
working  the  guns — would  be  destroyed,  thus  cutting  off  communi- 
cation between  the  9-inch  gun  and  the  magazine.  I therefore  or- 
dered all  firing  to  cease.  With  reference  to  the  effect  of  Battery 
Gregg’s  fire  upon  the  batteries  which  play  upon  Fort  Sumter,  Lieu- 
tenant Pringle  thinks  it  doubtful  if  he  could  do  them  much  damage, 
as  he  will  be  forced  to  fire  slowly  on  account  of  the  concentrated  fire 
of  the  enemy,  before  alluded  to,  whenever  he  opens.  In  my  opinion, 
if  the  9 -inch  gun  was  placed  in  embrasure  it  might  be  used  with 
much  more  effect  on  these  batteries,  and,  in  addition,  would  act  as  a 
protection  to  the  mouth  of  the  bomb-proof.  The  only  disadvantage 
from  this  arrangement  would  be  cutting  off  the  field  of  fire  from  the 
sea ; but,  as  a 9-inch  gun  is  not  very  efficient  for  solid  shot,  I do  not 
deem  the  disadvantage  sufficiently  great  to  counteract  the  advantage 
gained  against  the  enemy’s  battery. 

The  ammunition  at  the  post  is  very  short,  there  being  only  20  10- 
inch  shell  for  two  guns  and  15  for  the  9-inch.  I beg  to  call  your 
attention  to  the  fact  that  the  present  transom  of  the  10-inch  colum- 
biad,  on  the  left,  bearing  on  the  land,  on  Monday  was  very  much 
injured  by  a Parrott  shot.  I consider  the  carriage  so  much  weak- 
ened that  it  will  cause  the  dismounting  of  the  gun  after  a few  rapid 
discharges.  I would  respectfully  recommend  a requisition  being 
made  for  a new  carriage. 

I would  further  suggest  that  a consultation  be  had  by  the  engineer 
of  Battery  Gregg  and  the  chief  engineer  of  the  island  as  to  the  most 
expedient  manner  of  repairing  damage  to  the  bomb-proof  and  avoid- 
ing a recurrence  of  the  same. 

Respectfully  submitted. 

ROBERT  PRINGLE, 

Captain,  and  Chief  of  Artillery. 

Major  Bryan, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Chap.  XL.]  OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C.  547 

[Indorsements.] 

Respectfully  referred  to  Captain  Gregorie,  engineer  in  charge,  for 
his  views. 

By  order  of  Colonel  Keitt : 

HENRY  BRYAN, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

After  an  inspection  of  Battery  Gregg  this  afternoon,  I agree  with 
Captain  Pringle’s  suggestions,  and  have  ordered  the  9-inch  gun  to 
be  placed  in  embrasure  relative  to  the  enemy’s  land  batteries  on 
Morris  Island,  and  have  ordered  the  bomb-proof  to  be  repaired  to- 
night in  the  best  way  possible,  but  consider  it  an  insecure  place  under 
any  circumstances. 

J.  W.  GREGORIE, 

Chief  Engineer. 

Battery  Wagner, 
Morris  Island , August  20,  1863. 

Major  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  it  being  observed  that  the 
enemy  were  this  morning  advancing  their  works  beyond  the  stock- 
ade by  means  of  a sap-roller,  so  that  their  working  parties  were  pro- 
tected from  the  fire  of  our  sharpshooters,  pursuant  to  orders  from 
the  commanding  officer,  I ordered  Captain  Gregg,  of  the  siege  train, 
to  open  fire  with  his  8-inch  siege  howitzer,  this  being  the  only  piece 
that  could  be  brought  to  bear  upon  it.  He  did  so,  and  fired  5 shells, 
improving  in  accuracy  with  each  shot.  I also  ordered  Lieutenant 
Colhoun,  commanding  Company  B,  Lucas’  battalion,  artillery,  to 
open  with  his  8-inch  shell  gun  and  32-pounder  smooth-bore,  in  po- 
sition on  the  land  face.  I did  this  not  so  much  with  the  hope  of 
damaging  their  works  as  to  create  a diversion  in  favor  of  the  8-inch 
siege  howitzer,  upon  which  the  enemy  were  directing  a very  severe 
fire  from  their  sharpshooters  and  land  batteries.  In  less  than  thirty 
minutes  after  I opened  fire,  the  Ironsides  came  into  position,  and 
opened  an  enfilade  fire  upon  the  guns  engaged.  My  guns  being  now 
subjected  to  a very  severe  fire  and  in  great  danger  of  being  dismounted, 
I deemed  it  prudent  to  cease  firing  and  to  close  my  embrasures, 
which  I did  at  twenty  minutes  of  2 p.  m. 

I regret  to  state  that  Private  [David]  Cain,  of  Captain  Gregg’s 
company,  was  slightly  wounded,  and  Sergeant  [Robert  C.]  Rogers, 
of  the  same  company,  severely  wounded  by  the  enemy’s  sharp- 
shooters, and  Corporal  [James]  McKin,  of  Company  B,  Lucas’  bat- 
talion, artillery,  slightly  wounded  by  a fragment  of  11 -inch  shell. 
No  other  casualties. 

ROBERT  PRINGLE, 

Captain , and  Chief  of  Artillery . 

Maj.  Henry  Bryan, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

[Indorsement.] 

Headquarters  Battery  Wagner,  August  20,  1863. 

Respectfully  forwarded,  with  the  remark  that  the  firing  proved 
only  temporary  check  to  the  enemy’s  operations,  but  seemed  to  be  a 
useful  diversion  in  favor  of  Fort  Sumter. 

LAWRENCE  M.  KEITT, 

Colonel , Commanding. 


[Chap.  XL. 


548  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

No.  48. 

Reports  of  Lieut.  R.  C.  Gilchrist , Lucas'  Artillery  Battalion. 

Battery  Gregg,  August  22,  1863. 

Major  : I would  respectfully  report  that  I opened  fire  with  the 
Dahlgren  and  one  of  the  10-inch  columbiads  on  one  of  the  monitors 
opposite  Battery  Wagner  this  morning.  There  were  two  monitors, 
and  the  fire  was  concentrated  on  the  one  nearest  to  this  battery.  The 
Dahlgren  fired  3 shots  and  the  columbiad  6.  The  monitor  was  struck 
at  least  once.  As  they  moved  beyond  range,  after  the  ninth  shot 
the  firing  ceased.  This  afternoon,  the  Dahlgren  fired  1 shot  at  the 
nearest  stockade,  to  get  the  range.  The  land  batteries  then  imme- 
diately opened  fire  on  this  battery,  but  without  effect. 

I also  respectfully  report  a 12-pounder  brass  field  howitzer,  with 
its  carriage,  disabled  and  the  gun  useless,  and  would  recommend  that 
another  be  immediately  procured,  as  the  gun  is  too  valuable  to  this 
battery  to  remain  dismounted. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

R.  C.  GILCHRIST, 

Lieutenant , Commanding  Battery. 

Maj.  F.  F.  Warley, 

Commanding  Artillery,  Morris  Island . 


Battery  Gregg,  August  23,  1863. 

Captain  : I have  nothing  to  report. 

The  day  has  been  quiet  at  this  post.  The  engineer  endeavored  to 
improve  the  time  by  repairing  the  damages  done  the  battery,  and  in 
building  a traverse  to  the  left  of  the  Dahlgren  gun,  but  the  fatigue 
party  was  withdrawn  at  an  early  hour  and  the  work  was  suspended. 

I would  respectfully  request  that  a good  detail  be  furnished  this 
battery  so  as  to  complete  the  said  traverse  and  repair  the  bomb- 
proof, which  are  absolutely  necessary  to  the  safety  of  the  post. 

Respectfully  reported. 

R.  C.  GILCHRIST, 

Lieutenant,  Commanding  Battery. 

Capt.  P.  K.  Molony, 

Morris  Island. 


Battery  Gregg,  August  24,  1863. 

Captain  : I would  respectfully  report  that  four  monitors  appeared 
off  this  point  this  morning  at  3 o’clock.  Thejr  opened  on  Sumter  and 
were  replied  to  by  that  fort,  as  the  guns  of  this  battery  were  difficult 
to  trail,  and  as  I had  nothing  but  the  flash  of  their  guns  to  indicate 
the  position  of  the  monitors,  I concluded  it  was  best  not  to  fire  until 
I had  light  sufficient  to  render  my  aim  exact;  at  day  dawn  I opened 
on  them  and  fired  whenever  the  fog  permitted  me  to  see  them. 

Four  shots  were  fired  from  one  of  the  10-inch  columbiads. 

Later  in  the  day,  when  the  Ironsides  opened  on  Battery  Wagner, 
I returned  her  fire  with  9 shots  from  the  same  columbiad,  3 of 


Chap.  XL.]  • 


operations  on  morris  island,  s.  c. 


549 


them  with  considerable  precision,  1 of  which  cut  away  from  her  a 
small  four-oared  boat,  which  I afterward  secured  as  it  was  floating 
past  this  post.  Several  shots  were  fired  at  this  battery  by  the  land 
batteries  of  the  enemy,  but  without  effect;  one  columbiad  carriage 
is  so  much  injured  that  I will  not  fire  that  gun  unless  in  cases  of  ex- 
treme necessity. 

Respectfully  reported. 

1 R.  C.  GILCHRIST, 

Lieutenant , Commanding  Battery . 

Capt.  P.  K.  Molony, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  49. 

Report  of  Capt.  W.  L.  De  Pass,  Palmetto  Artillery  Battalion . 

Battery  Wagner, 
Morris  Island,  July  19,  1863. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  report,  in  pursuance  of  your  re- 
quest, the  action  of  my  command  in  the  repulse  of  the  enemy  in 
their  assault  upon  the  works  of  Battery  Wagner  made  in  the  even- 
ing of  the  18th  ultimo  [instant]  : 

One  section  howitzers  (12-pounders),  of  Captain  [F.  D.]  Blake’s 
company,  First  Regiment  South  Carolina  Artillery,  under  the  charge 
of  Lieutenant  [T.  D.]  Waties,  and  one  section  howitzers  (12-pounders), 
of  Captain  De  Pass’  company,  of  Palmetto  Battalion  Light  Artillery, 
constituted  my  command  at  the  time  of  attack.  The  section  under 
charge  of  Lieutenant  Waties  occupied  the  left  of  the  works  of  Bat- 
tery Wagner.  The  other  section,  under  charge  of  Sergeant  [J.  F.] 
Holland,  was  assigned  to  the  position  on  the  beach  upon  the  right 
and  left  of  Battery  Gregg,  to  guard  the  approaches  to  any  barges  of 
troops  of  the  enemy  which  may  have  attempted  to  land  at  the  points 
designated  during  the  night.  The  section  under  Lieutenant  Waties 
opened  fire  upon  the  assaulting  columns  as  soon  as  they  came  within 
effective  range,  the  fire  of  the  left  piece  being  directed  by  him  and 
the  lire  of  the  right  piece  by  myself.  The  fire  was  kept  up  with 
rapidity  and  precision,  and  soon  told  with  evident  effect  upon  the 
advancing  foe.  They  wavered  and  were  driven  back  with  consider- 
able confusion ; however,  they  again  rallied  and  made  a second 
charge  upon  our  left,  gaining  ground  much  in  advance  of  their  first 
attempt.  The  pieces  were  then  well  charged  with  canister,  and  did 

freat  execution  in  their  ranks,  again  driving  the  enemy  back  in  a 
isorderly,  scattering  manner.  The  third  advance,  supported  strongly 
by  their  reserves  (judging  by  their  increased  numbers),  was  directed 
principally  to  storming  the  heights  of  the  magazine  considerably 
to  the  right  of  our  position.  The  fire  of  the  pieces  was  immediately 
directed  to  rake  the  ditch  and  its  approaches  in  the  front  of  the 
magazine.  This  told  with  great  slaughter,  which,  together  with 
the  infantry  supports  and  a cross-fire  from  pieces  of  heavy  artillery 
to  the  right  of  our  position,  drove  back  the  enemy  entirely  from 
that  portion  of  the  works,  excepting  those  that  gained  the  parapet  of 
the  magazine,  the  dislodgment  of  whom  was  effected  by  others. 

The  pieces  were  manned  at  the  commencement  of  the  attack  by  the 
cannoneers  of  Captain  Blake’s  company,  but  with  diminished  num- 
bers. Their  rapid  depletion  by  wounds  and  deaths  made  it  necessary 


550 


S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 


tCHAP.  XL. 


to  supply  their  places  with  the  detachments  of  Captain  Be  Pass’ 
company,  under  charge  of  Sergeant  Holland,  who  was  ordered  from 
his  position  with  his  detachments.  This  order  was  promptly  obeyed; 
the  piece  was  assigned  to  Sergeant  Holland  (Lieutenant  Waties 
having  been  wounded  in  the  early  part  of  the  engagement),  and  the 
posts  of  disabled  cannoneers  were  quickly  supplied  by  the  detach- 
ments of  his  section. 

Special  commendation  is  due  to  Lieutenant  Waties  (who  was 
wounded  in  the  early  part  of  the  engagement  and  compelled  to  retire) 
for  his  gallant  bearing,  cool  and  deliberate  judgment,  more  espe- 
cially manifested  in  the  decided  effect  of  his  fire  upon  the  enemy. 

The  captain  commanding  the  light  artillery  takes  much  pleasure 
in  speaking  of  the  active  assistance  and  energy  rendered  him  by 
Sergeant  Holland,  who,  by  his  example  during  the  attack,  infused 
spirit  and  energy  into  the  men  under  him. 

Sergeant  [William]  Ingerton,  of  the  regulars,  remained  at  his 
piece  from  the  commencement  to  the  end  of  the  attack,  and  to  his 
coolness  and  capacity  are  due  to  a considerable  extent  the  accuracy 
of  the  fire  of  his  piece. 

Corporals  [W.  J.]  Campbell  and  [Michael]  Hines  (the  former  of 
Captain  He  Pass’  company,  the  latter  of  Captain  Blake’s  company) 
remained  at  their  pieces  until  death  and  the  end  of  the  engagement 
relieved  them. 

It  would  be  invidious  to  speak  of  a few  when  all  behaved  with 
spirit  and  courage,  in  relation  to  the  cannoneers  generally.  With 
promptness  and  dispatch  they  obeyed  orders,  and  ceased  only  to  work 
at  their  pieces  when  the  engagement  ended. 

The  casualties  in  Captain  Blake’s  detachments  were  5 killed  and 
wounded.  In  Captain  He  Pass’  detachment,  2 killed  and  wounded. 
Total,  7 killed  and  wounded. 

Very  respectfully, 

W.  L.  HE  PASS, 

Captain,  Commanding  Light  Artillery,  Battery  Wagner. 

General  [William  B.]  Taliaferro, 

Commanding  Forces  on  Morris  Island. 


No.  50. 

Reports  of  Col.  Charles  H.  Olmstead,  First  Volunteers,  Georgia 
Infantry,  commanding  at  Fort  Johnson,  James  Island  J 

August  13. — The  water  picket  returned  about  1 o’clock,  with  the 
intelligence  that  the  enemy  had  been  discovered  at  Marsh  Battery 
(though  there  was  no  sign  of  a working  party).  Captain  Mitchel 
immediately  opened  on  that  point,  but  with  what  effect  is  unknown. 
From  the  observatory,  no  change  can  be  noted  in  the  position  of  af- 
fairs on  Morris  Island.  The  detachment  of  sharpshooters  from  the 
Twenty-first  South  Carolina  Regiment  went  over  to  Fort  Wagner  as 
ordered. 

August  14. — Nothing  special  to  report  this  morning. 

August  15. — Our  water  picket  went  last  night  quite  near  to  the 
Marsh  Battery,  and  remained  there  some  time,  but  discovered  noth- 

* Extracts  from  daily  reports  made  to  Capt.  William  F.  Nance,  assistant  adjutant- 
general,  August  13-September  3. 


Chap.  XL.]  OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C.  551 

ing.  The  lieutenant  in  command  of  Mathewes’  artillery  reports  no 
casualties  during  recent  tour  on  Morris  Island. 

August  16. — The  officer  in  charge  of  the  water  picket  last  night 
reports  that  he  landed  at  the  Marsh  Battery  in  person,  hut  discov- 
ered no  signs  of  the  enemy. 

August  17. — The  Twelfth  and  Eighteenth  Georgia  Battalions  re- 
lieved from  duty  on  Morris  Island  last  night ; the  First  Volunteers, 
Georgia,  detained  there  by  Colonel  Keitt.  The  Twenty-first  South 
Carolina  went  to  Morris  Island,  as  directed,  leaving  behind  4 officers 
and  40  men,  as  permanent  boat  picket. 

August  18. — Lieutenant-Colonel  Yates  reports  firing  all  day  at  Bat- 
tery Cheves ; he  thinks  with  considerable  annoyance  to  the  enemy. 
Three  of  the  guns  mounted  on  ship’s  carriages  were  dismounted  by 
their  own  recoil  yesterday,  and  the  fourth  this  morning. 

August  19. — The  weather  was  so  boisterous  last  night  that  I con- 
sidered it  too  dangerous  to  send  out  the  water  picket.  • The  new  bat- 
teries near  Martello  Tower  and  work  on  Fort  Johnson  are  progress- 
ing rapidly.  The  movement  of  troops  ordered  was  not  carried  into 
effect. 

August  20. — The  movement  of  troops  ordered  was  carried  into  ef- 
fect. List  of  casualties  in  the  First  Volunteers,  Georgia  Regiment, 
relieved  last  night : 

One  man  killed  and  1 wounded  August  12 ; 1 man  wounded  Au- 
gust 15  ; 1 man  killed  and  1 wounded  August  17 ; 1 man  killed  Au- 
gust 19. 

August  21. — Yesterday  passed  off  very  quietly. 

August  22. — My  pickets  report  nothing  this  morning  except  open- 
ing of  the  enemy’s  new  battery  in  the  marsh. 

August  23. — Yesterday  the  enemy  opened  on  this  post  from  one 
of  his  heavy  batteries  on  Morris  Island,  wounding  3 men  of  the 
Twenty-first  South  Carolina.  I have  moved  the  infantry  back  some 
little  distance  from  the  edge  of  the  woods,  so  as  to  get  them  out  of 
the  line  of  fire. 

August  24. — [Report  not  found.] 

August  25. — The  enemy  at  work  on  a battery  in  the  marsh,  appar- 
ently southeast  of  the  first  one. 

7.40  p.  m. — The  enemy  are' assaulting  Battery  Wagner,  evidently 
in  heavy  force. 

August  26. — [Report  not  found.] 

August  27,  3.30  p.  m. — Nothing  of  importance  to  communicate 
this  morning.  All  of  our  batteries  were  brought  to  bear  on  the 
works  in  front  of  Wagner  last  night,  between  6 and  7 o’clock,  firing 
heavy  for  half  an  hour. 

August  28. — The  day  passed  quietly.  Captain  Chichester’s  com- 
pany of  artillery  returned  from  Morris  Island  during  the  night. 

August  29. — The  day  passed  very  quietly. 

August  30. — The  enemy’s  works  between  Battery  Wagner  and  the 
rifle-pits  can  be  plainly  seen  from  the  observatory.  An  unfortunate 
accident  occurred  at  the  wharf  yesterday,  by  which  5 seamen  of  the 
Chicora  were  drowned.  The  submarine  torpedo-boat  became  en- 
tangled in  some  way  with  ropes,  was  drawn  on  its  side,  filled,  and 
went  down.  The  bodies  have  not  yet  been  recovered. 

August  31. — The  movement  of  troops  ordered  was  carried  into 
effect,  so  far  as  concerned  those  going  from  here  to  Morris  Island. 
On  the  return  trip,  the  steamer  [Sumter]  was  fired  into  from  Fort 
Moultrie,  grounded,  and  the  troops  had  to  be  taken  off  in  small 


[Chap.  XL. 


552  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  PL  A. 

boats.  Some  few  waded  ashore  to  this  place,  hut  the  bulk  of  them 
were  carried  to  the  other  side  of  the  bay.  The  torpedo-boat  sunk 
near  the  wharf ; is  not  yet  raised. 

September  1. — The  day  passed  quietly  at  this  post. 

11.30  p.  m. — Six  monitors  are  advancing,  Fort  Moultrie  firing 
briskly  upon  them. 

September  2. — Nothing  of  importance  to  report  this  morning.  The 
Twenty-fifth  South  Carolina  started  for  Morris  Island  last  night, 
but,  after  landing  about  two  companies,  the  approach  of  the  moni- 
tors compelled  the  steamer  to  return  with  the  remainder  of  the  regi- 
ment. The  garrison  was  under  arms  all  night. 

September  3. — The  enemy  threw  a few  shells  at  this  point  yester- 
day afternoon,  without  injuring  any  one. 


No.  51. 

Report  of  Mag.  Edward  Manigaidt,  C.  S.  Artillery , commanding 
Artillery  at  Legare’s  Point , James  Island. 

Headquarters  Legare’s  Point, 

James  Island,  July  26,  1863. 

Captain  : I beg  leave  to  call  the  attention  of  the  proper  authorities 
to  the  character  and  condition  of  the  work  constructed  at  Legare’s 
Point. 

These  fortifications  were  commenced  with  the  sole  view  of  defense 
against  an  attack  in  barges  from  the  direction  of  Black  Island,  or 
against  batteries  which  might  be  erected  on  that  island.  They  con- 
sist of  short  sections  or  portions  of  a parapet,  each  one  long  enough 
to  cover  a gun  from  fire  in  front,  thick  enough  to  resist  cannon  shot, 
and  of  a height  such  that  guns  mounted  on  siege-carriages  might  fire 
en  barbette  over  them.  These  short  parapets  were  disposed,  at  inter- 
vals of  35  to  40  yards,  on  a slightly  curved  line  corresponding  with 
the  indentation  of  the  shore.  Behind  each  of  these  short  parapets,  a 
platform  was  laid  for  a gun.  A simple  breastwork  for  riflemen  con- 
nected these  parapets  together. 

The  platforms  were  laid,  against  my  advice,  with  an  inclination 
toward  Black  Island  equal  to  that  which  is  usually  adopted  with 
siege  platforms,  where  the  guns  are  intended  to  fire  in  one  direction 
only.  The  result  of  this  mode  of  construction  is  that,  from  the  low- 
ness of  the  parapet,  the  absence  of  epaulements  or  flank  defenses,  the 
stringing  out  of  the  guns  on  a line  approximating  a straight  one,  the 
absence  of  merlons  and  traverses,  and  the  inclination  of  the  platforms, 
the  work  is  totally  unfit  for  either  bringing  a fire  to  bear  on,  or  sus- 
taining a fire  from,  any  other  point  but  one  nearly  in  the  direction  of 
Black  Island.  I do  not  hesitate  to  pronounce  it, in  its  present  condi- 
tion, totally  unfit  to  fire  on,  or  sustain  a fire  from,  Morris  Island. 

It  is  true  that  in  the  last  two  days  traverses  have  been  constructed, 
not  between  each  two  guns,  but  in  the  rear  of  the  space  between  two 
guns.  These  traverses  would  afford  no  protection  whatever  to  the 
guns  unless  they  were  withdrawn  entirely  from  the  platforms  and 
placed  behind  the  traverses,  in  which  position  they  would  be  of  no 
manner  of  use.  If  the  battery  is  to  be  of  any  use  against  Morris 
Island,  those  guns  which  have  sufficient  range  should  be  fired  through 
embrasures  of  splay  sufficient  to  give  a field  of  fire  corresponding  to 
the  distance  from  the  advanced  Yankee  batteries  on  Morris  Island 


Chap.  XL.] 


OPERATIONS  OK  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 


553 


(or  if  desired  from  Craig’s  Hill)  to  Battery  Wagner,  and  such  guns 
as  have  not  range  sufficient  had  better  be  shut  in  entirely  in  that 
direction  by  merlons  or  traverses. 

As  none  of  our  siege-carriages  are  constructed  to  admit  of  suffi- 
cient elevation  to  reach  Morris  Island  (distance,  2-£  miles),  when 
the  wheels  and  trail  are  upon  the  same  level,  it  would  be  well  to  dis- 
pense with  platforms  altogether  for  those  guns  intended  to  fire  on 
that  island;  and,  after  leveling,  packing,  and  ramming  the  platform 
space  well,  to  leave  it  to  the  artillerists  to  lay  planks  for  the  wheels 
to  rest  on,  while  the  trail  will  rest  upon  planks  in  the  bottom  of  a 
trench  dug  for  the  express  purpose  of  sinking  or  lowering  the  trail. 
This  plan  should  only  be  adopted  with  those  guns  intended  for  very 
long  range;  the  platforms  for  the  other  guns  might  remain  as  they 
are. 

Again,  if  the  battery  should  be  called  on  to  sustain  a fire  from 
Black  Island  from  a superior  number  and  caliber  of  guns,  the  small 
height  over  which  it  is  possible  to  fire  with  guns  mounted  on  siege- 
carriages  would  indicate  the  propriety  of  the  use  of  embrasures  in 
that  direction  also. 

With  the  exception  of  the  two  or  three  guns  which  might  be  put  in 
position  at  the  extreme  point  facing  Morris  Island,  there  should  be 
no  obstruction  to  each  gun’s  firing  to  the  right  over  the  parapet. 
With  most  of  the  guns,  this  would  be  in  the  direction  of  the  creeks 
and  marshes  toward  Secessionville. 

I beg  that  this  report  may  meet  with  immediate  attention. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

EDWARD  MANIGAULT, 

Major , Commanding  Post. 

Capt.  J.  M.  Carson, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  EoyaVs , James  Island. 


[Indorsements.] 

Headquarters  First  Military  District, 

Charleston,  July  27,  1803. 

Respectfully  forwarded  and  recommended  to  the  attention  of  the 
general  commanding  the  department. 

R.  S.  RIPLEY, 

Brigadier-  General,  Commanding. 

Hdqrs.  Department  of  South  Carolina,  &c., 

Charleston,  S.  C.,  August  4,  1863. 

Respectfully  referred  to  Lieutenant-Colonel  Harris  to  know  if  the 
objections  referred  to  by  Major  Manigault  have  been  remedied  where 
practicable. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General,  Commanding , 

Office  of  Chief  Engineer, 

Charleston,  August  6,  1863. 

Respectfully  returned. 

Battery  Haskell  has  been  prepared  for  two  guns  on  columbiad  car- 
riages and  six  siege  guns  in  embrasures,  to  fire  on  Morris  Island  from 
Graham’s  house  and  Battery  W agner,  inclusive.  One  gun  has  been 
arranged  to  fire  on  Morris  Island  and  the  approaches  to  Secession- 
ville, which  is  the  only  one  that  it  is  necessary  or  practicable  to  be 
made  to  bear  in  that  direction.  Orders  have  been  given  and  are 


554  S.  C.  AND  a A.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

now  being  executed  for  a similar  arrangement  in  Battery  Haskell 
for  eight  field  pieces. 

The  traverses  to  which  Major  Manigault  refers  were  constructed 
by  my  order  for  the  purpose  of  protecting  the  pieces  when  not  in 
position,  which  I considered  important  in  the  exposed  condition  of 
the  battery,  as  at  first  constructed  en  barbette. 

Battery  Ryan  and  battery  at  the  Point  of  Pines,  when  completed, 
will  command  Black  Island  and  all  the  approaches  to  Secessionville, 
in  conjunction  with  the  eastern  redoubt  of  the  lines  and  the  guns 
at  Secessionville. 

D.  B.  HARRIS, 

Lieutenant- Colonel,  and  Chief  Engineer. 


Extracts  from  diary  of  Maj.  Edward  Manigault,  C.  S.  Artillery,  com- 
manding Artillery  at  Leg  are’s  Point,  August  Yd- September  7.* 

August  19. — Opened  fire  at  5.30  a.  m.  with  8-inch  columbiad  and 
30-pounder  Parrott  gun ; also,  shortly  after,  with  10-inch  sea-coast 
mortar.  At  the  thirteenth  round,  the  30-pounder  Parrott  gun  burst ; 
1 man  badly  stunned  and  1 slightly  so ; no  other  damage  done ; this 
took  place  at  7.45  a.  m.  After  4 shots  with  mortar,  suspended  firing 
it  until  I could  communicate  with  Captain  Mitchel  at  Battery  Sim- 
kins,  and  make  arrangements  for  signaling  to  me  the  range  of  our 
mortar  shells. 

The  fuses,  as  before,  proved  very  defective,  very  few  of  the  shells 
bursting.  At  11.30  a.  m.  commenced  firing  with  the  4-inch  Blakely 
gun.  The  shells  failed  to  reach  Morris  Island,  and  after  9 shots  we 
ceased  firing. 

At  about  12  m.  commenced  firing  10-inch  sea-coast  mortar,  Cap- 
tain Mitchel  having  sent  one  of  the  signal  corps  to  signal  to  us 
whether  our  shells  fell  short,  went  over,  or  proved  correct. 

Moved  a rifle  24-pounder  from  Battery  Ryan  to  Battery  Haskell 
and  put  it  in  battery.  Four  34-inch  Blakely  guns  for  Company  A, 
South  Carolina  Siege  Train,  arrived  about  12  o’clock  last  night  from 
the  Charleston  Arsenal.  Ceased  firing  at  6.45  p.  m. 

Mortar  platform  for  No.  2 unserviceable,  and  needs  being  relaid. 

The  8-inch  columbiad  fired  54  shells;  the  30-pounder  Parrott,  13 
shells;  the  4-inch  Blakely,  9 shells;  the  10-inch  mortar,  18  shells. 

I respectfully  call  your  attention  to  the  above  note  of  the  unserv- 
iceable condition  of  mortar  platform  No.  2.  I hope  that  a requisi- 
tion will  be  made  immediately  upon  the  engineers  for  its  repair. 

[Indorsements.] 

Headquarters  East  Lines, 

August  19,  1863. 

Respectfully  forwarded,  and  attention  asked  to  remarks  upon  fuses 
and  mortar  platform. 

JOHNSON  HAGOOD, 

Brigadier -General,  Commanding. 


* These  extracts  were  forwarded  from  day  today,  those  for  August  19  and  Sep- 
tember 1-7  to  Capt.  P.  K.  Molony,  assistant  adjutant-general,  the  others  to  Lieut. 
E.  K.  Bryan,  acting  assistant  adjutant-general,  on  duty  at  Brig.  Clen.  Johnson  Ha- 
good’s  headquarters;  from  there  they  were  transmitted  to  department  headquarters. 


Chap.  XL.]  OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C.  555 

Headquarters  James  Island, 

August  20,  1863. 

Respectfully  forwarded.  Have  called  attention  before  to  the  con- 
dition of  the  mortar  beds,  and  respectfully  ask  that  evil  be  remedied. 

WM.  B.  TALIAFERRO, 

Brigadier -General. 

August  23. — At  3 a.  m.  heavy  firing  was  heard  in  the  direction 
of  Fort  Sumter.  As  there  was  a very  heavy  fog,  nothing  could  be 
seen,  but,  from  the  peculiar  sound  of  the  shells,  we  concluded  that 
two  or  more  monitors  were  firing,  at  short  range,  on  Fort  Sumter. 
The  fire  appeared  to  be  returned  from  the  fort.  The  fire  continued 
heavily  for  half  an  hour,  when  it  slackened  off.  The  monitors  ap- 
peared to  have  gone  off  before  the  fog  lifted.  The  Ironsides  was  seen 
to  go  off  after  it  cleared  off,  about  8 o’clock. 

After  the  fog  lifted,  commenced  firing  8-inch  columbiad,  first  at 
the  Marsh  Battery  and  afterward  at  the  heavy  rifle  battery  to  the 
south  of  Graham’s  headquarters.  Later  in  the  day,  fired  upon  one 
of  the  advanced  batteries  of  the  enemy.  Did  not  fire  the  other  guns, 
as  they  were  kept  in  reserve  for  the  battery  in  the  marsh. 

Sent  Capt.  S.  P.  Smith  to  the  city  about  12  m.,  on  special  ordnance 
duty. 

Lieutenant  [Felix]  Lake,  of  Company  K,  Second  Regiment  South 
Carolina  Artillery,  who  has  been  in  command  of  the  detachment 
working  the  columbiad  and  mortars,  was  relieved  at  4 p.  m.  by 
Lieutenant  [T.  A.]  Pitts,  of  the  same  regiment.  This  change  was 
made  by  special  request  and  arrangement  of  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Brown. 

At  5 p.  m.  commenced  firing  8-inch  sea-coast  howitzers  and  4-inch 
Blakely  gun  on  the  Marsh  Battery,  in  order  to  ascertain  the  direc- 
tion and  range  for  night  firing.  A considerable  number  of  men  seen 
at  the  Marsh  Battery  a little  before  sunset. 

August  25. — During  the  night  the  enemy  has  thrown  up  another 
battery  in  the  marsh,  about  400  yards  to  the  east  of  the  eastern  ex- 
tremity of  Black  Island.  This  battery  is  about  the  same  distance 
from  Battery  Haskell  as  Black  Island  is,  viz,  about  li  miles.  (The 
conclusion  which  I draw  from  the  erection  of  this  battery  is  that  the 
enemy  is  about  to  attack  this  point,  and  it  would  be  folly  to  suppose 
that  he  will  confine  himself  to  building  batteries  in  the  marsh  when 
the  firm  ground  of  Black  Island,  not  more  distant,  offers  so  many 
superior  advantages.  I have  no  doubt,  therefore,  but  that  there 
either  are  or  soon  will  be  strong  batteries  on  Black  Island.)  Only 
the  base  of  the  battery  is  as  yet  thrown  up  (probably  to  a height  of 
4 feet).  It  is  likely  that  the  remaining  height  will  be  given  by  sand- 
bags. It  should  he  noted  that  there  are  only  two  platforms  at  Bat- 
tery Haskell  from  which  guns  can  he  brought  to  hear  upon  this  battery 
in  the  marsh  (No.  2). 

In  consequence  of  the  heavy  showers  of  last  night,  five  of  the  plat- 
forms at  Battery  Haskell  were  under  water  this  morning,  and  the 
planks  in  some  of  them  were  floating.  One  or  two  of  these  jjlatforms 
we  were  unable  to  drain,  as  the  level  of  the  platforms  was  below  the 
surface  of  the  ivater  in  the  borrow  pits.  The  engineers  have  been 
called  on  by  me  (in  pursuance  of  oral  instructions  to  me  from  General 
Beauregard)  to  take  measures  to  drain  the  borrow  pits,  but  nothing 
has  been  done ; on  the,  contrary , a road  has  been  made  which  backs 
up  an  additional  quantity  of  water . 


556  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

A considerable  engineer  force  employed  in  finishing  magazine  at 
Battery  Ryan  (central  battery  or  section).  The  magazine , which  is 
in  two  compartments , is,  however,  small,  and  the  water  was  dripping 
through  it  at  2 p.  m.  to-day. 

At  2 p.  m.  the  8-inch  navy  shell  gun  (one  of  the  guns  from  the 
Isaac  P.  Smith)  was  mounted  in  southeast  angle  of  Redoubt  No.  1. 
It  is  mounted  on  a columbiad  carriage  of  pine  wood,  inches  too 
wide  between  the  cheeks.  The  maximum  elevation  possible,  10°.  The 
elevating  screw  is  out  of  order. 

At  2 p.  m.  Captain  Smith  arrived  with  one  section  of  8-inch  siege 
howitzers,  Company  B,  Siege  Train,  at  Point  of  Pines,  in  accordance 
with  orders  previously  given. 

At  about  4 p.  m.  Colonel  Gonzales,  chief  of  artillery,  visited  Bat- 
tery Haskell,  to  inspect  the  condition  of  the  same.  (This  inspection 
was  in  consequence  of  the  unfavorable  report  of  them  which  I sent 
to  headquarters  to-day. ) 

At  7 p.  m.  received  orders  to  fire  with  all  available  guns  on  Morris 
Island  to  south  of  Battery  Wagner,  as  the  enemy  was  reported  ad- 
vancing in  heavy  force.  Opened  immediately  from  the  8-inch  co- 
lumbiad, and  from  4.62-inch  rifle  and  24-pounder  rifle  (5.82-inch  cali- 
ber), as  soon  as  the  skids  upon  which  the  wheels  rested  (for  elevation) 
could  be  turned  in  the  new  direction.  (They  had  been  trained  on 
Marsh  Battery  No.  1,  preparatory  to  night  firing.)  Fired  33  shells 
from  the  8-inch  columbiad,  22  from  the  4.62-inch  rifle,  and  15  from 
the  5.82-inch  rifle.  As  the  firing  of  small-arms  ceased  in  front  of 
Battery  Wagner,  the  fire  of  our  guns  was  slackened  and  finally 
ceased  also.  It  did  not  appear  to  us  that  an  actual  assault  was  made 
on  Battery  Wagner,  as  our  men  did  not  seem  to  be  driven  in  from 
the  rifle-pits  in  front  of  that  work. 

The  enemy  made  many  signals  from  Light-House  Inlet  during  the 
engagement,  by  means  of  rockets,  and  red,  blue,  green,  and  white 
lights. 

The  infantry  supports  at  Battery  Haskell  and  Point  of  Pines  were 
strongly  re-enforced  by  Major  Glover. 

Heavy  showers  fell  about  this  time,  say  8.30  to  9 o’clock,  and  lighter 
ones  off  and  on  until  early  in  the  morning. 

At  1 a.  m.  two  ordnance  wagons  arrived  from  Fort  Johnson  with 
ammunition,  &c.,  viz,  fuses,  gunners’  pouches,  4-inch  Blakely  shells, 
8-inch  canister  and  grape,  rammer  and  sponge,  &c. 


[Indorsements.] 

Hdqrs.  1st  Mil.  Dist.,  Dept,  of  S.  C.,  Ga.,  and  Fla., 

Charleston,  August  28,  1863. 

Respectfully  forwarded.  Wants  noted  [in  italics]  and  ordered  to 
be  supplied  at  once. 

R.  S.  RIPLEY, 

Brigadier-  General,  Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston,  August  29,  1863. 

Respectfully  referred  to  Lieutenant-Colonel  Harris,  chief  engineer, 
who  will  please  attend  at  once  to  the  wants  of  the  battery  at  Legare’s 
Point  and  return  this  paper  to  these  headquarters. 

Bv  command  of  General  Beauregard: 

CLIFTON  H.  SMITH, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Chap.  XL.] 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 


557 


August  26. — Captain  [T.  B.]  Lee,  of  the  engineers,  engaged  in  open- 
ing the  embrasures  at  Battery  Haskell,  so  as  to  extend  the  field  of 
fire  to  the  southward. 

While  his  hands  were  so  employed,  we  were  prevented  from  firing 
upon  Morris  Island  or  the  Marsh  Battery  No.  1.  In  the  afternoon, 
fired  several  shots  at  the  Marsh  Battery  No.  1. 

Nothing  more  has  been  done  by  the  enemy  on  Marsh  Battery  No. 
2.  It  is  possible  that  this  battery  may  be  only  a sham  to  attract  our 
notice  and  draw  our  fire,  while  the  true  batteries  are  being  erected 
on  Black  Island.  Battery  Haskell  has  not  yet  fired  on  this  battery, 
and  will  not  do  so  until  there  are  further  evidences  of  its  being  a 
real  work.  It  has,  however,  been  fired  on  from  either  Battery 
Cheves  or  one  of  the  batteries  at  Fort  Johnson. 

At  6.40  p.  m.  the  enemy  made  an  attack  upon  the  rifle-pits  in  front 
of  Battery  Wagner.  All  of  the  James  Island  batteries  opened  a 
rapid  fire  upon  the  portion  of  Morris  Island  to  the  south  of  said  rifle- 
pits.  The  8-inch  columbiad,  5.82-inch  rifle,  and  4.62-inch  rifle  were 
used  for  this  purpose  at  Battery  Haskell.  As  the  evidences  of  mus- 
ketry fire  at  Battery  Wagner  ceased,  our  fire  was  suspended.  Later 
we  received  orders  from  General  Taliaferro  to  continue  the  fire  at 
intervals,  as  nearly  as  possible  upon  the  rifle-pits,  which  were  re- 
ported to  be  in  the  hands  of  the  enemy.  Accordingly,  fire  was  kept 
up  all  night  from  the  8-inch  columbiad  and  4. 62-inch  rifle,  at  inter- 
vals of  ten  to  fifteen  minutes. 

The  detachment  from  the  Siege  Train  (20  men)  which  has  been  on 
duty  at  Battery  Wagner,  was  relieved  at  1 o’clock  this  morning  (27th), 
and  returned  to  James  Island.  Night  stormy  and  rainy.  Wind  at 
first  southeast,  then  permanently  northeast. 

August  27. — The  enemy  very  busy  in  intrenching  himself  in  the 
sand-hill  about  200  or  250  yards  in  front  of  Battery  Wagner  (of 
which  he  got  possession  last  night).  The  8-inch  columbiad  in  Bat- 
tery Haskell  was  brought  to  bear  upon  the  working  parties,  and  con- 
tinued firing  slowly  until  the  ammunition  was  so  nearly  exhausted 
as  to  render  it  prudent  to  reserve  what  remained  (the  difficulty  is  to 
procure  8-inch  shells).  The  24-pounder  rifle  and  4.62-inch  rifle  were 
then  brought  to  bear,  and  continued  firing  steadily  (with  some  in- 
terval from  4 to  5 p.  m.)  during  the  remainder  of  the  day.  Some 
very  good  shots  were  made  with  the  4. 62-inch  rifle ; but  the  failure 
of  the  shells  to  explode  rendered  the  fire  comparatively  ineffective. 
Battery  Simkins  was  also  firing  slowly  at  the  same  point.  Battery 
Cheves  did  not  fire. 

At  8 p.  m.  received  orders  to  be  prepared  for  firing  on  Morris 
Island  to  south  of  Battery  Wagner,  in  case  of  a further  attack  on 
that  post.  The  guns  were  accordingly  prepared,  but  as  no  attack  was 
made,  we  did  not  fire. 

August  28. — Some  object  resembling  a gun  is  visible  this  morning 
in  Marsh  Battery  No.  2.  It  is  impossible,  however,  to  decide  if  it  be 
a real  gun  or  not.  The  battery  has  not  been  built  higher  since  it  was 
first  observed  on  the  morning  of  25th  instant. 

About  11  o’clock  Major  Mallett,  of  the  Confederate  Ordnance  De- 
partment, came  to  Legare’s  Point  for  the  purpose  of  inspecting,  and, 
if  possible,  remedying  the  defects  of  the  fuses  and  other  ordnance 
stores.  He  remained,  witnessing  the  firing,  &c.,  for  two  hours,  and 
had  full  evidence  of  the  worthlessness  of  the  fuses. 

About  3p.  m.  Colonel  {John  F.]  Lay,  inspector  of  artillery,  visited 
Battery  Haskell,  and  remained  until  4.30  p.  m. 


[Chap.  XL. 


558  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

Fired,  by  order,  at  the  old  rifle-pits  in  front  of  Fort  Wagner,  with 
the  columbiad,  4 solid  shot;  with  the  24-pounder  rifle,  8 shells; 
with  4.62-inch  rifle,  18  shells.  Some  of  the  shots  were  very  good,  the 
round  shot  and  shells  being  several  times  thrown  into  the  enemy’s 
works,  but  the  failure  of  the  shells  to  explode  prevented  the  fire 
from  being  effective. 

Captain  Lee’s  engineer  hands  engaged  in  widening  the  embrasures 
more  to  the  southward.  The  borrow  pits  have  been  in  a great  meas- 
ure drained ; but  this  has  been  done  by  cutting  through  the  roads 
and  interior  communications  of  the  battery,  so  as  to  interfere  with 
the  moving  of  the  guns,  &c. , from  one  part  of  the  battery  to  another. 
It  is  probable,  however,  that  this  interruption  of  the  communica- 
tions is  only  temporary.  Heavy  rain  about  6 p.  m.,  lasting  about 
an  hour. 

August  31. — J.  H.  Lopez,  artificer,  of  Company  A,  South  Carolina 
Siege  Train,  was  sent  to  the  city  to  endeavor  to  procure  seasoned 
oak  for  repairing  mortar  beds. 

Lieutenant  [Ralph]  Nesbit  sick.  This  is  particularly  unfortunate, 
as  he  was  the  only  officer  available  for  the  special  service  of  the  rifle 
guns  firing  upon  Morris  Island.  Application  has  been  made  to  head- 
quarters for  a detail — of  one,  at  least — of  Captain  [B.  C.]  Webb’s 
(Company  A,  Siege  Train)  lieutenants,  but  no  notice  has  been  taken 
of  it. 

The  companies  and  detachments  (artillery)  at  Legare’s  Point  in- 
spected and  mustered  about  12  m.  to-day. 

In  consequence  of  the  high  wind,  Lieutenant  Nesbit’s  sickness, 
and  the  occupation  of  other  officers  in  inspection  and  muster  and 
other  duties  usual  on  last  day  of  month,  there  was  no  firing  from 
Battery  Haskell  to-day.  These  latter  reasons  would  not  be  sufficient, 
and  would  not  be  given  if  it  were  not  that  it  is  seriously  doubted 
whether,  at  2f  miles’  range,  and  with  a high  wind  blowing,  we  can 
effect  anything  with  our  shells,  which  do  not  explode. 

Ninety-eight  8-inch  columbiad  shells  and  200  sabots  received  at 
Battery  Haskell  to-day. 

At  2.30  p.  m.  four  monitors  moved  up  and  engaged  Fort  Moultrie, 
Battery  Bee,  Battery  Beauregard,  and  Battery  Gregg ; all  at  long 
range  excepting  Battery  Gregg.  After  about  one  and  a half  to  two 
hours  they  retired,  one,  it  is  thought,  precipitately. 

Generals  Taliaferro  and  Hagood,  Colonels  Roman,  Lay,  and 
others,  visited  Battery  Haskell  about  5 p.  m. 

The  engineers  engage  to-day  in  strengthening  the  parapet  of  Bat- 
tery Tatom  (Point  of  Pines). 

September  1. — All  the  officers  very  busy  making  up  monthly  re- 
turns— ordnance  returns,  weekly  returns  artillery,  &c.  Made  re- 

gort  to  chief  of  artillery  of  bursting  of  4.62-inch  gun,  August  22,  at 
iattery  Haskell ; also  report  of  Captain  Smith’s  trials  in  shelling 
Black  Island  from  Point  of  Pines  (Battery  Tatom). 

At  12.30  p.  m.  Generals  Ripley  and  Taliaferro  visited  Battery 
Haskell. 

At  1 p.  m.  engineer  hands  commenced  repair  of  magazine  at  Bat- 
tery Ryan. 

At  the  same  time,  another  party  commenced  a more  thorough 
drainage  of  the  interior  of  Battery  Haskell.  I visited  Battery 
Cheves  to  see  the  8- inch  navy  shell  guns  of  55  and  56  cwt.,  one  of 
which  is  promised  to  Battery  Haskell  under  certain  contingencies. 
Took  measurement  of  same  in  order  to  adapt  a carriage  to  them, 


559 


Chap.  XL.]  OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 

Rode  to  Fort  Johnson  and  saw  Lieutenant-Colonel  Yates,  who  said 
we  might  have  one  of  the  guns ; and  also  one  columbiad  pattern  car- 
riage and  chassis,  provided  there  were  two  of  them.  As  there  turned 
out  to  be  only  one,  of  course  we  could  not  get  it. 

At  6 p.  rn.  the  Second  Battalion,  Twenty-fifth  Regiment  South 
Carolina  Volunteers,  Major  Glover  commanding,  was  relieved  by 
the  Fifty-fourth  Georgia,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Rawls  commanding. 
The  battalion  of  the  Twenty-fifth  (Eutaw)  marched  immediately  to 
Fort  Johnson,  preparatory  to  going  to  Morris  Island. 

At  11  p.  m.  a heavy  cannonade  commenced  between  Fort  Moul- 
trie and  Batteries  Bee,  Beauregard,  and  Gregg,  and  the  Yankee  iron- 
clads. This  firing  lasted  almost  all  night. 

September  2. — At  early  dawn,  four  monitors  were  seen  to  go  off 
from  the  neighborhood  of  Fort  Sumter.  Some  persons  assert  that 
there  were  six  of  them ; but  this  is  far  from  certain.  Their  fire  ap- 
pears to  have  been  principally  directed  against  Fort  Sumter.  Dur- 
ing the  morning,  and  again  in  the  afternoon,  we  fired  with  the  8-inch 
columbiad  upon  Marsh  Battery  Ho  1 whenever  any  person  was  seen 
about  it.  Generals  Beauregard,  Taliaferro,  and  Hagood  visited 
Battery  Haskell  about  12.30  p.  m. 

Sent  wagon  into  town  to  carry  the  wrought-iron  work  of  two  mor- 
tar beds  to  the  Charleston  Arsenal,  to  be  used  with  the  new  iron 
mortar  beds  which  are  being  cast  for  Battery  Haskell. 

About  8 p.  m.  a wooden  mortar  bed  was  brought  to  Battery  Has- 
kell. 

V ery  quiet  during  the  night ; scarcely  any  firing  at-  all,  except  oc- 
casionally from  Battery  Wagner. 

September  3. — At  about  10  a.  m.  sent  carriage  and  limber  of  the 
30-pounder  Parrott  which  burst  at  Battery  Haskell,  August  19,  to 
central  ordnance  depot  in  Charleston,  together  with  the  chase  por- 
tion of  the  exploded  gun.  Lieutenant-Colonel  Waddy,  chief  of  ord- 
nance, had  directed  the  carriage  and  limber  only  to  be  carried  to  the 
city,  but,  in  pursuance  of  a verbal  order  given  by  General  Beaure- 
gard yesterday,  such  portion  of  the  gun  as  could  be  gotten  on  the 
carriage  was  sent  also.  Lieutenant  [ W.  W.  ] Legare,  ordnance  offi- 
cer, furnished  the  mules  and  drivers  by  order. 

Moved  the  4-inch  Blakely  gun  from  Platform  Ho.  7 in  Battery 
Haskell  to  Platform  Ho.  9.  Moved  the  4.62-inch  rifle  siege  gun, 
received  August  30,  to  Platform  Ho.  7,  but  accidently  it  was  dis- 
mounted while  being  shifted  from  the  traveling  bed  to  trunnion  beds. 
As  we  were  not  provided  with  the  proper  blocks,  levers,  ropes,  &c., 
sent  immediately  to  Lieutenant  Legare,  ordnance  officer,  requesting 
that  a garrison  gin  should  be  sent  down  with  hands  to  mount  the 
gun.  The  gin  arrived  at  Battery  Haskell  about  7 p.  m.,  but  with- 
out block  and  tackle.  The  labor  of  shifting  guns  at  Battery  Has- 
kell is  very  great,  as  the  road  of  communication  in  rear  of  the  plat- 
forms is  cut  through  by  open  drains  between  each  two  platforms,  in 
order  to  drain  the  borrow  pits  ; hence,  heavy  skids  have  to  be  moved 
from  drain  to  drain  to  pass  the  guns  over. 

In  the  forenoon,  fired  10  shots  from  the  8-inch  columbiad  at  Marsh 
Battery  Ho.  1,  about  which  some  of  the  enemy  were  seen.  Only  1 
shot  struck  the  battery,  though  several  went  near  it.  The  enemy 
went  off  or  concealed  themselves  closely  in  the  battery. 

Lieutenant  Hesbit  went  to  the  city  on  surgeon’s  certificate ; as  he 
was  much  prostrated  by  sickness,  four  hours’  leave  of  absence  was 
granted  to  Captain  Smith  to  accompany  him  to  hospital,  and  make 


[Chap.  XL. 


560  SC.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

proper  arrangements  for  him,  &c.  In  consequence,  however,  of 
several  hours’  delay  at  the  Ashley  River  Bridge  (which  is  undergoing 
repair),  Captain  Smith  did  not  report  again  to  headquarters  at 
Legare’s  Point  until  8 p.  m. 

As  a good  many  of  the  enemy  were  visible  in  the  hills  to  the  south 
of  Fort  Wagner,  about  5 p.  m.  commenced  firing  on  them  with  8-inch 
columbiad  and  4.62-inch  rifle  No.  1.  Fourteen  shots  were  fired  from 
the  4.62-incli  rifle  and  10  from  the  columbiad.  Only  1 of  the  shells 
from  each  gun  burst,  and  in  both  cases  they  were  short.  Four  of  the 
shells  from  the  4. 62-inch  fell  in  the  very  midst  of  the  enemy,  but  as 
they  did  not  burst,  it  is  not  likely  that  much,  if  any,  damage  was 
done.  They  did  not  interrupt  the  enemy’s  operations.  The  practice 
with  the  8-inch  columbiad  was  rather  wild,  and  none  of  its  shells 
appeared  to  fall  in  immediate  contiguity  with  the  enemy  (distance, 
2f  miles).  At  dark  ceased  firing,  as  no  reliance  could  be  had  in  our 
shells  by  night. 

At  5 p.  m.  Lieutenants  [J.  A.]  Brux  and  [R.  E.]  Mellichamp,  of 
Company  A,  Siege  Train,  reported  for  duty  at  Battery  Haskell. 

At  5 p.  m.  the  enemy  fired  3 shots  from  east  end  of  Black  Island 
toward  Battery  Haskell.  The  shots  appeared  to  come  from  a rifled 

Eiece  of  small  caliber,  say  30-pounder  at  most ; but  as  all  the  shell 
roke  or  burst  prematurely,  none  reached  Battery  Haskell,  and  it 
was  impossible  to  judge  what  was  the  caliber  of  the  piece  used. 
After  3 shots  the  enemy  ceased  firing.  No  reply  was  made  from 
Battery  Haskell,  as  their  fire  was  not  at  all  annoying,  and  it  was  not 
deemed  worth  while  to  reply. 

P.  S. — Unusually  quiet  to-day.  Very  little  firing  on  either  side. 

[Indorsement.  ] 

Headquarters  James  Island, 

September  4,  1863. 

Respectfully  forwarded.  Attention  particularly  called  to  the  fact, 
so  often  reported,  of  the  worthlessness  of  the  fuses  furnished,  which 
it  is  to  be  hoped  will  be  improved.  Also  to  the  firing  of  the  enemy  from 
Black  Island,  and  particularly  to  their  opening  with  what  I conceive 
to  be  boat  howitzers.  No  works  can  be  seen. 

WM.  B.  TALIAFERRO, 

Brigadier-  General. 

September  4. — One  of  the  10-inch  mortars  remounted,  but  on  an 
old  pine  mortar  bed  which  will  not  probably  stand  many  shots. 
The  4.62-inch  rifle,  which  was  accidentally  dismounted  yesterday, 
was  also  remounted. 

As  the  enemy  was  seen  working  very  assiduously  on  a battery  or 
breastwork  in  front  of  Battery  Wagner,  which  is  constructed  on  a 
line  open  to  direct  enfilading  fire  from  Battery  Haskell,  at  1 p.  m. 
we  opened  fire  on  him  with  the  4.62-inch  gun  No.  1.  Fired  18  shells, 
of  which  3 burst  short,  and  2 broke  to  pieces  or  burst  prematurely. 
No  others  burst  at  all.  Three  or  4 shots  were  very  good,  and  scat- 
tered the  workmen,  but  they  appear  to  be  practiced  hands,  and  re- 
turned instantly  to  work  as  soon  as  the  danger  was  past,  without  one 
moment’s  delay  or  loss  of  time.  About  3 p.  m.  ceased  firing,  to  allow 
the  gun  to  cool  and  the  men  to  get  their  dinner.  At  5 p.  m.  com- 
menced firing  from  the  same  gun  (which  is  by  far  the  most  accurate 
and  reliable  one  we  have)  at  the  same  point.  Fired  18  shells,  of 
which  3 burst  short,  and  3 of  them  exceedingly  near  the  working 


Chap.  XL.]  OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C.  561 

parties.  We  could  not  at  the  distance  (2|  miles)  see  if  any  one  was 
injured,  though  observing  with  two  glasses.  The  workmen  scattered 
as  usual  whenever  a shell  went  near  them,  hut  instantly  returned  to 
work  as  soon  as  the  danger  was  past.  At  6.15  p.  m.  the  enemy’s  re- 
liefs moved  up  from  the  neighborhood  of  Graham’s  headquarters. 
They  appeared  so  numerous  that  it  was  supposed  that  an  assault  was 
intended,  and  fire  was  opened  from  the  8-inch  columbiad  on  them. 
Six  shells  were  thrown  at  them,  but  did  not  burst.  By  this  time  it 
became  evident,  from  the  number  of  men  returning  toward  Graham’s 
from  the  different  batteries,  that  the  body  of  men  first  seen  was 
simply  the  relief.  Ceased  firing  at  dark. 

The  Marsh  Battery  No.  1,  of  which  the  parapet  to  the  north  was 
considerably  damaged  and  displaced  by  the  concussion  of  the  gun, 
has  been  repaired.  The  muzzle  of  the  gun  which  showed  over  the 
parapet  no  longer  appears.  From  the  indications  noticed,  it  is  likely 
that  the  damaged  gun  will  soon  be  replaced  by  a new  one. 

Very  little  firing  during  the  night.  An  occasional  shot  from  Bat- 
tery Cheves  toward  Marsh  Battery  No.  1,  and  rifle  battery  to  south 
of  Graham’s  headquarters. 

September  5. — The  Ironsides  and  two  or  three  monitors  bombarded 
Battery  Wagner  from  early  dawn,  the  land  batteries  aiding  slightly. 
This  was  continued  until  about  midday.  The  bombardment  was 
very  heavy.  Battery  Wagner  returned  the  fire  slowly  until  about 
10  a.  m. 

In  the  afternoon  the  bombardment  was  continued  by  the  heavy 
rifle  batteries  near  Graham’s  headquarters  (the  iron-clads  having 
retired).  The  bombardment  of  the  afternoon  was  also  very  severe. 

About  5.30  p.  m.  we  received  notice  from  General  Hagood  that  an 
attack  on  Cumming’s  Point  was  probable.  All  the  available  guns 
in  Battery  Haskell  were  immediately  prepared  for  firing  upon  Mor- 
ris Island  in  case  of  assault.  While  preparing  the  4. 62-inch  gun, 
No.  2,  for  firing,  the  gun  was  accidentally  spiked  by  a gunner’s  gim- 
let breaking  off  in  the  vent.  For  the  time  the  gun  was  rendered 
unserviceable. 

In  the  afternoon,  7 shots  were  fired  from  the  4.62-inch  rifle,  No. 
1,  upon  Morris  Island.  Some  of  the  shots  were  good,  but  only  1 
shell  burst.  Six  shots  were  also  fired  from  the  smooth-bore  24- 
pounder  at  second  battery  to  north  of  Graham’s  headquarters.  One 
of  the  shots  struck  very  near  the  battery  and  made  some  of  the  gun- 
ners scatter  (distance,  2-J  miles). 

After  nightfall,  a monitor  took  up  a position  to  northeast  of  Bat- 
tery Gregg,  occasionally  firing,  and  being  fired  at  from  Battery 
Gregg.  The  Yankee  land  batteries  at  the  same  time  shelled  Wag- 
ner and  the  hills  between  Wagner  and  Gregg.  Captain  [John  H.] 
Mickler  came  to  Legare’s  Point  to-day  about  2.30  p.  m.,  preparing 
for  some  scouting  expedition. 

September  6. — At  1 a.  m.  precisely,  being  about  one  hour  after  the 
moon  had  risen,  the  Yankees  attacked  Cumming’s  Point  in  barges. 
A heavy  fire  from  the  enemy’s  boat  howitzers,  and  from  two  of  our  12- 
pounder  howitzers,  together  with  a sharp  musketry  fire,  opened  the 
attack.  Battery  Gregg  does  not  appear  to  have  fired  her  heavy  guns 
at  all.  The  Yankee  land  batteries  immediately  commenced  to  shell 
Wagner  heavily,  and  also  that  portion  of  the  island  between  Gregg 
and  Wagner.  The  James  Island  batteries  immediately  directed  their 
fire  against  different  points  of  the  enemy’s  batteries  on  Morris  Island. 
Til©  fire  of  the  8-inch  columbiad,  one  £4-pouuder  rifle,  one  21-pounder 
3*  R— Y Qb  X&VIJJj  VT  l 


562  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

smooth-bore,  and  one  4. 62-inch  rifle,  in  Battery  Haskell,  was  directed 
at  a calcium  light  visible  on  one  of  the  mortar  batteries,  between 
one-fourth  and  one-half  mile  south  of  Battery  W agner.  One  10-inch 
mortar  was  fired  toward  a battery  still  farther  to  the  south.  The 
8-inch  columbiad  was  fired  fourteen  times;  the  10-inch  mortar,  thir- 
teen times;  the  24-pounder  rifle,  seven  times;  the  24-pounder  smooth- 
bore, thirteen  times;  the  4. 62-inch  rifle,  seven  times.  As  it  was  night, 
we  did  not  ascertain  if  any  damage  was  done  by  our  fire.  After 
twenty  or  thirty  minutes,  the  attack  on  Cumming’s  Point  ceased, 
and  the  attacking  party  was  repulsed.  The  fire  on  both  sides  grad- 
ually subsided.  The  enemy  fired  slowly  and  steadily  after  this,  and 
only  occasional  shots  were  fired  from  our  batteries  in  return.  At 
3.30  a.  m.  dismissed  the  men  from  their  guns.  At  day  dawn  the  Iron- 
sides and  two  or  three  monitors  commenced  a heavy  bombardment 
of  Battery  Wagner.  This  was  continued  by  the  land  batteries  in 
the  afternoon. 

I sent  in  to  headquarters  the  following  papers  : (1)  Weekly  return 
of  ordnance  at  Battery  Haskell  (for  Colonel  Waddy).  (2)  Weekly 
return  of  ordnance  at  Redoubt  No.  1,  for  same  officer.  (3)  Return 
of  small-arms,  accouterments,  and  ammunition,  to  Lieut.  H.  C.  Cun- 
ningham, ordnance  officer.  (4)  Requisition  for  mechanic  to  drill 
vent  of  4.62-inch  rifle;  for  friction  tubes  (1,000),  and  for  nails  to 
strap  shells.  (5)  Captain  Webb's  return  of  light  artillery  to  Colo- 
nel Gonzales.  (6)  Note  to  Captain  Taliaferro  about  an  objectiona- 
ble part  of  my  diary  of  31st  August. 

About  12  m.  a barbette  carriage  and  chassis  arrived  at  Battery 
Haskell  for  a double-banded  24-pounder  rifle.  This  description  of 
carriage  does  not  give  a field  of  fire  sufficient  for  the  position  in 
which  it  is  proposed  to  place  the  gun.  It  would  have  been  infinitely 
better  if  the  gun  could  be  traversed  on  a full  circle. 

At  3.30  p.  m.  a double-banded  24-pounder  was  brought  to  Battery 
Haskell.  Inner  band,  31  inches  by  If  inches  thick.  Outer  band,  25  j 
inches  by  If  inches.  Also,  about  dark,  54  immensely  heavy  solid 
conical  shot  for  same  gun.  I think  they  will  necessarily  strain  the 
gun.  At  7 p.  m.  received  notice  that  Morris  Island  will  be  evacuated 
to-night,  with  orders  to  have  every  available  gun  ready  to  check  the 
advance  of  the  Yankees  on  our  retreating  troops.  The  guns  were 
accordingly  prepared  and  the  detachments  at  their  posts.  Up  to  12 
o’clock  there  was  nothing  to  indicate  that  such  a movement  was  in- 
tended. 

September  7. — About  2 a.  m.  the  Yankees  appeared  to  have  become 
aware  that  some  unusual  movement  was  going  on,  for  they  ceased 
firing  into  Fort  Wagner,  and  commenced  shelling  the  ground  between 
Wagner  and  Gregg  tolerably  vigorously. 

At  3 a.  m.  3 rockets  were  thrown  up  from  the  direction  of  Shell 
Point,  which  was  the  signal  previously  arranged  for  opening  fire 
upon  the  sites  of  Batteries  Wagner  and  Gregg  (it  had  been  intended 
to  blow  up  those  works).  As  the  expected  destruction  of  the  works 
had  not  taken  place,  and  as  Colonel  Yates,  at  Fort  Johnson,  so  much 
nearer  the  scene  of  operations,  had  not  opened  fire,  I hesitated  to  fire 
for  some  minutes.  Under  General  Taliaferro’s  direction  (who  passed 
the  night  from  about  10  p.  m.  to  3.30  a.  m.  at  Battery  Haskell),  I 
dispatched  a courier  to  Colonel  Yates  to  inquire  if  any  change  had 
been  made  in  the  signals  previously  decided  on.  In  the  meantime 
commenced  firing  slowly  upon  Morris  Island  to  south  of  Battery 
*Wagner,  and  gradually  (as  Colonel  Yates’  reply  did  not  arrive)  upon 


Chap.  XL.]  OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C.  563 

Battery  Wagner  itself.  Fired  till  daylight,  and  then  ceased.  The 
Second  Battalion,  Twenty-fifth  Regiment  South  Carolina  Volunteers, 
from  Battery  Wagner,  arrived  at  their  camp  at  Legare’s  shortly  be- 
fore day.  They  left  this  point  to  go  to  Morris  Island  on  Tuesday 
evening,  September  1.  Some  of  the  companies  went  over  that  night, 
and  the  rest  the  next  night,  Battery  Simkins  and  Cheves  firing  upon 
Gregg  and  Wagner  and  the  intervening  space  during  the  day.  The 
enemy  did  not  return  the  fire.  Battery  Haskell  did  not  fire  until 
about  5 p.  m. , and  then  only  a few  shots. 

The  engineer  hands  ' engaged  in  constructing  a covered  way  and 
causeway  from  the  mortar  battery  on  right  flank  of  Battery  Has- 
kell to  the  covered  way  already  constructed  on  north  side  of  the 
road  to  the  point. 

At  6.15  p.  m.  the  Ironsides  and  five  monitors  entered  the  harbor 
(above  Battery  Gregg)  and  had  an  engagement,  lasting  from  forty- 
five  to  sixty  minutes,  with  Fort  Moultrie  and  Batteries  Bee  and 
Beauregard.  The  firing  was  at  long  range.  Shortly  after  7 p.  m. 
the  iron-clads  retired.  General  Hagood  visited  Battery  Haskell  at 
nightfall  and  gave  certain  directions  for  increased  vigilance.  He 
afterward  visited  Battery  Ryan  and  gave  similar  directions.  The 
shots  fired  from  Battery  Haskell  on  Morris  Island  from  3.30  a.  m.  to 
daybreak  were  as  follows : 10-inch  mortar,  8 shots ; 8-inch  colum- 
biad,  4 shots ; 24-pounder  smooth-bore,  7 shots : 24-pounder  rifle,  4 
shots ; 4. 62-inch  rifle,  4 shots.  Total,  27. 


No.  52. 

Report  of  Capt.  John  C.  Mitchel,  First  South  Carolina  Artillery, 
commanding  battery  at  Shell  Point,  James  Island. 

Fort  Johnson,  July  20,  1863. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  the  carriage  sent  for  the 
Brooke  gun  does  not  fit  its  chassis ; that  the  bed  of  one  of  the  mor- 
tars does  not  fit  its  piece ; that  the  pintle  of  the  Brooke  did  not  fit 
the  chassis  (this  last  I have  remedied),  and,  in  fact,  very  little  of  the 
material  sent  from  the  arsenal  does  fit.  Mr.  La  Coste  goes  up  to- 
night, either  to  get  another  chassis  for  the  Brooke  or  tools  with  which 
to  alter  it.  I should  also  be  much  obliged  if  either  Private  Cullum 
or  Private  McCall  should  be  sent  me  for  a day  from  Fort  Sumter. 

Soon  after  opening  fire  this  evening  the  enemy  commenced  firing, 
when  the  owners  of  the  negro  hands  immediately  withdrew  them. 
The  magazine  is  not  yet  finished — in  fact, hardly  commenced — and  the 
transportation  of  ammunition  to  the  guns  from  the  depot  can  be 
easily  cut  off,  nor  can  I,  of  course,  keep  much  at  the  guns  and  mortars. 
W ould  it  not  be  well  to  hurry  up  the  magazine,  and  not  tempt  them 
to  fire  until  it  is  ready?  Besides,  there  are  50,000  pounds  of  powder  in 
a wooden  house  here,  exposed  to  their  fire,  and  plenty  of  loaded  shells. 

I have  just  got  the  range  of  their  (the  enemy’s)  mortar  battery 
with  the  10-inch  columbiad,  but  have  not  done  them  apparently  any 
damage. 

I have,  captain,  the  honor  to  remain,  very  respectfully,  your  obe- 
dient servant, 

JOHN  C.  MITCHEL, 

Captain,  First  South  Carolina  Artillery. 

Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  First  Military  District , 


[Chap.  XL. 


564  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

[Indorsement.] 

Hdqrs.  1st  Mil.  Dist.,  Dept,  of  S.  C.,  Ga.,  and  Fla., 

Charleston,  July  20,  1863. 

Respectfully  forwarded,  with  the  remark  that  Captain  Mitchel  has 
been  ordered  not  to  provoke  fire  of  the  enemy  unnecessarily,  to 
push  forward  the  magazines,  and  to  alter  the  chassis  with  the  aid  of 
McCall  or  Cullum,  one  of  whom  Colonel  Rhett  has  been  directed  to 
send  him.  Meantime  the  brigadier-general  commanding  desires  to 
call  attention  to  the  imperfect  work  turned  out  at  the  arsenal. 

In  the  absence  and  by  command  of  Brigadier-General  Ripley  : 

WM.  F.  NANCE, 
Assistant  Adjutant-General. 


Extracts  from  journal*  of  Capt.  John  C.  Mitchel,  First  South  Caro- 
lina Artillery,  of  operations  at  Shell  Point  Battery  ( Battery  Sim- 

kins),  July  19- September  7. 

July  19.-— Capt.  John  C.  Mitchel  assumed  command,  and  Capt.  J. 
B.  Humbert  reported  for  duty  with  his  company  (I,  Second  South 
Carolina  Artillery). 

July  20. — Capt.  G.  W.  Stallings  reported  for  duty  with  his  com- 
pany (G,  Second  South  Carolina  Artillery). 

July  20,  21. — Occupied  in  mounting  guns  and  arranging  battery 
for  action. 

July  22. — No  record. 

July  23. — By  order  of  Brigadier-General  Ripley,  opened  the  bat- 
tery, consisting  of  two  10-inch  columbiads  and  two  mortars,  on  the 
enemy’s  land  battery  at  left  of  house  known  as  Graham’s  headquar- 
ters, to  which  the  enemy  replied  very  slowly  from  their  batteries  on 
right  of  Graham’s  headquarters.  The  fire  was  continued  until  a late 
hour  in  the  evening,  say  7 o’clock.  The  batteries  not  being  com- 
pleted, I ordered  the  fire  to  cease,  in  order  that  the  engineers  and 
workmen  might  proceed  with  their  work. 

July  24. — The  double-banded  Brooke  rifle  put  in  position. 

July  25. — Opened  fire  on  the  enemy’s  batteries,  my  battery  con- 
sisting of  two  10-inch  columbiads,  one  Brooke  rifle  (6.40  caliber), 
and  three  mortars.  Fired  at  intervals  of  fifteen  minutes,  to  which 
enemy  replied  slowly.  Toward  evening  the  fire  slackened,  and  about 
7 o’clock  it  ceased.  At  11  and  2 o’clock,  same  night,  I fired  salvos 
from  all  my  guns  and  mortars,  by  special  order,  about  3 rounds 
from  each  piece. 

July  26. — Reopened  fire  at  daylight,  firing  at  fifteen-minute  inter- 
vals for  each  gun.  At  the  second  discharge  of  the  Brooke  gun,  then 
under  special  charge  (4  Lieut.  C.  C.  Rush,  it  burst,  killing  1 and 
wounding  3 cannoneers.  It  was  loaded  with  12  pounds  of  powder  and 
a solid  shot.  The  fire  was  continued  with  the  other  pieces. 

July  27,  28.— Firing  continued.  The  fuses  burned  badly,  many 
never  igniting,  and  those  that  did  burning  very  irregularly. 

July  29,  —-Firing  continued.  Np  regularity  in  the  fuses.  Would 
effect  as  much  by  throwing  solid  shot,  An  8-inch  columbiad  mounted 
in  place  of  the  Brooke  gun.  Captain  Stallings’  company  relieved  by 

* As  forwarded  from  day  to  day  to  department.  lieadounrlers,  The  battery  was 
Officially  designated  as  above  August  21,  ] 863, 


Citap.  XL.]  OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  0.  565 

Capt.  B.  E.  Dickson’s  company  (E),  Second  South  Carolina  Artillery. 
Stallings’  company  sent  to  Morris  Island. 

July  30. — Firing  continued  with  same  results.  Fuses  very  bad — 
worthless.  Enemy  replying  in  the  afternoon. 

July  3 1 . — Firing  continued.  Directed  to  right  and  left  of  Graham’s 
headquarters.  Fuses  no  better. 

August  1. — Firing  continued  as  on  yesterday,  with  same  results. 

August  1,  2. — Fired  during  the  night  at  fifteen -minute  intervals, 
ceasing  at  6 a.  m.  About  noon  commenced  firing  with  the  colum- 
biads,  firing  three  discharges  to  ascertain  range.  At  2 p.  m.  com- 
menced again  with  columbiads,  firing  rapidly  some  twenty-five  times. 
Continued  the  fire  with  mortars,  at  from  five  to  fifteen  minute  inter- 
vals, till  midnight.  Range  generally  good.  Shells  burst  pretty  well. 
Mortar  fire  excellent. 

August  3. — No  record. 

August  4. — Firing  very  little  during  the  day.  Chiefly  from  mortar 
battery.  Toward  evening  increased  in  rapidity.  At  night  fired  at 
fifteen-minute  intervals  at  Black  Island  and  the  batteries  on  left  of 
Graham’s  headquarters. 

August  5. — No  record. 

August  6. — Commenced  firing  at  0 p.  m.  (August  5),  from  mortars, 
and  continued  till  5 o’clock  this  morning.  Intervals,  fifteen  minutes. 

August  7. — No  firing  until  evening.  Commenced  at  6 p.  m.,  with 
columbiads  and  mortars,  at  the  works  on  Morris  Island.  The  co- 
lumbiads ceased  at  7.30  p.  m.  Mortars  continued,  at  fifteen-minute 
intervals,  during  the  night. 

August  8. — Opened  with  columbiads  at  5 p.  m.  , at  the  Morris  Island 
works.  Ceased  at  7 p.  m.  with  columbiads  and  opened  with  mortars, 
which  fired  at  fifteen-minute  intervals  through  the  night. 

August  9. — Fired  from  6 to  7 p.  m.,  with  columbiads  and  mortars, 
at  the  Morris  Island  works.  Continued  the  fire  with  mortars,  at  in- 
tervals of  fifteen  minutes,  during  the  night. 

August  10. — Opened  fire  with  columbiads  at  11  a.  m.,  and  contin- 
ued till  1 1 p.  m. , on  the  enemy’s  works  on  Morris  Island.  Commenced 
with  mortars  at  6 p.  m.,  and  continued  till  morning  at  intervals  of 
twelve  minutes. 

August  11,  12. — No  record. 

August  13.— No  firing  till  5 p.  m.,  when  columbiads  commenced 
and  fired  a few  shots.  Mortars  commenced  at  6.30  p.  m.,  and  fired 
all  night  at  ten-minute  intervals. 

August  14. — The  day  passed  off  comparatively  quiet  at  this  point. 
At  6 a.  m.  a few  discharges  were  fired  from  the  columbiads.  When 
they  ceased  the  mortars  commenced,  and  continued  at  intervals  of 
fifteen  minutes  through  the  night.  The  amount  of  damage  done  the 
[enemy]  unknown,  but  the  firing  was  very  good. 

August  15. — Very  little  firing  on  either  side.  A few  rounds  from 
columbiads  in  the  afternoon,  but  ceased  at  night.  Commenced  with 
mortars  at  6.30  p.  m.,  and  continued  through  the  night  at  intervals 
of  ten  minutes. 

August  16. — At  4 p.  m.  fired  a few  rounds  from  columbiads.  Com- 
menced firing  with  mortars  at  6.30  p.  m.,  and  continued  at  intervals 
of  fifteen  minutes  during  the  night. 

August  17. — Commenced  firing  with  columbiads  and  mortars  at 
6. 30,  and  continued  very  rapidly  until  1 o’clock,  when  ceased  with 
mortars  and  continued  with  columbiads  until  evening.  An  occa- 
sional mortar  was  fired  through  the  night ; all  on  the  enemy’s  bat- 
teries on  Morris  Island. 


[Chap.  XL. 


566  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

August  18. — Commenced  firing  with  columbiads  and  mortars  at 
4 o’clock  and  continued  until  12,  when  ceased  the  mortar  firing  and 
continued  with  columbiads  but  a few  rounds  and  ceased  with  them. 

August  19. — Firing  steady  all  day  from  the  two  Brooke  rifles  and 
columbiads.  At  6 o’clock  commenced  with  mortars,  and  continued 
all  night  at  intervals  of  ten  or  fifteen  minutes.  At  dark  an  officer 
and  detachment  of  men  were  sent  to  each  battery  at  Fort  Johnson, 
and  there  remained  all  night,  to  be  in  readiness  should  their  services 
be  needed. 

August  20. — Fired  slowly  but  constantly  all  day  from  columbiads 
and  mortars.  Mortar  fire  continued  all  night  at  intervals  of  ten  min- 
utes. The  Brooke  rifles  also  kept  up  a constant  fire  on  the  enemy’s 
works  on  Morris  Island.  No  reply  to  our  fire. 

August  21. — Continued  firing  through  the  day  with  columbiads  and 
mortars  at  intervals  of  from  five  to  ten  minutes.  At  night  ceased 
to  some  extent,  but  continued  at  longer  intervals,  from  fifteen  to 
twenty  minutes,  through  the  night. 

August  22. — Constant  fire  kept  up  from  columbiads,  mortars,  and 
Brooke  guns,  on  the  enemy’s  works  on  Morris  Island,  and  the  bat- 
tery in  the  marsh,  until  stopped  by  flag  of  truce. 

August  23-26. — No  record. 

August  27. — Firing  from  columbiads  at  intervals  through  the  day. 
At  night  commenced  with  mortars,  and  continued  until  6 o’clock 
this  morning,  at  intervals  of  from  fifteen  to  twenty  minutes,  on  the 
enemy’s  works  on  Morris  Island. 

August  28. — All  quiet  up  to  8 p.m.,  when  commenced  with  mortars, 
and  continued,  at  intervals  of  fifteen  minutes,  until  3 a.  m. 

August  29. — All  quiet  during  the  day.  At  6 p.  m.  a few  colum- 
biad  shells  thrown.  At  night  mortar  practice  continued  through  the 
night  at  intervals  of  twenty  minutes.  All  quiet  this  morning. 

August  30. — Firing  continued  very  slowly  through  the  day  from 
columbiads.  At  night  commenced  with  mortars.  Fired  — rounds 
at  the  enemy’s  works  on  Morris  Island.  Effect  unknown. 

August  31.  Very  little  firing  from  either  battery.  Effect  un- 
known. One  dozen  rounds  fired  only. 

September  1. — Fired  from  Brooke  gun,  11  rounds  (shells),  with  8- 
pound  cartridges ; from  columbiads,  12  rounds  (shells),  with  good 
effect;  from  mortars,  9 rounds — effect  good. 

Battery  Cheves  * fired  45  shots.  Effect  good. 

September  2. — Fired  13  shots  from  columbiad  battery.  Effect 
good.  Mortars  and  Brooke  gun  not  firing. 

Battery  Cheves  fired  50  solid  shot  and  55  shells. 

September  3.  f — Fired  10  rounds  (shot)  from  columbiad  battery. 
Effect  tolerably  good.  Four  rounds,  from  mortar  battery.  Effect 
good. 

Battery  Cheves  fired  27  solid  shot  and  30  shells.  Effect  good. 

September  4,  5. — No  record. 

September  6. — Columbiad  battery  fired  69  rounds  ; mortar  battery, 
70  rounds.  Effect  supposed  to  be  tolerably  good  on  enemy’s  works 
on  Morris  Island. 

Battery  Cheves  fired  up  to  6 a.  m.  32  shells. 

September  7. — Fired  80  rounds  from  columbiad  battery  and  170 
rounds  from  mortar  battery.  Effect  supposed  to  be  tolerably  good. 


* Between  Legare’s  and  Shell  Point;  named  as  above,  August  21,  1863. 
f Exhibit  for  this  date  signed  by  Lieutenant-Colonel  Yates. 


Chap.  XL.] 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 


567 


Battery  Cheves  fired  25  solid  shot  and  99  shells. 

September  8. — Fired  in  the  last  twenty-four  hours  from  columhiads, 
80  shells;  from  mortars,  160  shells. 

Battery  Cheves  * fired  24  solid  shot  and  98  shells.  Effect  unknown. 


No.  53. 


Reports  of  Maj.  John  V.  Glover , Twenty-fifth  South  Carolina 
Infantry,  commanding  Battery  Haskell,  James  Island . 


Headquarters  Legare’s  Point, 

August  10,  1863. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  in  pursuance  of  your  in- 
structions, I opened  fire  this  morning  from  a 10-pounder  Parrott  gun 
upon  the  Yankee  working  party  in  the  marsh,  nearly  in  the  direc- 
tion of  Craig’s  Hill. 

Major  Manigault,  commanding  artillery,  reports  that  he — 


Commenced  firing  at  8 a.  m.  and  fired  4 shells.  The  distance  being  so  great  (prob- 
ably 2 miles),  it  was  impossible  to  see  whether  any  actual  damage  was  done;  but  the 
first  shot  evidently  disturbed  the  party,  and  after  the  fourth  they  all  dispersed  to 
the  high  land  of  Morris  Island. 


Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JNO.  Y.  GLOVER, 
Major,  Commanding. 


Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


Headquarters  Legare’s  Point, 

August  23,  1863. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  on  yesterday,  at  the  tenth 
round,  the  mortar  bed  gave  way,  in  consequence  of  the  splitting  of 
the  front  transom.  Both  mortars  are  now  useless.  At  2.20  p.  m. 
the  4.62-inch  rifle  siege  gun,  on  Platform  No.  1,  burst.  The  breech 
was  blown  out  without  any  other  damage.  The  bands  were  neither 
broken  nor  thrown  off,  and  the  rear  one  only  somewhat  loosened. 

The  following  shots  were  fired  yesterday  from  Battery  Haskell: 

The  10-inch  mortar  fired  10  shots;  the  8-inch  columbiad  fired  31 
shots;  the  4.62-inch  rifle  fired  7 shots  (burst);  the  24-pounder  (5.82 
caliber)  fired  20  shots;  the  4.62-inch  rifle  fired  12  shots;  the  24-pounder 
smooth-bore  fired  9 shots;  the  20-pounder  Parrott  fired  9 shots — all 
premature  explosions  on  account  of  the  worthlessness  of  the  shell, 
bursting  near  the  muzzle  of  the  gun. 

As  we  are  now  without  the  use  of  the  mortars,  I would  respectfully 
urge  that  iron  beds  be  furnished  (if  possible)  for  them;  if  not,  the 
strongest  wooden,  the  range  being  so  great  that  it  requires  them  to 
be  fired  with  the  extreme  charge. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JNO.  Y.  GLOYER, 

Major,  Commanding. 


Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


* Journal  from  Battery  Cheves  signed  by  Capt.  W.  W.  Billopp. 


568  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

Headquarters  Legare’s  Point, 

August  24,  1863. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  report  no  change  on  this  front  dur- 
ing the  past  twenty-four  hours.  On  yesterday  the  fire  from  Battery 
Haskell  was  resumed  at  8 a.  m. , with  the  8-inch  columbiad.  Having 
received  orders  from  headquarters  to  open  fire  on  Marsh  Battery  at  10 
p.  m.  with  all  of  our  available  guns,  commenced  firing  at  3 p.  m.,  8- 
inch  sea-coast  howitzer  and  4-inch  Blakely  gun  on  said  battery,  in 
order  to  ascertain  the  direction  and  range  for  night  firing,  the  other 
guns  being  already  trailed.  At  10  p.  m.  opened  fire  on  battery  in 
marsh  from  the  8-inch  columbiad,  8-inch  sea-coast  howitzer,  4-inch 
Blakely,  24-pounder  rifle,  24-pounder  smooth-bore,  and  4. 62-inch  rifle, 
and  continued  a steady  fire  until  12  p.  m.  At  1.30  a.  m.  received  in- 
structions to  reserve  our  fire,  so  as  to  open  on  enemy  should  he 
begin  firing.  The  enemy  did  not  return  our  fire,  but  from  battery 
in  marsh  threw  19  shells  in  the  direction  of  the  city;  3 or  4 of  these 
broke  to  pieces  or  burst  prematurely. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JNO.  V.  GLOVER, 
Major,  Commanding. 

Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  54. 

Reports  of  Capt.  Samuel  Le  Roy  Hammond,  Twenty-fifth  South 

Carolina  Infantry. 

Camp  Hagood,  August  5,  1863. 

. Major  : Agreeably  to  your  instructions,  I proceeded  on  Monday 
evening,  with  2 men,  to  Black  Island.  After  reaching  the  marsh 
off'  the  island,  the  boat  was  secured,  and  at  low  tide  we  crossed  over 
about  500  yards  of  marsh,  very  boggy,  sinking  sometimes  to  our 
hips,  and  crawled  past,  and  within  30  yards  of,  the  Yankee  picket 
post.  Heard  the  pickets  laughing  and  talking;  saw  them.  We 
gained  a thicket  and  awaited  daylight.  The  enemy  has  no  batteries 
on  Black  Island  that  I can  see.  About  one  company,  say,  60  to  70 
men,  on  the  island.  The  undergrowth  on  the  side  of  the  island 
fronting  Morris  Island  has  been  cleared  away.  I do  not  think 
any  battery  has  been  erected  for  the  purpose  of  commanding  Black 
Island,  though  I believe  the  guns  of  several  can  be  turned  against  it. 
Yesterday  the  enemy  was  all  around  us ; once  we  were  narrowed 
down  to  a circle  of  about  200  yards.  Remained  all  day ; climbed 
trees ; took  observations,  and,  passing  the  enemy’s  pickets  again,  so 
near  that  we  could  hear  them  talking,  recrossed  the  marsh,  gained 
the  boat,  and  returned  to  camp. 

A shell  from  one  of  our  batteries  struck  about  the  center  of  Black 
Island  last  night.  It  passed  quite  near  and  exploded  a little  to  the 
rear  of  us. 

Respectfully  submitted. 

SAMUEL  LE  ROY  HAMMOND, 

Captain  Company  H,  Twenty -fifth . South  Carolina  Vols. 

Maj.  John  Y.  Glover, 

Commanding,  Legare’s  Point. 


Chap.  XL]  OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C.  569 

James  Island,  August  31,  1863. 

Captain  : I have  made  a reconnaissance  of  Light-House  Inlet  and 
of  the  south  side  of  Black  Island,  and  beg  leave  to  report  as  follows  : 

Leaving  Battery  Haskell  last  night  at  half -past  8 o’clock,  I pro- 
ceeded to  the  inlet,  and,  drifting  with  the  current  for  about  a mile 
and  a half,  enjoyed  an  excellent  view  of  the  enemy’s  fleet  of  trans- 
ports. They  were  lying  at  anchor  from  the  mouth  of  the  inlet  to 
within  three-quarters  of  a mile  or  a mile  of  Black  Island.  I could 
not  recognize  any  gunboats,  nor  could  I see  any  guard-boats  or 
barges  in  front  of  the  fleet.  I afterward  landed  on  the  marsh  and 
walked  far,  in  front  of,  and  near  to,  Black  Island  beach.  Saw  a 
picket  or  bivouac  fire  about  250  to  300  yards  from  the  western  point 
and  near  the  center  of  the  island,  hut  could  see  no  earthworks,  al- 
though the  southern  side  of  the  island  was  carefully  scrutinized  in 
search  of  such.  Returning  about  3.30  a.  m.,  I am  sorry  to  say  our 
boat  picket,  stationed  in  the  creek  beyond  Battery  Haskell,  were 
surprised,  sleeping — not  one  awake.  The  men  comprising  this  hold 
the  safety  of  Battery  Haskell  and  the  lives  of  its  garrison  in  their 
hands,  and  unsleeping  vigilance  should  be  maintained.  I have  re- 
ported the  sergeant  in  charge  of  the  picket  to  Brigadier-General 
Taliaferro. 

Respectfully  submitted. 

SAMUEL  LE  ROY  HAMMOND, 
Captain  Yeadon  Light  Infantry,  2 5th  Begt.,  S.  C.  Veils. 

Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Memoranda. 

Leaving  Battery  Haskell  and  taking  the  creek  to  the  right,  I 
turned  into  Black  Island  Creek  and  continued  on  it  beyond  the  eastern 
point  of  Black  Island,  where  it  branches,  one  narrow  stream  run- 
ning toward  the  island  and  the  other  in  the  direction  of  the  Marsh 
Battery.  I proceeded  toward  the  battery  until  the  creek  or  gully 
became  so  shallow  that  I could  go  no  farther.  This  creek  runs 
nearly  dry  at  half  tide.  A small  creek  connects  it  with  a branch 
from  Thomas  Island  Creek,  upon  which,  or  in  the  vicinity  of  which, 
the  battery  has  been  erected.  As  the  marsh  was  very  soft  and  the 
battery  still  a full  quarter  of  a mile  distant,  I turned  back  and  took 
the  large  creek  running  toward  Morris  Island  and  leading  to  Thomas 
Island  Creek. 

After  going  about  1^  miles  I left  the  boat  and  took  the  marsh, 
and  succeeded  in  getting  within  from  200  to  250  yards  of  the  bat- 
tery, when  the  marsh  becoming  soft  I could  not  go  farther.  The 
moon  was  shining  brightly  and  I had  a fair  view  of  the  battery. 
Getting  somewhat  to  the  rear,  I could  plainly  see  the  Yankees  at 
work,  busy  as  bees,  making  an  embrasure  or  widening  one,  build- 
ing or  repairing  platform,  and  hammering  at  a gun-carriage.  I 
counted  23  at  work.  One  gun  was  cocked  up  over  the  epaulement, 
and  although  I could  not  distinctly  see,  yet  it  is  my  impression  that 
this  gun  has  been  disabled,  and  the  enemy  preparing  to  put  another 
in  position  and  break  the  mysterious  silence  which  the  battery  has 
maintained  during  the  week.  Meanwhile  the  disabled  gun  is  hoisted 


[Chap.  XL. 


570  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

over  the  epaulement  as  a scarecrow.  The  battery  is  triangular  in 
shape,  about  20  feet  high,  with  15  feet  as  width  of  epaulement, 
and  situated  about  a mile  or  a mile  and  a quarter  from  Graham’s 
old  headquarters,  and  a short  distance  to  the  left  or  nearer  Fort 
Sumter. 

Unless  the  branch  creek  from  Thomas  Island  Creek  is  wider  and 
deeper  than  the  one  branching  from  Black  Island  Creek,  it  would  be 
difficult  to  reach  the  battery,  as  troops  could  not  pass  any  distance 
over  the  marsh. 

There  is  a kind  of  causeway,  hard  road,  or  path  leading  from 
Morris  Island  to  the  battery. 

SAMUEL  LE  ROY  HAMMOND, 
Captain  Yeadon  Light  Infantry , 2 oth  Regt.  S.  C.  Veils. 


No.  55. 

Report  of  Corpl.  D.  L.  Crawley , Company  A , Twenty-second  Bat- 
, talion , Georgia  Artillery. 

Charleston,  July  22,  1863. 

General  : In  accordance  with  your  order  I respectfully  submit 
the  following  report : 

A detachment  from  Company  A,  Twenty-second  Battalion,  Georgia 
Artillery,  under  my  command  as  gunner,  had  charge  of  a 32-pounder 
howitzer,  almost  directly  under  the  flag. 

The  flag  having  been  shot  down  by  the  enemy’s  fire,  with  the  as- 
sistance of  Private  W.  J.  McLeroy,  of  my  detachment,  I mounted 
the  parapet  and  hoisted  it  again.  In  about  ten  minutes  it  was  shot 
down  and  torn  into  tatters,  and  was  not  again  hoisted. 

As  the  enemy  approached  in  line  of  battle,  we  fired  twice.  At  the 
second  fire  the  piece  was  trailed  so  far  to  the  right  that  its  rebound 
threw  it  off  the  platform,  and  it  was  impossible  to  work  it  any 
longer.  The  enemy  was  now  approaching  the  left  wing  of  the  bat- 
tery. The  first  port-hole  to  the  left  was  closed.  The  second  was 
open,  but  the  howitzer  was  not  in  fighting  order.  The  party  in  charge 
ot  the  piece  first  on  our  left  having  abandoned  it,  my  detachment, 
with  the  assistance  of  some  members  of  the  Fifty-first  North  Caro- 
lina Regiment,  moved  this  piece  to  the  second  port-hole  to  the  left, 
which  gave  a bearing  on  the  left  flank  of  the  enemy  as  they  were 
crossing  the  ditch  on  the  left  wing  of  the  battery.  We  fired  the 
piece  in  this  position  with  grape  and  canister  eight  times,  at  which 
time  the  enemy  ceased  firing. 

The  last  eight  loads  completely  swept  the  enemy’s  lines  and  caused 
terrible  havoc. 

The  foregoing  is  a correct  statement  of  the  part  taken  by  my  de- 
tachment in  the  conflict  at  Battery  Wagner  on  Saturday,  July  18, 
1863. 

Very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

D.  L.  CRAWLEY, 

Corporal,  Co.  A,  Twenty -second  Battalion,  Georgia  Art. 

Brigadier-General  Taliaferro, 

Commanding  Forces  on  Morris  Island. 


Chap.  XL.]  OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C.  57 1 

No.  56. 

Reports  of  Col.  Alfred  Rhett , First  South  Carolina  Artillery , com- 
manding Fort  Sumter .* 

July  10,  5.10  a.  m. — The  enemy  have  just  opened  heavy  fire  on 
Mitchel. 

July  10,  5.50  a.  m. — Monitors  in  motion.  Think  they  are  going  to 
cross  the  bar.  Can  see  distinctly  barges  already  loaded  with  men, 
concealed  behind  Little  Folly  Island.  Captain  King  has  counted  15. 

July  10,  6.10  a.  m. — Mitchel  is  replying  slowly  from  his  guns. 
Three  monitors  have  crossed  the  bar  and  are  moving  up  to  Morris 
Island. 

July  10. — Monitors  firing  slowly  at  Battery  Wagner  without  much 
effect.  Everything  the  same. 

July  10  (to  General  Ripley). — I have  just  received  the  following 
unofficial  note  from  Captain  Lesesne  at  Cumming’s  Point : 

There  have  been  several  wounded;  no  officers  as  far  as  known.  Enemy  have 
landed  800  or  1,000  men  on  Oyster  Point.  Colonel  Yates  has  just  told  me  that  he 
cannot  hold  the  battery,  and  ordered  me  to  protect  his  retreat  as  far  as  possible. 
The  whole  island  is  in  most  imminent  danger. 

H.  R.  LESESNE. 

July  10,  6.50. — The  following  messages  have  just  been  received 
here  by  signal  from  Morris  Island : 

July  10,  1863. 

Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant-General : 

The  enemy  have  opened  from  Little  Folly  with  eighty -nine  pieces  of  artillery. 
Hurry  up  re-enforcements. 

GRAHAM, 

Colonel. 


July  10,  1863. 

Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant-General : 

Three  monitors  are  approaching  now  inside  the  bar. 

W.  E.  STONEY, 
Assistant  Adjutant-General. 


July  10,  1863. 

General  Ripley  : 

The  enemy  opened  a terrible  fire  with  light  artillery.  Send  re-enforcements  im- 
mediately. 

YATES, 

. Colonel. 


July  10. — The  monitors  have  ceased  firing.  Battery  Wagner  is 
firing  slowly.  W e are  throwing  shells  on  the  island.  General  Ripley 
is  on  Morris  Island. 

July  11. — The  following  message  has  just  been  received  for  Gen- 
eral Ripley : 


General  Ripley: 


Morris  Island,  July  11. 


Send,  if  possible,  at  once  a light  battery  of  howitzers.  I can  use  them  with  great 
effect. 


R.  F.  GRAHAM. 


* Being  extracts  from  daily  reports  and  journal  of  the  defense,  forwarded  by 
him  from  day  to  day,  July  10- August  12. 


572  S.  C.  AND  DA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

July  11. — The  monitors  are  coming  np  the  channel  in  the  same 
manner  as  yesterday  afternoon. 

July  11,  11.30. — There  are  eight  wooden  gunboats  and  one  supply 
ship  inside  of  the  bar.  The  gunboats  have  fired  a few  round  shot 
at  Battery  Wagner.  I do  not  consider  it  safe  to  send  a steamer  to 
Morris  Island  at  present. 

July  11,  12.35. — The  wooden  gunboats  are  shelling  the  batteries 
on  Morris  Island  with  rifled  shells.  Yates  is  not  replying  to  them; 
I expect  he  wants  shells  for  his  rifled  gun. 

July  11,  12.54. — The  enemy  have  ceased  firing  on  Morris  Island. 

July  12. — The  enemy  have  ceased  firing  for  some  time.  We  are 
shelling  Morris  Island  slowly.  Yates  is  also  shelling. 

July  16. — One  monitor  and  three  wooden  gunboats  shelling  Bat- 
tery Wagner.  I am  shelling  new  batteries  on  Morris  Island  with 
Brooke  gun. 

July  17,  7.50  a.  m. — Steamer  Chesterfield  is  going  to  Sullivan’s 
Island  immediately  with  ordnance  and  ordnance  stores.  On  her  re- 
turn, will  proceed  to  Morris  Island  with  troops. 

July  18  (to  Brigadier-General  Jordan). — I have  the  honor  to  for- 
ward the  following  extract  from  journal  kept  at  this  post,  in  com- 
pliance with  Special  Orders,  No.  141,  department  headquarters : 

July  17,  at  2 a.  m.,  the  long  roll  was  beaten.  After  remaining 
at  battery  for  thirty  minutes,  and  seeing  no  signs  of  an  attack,  the 
recall  was  sounded.  This  morning  the  shifting  of  a 32-pounder 
rifled  gun  from  northwest  casemate  battery  to  gorge  battery  was 
completed.  At  6 a.  m.  one  10-inch  sea-coast  mortar  and  bed,  with 
296  shells,  was  shipped  to  Sullivan’s  Island. 

At  6. 30  p.  m.  the  steamboats  arriving  at  this  wharf  were  fired  into 
from  a land  battery  on  Morris  Island. 

This  is  the  first  shot  fired  from  land  in  the  direction  of  this  fort. 
We  replied  by  bursting  4 percussion  shells  on  the  island.  The  en- 
gineer work  is  progressing.  Preparations  are  being  made  to  re- 
enforce southern  wall  by  filling  officers’  quarters  with  cotton  bales 
and  sand. 

The  lower  casemates  on  western  face  are  being  converted  into  a 
hospital,  and  have  advanced  rapidly  toward  completion. 

A sally-port  is  being  cut  on  the  western  face  to  enable  boats  to 
arrive  under  cover  of  the  fort,  protected  from  the  Abolition  batteries. 

At  7. 30  p.  m.  100  negro  laborers  arrived. 

July  18  (extract  from  journal). — The  enemy  opened  this  morning 
from  two  newly  constructed  batteries  on  Morris  Island — one  at  the 
base  of  the  high  hills  on  the  lower  part  of  island,  consisting  of  ap- 
parently eight  guns,  and  the  other  on  the  old  site  of  Vinegar  Hill, 
consisting  of  two  guns  and  a mortar.  By  11  a.  m.  three  wooden 
gunboats,  five  monitors,  and  the  Ironsides,  had  opened  also  upon 
Battery  Wagner. 

At  this  time  the  fire  was  exceedingly  heavy,  and  as  many  as  27 
shells  per  minute  were  seen  to  burst  over  and  around  the  battery. 

At  7.40  p.  m.  the  enemy’s  land  forces  assaulted  the  battery,  but 
after  an  engagement  of  three  hours  and  five  minutes  they  were  re_ 
pulsed.  During  the  whole  day  we  shelled  the  enemy’s  position  and 
expended  the  following  ammunition,  viz  : 10-inch  columbiad  shells, 
45;  9-inch  Dahlgren  shells,  17;  8-inch  columbiad  shells,  30;  42-pounder 
rifled  shells,  3;  32-pounder  bolts,  18;  32-pounder  rifle  shells,  12=125 
shots  in  all. 

The  engineer  work  is  still  progressing,  and  the  hospital  is  nearly 


Chap.  XL.]  OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C.  573 

completed.  A hastily  constructed  wharf  opposite  the  new  sally- 
port, which  is  being  cut,  has  been  made.  Company  I,  30  men,  left 
this  post  during  the  night,  under  orders  to  report  to  Captain  Mitchel, 
commanding  batteries  on  Shell  Point,  James  Island. 

July  19  (extract  from  journal). — The  day  was  comparatively  quiet, 
the  enemy  having  sent  in  a flag  of  truce  in  the  morning,  and  our  men 
being  engaged  in  burying  the  dead  of  both  sides.  The  steamer  Margaret 
and  Jessie  ran  the  blockade  and  passed  the  fort  at  12  m.  last  night. 
She  was  unmolested  by  the  enemy’s  fleet.  Several  barges  loaded 
with  men  were  seen  to  come  from  a large  frigate  outside  just  at  dusk 
and  lay  off  the  position  occupied  by  the  Ironsides. 

As  a precaution,  the  garrison  slept  at  the  guns  during  the  entire 
night. 

One  gun  was  fired  from  this  post  at  8. 30  a.  m.  to  clean  the  piece. 

The  engineer  work  is  still  progressing  and  the  rooms  on  the  gorge 
face  are  being  filled  with  cotton  and  sand.  Most  of  the  work  is  done 
at  night. 

July  20  (telegram). — We  got  her  range.  The  Ironsides  drew  off 
and  has  ceased  firing. 

ALFRED  RHETT, 

Colonel , Commanding. 

[Indorsement.] 

Headquarters  First  Military  District, 

Charleston , July  25,  1863 — 6.15  p.  m. 

Respectfully  forwarded  for  information.  Seeing  the  Ironsides 
come  up,  I directed  Colonel  Rhett  and  Captain  Lesesne  to  open  at 
long  range.  The  result  is  as  reported,  and  I hope  the  usual  prudence 
of  the  commander  of  the  Ironsides  will  permit  further  experiments 
for  some  time. 

R.  S.  RIPLEY, 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 

July  20. — At  3.30  a.  m.  the  steamer  Sumter  got  aground  500  yards 
in  front  of  the  fort,  and  after  having  taken  50  men  off  she  was  got 
afloat  and  proceeded  safely  to  the  city. 

11.20  a.  m. — The  enemy’s  batteries,  fleet  and  land,  opened  fire  upon 
Battery  Wagner,  and  continued  fire  till  6.20  p.  m.,  when  the  fleet 
ceased.  The  mortar  batteries  kept  up  fire  during  the  entire  night. 

12.20  p*  m. — Gunboat  in  creek  beyond  Black  Island  opened  fire. 

At  2 p.  m.  a shell  from  enemy’s  batteries  struck  the  fort,  and  a 

continuous  fire  upon  us  was  kept  up  till  dark.  One  shot  struck  cot- 
ton-bale defenses  of  parapet  and  set  it  afire.  Drummer-boy  [John] 
Graham,  Company  E,  severely  wounded. 

At  3.30  p.  m.  Captain  Mitchel’s  battery,  on  Shell  Point,  opened 
fire. 

At  3.57  Fort  Sumter  opened  fire  on  Ironsides  and  enemy’s  bat- 
teries. 

At  4.30  Ironsides  retired. 

At  6.45  a river  steamer  off  Battery  Wagner  with  eight  barges  in 
tow. 

The  night  was  extremely  quiet  with  the  exception  of  enemy’s 
mortars  firing  upon  Battery  Wagner. 

There  were  17  shots  fired  upon  the  enemy  from  this  fort  during  the 
afternoon.  The  engineer  work  is  still  progressing,  and  tiff)  HQW 

sally-port  is  nearly  completed. 


574  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

July  21. — The  enemy  have  erected  three  batteries  this  side  of  Gra- 
ham’s headquarters.  We  can  see  apparently  six  new  embrasures 
also,  extending  the  battery  across  the  island.  They  have  erected  a 
telegraph  connecting  Big  Folly  with  Little  Folly. 

July  21  (extract  from  journal). — We  have  been  unable  to  dismount 
the  guns  ordered  to  be  sent  away,  on  account  of  not  having  the 
proper  implements. 

The  enemy  have  apparently  mounted  eight  new  guns  on  their  bat- 
teries, this  side  of  Graham’s  house. 

At  11.20  a.  m.  the  enemy’s  land  batteries  and  two  wooden  gun- 
boats commenced  to  shell  Battery  Wagner.  This  was  kept  up  till 
evening.  No  bring  took  place  here. 

The  new  sally-port  has  been  nearly  completed.  The  wharf  on 
western  face  has  been  floored  and  is  now  capable  of  bearing  heavy 
guns.  One  of  the  lower  rooms  on  southern  face  has  been  filled  with 
cotton  and  sand,  and  a second  one  is  about  half  done. 

July  22. — I do  not  think  it  worth  while  to  open  fire,  as  only  two 
monitors  are  shelling.  Have  only  shell  for  our  32-pounder  rifled 
guns.  Can  the  ordnance  department  not  furnish,  or  have  made, 
right  kind  of  shell  for  our  rifled  32-pounders  ? 

July  22,  9.10  a.  m. — A great  many  tents  near  Light-House  Inlet 
have,  I think,  disappeared.  There  are  five  steamboats  in  the  inlet ; 
some  men  aboard. 

ALFRED  RHETT, 

Colonel , Commanding. 

Captain  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


[Indorsements.] 


Headquarters  First  Military  District, 

Charleston , July  22,  1863. 

Respectfully  forwarded  for  information  of  the  commanding  gen- 
eral. Should  this  prove  true,  I suggest  that  it  sustains  the  views 
mentioned  last  evening. 

R.  S.  RIPLEY, 

Brigadier -General,  Commanding. 


July  23. 


Inform  troops 
batteries. 


on  James  Island  to  be  vigilant,  especially  at  the  new 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General,  Commanding. 


July  22. — At  12  m.  two  monitors  firing  upon  Battery  Wagner,  the 
fire  irregularly  kept  up  during  the  day. 

At  5 p.  m.  battery  near  Vinegar  Hill  opened  fire.  There  was  no 
firing  from  this  fort  during  the  day. 

At  3 p.  m.  one  double-banded  Brooke  gun  arrived. 

The  engineer  work  is  being  pushed  forward,  and  the  rooms  on 
gorge  face  filled  as  rapidly  as  possible. 

July  24  (extract  from  journal). — At  5.30  a.  m.  the  enemy  opened 
a heavy  fire  from  five  monitors,  the  Ironsides,  and  mortar  battery. 

At  9.30  a.  m.  firing  occurred  from  creek  running  toward  Black 
Island,  The  tops  of  both  magazines  have  been  traversed  with  sand- 
bags. The  filling  of  lower  rooms  on  gorge  face  has  been  about  three- 


Chap.  XL.] 


675 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 

fourths  completed.  The  sand  is  being  taken  from  the  second-tier 
casemates  on  northeast  face.  The  work  is  still  being  pushed  forward 
as  rapidly  as  possible. 

One  10-inch  columbiad  was  dismounted  during  the  night  from 
northwest  face,  and  put  upon  the  wharf.  The  following  shells  were 
fired  during  the  night,  viz:  10-inch  shells,  88;  9-inch  shells,  9;  32- 
pounder  rifle  shells,  20;  Brooke  shells,  14;  Brooke  bolts,  6.  Bunks 
and  all  combustible  material  have  been  taken  from  the  men’s  quar- 
ters, and  the  temporary  buildings  in  the  parade  taken  down. 

July  25  (extract  from  journal). — During  the  morning  the  enemy 
kept  up  a fire  upon  this  fort,  at  long  intervals,  from  30-pounder  Par- 
rott guns. 

During  the  day  and  night  we  shelled  the  enemy’s  rifle-pits  and 
lower  battery.  There  were  104  shells  fired  during  the  whole  time. 

Five  rooms  on  gorge  face  have  been  filled  with  cotton  and  sand. 
One  10-inch  columbiad  carriage  and  chassis  were  shipped  during  the 
night  to  Sullivan’s  Island. 

July  26  (extract  from  journal). — During  the  night  the  shelling 
of  the  enemy’s  batteries  was  kept  up  from  this  post  at  intervals  of 
fifteen  minutes. 

The  following  ammunition  was  expended:  10-inch  columbiad  shells, 
26;  8-inch  columbiad  shells,  13;  9-inch  Dahlgren  shells,  4;  7-inch  rifle 
shells,  5;  32-pounder  rifle  shells,  3. 

An  8-inch  navy  shell  gun  was  dismounted  during  the  night  and  is 
on  the  wharf  ready  for  shipment. 

The  engineer  work  is  still  being  carried  on,  and  the  sally-port  on 
gorge  face  is  now  being  filled,  as  also  guard-room  and  cells. 

July  27  (extract  from  journal). — A fire  on  the  enemy’s  upper  bat- 
tery was  kept  up  during  the  entire  night  at  intervals  of  fifteen  min- 
utes. 

The  following  ammunition  was  expended:  10-inch  shells,  20;  8- 
inch  shells,  12;  9-inch  shells,  28. 

Two  8-inch  columbiads,  two  carriages,  and  two  chassis  were  dis- 
mounted during  the  night,  and  all  on  the  wharf  ready  for  shipment. 

The  filling  of  the  rooms  on  gorge  face  with  cotton  and  sand  is 
pushed  forward  as  rapidly  as  possible  by  the  engineer  department; 
six  filled,  eight  to  be  filled. 

July  28.— Two  monitors  have  just  opened  on  Battery  Wagner;  land 
batteries  still  firing. 

July  28,  10.30  a.  m. — The  enemy  have  opened  two  mortar  batteries 
on  Battery  Wagner;  one  wooden  gunboat  also  firing. 

July  28.— Enemy  have  put  up  some  traverses  to  protect  their  bat- 
tery near  Graham’s  house.  Do  not  think  they  have  done  anything  at 
the  battery  nearest  Wagner.  Enemy  opened  from  their  mortars  this 
morning  about  4 o’clock.  All  quiet  now.  Four  monitors  to  be  seen; 
one  monitor  has  the  awnings  off,  also  the  Ironsides. 

July  28,  lip.  m. — There  are  three  monitors  and  the  Ironsides  lying 
off  Battery  Wagner,  and  the  enemy  are  signalizing  and  throwing 
up  rockets  from  one  of  their  gunboats  inside.. 

July  28  (extract  from  journal). — Two  8-inch  columbiads  were 
shipped  from  this  post  at  2 p.  m.  At  3 p.  m.  one  8-inch  navy  shell 
gun,  55  cwt. , was  placed  on  the  wharf  ready  for  shipment.  All  these 
guns  have  100  rounds  of  ammunition  shipped  with  them. 

During  the  day  two  more  8-inch  columbiads,  two  chassis,  and  two 
carriages  were  dismounted  and  placed  on  the  wharf  ready  to  be  sent 
away. 


[Chap.  XL. 


576  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

The  eight  rooms  on  lower  tier  gorge  face  have  nearly  been  com- 
pleted. One  room,  on  second  tier,  was  commenced  at  12  m.,  and  is 
now  about  half  filled.  The  earth  is  being  taken  from  the  parade. 

During  the  night  we  kept  up  a fire  from  this  post  at  intervals  of 
fifteen  minutes.  The  following  ammunition  was  expended,  viz  : 
10-inch  columbiad  shells,  10;  8-inch  columbiad  shells,  7;  9 -inch  Dahl- 
gren  shells,  8;  7-inch  rifle  shells,  4;  32-pounder  rifle  shells,  10. 

July  29  (extract  from  journal). — The  engineer  work  is  still  pro- 
gressing, and  all  the  lower  rooms  have  been  filled.  Two  of  the  upper 
rooms  are  now  being  worked  at. 

Several  shots  were  fired  at  the  Ironsides  about  1 p.  m.,  and  during 
the  night,  at  intervals  of  fifteen  minutes,  we  shelled  the  enemy’s 
upper  battery. 

The  following  ammunition  was  expended:  10-inch  shells,  12;  9-inch 
shells,  4;  8-inch  shells,  8;  42-pounder  shells,  10;  32-pounder  shells,  9. 

One  8-inch  columbiad,  chassis  and  carriage,  were  dismounted  dur- 
ing the  night  and  placed  on  the  wharf  ready  for  shipment. 

July  30  (extract  from  journal). — The  Ironsides  moved  up  at  12.20 
p.  m.  and  opened  fire  upon  Battery  Wagner.  After  repeated  shots 
from  this  fort,  she  retired  at  1.15  p.  m. 

A monitor  was  fired  at  several  times  between  6. 30  p.  m.  and  7 p.  m. 

One  of  the  rooms  on  upper  floor  has  been  completed  and  two  more 
are  in  process  of  being  filled,  and  the  work  is  being  carried  on  as 
rapidly  as  possible. 

One  42-pounder,  with  carriage  and  chassis,  was  dismounted  during 
the  night,  as  also  an  8-inch  navy  shell  gun,  55  cwt.  Both  are  on  the 
wharf  ready  for  shipment. 

July  31,  4 a.  m. — The  enemy  opened  fire  upon  Battery  Wagner 
with  six  mortars.  We  replied  at  intervals  of  two  minutes  between 
each  gun.  The  firing  ceased  about  5.30  a.  m. 

The  following  ammunition  was  expended,  viz:  10-inch  columbiad 
shells,  18;  8-inch  columbiad  shells,  6;  7-inch  Brooke  rifle  shells,  3; 
9-inch  Dahlgren  shells,  12 ; 32-pounder  rifle  shplls,  6. 

July  31. — Seven  10-inch  mortar  shells  were  fired  between  7 p.  m. 
and  8.30  p.  m.  from  mortar  mounted  on  end  of  wharf,  on  southern 
face. 

One  8-inch  navy  shell  gun,  63  cwt.,  was  dismounted,  and  is  on  the 
wharf  ready  for  shipment. 

The  engineer  work  is  still  progressing,  and  two  rooms  on  second 
floor  are  filled ; three  more  are  in  different  stages  of  completion. 

August  1. — At  3.45  a.  m.  the  enemy  again  opened  upon  Battery 
Wagner  from  his  mortars.  We  replied. 

The  following  ammunition  has  been  expended  during  the  past 
twenty-four  hours : 10-inch  mortar  shells,  7 ; 10-inch  columbiad  shells, 
5;  7-inch  rifled  shells,  1. 

August  1. — The  day  was  unusually  quiet,  and  no  firing  took  place 
from  this  fort  except  from  10-inch  mortar  on  end  of  wharf.  The  fol- 
lowing ammunition  was  expended:  Six  10-inch  mortar  shells.  Two 
rifle  32-pounders  were  dismounted  and  taken  outside  the  fort.  The 
wharf  proper  has  sunken  much  from  the  length  of  time  that  guns 
have  been  left  there  before  being  taken  off.  No  more  rooms  have 
been  started  by  engineer;  work  still  progressing. 

At  9.05  p.  m.  the  enemy  opened  fire  upon  steamer  Chesterfield,  land- 
ing atCumming’s  Point.  At  9,15  p.  m.  she  got  off  uninjured.  Just 
before  the  firing  commenced,  a rocket  was  thrown  up  from  somewhere 
in  t be  marsh*  and  as  soon  as  the  steamer  started  another  was  fired3 


Chap.  XL.] 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 


577 


both  evidently  from  a corps  of  observation  stationed  for  that  purpose. 
Captain  Harleston,  with  detachment  of  Company  D,  who  have  gone 
to  Morris  Island  for  the  past  three  nights  to  mount  two  10-inch  co- 
lumbiads,  had  to  be  brought  over  this  morning  in  small  boats  at  3 
o’clock  August  1,  the  steamer  being  unable  to  go  for  them.  The  pro- 
visions for  Charleston  Battalion  were  carried  in  same  manner. 

August  2. — At  1 p.  m.  the  enemy  commenced  a rapid  bombard- 
ment of  Battery  Wagner  from  his  mortars;  we  replied  vigorously, 
and  the  enemy  slackened  their  fire  in  about  one  hour. 

The  following  ammunition  was  expended,  viz : 32-pounder  rifle 
shells,  2;  7-inch  rifle  shells,  10;  10-inch  columbiad  shells  30;  10- 
inch  mortar  shells,  13;  9-inch  Dahlgren  shells,  12;  8-inch  columbiad 
shells,  40. 

The  engineer  work  is  still  progressing,  and  five  rooms  on  upper 
floor  are  filled;  two  are  in  progress.  The  wharf  sunk  so  much  yes- 
terday, that  it  broke  in,  ana  it  is  now  dangerous  to  carry  heavy  guns 
on  it  to  be  shipped.  It  is  now  being  repaired.  Captain  Harleston, 
with  a detachment  of  Company  D,  again  went  to  Morris  Island  last 
night  and  succeeded  in  mounting  the  second  10-inch  columbiad. 

Two  mechanics  have  been  sent  from  this  post  to  repair  guns  at 
Battery  Wagner.  The  ammunition  for  Battery  Wagner  had  to  be 
carried  from  this  post  last  night  by  a crew  detailed  from  this  garri- 
son with  our  boat. 

August  3. — The  day  was  unusually  quiet  and  no  firing  took  place 
from  this  post. 

The  steamer  Sumter  was  driven  away  from  Morris  Island  last 
night.  She  was  forced  to  return  here  without  landing  provisions.  A 
crew  was  detailed  from  this  garrison,  and  the  rations  and  ordnance 
stores  were  carried  over  in  barges.  The  signals  on  arrival  and  de- 
parture of  Sumter  at  Morris  were  signaled  by  the  enemy  with  a 


single  rocket 


position  where  the  steamboat 


Manigault  was  burned. 

The  engineer  work  is  still  progressing,  but  no  more  rooms  have 
been  completed.  One  mortar  and  bed  were  taken  down  from  the 
terre-plein  and  is  now  ready  for  shipment. 

August  4. — There  was  no  firing  from  this  fort.  A smooth-bore 
32-pounder,  which  has  been  lying  on  the  south  wharf,  was  brought  in 
to  be  mounted  in  casemate.  The  10-inch  mortar  mounted  on  the 
wharf  was  also  brought  in,  to  be  mounted  in  parade. 

A boat’s  crew  from  this  garrison  was  employed  during  the  greater 
part  of  the  night  in  transporting  provisions  to  Morris  Island. 

Lieutenant  Alston,  with  detachment  of  14  men,  Company  E,  left 
during  the  night  for  Battery  Wagner. 

The  engineer  work  is  still  being  pushed  forward,  and  seven  rooms 
on  upper  floor  are  filled.  Two . rooms  on  upper  floor  and  the  south 
sally-port  are  the  only  ones  remaining. 

August  5.— A 10-inch  mortar  was  mounted  in  the  parade  and  a 
platform  for  another  is  nearly  completed.  A 42-pounder  carriage 
and  chassis  (barbette)  arrived. 

The  last  two  rooms  on  upper  floor  are  being  filled  with  cotton  and 
sand. 

Company  H was  transported  to  Morris  Island  last  night,  and  Com- 
pany C relieved  and  transported  here  by  our  own  boats. 

Eighteen  7-inch  rifle  shell  and  3 32-pounder  rifle  shell  were  fired  at 
the  enemy’s  batteries  during  the  afternoon. 

August  6. — One  24-pounder  was  dismounted  from  gorge,  as  also  1 
37  R R — YOL  XXVIII,  PT  I 


578  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

10-inch  mortar.  One  rifled  32-pounder  was  removed  from  northeast 
casemate  and  mounted  on  gorge. 

The  rooms  on  upper  floor  will  be  completed  in  about  twelve  hours. 
The  gate  of  new  sally-port  was  hung  to-day. 

The  following  ammunition  was  expended:  10-inch  shell,  — ; 9-inch 
shells,  5 ; 7-inch  rifle  shells,  4 ; 32-pounder  shells,  3 ; 10-inch  colum- 
biad  shells,  3. 

'August  7. — The  following  ammunition  was  expended  : 10-inch 
mortar  shells,  10 ; 9-inch  Dahlgren  shells,  1 ; 9-inch  shot,  2 ; 8-inch 
shot,  1 ; 7-inch  rifle  shells,  1 ; 7-inch  rifle  bolts,  2. 

The  second  10-inch  mortar  was  mounted  in  the  parade.  A 24- 
pounder  was  brought  from  gorge  and  is  now  on  wharf  ready  for 
shipment. 

Merlons  have  been  put  between  the  guns  on  eastern  face.  A trav- 
erse is  being  built  at  southeastern  angle,  to  protect  guns  on  eastern 
face.  It  is  already  near  the  level  of  the  parapet. 

Two  attempts  to  raise  the  10-inch  mortar  which  fell  overboard 
while  being  shipped  for  Morris  Island  were  made  during  the  night, 
but  failed. 

August  8. — Mortar  firing  was  kept  up  at  this  fort  during  the  en- 
tire night.  The  following  ammunition  was  expended  : 10-inch  mortar 
shells,  52  ; 7-inch  rifle  shells,  6 ; 8-inch  columbiad  shells,  14. 

The  double-banded  7-incli  Brooke  gun  was  dismounted  during  the 
night  and  will  be  ready  for  transportation  to-day.  The  10-inch  mor- 
tar that  fell  overboard  was  raised  and  carried  to  Morris  Island.  Two 
24-pounders  are  on  the  wharf  ready  for  transportation. 

The  merlons  and  traverse  at  southeast  angle  of  fort  is  being  pushed 
forward  by  the  engineer  department  as  rapidly  as  possible. 

August  9. — Mortar  firing  was  kept  up  during  the  entire  night  at 
intervals  of  thirty  minutes.  The  following  ammunition  was  ex- 
pended: 19  10-inch  mortar  shells. 

Four  steamboats,  viz,  De  Kalb,  Etiwan,  Rebel,  and  Sumter,  ar- 
rived about  6 p.  m.,  loaded  with  sand  in  bags.  Two  24-pounders 
were  shipped  to  the  city.  One  32-pounder  rifle  gun  was  removed 
from  northeast  casemate  to  parapet  on  gorge  face.  The  Brooke  gun 
is  ready  for  shipment. 

The  traverse  and  merlons  on  southeast  angle  are  nearly  completed. 
A small  bomb-proof  for  ammunition  chests  is  also  being  built  on 
southeast  angle. 

August  10,  7.10  a.  m.— The  enemy  have  opened  on  Wagner  heavily 
with  his  land  batteries  and  monitors. 

August  10.— Mortar  firing  from  the  two  mortars  in  the  parade  was 
kept  up  during  the  entire  night.  The  following  ammunition  was 
expended:  mortar  shells,  49;  32-pounder  rifle  shells,  2. 

The  double-banded  Brooke  gun  was  shipped.  The  Brooke  gun  from 
salient  angle  was  shifted  to  southeast  angle.  A 32-pounder  rifle  gun 
was  mounted  on  gorge  face. 

The  engineer  work  is  being  advanced  as  rapidly  as  the  force  on 
hand  will  allow.  The  traverse  on  southeast  angle  has  been  com- 
pleted, and  the  outside  of  gorge  is  now  strengthened  with  sand. 

Several  steamers  arrived  about  9.30  p.  m.,  on  their  way  to  Morris 
Island,  but  the  enemy  having  a powerful  Drummond  light  shining 
on  the  point,  they  returned  to  the  city. 

August  11.— The  third  10-inch  mortar  was  brought  during  the 
night  from  gorge  face  and  landed  in  the  parade. 

Mortar  firing  was  kept  up  from  9.30  p.  m,  The  following  anunu- 


Chap.  XL.] 


OPERATIONS  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND,  S.  C. 


579 


nition  was  expended:  34  mortar  shells.  A traverse  has  befcn  com- 
menced on  gorge  face. 

The  revetment  to  gorge  is  still  being  pushed  forward. 

August  12. — The  steamer  Hibben  was  this  morning  disabled  at 
the  wharf  by  a 200-pounder  Parrott  shell;  7 negroes  were  injured,  3 
more  or  less  seriously.  The  oven  in  bakery  has  been  rendered  use- 
less, and  about  one-half  bushel  of  bricks  thrown  from  arch  beneath. 
Three  shells  exploded  in  western  barracks,  injuring  no  one.  The 
commissary  stores  have  been  removed  to  the  three  casemates  on 
northeast  angle. 

A small  boat  has  been  sent  to  Fort  Johnson  to  bring  over  fresh 
beef. 


No.  57. 


Confederate  Roll  of  Honor. 


General  Orders,  ) Adjt.  and  “Inspector  General’s  Office, 

No.  93.  j Richmond , Va.,  November  22,  1862. 

I.  The  following  acts  of  Congress,  having  been  approved  by  the 
President,  are  published  for  the  information  of  the  Army  : 

* * * * * * * 


No.  27.— AN  ACT  to  authorize  the  grant  of  medals  and  badges  of  distinction  as  a reward  for  courage 
and  good  conduct  on  the  field  of  battle. 


The  Congress  of  the  Confederate  States  of  America  do  enact , That  the  President 
be,  and  he  is  hereby,  authorized  to  bestow  medals,  with  proper  devices,  upon  such 
officers  of  the  armies  of  the  Confederate  States  as  shall  be  conspicuous  for  courage 
and  good  conduct  on  the  field  of  battle,  and  also  to  confer  a badge  of  distinction 
upon  one  private  or  non-commissioned  officer  of  each  company  after  every  signal 
victory  it  shall  have  assisted  to  achieve.  The  non-commissioned  officers  and  pri- 
vates of  the  company  who  may  be  present  on  the  first  dress-parade  thereafter  may 
choose,  by  a majority  of  their  votes,  the  soldier  best  entitled  to  receive  such  distinc- 
tion, whose  name  shall  be  communicated  to  the  President  by  commanding  officers 
of  the  company;  and  if  the  award  fall  upon  a deceased  soldier,  the  badge  thus 
awarded  him  shall  be  delivered  to  his  widow,  or  if  there  be  no  widow,  to  any  rela- 
tive the  President  may  adjudge  entitled  to  receive  it. 

Approved  October  13,  1862. 

^ ^ ^ ^ 


By  order: 


S.  COOPER, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 


General  Orders,  ) Adjt.  and  Inspector  General’s  Office, 

No.  131.  j Richmond,  Va.,  October  3,  1863. 

Difficulties  in  procuring  the  medals  and  badges  of  distinction 
having  delayed  their  presentation  by  the  President,  as  authorized  by 
the  act  of  Congress  approved  October  13,  1862,  to  the  officers,  non- 
commissioned officers,  and  privates  of  the  armies  of  the  Confederate 
States  conspicuous  for  courage  and  good  conduct  on  the  field  of 
battle,  to  avoid  postponing  the  grateful  recognition  of  their  valor 
until  it  can  be  made  in  the  enduring  form  provided  by  that  act,  it  is 
ordered — 


580 


[Chap.  XL. 


S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 


I.  That  the  names  of  all  those  who  have  been,  or  may  hereafter 
be,  reported  as  worthy  of  this  distinction  be  inscribed  on  a Roll  of 
Honor,  to  be  preserved  in  the  office  of  the  Adjutant  and  Inspector 
General  for  reference  in  all  future  time,  for  those  who  have  deserved 
well  of  their  country,  as  having  best  displayed  their  courage  and 
devotion  on  the  field  of  battle. 

II.  That  the  Roll  of  Honor,  so  far  as  now  made  up,  be  appended 
to  this  order  and  read  at  the  head  of  every  regiment  in  the  service  of 
the  Confederate  States  at  the  first  dress-parade  after  its  receipt,  and 
be  published  in  at  least  one  newspaper  in  each  State. 

III.  The  attention  of  the  officers  in  charge  is  directed  to  General 
Orders,  No.  93,  Section  No.  27,  of  the  series  of  1862,  Adjutant  and 
Inspector  General’s  Office,  for  the  mode  of  selecting  the  non-commis- 
sioned officers  and  privates  entitled  to  this  distinction,  and  its  execu- 
tion is  enjoined. 

* * * * * * * 


By  order : 


S.  COOPER, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 


General  Orders,  \ Adjt.  and  Inspector  General’s  Office, 

No.  64.  j Richmond,  Va.,  August  10,  1864. 

I.  The  following  Roll  of  Honor  is  published  in  accordance  with 
Paragraph  I,  General  Orders,  No.  131,  1863.  It  will  be  read  to  every 
regiment  in  the  service,  at  the  first  dress-parade  after  its  receipt. 

* * * * * * 


BATTERY  WAGNER,  CHARLESTON  HARBOR. 

Capt.  C.  S.  Hill,  acting  chief  of  ordnance. 

Capt.  [C.  E.]  Chichester,  acting  chief  of  artillery. 

Maj.  [J.  T.]  Champneys,  acting  chief  of  engineers. 

Sergt.  J.  T.  Respess,  Company  B,  61st  North  Carolina  Troops. 
Private  Henry  Winemore,  Company  F,  61st  North  Carolina  Troops. 


BATTERY  GREGG,  CHARLESTON  HARBOR. 


Sergt.  J.  E.  Edgerton,  Company  A,  25th  South  Carolina  Infantry. 

Private  E.  H.  Martin,  Company  K,  Rutledge  Cavalry  (4th  South  Carolina  Cav- 
alry). 

Private  W.  D.  Du  Barry,  Company  E,  Charleston  Battalion. 

Private  A.  Grimball,  Marion  Artillery. 

Private  F.  K.  Huger,  Company  F,  Aiken’s  Partisan  Rangers  (6th  South  Carolina 
Cavalry). 

The  above-named  non-commissioned  officer  and  privates  are  on  detached  service 
with  the  signal  corps. 

* * * * * * * 


By  order: 


S.  COOPER, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 


Chap.  XL.]  ENGAGEMENT  NEAR  GRIMB ALL'S  LANDING,  S.  C.  581 

JULY  16,  1863. — Engagement  near  Grimball’s  Landing,  James  Island,  S.  C. 


REPORTS.^ 


No.  1.— Lieut.  Paul  Brodie,  Seventy-ninth  New  York  Infantry,  Acting  Signal  Offi- 
cer, including  operations  July  7-20. 

No.  2. Col.  William  W.  H.  Davis,  One  hundred  and  fourth  Pennsylvania  In- 

fantry, commanding  brigade. 

No.  3.— Brig.  Gen.  Johnson  Hagood,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  on  James  Island. 
No.  4.— Brig.  Gen.  A.  H.  Colquitt,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  brigade. 

No.  5.— Col.  Charlton  H.  Way,  Fifty -fourth  Georgia  Infantry. 

No.  6.— Col.  James  D.  Radcliffe,  Sixty-first  North  Carolina  Infantry. 

No.  7.— Lieut.  Col.  R.  J.  Jeffords,  Fifth  South  Carolina  Cavalry. 

No.  1. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Paul  Brodie,  Seventy -ninth  New  York  Infantry, 
Acting  Signal  Officer,  including  operations  July  7-20. 

Hilton  Head,  S.  C., 

September  10,  1863. 

Sir  : In  obedience  to  Special  Orders,  No.  10  (a  copy  of  which  I 
inclose,  marked  Af),  I reported  for  duty  to  Brig.  Gen.  A.  H.  Terry, 
commanding  First  Division. 

On  the  7th  of  Jnly,  1863,  embarked  on  the  steamer  Mary  A.  Board- 
man,  arrived  at  Stono  Inlet  on  the  afternoon  of  the  8th,  and  in  the 
evening  of  the  same  day  debarked  on  the  south  end  of  Folly  Island. 

At  1.30  a.  m.  of  the  9th,  General  Terry  gave  me  verbal  orders  to 
report  at  once  for  duty  to  Commander  George  B.  Balch,  on  board 
the  U.  S.  steam  sloop  Pawnee,  then  lying  at  the  mouth  of  Stono 
River.  At  2 o’clock  of  same  morning  I reported  on  board.  The 
following  are  the  names  of  signal  men  who  accompanied  me: 

Private  David  Russell,  Company  C,  Seventy-ninth  Regiment 
New  York  Volunteers ; Privates  William  R.  Elston,  [John]  Tilley, 
and  [Thomas  C.]  Parsons. 

At  9 o’clock  General  Terry  sent  a boat  for  me  to  go  to  the  Mary 
A.  Boardman  and  arrest  a deserter  I had  recognized  the  day  pre- 
vious on  that  steamer.  Before  leaving  the  Pawnee,  Private  David 
Russell  was  reported  sick.  I ordered  him  into  the  boat  with  me,  and 
after  having  arrested  the  deserter  and  reported  on  shore  to  General 
Terry  for  further  orders,  I placed  Russell  in  care  of  a surgeon,  who 
pronounced  him  unfit  for  duty.  Later  in  the  day,  General  Terry 
ordered  that  Russell  be  sent  to  general  hospital  at  Hilton  Head. 

Received  orders  from  General  Terry  to  remain  on  shore  for  the 
present.  At  2 p.  m.  embarked  on  the  steamer  General  Hunter. 
At  5. 20,  the  whole  division  having  been  placed  on  board  transports, 
proceeded  up  Stono  River,  the  gunboats  leading  the  way.  At  about 
6.15  p.  m.  the  woods  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  Stevens’  Landing, 
on  James  Island,  were  shelled  by  the  Pawnee  and  other  vessels. 
During  this  firing  I was  ordered  by  General  Terry  to  report  on  the 
Pawnee  and  open  communication  with  the  land  force.  At  7 p.  m. 


* See  also  reports  of  Gillmore  and  Beauregard  pp.  3,  55,  and  for  report  of  Com- 
mander George  B.  Balch,  U.  S.  Navy,  see  Annual  Report  of  the  Secretary  of  the 
Navy,  December  7,  1863. 
f Not  found. 


[Chap.  XL. 


582  S.  0.  AND  GrA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

communication  was  open  between  General  Terry  on  shore  and  Com- 
mander Balch  on  the  Pawnee. 

On  the  afternoon  of  the  10th,  the  land  force  made  a forward  move- 
ment of  about  a mile  and  a half  up  the  island,  with  the  Pawnee 
under  way  and  shelling  the  woods  in  advance.  The  fire  of  the 
vessel  was  directed  from  the  shore,  the  nature  of  the  country  not 
admitting  of  accuracy  of  fire  from  the  decks  without  signals. 
About  dark,  the  outposts  being  established  on  shore,  the  Pawnee 
moved  up  to  Wright’s  Landing  and  anchored. 

At  4.35  a.  m.  of  the  16th,  the  enemy  opened  fire  on  the  ship  from 
a battery  of  light  artillery,  which  they  had  brought  down  during 
the  night  to  the  edge  of  the  woods  skirting  Wright’s  Landing. 

The  position  of  the  rebel  battery  was  such  that  we  could  not  bring 
our  guns  to  bear  on  it,  and  before  the  cable  could  be  slipped  and  a 
new  position  taken,  the  ship  was  struck  thirty-nine  times  in  her  hull. 
I had,  in  the  meantime,  opened  communication  with  the  shore,  and 
was  working,  when  the  rebel  battery  suddenly  ceased  firing  on  the 
vessel  and  turned  toward  our  troops.  The  enemy  advanced  at  5 a.  m. 
on  General  Terry,  their  force  numbering  9,000  infantry,  one  light 
battery,  and  about  200  cavalry.  The  fire  of  the  naval  vessels  was 
directed  by  signals,  and  at  7.10  a.  m.  the  enemy  were  in  full  retreat 
toward  Secessionville,  having  been  defeated  with  considerable  loss. 

At  the  close  of  the  action,  Commander  Balch  and  other  officers  of 
his  vessel  voluntarily  acknowledged  the  great  value  of  our  signals, 
and  in  his  communication  to  Colonel  Myer  (a  copy  of  which  I in- 
close, marked  B)  he  ascribes  the  victory  of  the  16th  to  the  facilities 
for  communication  afforded  by  our  signals. 

My  detachment  of  signal  men  behaved  well.  I beg  to  be  per- 
mitted to  bring  to  your  notice  the  name  of  Private  William  R.  Elston. 
This  man  worked  my  flag  coolly  and  courageously  during  the  ac- 
tion; he  is  well  worthy  of  reward.  While  sending  a message  from 
the  Pawnee,  a round  shot  entered  the  side  of  the  ship,  about  15  inches 
from  his  person.  Although  making  a number  at  the  time,  he  did 
not  stop  nor  make  any  error.  At  no  time  did  I see  him  flinch  when 
under  the  heavy  fire  from  the  battery.  In  addition  to  this,  he 
proved  himself  the  most  vigilant,  intelligent,  and  trustworthy  look- 
out of  my  party.  I therefore  respectfully  commend  him  to  your 
favorable  notice,  hoping  he  may  be  suitably  rewarded  for  his  gal- 
lant conduct. 

The  other  two  men,  Privates  Tilley  and  Parsons,  are  also  deserv- 
ing of  notice.  They  were  constant  and  faithful  in  the  discharge  of 
their  duties,  and  were  steady  and  reliable  under  fire. 

I had  no  casualties  among  my  men.  I received  a slight  wound  in 
my  right  shoulder  and  neck  from  a splinter;  was  not  disabled  for  duty. 

On  the  17th,  our  forces  left  James  Island,  and  on  the  18th  the 
Pawnee  dropped  down  the  river  to  her  anchorage  at  its  mouth. 

On  the  afternoon  of  the  18th,  I was  relieved  from  duty  on  the  Paw- 
nee, and  accompanied  General  Terry  to  Morris  Island,  where  I was  on 
the  19th  ordered  to  duty  in  the  batteries.  On  the  20th,  I was  relieved 
from  duty  on  the  staff  of  General  Terry,  and  on  the  23d  was  ordered 
to  duty  at  Hilton  Head. 

I may  state  that  I labored  under  many  disadvantages  while  read- 
ing signals  during  action,  the  distance  between  the  shore  and  ship 
communication  being  too  great  to  dispense  with  a glass,  while  the 
almost  constant  jarring  of  the  vessel,  caused  by  the  firing  of  the  guns, 
made  it  difficult  to  read  at  all. 


Chap.  XL]  ENGAGEMENT  NEAR  GRIMBALl’s  LANDING,  S.  C. 


583 


Every  facility  for  signaling  was  afforded  me  by  Commander  Balch 
and  bis  officers,  all  of  whom  were  lavish  in  their  praise  of  a system 
of  communication  so  rapid  and  reliable,  and  which  had  proved  itself 
of  so  much  value. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

PAUL  BRODIE, 

2 d Lieut.,  79 th  Begt.  N.  Y.  VUs.,  Acting  Signal  Officer. 

Lieut.  F.  E.  Town, 

Acting  Chief  Signal  Officer , Dept,  of  the  South. 

[Inclosure  B.] 

U.  S.  Steam  Sloop  Pawnee, 

Stono  Inlet , S.  C .,  August  11,  1863. 

Col.  A.  J.  Myer, 

Chief  Signal  Officer,  U.  S.  Army : 

Sir  : I have  great  pleasure  in  testifying  to  the  most  important  and 
valuable  services  rendered  by  Lieut.  Paul  Brodie,  acting  signal 
officer,  during  the  recent  operations  in  the  Stono,  by  a division  under 
command  of  General  Terry. 

Lieutenant  Brodie  was  assigned  to  the  Pawnee  under  my  command, 
and  I gladly  testify,  not  only  to  his  energy,  zeal,  and  intelligence,  but 
to  his  great  coolness  under  a very  hot  fire  from  the  enemy’s  batteries 
upon  the  Pawnee,  in  which  she  was  struck  nearly  fifty  times,  but 
furthermore,  to  his  accurate  reports  from  General  Terry,  we  were 
enabled  to  not  only  stop  an  advance  of  a heavy  force  against  the 
general,  but  we  were  able  to  cause  a speedy  retreat  of  the  enemy. 

I therefore  deem  it  but  fair  to  make  this  statement  in  favor  of 
Lieutenant  Brodie,  and  I trust  he  may  be  appointed  to  the  Signal 
Corps  now  being  organized  in  the  army. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

GEO.  B.  BALCH, 

Commander,  XJ.  S.  Navy,  and  Senior  Officer  present. 


No.  2. 

Report  of  Col.  William  W.  H.  Davis,  One  hundred  and  fourth 
Pennsylvania  Infantry,  commanding  brigade. 

Hdqrs.  Second  Brigade,  Terry’s  Division, 

Folly  Island,  S.  C.,  July  31,  1863. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the 
operations  of  the  Second  Brigade  during  the  recent  expeditions  to 
James  Island  : 

The  One  hundred  and  fourth  and  Fifty-second  Pennsylvania  Vol- 
unteers embarked  on  board  the  steamer  Boston,  on  the  afternoon  of 
the  9th  instant,  at  the  south  end  of  Folly  Island,  to  accompany  the 
division  up  the  Stono.  The  brigade  at  this  time  was  composed  of 
only  portions  of  these  two  regiments,  the  One  hundredth  New  York 
having  been  detached,  and  the  Fifty-sixth  New  York  not  yet  having 
come  up  from  Seabrook  and  reported  for  duty.  Four  companies  of 
the  One  hundred  and  fourth  and  three  companies  of  the  Fifty-second 
remained  behind  on  picket,  so  that  the  effective  strength  of  the  bri- 
gade did  not  exceed  600  men. 

The  Boston  reached  Stevens’  Landing  about  dark,  when,  by  virtue 


[Chap.  XL. 


584  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

of  orders  from  the  brigadier-general  commanding,  the  brigade  was 
disembarked  in  boats,  the  officers  and  men  wading  ashore  through 
deep  mud.  Upon  landing  the  first  boat  load,  I threw  out  pickets,  and 
pushed  them  farther  out  as  more  troops  were  put  on  shore.  Both 
regiments  being  now  landed,  the  knapsacks  were  piled  on  the  beach 
and  the  troops  formed  to  move  inland.  Meanwhile,  Brigadier-Gen- 
eral Terry  and  staff  had  come  ashore  and  marched  at  the  head  of  the 
column.  After  proceeding  about  three-fourths  of  a mile,  we  arrived 
at  a bridge,  the  only  approach  to  the  landing  from  the  interior,  which 
was  seized.  The  column  was  halted  here  for  the  night  and  the  proper 
disposition  made  to  prevent  surprise ; strong  pickets  were  stationed 
across  the  bridge  in  front.  Soon  after  the  bridge  was  seized,  a rebel 
picket  on  duty  near  it  fired  upon  my  troops.  A few  shots  were  re- 
turned by  the  regiments  and  a momentary  alarm  created,  but  it 
passed  away  instantly.  There  were  no  casualties  on  our  side,  and 
none  known  to  be  with  the  enemy.  The  troops  were  placed  behind 
the  slope  of  the  causeway  and  a ridge  that  ran  in  front  of  the  bridge, 
for  better  protection  in  case  of  attack,  where  they  remained  all  night 
without  further  alarm.  At  daylight  in  the  morning,  I pushed  for- 
ward my  skirmishers,  under  Captain  Davis,  Fifty-second  Pennsyl- 
vania V olunteers,  and  advanced  the  column  nearly  2 miles  into  the 
interior  of  the  island,  and  until  I seized  and  held  the  causeways 
leading  across  the  low  ground  toward  Secessionville.  The  enemy 
had  mounted  pickets  on  the  road,  who  retired  before  us,  but  they 
were  so  closely  followed  that  our  skirmishers  captured  their  break- 
fast, ready  cooked,  a blanket,  and  some  other  articles.  Strong  pick- 
ets were  posted  to  hold  the  ground  we  had  occupied.  It  being  re- 
ported to  me  that  a large  force  of  infantry  was  seen  coming  across 
the  causeways,  I advanced  with  my  two  regiments  to  meet  them,  but 
found  no  enemy  to  oppose  us,  excepting  a few  cavalrymen  at  the 
building  near  our  picket  line,  used  by  the  rebels  as  a signal  station, 
\vho  fled  on  our  approach.  About  this  time,  General  Stevenson’s 
brigade  came  up  and  relieved  mine,  which  went  into  bivouac,  in  the 
strip  of  wood  fronting  the  ground  occupied  by  our  army  in  the  sum- 
mer of  1862. 

From  this  time  to  the  16th  instant,  when  our  troops  were  attacked 
by  the  enemy,  my  brigade  was  engaged  in  doing  the  usual  picket  and 
fatigue  duty.  On  the  13th,  the  Fifty-sixth  New  York  reported  to 
me,  and  meanwhile  the  companies  left  behind  on  picket  had  joined 
us,  which  increased  the  effective  strength  of  the  brigade  to  about 
1,100  men.  Upon  the  first  alarm  on  the  morning  of  the  attack,  the 
brigade  was  promptly  under  arms  and  placed  in  order  of  battle, 
forming  the  second  line  200  yards  in  rear  of  the  first  line.  The  One 
hundred  and  fourth  Pennsylvania  Volunteers  formed  the  right  of  the 
line,  and  the  Second  South  Carolina  Volunteers,  under  Colonel  Mont- 
gomery, which  reported  to  me  at  the  first  alarm,  was  on  the  left. 
The  enemy  did  not  come  near  enough  for  the  use  of  small-arms,  but 
my  troops  bore  the  heavy  artillery  fire  of  the  enemy,  which  seemed 
directed  to  the  right  of  my  line,  tor  an  hour,  with  great  steadiness. 
The  shot  and  shell  tore  through  and  about  my  ranks  in  great  num- 
ber, and  yet  not  an  officer  or  man  was  struck.  Private  Knight,  First 
Massachusetts  Cavalry,  one  of  my  mounted  orderlies,  was  wounded 
by  a musket-ball,  as  was  also  his  horse,  the  only  casualty  in  my 
brigade. 

In  the  evacuation  of  James  Island,  that  night,  by  order  of  the 
brigadier-general  commanding,  I withdrew  two  regiments  of  my 


Chap.  XL.]  ENGAGEMENT  NEAR  GRIMBALL’s  LANDING,  S.  C. 


585 


brigade,  together  with  the  Tenth  Connecticut,  Fifty-fourth  Massa- 
chusetts, and  Second  South  Carolina,  which  were  assigned  to  my 
column,  by  the  causeways  and  foot-bridges  which  lead  across  the 
swamp  to  Cole’s  Island.  I caused  the  bridges  to  be  destroyed  behind 
me,  and  thus  prevented  pursuit.  I arrived  at  the  mouth  of  Stono  the 
morning  of  the  17th,  about  sunrise. 

It  affords  me  pleasure  to  bear  testimony  to  the  good  conduct  of 
the  officers  and  men  of  my  command,  both  while  under  fire  and  en- 
during the  fatigue  and  hardships  incident  to  the  operations. 

I remain,  yours,  respectfully, 

W-  W.  H.  DAVIS, 

Colonel  104 th  Pennsylvania  Vols.,  Comdg.  Brigade. 

Capt.  Adeian  Teery, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


Hdqrs.  Second  Brigade,  Terry’s  Division, 

Folly  Island,  S.  C.,  July  18,  1863. 

Captain  : In  answer  to  your  favor  of  the  17th  instant,  directing 
me  to  send  in  to  your  headquarters,  as  soon  as  possible,  a list  of  the 
killed,  wounded,  and  missing  in  my  command  in  the  action  on  James 
Island,  July  16,  I have  the  honor  to  state  that  there  were  no  casual- 
ties in  my  brigade  upon  that  occasion,  with  the  exception  of  a wound 
received  by  Private  Thomas  Dorr  Knight,  First  Massachusetts  Cav- 
alry, one  of  my  mounted  orderlies.  I had  occasion  to  send  him  to 
the  front,  when  he  received  a volley  of  musketry  from  the  rebel  in- 
fantry, which  wounded  both  himself  and  horse.  He  was  shot  in  the 
right  leg  below  the  knee,  but  the  wound  is  not  dangerous. 

It  affords  me  pleasure  to  call  the  attention  of  the  brigadier-general 
commanding  to  the  good  conduct  of  the  officers  and  men  of  my 
command.  The  right  of  my  line  was  under  a heavy  fire  of  artillery, 
and  it  seems  providential  that  my  men  escaped  unhurt. 

I remain,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  W.  H.  DAVIS, 

Colonel  104i th  Pennsylvania  Vols.,  Comdg.  Brigade. 

Capt.  Adrian  Terry, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 

ADDENDA. 

Return  of  Casualties  in  the  Union  forces  engaged  near  Grimball's  Landing , James 
Island , S.  C.,  July  16,  1863. 


[Compiled  from  nominal  list  of  casualties,  returns,  &c.] 


Command. 

Killed. 

Wounded. 

Captured  or 
missing. 

Aggregate. 

Officers. 

Enlisted  men. 

Officers. 

Enlisted  men.  j 

Officers. 

Enlisted  men. 

1st  Connecticut  Battery 

1 1 
! 

17  ' 

1 

1 

1 

43 

1st  Massachusetts  Cavalry  (detachment) 

24th  Massachusetts  Infantry 

54th  Massachusetts  Infantry  (Colored) 

Total 

14 

12 

14 

“i 

12  j 46 



[Chap.  XL. 


586  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

No.  3. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Johnson  Hagood , C.  S.  Army , commanding 

on  James  Island. 

Hdqrs.  1st  Subdivision  1st  Mil.  Dist.  South  Carolina, 

James  Island,  July  18,  1863. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  make  the  following  report  of  the 
operations  of  the  troops  under  my  command  on  the  16th  instant: 

I had  been  instructed  on  the  day  previous  to  observe  and  report 
the  possibility  of  offensive  operations  against  the  enemy  in  my  front, 
and  had  reported  two  plans.  The  one  which  limited  to  driving 
in  their  pickets  on  the  left  and  making  a reconnaissance  of  that  part 
of  their  line,  with  the  further  object  of  capturing  or  destroying  the 
part  of  their  force  nearest  Grimball’s,  was  the  one  approved. 

The  enemy  occupied  Battery  Island  and  Legarffs  plantation,  prin- 
cipally, and  a part  of  Grimball’s,  while  their  gunboats  lay  in  the 
Stono  and  Folly  Rivers,  giving  a cross-fire  in  front  of  their  position 
extending  as  far  as  our  picket  line.  General  Colquitt  was  ordered 
with  about  1,400  infantry  and  a battery  of  artillery  to  cross  the 
marsh  dividing  Legard’s  plantation  from  Grimball’s  at  the  cause- 
way nearest  Secessionville,  drive  the  enemy  as  far  as  the  lower 
causeway  (nearest  Stono),  rapidly  recross  the  marsh  at  that  point 
by  a flank  movement,  and  cut  off  and  capture  the  force  encamped 
at  Grimball’s.  Colonel  Way,  Fifty-fourth  Georgia,  with  about 
800  infantry,  was  directed  to  follow,  en  echelon,  on  the  Grimball  side 
of  the  marsh  the  advance  of  General  Colquitt  and  co-operate  with 
him.  A reserve  of  one  section  of  artillery,  supported  by  a com- 
pany of  infantry  and  a squadron  of  cavalry,  under  Lieutenant-Col- 
onel Jeffords,  Fifth  South  Carolina  Cavalry,  was  held  in  hand 
near  Rivers’  house.  On  the  right,  a battery  of  four  rifled  12-pounders 
and  one  of  four  Napoleons,  under  Lieutenant-Colonel  Kemper,  sup- 
ported by  Colonel  Radcliffe  with  about  400  infantry,  was  ordered  to 
engage  the  gunboats  lying  highest  up  the  Stono. 

The  troops  moved  upon  the  enemy  in  the  gray  of  the  morning, 
becoming  immediately  engaged,  and  the  whole  enterprise  was  car- 
ried out  as  planned.  The  force  at  Grimball’s,  however,  was  smaller 
than  was  anticipated,  and  by  retreating  across  to  Battery  Island  as  soon 
as  Colquitt’s  firing  was  heard,  managed  to  save  themselves  before 
he  could  get  into  position  to  intercept  them.  Colonel  Kemper  en- 
gaged the  Pawnee  and  another  gunboat  at  250  yards,  and  after  some 
10  rounds  drove  them  down  the  river  beyond  his  range.  The  re- 
serve artillery  was  not  brought  into  action.  The  cavalry  did  good 
service  in  sweeping  up  fugitives.  The  troops  were  under  fire  one 
hour  and  a half,  and  behaved  well.  This  fire  was  chiefly  shell  from 
gunboats  and  shell  and  case  from  a field  battery.  The  enemy’s 
infantry  fought  badly.  They  were  chiefly  colored  troops,  and  14  of 
them  were  captured.  These  belonged  to  the  Fifty-fourth  Massa- 
chusetts. About  30  of  the  enemy  were  killed  upon  the  field. 

I beg  leave  to  refer  to  accompanying  reports  of  subordinate  com- 
manders for  full  details. 

The  enemy  were  supposed  not  to  have  been  above  2,000  infantry 
and  one  battery  artillery.  Upon  the  following  night  they  evacu- 
ated James  and  Battery  Islands,  leaving  behind  them  arms  and  stores, 
of  which  a full  return  will  be  made. 


587 


Chap.  XL.]  ENGAGEMENT  NEAR  GRIMBALL’s  LANDING,  S.  C. 

Our  casualties  were  3 killed  and  12  wounded,  and  3 missing. 

Colonel  [William]  Bull  and  Captain  [A.  N.  T.  ] Beauregard,  of 
the  staff  of  General  Beauregard,  and  Captain  [B.  H.]  Read,  of  Gen- 
eral Ripley’s  staff,  reported  to  me  for  duty  upon  the  occasion,  and, 
together  with  my  own  staff,  rendered  efficient  service. 

I am,  captain,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOHNSON  HAGOOD, 
Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 

Captain  [W.  F.]  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  4. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  A.  H.  Colquitt,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding 

brigade. 

Headquarters  Colquitt’s  Brigade, 

July  17,  1863. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  an  account  of  the  recon- 
naissance of  the  enemy’s  position  and  forces  on  James  Island,  made 
on  the  morning  of  July  16. 

My  command  consisted  of  the  Twenty-fifth  South  Carolina,  Lieu- 
tenant-Colonel [J.  G.]  Pressley;  Sixth  Georgia,  Colonel  [J.  T.] 
Lofton;  Nineteenth  Georgia,  Colonel  [A.  J.]  Hutchins;  four  com- 
panies of  the  Thirty-second  Georgia,  Lieutenant-Colonel  [W.  H.] 
Pruden,  and  Captain  [E.  L.]  Parker’s  battery  of  light  artillery. 

By  order  of  Brigadier-General  Hagood,  these  forces  united  at  Se- 
cessionville  at  12  o’clock  on  the  night  previous.  At  3.30  o’clock  we 
took  up  the  line  of  march  and  moved  to  the  picket  outposts.  W aiting 
until  dawn,  six  companies  of  the  Twenty -fifth  South  Carolina  Regi- 
ment were  deployed  as  skirmishers  on  the  right  and  left  of  the  road 
leading  from  Secessionville  to  Legar^’s  house,  with  instructions  to 
press  forward  as  fast  as  practicable.  Just  after  crossing  the  first 
causeway,  our  skirmishers  encountered  the  enemy’s  pickets,  and  a 
brisk  fire  was  kept  up  for  a few  minutes,  when  the  enemy’s  line  gave 
way  and  retreated  in  confusion.  My  skirmishers,  advancing,  pressed 
the  retreating  line  beyond  Legarffs  overseer’s  house.  Captain  Parker’s 
battery  followed  the  reserve  skirmishers,  and  my  other  forces  moved 
by  the  flank  in  rear  of  the  battery.  When  near  the  house,  perceiv- 
ing that  a considerable  party  of  the  enemy  had  been  cut  off  by  the 
left  of  the  line  of  skirmishers,  I sent  a company  from  the  Nineteenth 
Georgia  Regiment  with  instructions  to  kill  or  capture  them.  I moved 
forward  until  I reached  the  road  leading  across  the  lower  causeway. 
I found  the  enemy  drawn  up  in  line  of  battle  in  front  of  his  camps, 
400  or  500  yards  beyond.  His  force,  I think,  did  not  exceed  1,500  in- 
fantry and  a battery  of  artillery.  They  could,  I think,  easily  have 
been  routed,  and  the  spirit  of  the  command  was  high  for  the  enterprise. 
Captain  Parker  moved  his  battery  into  position,  and  fired  several 
rounds  into  his  ranks  with  good  effect.  I had  proceeded,  however,  as 
far  as  I had  instructions,  and  the  object  of  the  expedition  having 
been  accomplished,  I directed  the  movement  to  the  right,  recrossed 
the  marsh,  and  returned  through  open  fields  to  Secessionville. 
While  passing  through  Legarffs  plantation,  we  were  subjected  to  a 


[Chap.  XL. 


588  S.  C.  AND  GrA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

brisk  fire  from  tlie  enemy’s  artillery,  which,  however,  did  but  little 
damage. 

We  captured  14  negro  soldiers  and  killed  and  wounded  30  or  40. 
The  picket  force  of  the  enemy  was  composed  of  this  class,  headed 
by  white  officers.  One  of  the  officers  is  reported  to  have  been  among 
the  killed. 

Colonel  Simonton,  of  the  Twenty-fifth  South  Carolina,  was  as- 
signed to  my  staff  and  rendered  valuable  service  in  indicating  routes 
and  localities.  My  thanks  are  due  to  him. 

Lieutenant-Colonel  Pressley-  led  his  regiment  in  the  advance,  with 
skill  and  coolness. 

My  thanks  are  also  due  to  Lieutenant  [J.  M.]  Schnierle,  of  Gen- 
eral Ripley’s  staff,  who  accompanied  me  as  volunteer  aide,  and  ren- 
dered efficient  service. 

Very  respectfully  submitted. 

A.  H.  COLQUITT, 

Brigadier-  General. 

Capt.  P.  K.  Molony, 

Assistant  Adjutant-General. 


Return  of  Casualties  in  Colquitt’s  brigade. 

[Compiled  from  nominal  list.] 


Report  of  Col.  Charlton  H.  Way , Fifty-fourth  Georgia  Infantry. 

James  Island,  July  17,  1863. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  to  the  general  commanding 
the  following  report  of  the  part  taken  by  my  command  in  the  recon- 
naissance made  on  the  morning  of  the  16th  instant: 

At  10.45  p.  m.  on  the  loth  instant,  I received  an  order  from  the 
general  commanding  the  forces  on  James  Island  to  report  at  Seces- 
sion ville,  at  12  o’clock  that  night,  with  the  Fifty-fourth  Georgia 
Regiment,  a section  of  two  12-pounder  howitzers  from  the  Chatham 
Artillery,  and  Captain  [J.  C.]  Edwards’ company  of  cavalry.  The 
troops  were  rapidly  put  in  motion  and  arrived  at  the  point  indicated 
at  the  hour  designated  in  the  order. 

My  instructions  having  been  to  allow  General  Colquitt’s  brigade 
to  cross  the  marsh  in  front  of  Secession  ville  by  Rivers’  causeway,  and 
move  down  upon  its  left  (my  command  moving,  en  echelon , upon  the 
right  and  in  rear  of  his)  as  soon  as  I found  his  left  had  moved,  I put 
the  column  in  motion,  consisting  of  the  Fifty-fourth  Georgia  and 
Thirty-first  North  Carolina  Regiments,  moving  by  a flank  and  mak- 


Chap.  XL  ] ENGAGEMENT  NEAR  GRIMB  ALL’S  LANDING,  S.  C. 


589 


ing  a detour  to  the  right  to  avoid  the  dense  and  almost  impassable 
abatis  immediately  in  front.  The  artillery,  however,  were  obliged 
to  move  np  the  road  leading  from  the  front  of  the  work  at  Secession- 
ville  toward  the  extreme  left  point  of  the  woods  known  as  Grimball’s, 
while  the  cavalry  remained  near  Rivers’  causeway  to  aid  in  any 
rapid  movement  necessary  to  cut  off  the  retreating  picket  stationed 
upon  the  right  of  the  marsh.  This  change  in  the  disposition  of  these 
portions  of  my  command  were  rendered  necessary  by  the  condition 
of  the  ground  over  which  the  artillery  had  to  be  moved,  and  the 
evident  precipitancy  with  which  the  enemy  upon  the  right  of  the 
marsh  were  retreating. 

Arriving  about  600  yards  from  the  line  of  pickets  thrown  out  by 
the  enemy,  I deployed  as  skirmishers  200  men  of  the  Fifty-fourtk 
Georgia  Regiment  in  front  of  the  column  and  moved  rapidly  for- 
ward; but  crossing  the  abatis  in  front  of  their  line  I found  that, 
alarmed  by  the  fire  from  General  Colquitt’s  command  and  the  force 
moving  down  upon  their  front,  they  had  (together  with  all  that  por- 
tion of  their  force  stationed  upon  the  right  of  the  marsh)  retreated, 
leaving  their  camp  strewn  with  muskets,  accouterments,  blankets, 
overcoats,  provisions,  &c. 

After  crossing  the  abatis  through  which  my  skirmishers  had  passed, 
I brought  my  command  in  line  of  battle  and  (agreeably  to  the  in- 
structions received)  awaited  the  appearance  of  General  Colquitt’s 
command,  which  it  was  intended  should  cross  over  from  the  left  to 
the  right  of  the  marsh  by  the  lower  causeways.  At  this  point,  my 
command  was  perceived  by  the  enemy’s  light  batteries,  which  had 
been  stationed  upon  a hill  and  apparently  (in  the  gray  of  the  morning) 
within  an  earthwork.  A terrible  fire  was  opened  upon  us  from  these 
batteries  in  front,  but,  as  usual,  proved  to  be  almost  entirely  harmless. 

After  remaining  in  this  position  some  twenty  minutes,  General 
Colquitt’s  command  made  its  appearance.  My  guides  were  under 
the  impression  that  it  was  a column  of  the  enemy  endeavoring  to 
turn  our  flank,  as,  owing  to  the  smoke  and  the  haze  of  the  morning, 
it  was  impossible  to  distinguish  their  standards.  Another  reason  in- 
duced me  to  believe  the  statements  of  my  guides,  viz,  the  total  ces- 
sation of  musketry  from  the  other  side  of  the  marsh,  where  General 
Colquitt’s  command  had  moved,  and  the  continued  fire  from  the  en- 
emy’s batteries  upon  me.  But  reasoning  if  it  were  a column  of  the 
enemy  that  they  could  turn  my  right  and  cut  me  off  from  the  route 
marked  out  in  my  instructions,  or  if  it  was  General  Colquitt’s  com- 
mand, that  the  time  had  arrived  for  me  to  move  up  in  conjunction 
with  him,  I recrossed  the  hedge  and  ordered  the  command  to  move 
up  to  Grimball’s  woods,  having  carried  out  entirely  the  portion  of 
the  work  assigned  me. 

I cannot  close  this  report  without  expressing  the  amount  of  obli- 
gations which  I owe  to  Lieut.  G.  H.  Moffett,  who  acted  as  my  guide 
throughout  the  entire  movement. 

The  casualties  in  my  command  were  2 killed,  in  the  Thirty-first 
North  Carolina  Regiment,  by  explosion  of  a shell,  and  some  slight 
contusions  from  the  same  cause  in  the  Fifty-fourth  Georgia. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  captain,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient 
servant, 

CHARLTON  H.  WAY, 
Colonel  Fifty-fourth  Georqia , Commandinq. 

Capt.  P.  K.  Molony, 

Assistant  Adjutant-General . 


[Chap.  XL. 


590  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

No.  6. 

Report  of  Col.  James  D.  Radelijfe,  Sixty -first  North  Carolina  In- 
fantry. 

James  Island,  S.  C., 

July  17,  1863. 

Captain  : I respectfully  beg  leave  to  submit  the  following  report 
of  the  engagement  by  the  troops  under  my  command  with  the  U.  S. 
sloop  of  war  Pawnee  and  one  other  gunboat  (name  not  known)  near 
Grimball’s  Landing,  on  the  Stono  River,  on  Thursday  morning,  the 
16th  instant : 

On  Wednesday  night,  at  12  o’clock,  in  obedience  to  instructions  from 
the  general  commanding,  I moved  with  my  regiment  (Sixty-first 
North  Carolina  Troops)  toward  the  Artillery  Cross-Roads,  where  I 
was  joined  by  a section  of  the  Chatham  Artillery,  Captain  [J.  F.] 
Wheaton  commanding,  and  a section  of  Captain  [F.  D.]  Blake’s 
artillery,  consisting  in  all  of  four  Napoleon  guns,  under  the  imme- 
diate command  of  Lieut.  Col.  Del.  Kemper,  C.  S.  Army.  The  siege 
train  of  three  rifled  guns  which  was  to  form  part  of  the  column  of 
attack,  being  delayed  by  some  cause,  I thought  it  proper  to  put  the 
troops  in  march,  throwing  forward  200  men  of  the  Sixty-first  North 
Carolina  Troops,  to  be  used  as  skirmishers  against  the  enemy’s  line 
of  pickets,  under  the  immediate  command  of  Maj.  Henry  Harding. 
The  whole  column  moved  from  the  cross-roads  down  the  Grimball 
road,  about  3 o’clock  on  the  morning  of  the  16th,  in  the  direction  of  the 
point  supposed  to  be  occupied  by  a force  of  the  enemy’s  infantry  and 
commanded  by  the  guns  of  two  formidable  vessels.  On  arriving  at 
the  field  adjacent  to  the  Grimball  Landing,  I caused  the  infantry  in 
advance  to  be  deployed  as  skirmishers  on  the  skirt  of  the  woods  con- 
tiguous, and  for  a distance  of  several  hundred  yards  on  either  side 
of  the  road  leading  to  the  landing. 

The  light  batteries,  under  Col.  Del.  Kemper,  had  received  orders 
to  advance  simultaneously  with  the  line  of  skirmishers,  followed  by 
the  remainder  of  the  Sixty-first  North  Carolina  Troops  as  an  in- 
fantry support. 

At  the  first  dawn  of  day,  the  command  was  given  to  advance,  the 
troops,  infantry  and  artillery,  moving  up  boldly  and  eagerly  to  the 
attack.  So  prompt  and  silent  were  they  in  taking  their  positions, 
that  the  whole  attack  proved  a complete  surprise,  our  batteries  having 
fired  about  six  times  before  the  Pawnee,  the  most  formidable  of  the 
two  boats,  could  prepare  for  action.  The  rapidity  and  accuracy 
with  which  our  batteries  fired  on  this  occasion  has  scarcely  been 
equaled  in  artillery  practice,  more  than  one-third  of  the  missiles 
discharged  from  our  guns  taking  effect  on  the  Pawnee,  a fact  easily 
ascertained  by  the  crashing  of  her  timbers  and  confusion  and  cries  of 
her  crew.  Both  boats  finally  withdrew  beyond  range  of  our  guns, 
the  Pawnee  supposed  to  be  very  seriously  crippled  and  the  other 
boat  more  or  less  damaged. 

The  infantry,  who  were  disappointed  in  meeting  the  enemy  on 
land,  were,  nevertheless,  exposed  during  the  entire  action  to  a galling 
fire  of  shell  and  canister  from  the  gunboats,  and  showed,  both  offi- 
cers and  men,  by  their  proximity  to  danger,  that  they  would  never 
desert  the  batteries. 

Much  credit  is  due  to  the  skill  and  coolness  of  Lieut.  Col.  Del. 
Kemper  in  the  disposition  of  the  artillery  for  action,  and  also  to  Cap- 


591 


Chap.  XL.]  ENGAGEMENT  NEAR  GRIMBALl’s  LANDING,  S.  C. 

tains  Wheaton  and  Blake  for  the  efficiency  attained  in  the  instruc- 
tion of  their  respective  commands,  as  shown  in  the  serious  damage 
sustained  by  the  gunboats. 

Officers  and  men,  although  exposed  to  a most  galling  fire,  performed 
their  duty  well. 

The  siege  train  participated  in  the  latter  part  of  the  engagement, 
hut  under  unfavorable  circumstances. 

I regret  to  have  to  report  1 man  mortally  and  another  slightly 
wounded  in  Company  F,  Sixty-first  North  Carolina  Troops.  No  other 
casualties  occurred. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  captain,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

JAS.  D.  RADCLIFFE, 

Colonel , Commanding. 

Capt.  P.  K.  Molony, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  7. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  R.  J.  Jeffords , Fifth  South  Carolina  Cavalry. 

Charleston,  S.  C., 

July  18,  1863. 

Captain  : In  obedience  to  instructions  received  on  evening  of 
15th  instant,  I moved  to  Secessionville  with  portions  of  Companies 
A,  Captain  [J.  C.]  Edwards;  C,  Captain  [W.  G.]  Smith,  and  G, 
Captain  [B.  W.]  McTureous,  of  the  Fifth  South  Carolina  Cavalry, 
stationed  on  James  Island — in  all  about  120  men,  the  remainder 
being  on  various  duties — and  reported  to  Colonel  Way,  Fifty-fourth 
Georgia  Volunteers,  at  12  p.  m.  precisely.  The  cavalry  was  formed 
in  rear  of  Colonel  Way’s  column,  and  in  this  position  moved  for- 
ward until  the  column  reached  causeway  leading  to  Legare’s  Point, 
when  Colonel  Way  moved  his  infantry  in  line  to  right.  A portion 
of  the  cavalry,  under  Captain  Edwards,  was  ordered  across  cause- 
way to  cover  the  ground  on  left  of  road  leading  to  Legare’s  house, 
the  remainder  halting  at  causeway.  A few  moments  later  another 
detachment  of  cavalry  was  ordered  forward.  I moved  promptly  and 
reported  to  General  Hagood  at  Legar^’s  house,  when  I received  in- 
structions to  sweep  the  rear  of  Legar^’s  house,  which  was  promptly 
and,  I think,  thoroughly  done,  driving  some  30  or  40  negroes  and  2 
white  men  into  the  marsh  and  intercepting  some  10  negroes,  who 
were  returned  to  the  rear  under  infantry  guard.  Those  that  took  to 
the  marsh  the  cavalry  could  not  reach,  but  some  40  infantry  were 
soon  firing  upon  them,  and  (I  am  impressed)  at  least  20  men  were 
killed  and  wounded  at  this  point,  among  them  2 white  men.  Many 
took  to  the  river  beyond,  and  some  may  have  been  drowned.  Some 
4 negroes  were  killed  and  1 or  2 taken  on  left  of  road  leading  to 
Legar^’s  house. 

The  officers  and  men  behaved  well,  under  a heavy  fire  from  the 
enemy’s  gunboats  and  a field  battery. 

I have  no  casualties  to  report. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

R.  J.  JEFFORDS,  . 

Lieutenant-  Colonel , Commanding. 

Capt.  P.  K.  Molony, 

Assistant  Adjutant-General. 


592  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

JULY  20,  1863.— Bombardment  of  Legare’s  Point,  S.  C. 

Report  of  Maj.  W.  H.  Echols , C.  S.  Engineers  * 

C.  S.  Engineer’s  Office, 

Charleston , July  20,  1863. 

General  : Lieutenant  [R.  M.  ] Stiles,  in  charge  of  the  works  at 
Legare’s  Point,  reports  that  at  12. 30  o’clock  to-day  the  enemy  opened 
fire  from  his  gunboats  (river  steamers)  from  behind  Black  Island, 
and  drove  the  working  parties  away.  The  work  will  be  resumed  at 
night. 

A schooner  with  a large  derrick  is  lying  behind  the  island;  two 
steamers  along  with  or  very  near  her. 

The  battery  has  three  guns  mounted  and  is  ready  for  seven  more, 
and  will  be  ready  for  two  more  by  morning,  if  unmolested. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  H.  ECHOLS, 

Major,  and  Chief  Engineer,  South  Carolina. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan, 

Chief  of  Staff. 


[Indorsement.] 


Order  again  those  guns  in  position  at  once,  and  let  the  batteries 
open  as  soon  as  ready. 


G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


JULY  30,  1863. — Expedition  to  Barnwell’s  Island,  S.  C. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  W.  S.  Walker,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding 
Third  Military  District. 

Hdqrs.  Third  Military  District  of  S.  Carolina, 

McPhersonville,  S.  C.,  August  15,  1863. 

General  : Capt.  M.  J.  Kirk,  of  the  Partisan  Rangers,  having 
been  directed  by  me  to  attack  the  enemy’s  pickets  and  penetrate  his 
lines  at  some  point  near  our  outpost  at  Cunningham’s  Bluff,  landed 
with  a detachment  of  40  men  of  his  own  company,  under  Lieuten- 
ant [P.  E.]  Terry,  25  of  the  Beaufort  Artillery,  under  Lieutenant 
[J.  J.  J Rhodes,  and  25  men  of  the  Eleventh  Regiment  South  Caro- 
lina Infantry,  under  Lieutenant  [J.  T.]  Morrison,  on  Barnwell’s  Island, 
on  the  night  of  July  30  last,  without  meeting  resistance,  and  advanced 
a half  mile  into  the  island  to  the  settlement  of  Mr.  Trescott,  where 
he  captured  31  negroes,  including  3 men.  The  alarm  having  been 
extended  to  the  enemy  on  Hall’s  Island,  Captain  Kirk  retreated  to 
his  boats  and  brought  off  his  party  and  prisoners  safely,  although 
fired  upon  by  the  enemy  while  recrossing  the  river. 

I take  pleasure  in  commending  the  energy  and  skill  shown  by 
Captain  Kirk  in  carrying  out  my  orders,  and  the  good  conduct  of 
the  officers  and  men  under  his  command. 

The  negro  women  and  children  captured  and  2 men  who,  I had 
good  reasons  to  believe,  had  not  been  in  military  service  in  the  Fed- 

*See  report  of  Maj.  Edward  Manigault,  C.  S.  Army,  p.  552. 


593 


Chap.  XL .]  AFFAIR  AT  MOUTH  OF  VINCENTS  CREEK,  S.  C. 

eral  Army,  have  been  delivered,  or  are  awaiting  delivery,  to  their 
owners.  One  of  the  men,  suspected  of  having  been  in  one  of  the 
Federal  negro  regiments,  is  retained  in  custody  to  await  the  orders 
of  the  Governor  of  South  Carolina,  who  has  been  informed  of  his 
capture. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  S.  WALKER, 
Brigadier- General , Commanding. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan, 

Chief  of  Staff,  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


AUGUST  4,  1863. — Affair  at  the  Mouth  of  Vincent’s  Creek,  S.  C. 

REPORTS.* 

No.  1.— Brig.  Gen.  Roswell  S.  Ripley,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  First  Military  Dis- 
trict. 

No,  2. — Capt.  M.  H.  Sellers,  Twenty-fifth  South  Carolina  Infantry. 

No.  1. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Roswell  S.  Ripley,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding 
First  Military  District. 

Headquarters  First  Military  District, 

Charleston,  August  5,  1863. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  an  expedition,  com- 
posed of  four  boats’  crews,  under  Lieutenant-Commander  [A.  F.J 
Warley,  C.  S.  Navy,  carrying  a force  of  30  men  from  the  Twenty- 
fifth  Regiment  South  Carolina  Volunteers,  under  Captain  Sellers, 
captured  and  broke  up  the  enemy’s  picket  stationed  at  the  unfin- 
ished battery  at  the  mouth  of  Vincent’s  Creek  about  10  o’clock  last 
night.  The  picket  consisted  of  2 officers  and  some  10  or  12  men.  Of 
these,  the  officers  and  8 men  were  taken,  4 of  the  number,  including 
the  officers,  being  wounded,  f We  lost  1 private  of  the  Twenty-fifth 
Regiment  killed.  The  party  was  successfully  guided  by  Mr.  J. 
Fraser  Mathewes. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

R.  S.  RIPLEY, 

Brigadier-  General,  Commanding. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan, 

Chief  of  Staff,  &c. 

[Indorsement.] 


August  4 [5],  1863. 

General  Jordan  : 

Order  some  Racine  torpedoes  to  be  put  around  and  in  that  battery. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


* See  also  Ripley’s  report  of  August  21,  p.  384,  ante , and  Beauregard  to  Tucker, 
August  6,  “ Correspondence,  etc.,”  Part  II. 

f Provost-marshal’s  list  shows  1 officer  (Capt.  Lewis  S.  Payne)  and  9 men,  of  the 
One  hundredth  New  York  Infantry,  captured;  the  officer  and  3 men  being  reported 
as  wounded. 

38  R R — YOL  XXVIII,  PT  I 


594  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

No.  2. 

Report  of  Capt.  M.  H.  Sellers,  Twenty-fifth  South  Carolina  In- 
fantry. 

James  Island,  S.  C.,  August  6,  1863. 

Captain  : I have  received  orders  to  make  a report  immediately  of 
the  expedition  of  the  night  of  the  4tli  of  Angnst,  and,  in  obedience 
to  the  orders,  I would  respectfully  make  the  following  report,  after 
stating  that  Captain  Warley,  of  the  navy,  was  in  command  of  the 
expedition,  and  I in  command  of  the  30  men  detailed  from  the 
Twenty-fifth  Regiment  South  Carolina  V olunteers  : 

I proceeded  to  Fort  Johnson,  according  to  the  order,  and,  after 
waiting  some  time,  Captain  Warley,  of  the  navy,  came  up,  and  then 
Brigadier-General  Ripley  arrived.  The  officers  were  then  summoned 
together  by  Brigadier-General  Ripley,  and  he  explained  the  object 
of  the  expedition  to  us  to  be  the  capturing  of  a party  of  the  enemy 
supposed  to  be  on  a marsh  island,  between  James  Island  and  Morris 
Island.  He  then  placed  Captain  Warley  in  command  of  the  expedi- 
tion, with  instructions  to  land  me  at  the  point  of  this  island,  and 
Captain  Warley,  with  two  boats,  to  follow  the  creek  around,  so  as 
to  operate  with  me  at  the  other  end  of  the  island,  where  it  was  sup- 
posed the  enemy  was. 

Having  arrived  at  the  point  of  the  island,  I landed  with  a guide, 
as  directed,  and  obtained  from  him  all  the  information  desired  of  the 
locality  and  direction  of  the  point  on  which  I was  to  advance.  I 
then  returned  to  my  boats  (two  in  number)  and  landed  my  men,  and 
proceeded  to  make  my  arrangements  to  advance.  I posted  a cor- 
poral and  5 men  at  my  boats  as  a guard  and  to  act  as  a reserve,  and 
after  selecting  10  men  to  post  as  sentinels  at  every  200  yards  as  I 
advanced,  to  establish  proper  communications  with  my  boats,  I 
deployed  as  skirmishers  the  remaining  15  men,  letting  the  center 
of  my  line  rest  on  the  path  leading  to  the  point  on  which  I was  to 
advance.  I then  reported  to  Captain  Warley  that  I was  ready  to 
go  forward,  and  he  told  me  to  go  ahead.  I then  proceeded  very  cau- 
tiously, establishing  posts  of  2 men  at  intervals  of  150  or  200  yards, 
so  as  to  secure  communication  with  my  boats. 

No  signs  of  the  enemy  could  be  seen  till  my  line  arrived  in  full 
view  of  the  battery  thrown  up  on  that  part  of  the  island  by  our  engi- 
neers some  time  ago,  when  I observed  an  object  like  a man  standing 
on  the  battery.  I asked  several  men  what  it  was,  pointing  to  it,  and 
we  concluded  it  was  a post,  as  there  seemed  to  be  no  motion  about 
it  at  all.  I then  advanced  more  cautiously  than  ever,  and  when 
about  100  yards  from  the  battery  several  men  said  they  saw  a man 
run,  and  it  proved  to  be  the  object  on  the  battery.  I then  pushed 
forward  my  right  and  left  wings  of  the  skirmishers,  converging  to 
the  battery,  so  as  to  allow  no  escape  but  by  boats. 

When  the  line  reached  a mound  near  the  battery,  the  right  wing 
opened  on  a boat  of  about  8 men,  leaving,  and  already  at  some  dis- 
tance, and  when  last  seen  but  2 men  were  oaring  the  boat.  When 
my  line  reached  the  water’s  edge,  it  was  fired  upon  by  a boat,  taking 
refuge  behind  the  battery  and  the  hull  of  the  Manigault,  from  both 
of  which  the  island  was  separated  by  a creek,  which  I afterward 
found  to  contain  about  8 feet  of  water. 

Finding  it  impossible  to  do  anything  from  my  present  position,  I 
drew  the  men  back  about  ten  steps  behind  the  mound  mentioned 


595 


Chap.  XL.]  AFFAIR  AT  MOUTH  OF  VINCENT’S  CREEK,  S.  C. 

above,  and  gave  them  directions  to  climb  upon  it  and  fire  into  the 
enemy,  and  then  dropping  down,  load,  so  as  to  escape  the  enemy’s 
fire. 

I fonght  the  enemy  from  this  position  for  a few  minutes,  and  was 
in  the  act  of  leading  a charge  upon  the  battery,  across  the  creek, 
when  I observed  Captain  Warley  coming  around  on  my  left,  and 
about  to  take  the  enemy  in  rear.  I then  quickly  took  my  position 
between  my  own  men  and  Captain  War  ley’s  boats,  so  as  to  prevent 
them  from  firing  into  Captain  Warley. 

On  the  near  approach  of  Captain  Warley,  the  enemy  came  out 
from  behind  the  battery  and  fired  into  us,  to  which  I replied  immedi- 
ately, and  then  they  surrendered  to  me  immediately.  I ordered  them 
to  pull  up  to  me  as  fast  as  possible,  and  after  securing  them  prisoners, 
I turned  the  boat  over  to  Captain  Warley,  to  be  manned  by  some  of 
his  men..  With  all  expedition  I then  hastened  back  to  my  boats, 
and  getting  my  men  in  them  the  expedition  left  for  Fort  Johnson, 
where  we  arrived  without  any  further  incident. 

I captured  1 captain,  1 sergeant,  and  8 privates.  I lost  1 man,  B. 
Fertic,  killed.  He  was  a member  of  my  company  of  the  Twenty-fifth 
Regiment  South  Carolina  Volunteers,  and  when  I ordered  the  men 
to  climb  that  mound  and  shoot  the  boat,  he  took  the  highest  point, 
and  there,  as  cool  as  if  no  danger  surrounded  him,  he  stood  up,  firing 
and  loading,  without  even  heeding  my  order  to  try  and  escape  the 
fire  of  the  enemy  when  loading  the  guns.  A braver  man  has  not 
died  for  his  country.  Private  [W.  A.]  Dotterer,  of  Captain  Carson’s 
company,  Twenty-fifth  South  Carolina  Volunteers,  received  a slight 
graze  on  his  left  arm,  and  he  displayed  great  coolness  and  bravery, 
not  heeding  the  fire  of  the  enemy,  calling  to  them  to  surrender,  and 
cheering.  My  men  behaved  admirably  well,  and  I am  proud  to  re- 
port that  I saw  no  flinching  at  all  on  the  part  of  any  man,  but  they 
all  stood  up  like  men,  returning  the  enemy;s  fire  with  cheers. 

Very  respectfully  submitted. 

M.  H.  SELLERS, 

Captain , Comdg.  Detachment  Twenty-fifth  Eegt.  S.  C.  Vols. 

Capt.  P.  K.  Molony, 

Assistant  Adjutant-General. 


Congratulatory  letter. 

Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston,  S.  C.,  August  6,  1863. 

Captain  Sellers, 

Company  C [F],  Twenty -fifth  South  Carolina  Volunteers : 
Captain  : I am  directed  by  the  commanding  general  to  convey  to 
you  his  thanks  and  high  appreciation  of  the  gallantry  and  soldier- 
like conduct  of  the  detachment  of  the  Twenty-fifth  South  Carolina 
Infantry  engaged  in  the  expedition  against  the  enemy  on  the  night 
of  the  5th  instant,  and  to  communicate  that  portion  of  Lieutenant- 
Commander  Warley ’s  report  in  reference  thereto: 

I cannot  speak  too  highly  of  the  conduct  of  the  Eutaws  under  Captain  Sellers. 
Had  it  not  been  for  their  strict  adherence  to  directions,  and  gallant  dash  in  finding 
the  enemy,  the  object  of  the  expedition  must  have  failed. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

[JOHN  M.  OTEY], 
Assistant  Adjutant- General, 


596 


[Chap.  XL. 


S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

AUGUST  17-DECEMBER  31,  1863. — Bombardment  of  Fort  Sumter,  S.  C. 

REPORTS. 


No.  1. — Maj.  Gen.  Quincy  A.  Gillmore,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Department  of 
the  South. 

No.  2. — Return  of  Casualties  in  the  Union  Forces  on  Morris  Island,  September  8- 
December  31. 

No.  3. — Commander  Foxhall  A.  Parker,  U.  S.  Navy,  commanding  Naval  Battery. 

No.  4. — Col.  Alfred  Rhett,  First  South  Carolina  Artillery,  commanding  Fort  Sum- 
ter, of  operations  August  12-September  4. 

No.  5. — Lieut.  Col.  Stephen  Elliott,  jr.,  C.  S.  Artillery,  commanding  Fort  Sumter, 
of  operations  September  5-December  31. 

No.  6.— Tabular  statements- of  shots  fired  against  Fort  Sumter,  August  12-Decem- 
ber  31. 

No.  7.— Return  of  Casualties  in  the  Confederate  forces  at  Fort  Sumter,  August  12- 
December  31. 

No.  8.— Proceedings  of  a Council  of  Officers  held  at  Fort  Sumter  August  24. 

No.  9.— Col.  Jeremy  F.  Gilmer  and  Lieut.  Col.  D.  B.  Harris,  C.  S.  Corps  of  En- 
gineers, of  inspections,  &c. , August  24  and  September  22. 

No.  10. — Capt.  John  Johnson,  C.  S.  Corps  of  Engineers,  of  operations  August  12-23. 

No.  11. — Capt.  J.  T.  Champneys,  C.  S.  Corps  of  Engineers. 

No.  12. — Brig.  Gen.  T.  L.  Clingman,  C.  S,  Army,  commanding  on  Sullivan’s  Island, 
of  operations  August  23. 

No.  13. — Col.  William  Butler,  Third  South  Carolina  Artillery,  commanding  artillery 
on  Sullivan’s  Island,  of  operations  August  23  and  31  and  September  1-2. 

No.  14. — Maj.  Robert  De  Treville,  Third  South  Carolina  Artillery,  commanding  Fort 
Moultrie,  of  operations  August  17-September  6. 

No.  15. — Capt.  T.  A.  Huguenin,  Third  South  Carolina  Artillery,  commanding  Bat- 
tery Beauregard,  of  operations  August  23,  30,  and  31. 

No.  16. — Capt.  C.  H.  Rivers,  Third  South  Carolina  Artillery,  of  operations  August 
23  and  31. 

No.  17. — Lieut.  R.  Y.  Dwight,  Third  South  Carolina  Artillery,  of  operations  Sep- 
, tember  1. 


1ST  o.  1. 


Reports  of  Maj.  Gen.  Quincy  A.  Gillmore , U.  S.  Army , command- 
ing Department  of  the  South.  * 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

Morris  Island,  S.  C.,  August  18,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  I opened  fire  on  Fort  Sumter 
at  daybreak  yesterday,  with  a part  of  my  heavy  guns,  and  kept  it 
np  until  dusk  in  the  evening,  with  the  exception  of  an  intermission 
of  a few  hours  during  the  heat  of  the  day.  The  fire  was  resumed 
this  morning  and  is  now  in  progress.  I am  satisfied  with  the  results 
thus  far.  The  completion  of  my  breaching  batteries,  which  will  be 
accomplished  to-day,  will  enable  me  to  increase  the  intensity  of  my 
fire  fully  one-third.  The  enemy  employ  the  night  time  in  piling  up 
immense  quantities  of  sand-bags  against  the  gorge  wall  of  the  fort. 
Two  monitors  are  also  operating  against  Sumter. 

Q.  A.  GILLMORE, 
Brigadier-  General,  Commanding . 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-Chief,  U.  S.  Army,  Washington,  D.  C. 


* See  also  Gillmore’s  general  report,  p.  3. 


SKETCHED  FROM  CRAIG'S  HILJL 


Headqrs.  Dept,  of  the. South. 

Aug.  21st,  1863. 

I regard  this  sketch  asremarkally  correct  and 
faithful. 

Q.  A.  Gillmore,  Brig.-Gen.  Comdg. 


[Chap.  XL. 


598  S.  C.  AND  G A.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

Morris  Island , S.  C.,  August  19,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  a heavy  northeaster,  which 
commenced  early  yesterday  afternoon,  and  is  still  raging,  has  very 
seriously  interfered  with  the  accuracy  of  our  fire  against  Fort  Sum- 
ter, and  has  temporarily  suspended  our  approaches  to  Fort  Wagner. 

The  tides  have  been  very  high,  entirely  overflowing  to  the  depth 
of  1 foot  the  narrow  neck  of  low  ground  between  our  advanced 
batteries  and  Fort  Wagner,  and  completely  submerging  our  trenches. 

Two  deserters  from  Cumming’s  Point  reached  our  lines  to-day* 
having  been,  according  to  their  report,  forty-eight  hours  in  coming 
through  the  marsh.  They  represent  themselves  as  part  of  boat’s 
crew  regularly  plying  between  Cumming’s  Point  and  Fort  Sumter, 
and  say  that  all  the  casemates,  including  the  officers’  quarters,  on 
the  gorge  of  that  work,  have  been  filled  with  sand-bags  and  cotton 
bales  (the  former  being  next  to  the  scarp  wall)  to  the  thickness  of 
18  or  20  feet.  They  also  say  that  the  guns  mounted  on  the  gorge  of 
Sumter  have  all  been  removed  to  James  Island,  and  their  places  sup- 
plied with  “quaker  guns.”  This  last  report  is  doubtless  correct  and 
the  others  probably  so. 

They  represent  the  enemy’s  force  on  this  island  as  about  3,000,  in- 
cluding three  batteries  of  light  artillery,  and  that  the  batteries  oc- 
cupy a position  about  200  yards  in  rear  of  Fort  Wagner  through  the 
night,  and  are  kept  in  deep  trenches  near  Cumming’s  Point  during 
the  day. 

The  average  number  of  casualties  per  day  remains  about  the  same. 
Some  days  I lose  as  many  as  5 or  6 killed  and  wounded;  on  others 
none  at  all. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

Q.  A.  GILLMORE, 
Brigadier-  General r Commanding. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-Chief , U.  S.  Army,  Washington,  D.  C. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

Morris  Island,  S.  C.,  August  24,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  the  practical  demolition  of  Fort 
Sumter  as  the  result  of  our  seven  days’  bombardment  of  that  work, 
including  two  days  of  which  a powerful  northeasterly  storm  most 
seriously  diminished  the  accuracy  and  effect  of  our  fire. 

Fort  Sumter  is  to-day  a shapeless  and  harmless  mass  of  ruins. 
My  chief  of  artillery,  Col.  J.  W.  Turner,  reports  its  destruction  so 
far  complete  that  it  is  no  longer  of  “any  avail  in  the  defense  of 
Charleston.”  He  also  says  that — 

By  a longer  fire  it  could  be  made  more  completely  a ruin  and  a mass  of  broken 
masonry,  but  could  scarcely  be  more  powerless  for  the  defense'  of  the  harbor. 

My  breaching  batteries  were  located  at  distances  varying  between 
3,330  and  4,240  yards  from  the  work,  and  now  remain  as  efficient  as 
ever.  I deem  it  unnecessary  at  present  to  continue  their  fire  upon 
the  ruins  of  Fort  Sumter. 

I have  also,  at  great  labor,  and  under  a heavy  fire  from  James 
Island,  established  batteries  on  my  left,  within  effective  range  of  the 


Chap.  XL.] 


BOMBARDMENT  OF  FORT  SUMTER,  S.  C. 


599 


heart  of  Charleston  City,  and  have  opened  with  them,  after  giving 
General  Beauregard  due  notice  of  my  intention  to  do  so. 

My  notification  to  General  Beauregard,  his  reply  thereto,  with  the 
threat  of  retaliation,  and  my  rejoinder,  have  been  transmitted  to 
army  headquarters. 

The  projectiles  from  my  batteries  entered  the  city,  and  General 
Beauregard  himself  designates  them  as  4 ‘ the  most  destructive  mis- 
siles ever  used  in  war.” 

The  report  of  my  chief  of  artillery*  and  an  accurate  sketch  of  the 
ruins  of  Fort  Sumter,  f taken  at  12  m.  yesterday,  six  hours  before 
we  ceased  firing,  are  herewith  transmitted. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

Q.  A.  GILLMORE, 
Brigadier-  General,  Commanding . 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-Chief,  U.  S.  Army,  Washington,  D.  C. 

[Inclosure.] 

Office  Chief  of  Artillery,  Dept,  of  the  South, 

Morris  Island , S.  C.,  August  23,  1863. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  report  the  effect  that  our  breaching 
batteries  have  had  upon  Fort  Sumter,  and  the  condition  of  that 
work  to-night  at  the  close  of  the  seventh  days’  bombardment. 

The  gorge  wall  of  the  fort  is  almost  a complete  mass  of  ruins.  For 
the  distance  of  several  casemates,  about  midway  on  this  face,  the 
ramparts  are  removed  nearly,  and  in  places  quite,  to  the  arches,  and 
but  for  the  sand-bags  with  which  the  casemates  w^ere  filled,  and 
which  have  served  to  sustain  the  broken  arches  and  masses  of  ma- 
sonry, it  would  have  long  since  been  entirely  cut  away,  and  with  it  the 
arches,  to  the  floor  of  the  second  tier  of  casemates.  The  debris  on 
this  front  now  forms  a ramp,  reaching  as  high  as  the  floor  of  these 
casemates. 

The  parapet  wall  of  the  two  northeasterly  faces  is  completely  car- 
ried away,  a small  portion  only  being  left  in  the  angle  made  with 
the  gorge  wall,  and  the  ramparts  of  these  faces  is  also  a total  ruin. 
Quite  one-half  of  our  projectiles  seem  to  have  struck  the  parade  and 
parapet  of  these  two  faces,  and,  judging  from  the  effect  they  have 
had  upon  the  gorge  wall,  within  our  observation,  the  destruction  of 
masonry  on  these  two  sides  must  be  very  great,  and  I am  of  the 
opinion  that  nearly  every  arch  in  these  fronts  must  be  broken  in. 
But  one  gun  remains  in  position  on  these  two  fronts,  and  this  in  the 
angle  of  the  gorge,  and,  I think,  unserviceable. 

The  ruin  extends  around,  taking  in  the  northeasterly  face  as  far  as 
can  be  seen.  A portion  of  this  face,  adjoining  the  angle  it  makes 
with  the  southeasterly  face,  is  concealed,  Imt  from  the  great  number 
of  missiles  which  have  struck  in  this  angle  during  the  last  two  days, 
it  cannot  be  otherwise  than  greatly  damaged,  and  I do  not  think  any 
guns  can  be  left  on  this  face  in  a serviceable  condition. 

The  ramparts  in  this  angle,  as  well  as  in  the  southeasterly  face, 
must  be  plowed  up  and  greatly  shattered,  the  parapet  on  this  latter 
face  being  torn  off  in  many  places,  as  we  can  see,  and  I hardly  think 
the  platforms  of  the  three  remaining  guns  on  this  face  could  have 
escaped.  With  the  assistance  of.  a powerful  glass,  I cannot  deter- 


*See  also  Turner’s  report,  p.  21: 


f Made  by  W.  T.  Crane.  See  p.  601. 


[Chap.  XL. 


600  S.  C.  AND  GrA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

mine  that  more  than  one  of  these  guns  can  be  used,  and  it  has  been 
dismounted  once.  The  carriages  of  the  others  are  evidently  more  or 
less  shattered,  and  such  is  the  ruin  of  the  parapet  and  parade  in  the 
immediate  vicinity  of  this  gun,  that  it  probably  could  not  be  served 
for  any  length  of  time. 

In  fine,  the  destruction  of  the  fort  is  so  far  complete  that  it  is  to- 
day of  no  avail  in  the  defense  of  the  harbor  of  Charleston.  By  a 
longer  fire,  it  can  be  made  more  completely  a ruin  and  a mass  of 
broken  masonry,  but  could  scarcely  be  more  powerless  for  the  de- 
fense of  the  harbor. 

I therefore  respectfully  submit  my  opinion,  that  a continuation 
of  our  fire  is  no  longer  necessary,  as  giving  us  no  ends  adequate  for 
the  consumption  of  our  resources. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JNO.  W.  TURNER, 
Colonel,  and  Chief  of  Artillery. 

Brig.  Gen.  Q.  A.  Gillmore, 

Comdg.  Dept,  of  the  South,  Morris  Island,  S.  C. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

Morris  Island,  S.  C.,  August  26,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  to  report  no  essential  change  in  the  condition  of  affairs 
here  since  my  letter  of  the  24th  instant.  No  guns  have  been  mounted 
on  Fort  Sumter,  as  far  as  I can  judge  from  appearances. 

Three  contrabands  came  in  from  Fort  Johnson  yesterday.  They 
were  officers’  servants,  and  report,  from  conversation  of  the  officers 
there,  that  north  and  northwest  faces  of  Fort  Sumter  are  nearly  as 
badly  breached  as  the  gorge  wall,  and  that  many  of  our  projectiles 
passed  through  both  walls,  and  that  the  fort  contains  no  serviceable 
guns. 

The  monitors  are  expected  to  go  in  again  to-night,  to  operate  on 
the  obstructions.  I have  procured  some  calcium  lights,  and  hope, 
with  the  assistance  of  the  navy,  to  be  able  to  interrupt  the  commu- 
nications of  the  enemy  with  the  island,  and  cut  off  their  supplies. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

Q.  A.  GILLMORE, 
Brigadier-General,  Commanding. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-Chief,  Washington,  D.  C. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

Morris  Island,  S.  C.,  August  30,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  nothing  to  report  since  mine  of  yesterday,*  except 
that  I reopened  fire  on  Sumter  this  morning  at  the  request  of  Ad- 
miral Dahlgren,  whose  chief  pilot  reported  that  he  saw  some  guns  in 
position  there  last  evening,  a report  which,  whether  correct  or  other- 
wise, prevented  the  monitors  from  operating  as  they  intended  to  do. 

It  is  not  at  all  improbable  that  guns  may  have  been  remounted 
on  Sumter  during  the  night  time  within  the  past  week.  I admit 


See  Operations  on  Morris  Island,  p.  199. 


Ohap.  XL.] 


BOMBARDMENT  OF  FORT  SUMTER,  S.  C. 


601 


602  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 


[Chap.  XL. 


my  inability  to  prevent  it  without  a constant  bombardment  and  an 
-enormous  expenditure  of  guns  and  ammunition. 

I can  discern  no  guns  on  Sumter  from  my  batteries,  and  none  have 
been  fired  for  the  last  five  days,  according  to  the  reports  of  my  look- 
outs. 

The  party  controlling  the  waters  of  Charleston  Harbor  of  course 
control  the  communication  to  and  from  Fort  Sumter,  and  can  come 
and  go  when  they  please,  if  favored  by  darkness. 

Fort  Sumter  was  thoroughly  silenced  on  the  24th  instant,  and  can 
be  again. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

Q.  A.  GILLMORE, 
Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 

Maj. 'Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-Chief , Washington , D.  C. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  South,. 

Morris  Island,  S.  C.,  September  1,  1863. 

Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  report  that  at  the  request  of  Rear-Ad- 
miral Dahlgren,  I have  again  opened  fire  on  Fort  Sumter  with  such 
guns  as  I have  available  for  that  purpose. 

Six  Parrott  guns  (viz,  five  8-inch  and  one  100-pounder)  and  two 
Whitworth  guns  have  been  entirely  expended.  I have  borrowed 
from  the  fleet  for  my  breaching  batteries,  three  8-inch  and  three 
100-pounder  Parrott  guns.  Some  of  them  are  already  in  position  ; 
the  others  will  be  by  to-morrow  night. 

I am  to-day  operating  against  Sumter  with  one  10-inch  and  four 
8-inch  Parrott  guns,  and  had  four  guns  working  all  day  yesterday. 

Sumter  fired  one  gun  on  the  26th  ultimo  at  my  advanced  trenches. 
She  has  not  fired  since  except  occasionally  a sunset  gun,  apparently 
not  shotted.  The  arches  of  the  casemates  of  the  southeast  face  are 
beginning  to  show  themselves. 

I inclose  herewith  copies  of  certain  correspondence  between  Rear- 
Admiral  Dahlgren  and  myself,  forming  a part  of  the  official  record 
of  operations  here.* 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

Q.  A.  GILLMORE, 
Brigadier-  General,  Commanding. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-Chief,  Washington,  D.  C. 

P.  S. — I must  add  that,  in  my  judgment,  the  bombardment  of 
Sumter,  now  in  progress,  is  entirely  unnecessary. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

In  the  Field , Folly  Island,  S.  C.,  October  27,  1863. 
General  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that,  on  the  strength  of  cer- 
tain reports  from  refugees  and  deserters  that  the  enemy  have  re- 
cently been  at  work  remounting  some  guns  on  the  northeast  front 

*See  correspondence  August  21  to  31,  1863,  Part  II. 


SKETCHED  FROM  THE  "BEACON  HOUSE"  ON  MORRIS  ISLAND, 


Chap.  XL.] 


603 


BOMBARDMENT  OF  FORT  SUMTER,  S.  0. 


[Chap.  XL. 


604  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  NLA. 

of  Fort  Sumter,  I opened  fire  upon  that  work  yesterday,  with  the 
guns  from  Wagner  and  Gregg.  The  firing  is  progressing  to-day 
with  satisfactory  effect. 

I inclose  a Charleston  newspaper  of  the  24th  instant. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

Q.  A.  GILLMORE, 
Major-General,  Commanding. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-Chief,  U.  S.  Army,  Washington,  D.  C. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

In  the  Field,  Folly  Island,  S.  C.,  October  30,  .1863 — 1 p.  m. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  the  operation  of  our 
breaching  guns’  in  Wagner  and  Gregg  (Fort  Strong  and  Fort  Put- 
nam), against  the  southeast  face  of  Fort  Sumter,  has  been  as  suc- 
cessful as  I could  desire.  That  face  is  now  more  completely  a ruin 
than  the  gorge  wall.  Most  of  its  arches  have  already  tumbled  in. 
The  others  are  rapidly  crumbling  away,  and  the  ruined  terre-pleins 
of  the  channel  fronts  are  plainly  visible.  No  guns  have  been  dis- 
closed upon  either  of  those  faces,  and  the  reports  that  some  pieces  had 
been  remounted  there  are  doubtless  incorrect.  Sumter  replies  with 
harmless  musketry  fire  only.  I shall  continue  the  firing  for  at  least 
t weil ty-f our  hours  longer,  and  probably  shall  then  make  an  assault, 
although  I have  not  yet  fully  determined  upon  it. 

Some  of  the  monitors  have  taken  part  in  the  bombardment  and 
have  done  good  execution. 

The  enemy’s  batteries  on  James  and  Sullivan’s  Islands  reply  but 
slowly,  and  have  done  us  no  harm  as  yet. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

Q.  A.  GILLMORE, 
Major-General,  Commanding. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-Chief,  U.  S.  Army,  Washington,  D.  C. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

In  the  Field,  Folly  Island,  S.  C.,  November  12,  1863. 

General  : I have*  to  report  no  essential  change  in  the  condition  of 
things  here  since  my  letter  of  October  30.  I keep  up  a slow  fire  on 
the  ruins  of  Fort  Sumter  night  and  day.  During  the  daytime.  I fire 
mostly  from  mortars  at  low  angles,  in  order  to  search  the  casemates 
on  the  channel  front.  During  the  night,  a few  light  rifle  guns  play 
upon  the  breaches  to  prevent  any  defensive  measures  being  taken  by 
the  enemy.  Some  of  the  monitors  occasionally  engage  in  the  bom- 
bardment. The  enemy  do  not  reply,  except  sometimes  with  small- 
arms.  Of  the  practicability  of  carrying  the  place  by  assault,  I en- 
tertain but  little  doubt,  but  I have  never  seen  any  necessity  for  doing 
so,  while  its  sole  power  of  doing  harm  consists  in  the  protection  which 
its  infantry  garrison  affords  to  the  channel  obstructions.  I am  con- 
vinced that  those  obstructions  can  be  removed  while  Sumter  is  oc- 
cupied by  the  enemy  with  less  sacrifice  of  life  than  we  would  have. 


Chap.  XL.] 


BOMBARDMENT  OF  FORT  SUMTER,  S.  C. 


605 


to  make  to  occupy  and  hold  the  place.  Should  anything  occur  to 
convince  me  that  there  would  he  any  advantage  in  holding  the  place, 
I shall  not  hesitate  to  make  the  attempt.  I had  an  interview  with 
Rear-Admiral  Dahlgren  yesterday.  He  has  recently  received  dis- 
patches from  the  Navy  Department,  embracing  its  “views”  on  af- 
fairs here,  but  I have  not  yet  seen  the  dispatches.  I am  acting  with- 
out “instructions,”  and  have  been  ever  since  I assumed  command  of 
this  department.  I do  not  shrink  from  responsibility,  but  I am  con- 
vinced that  the  best  interests  of  the  service  require  that  I should 
be  intrusted  with  the  views  of  the  War  Department  in  reference  to 
matters  here.  Otherwise  I might  take  some  step  involving  the  Gov- 
ernment in  embarrassment. 

I inclose  a correct  sketch  of  Fort  Sumter,  taken  on  the  10th  instant.  * 
Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

Q.  A.  GILLMORE, 
Major-General , Commanding. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  IIalleck, 

General-in-Chief,  TJ.  S.  Army,  Washington,  D.  C. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

In  the  Field,  Folly  Island,  S.  C.,  November  20,  1863. 

Sir  : Nothing  of  special  interest  has  transpired  here  since  my  let- 
ter of  the  12th  instant. 

I keep  up  a slow  shell  fire  on  the  ruins  of  Sumter,  to  prevent  any 
work  being  done  inside.  I ordered  a reconnaissance  of  the  place  last 
night,  of  the  nature  of  a simulated  attack,  with  a view  to  compel  the 
garrison  to  show  its  strength. 

The  inclosed  dispatch,  f just  received  from  Brigadier-General  Terry, 
commanding  on  Morris  Island,  gives  all  I yet  know  of  the  result. 

The  Charleston  papers  inform  us  that  traverses  and  bomb-proofs 
were  constructed  in  the  work  during  the  interval  between  the  first 
and  second  bombardments. 

This  was  while  we  were  besieging  Fort  Wagner  and  establishing 
guns  on  Cumming’s  Point.  I inclose  a slip  from  the  Charleston 
Courier,  of  the  11th  instant,  containing  this  statement,  f 

The  new  monitors  are  expected  here  about  the  middle  of  Decem- 
ber. I have  always  entertained  serious  doubts  that  we  would  be- 
come relatively  stronger  by  waiting  for  these  new  vessels.  For  every 
gun  they  will  bring  into  action,  the  enemy  will  have  had  time  to 
establish  a dozen. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

Q.  A.  GILLMORE, 
Major-General,  Commanding. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  H allege, 

General-in-Chief , U.  S.  Army,  Washington,  D.  C. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  South, 

Folly  Island,  S.  C.,  November  26,  1863. 
Sir  : I have  nothing  of  special  importance  to  report.  I fire  but 
slowly  at  Sumter,  and  that  simply  to  prevent  work  being  done  inside 


*See  p.  603. 


f See  inclosures  to  report  of  November  26,  p.  606. 


[Chap.  XL. 


606  S.  0.  AND  G A.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

while  the  navy  are  getting  ready.  I fire  into  Charleston  at  irregu- 
lar intervals  day  and  night.  From  the  Charleston  papers , I judge 
that  nine-tenths  of  all  the  missiles  thrown  enter  the  city.  Most  of 
the  business  offices  are  being  removed  beyond  range. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

Q.  A.  GILLMORE, 
Major-General,  Commanding. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-Chief,  Washington,  D.  C. 


P.  S. — The  inclosed  dispatch  and  newspaper  slip  were  inadver- 
tently omitted  from  my  letter  of  the  20th.  I judge  that  there  are  at 
least  200  men  in  Sumter. 


[Inclosure  No.  1.] 


General  Gillmore: 


Morris  Island,  S.  C., 

November  20,  1863. 


The  reconnaissance  was  as  ordered.  The  boats  met  a heavy  fire. 
Major  Cunningham,  who  commanded,  and  Colonel  Davis,  who  was 
at  Gregg,  estimate  the  fire  at  200  muskets.  We  had  2 men  wounded. 
I shall  send  a full  report  as  soon  as  I can  get  it. 

A.  H.  TERRY, 

Brigadier-  General. 


[Inclosure  No.  2.] 

NEWSPAPER  SLIP. 

Captain  Champneys,  engineer’s  department,  who  has  just  been  re- 
lieved from  duty  at  Fort  Sumter,  is  a fellow-townsman,  who,  after  a 
severe  tour  of  duty  at  Fort  Wagner,  applied  for  duty  at  Sumter,  and 
was  among  those  fired  into  on  the  steamer  Sumter,  while  en  route 
from  Morris  Island  to  the  fort,  since  which  time  he  has  been  con- 
stantly at  work  upon  the  old  ruins.  Under  his  supervision,  during 
the  fifty  days’  interval  between  the  first  and  second  bombardments, 
the  traverses  and  bomb-proofs  have  been  put  up,  to  which  the  garri- 
son owes  its  protection  during  the  assault  on  the  8th  September.  Cap- 
tain Champneys  was  on  the  parapet,  and  was  among  the  first  to  see 
the  advancing  boats,  and,  at  the  request  of  Major  Elliott,  took  charge 
of  an  important  means  of  defense,  in  an  exposed  position  of  the 
gorge  wall.  The  two  months  constant  labor  at  the  fort  has  some- 
what affected  the  health  of  this  officer,  and  he  has  been  temporarily 
relieved,  to  recuperate,  under  medical  advice. 


Chap.  XL.] 


BOMBARDMENT  OF  FORT  SUMTER,  S.  C. 

No.  2. 


607 


Return  of  Casualties  in  the  Union  forces  on  Morris  Island , Sep- 
tember 8- December  31. 


[Compiled  from  nominal  list  of  casualties,  returns,  &c.] 


Command. 

Killed. 

Wounded. 

Aggregate. 

Officers. 

Enlisted  men. 

Officers. 

Enlisted  men. 

7th  Connecticut 

7 

7 

10th  Connecticut 

1 

1 

39th  Illinois 

1 

2 

2 

5 

9th  Maine 

1 

1 

2 

4 

Mn ccp  eb n «pf.f <2  l^cnlnrerl^  

2 

2 

4th  New  Hampshire  

4 

4 

47th  New  York  

1 

1 

2 

1 

1 

Enfans  Perclus  New  York  

2 

5 

62d  Ohio  ’ 

1 

i 

85th  Pennsylvania  . 

2 

2 

97th  Pennsylvania  , 

1 

1 

2 

104  th  Pennsylvania  . 

2 

1 

12 

15 

U Holororl  Troops  

1 

2 

3 

Total  

2 

i 12 

1 

41 

56 

! 

OFFICERS  KILLED. 

ILLINOIS. 

Capt.  Joseph  Woodruff,  39th  Infantry,  September  23. 

MAINE. 

Capt.  Scolly  D.  Baker,  9th  Infantry,  September  8. 


No.  3. 

Report  of  Commander  Foxhall  A.  Parker,  U.  S.  Navy,  commanding 

Naval  Battery. 


Camp  Edgeward, 

Morris  Island , S.  C.,  August  23,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  to  yon  that,  agreeably  to  instruc- 
tions from  General  Gillmore,  the  Naval  Battery,  under  my  command, 
opened  upon  Fort  Sumter  with  two  8-inch  Parrott  and  two  80-pounder 
Whitworth  guns,  on  the  17th  instant,  since  which  period  we  have 
been  engaged  from  daylight  to  dusk  of  each  day,  up  to  the  present 
time. 

The  whole  number  of  Parrott  shells  expended  amounts  to  703,  of 
which  373  struck  the  fort;  252  fell  short  or  went  over  it,  and  78 
tumbled. 

From  the  Whitworth  guns,  222  solid  projectiles  were  fired,  of  which 
98  hit  and  124  missed  the  fort. 


608  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

On  the  19th  instant,  one  of  the  Whitworths  was  entirely  disabled 
by  the  re-enforced  bands  starting  forward,  and 'on  the  21st  I dis- 
continued firing  from  the  other,  as  the  shot  were  continually  jam- 
ming in  the  bore,  in  ramming  home  one  of  which  4 men  were  killed 
by  a premature  explosion  of  the  charge. 

Although  shot  and  shell  were  constantly  passing  over  and  around 
us,  through  the  mercy  of  God  they  harmed  us  not. 

The  officers  and  men  under  my  command  have  done  their  whole 
duty  to  the  country  and  to  the  navy,  and  to-day,  as  a reward  of  their 
labors,  have  the  proud  satisfaction  of  beholding  Fort  Sumter  a 
shapeless  mass  of  ruins,  with  its  last  gun  dismounted  and  fallen 
amid  the  debris. 

FOXHALL  A.  PARKER, 

U.  S.  Navy. 

Admiral  Dahlgren, 

Commanding  South  Atlantic  Blockading  Squadron. 


No.  4. 

Reports  of  Col.  Alfred  Rhett,  First  South  Carolina  Artillery,  com- 
manding Fort  Sumter,  of  operations  August  12-September  4.  * 

August  12. — The  steamer  Hibben  was  this  morning  disabled  at  the 
wharf  by  a 200-pounder  Parrott  shell.  Seven  negroes  were  injured, 
3 more  or  less  seriously. 

The  oven  in  bakery  has  been  rendered  useless,  and  about  one-half 
bushel  of  bricks  thrown  from  arch  beneath. 

Three  shells  exploded  in  western  barracks,  injuring  no  one. 

The  commissary  stores  have  been  removed  to  the  three  casemates 
on  northeast  angle. 

Mortar  firing  was  kept  up  during  the  entire  night.  The  following 
ammunition  was  expended : 38  10-inch  mortar  shells.  One  8-inch 
Columbiad  was  dismounted  during  the  night  from  east  face,  to  be 
sent  to  James  Island.  One  10-inch  columbiad  was  shifted  from  next 
to  11-inch  Dahlgren  to  near  center  of  battery  on  east  face. 

The  center  traverse  on  east  face  is  now  being  built.  The  other 
traverse  will  be  built  to-day.  Seventeen  200-pounder  Parrott  shots 
and  shells  struck  the  fort  during  the  entire  day,  6 outside  and  11  in- 
side. Two  men  were  wounded — Corporal  [James  A.]  Phillips,  Com- 
pany F,  and  Private  [Patrick]  Norton,  Company  E.  They  have  been 
sent  to  the  city.  One  32-pounder  rifle  carriage  was  disabled  and  gun 
struck  on  muzzle;  not  supposed  to  be  injured.  Two  traverse  circles 
on  western  face  have  been  destroyed.  A clear  breach  of  3 feet  has 
been  made  in  northwest  angle  by  a single  200-pounder  shot.  One 
wounded  negro  died.  The  wood  piles  on  southern  side  of  fort  have 
been  removed  to  the  pits,  and  curtains  will  be  constructed  to  protect 
the  men  from  fragments  of  bricks. 

* Being  extracts  from  the  daily  dispatches  from  that  officer  and  from  the  “ Jour- 
nal of  the  Defense  of  Fort  Sumter,”  which  was  kept  under  Special  Orders,  No.  141, 
department  headquarters,  of  July  17, 1863.  The  journal  is  not  found  among  the 
Confederate  archives,  but  the  extracts  here  given  are  those  forwarded  from  day  to 
day  by  the  post  commandant  to  district  and  department  headquarters,  and  thus 
preserved.  The  extracts  for  August  13  and  14  were  transmitted  by  Maj.  Ormsby 
Blanding,  all  others  by  Colonel  Rhett.  For  his  reports  from  July  10  to  August  11, 
see  Operations  on  Morris  Island,  p.  571. 


Chap.  XL.]  BOMBARDMENT  OF  FORT  SUMTER,  S.  C.  609 

August  13. — The  Mary  Francis  arrived  at  6 a.  m.,  with  ammunition 
and  stores  for  Morris  Island  and  this  post.  The  enemy  fired  3 shots, 
all  striking  outside,  1 injuring  parapet  on  gorge  face. 

The  engineer  work  on  the  outside  of  gorge  face  has  to  be  stopped 
during  the  day  on  account  of  the  enemy’s  shells. 

Mortar  firing  was  kept  up  during  the  entire  night.  The  following 
ammunition  was  expended:  28  10-inch  mortar  shells.  One  8-inch 
columbiad  carriage  and  chassis  is  ready  for  shipment.  The  32- 
pounder  rifle  gun  which  was  struck  was  found  to  be  cracked,  and 
was  dismounted.  The  one  to  the  right  of  it  was  shifted  in  its  place. 
Four  gunboats  came  up  during  the  day  and  threw  several  shots  at 
this  fort.  One  came  in,  bursting  beneath  the  platform  of  one  of 
the  mortars,  temporarily  disabling  it.  Ten  shots  struck  the  fort 
during  the  day,  injuring  no  one.  The  greatest  penetration,  4 feet. 

The  second  and  third  traverses  on  east  face  have  been  very  nearly 
completed.  The  revetment  to  gorge  face  is  still  being  carried  on. 

August  14. — Two  shots  struck  the  fort  this  morning.  A schooner 
loaded  with  sand  dragged  her  anchor  during  the  night  and  was 
wrecked  near  the  northeast  face  of  fort.  Two  men  on  board  were 
saved.  One  of  the  shots  this  morning  carried  away  the  top  of  flag- 
staff near  southeast  angle  of  fort. 

Mortar  firing  was  kept  up  during  the  entire  night  from  one  mor- 
tar. The  mortar  platform,  which  was  disabled,  has  been  repaired, 
but  the  work  was  finished  so  late  that  the  direction  could  not  be 
obtained.  The  following  ammunition  was  expended:  35  10-inch 
mortar  shells.  The  10-inch  columbiad  next  to  salient  was  dis- 
mounted during  the  night,  to  be  shifted  to  salient. 

A force  of  470  laborers  and  mechanics  has  been  engaged,  in  two 
reliefs,  day  and  night,  upon  the  defenses  of  the  fort.  Two  sand-bag 
traverses  on  east  face  have  been  completed  and  the  arches  of  western 
magazine  covered  over.  The  crib  work  on  east  face  is  being  taken 
away  to  construct  blindages  for  shelter  under  gorge  wall  on  interior 
of  fort.  During  the  night  3,000  sand-bags  were  received  and  2,500 
were  built  up  on  exterior  of  gorge. 

The  fort  was  struck  five  times  from  land  batteries  and  once  by 
shell  from  gunboats.  Assistant  Engineers  White  and  Mikell  reported 
for  duty  during  the  night. 

August  15. — Mortar  firing  from  both  mortars  in  the  parade  was 
kept  up  during  the  entire  night;  37  10-inch  mortar  shells  were  fired. 
The  10-inch  columbiad  was  mounted  during  the  night  on  salient. 
One  10-inch  mortar  and  bed  and  one  8-inch  columbiad  carriage  and 
chassis  are  ready  for  shipment.  Two  shots  were  fired  at  this  fort 
from  Abolition  land  batteries  in  the  afternoon;  both  passed  over. 

F orce  employed  by  engineers  for  past  twenty-four  hours,  450.  The 
filling  of  arches  over  western  magazine  has  been  completed.  The 
erecting  of  blindage  shelter  under  inside  of  gorge  face  is  being  car- 
ried on;  2,928  bags  of  sand  were  built  up  on  outside  of  gorge,  to  a 
level  with  top  of  second-story  windows,  m a two-bag  thickness  ; to- 
night it  will  be  up  to  top  of  parapet  on  western  half.  To  the  east 
of  caponiere  no  work  has  yet  been  done. 

August  16. — Mortar  firing  was  kept  up  during  the  entire  night 
from  8 p.  m.  The  following  ammunition  was  expended : 34  10-inch 
mortar  shells. 

Forty-eight  shots  and  shells  were  fired  at  this  fort  during  the  after- 
noon; 4 passed  over,  4 or  5 fell  short,  10  struck  inside,  and  the  re- 
mainder outside.  The  pintle  of  one  24-pounder  was  loosened  by  shot 
39  R R— VOL  XXVIII,  PT  i 


[Chap.  XL. 


610  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS/ AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

striking  outside ; 1 shot  passed  through  parapet  above  terre-plein, 
and  the  parapet  also  received  another  bulging  shot.  One  man,  Com- 
pany K,  slightly  wounded. 

One  8-inch  columbiad  carriage  and  chassis  were  shipped  during 
the  night. 

Four  hundred  and  fifty  laborers  have  been  employed  by  engineer 
department ; 2,300  sand-bags  were  piled  on  outside  of  gorge  wall,  and 
the  western  magazine  arches  have  been  filled  over.  The  blindage 
for  cover  of  troops  has  been  carried  on. 

August  17. — The  enemy  opened  fire  upon  us  at  5 a.  m.  Nine 
o’clock,  159  shots  and  shells  have  struck  outside  ; 68  shots  and  shells 
have  struck  [inside];  83  shots  and  shells  have  passed  over  or  fell 
short. 

One  32-pounder  rifle  gun  has  had  its  trunnion  shot  away.  The 
upright  to  carriage  of  10-inch  columbiad  on  salient  angle  has  been 
shot  away.  The  inside  of  the  fort  buildings  has  been  much  torn. 
The  damage  to  outside  has  not  yet  been  ascertained.  The  firing  is 
still  going  on. 

Our  chief  blacksmith,  [William]  Barringer,  Company  K,  has  been 
killed ; 1 corporal  has  been  severely,  and  5 men  slightly,  wounded, 
from  Company  C ; 1 man,  Company  D,  and  1,  Company  B,  slightly 
wounded  by  bricks.  Lieutenants  Rhett  and  John  Middleton  have 
been  slightly  bruised  by  bricks. 

At  5 a.  m.  the  enemy  opened  from  land  batteries  on  Morris  Island 
with  seven  guns,  five  200-pounder  Parrotts  and  two  lighter  guns. 
Fire  was  opened  at  the  same  time  upon  Battery  Wagner  and  Battery 
Gregg,  the  Ironsides  and  monitors  participating  in  the  attack  on 
those  batteries  at  6 a.  m.  At  10. 45  a.  m.  the  Ironsides  and  two  mon- 
itors moved  up  and  commenced  fire  upon  the  fort.  At  11.15  a.  m. 
we  opened  upon  the  iron-clads  and  continued  fire  until  1.30  p.  m., 
when  the  enemy  withdrew  and  our  fire  was  stopped.  The  following 
number  of  rounds  were  expended,  viz,  64. 

From  5 a.  m.,  August  17,  tov5  a.  m.,  August  18,  948  shots  and  shells 
have  been  fired ; 445  struck  outside,  233  inside,  and  270  passed  over. 
The  firing  during  the  day  was  very  rapid  ; during  the  night,  1 shot 
in  fifteen  minutes.  The  engineer  will  make  report  as  regards  injury 
done  the  fort. 

The  western  magazine  has  been  traversed  on  the  outside  to  a thick- 
ness of  10  feet  and  to  a height  equal  to  first  story.  The  second  floor 
of  eastern  magazine  has  been  covered  with  4 feet  of  sand,  and  the 
same  floor  of  western  magazine  with  18  inches.  A few  sand-bags 
were  also  placed  to  assist  in  protection  of  hospital. 

Our  32-pounder  rifle  had  trunnion  shot  away.  On  northwest  face 
two  10-inch  columbiads,  one  9-inch  Dahlgren,  one  8-inch  columbiad, 
and  two  42-pounders  were  disabled.  The  two  42-pounders  were  taken 
from  parapet  to  parade  during  the  night,  to  be  shipped. 

All  the  wounded  enlisted  men*  have  been  sent  to  the  city. 

August  17, 11  p.  m. — Nine  hundred  and  nineteen  shots  have  been 
fired ; 455  struck  outside,  218  inside,  and  266  passed  over.  Casual- 
ties : Barringer,  Company  K,  killed ; Lieutenants  Rhett,  John  Mid- 
dleton, and  John  Johnson,  engineer,  slightly  wounded;  Corporal 
[Patrick]  Charles,  Company  C,  severely  wounded ; Quartermaster- 
Sergeant  [William]  Nicol,  four  fingers  cut  from  left  hand.,  and  12 
privates  slightly  wounded.  The  enemy  are  still  firing  once  in  fifteen 

* Nominal  list  of  casualties  reports  Private  Barringer,  Company  K,  First  South 
Carolina  Artillery,  killed,  and  8 officers  and  14  men  wounded. 


Chap.  XL.]  BOMBARDMENT  OF  FORT  SUMTER,  S.  C.  611 

minutes  to  prevent  working.  Mr.  Johnson  will  endeavor,  however, 
to  fix  the  western  magazine.  The  damage  done  to  gorge  face  since 
the  general  was  here  is  considerable.  Engineers  will  report  and  I 
will  forward  report.  All  the  guns  on  northwest  face  have  been  dis- 
abled, excepting  one  8-inch  columbiad  and  one  42-pounder,  including 
the  big  10-inch  columbiad. 

August  18,  10.15  a.  m.  (telegram). — It  is  impossible  to  get  out  a 
gun  to-day.  The  sally-port  and  the  way  to  it  covered  with  rubbish, 
and  shells  continually  bursting  near.  Two  42-pounders  were  taken 
off  parapet  last  night,  but  could  not  be  got  out  on  the  wharf. 

August  18,  11.25  a.  m.  (telegram). — It  is  simply  impossible  to  dis- 
mount or  remove  one  disabled  gun  to-day. 

August  18  (journal).- — No  firing  took  place  from  this  fort.  The 
enemy  opened  fire  with  rapidity  at  5 a.  m.  and  continued  till  7 p.  m. 
Eight  hundred  and  seventy-six  shots  and  shells  were  fired;  452  struck 
outside,  244  inside,  and  180  passed  over.  All  the  guns  on  gorge  face 
have  been  disabled  but  one  rifled  32-pounder  and  one  24-pounder. 
Both  guns  on  west  face  disabled.  All  the  guns  on  northwest  face  un- 
serviceable. The  two  10-inch  columbiads,  right  of  flag-staff,  disabled. 
The  Brooke  gun  on  southeast  angle  had  its  carriage  shattered,  but 
was  remounted  during  the  night. 

The  garrison  flag  was  twice  cut  away.  The  sand-bag  revetment 
to  western  magazine  was  raised  2 feet  higher  during  the  night; 
three  shot  holes  higher  up  were  filled;  the  whole  of  lower  magazine 
thus  defended. 

Traverse  on  southeast  pan  coupe  raised  2 feet  higher. 

Floors  of  both  upper  magazines  covered  with  4 feet  of  sand. 

Stewart,  cockswain,  severely  wounded  in  arm ; [John]  Bennett, 
corporal,  Company  B,  slightly  wounded ; N.  F.  Devereux,  engineer 
department,  slightly  wounded. 

August  19. — An  attempt  was  made  last  night  to  get  one  of  the 
disabled  10-inch  columbiads  ready  for  shipment,  but  it  was  found  to 
be  impossible. 

The  enemy  opened  fire  again  this  morning  at  4.30  o’clock,  and  up 
to  the  present  time,  9.10  a.  m.,  245  shots  and  shells  have  been  fired; 
140  struck  outside,  77  inside,  and  28  passed  over. 

Casualties:  Private  [William]  Fink,  Company  K,  killed;  Private 
[Jacob]  Probst,  Company  K,  severely  wounded  twice;  Private  [Z.] 
Holmes,  Company  K,  slightly  wounded;  Private  [Edward]  Hatcher, 
Company  K,.  slightly  wounded ; Corporal  [C.  P.]  Barnett,  Company 
C,  slightly  wounded. 

All  gorge  guns  useless. 

August  19,  9.50  a.  m.  (telegram). — We  need  all  the  garrison  we 
have  to  hold  the  fort,  and  are  short  of  officers.  The  firing  this  morn- 
ing is  the  heaviest  yet  and  the  walls  are  seriously  damaged.  One 
killed  and  4 wounded  this  morning.  All  gorge  guns  useless.  Mid- 
dleton went  to  town  last  night. 

August  19,  10.^0. — The  first  shot  has  passed  through  the  gorge 
[wall],  coming  out  of  the  room  on  the  right  of  the  adjutant’s  office. 
The  room  is  known  as  General  Ripley’s  room  (10  o’clock  and  20 
minutes).  Shot  struck  close  under  the  arch  where  there  is  little  sand. 

August  19,  12  m. — The  Sumter  slipped  her  ropes  and  left  the 
wharf,  with  190  barrels  of  powder  aboard.  Will  try  and  ship  the  re- 
mainder by  Etiwan  this  evening,  if  possible. 

August  19,  12.10  p.  m.  (telegram). — The  width  of  20  feet  of  the 
gorge  wall  has  fallen,  and  two-thirds  will  probably  be  down  to-mor- 


612  S.  0.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MFD.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

row,  and  light  is  showing  through  three  or  four  of  the  casemates  of 

eorge  wall.  One  mortar  dismounted,  and  bed  torn  and  broken. 

even  casemates,  west  face,  are  shattered;  three  piers  shot  away,  and 
three  more  shattered  on  second  tier.  The  same  for  first  tier.  A 
good  part  of  terre-plein  has  fallen  in.  One  killed  and  4 wounded. 

Seven  hundred  and  sixty-three  shots  to-day;  398  struck  outside, 
236  inside,  and  129  over. 

August  19  (journal). — Three  fires  occurred  during  the  day.  These 
fires  were  promptly  extinguished  by  the  officer  of  the  day,  ably  and 
gallantly  assisted  by  Sergeant  [Theodore]  Schaeffer,  Company  H,  act- 
ing provost  sergeant  of  the  garrison,  who  went  among  the  ruins  re- 

Eeatedly,  directly  in  the  line  of  fire  from  the  enemy,  and  put  out  the 
res. 

August  19, 5.30  p.  m.  (telegram). — The  following  intercepted  dis- 
patch forwarded  from  bathing  house  to  Captain  Tucker  : * 

The  admiral  is  going  to  try  Fort  Sumter,  and  wishes  hot  fire  when  he  gets  in. 

G , 

General. 

August  19  (journal).— The  Ironsides  moved  up,  and  we  opened  at 
long  range  upon  her  from  a few  guns ; 4 shots  were  fired.  The  fire 
of  the  enemy  slackened  during  the  heat  of  the  day,  and  again  in- 
creased in  rapidity  toward  the  afternoon  till  7 o’clock,  when  the  fire 
for  the  night  was  reduced  to  1 shot  in  thirty  minutes.  Seven  hun- 
dred and  eighty  shots  and  shells  were  fired;  408  struck  outside,  241 
inside,  and  131  over. 

About  one-half  of  gorge  wall  has  fallen,  exposing  the  arches  and 
sand  in  rooms,  the  sand-bag  traversing  protecting  the  lower  rooms 
to  west  of  the  old  sally-ports.  A large  part  of  the  remaining  gorge 
wall  will  fall  shortly.  Three  of  casemates  were  opened  through 
sand. 

On  northwest  face  seven  casemates  in  the  upper  and  lower  tier  are 
badly  shattered,  several  of  them  being  clean  breaches.  Almost  every 
one  of  the  piers  sustaining  the  terre-plein  are.  badly  shattered.  Part 
of  the  terre-plein  has  already  fallen  in,  and  more  is  continually  going. 
Magazine  still  reported  safe. 

The  10-inch  mortar  in  parade  is  dismounted  and  bed  broken  and 
shattered.  Two  of  the  rooms  on  east  side  of  sally-port  on  gorge  face 
have  been  repacked  and  rammed  with  sand.  The  hospital  has  been 
traversed,  and  the  revetment  to  western  magazine  raised  higher. 

Wo  casualties  after  9 a.  m.  Fifteen  men  of  Company  E,  who  have 
been  on  detached  service  at  Battery  Wagner,  were  sent  to  Castle 
Pinckney  to  rest. 

August  20,  3 a.  m.  (telegram). — I have  shipped  by  steamers  Sum- 
ter and  Etiwan  35,000  pounds  of  powder,  between  300  and  400  32- 
pounder  rifle  shells,  besides  7-inch  projectiles,  &c. 

August  20. — The  enemy  opened  a heavy  fire  at  5 a.  m.  and  is  still 
keeping  it  up.  Up  to  this  time,  9 a.m.,  244  shots  have  been  made — 
136  outside,  69  inside,  and  39  over.  The  double-banded  rifled  42- 
pounder,  east  face,  has  been  disabled. 

Twenty-five  thousand  pounds  powder,  275  32-pounder  shells,  200 
Brooke  bolts,  25  11-inch  shells,  1'  set  of  wheels,  axles,  &c.,  were 
shipped  during  the  night,  but  no  guns  can  be  removed.  Wo  cas- 
ualties. 


* See  also  Ripley’s  dispatches  of  this  date,  p.  383. 


Chap.  XL.]  BOMBARDMENT  OF  FORT  SUMTER,  S.  C.  613 

August  20  (journal). — The  enemy  kept  up  a heavy  and  continuous 
fire  during  the  whole  day,  but  increasing  perceptibly  toward  the  after- 
noon; 879  shots  and  shells  were  fired;  408  struck  outside,  296  inside, 
and  175  passed  over.  At  12.15  p.  m.  the  flag  was  shot  away.  The 
greater  part  of  the  gorge  wall  has  fallen,  the  debris  from  the  upper 
revetting  in  a manner  the  lower  floors.  The  northwest  terre-plein 
has  to  a great  degree  fallen  in,  and  the  wall  has  several  clean  breaches, 
one  whole  casemate  being  knocked  through.  One  42-pounder  rifle 
gun,  northeast  battery,  has  been  disabled. 

The  enemy  ceased  firing  at  7. 15  a.  m.  Captain  Gaillard  was  slightly 
wounded,  and  Captain  Fleming  struck,  though  not  hurt.  Private 
[James]  Connelly,  Company  K,  slightly  wounded. 

Some  large  holes  opened  through  northwest  scarp  wall  by  reverse 
firing  to-day.  Six  upper  and  three  lower  embrasures  shattered.  One 
opening  8 by  10  feet.  East  scarp  wall,  damage  very  slight.  South- 
east pan  coupe  battered  under  traverse,  and  one-half  parapet  in  its 
front  fallen.  Eastern  magazine  re-enforce  stone  work,  damage  slight ; 
now  covered  by  rubbish  from  upper  part,  which  is  half  gone;  same 
way  rubbish  from  upper  rooms  have  covered  the  lower.  W orst  effect 
to-day  is  demolishing  some  7 feet  of  arch  and  rampart  for  length  of 
30  feet  along  eastern  half  of  gorge.  The  western  magazine  is  safe  as 
yet. 

August  20,  12.40  p.  m.  (telegram). — If  I send  out,  two  companies,  F 
and  K,  it  will  leave  us  but  200  men  for  duty — out  of  these  to  be 
taken  magazine  men,  police,  cooks,  old  guard,  and  new  guard. 

I do  not  think  it  would  be  advisable  to  send  volunteers  among 
our  garrison  at  this  time;  think  it  would  have  a bad  effect.  Com- 
pany K has  been  ordered  to  hold  itself  in  readiness  to  move  this 
evening. 

The  firing  this  morning  has  been  exceedingly  heavy,  more  de- 
structive than  it  has  ever  been.  Our  flag  has  just  been  shot  away 
and  replaced. 


[Indorsement.] 

One  company  will  be  removed  from  Fort  Sumter  to-night. 

. NANCE, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

August  20,  9.30  p.  m.  (telegram). — The  battery  in  marsh  near 
Black  Island  appears  to  be  built  of  sand,  and  is  probably  a sand 
battery. 

The  fire  this  afternoon  was  the  heaviest  that  has  taken  place. 
Eight  hundred  and  seventy-nine  shots  were  fired  to-day;'  428  outside, 
476  inside,  175  over.  The  gorge  face  has  been  much  battered,  and 
the  quarter  [greater]  portion  of  it  has  fallen.  The  lower  rooms, 
however,  are  in  a manner  revetted  by  the  debris  from  the  upper. 
The  northwest  wall  has  been  breached  clearly  in  several  places,  and 
one  casemate  second  door  [floor]  is  entirely  knocked  through. 
Large  portions  of  terre-plein  have  fallen.  The  rifled  42-pounder,  Cap- 
tain Fleming’s  battery,  and  the  left  rifled  42-pounder,  Captain  Har- 
leston’s  battery,  have  been  disabled.  Captain  Harleston  is  slightly 
wounded,  though  painfully,  by  a shell.  Captain  Fleming  was  struck, 
though  not  hurt,  by  a shell.  Frivate  Connelly,  Company  K,  slightly. 

August  21. — The  enemy  opened  at  5 a.  m.  a heavy  enfilading  fire 
on  east  battery. 


[Chap.  XL. 


614  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

One  heavy  10-inch,  columbiad,  east  face,  and  1 rifled  42-pounder, 
northeast  face,  disabled. 

The  flag-staff  is  disabled,  and  the  flag  twice  shot  away.  A shell 
came  into  the  adjutant’s  office,  knocking  the  desks  to  pieces,  but  the 
papers  have  been  saved. 

A 75-pounder  Whitworth  shot  has  been  found  in  the  fort. 

The  following  ordnance  stores  were  shipped:  11-inch  shell,  10-inch 
shell,  10-inch  shot,  42-pounder  shell,  32-pounder  shell,  cartridges,  bags, 
sponges  and  staves,  rammers,  scoops,  worms,  scrapers,  handspikes, 
and  900  pounds  of  powder. 

All  the  powder  from  east  magazine  taken  out,  and  wall  found  to  be 
cracked  in  west  corner. 

Commissary  stores,  120  barrels  of  pork  and  75  barrels  of  flour. 

One  negro  died  suddenly  of  disease  of  heart,  and  1 slightly  wounded. 

Hospital  traverse  completed.  Strengthened  revetment  to  western 
magazine.  Threw  over  traverse  from  gorge  wall.  Started  traverse 
in  rear  of  three-gun  battery.  Packed  four  rooms  east  of  gorge  with 
sand. 

August  21,  7.40  a.  m.  (telegram). — The  enemy  are  enfilading  our 
east  face  this  morning.  One  heavy  10-inch  and  a rifled  32-pounder, 
in  Harleston’s  battery,  are  disabled.  I expect  both  batteries  will  go 
to-day. 

August  21,  10.55  a.  m.  (telegram). — The  fire  of  the  enemy  is  very 
heavy  on  the  east  battery,  and,  should  the  fleet  come  up,  I do  not 
think  the  men  could  stay  at  the  guns.  Our  flag  has  been  twice  shot 
away  this  morning. 


[Indorsement.] 

All  other  batteries  are  ordered  on  the  qui  vive,  should  the  fleet  at- 
tempt to  come  in,  or  come  within  their  range  to  aid  in  the  attack  on 
Fort  Sumter. 

NANCE, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

August  21,  11.45  a.  m.  (telegram). — We  have  now  only  nine  ef- 
fective guns  en  barbette , and  the  probabilities  are  that  this  afternoon 
most  of  them  will  be  disabled. 

August  21,  8.45  p.  m.  (telegram). — The  firing  ceased  at  7 p'.  m. 
It  has  been  very  heavy  all  day.  Since  5 a.  m.  923  shots  were  fired; 
445  struck  outside,  259  inside,  219  passed  over.  The  eastern  face  has 
been  pretty  well  battered. 

One  10-inch  columbiad  and  one  8-inch  columbiad,  east  face,  and 
two  rifled  42-pounders,  northeast  face,  were  disabled.  Seven  service- 
able guns  are  now  on  the  parapet. 

Private  Thomas  Powers,  Company  B,  wounded  severely;  leg 
amputated  above  knee.  Privates  H.  Robertson  and  William  Dum- 
phries,  Company  F,  slightly.  Corporal  [Henry]  O’Neil  and  Pri- 
vate [Thomas]  Goggins,  Company  K,  slightly.  Two  negroes — Daniel, 
slave  of  Mr.  Purvis,  and  Isaac,  slave  of  Mr.  Marmins — dangerously 
wounded. 

Flag-staff  shot  down  four  times. 

August  21  (journal).— A heavy  and  continuous  fire  was  kept  up 
during  the  entire  day.  The  following  number  of  shots  and  shells 
were  fired,  viz,  943;  465  struck  outside,  259  inside,  219  passed  over. 

One  10-inch  columbiad  and  one  8-inch  columbiad,  east  face,  and 


Chap.  XL.] 


BOMBARDMENT  OF  FORT  SUMTER,  S.  C. 


615 


two  42-pounders,  rifled,  were  disabled.  The  flag-staff  was  shattered 
and  the  flag  was  four  times  shot  away.  The  fire  ceased  at  7 p.  m. 

Traverses  on  east  face  have  been  repaired  and  rebuilt ; traverse 
over  42-pounder  rifle  gun  built  up  4 feet. 

East  front,  scarp  wall,  deep  penetrations  on  the  level  of  the  second 
tier  of  casemates ; worst  displacement  under  traverses.  Upper  part 
of  re-enforce  to  west  magazine  gone,  and  one  crater  in  old  wall.  The 
demolition  of  gorge  rampart  increased.  West  magazine  re-enforce, 
no  increased  damage.  Northwest  scarp  wall  penetrated  at  seven 
upper  and  five  lower  casemates;  breaches  8 by  10  and  6 by  8 through 
two  of  them.  Stairway  at  salient  demolished;  only  two  traverse 
circles  of  barbette  battery,  northeast  face,  in -good  condition;  east 
barracks  badly  damaged. 

At  6.30  p.  m.  5 11-inch  shots  were  fired  at  the  Ironsides. 

Handspikes,  elevating  bars,  sponges,  rammers,  worms,  scrapers, 
friction-tubes,  blocks,  set  of  eccentric  axles,  &c.,  for  columbiad;  8 
sets  of  traversing  gear,  and  9,700  pounds  of  powder,  were  shipped; 
also  12  bags  of  sugar. 

Captain  Gaillard’s  company  (K)  was  sent  to  Sullivan’s  Island. 
Casualties  [nominal  list  omitted]:  1 man  dangerously,  4 slightly, 
wounded;  2 negroes,  severely. 

August  22. — The  enemy  opened  again  this  morning  at  6 o’clock 
Up  to  9 a.  m.  266  shots  have  been  fired;  76  struck  outside,  85  inside, 
105  over.  Casualties,  1 man  wounded. 

The  general  commanding  and  staff  visited  the  fort  last  evening 
after  the  firing  ceased,  accompanied  by  Colonel  Gilmer,  chief  en- 
gineer, and  Lieutenant-Colonel  Harris,  chief  engineer  of  the  depart- 
ment. One  of  the  rifled  42-pounders,  northeast  face,  which  was  put  in 
condition  last  night,  was  totally  disabled  this  morning.  The  Brooke 
gun  is  also  disabled,  leaving  only  seven  serviceable  guns  now  on  the 
ramparts. 

August  22  (journal). — During  the  entire  day,  604  shots  and  shells 
were  fired  at  this  fort;  203  struck  outside,  216  inside,  185  missed. 
All  the  barbette  guns  have  been  disabled,  with  the  exception  of  the 
11-inch  Dahlgren  and  a 10-inch  columbiad,  east  face.  The  east  para- 
pet has  been  much  shattered  and  undermined;  east  front  much  scaled 
by  slant  fire;  large  craters  under  traverses;  principal  injury  at  level 
of  arches  and  terre-plein ; magazine  safe ; 1 man  slightly  wounded. 

August  23,  2.30  p.  m.  (telegram). — While  at  dinner-table  a shell 
burst  just  above  our  mess-room,  parts  of  the  shell  coming  through 
on  the  dinner-table  and  throwing  down  brick.  Lieutenant  Boylston 
was  seriously  bruised;  Lieutenant  Scanlan,  slightly,  in  the  arm ; Cap- 
tain Fleming,  bruised;  Lieutenant  Fickling,  slightly  hurt;  myself, 
slightly  hurt. 

August  23  (journal). — Another  attempt  to  hurl  10-inch  columbiad 
off  northwest  pan  coupe  wras  made  during  the  night  ; the  work  done 
was  inconsiderable.  Traverses  over  rifled  42-pounder  raised  2 feet 
higher,  and  northeast  traverses  thickened  to  height  of  3 feet. 

The  gang  of  negroes  was  relieved  by  others. 

Two  hundred  8-inch  shell  were  shipped. 

Monitors  engaged  fort  3.15  a.  m.  to  5.30  a.  m.,  firing  on  line  east  of 
pan  coupe  and  western  magazine;  time  fuse  and  rifle  shell.  One  sent 
particle  of  shell  into  ordnance  store;  one  threw  sand  from  below  into 
magazine  passage.  No  material  damage  done  to  magazine. 

Two  15-inch  shells  made  breaches  in  east  parapet.  Number  of  shots 
and  shells  fired  by  monitors,  27  outside,  15  inside,  17  missed. 


616  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

Private  [Henry]  Davis,  Company  C,  severely,  2 negroes  slightly, 
wounded.  Land  batteries  opened  fire  at  7.15  a.  m.,  and  are  still 
firing.  The  entire  day,  G33  shots  and  shells  were  fired  at  this  post; 
282  struck  outside,  210  inside,  141  missed. 

All  the  barbette  guns  have  been  disabled,  with  the  exception  of  the 
11-inch  Dahlgren  gun,  east  face.  Scaling  effect  on  east  face  and  south- 
east pan  coupe  very  great.  East  parapet  very  much  shattered.  All 
the  guns  in  three-gun  battery,  second  tier  of  casemates,  disabled;  east 
magazine  safe.  Eleven  thousand  pounds  of  powder  removed  to  east 
magazine  during  the  night ; 15,000  pounds  of  powder  kept  in  western 
magazine  and  ready  for  shipment ; 50  Brooke  bolts,  50  10-inch  solid 
shots,  50  10-inch  shells,  20  rifle  shells,  20  loaded  shells,  ammunition 
chests,  rammers,  sponges,  &c.,  ready  for  shipment. 

Force  of  210  negroes  engaged  all  night  in  strengthening  western 
magazine  against  reverse  fire  from  the  monitors,  and  in  repairing  and 
strengthening  traverses  on  east  barbette  battery.  The  flag-staff  was 
shot  away  twice.  The  whole  garrison  worked  all  night. 

Henry  Davis,  Company  C,  died  on  the  way  to  the  city ; Henry 
Osteen,  Company  D,  slightly  wounded,  head ; Lieutenant  Boylston, 
adjutant,  severely  wounded,  back;  Lieutenant  Fickling,  severely 
wounded,  leg;  Lieutenant  Scanlan,  ordnance  officer,  slightly  wounded, 
arm;  2 negroes,  severely  wounded,  head ; 1 negro  slightly  wounded, 
head. 

Land  batteries  opened  fire  at  6.30*a.  m.,  and  are  still  firing  slowly. 

August  24  (journal). — The  entire  day,  150  shots  and  shells  were  fired 
at  this  post;  112  struck  outside,  14  inside,  and  24  missed.  I consider 
only  one  gun,  11 -inch  Dahlgren,  east  face,  as  serviceable  in  action. 

The  fire  to-day  principally  upon  southeast  pan  coupe  and  east  scarp. 
The  former  has  its  lower  casemate  embrasures  breached,  and  the 
upper  casemates  probably.  The  east  scarp  has  a large  displacement 
along  its  whole  extent,  with  one  or  two  penetrations  in  lower  case- 
mates. 

Firing  to-day  at  intervals  of  half  hour,  and  with  some  light  and 
one  heavy  10- inch  Parrott  guns.  During  the  night,  working  parties 
employed  filling  with  sand-bags  four  penetrations  at  lower  embra- 
sure on  southeast  pan  coupe  and  east  scarp;  also  adding  to  security 
of  west  magazine,  and  repairing  traverses  on  east  barbette.  Eleven 
thousand  pounds  of  powder  removed  from  east  to  west  magazine 
during  the  night.  During  the  day,  Colonel  Gilmer,  chief  of  engi- 
neers, and  Colonel  Harris,  chief  engineer  of  the  department,  visited 
this  post  officially,  and  also  General  Ripley  after  dark. 

No  casualties.  The  whole  garrison  at  work  all  night. 

August  25  (journal). — The  entire  day,  175  shots  and  shells  were  fired 
at  this  post ; 62  struck  outside,  36  inside,  77  missed.  The  fire  to-day 
more  destructive  inside  than  out.  East  scarp  more  scaled  and  cut 
up,  but  without  any  decided  breach.  Interior  damage  on  northeast 
casemates,  upper  and  lower ; but  two  of  them  more  or  less  damaged 
by  fire  in  reverse,  cutting  away  pieces,  chipping  arches,  and  damag- 
ing terre-plein. 

One  shell  penetrated  gorge  ramparts  over  the  east  magazine  and 
exploded,  sending  smoke  above  this  crack  in  filling  of  terre-plein , 
and  below  this  probably  cracked  arch  of  passage  between  inner  and 
outer  doors  of  upper  magazine.  In  magazine  proper,  no  smoke  at 
all  was  found.  The  east  magazines  are  without  any  damage.  The 
stone  work  of  re-enforce  is  intact.  The  shock  of  the  10-inch  Parrott 
shells  is  very  great. 


Chap.  XL.] 


BOMBARDMENT  OF  FORT  SUMTER,  S.  C. 


617 


Finished  securing  west  magazine  from  reverse  fire ; began  trav- 
erse on  parade  at  entrance  to  passage  now  used  for  hospital  sally- 
port. Magazine  and  telegraph  office  repaired  and  filled  up  with 
bags.  Some  small  breaches  at  embrasure  of  east  front,  lower  tier, 
and  one  large  opening  under  arch  of  Captain  Harleston’s  room  on 
gorge.  Restored  traverses  on  east  barbette.  Embrasures  on  north- 
east and  northwest  faces  in  process  of  being  bricked  up. 

Twelve  thousand  pounds  of  powder,  5 boxes  port-fire,  7,200  prim- 
ing-tubes, 1 box  paper  fuses  assorted,  50  Brooke  bolts,  50  10-inch 
solid  shot,  50  10-inch  shells,  20  rifle  shells,  about  50  damaged  mus- 
kets, sponges,  rammers,  and  iron  handspikes  shipped  on  steamer 
Spaulding. 

Companies  C and  F left  this  post  last  night  on  steamer  Spaulding, 
to  proceed  to  Fort  J ohnson  for  duty,  with  Lieutenant-Colonel  Y ates. 
They  were  replaced  by  150  men  of  the  two  reserve  regiments  of  Col- 
quitt’s brigade,  under  command  of  Capt.  G.  W.  Warthen. 

Nearly  the  whole  garrison  at  work  the  entire  night.  No  casualties. 

Land  batteries  commenced  firing  at  6 a.  m.,  firing  slowly. 

August  26  (journal). — The  entire  day,  130  shots  and  shells  were 
fired  at  this  post;  45  struck  outside,  45  inside,  and  40  missed. 

Fire  to-day  slack  and  inexact;  damage  not  very  perceptible.  Most 
of  the  holes  stopped  on  the  outside  last  night  are  undisturbed,  and 
but  one  or  two  new  ones  made  on  east  scarp.  Southeast  pan  coupe 
and  east  magazine  received  most  of  to-day’s  outside  shots.  The 
upper  courses  of  east  solid  angle  of  stone  re-enforce  to  east  magazine 
a little  displaced  by  fire  to-day.  This  angle  never  yet  has  been  pro- 
tected by  falling  rubbish,  excepting  for  two-thirds  of  its  height,  some 
10  feet. 

Rain  and  want  of  sand-bags  delayed  engineer  work;  filling  holes 
in  outside  on  gorge  and  east  front;  building  up  traverses  by  rifled 
42-pounders  on  east  barbette. 

Unloaded  steamer  Etiwan  of  bags  of  sand. 

A large  quantity  of  10-inch  mortar  shells  were  shipped  during  the 
night  on  steamer  Etiwan. 

The  garrison  at  work  the  entire  night. 

No  casualties  to-day.  Embrasures  to  casemates  in  process  of  be- 
ing bricked  up. 

August  27  (journal). — Only  4 shots  were  fired  during  the  day, 
evidently  at  the  flag;  all  went  over.  Consequently  no  increase  of 
damage  to  works. 

Working  parties  finished  heavy  traverse  over  42-pounder  rifle  gun, 
east  barbette  battery;  repaired  others  on  same.  Discharged  steamer 
Etiwan,  bringing  500  bags  of  sand  from  Sullivan’s  Island. 

About  400  10-inch  shots  and  shells,  1 parapet  gun,  1 lot  sabots,  tin 
straps,  brass  fuses,  blocks,  one  box  bridge  sights,  6 boxes  9-inch 
Dahlgren  shells,  1 9-inch  Dahlgren  gun;  1 lot  of  axles,  wheels,  &c., 
for  columbiad  carriage;  1 lot  elevating  screws,  were  shipped  at  4.30 
a.  m.  by  steamer  Etiwan. 

The  9-inch  Dahlgren  gun,  mentioned  above,  and  10-inch  columbiads 
on  northwest  pan  coupe  thrown  over  the  parapet  during  the  night, 
by  Mr.  J.  Fraser  Mathewes. 

Breaking  up  of  embrasures  in  lower  tier  casemates  completed. 
Garrison  at  work  the  whole  day  and  night.  No  casualties. 

August  28  (journal). — The  entire  day,  6 shots  were  fired;  3 struck 
outside,  3 missed. 

No  increase  of  damage  to  works.  Working  parties  during  the 


[Chap.  XL. 


618  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

night  completed  traverse  on  parade  at  entrance  to  magazine  and  hos- 
pital, southwest  angle;  also  repairs  and  improvement  to  east  bar- 
bette battery. 

By  steamer  Etiwan  were  shipped  the  following  ordnance  stores: 
400  10-inch  mortar  shells,  1,500  paper  fuses,  1 box  tops  of  brass  fuses, 
plugs,  3 damaged  muskets,  2 elevating  screws,  6 boxes  mortar  fuses, 
18  8-inch  columbiad  incendiary  shells,  3 9-inch  Dahlgren  shells  pre- 
pared, 300  pounds  lead,  1 10-inch  columbiad  gun,  1 sponge,  8 boxes 
canister,  1 box  of  implements,  fuse  extractors,  &c.,  fragments  of 
gin  legs;  1 box  of  fuse  plugs. 

Mr.  J.  Fraser  Mathewes  threw  the  9-inch  Dahlgren  gun  on  south- 
west face  over  the  parapet;  disabled  in  the  fall.  The  garrison  worked 
day  and  night.  No  casualties. 

August  29  (journal). — There  was  no  firing  to-day;  Company  D left 
for  Charleston,  and  a detachment  of  the  Twenty-seventh  Georgia 
Volunteers,  50  men,  under  command  of  Captain  [H.]  Bussey,  arrived 
here.  There  are  ready  for  shipment  400  10-inch  shells  (mortar),  am- 
munition chests,  wheels,  &c.  One  Brooke  gun  and  1 42-pounder 
rifle  were  thrown  over  the  ramparts.  Brooke  gun  shipped  last 
night.  Garrison  worked  all  day. 

August  29  (letter  to  Brigadier-General  Jordan). — I have  the  honor 
to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  the  paper  containing  the  opinions  of 
Col.  J.  F.  Gilmer  and  Lieut.  Col.  D.  B.  Harris,  in  relation  to  the 
advisability  of  the  abandonment  of  Fort  Sumter,*  together  with  the 
indorsement  of  General  Beauregard  approving  the  same,  and  direct- 
ing that — 

Fort  Sumter  be  held  to  the  last  extremity,  i.  e. , not  surrendered  until  it  becomes 
impossible  to  hold  it  longer  without  an  unnecessary  sacrifice  of  human  fife.  Evacua- 
tion of  the  fort  must  not  be  contemplated  one  instant  without  positive  orders  from 
these  headquarters. 

I would  respectfully  state  that  I had  already  received  instructions 
from  district  headquarters  to  hold  the  fort  to  the  last,  and  that  I 
informed  Col.  J.  F.  Gilmer  and  Lieut.  Col.  D.  B.  Harris  of  the  same. 
I would  also  respectfully  state  that  I have  not  asked  for  a consulta- 
tion with  the  engineer  officers  ; nor  have  I recommended  that  Fort 
Sumter  be  evacuated;  nor  have  I “contemplated  for  one  instant, 
without  positive  orders  from  these  headquarters,  the  evacuation  of 
Fort  Sumter.” 

Fort  Sumter  will  not  be  surrendered  by  me  until  in  my  opinion 
it  becomes  “ impossible  to  hold  it  longer  without  an  unnecessary 
sacrifice  of  human  life.”  The  commanding  general  is  kept  informed 
by  reports  as  to  the  condition  of  the  fort,  and  alone  must  determine 
as  to  the  evacuation  or  not  of  the  fort. 

Should  emergencies  arise  requiring,  in  my  opinion,  the  surrender 
of  the  fort,  the  responsibility  will  rest  with  me. 

August  30. — Firing  commenced  .at  5 a.  m.,  very  rapidly. 

Casualties:  Sergeant  Schaeffer,  Company  H;  Private  [Hugh]  Lu- 
guire,  Company  B,  First  South  Carolina  Artillery;  Private  [S.] 
Van,  Company  A,  Twenty-seventh  Georgia,  slightly. 

Working  parties  engaged  on  second-tier  passage  traverse,  at  west- 
ern magazine,  filling  mess-room,  and  protecting  from  reverse  fire  of 
monitors;  also  filling  from  outside  an  opening  on  left  of  old  sally- 
port on  gorge,  and  aiding  party  dismounting  guns  by  shoveling  and 
building  sand-bag  cushions  on  berme. 


* See  report  No.  4,  p.  608. 


619 


Chap.  XL.]  BOMBARDMENT  OF  FORT  SUMTER,  S.  C. 

An  hour  was  lost  by  separating  and  sending  away  61  hands;  pres- 
ent force,  110. 

August  30  (journal). — The  entire  day,  634  shots  and  shells  were 
fired  at  this  post;  322  struck  outside,  168  inside,  144  missed. 

About  400  10-inch  mortar  shells,  200  42-pounder  rifled  bolts,  20 
11-inch  shells  and  shots,  a lot  of  wheels,  elevating-screw  beds, 
elevating  screws,  trunnion  plates,  1 barrel  brass,  2 barrels  of  lead, 
27  pass  boxes,  1 box  of  sabots,  1 barrel  of  tow,  2 sets  of  traversing 
gears  and  segments,  were  shipped  by  steamer  Etiwan.  Garrison 
worked  a part  of  the  night. 

Casualties:  Privates  A.  E.  Woolright  and  P.  Ward,  Company  C, 
Twenty-eighth  Georgia. 

Damage  at  Fort  Sumter  most  apparent  inside.  On  east  barbette 
battery  two  10-inch  columbiads,  serviceable  up  to  to-day,  had  car- 
riages broken;  one  10-inch  columbiad  muzzle  shot  off  and  dismounted. 
Parapet  all  shaky  and  partially  demolished ; traverses  badly  cut  up. 
Three  arches,  with  ramparts,  on  northeast  front,  cut  away  and 
tumbled  in,  burying  some  commissary  stores;  east  scarp,  near  south- 
east pan  coupe,  has  large  blocks  knocked  away  from  face  of  second- 
tier  casemates  arch,  exposing  segment  of  arch  and  displacing  sand 
filling. 

Two  more  such  places  on  a smaller  scale  on  same  point.  Working 
party  last  night  only  100  men,  engaged  in  repairing  damage  on  east 
barbette,  caused  by  very  destructive  fire  of  yesterday;  restored  trav- 
erses on  either  side  of  11-inch  gun.  Pilled  breaches  in  parapet  and 
repaired  middle  traverse;  also  prepared  cushion  on  berme  for  colum- 
biad thrown  over. 

Two  10-inch  columbiads  thrown  over  ramparts. 

\August  31.] — At  2.30  a.  m.  Fort  Moultrie  opened  fire  on  steamer 
Sumter,  loaded  with  two  regiments  relieved  from  duty  at  Morris 
Island,  by  mistake. 

Fort  Sumter  and  navy  gunboats  sent  forth  with  barges  to  aid,  and 
saved  about  600  officers  and  men  belonging  to  the  Twentieth  Regi- 
ment South  Carolina  Volunteers  and  Twenty-third  Regiment  Geor- 
gia Volunteers. 

Steamer  Sumter  was  disabled  and  a large  hole  knocked  in  her  side, 
and  is  reported  going  to  pieces. 

No  report  yet  of  the  killed  and  missing  from  the  steamer  Sumter. 

August  31  (journal). — The  entire  day,  56  shots  and  shells  were  fired 
at  this  post;  34  struck  outside,  5 inside,  and  17  missed. 

Night  force  engaged  in  securing  upper  west  magazine  passage  and 
casemate  arches  over  hospital.  Garrison  detail  during  day  employed 
filling  one  of  the  east  upper  casemates  where  sand  had  been  slightly 
displaced  by  breach  near  crown  of  arch. 

About  275  rifled  bolts,  32  42-pounder  and  20  11-inch  shells  and  shots, 
1 box  tallow,  1 large  box  brass,  1 carriage,  1 pass  box,  shell  imple- 
ments, 1 box  priming  wires,  sundries,  &c.,  150  grape,  were  shipped  by 
steamer  Etiwan. 

The  Twentieth  Regiment  South  Carolina  Volunteers,  Twenty-third 
Regiment  Georgia  Volunteers,  and  Captain  Mathewes’  company  of 
artillery,  left  for  Sullivan’s  Island  on  steamer  Chesterfield  at  8 p.  m. 
About  100  incendiary  shots  were  shipped  to  Sullivan’s  Island. 

No  casualties. 

September  1 (journal). — The  entire  day,  382  shots  and  shells  were 
fired  at  this  post;  166  struck  outside,  95  inside,  121  missed. 

At  11.40  p.  m.  six  monitors  and  the  Ironsides  moved  up  and  com- 


620  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

menced  shelling  the  fort;  185  shots  were  fired  till  5 a.  m.;  116  struck 
outside,  35  inside,  34  over. 

One  box  powder-measures  and  gunners’  haversacks,  1 box  locks 
and  covers  to  8-inch  navy  gun,  1 pass  box  with  dredge  boxes,  &c., 

1 set  of  wrenches,  10  iron  and  iron-shod  handspikes,  1 traversing 
wheel,  4 budge-barrels,  2 sets  of  traversing  gear,  1 10-inch  columbiad 
bed  for  screw  (1  32-pounder  rifled  gun,  shipped  August  31),  2 cap- 
squares,  sponges,  and  rammers,  1 city  fire-engine  and  hose,  ammuni- 
tion chests,  10  7-inch  rifled  bolts,  110  8-inch  shots  and  shells,  75  42- 
pounder  conical  shot,  15  8-inch  columbiad  shell,  30  10-inch  columbiad 
shell,  loaded  and  damaged,  were  shipped  by  steamer  Etiwan. 

No  work  to  speak  of  done  all  night.  One  8-inch  gun  was  thrown 
over  parapet  and  shipped  as  monitors  came  in,  and  party  stopped  at 
10  p.  m.,  after  only  one  hour’s  work.  Damage  very  great  by  day 
and  night  fire. 

On  northeast  face  the  entire  terre-plein  has  fallen  in,  except  east  of 
the  two  walls  next  and  northeast  of  the  pan  coupe.  Two  shells  burst 
in  commissary’s  store.  Scarp  in  front  of  three  upper  casemates  at 
southeast  pan  coupe  shot  away;  lower  scarp  somewhat  protected  by 
rubbish;  east  scarp  is  much  cut  up,  but  has  not  yet  fallen  in  masses 
large  enough  to  uncover  any  whole  arch  or  casemate. 

Since  monitor  fire  last  night,  every  casemate,  upper  and  lower,  has 
been  more  or  less  breached,  in  most  of  them  exposing  sand-bags. 

Three  shells  exploded  in  immediate  proximity  to  west  magazine, 
two  entering  into  second  tier,  outer  magazine  passage,  sending  blast 
down  stairway  into  lower  outer  magazine  passage,  the  outer  door 
being  closed  at  the  time.  Had  the  door  been  open  the  most  serious 
consequences  would  have  ensued.  The  third  struck  and  brought  up 
in  the  sand-bag  traverses  at  parade  end  of  passage  into  hospital  and 
magazine ; it  would  otherwise  have  gone  into  hospital  passage  used 
for  guard  room. 

Casualties:  Slightly  wounded.  Privates  [R.  B.]  Foshee,  Company 
B (Colonel  Rhett’s  orderly);  [William]  Brown,  Company  C,  and  [F.] 
Alexander,  Company  H,  Twenty-seventh  Georgia  Volunteers. 

September  2 (journal). — The  entire  day,  38  shots  and  shells  were 
fired  at  this  post;  12  struck  outside,  9 inside,  and  17  missed. 

About  11,000  pounds  of  powder,  2 boxes  rockets,  1 box  damaged 
musket  cartridges,  rammers,  and  sponges  were  shipped  last  night 
by  steamer  Etiwan. 

No  material  damage  was  done.  It  was  discovered  that  one  shot 
had  penetrated  the  scarp-wall,  opening  daylight  into  the  magazine 
in  southeastern  pan  coupe. 

The  negroes  worked  all  day  in  repairing  the  damage  of  the  pre- 
vious night  and  further  strengthening  the  western  magazine.  One 
embrasure  on  the  eastern  right  of  the  northwest  face  was  opened 
sufficiently  to  enable  the  removal  of  its  gun  when  necessary.  The 
relieving  of  hands  consumed  the  greater  portion  of  the  night,  so 
that  little  was  done. 

Garrison  worked  all  day.  The  casemates  on  east  face  were  filled 
inside  with  sand-bags  between  the  crown  of  the  arch  and  the  sand 
which  had  fallen  down. 

Lieut.  John  Johnson,  engineer  officer,  was  relieved  from  duty  at 
this  post,  in  consequence  of  the  aggravated  condition  of  his  wound, 
and  Lieutenant  Hall  reported  for  duty  as  engineer  officer  in  his 
stead.  Mr.  William  Mathewes  was  also  sent  down  to  assist  the  latter. 

Mr.  J.  Fraser  Mathewes  came  last  night  for  the  purpose  of  taking 


Chap.  XL.]  BOMBARDMENT  OF  FORT  SUMTER,  S.  C.  621 

guns  from  the  berme,  but,  in  consequence  of  the  roughness  of  the 
water,  was  unable  to  do  any  work. 

September  4 (letter  to  General  Jordan). — Yesterday,  September  3, 
there  was  no  firing  on  the  fort,  and  the  entire  garrison  was  kept  at 
work  during  the  day  and  night  in  reliefs.  The  engineers  were  en- 
gaged in  preparing  bomb-proofs,  and  in  opening  embrasures  in 
second-tier  casemates,  for  the  purpose  of  throwing  out  two  42- pounder 
rifled  guns.  During  the  night,  the  11-inch  gun  and  one  32-pounder 
rifled  gun  were  thrown  over  the  parapet  without  injury,  both  guns 
having  been  previously  disabled. 

There  is  now  [September  4]  not  a single  gun  en  barbette , and  there 
is  but  one  smooth-bore  32-pounder  next  the  sally-port  on  western 
face  that  can  be  fired. 

Mr.  J.  F.  Mathewes,  assisted  by  an  officer  and  men  of  the  C.  S.  Navy, 
have  done  good  service  in  removing  disabled  guns  from  the  fort, 
having  dismounted  and  removed  one  10-inch  gun  and  one  9-inch 
Dahlgren.  He  has  also  removed  from  the  berme  of  the  fort  the 
Brooke  gun,  another  10-inch,  an  8-inch,  and  one  32-pounder  rifled 
gun.  Lieutenant  Rhett,  with  Company  B,  has  dismounted  the 
Brooke  gun,  two  10-inch,  one  8-inch,  one  42-pounder  rifled,  the  11- 
inch,  and  one  32-pounder  rifled  gun  in  the  last  few  nights. 

The  northeastern  and  northwestern  terre-plein  have  fallen  in. 
The  western  wall  has  a crack  in  it  extending  entirely  through  from 
parapet  to  berme.  The  greater  portion  of  southern  wall  is  down. 
The  upper  eastern  magazine  is  penetrated;  the  lower  eastern  maga- 
zine wall  is  cracked.  The  eastern  wall  is  very  nearly  shot  away;  a 
large  portion  of  the  wall  is  down,  the  ramparts  gone,  and  nearly 
every  casemate  breached,  and  the  remaining  wall  very  thin.  The 
casemates,  however,  on  east  face  are  still  filled  with  sand  sufficient 
to  protect  the  garrison  from  shells. 

I consider  it  impracticable  to  either  mount  or  use  guns  on  any  part 
of  the  parapet,  and  I deem  the  fort  in  its  present  condition  unserv- 
iceable for  offensive  purposes.  What  the  engineers  may  effect  by 
rebuilding  or  remodeling,  I am  unable  to  say. 

About  40  32-pounder  rifled  bolts,  20  42-pounder  rifled  bolts,  50 
42-pounder  round  shots,  20  10-inch  columbiad  shots,  1 lot  32-pounder 
bolts  in  boxes,  and  1 lot  of  sundries,  were  shipped  by  steamer  Etiwan 
last  night. 

Lieutenant  Grimball,  Company  E,  assigned  to  ordnance  duty,  has 
rendered  efficient  service  in  the  collection  and  shipping  of  ordnance 
stores.  Capt.  J.  T.  Champneys,  Engineer  Corps,  has  reported  for 
duty  at  this  post. 

Major-General  Gilmer  and  Lieutenant-Colonel  Harris  visited  the 
fort  about  half  past  11  o’clock  last  night. 

Brigadier-General  Ripley  also  came  over  about  1 this  morning. 

The  enemy  opened  fire  from  battery  on  Black  Island  last  evening. 

September  4 (journal). — No  firing  to-day.  Seventy-six  negroes 
arrived  to-day  and  finished  the  traverse  and  arch  of  the  second  tier, 
and  began  to  fill  in  the  arch. 

About  500  shots  and  shells,  viz,  10-inch  columbiad,  8-inch  colum- 
biad, 32-pounder  rifled  bolts,  1 lot  of  lead,  8 pieces  brass,  5 budge- 
barrels  of  powder,  cartridge  bags,  1 box  friction  tubes,  2 pass  boxes, 
implements,  were  shipped  last  night  by  steamer  Etiwan. 

At  10  p.  m.  the  Charleston  Battalion  arrived  at  the  fort,  under  com- 
mand of  Major  Elliott,  and  relieved  Col.  Alfred  Rhett,  command- 
ing, and  Captain  Fleming,  Company  B,  detachment  of  First  South 


622 


S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 


[Chap.  XL. 


Carolina  Artillery  and  Twenty-seventh  and  Twenty-eighth  Georgia 
Y olunteers. 

September  5. — Final  report  of  ordnance  at  Fort  Sumter,  South 
Carolina.  * 


Class  of  ordnance. 

On  hand  June  30. 

i 

Left  uninjured. 

Injured. 

Where  shipped. 

Charleston. 

Sullivan’s  Island. 

James  Island. 

Morris  Island. 

Castle  Pinckney. 

Total. 

11 -inch  Dalhgren 

1 

1 

1 

10-inch  columbiad 

10 

4 

3 

2 

1 

6 

9-inch  Dahlgren 

2 

1 

1 

1 

8-ineh  columbiad 

10 

2 

1 

1 

6 

g 

7-innh  rifle ' 

2 

1 

1 

2 

42-pounder  rifled  and  banded 

9 

8 

1 

1 

42-inch  smooth-bore 

4 

3 

1 

1 

32-inch  rifled  and  banded 

9 

3 

1 

3 

1 

1 

5 

32-inch  smooth-bore 

4 

3 

1 

1 

24-inch  smooth-bore 

4 

1 

1 

2 

2 

24-pounder  howitzer 

4 

4 

8-inch  navy  gun 

5 

1 

4 

4 

10-inch  sea-coast  mortar 

4 

2 

1 

1 

2 

Total 

68 

27 

7 

12 

5 

14 

2 

1 

34 

Kemarks. — In  column  “Left  uninjured”  are  set  down  all  guns 
that  are  buried.  If  some  are  injured  that  fact  could  not  be  ascer- 
tained. It  is  thought  that  the  majority  of  guns  even  in  that  column 
are  injured.  The  only  gun  in  working  condition  is  a 32-pounder 
smooth-bore,  situated  at  the  extreme  left  of  northwest  casemate 
battery. 


No.  5. 

Reports  of  Lieut.  Col.  Stephen  Elliott , jr.,  C.  S.  Artillery , com- 
manding Fort  Sumter,  of  operations  September  5-December  31.  f 

September  6. — I have  the  honor  to  make  the  following  report : 

I assumed  the  command  of  this  post  yesterday,  pursuant  to  orders 
from  department  headquarters.  There  has  been  no  direct  fire  upon 
the  fort.  Two  monitors  took  position  after  dark  and  kept  up  a con- 
tinuous fire  upon  the  entrance  to  the  harbor  during  the  night,  throw- 
ing grape  and  shrapnel.  At  about  12.15  a.  m.  heavy  firing  from  the 
enemy’s  land  batteries  and  heavy  musketry  firing  induced  a belief 
that  an  assault  was  being  made  upon  Battery  Gregg.  I submit  the 
engineer’s  report,  and  would  recommend  that  the  timber  for  bomb- 
proofs  be  sawed  up  in  the  city,  as  there  are  no  facilities  for  doing  it 
here. 

There  are  eighteen  days’  rations  for  the  present  garrison.  I would 
also  draw  your  attention  to  the  fact  that  there  is  no  quartermaster 
at  the  post. 

*Made  by  Lieut.  James  S.  Heyward,  ordnance  officer. 

f Extracts  from  the  daily  reports  made,  when  not  otherwise  indicated,  to  Capt. 
William  F.  Nance,  assistant  adjutant-general,  September  6-October  27,  and  subse- 
quently to  Lieut.  S.  C.  Boyleston,  acting  assistant  adjutant-general. 


Chap.  XL.]  BOMBARDMENT  OF  FORT  SUMTER,  S.  C.  623 

September  7,  2.40  a.  m. — All  the  garrison  of  Morris  Island  who 
came  here  have  been  shipped.  Lieutenant  Hasker’s  boat  from  the 
Chicora  was  captured  by  a Yankee  barge.  Two  of  the  crew  came 
to  Fort  Sumter.  Report  that  all  of  our  troops  had  left  the  island. 

September  7,  7.20  a.  m. — A flag  of  truce  from  Commodore  [Rear- 
Admiral]  Dahlgren,  demanding  the  surrender  of  this  fort,  has  been 
met  by  Lieutenant  [Robert  J.]  Bowen,  of  the  Palmetto  State.  I pre- 
sume I shall  refuse. 

September  7,  5 p.  m. — From  the  repeated  demands  made  for  the 
surrender  of  this  fort,  I conclude  that  the  enemy  desires  to  possess 
it  before  it  is  demolished.  In  that  event  he  will  assault,  probably, 
after  a bombardment.  I would  suggest  that  our  batteries  be  directed 
to  have  their  guns  manned  at  nights,  and  trained  with  the  axis  of 
their  pieces  perfectly  horizontal,  as  this  fire  keeps  the  projectiles 
always  near  the  surface  of  the  water.  Grape  from  our  large  gun 
would’ be  effective  at  their  present  distance.  In  addition  to  the 
rockets,  a blue  light  will  be  displayed  on  the  threatened  face.  No 
opportunity  for  reducing  the  garrison  has  occurred  since  the  receipt 
of  the  order.  I object  to  its  reduction.  All  the  appliances  for  re- 
sisting assaults  should  be  furnished  me.  Greek-fire,  hand-grenades, 
and  turpentine  should  be  sent  down.  The  west  face  of  the  wreck 
should  be  mined. 

September  7,  7.20  p.  m. — The  iron-clads  still  lying  off  the  fort.  It 
is  very  probable  that  they  will  try  to  move  the  obstructions  with 
small  boats.  It  would  be  best  if  we  can  throw  some  lights  upon  the 
obstructions  from  Sullivan’s  Island.  They  fire  an  occasional  shot  at 
the  wharf. 

September  7. — Up  to  this  time  no  direct  shots  have  been  fired  upon 
this  fort.  Heavy  firing  was  kept  up  continuously  during  yesterday 
and  until  2 o’clock  this  morning.  Two  monitors  had  moved  up  under 
cover  of  the  darkness,  and  about  the  time  the  Morris  Island  move- 
ment commenced,  commenced  throwing  random  shots  up  the  harbor 
approaches,  which  they  continued  during  the  night.  The  Morris 
Island  movement  was  accomplished  successfully,  so  far  as  this  post 
was  concerned. 

At  8 this  morning  the  Ironsides  and  five  monitors  were  near  this 
post ; one  of  the  latter  quite  near.  There  being  a fog  seaward,  the 
number  of  vessels  inside  the  bar  and  at  the  other  points  cannot  be 
accurately  counted,  but  there  is  no  perceptible  change  since  yester- 
day. 

Two  monitors  have  been  employed  this  morning  in  sounding  along 
Morris  Island.  They  have  taken  convenient  positions  for  firing  at 
short  range  at  this  fort.  I received  a communication  from  Com- 
mander [Rear-Admiral]  Dahlgren,  through  Lieutenant  Bowen,  C.  S. 
Navy,  demanding  the  surrender  of  this  fort.  An  answer  has  been 
sent  stating  that  a definite  reply  would  be  returned  as  soon  as  I 
could  communicate  with  the  commander  of  the  department.  Some 
valuable  time  has  thus  been  gained. 

# September  8.—  During  yesterday  the  enemy’s  land  batteries  were 
silent.  Early  in  the  morning  two  monitors  came  up  within  short 
range  of  the  fort,  the  Ironsides  and  the  remaining  four  monitors 
taking  position  near  the  outer  buoy. 

About  8 a.  m.  a flag  of  truce  was  sent  by  the  enemy’s  fleet,  which 
was  met  by  Lieutenant  Bowen,  C.  S.  Navy.  A reply  to  the  com- 
munication received  was  subsequently  sent  by  a flag  of  truce  from 
this  fort. 


[Chap.  XL. 


624  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

At  7 p.  m.  the  Ironsides  and  six  monitors  engaged  Fort  Moultrie, 
throwing  an  occasional  shot  at  this  post,  which  did  no  damage,  except 
tearing  away  a small  portion  of  the  parapet  on  the  west  face.  Dur- 
ing the  night  the  noise  of  hammering  could  be  distinctly  heard  from 
the  parapet,  indicating  that  one  of  the  monitors  had  been  injured 
and  was  repairing  damages.  One  of  the  monitors  appears  to  he 
aground  about  1,200  yards  from  Sumter.  There  are  thirty-six  vessels 
inside  the  bar,  including  the  Ironsides  and  six  monitors.  * 

September  10. — Everything  was  very  quiet  yesterday  and  last  night. 

A flag  of  truce  from  the  enemy’s  fleet  was  received  at  about  9 a.  m. 
in  reference  to  the  prisoners. 

Another  flag  was  received  at  4 p.  m. , bringing  baggage  belonging 
to  the  captured  officers  and  conveniences  for  the  wounded. 

A flag  was  sent  from  this  post  to  the  fleet  at  about  6 o’clock,  bear- 
ing dispatches  from  General  Jordan,  and  the  bodies  of  their  dead. 
The  prisoners,  except  the  wounded,  were  sent  to  the  city  last  night. 

The  Ironsides,  four  monitors,  and  twenty-two  other  vessels  inside 
the  bar. 

September  11. — Nothing  of  importance  took  place  yesterday  or 
last  night. 

The  number  of  vessels  inside  the  bar  is  exactly  the  same,  and  they 
have  not  changed  their  positions  during  the  last  twenty-four  hours. 
This  morning  I notice  that  the  enemy  worked  industriously  at  Bat- 
tery Gregg,  and  made  several  additions  to  that  work. 

The  wounded  prisoners  were  shipped  yesterday  in  a small  boat. 

A quantity  of  shot  and  shell  is  lying  on  the  wharf  ready  for  ship- 
ment and  waiting  for  transportation.  \ 

* * * $ * * * 

September  13. — There  was  no  firing  yesterday,  excepting  from  our 
batteries,  who  gave  Morris  Island  an  occasional  shot.  The  enemy  is 
still  working  at  Gregg. 

The  number  of  vessels  inside  the  bar  has  diminished.  There  are 
now  only  two  monitors  in  sight,  and  the  Ironsides  has  dropped  lower 
down.  An  explosion  took  place  on  Morris  Island  last  night,  supposed 
to  have  been  at  Battery  Wagner. 

September  14. — The  enemy  continues  to  appear  inactive,  excepting 
at  Battery  Wagner,  where  they  are  working  industriously,  altering 
the  fort  and  mounting  guns. 

There  was  no  firing  at  all  during  the  day,  excepting  a few  shots 
thrown  from  our  batteries  at  Morris  Island. 

There  are  now  inside  the  bar,  the  Ironsides,  three  monitors,  and 
twenty-four  other  vessels,  all  lying  off  the  southern  portion  of  Mor- 
ris Island. 

The  other  moni-tors  may  not  have  gone  off,  but  may  lie  concealed 
behind  the  hulks  of  the  other  vessels. 

September  15. — The  enemy  still  appears  to  be  working  industri- 
ously on  Morris  Island,  chiefly  at  Wagner,  but  also  at  Gregg. 

Our  batteries  kept  up  a very  slow  fire  all  day  and  night. 

There  are  now  inside  the  bar,  the  Ironsides,  five  monitors,  and 
twenty-six  other  vessels. 

September  16,  12.30  p.  m. — Enemy  working  within  400  yards  south- 
east of  Fort  Gregg,  perfectly  unmolested. 


* For  other  of  Elliott’s  reports  (of  September  8,  9,  and  10),  see  Engagement  in 
Charleston  Harbor,  p.  713  ; also  Boat  Attack  on  Fort  Sumter,  p.  725. 
f Portion  omitted,  under  date  of  September  12,  will  be  found  on  p.  127. 


Chap.  XL.] 


BOMBARDMENT  OF  FORT  SUMTER,  S.  C. 
[Indorsement.] 


625 


The  James  Island  and  Snlli van’s  Island  batteries  have  been  or- 
dered to  break  up  the  party,  if  possible. 

NANCE, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


September  16. — There  are  now  inside  the  bar,  the  Ironsides,  five 
monitors,  two  mortar-boats,  and  twenty-five  other  vessels;  two  river 
steamers  coming  up,  and  ten  blockaders  off  the  bar;  also  thirty-five 
in  Light-House  Inlet. 

The  enemy  are  still  working  at  Gregg,  and  exposing  themselves 
with  perfect  impunity. 

There  was  no  firing  yesterday,  excepting  by  our  batteries  and  a 
few  shots  from  Morris  Island. 

September  17.— Yesterday  one  banded  42-pounder  was  thrown  on 
the  berme. 

There  is  no  material  change  in  the  appearance  of  things  on  Morris 
Island. 

There  are  now  inside  bar,  the  Ironsides,  five  monitors,  and  twenty- 
five  other  vessels;  they  appear  to  have  stood  the  blow  without  injury. 

September  18.— Apparently  no  change  has  taken  place  in  the  fleet 
since  my  last  report. 

Yesterday  long  trains  of  wagons  came  down  the  beach  to  Gregg, 
and,  after  discharging  their  contents,  returned  again  to  the  upper 
end  of  the  island. 

The  enemy  last  night  displayed  a large  calcium  light  at  Cumming’s 
Point.  Its  rays  were  directed  on  this  fort  and  its  approaches. 

No  shot  was  fired  by  the  enemy  yesterday,  and  only  a few  were 
thrown  from  our  batteries  at  Sullivan’s  and  James  Islands. 

September  19. — The  Ironsides,  five  monitors,  and  twenty-five  other 
vessels  are  now  inside  the  bar. 

The  enemy  continues  to  work  industriously  at  Morris  Island. 

A French  steamer  is  off  the  bar. 

I shipped  a large  quantity  of  shot  and  some  shell  in  the  steamer 
last  night  which  carried  up  the  two  guns ; also  some  iron  stripped 
from  gun  carriages. 

September  20. — The  change  of  the  garrison  was  accomplished  last 
night  at  10  o’clock.  Mr.  Mathewes  had  previously  taken  off  a 7-inch 
rifle,  banded. 

September  21. — I have  the  honor  to  report  the  Ironsides,  four  moni- 
tors, and  twenty-nine  other  vessels  within  the  bar,  five  propellers 
outside,  and  twenty-seven  craft  in  Light-House  Inlet. 

The  10-inch  columbiad  at  Gregg  has  been  dismounted  and  rolled 
over  upon  the  parapet,  where  it  now  lies.  A monitor  was  towed  out 
to  sea  and  to  the  southward  yesterday. 

Wagner  is  being  enlarged  and  strengthened.  Heavy  parapets 
are  being  thrown  up  facing  the  northward  and  westward.  All  of 
the  sand-hills  between  Wagner  and  Gregg  are  filled,  with  working 
parties. 

September  22. — One  banded  7-incli  was  taken  to  the  city  last  night, 
and  a large  quantity  of  32-pounder,  canister,  and  8-inch  shot. 

An  8-inch  shell  gun  was  placed  upon  the  berme  this  morning, 
ready  for  shipping. 

September  23. — Enemy  working  in  large  numbers  at  Wagner,  the 
sand-hills,  and  Gregg.  Moultrie  is  shelling  the  latter  position,  but 
40  R R— VOL  XXVIII,  PT  I 


[Chap.  XL. 


626  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  ELA. 

with  little  effect.  Sand  is  being  carted  to  the  flat  beach  near  Gregg, 
for  the  purpose  of  making  a covered  way. 

Our  fire  has  a better  effect  when  directed  at  Wagner  than  at  any 
other  point.  The  working  party  there  is  larger,  and  a discharge 
from  our  batteries  invariably  causes  them  to  seek  cover. 

September  24. — I have  the  honor  to  report  the  Ironsides,  four  moni- 
tors, and  thirty  other  vessels  inside  the  bar;  seven  outside,  and  about 
thirty  in  Light-House  Inlet;  one  of  the  latter  shelled  the  batteries  on 
James  Island  yesterday  for  an  hour.  The  enemy  still  busy  on  Mor- 
ris Island,  especially  at  Battery  Wagner. 

Six  of  the  subterranean  torpedoes  exploded  during  the  rising  of  the 
tide  after  midnight.  The  beating  of  the  surf  rolled  fragments  upon 
them,  causing  their  ignition. 

September  25. — During  the  night  the  enemy  have  erected  a row  of 
palisades  around  Gregg,  and  have  mounted  a large  Parrott  gun  in 
the  new  work  near  Gregg. 

September  26. — Wagner  has  been  extended  somewhat  to  the  south- 
ward and  westward  and  Gregg  to  the  southward  and  eastward.  A 
great  deal  was  accomplished  at  both  points  last  night.  Large  de- 
tachments of  men  could  be  seen  moving  to  and  from  Gregg  on  the 
beach.  At  the  moment  of  writing,  a shell  from  Moultrie  has  killed 
a horse  working  at  Gregg,  and  most  probably  some  men. 

September  27. — The  work  at  Wagner  and  Gregg  goes  vigorously  on. 

September  28. — Exchange  of  companies  effected  last  night;  cov- 
ered way  thrown  from  Gregg  to  sand-hills.  Southern  slope  of  one 
of  Wagner’s  face  directed  on  this  point  finished  and  merlons  con- 
structed. Ho  water-boat  came  last  night.  Commander  of  water- 
boat  is  an  arrant  coward,  and  if  the  boat  is  not  seized  and  placed 
under  military  control,  we  will  not  get  our  full  supply  of  water. 

September  29. — I have  the  honor  to  report  that  at  a quarter  be- 
fore 2 yesterday  land  batteries,  distant  2$  miles,  opened  a slow  fire 
upon  this  work,  directed  mainly  upon  the  southwest  angle.  One 
hundred  shots  were  thrown,  of  which  48  struck,  16  fell  short,  36 
passed  over.  A negro  was  killed.  The  damage  to  the  work  is  not 
considerable.  A monitor  came  up  apparently  to  observe  Nthe  effect 
of  the  practice.  This  morning  the  fleet  retains  the  position  and 
numbers  of  yesterday.  The  usual  amount  of  work  appears  to  have 
been  done  on  Morris  Island.  The  embrasures  of  Gregg  begin  to  as- 
sume the  appearance  of  an  evident  development  toward  the  city. 

September  30. — I have  the  honor  to  report  the  fleet  as  diminished 
by  three  wooden  vessels;  one  monitor  lay  near  in  last  night.  A 
quantity  of  lumber  for  palisades  lies  on  the  beach  near  Gregg.  Four 
guns  have  apparently  been  mounted  at  Wagner. 

The  10-inch  columbiad,  on  the  north  angle,  was  removed  to  the 
parade  last  night  by  Mr.  Butterfield,  and  a 42-pounder  rifle  placed 
on  skids,  ready  for  removal  to  the  casemates.  During  the  bombard- 
ment yesterday,  the  enemy  fired  95  shots,  of  which  34  struck,  with- 
out injuring  the  work  materially. 

October  1. — The  enemy’s  fire  was  resumed  yesterday  at  11.30  a.  m. 
Of  68  shots,  45  struck ; the  remainder  passed  over.  Some  damage 
was  done  to  the  stairway  in  the  southwest  angle;  1 man  was  wounded 
in  the  face  by  a fragment  of  brick. 

In  the  afternoon  a long  line  of  men  could  be  observed  at  Wagner 
apparently  moving  a heavy  gun. 

Two  monitors  lay  in  close  last  night. 

Yesterday  morning  I placed  a 42-pounder  rifle,  banded,  in  one  of 


Cbap.  XL.] 


BOMBAEDMENT  OF  FOET  SITMTEE,  S.  C. 


627 


the  casemates  on  the  northeast  face.  Last  night  Mr.  Butterfield 
threw  over  on  the  eastern  berme  a banded  42  and  a 10  inch  columbiad, 
with  broken  trunnions.  A portion  of  the  garrison  were  employed 
in  constructing  cushions  to  receive  them. 

No  marked  change  has  taken  place  on  Morris  Island,  but  there  is 
a gradual  progress  visible. 

The  enemy’s  fire  was  resumed  this  morning  at  8 o’clock. 

October  2. — I have  the  honor  to  report  the  Ironsides,  four  monitors, 
two  mortar-boats,  and  twenty -five  other  vessels  within  the  bar;  elseJ 
where  the  status  remains  the  same. 

Appearances  on  Morris  Island  suggest  permanent  occupation  rather 
than  immediate  operations ; all  the  high  sand-hills  on  the  southern 
end  of  the  island  are  strongly  intrenched.  Wagner  is  being  ex- 
tended still  more  to  the  southwest.  Two  siege  and  two  barbette  guns 
are  mounted  upon  one  of  her  faces  looking  toward  this  fort. 

The  firing  commenced  early  yesterday;  out  of  129  shots,  75  struck; 
the  injury  was  immaterial.  Two  monitors  perform  picket  duty 
nightly.  All  the  enemy’s  movements  by  land  and  water  show  cau- 
tion and  fear  of  surprise. 

October  3. — The  firing  commenced  at  8 a.  m.  yesterday.  Out  of 
74  shots,  44  struck,  2 of  which  penetrated  the  gorge  wall  near  the 
officers’  old  quarters;  no  other  material  damage  done  to  the  work. 

8 a.  m. — This  morning  the  enemy’s  batteries  have  opened  again. 

October  4. — Out  of  95  shots  yesterday,  78  struck  the  fort.  The  in- 
jury was  immaterial,  excepting  that  the  top  of  the  breach  was 
knocked  off. 

Captain  [E.  W.]  Lloyd’s  company  (B),  Twenty -fifth  South  Carolina 
Volunteers  (31  men),  relieved  Captain  [T.  E.]  Raysor’s  company 
(H),  Eleventh  South  Carolina  Volunteers  (63  men),  last  night. 

The  enemy  are  still  at  work  on  the  northeast  face  of  Wagner. 

October  5. — Gregg  is  being  enlarged  to  the  eastward  and  westward. 
Guns  have  been  transported  thither  during  the  last  two  nights,  as 
traces  on  the  beach  indicate. 

Sand  Hill  Battery  continues  to  be  enlarged.  The  gun  previously 
seen  there  is  now  concealed  by  sand. 

Wagner  progresses  steadily.  Some  half  dozen  shots  were  fired  at 
this  fort  yesterday  morning.  The  effect  of  the  week’s  bombard- 
ment has  been  to  cut  the  top  of  the  gorge  wall  slightly  in  one  or  two 
places,  to  dig  holes  in  the  parade,  and  to  extend  the  breach  in  the 
north  wall,  and  to  give  indications  of  future  breaches  possible  at 
some  remote  period.  When  the  guns  shall  have  been  brought  nearer, 
their  fire  will  be  less  dangerous  to  the  walls,  taken  in  reverse,  and 
the  direct  breaches  can  be  made  secure  if  you  will  send  Captain 
Champneys,  engineer  in  charge,  1,000  or  2,000  filled  sand-bags  every 
night. 

Lieutenant  Young  took  off  the  10-inch  broken  trunnion  last  night. 
Steamer  Etiwan  brought  down  carriages  and  chassis  for  42  and  10 
inch.  Mr.  Butterfield  and  crew  placed  the  former  near  its  casemate 
and  left.  . With  a portion  of  the  garrison,  I placed  the  latter  in  the 
same  position,  being  obliged  to  remain  up  all  night  for  the  purpose. 
The  steamers  should  always  bring  written  orders.  Butterfield  should 
have  remained  to  do  the  work  for  which  he  was  sent,  but  I was  un- 
able to  detain  him,  except  at  the  risk  of  interfering  with  the  plans  of 
some  other  parties. 

If . the  shelling  is  not  resumed  to-day,  I will  have  them  in  position 
to-night ; if  it  is,  to-morrow  morning. 


[Chap.  XL. 


628  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

[Indorsement.] 

October  14,  1863. 

Noted.  Major  Elliott  appears  a vigilant,  zealous  officer. 

J.  A.  S.  [SEDDON], 

Secretary  of  War . 

October  6. — The  enemy  have  made,  and  are  still  making,  great  im- 
provements on  Wagner  and  Gregg. 

Captain  Gaillard’s  company  reported  last  night,  numbering  50  men. 

There  are  two  submarine  affairs  near  the  Ironsides;  there  are  also 
several  wooden  gunboats  close  in.  Look  out  for  some  trick  to-night. 

October  6 Cto  Brigadier-General  Jordan). — I have  four  floating 
torpedoes  in  Charleston  ready  for  use.  Can  you  order  Sergt.  S.  E. 
Barnwell  and  4 men,  of  the  Beaufort  Artillery,  from  Pocotaligo,  to 
operate  with  them  ? * 

October  7. — The  monitor  seen  off  the  bar  on  the  5th  instant  has 
taken  position  inside,  and  one  of  those  here  previously  is  not  to  be 
seen.  They  are  probably  going  to  Port  Royal  in  turn  to  be  over- 
hauled. 

Work  is  going  on  as  usual  on  Morris  Island. 

October  8. — Two  shots  were  fired  last  night  by  the  monitor  on  ad- 
vanced post  at  a schooner  containing  sand-bags,  lying  between  Sum- 
ter and  Battery  Bee ; musketry  from  the  fleet  was  also  heard. 

A large  Parrott  has  been  mounted  in  Gregg,  in  the  embrasure 
directed  upon  this  fort ; the  breech  of  the  gun,  however,  lies  this 
way.  The  Half -Moon  Battery  in  the  sand-hills  I take  to  be  a mortar 
battery. 

A 42-pounder  rifle,  banded,  was  mounted  here  yesterday,  and  a 10- 
inch  placed  in  position  ready  for  mounting.  Some  necessary  altera- 
tion in  the  chassis  delayed  the  operation  last  night. 

October  9. — There  is  but  little  change  this  morning,  with  the  excep- 
tion of  a gradual  advance  in  the  completion  of  the  batteries  on  Morris 
Island. 

A wide  embrasure  at  Gregg  directed  toward  this  place  is  being 
revetted,  as  is  also  the  Half-Moon  Battery  in  the  sand-hills. 

Our  fire  was  effective  yesterday;  casualties  were  seen  to  take  place 
both  at  Gregg  and  Wagner. 

October  11. — Affairs  are  not  materially  changed  in  the  fleet  or  on 
shore  this  morning. 

A detachment  of  5 men  under  the  command  of  Sergt.  S.  E.  Barn- 
well, of  the  Beaufort  Artillery,  sent  down  four  floating  torpedoes  last 
night.  A heavy  explosion  took  place  at  the  proper  time  in  the  fleet, 
but  no  results  are  apparent  this  morning. 

At  8 p.  m.  the  post-boat  coming  from  Fort  Johnson  overhauled  a 
small  boat  containing  2 of  the  enemy,  who  surrendered  immediately. 
They  were  evidently  expecting  a friendly  boat,  whether  from  the  city 
or  not  is  uncertain. 

Is  it  well  that  this  portion  of  the  harbor  should  be  without  an 
armed  patrol  of  some  sort  ? The  prisoners  were  sent  up  under  a 
guard  last  night. 

A 10-inch  was  placed  upon  the  wharf  last  night. 

October  14. — The  command  of  the  western  salient  at  Gregg  is  being 
much  increased.  A new  battery  has  been  commenced  to  the  east- 
ward of  and  near  to  the  Half-Moon  Battery. 


*So  ordered,  same  day. 


Chap.  XL.]  BOMBARDMENT  OF  FORT  SUMTER,  S.  C.  629 

The  second  10-inch  colnmbiad  was  mounted  last  night  in  our  case- 
mate battery. 

October  15. — The  Ironsides,  four  monitors,  three  mortar-boats, 
and  twenty-three  other  craft  within  the  bar,  five  blockaders  outside, 
and  nineteen  vessels  in  Stono.  Judging  by  the  ventilators,  an  ex- 
tensive bomb-proof  has  been  built  at  Gregg.  A number  of  carts  may 
be  seen  passing  behind  the  covered  way.  The  battery  reported 
yesterday  is  progressing,  and  a heavy  force  is  at  work  on  what  was 
the  old  bomb-proof  at  Wagner.  The  detachment  of  30  men  from 
Captain  Harleston’s  company  was  returned  last  night  by  steamer 
Etiwan,  as  also  some  of  the  iron  collected  by  them  at  the  fort.  The 
presence  of  a schooner  with  sand  prevented  as  large  a shipment  of 
iron  as  was  advisable. 

October  18.— Appearance  of  the  fleet  unchanged  this  morning.  The 
fourth  monitor  has  not  been  discovered,  though  she  may  be  con- 
cealed by  some  of  the  other  vessels. 

The  progress  of  the  enemy  on  the  battery  next  the  Half -Moon  Bat- 
tery is  very  rapid.  The  disposition  of  their  batteries  indicates  at  pres- 
ent operations  against  Sullivan’s  Island. 

Companies  I and  K,  Eleventh  South  Carolina  Regiment,  were  re- 
lieved last  night  bv  the  Twelfth  Georgia  Battalion,  Major  Hanvey, 
218  men.  A lot  oi  coal  was  shipped  by  the  Etiwan  last  night;  the 
remainder  will  be  sent  on  Monday  night. 

October  21. — The  new  batteries  on  Morris  Island  continue  to  in- 
crease in  dimension.  No  correct  report  can  be  made  of  the  fleet  this 
morning  on  account  of  the  fog.  Two  of  the  enemy’s  picket-boats 
were  observed  last  night  between  this  post  and  Gregg  ; information 
was  extended  to  Major  Blanding,  who  fired  upon  them  with  grape, 
but  the  range  was  too  great. 

A flat  loaded  with  coal,  shot,  and  iron  was  sent  up  last  night. 

October  22. — There  are  four  monitors  in  the  harbor  this  morning. 
One  of  them  has  a network  of  wire  surrounding  and  probably  cov- 
ering the  forward  half  of  the  deck. 

The  Ironsides  has  three  stout  beams  projecting  obliquely  from  her 
bow  downward  into  the  water;  they  are  probably  braces  to  come 
torpedo  or  anti-torpedo  device.  One  of  the  mortar-boats  has  been 
towed  outside,  and  now  lies  near  the  Wabash.  In  other  respects 
the  fleet  is  as  usual.  The  land  batteries  are  being  pushed  forward 
vigorously.  Their  working  parties  suffer  greatly  from  the  want  of 
being  shelled.  The  flat  was  not  sent  back  last  night,  and  a large 
amount  of  iron  is  lying  on  the  wharf  ready  for  shipment. 

[Indorsement.  ] 


Order  the  flat  to  be  sent, 
tinuously. 


We  are  too  short  of  shells  to  fire  con- 
G.  T.  B.  [BEAUREGARD.] 


October  24. — The  Ironsides,  four  monitors,  one  mortar-boat,  and 
twenty  other  vessels  inside ; five  blockaders  and  twenty-four  craft  in 
Light-House  Inlet.  No  new  earthworks  are  being  thrown  up,  but 
those  already  in  hand  are  being  rapidly  pushed  forward. 

The  steamer  Randolph,  with  a raft  of  logs  in  tow,  allowed  herself 
to  be  taken  by  the  tide  past  the  fort  last  night.  After  some  time, 
being  discovered  and  fired  upon  by  a monitor,  she  was  compelled  to 
cut  the  logs  adrift  and  return  to  the  wharf.  About  fifty  discharges 


$30  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

of  small-arms  from  the*  beach,  near  the  Moultrie  House  were  observed 
at  9 o’clock  last  night. 

October  25. — The  state  of  the  fleet  is  to-day  the  same  in  every 
respect  as  yesterday,  excepting  that  the  number  of  blockaders  is 
reduced  to  three,  and  there  are  three  tugs  outside,  near  the  W abash. 

At  Gregg  portions  of  three  guns  can  be  seen ; one  bears  upon  this 
point,  a second  upon  this  point  and  Fort  Johnson,  and  the  third 
upon  Fort  Johnson. 

At  sunset  yesterday,  there  was  heavy  firing  from  a blockader  some 
10  miles  to  the  northward  and  eastward. 

While  the  Ironsides  was  lying  in  a certain  position  yesterday,  it 
was  apparent  that  the  structure  under  her  bow  extended  also  some 
distance  on  her  side.  This  renders  it  probable  that  it  is  a defensive 
arrangement. 

October  26,  4.30. — Enemy  has  opened  upon  us  from  Gregg,  Wag- 
ner, and  center  battery.  We  are  all  right. 

October  26. — One  hundred  and  eighty  shots  from  Morris  Island; 
165  struck,  23  passed  over.  Ten  shots  fired  from  monitors. 

October  27. — The  enemy’s  fire  was  very  damaging  to  the  sea  face, 
breaching  the  traverse  in  the  arches. 

The  gorge  wall  was  also  cut  to  a thin  edge  in  some  places.  The 
land  batteries  and  fleet  fired  625  shots. 

Lieutenant  [Andrew  P.]  Brown,  Georgia  Battalion,  is  dangerously 
hurt.  No  other  serious  casualties. 

I have  the  honor  to  report  that  the  number  of  vessels  inside  has 
been  reduced  by  three,  while  two  have  been  added  to  the  list  in 
Light-House  Inlet.  At  half  past  12  yesterday,  Battery  Gregg,  the 
middle  battery,  and  Wagner  opened  upon  us,  firing  188  shots,  of 
which  165  struck,  making  some  impression  upon  the  gorge  wall,  upon 
which  their  fire  is  directed.  In  the  afternoon  a wooden  gunboat 
steamed  up  to  the  two  monitors  lying  at  their  usual  picket  station. 
One  of  the  latter  and  the  gunboat  fired  9 shots,  1 of  which  pene- 
trated the  sand-bag  traverse  above  the  hospital  and  wounded  a negro. 

No  other  casualties  occurred  from  the  fire.  There  are  two  guns  at 
Gregg  bearing  upon  us,  and  embrasures  in  the  curtain  for  two  more. 
There  is  a 300-pounder  in  the  middle  battery  and  two  smaller  guns. 

I cannot  distinctly  ascertain  the  number  at  Wagner,  although 
there  appears  to  be  about  five  in  position  for  us. 

Most  of  these  guns  being  in  embrasures,  it  is  evident  from  their 
direction  that  their  intention  is  to  operate  regularly  against  this 
work. 

The  powder  has  been  removed  from  the  old  magazine,  and  a part 
placed  in  the  new  magazine  near  the  casemate  battery,  and  the  re- 
mainder in  the  bomb-proof  near  the  old  sally-port. 

Major  Pringle  took  off  the  flat  with  iron  last  night.  It  is  not  ad- 
visable to  send  it  back  at  present. 

October  29. — Enemy  fired  779  shots;  80  missed.  The  top  row  of 
arches  on  sea  face  cut  down.  The  whole  of  that  face  and  the  gorge 
perfectly  accessible  from  the  outside.  One  man  killed  on  post. 

Not  a captain  of  the  Georgia  Battalion  is  present;  Captain  [John 
W.]  Rudisill,  Company,  B,  went  off  to  Fort  Johnson  night  before 
last,  on  certificate  of  his  brother,  the  surgeon,  without  my  knowl- 
edge. Captain  [J.  W.]  Anderson  is  on  court-martial  on  James 
Island.  Captain  [G.  M.]  Hood,  Company  F,  and  Capt.  J.  N.  Talia- 
ferro, Company  D,  are  both  at  Augusta  on  sick  leave.  I have  good 
reason  to  believe  that  none  of  these  three  who  are  reported  sick 


Ghap.  XL.]  BOMBARDMENT  OF  FORT  SUMTER,  S.  C.  631 

are  unfit  for  duty.  Unless  I have  my  company  commanders,  I can- 
not be  responsible  for  the  result  of  a night  attack.  Please  send  this 
at  once  to  the  commanding  general. 

October  30. — The  haze  prevents  an  accurate  report  of  the  fleet 
this  morning,  Seven  hundred  and  seventy-nine  shots  were  fired  at 
the  fort  yesterday ; 80  of  these  passed  over.  Their  effect  was  to  cut 
away  all  of  the  top  arches  on  the  sea  face,  and  to  make  that  face  and 
the  gorge  easy  of  access  throughout  their  whole  extent.  Two  hun- 
dred and  sixty  shots  were  fired  last  night,  80  of  which  missed.  This 
makes  1,039  of  all  calibers,  from  15-inch  mortars  and  300-pounder 
Parrotts  downward. 

From  the  present  direction  of  the  enemy’s  fire,  I am  led  to  con- 
clude that  he  wishes  to  avoid  injuring  the  northeast  and  city  faces 
of  the  work  as  much  as  possible.  I think  he  will  try  an  assault. 

Fort  Moultrie  can  sweep  our  sea  face,  but  there  is  no  enfilade  fire 
for  the  gorge  wall.  Unless  a gunboat  can  be  placed  in  position  be- 
forehand between  this  fort  and  Fort  Johnson,  her  assistance  will  be 
useless,  as  the  success  of  an  assault  will  be  determined  in  a very  few 
minutes. 

It  would  be  all  important  to  have  a guard-boat  stationed  between 
this  fort  and  Cumming’s  Point,  which  could  signal  the  approach  of 
barges;  another  stationed  to  seaward  for  same  purpose  would  be  of 
a great  advantage.-  I recognize  the  perilous  nature  of  this  service; 
but  is  not  the  holding  of  this  post  worth  some  little  risk  ? 

Private  H.  C.  Castlebury,  Company  B,  Twelfth  Georgia  Battalion, 
was  killed,  while  on  post  yesterday,  by  the  explosion  of  a 15-inch 
shell.  Private  B.  W.  Griffin,  Company  A,  Twelfth  Georgia,  slightly 
wounded  in  hand ; Private  Z.  Stanford,  same  company,  slightly 
wounded  in  leg;  Private  Augustus  Williams,  Company  A,  Twelfth 
Georgia  Battalion,  stunned;  Private  [R.  H.]  Bearden,  same  com- 
pany, wounded  in  shoulder;  Private  T.  Goggins,  Company  K,  First 
South  Carolina  Artillery,  slightly,  in  head;  Sergt.  A.  D.  Freeman, 
Company  A,  Twelfth  Georgia  [Battalion],  slightly. 

Flag-staff  shot  away  after  retreat. 

I was  enabled  to  keep  strong  guard,  on  the  parapet  last  night,  and 
the  main  body  within  a few  yards,  in  readiness  to  move  immediately. 
The  cutting  of  the  Keokuk  angle  still  continues;  the  greater  portion 
of  the  fire  this  morning  is  done  by  mortars. 

Three  men  slightly  wounded  this  morning. 

October  30,  6.30. — Number  of  shots  fired  at  Sumter  from  sun  up  to 
sun  down  to-day,  955,  68  of  which  missed. 

October  30,  10.35  (to  General  Jordan). — The  firing  to-day  was  from 
two  monitors,  from  two  heavy  and  two  light  rifled  guns  at  Gregg, 
from  three  heavy  rifled  guns  and  four  10-inch  mortars  at  the  middle 
battery,  and  from  four  medium  rifled  guns  at  Wagner;  443  rifled 
shots  were  fired,  of  which  61  missed;  86  shots  fired  from  monitors 
all  reported  as  having  struck,  and  373  mortar  shells,  of  which  120 
missed. 

October  31. — Sergt.  W.  C.  Owens,  Sergt.  J.  A.  Stevens,  Privates 
S.  L.  Burrows,  F.  M.  Burrows,  S.  W.  Anderson,  James  Calder,  O.  J. 
Burn,  W.  E.  Gibson,  J.  W.  Jones,  L.  S.  Lee,  and  W.  N.  Patterson, 
of  Washington  Light  Infantry,  Company  A,  Twenty -fifth  Regi- 
ment, Private  W.  Martin,  of  Twelfth  Georgia  Battalion,  and  Mr. 
Matthewes,  an  overseer,  were  buried  this  morning  by  the  falling  in  of 
the  barracks  on  the  sea  face,  where  they  had  been  placed  in  position 
for  mounting  the  parapet  in  case  of  an  assault. 


[Chap.  XL. 


632  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  EL  A. 

[Indorsement.] 

Order  all  walls  threatening  to  fall  and  injure  garrison  to  be  pulled 
down  or  shot  down,  for  which  purpose  an  iron  field  piece  can  be 
sent  there  if  desired. 

G.  T.  B.  [BEAUREGARD.] 

October  31  (telegram). — The  land  batteries  and  three  monitors  fired 
in  all  yesterday  955  shots  and  shells,  60  of  which  missed.  During 
the  night  68  were  fired,  8 of  which  missed,  making  an  aggregate  of 
1,020  shots  in  the  twenty-four  hours.  At  3 o’clock  this  morning  a 
Parrott  shot  struck  an  iron  girder  in  the  sea  wall,  and  a moment 
after  the  roof  fell  in  crushing  13  men,  who  were  posted  there  in 
readiness  for  an  immediate  mount  to  the  crest,  in  case  of  a boat  at- 
tack. The  position  was  considered  comparatively  safe,  as  the  roof 
had  resisted  the  shock  of  this  falling  debris.  It  is  a matter  of  seri- 
ous regret  that  my  recommendation  for  the  construction  of  a capa- 
cious bomb-proof,  soon  after  assuming  command,  was  not  adopted  by 
the  engineer  department.  It  will  be  a matter  of  difficulty  to  repel 
the  enemy,  should  he  advance  this  way.  I would  be  glad  to  receive 
eight  or  ten  ladders,  15  feet  in  length,  to-night,  to  enable  me  to  mount 
more  rapidly. 

November  1. — The  fire  yesterday  proceeded  from  two  monitors,  two 
heavy  and  two  light  rifled  guns  at  Gregg,  three  heavy  rifled  guns 
and  four  10-inch  mortars  at  the  middle  battery,  and  four  rifled  guns 
at  Wagner;  443  rifled  shots  were  fired  from  the  land  batteries,  of 
which  61  missed;  86  shots  were  fired  from  the  monitors,  all  of  which 
were  reported  as  having  struck,  and  373  fi%om  mortars,  of  which  120 
missed.  The  mortar  fuses  are  cut  so  as  to  explode  the  shell  a second 
or  two  after  impact.  In  fact,  during  the  night  70  rifled  shots  were 
fired,  mostly  with  time  fuses,  of  which  10  passed  over,  and  33  mor- 
tar shells,  12  of  which  did  not  strike.  The  fire  of  the  land  batteries 
was  directed  chiefly  at  southwest  angle,  which  suffered  severely. 
The  flag-staff  was  shot  away  twice  and  replaced  by  Sergeant  [James] 
Garahan,  Corporal  [W.  M.  J Hitt,  and  Private  R.  J.  Swain,  all  of  Com- 
pany P,  Twelfth  Georgia  Battalion.  The  flag-staff  was  so  cut  up 
that  it  was  necessary  to  raise  the  battle-flag  of  the  Georgia  Battalion 
in  place  of  the  flag. 

The  following  is  a list  of  casualties  during  yesterday : 

Private  John  W.  Meyers,  Company  F,  Twelfth  Georgia  Battalion, 
killed  by  mortar  shell;  Private  Milton  Gibbs,  same  company,  killed 
at  the  same  time;  Private  M.  W.  Walker,  Company  D,  Twelfth 
Georgia  Battalion,  fracture  of  jaw-bone;  Private  David  J.  Hughes, 
Company  F,  same  corps,  wounded  severely  in  back;  Private  T.  A. 
Honour  and  Corporal  F.  H.  Honour,  Company  A,  Twenty-fifth  South 
Carolina  Volunteers,  all  wounded  by  mortar  shells. 

November  2. — The  fire  of  the  enemy  was  directed  mainly  at  the 
southwest  angle  yesterday,  which  he  succeeded  in  breaching  on  the 
outside,  but  not  to  an  extent  to  make  the  protection  within  insecure 
as  yet.  Monitors  opened  upon  the  sea  wall,  and  in  reverse  upon  the 
city  face,  doing  some  damage  in  the  region  of  the  new  sally-port. 
Owing  to  the  difficulty  of  observing  the  monitors  during  their  period 
of  action,  an  accurate  estimate  of  the  number  of  shots  from  them  was 
not  obtained.  It  bore,  however,  about  the  same  proportion  to  the 
number  of  shots  from  the  land  batteries  as  on  the  previous  day.  The 
number  of  their  shots,  compared  with  the  land  guns,  was  375,  of 


Chap.  XL.] 


BOMBARDMENT  OF  FORT  SUMTER,  S.  C. 


633 


which  46  missed.  The  number  of  mortar  shells  fired  was  308,  of 
which  87  missed.  The  number  last  night  was  54  rifled  shells,  of 
which  7 missed,  and  4 mortar  shells,  of  which  2 missed.  The  num- 
ber of  projectiles  of  all  kinds  fired  since  Monday  last  is  5,565,  of 
which  817  missed  and  4,748  struck.  I beg  leave  to  call  your  atten- 
tion to  the  fact  that  for  the  second  time  the  movement  to  relieve  a 
portion  of  the  garrison  failed  of  accomplishment,  and  to  urge  that 
some  remedy  be  applied.  Learning  that  the  troops  detailed  to  re- 
lieve the  companies  of  the  Twenty-fifth  South  Carolina  Volunteers 
were  awaiting  transportation  at  Fort  Johnson,  I sent  over  Captain 
Carson’s  company  in  my  mail-boat  after  its  arrival  from  Charleston, 
making  two  trips,  and  bringing  over  1 officer  and  14  men  of  the 
relief.  The  non-fulfillment  of  official  promises  is  to  be  regretted, 
as  it  shows  a want  of  confidence  on  the  part  of  the  troops.  The 
only  casualty  yesterday  happened  to  W.  Hallett,  private  Company 
D,  Twelfth  Georgia  Battalion,  who  was  wounded  slightly  on  the  leg. 


[Indorsement.] 

General  Jordan  will  issue  very  stringent  orders  relative  to  relief 
for  Sumter. 

G.  T.  B.  [BEAUREGARD], 

General,  Commanding. 

November  2. — One  hundred  and  forty  shots  from  the  monitors;  all 
struck ; 250  rifled  shots  from  Morris  Island,  55  of  which  missed  ; 345 
mortar  shells,  of  which  135  missed.  One  man  killed  by  mortar  shell. 
I consider  the  damage  done  to  the  fort,  as  a defensive  position,  is, 
perhaps,  less  to-day  than  on  any  day  of  the  bombardment. 

Although  the  crest  of  the  southwest  angle  has  been  much  cut,  the 
disjoined  masses  have  assumed  a favorable  position  for  the  defense 
of  the  lower  casemates.  Besides  15-inch  shells,  the  monitors  fire  rifled 
shells,  19  inches  long  and  6-J-  inches  in  diameter,  of  the  pattern  styled 
Wiard.  Send  us  some  fresh  beef. 

November  3 (to  General  Jordan). — I respectfully  recommend  that 
a promise  of  a furlough  of  ten  days  be  held  out  to  my  garrison  in 
the  event  of  their  repelling  a heavy  assault  upon  this  work.  It 
would  contribute  more  powerfully  to  the  success  of  the  defense  than 
any  measure  I can  think  of. 


[Indorsement.] 


Approved,  for  fifteen  days. 

G.  T.  B.  [BEAUREGARD.] 

November  3. — The  bombardment  continued  as  usual  yesterday, 
the  monitors  relieving  the  heavy  guns  on  Morris  Island.  About 
noon  140  15-inch  and  6^-inch  rifled  shots  were  fired  from  the  moni- 
tors, all  of  which  struck ; 250  rifled  shots  from  Morris  Island,  55  of 
which. missed,  and  345  mortar  shells,  135  of  which  missed. 

During  the  night  87  rifled  shots  were  fired,  36  of  which  missed,  and 
5 mortar  shells,  which  fell  in.  The  upper  portion  of  the  scarp  on 
the  southwest  angle  is  cut  away,  but  the  fragments  have  assumed 
the  natural  slope  and  contribute  to  the  safety  of  the  lower  casemates. 
Immediately  after  dark  a small  boat  containing  4 of  the  enemy’s 
scouts  made  a landing  at  the  southeast  angle.  The  darkness  having 
prevented  its  approach  from  being  observed,  and  our  sentinels  not 


[Chap.  XL. 


534  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

believing  that  it  could  be  an  enemy,  hailed  and  allowed  the  party  to 
escape,  although  the  officer  in  command  states  that  several  shots 
struck  the  boat  during  its  retreat.  The  delay  in  firing  was  due  to 
the  fact  that  there  was  only  one  boat,  and  that  it  was  known  that  a 
picket-boat  was  assigned  to  this  station.  The  infantry  garrison  was 
relieved  by  a detachment  of  2 officers  and  40  men  from  each  of 
the  following  regiments:  Sixth,  Nineteenth,  Twenty-third,  Twenty- 
seventh,  and  Twenty-eighth  Georgia,  and  by  Companies  C and  D, 
Twenty-fifth  South  Carolina  Volunteers,  96  men.  The  different  po- 
sitions of  the  garrison  have  been  assigned  permanently  to  separate 
parts  of  the  work,  which  it  is  hoped  will  contribute  to  the  certainty 
of  a repulse.  The  only  casualty  yesterday  was  the  death  of  Private 
Calvin  Giles,  Company  B,  Twelfth  Georgia  Battalion,  by  the  explo- 
sion of  a mortar  shell. 

November  4. — The  following  is  the  number  of  shots  fired  to-day  : 
Monitors,  86  shots,  all  reported  hit.  Number  of  rifled  shots,  200,  26 
of  which  missed ; 136  mortars,  36  of  which  missed. 

I have  the  honor  to  report  that  the  fire  from  the  fleet  and  batteries 
continued  yesterday.  Monitors  fired  114  shots,  all  of  which  are  re- 
ported to  have  struck ; Morris  Island  fired  277  rifled  shots,  40  of 
which  missed,  and  178  mortar  shells,  of  which  17  missed ; during 
the  night,  92  30-pounder  rifled  shots  with  time-fuses  were  fired,  all 
of  which,  excepting  15,  exploded  over  and  within  the  fort.  The 
practice  with  these  projectiles  is  very  beautiful,  the  adjustment  of  the 
time  being  so  perfect  that  the  occupants  of  the  gorge  wall  are  secure 
from  the  effects  of  the  explosion,  which  rarely  fails  to  occur  during 
the  passage  of  the  shell  over  the  parade.  The  fire  was  directed  yes- 
terday upon  the  southwest  angle,  the  upper  casemate  of  which  was 
breached,  and  in  reverse  upon  the  city  face,  the  northern  portion  of 
which  was  somewhat  cut  and  the  traverse  over  the  hospital  partly 
knocked  down;  on  the  whole,  the  damage  was  not  great.  Capt.  W.  H. 
Peronneau,  Company  G,  First  South  Carolina  Artillery,  40  men,  re- 
lieved Lieutenant  [Edward]  Lowndes,  Company  K,  same  corps,  40 
men. 

The  following  is  a list  of  the  casualties  yesterday  from  the  explo- 
sion of  a mortar  shell,  which  accidentally  found  its  way  into  the 
battery:  Privates  William  B.  Eates,  Company  E;  B.  F.  Morris,  Com- 
pany H;  J.  A.  Smith,  Company  D;  James  Chambers,  Company  E;  J. 
R.  Morris,  Company  E,  all  of  the  Twenty-seventh  Georgia.  Con- 
cussion from  explosion  of  shell  in  battery : Privates  I.  R.  Stephens, 
Company  E.  [Apparently  incomplete.] 

November  5. — The  following  is  the  number  of  shots  fired  to-day  : 
Rifled,  200,  of  which  43  missed ; mortars  fired  213,  of  which  46 
missed;  monitors  fired  68,  of  which  7 missed. 

November  6. — The  enemy  fired  the  following  number  of  shots 
yesterday:  Rifled,  200,  of  which  43  missed;  mortars,  213,  of  which  40 
missed;  monitors,  98;  during  the  night,  58,  of  which  21  missed;  moni- 
tors, 1,  struck.  The  fire  of  the  land  batteries  was  directed  on  southwest 
angle,  upon  which  the  effect  was  not  very  considerable.  The  fire  of 
the  monitors  was  directed  on  the  eastern  pan  coupe ; the  crown  of  the 
eastern  arch  was  destroyed;  the  debris  fell  in  and  assisted  the  work  of 
the  engineers.  Private  A.  Lavender,  Company  F,  Twenty-fifth  Geor- 
gia Regiment,  severe  flesh  wound,  by  fragments  of  shell,  in  the  back. 

The  flag-staff  was  shot  down  to-day,  and  was  replaced  by  Sergt. 
N.  D.  Currie,  Company  D,  and  Corpl.  S.  Montgomery,  Company  C, 
Twenty-fifth  South  Carolina  Volunteers.  The  following  is  the 


Chap.  XL.]  BOMBARDMENT  OF  FORT  SUMTER,  S.  C.  635 

number  of  casualties:  10  men  slightly  wounded,  2 severely,  and  2 
killed;  all  of  the  Twenty-seventh  Georgia. 

November  7. — The  bombardment  continued  yesterday  to  the  fol- 
lowing extent : Rifled  shots  fired  from  land  batteries,  153,  of  which 
31  missed;  mortar  shells,  193,  of  which  34  missed.  Monitors  fired  80, 
of  which  14  missed.  During  the  night  68  light  rifled  shells  were  fired 
from  Gregg,  29  of  which  either  failed  to  explode  or  exploded  after 
passing  over.  The  fire  of  the  monitors  was  directed  upon  the  east 
angle  and  upon  the  scarp  of  the  northeast  face,  to  which  it  did  some 
injury.  Is  it  impracticable  to  annoy  the  monitors  when  in  position 
from  Sullivan’s  Island  ? Another  mortar  shell  found  its  way  into 
the  battery  yesterday  and  exploded,  wounding  several  men  slightly. 
Another  exploded  at  the  eastern  entrance  of  main  bomb-proof,  and 
killed  2 and  wounded  several. 

The  following  is  a list  of  the  killed  and  wounded  : 

Killed:  Privates  Howell  Jones  and  Robert  Yance,  Company  B, 
Twenty-eighth  Georgia. 

Wounded : Private  Henry  Stoubelfield,  Company  G,  First  South 
Carolina  Artillery,  slight ; Private  Aaron  Bates,  First  South  Caro- 
lina Artillery,  hip,  severe;  Private  John  Benton,  Company  G,  First 
South  Carolina  Artillery,  thigh,  slight ; Private  W.  T.  Butler,  Com- 
pany E,  Twenty-eighth  Georgia,  foot,  severe;  Private  S.  C.  Law- 
rence, Company  B,  Twenty-eighth  Georgia,  scalp,  slight;  Private 
James  L.  Salter,  Company  H,  Twenty-eighth  Georgia,  concussion; 
Privates  John  Morrell  and  James  A.  Lane,  Company  G,  Twenty- 
eighth  Georgia,  concussion;  Privates  James  D.  Emery,  Henry  O. 
Wood,  and  Peter  Wood,  Company  F,  Twenty-eighth  Georgia,  con- 
cussion; and  H.  M.  Lawrence,  Company  B,  Twenty-eighth  Georgia, 
side,  slight. 

Last  night  Captain  [W.  H.]  Rentfro,  with  1 lieutenant  and  24 
men,  from  the  Twenty-seventh  Georgia,  Lieutenant  [W.  P.]  Math- 
ews, Sixth  Georgia,  34  men;  Lieutenant  [G.  W.]  Smith,  Twenty- 
eighth  Georgia,  33  men,  relieved  detachments  of  40  and  20  men  and 
3 officers,  from  Twenty-seventh,  Sixth,  and  Twenty-eighth  Georgia, 
respectively.  The  captains  of  two  of  these  detachments,  whose  time 
had  expired,  were  retained  for  twenty-four  hours  for  the  purpose  of 
assisting  the  new  officers,  strangers  to  the  works,  in  the  discharge  of 
their  duties.  Capt.  John  Johnson  arrived  for  the  purpose  of  reliev- 
ing Captain  Champneys. 

November  8. — The  enemy’s  fire  continued  yesterday  with  still  fur- 
ther abatement.  The  monitors  took  no  part  in  the  action.  Seventy- 
one  rifled  shots  were  fired,  15  of  which  missed,  and  212  mortar  shells, 
of  which  46  missed.  During  the  night,  63  time-shells  were  fired,  of 
which  16  missed.  The  injury  done  to  the  work  was  perhaps  less 
marked  than  on  any  previous  day.  The  following  casualties  oc- 
curred: First  Lieut.  T.  Davis  Waties,  Company  G,  First  South  Caro- 
lina Artillery,  concussion,  slight ; Private  Thomas  H.  Watts,  Com- 
pany C,  Twenty-eighth  Georgia,  fore-arm  and  hand,  severe;  Private 
J.  M.  Page,  Company  B,  Twenty-ninth  Georgia,  contusion  of  side, 
slight. 

The  mountain  howitzer,  though  placed  in  a position  of  supposed 
security,  was  struck  in  the  chase  by  a fragment  of  a mortar  shell, 
causing  a convexity  in  the  bore.  This,  I think,  can  be  removed  by 
boring  out.  The  piece  was  sent  up  per  steamer  Randolph  last  night, 
and  contains  a round  of  case  shot. 

I append  a condensed  statement  of  the  work  performed  by  engineer 


536  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

department  on  the  nights  of  November  7 and  8,  as  submitted  by  Cap- 
tain Johnson,  engineer  in  charge  : 

Force,  170  hands;  discharged  2,700  bags  of  sand  and  some  timber;  repaired,  raised, 
and  enlarged  traverse  over  west  circular  stairway ; filled  mortar  holes  on  gorge 
bomb-proof  and  traverse  in  rear  of  northeast  lower  casemate  battery.  Carpenters 
worked  on  ladders,  ventilators,  and  chevaux-de-frise;  being  obliged  to  remodel  the 
latter.  No  wire  fencing  yet  built,  as  the  expected  posts  and  frames  have  not  yet 
arrived  from  the  city. 

November  9. — The  number  of  the  enemy’s  shots  yesterday  amounted 
to,  rifled,  93,  of  which  33  missed ; number  of  shells,  188,  of  which  45 
missed,  and  monitors,  11,  of  which  5 missed ; during  the  night,  58 
rifled  shots  were  fired,  of  which  1G  missed.  The  fire  of  the  land  bat- 
teries during  the  day  was  directed  chiefly  upon  the  southwest  angle, 
without  serious  damage ; that  of  the  monitors,  upon  the  scarp  wall 
of  the  northeast  face,  which  was  not  materially  injured. 


Recapitulation  of  the  week. 

Rifled,  from  land  batteries: 

Fired 1,803 

Missed 411 

From  mortars: 

Fired 1,467 

Missed 359 

From  monitors: 

Fired 471 

Missed 19 

Total  fired 3,741 

Struck.... 2,952 

Missed 789 

Total  fired  during  the  previous  week 5, 565 

Struck 4,748 

Missed 817 

Aggregate  fired  since  the  opening  of  the  present  bombardment 9, 306 

Struck 7,700 

Missed 1,606 


I have  to  correct  an  error  into  which  I was  led  by  the  report  of  an 
officer  detailed  to  take  the  measurement  of  the  rifled  projectiles  fired 
from  the  monitors.  Their  correct  diameter  is  8 inches  and  not  6^,  as 
was  reported;  length  20  inches.  Five  negroes  were  wounded  yester- 
day by  the  explosion  of  a mortar  shell,  and  by  bricks,  thrown  by  a 
rifled  shell  at  night;  1 dangerously,  1 severely,  and  3 slightly.  I add 
condensed  statement  of  work  done,  submitted  by  Capt.  J.  J ohnson, 
engineer  in  charge: 

Force,  160;  discharged  1,700  filled  sand-bags;  filled  mortar-shell  holes  over  venti- 
lators above  and  in  rear  of  battery ; repaired  bomb-proof  cone  over  stairway  of 
southwest  angle;  began  covering  west  end  of  gorge  bomb-proof  chevaux-de-frise 
along  three-fourths  of  sea  slope;  spiked  plank  along  east  half  of  gorge  slope;  former 
taken  in  before  day  by  garrison.  No  frames  yet  arrived  for  iron  fence.  They  shall 
be  made  here,  if  not  sent  to-night. 

November  9 (to  General  G.  T.  Beauregard). — On  the  night  of  the 
4th,  86  rifled  shots  fired,  60  of  which  struck ; during  the  day  of  the 
5th,  200  rifled  shots  fired,  157  of  which  struck.  Mortars  fired  213,  173 


Chap.  XL.]  BOMBARDMENT  OF  FORT  SUMTER,  S.  C 637 

of  which  struck.  Monitors  fired  78,  all  of  which  struck.  During  the 
night  of  the  5th,  58  rifled  shots  fired,  37  of  which  struck.  Mortars 
fired  1 shell,  which  struck.  During  day  of  the  8th,  93  rifled  shots 
fired,  60  of  which  struck ; 188  mortar  shells  fired,  143  of  which  struck; 
11  shots  fired  by  monitors,  6 of  which  struck ; during  the  night  of 
the  8th,  58  rifled  shots  fired,  42  of  wliich  struck. 

November  10. — The  following  number  of  shots  were  fired  yester- 
day: Rifled,  61,  of  which  21  missed;  monitors,  25,  of  which  7 missed. 

Mortar  shelling  by  night  was  resorted  to  for  the  first  time  since 
the  commencement  of  the  bombardment.  The  rifle  practice  was  also 
more  frequent  than  on  previous  nights.  Number  of  shots  from  rifle, 
154;  missed,  62.  From  mortars,  182;  missed,  50.  The  heavy  guns 
from  the  land  have  ceased  their  fire  to  a great  extent.  The  rifle 
practice  is  conducted  almost  exclusively  from  light  pieces.  Day 
firing  has  in  like  manner  given  way  to  night.  This  may  indicate 
that  their  heavy  ammunition  has  been  much  reduced  and  their  heavy 
guns  endangered.  They  may  have  resorted  to  night  firing  as  a 
means  of  covering  an  assault,  which  I think  will  probably  be  at- 
tempted within  the  present  week,  as  the  bright  nights  will,  after  that 
period,  have  come  in. 

I have  the  honor  again  to  direct  your  attention  to  the  propriety  of 
assigning  [W.  L.]  Trenholm’s  section  of  howitzers  to  duty  at  this 
post.  The  only  casualty  yesterday  was  the  wounding  of  Private  M. 
A.  Brown,  Company  C,  Twenty-fifth  South  Carolina  Volunteers, 
slightly,  in  the  foot  and  ankle. 

The  post-boat  broke  from  its  moorings  last  night  and  drifted  away. 
The  telegraphic  cable  was  cut  by  a shell  at  a distance  of  about  50 
feet  from  the  fort;  communication  has  therefore  been  suspended. 
Captain  Johnson,  engineer  in  charge,  reports  that  no  sand-bags  ar- 
rived last  night.  Force  repaired  top  of  traverse  in  rear  of  battery, 
resumed  filling  ordnance  store-room  southwest  angle,  placed  che- 
vaux-de-frise  along  the  whole  of  east  slope. 

November  11. — The  following  number  of  shots  fired  yesterday: 
Rifled,  46,  of  which  8 missed;  mortar  shells,  50,  of  which  25  missed; 
monitors,  30,  of  which  9 missed.  No  casualties  occurred. 

A detachment  of  100  men  and  10  officers,  under  the  command  of 
Captain  [E.  A.]  Crawford,  of  the  Seventeenth  South  Carolina  Vol- 
unteers, relieved  a detachment  of  100  men  and  officers  from  the  Sixth, 
Nineteenth,  and  Twenty-eighth  Georgia  Volunteers. 

A false  alarm  was  created  by  the  report  of  a blue  light.  The  men 
got  upon  the  ramparts  in  fair  time,  with  only  a moderate  amount  of 
skulking. 

November  12. — The  number  of  shots  fired  yesterday  was  from 
rifled  guns  23,  of  which  13  missed;  from  mortars,  196,  of  which  113 
missed. 

During  the  night  146  rifled  shots  were  fired,  of  which  33  missed, 
and  — mortar  shells,  of  which  5 missed.  First  Sergt.  Wales  S.  Lang- 
ford, Company  G,  First  South  Carolina  Artillery,  was  wounded  in 
the  head,  slightly,  by  a piece  of  shell,  while  with  his  company  on  the 
parapet. 

At  8 p.  m.  a calcium  light  was  displayed  at  Gregg,  for  the  appa- 
rent purpose  of  illuminating  our  works  and  preventing  the  location 
of  obstruction  upon  the  slopes. 

At  9 p.  m.  rapid  musketry  firing  was  observed  at  Gregg,  while 
voices  were  heard  to  cry  out  “Halt!”  The  occasion  has  not  been 
discovered. 


[Chap.  XL. 


638  S.  0.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

At  11  p.  m.  Company  G,  First  Regiment  South  Carolina  Artillery, 
Capt.  W.  H.  Peronneau,  40  men,  was  relieved  by  Company  D,  First 
Regiment  South  Carolina  Artillery,  Captain  Harleston,  45  men. 
Owing  to  the  refusal  of  the  captain  of  the  steamer  to  approach  the 
fort,  the  final  transfer  was  made  on  board  of  small  boats,  and  con- 
sumed much  time.  The  flag-staff  was  shot  down  and  the  flag  was  re- 
placed by  Sergeant  [G.  H.]  Mayo,  Company  B,  and  Private  Robert 
Autry,  Company  C,  Twenty-eighth  Georgia  Volunteers. 

November  13. — I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of 
the  firing  yesterday : Rifled  shots,  144,  of  which  34  missed;  mortars, 
159,  of  which  92  missed;  monitors  fired  twice,  struck  both  times. 
One  shot  passed  through  the  flag.  During  the  night  180  rifled  fired, 
of  which  51  passed  over;  mortars,  282,  of  which  110  missed. 

The  following  casualties  occurred:  Private  W.  J.  Hadden,  Com- 
pany I,  Twenty-eighth  Georgia,  killed  by  a fragment  of  Parrott 
shell  while  on  post ; Private  A.  J.  Clinton,  Company  K,  Seventeenth 
South  Carolina  Volunteers,  killed  by  a mortar  shell,  while  on  post; 
Private  E.  Johnson,  Company  C,  Twenty-fifth  South  Carolina  Vol- 
unteers, wounded  severely  in  face,  while  on  post. 

A strong  light  was  thrown  from  Fort  Gregg  upon  the  fort  during 
a greater  part  of  the  night.  Major  Pringle  effected  a transfer  of 
negroes  and  a transportation  of  commissary  stores  in  small  boats, 
without  loss,  assisted  by  Lieutenant  Swinton,  under  a very  heavy 
fire. 

November  14. — I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of 
the  shots  fired  yesterday : Rifled,  fired  74,  of  which  9 missed ; mor- 
tars, 315,  of  which  128  missed.  During  the  night,  rifled,  115,  of  which 
36  missed.  To-day  there  were  21  rifled  shots  fired,  of  which  9 missed  ; 
mortars  fired  225,  of  which  96  missed.  Private  J.  G.  Pound,  Com- 
pany K,  Twenty-seventh  Georgia,  was  dangerously  wounded  in  the 
thigh  by  a fragment  of  a mortar  shell.  A boat  was  seen  lying  at 
the  obstructions  last  night ; when  hailed,  she  proved  to  be  our  guard- 
boat.  Her  presence  there  does  not  contribute  to  the  safety  of  this 
work. 

November  15. — The  shelling  continued  heavy  last  night.  Ninety- 
eight  rifled  shells  were  fired,  of  which  39  missed,  and  219  mortar 
shells  were  thrown,  of  which  90  missed.  Casualties  were  as  follows  : 
Private  J.  R.  Wilson,  Company  K,  Twenty-seventh  Georgia,  shoul- 
der, slight;  N.  P.  Benton,  Company  A,  Twenty- seventh  Georgia, 
scalp,  slight ; William  Ment,  Company  H,  Twenty-seventh  Georgia, 
back,  slight.  To-day,  rifled  fired  16,  of  which  6 missed;  mortar 
shells,  320,  of  which  115  missed.  Casualties  to-day:  First  Sergt.  J. 
C.  Grimball,  Company  D,  First  Regiment  South  Carolina  Artillery, 
wounded  severely  in  head,  abdomen,  and  knee  by  a mortar  shell.  I 
append  a statement  of  the  engineer  work,  as  furnished  by  Captain 
J ohnson : 

November  14  and  15,  repaired  top  of  traverse  over  three-gun  battery;  construction 
of  infantry  epaulement  west  front,  near  southwest  pan  coupe.  Built  barricade  with 
loop-holes  at  north  end  of  three-gun  battery;  began  remodeling  east  end  of  center 
boom-proof  for  infantry  defense;  obstructions  repaired,  placed,  and  taken  in. 

November  16. — The  enemy  fired  last  night  184  rifled  shots,  of  which 
52  missed,  and  12  mortar  shells,  of  which  2 missed.  To-day  43  rifled 
shots  were  fired,  of  which  5 missed,  and  363  mortar  shells,  of  which 
118  missed.  Number  of  shots  of  all  kinds  fired  during  the  past  week 
up  to  this  morning,  3,030. 

This  morning  four  monitors  took  position  near  the  Cumming’s 


Chap.  XL.] 


BOMBARDMENT  OF  FORT  SUMTER,  S.  C. 


639 


Point  buoy.  Two  pairs  of  buoys  were  discharged  by  them  on  the 
flood  tide.  They  passed  up  the  channel  between  the  obstructions 
and  Fort  Sumter.  I am  led  to  believe  that  they  carried  heavy 
weights  suspended  at  a certain  depth  below  the  surface  of  the  water, 
and  were  designed  to  prove  whether  there  was  a practical  passage 
for  vessels  of  a certain  draught. 

November  17. — The  enemy  fired  last  night  as  follows:  Rifled  shots, 
156,  of  which  55  missed;  mortar  shells,  6,  1 of  which  missed.  To-day 
14  rifled  shots  were  fired,  of  which  5 missed,  and  366  mortar  shells, 
of  which  117  missed. 

Last  night  Private  Edmund  Lake,  Company  D,  Twenty-seventh 
South  Carolina  Volunteers,  acting  cockswain  of  the  quartermaster’s 
boat,  was  killed  by  a fragment  of  shell,  while  approaching  the  fort. 
No  casualties  to-day. 

November  18. — The  enemy  fired  last  night  as  follows:  Rifled  shots, 
133,  11  of  which  missed.  To-day  12  rifled  shots  were  fired,  of  which 
4 missed,  and  278  mortar  shells;  of  these  92  missed. 

At  about  1.30  o’clock  the  sentinel  at  the  northeast  angle  descried  a 
small  boat  approaching  the  fort;  he  hailed  it  several  times  and  was 
answered  with  an  oath.  He  thereupon  fired  and  the  boat  immedi- 
ately retreated.  A short  time  afterward  there  was  considerable 
musketry  firing  directed  toward  the  fort,  apparently  from  boats  be- 
tween this  post  and  Gregg.  Several  balls  struck  the  fort  and  some 
passed  over. 

Later,  near  daylight,  two  boats  approached  within  400  yards,  op- 
posite the  southeast  angle.  They  were  fired  upon,  and  retreated  to- 
ward Morris  Island.  No  casualties  since  my  last  report.  I append 
a brief  statement  of  engineer  work  done  last  night : 

The  force,  120;  worked  on  repairs  of  southwest  angle  bomb-proof  over  stair,  con- 
structing position  for  howitzer,  at  west  sally-port  casemate,  filling  ordnance  store- 
room southwest  angle,  and  completing  loop-holed  blindage  east  end  center  bomb- 
proof. Garrison  worked  on  filling  passage  to  southeast  magazine. 

November  19. — Two  hundred  and  eighty-five  rifled  shots  were  fired 
last  night,  of  which  96  missed,  and  3 mortar  shells,  which  struck. 
To-day  44  rifled  shots  were  fired,  of  which  9 missed,  and  362  mortar 
shells,  of  which  113  missed. 

No  casualties  have  occurred  since  the  last  report.  Engineer  in 
charge  reports  that  his  working  force  was  engaged  during  the  night 
repairing  large  holes  over  center  bomb-proof,  also  filling  ordnance 
store-room  adjoining  western  magazine,  second  tier.  Completed 
loop-holes  in  splinter-proof  at  east  end  of  center  bomb-proof,  and 
continued  filling  passages  inside  south  angle,  and  blew  up  middle 
kitchen  in  east  barracks. 

Captain  [R.  M.]  Mitchell,  with  3 officers  and  100  men,  from  Sixth, 
Nineteenth,  Twenty-third,  and  Twenty-seventh  Georgia  Regiments, 
relieved  Captain  Rentfro,  with  3 officers  and  100  men  from  the  Sixth, 
Twenty-seventh,  and  Twenty-eighth  Georgia. 

November  20,  9.45  a.  m. — Enemy  shelling  us  more  heavily  this 
morning  than  usual,  with  mortars.  Have  fired  few  rifled  shots.  I 
will  send  up  report  of  last  night’s  proceedings*  after  awhile. 

November  21. — Yesterday*  the  enemy  fired  18  rifled  shots,  of  which 
8 missed,  and  379  mortar  shells,  of  which  146  missed.  Last  night 
124  rifled  shots  were  fired,  of  which  41  passed  over  without  exploding. 

At  9 p.  m.  Captain  [N.  A.  J Burley,  Seventeenth  South  Carolina  Vol- 

*See  p.  742. 


640 


S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 


unteers,  and  Lieutenant  [A.  M.]  Hutchison,  Sixth  Georgia,  relieved 
Lieutenants  [J.  A.  F.]  Coleman  and  [J.  D.]  James,  of  the  same  regi- 
ments, respectively,  who  were  removed  at  my  request.  Thomas  J. 
Hornbuckle,  Company  C,  Twenty-third  Georgia,  was  killed  yester- 
day by  the  explosion  of  a mortar  shell ; wounded,  C.  Banks,  Com- 
pany fc,  Seventeenth  South  Carolina  Volunteers,  spine,  slight;  W. 
P.  Brown,  private,  Mathewes’  artillery,  shoulder,  severe ; also  Stew- 
art, Company  B,  Sixth  Georgia,  scalp,  slight.  At  5 a.  m.  the  broken 
arch  on  the  gorge  wall  was  struck  by  a Parrott  shell  and  fell,  killing 
2 negroes  and  wounding  6,  and  wounding  Privates  Charles  Ethe- 
ridge, Company  H,  Sixth  Georgia,  fractured  jaw;  and  Coote  Thayer, 
Company  H,  Sixth  Georgia,  spine,  slight.  Repeated  efforts  had  been 
made  a few  hours  before  to  pull  it  down,  but  to  no  purpose. 

The  following  is  a statement  of  the  engineer  work  done  last  night, 
as  submitted  by  Captain  Johnson : 

Filled  one  loop-hole  and  two  arches  over  magazine  ; completed  filling  passage  in 
south  angle  ; repaired  tops  of  battery  and  central  bomb-proof.  Began  covering  with 
sand-bags  the  loop-holed  blindage,  east  end,  corner  bomb-proof. 

November  22,  10  a.  m. — Twenty-three  rifled  shots  were  fired  yester- 
day, of  which  7 missed,  and  238  mortar  shells,  of  which  only  99 
missed.  At  night,  149  rifled  shells  were  fired;  45  of  these  exploded, 
after  passing  the  fort. 

There  have  been  no  casualties,  neither  has  any  serious  damage 
been  done  to  the  work.  At  3 o’clock  this  morning  a blue  light  was 
reported  at  the  entrance  to  Vincent’s  Creek.  The  parapet  was  hand- 
somely manned  by  the  garrison.  No  further  indications  of  the 
enemy’s  advance  appear. 

November  23,  10.30  a.  m. — Four  rifled  shots  were  fired  yesterday,  all 
of  which  struck,  and  143  mortar  shells,  of  which  63  missed.  Last  night 
94  rifled  shots  were  fired,  of  which  24  missed. 

Captain  [J.  Ward]  Hopkins  and  6 officers  and  108  men  from  the 
Twenty-seventh  South  Carolina  Volunteers  relieved  Captain  Craw- 
ford, Seventeenth  South  Carolina  Volunteers,  10  officers  and  101 
men.  No  casualties. 

November  24. — The  enemy  fired  7 rifled  shells  at  us  yesterday,  all 
of  which  struck,  and  192  mortar  shells,  of  which  81  missed. 

During  the  night,  170  rifled  shells  were  fired,  of  which  62  exploded 
after  passing,  or  passed  without  bursting. 

It  is  my  painful  duty  to  report  that  Capt.  F.  H.  Harleston,  Com- 
pany D,  First  Regiment  South  Carolina  Artillery,  was  wounded  in 
both  thighs  and  in  the  arm,  by  a Parrott  shell,  at  half  past  4.  He 
had  gone  down  the  slope  of  the  sea  face  to  examine  the  obstruc- 
tions, which  had  been  reported  as  being  washed  away  by  the  tide. 
He  is  mortally  hurt.  One  negro  was  killed,  and  another  lost  his 
leg  by  fragments  of  a Parrott  shell. 

November  25. — During  yesterday  2 rifled  shells  were  fired  at  the 
fort,  both  of  which  missed;  also  98  mortar  shells  were  fired,  65  of 
which  struck,  33  missed.  Our  report  for  last  night  is:  Rifled,  fired 
166,  of  which  115  struck;  mortar  shells  fired,  17,  only  6 of  which 
struck. 

The  casualties  last  night  were  Captain  Mitchell,  Company  F, 
Twenty-third  Georgia,  slightly  wounded ; 1 negro  killed,  and  another 
severely  wounded  in  shoulder. 

November  26. — Ten  rifled  shells  were  thrown  yesterday  at  the  fort, 
of  which  3 missed,  and  11  mortar  shells,  of  which  3 also  missed. 
During  the  night,  242  rifled  shells  were  fired,  of  which  88  missed. 


Chap.  XL.] 


BOMBARDMENT  OF  FORT  SUMTER,  S.  C. 


641 


There  have  been  no  casualties,  nor  any  material  injury  done  to 
the  work  since  last  report. 

November  27. — The  enemy  fired  yesterday  23  rifled  shells,  of  which 
5 missed,  and  48  mortar  shells,  of  which  18  missed.  Last  night  1G9 
rifled  shells  were  thrown,  of  which  92  missed.  There  have  been  no 
casualties  during  the  last  twenty-four  hours,  neither  has  the  injury 
to  the  work  been  serious.  Captain  [J.  A.]  Roe,  with  a detachment 
of  100  men  from  the  Nineteenth,  Twenty-third,  Twenty-seventh,  and 
Twenty-eighth  Georgia,  were  relieved  by  Captain  [W.  J.]  Jordan, 
with  6 officers  and  100  men  from  the  same  regiments.  The  following 
statement  of  work  done  is  submitted  by  the  engineer: 

Continued  and  nearly  completed  extension  of  traverse  over  loop-holed  blindage 
at  entrance  of  battery;  blocked  up  western  sally-port  within  and  without ; con- 
tinued and  nearly  completed  filling  of  ordnance  store-room,  second  tier  ; southwest 
pan  coupe  completed ; barrier  of  sand-bags  at  north  end  of  hospital  casemates  com- 
pleted; machicolated  gallery  over  northwest  berme  ; continued  mining  for  passage 
from  center  bomb-proof  through  lower  gorge  rooms  toward  south  magazines. 

November  28. — The  enemy  fired  106  shots  yesterday  from  the  land 
batteries,  53  of  which  missed,  and  105  mortar  shells,  40  of  which 
missed.  The  westernmost  of  the  two  heavy  guns  at  Gregg  bearing 
upon  this  point  is  ascertained  to  be  a 10-inch  columbiad.  The  shell 
practice  of  this  gun  at  southwest  angle  was  very  good  and  rather 
effective.  Fragments  of  a 13-inch  mortar  shell  were  also  found 
yesterday.  During  the  night,  the  usual  practice  with  light  Par- 
rotts continued;  fired  257,  missed  136.  Private  James  Tupper,  jr., 
shot-marker,  Company  D,  Twenty-seventh  South  Carolina  Volun- 
teers, Charleston  Battalion,  seeing  yesterday  morning  that  the  flag 
had  been  shot  down,  walked  along  the  whole  extent  of  the  gorge 
wall,  on  the  parapet,  and  endeavored  to  raise  it.  Finding  that  the 
staff  was  too  short,  he  procured  an  additional  piece  of  spar,  and,  with 
the  assistance  of  C.  B.  Foster,  same  command,  and  Corporals  W.  C. 
Buckheister  and  A.  J.  Bluett,  Company  B,  same  corps,  succeeded  in 
splicing  and  planting  the  staff,  under  a very  heavy  fire  directed  at 
them.  One  shot  cut  the  flag  from  their  hands.  It  was  a most  dis- 
tinguished display  of  gallantry.*  No  casualties  have  occurred  since 
the  last  report. 

November  29. — The  land  guns  fired  yesterday  97  shots,  of  which 
43  missed;  mortars  fired  21,  of  which  6 missed ; and  a monitor  22, 
of  which  8 missed.  Last  night  126  shots  were  fired,  of  which  59 
missed  ; 1 mortar  shell,  which  struck.  No  boats  arrived  from  the 
city  last  night.  No  casualties  occurred. 

November  30. — The  enemy  fired  only  8 rifled  shots  yesterday,  4 of 
which  missed.  Last  night  140  rifled  shots  were  fired,  74  of  which 
missed,  and  4 mortar  shells,  all  of  which  fell  outside.  A negro  was 
killed  by  a Parrott  shell.  Last  night  a good  deal  of  signaling  was 
observed  during  the  night  on  board  the  fleet,  on  Morris  Island  and 
on  Black  Island.  The  engineer  work  done  consisted  of  uncovering 
and  reconstructing  bomb-proof  over  southwest  stairway;  extend- 
ing mining  galleries  toward  east  magazine  from  center  bomb-proof 
and  from  northwest  casemates  to  battery.  No  bags  of  sand  arrived, 
last  two  nights,  weather  preventing. 

December  1. — The  enemy  fired  yesterday  : Rifled,  1,  struck;  mor- 
tar, 22,  of  which  11  missed.  Last  night  2 mortar  shells  were  fired; 
both  missed. 


*See  Special  Orders,  No.  272,  December  15,  “Correspondence,  etc.,”  Part  II,  p.  555, 
41  R R — VOL  XXVIII,  PT  I 


642 


S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 


[Chap.  XL. 


December  2, 11.20  a.  m. — I have  the  honor  to  report  the  fire  on  this 
place  as  having  almost  totally  ceased.  Six  mortar  shells  were  thrown 
yesterday,  of  which  2 missed.  No  firing  last  night. 

A detachment  of  6 officers  and  100  men  from  Nineteenth,  Sixth, 
Twenty-seventh,  and  Twenty-eighth  Georgia  Volunteers,  under  Cap- 
tain [J.  M.]  Bateman,  relieved  detachment  of  3 officers  and  100  men 
under  Captain  Mitchell,  from  Nineteenth,  Twenty -seventh,  Twenty- 
third,  and  Twenty-eighth  Georgia  Volunteers. 

December  3. — Enemy  reopened  fire  yesterday  at  half  past  10,  throw- 
ing 72  rifled  shots,  of  which  26  missed;  73  mortar  shells,  of  which  38 
missed,  and  68  columbiad  shots  and  shells,  of  which  14  missed. 

There  was  no  firing  last  night.  James  Fowler,  private,  Company 
H,  Twenty-seventh  South  Carolina  Volunteers,  wounded  by  shell  in 
head,  slightly. 

December  4. — The  fire  of  the  enemy  commenced  yesterday  at  10 
o’clock  at  the  southwest  angle ; 27  columbiad  shots  were  thrown,  of 
which  1 missed,  and  11  rifled,  of  which  2 missed ; damage  inflicted 
not  considerable. 

I have  made  a careful  examination  of  the  exterior  of  the  fort  this 
morning.  The  slope  is  exceedingly  steep  and  the  footing  very  in- 
secure; nothing  like  a rush  can  ever  be  made  up  these  slopes  as  long 
as  they  retain  their  present  inclination. 

December  5. — Forty -two  rifled  were  fired  yesterday,  of  which  11 
missed;  columbiad,  35,  of  which  10  missed;  and  17  mortar,  of  which 
9 missed.  Last  night  49  rifled  were  fired,  of  which  27  missed ; co- 
lumbiad, 6 fired,  of  which  2 missed. 

Captain  Sellers,  with  3 officers  and  89  men,  relieved  Captain  Hop- 
kins (6  officers  and  107  men). 

December  8. — No  shots  have  been  fired  at  this  fort  since  the  last 
morning  report.  The  enemy  are  at  work  revetting  the  batteries,  and 
appear  to  be  extending  Gregg  to  the  eastward;  wagons  could  be 
seen  moving  down  the  beach  toward  Wagner  yesterday  afternoon. 
At  dusk,  parties  of  200  or  300  men  could  be  seen  moving  down  toward 
Gregg.  The  pitching  of  one  of  the  monitors  yesterday  revealed 
some  timber  work  at  the  boat,  whose  exact  nature  and  the  strength 
of  which,  my  glass  did  not  permit  me  to  make  out. 

I do  not  think  it  is  well  for  our  batteries  to  suspend  their  fire 
when  the  enemy  are  silent,  as  they  are  working  when  not  firing; 
they  are  then  more  exposed  and  vulnerable. 

[Indorsement.] 

December  8,  1863. 

Inform  commanding  officer  in  First  and  Seventh  Military  Districts 
that  the  working  parties  of  the  enemy  on  north  end  of  Morris  Island 
must  not  be  allowed  to  work  day  and  night  undisturbed;  they  should 
be  fired  upon  occasionally,  due  regard  being  had  to  proper  economy 
of  ammunition,  as  already  ordered. 

G.  T.  B.  [BEAUREGARD], 

General,  Commanding. 

December  9. — Affairs  here  continue  quiet.  The  enemy  show  them- 
selves in  considerable  numbers  at  Gregg  and  Wagner,  where  the 
work  of  cutting,  hauling,  and  placing  sods  continues. 

December  10. — The  enemy  fired  6 light  rifled  yesterday,  all  of  which 
struck,  excepting  1. 

Captain  [R.  A.]  Harkey,  with  6 officers  and  100  men  from  the  Sixth, 
Nineteenth,  Twenty-third,  and  Twenty-seventh  Georgia,  relieved  Cap- 


Chap.  XL.] 


BOMBARDMENT  OF  FORT  SUMTER,  S.  C. 


643 


tain  Jordan,  6 officers  and  100  men,  from  the  Nineteenth,  Twenty- 
third,  Twenty-seventh,  and  Twenty-eighth  Georgia. 

Enemy  continue  working,  but  are  seriously  interrupted  by  our 
shelling,  when  it  takes  place. 

December  11.— Lieutenant-Colonel  Elliott  being  slightly  wounded, 
and  having  placed  me  * temporarily  in  command  of  the  fort,  I would 
respectfully  beg  leave  to  submit  the  following  report  of  shots  fired 
at  the  fort  to-day : Rifled  shots,  hit,  125;  rifled  shots,  missed,  18; 
total  rifled  fired,  143.  Mortar  shells,  hit,  62;  mortar  shells,  missed,  15: 
Total  shots  and  shells  fired,  220. 

The  signal  corps  established  communication  this  evening,  but  can- 
not to-night. 

December  12. — At  9.30  yesterday  morning,  the  southwest  magazine 
exploded.  Owing  to  the  want  of  space,  the  ammunition  for  small- 
arms  and  howitzers,  amounting  to  about  150  pounds  of  powder,  was 
stored  in  the  inner  room.  The  commissary  stores  were  kept  princi- 
pally in  the  outer  room,  which  was  also  used  as  an  issuing  office. 
The  materials  in  these  rooms  were  immediately  ignited,  their  occu- 
pants killed,  and  those  stationed  in  the  adjoining  passages  either 
killed,  or  burned  with  greater  or  less  severity. 

The  passages  leading  to  the  lower  and  upper  tiers  of  casemates,  and 
those  casemates  themselves,  were  filled  instantly  with  the  most  dense 
smoke,  introduced  by  a blast  of  great  strength,  whose  flame  was  vis- 
ible from  the  room  occupied  as  headquarters.  In  total  darkness,  the 
occupants' rushed  from  the  stifling  smoke  to  the  open 'embrasures, 
leaving  their  arms  and  blankets  behind.  The  continuance  of  the 
smoke  prevented  any  prolonged  attempt  to  obstruct  the  progress  of 
the  fire. 

With  great  promptness,  a boat  was  sent  from  the  navy,  with  a sup- 
ply of  water-buckets.  The  telegraphic  apparatus  was  removed  and. 
located  at  another  position,  by  Mr.  W.  R.  Cathcart,  the  operator,  who 
behaved  remarkably  well;  but  he  was  compelled  to  retire  from  this 
second  position  by  the  advance  of  the  fire. 

The  signal  officers  made  repeated  efforts  to  attract  the  attention  of 
Sullivan’s  Island  and  Fort  Johnson,  but  were  unable  to  succeed  until 
a late  hour  in  the  day.  The  Sullivan’s  Island  corps  could  be  seen 
operating  with  other  points,  an  inattention,  when  it  was  known  that 
we  were  under  unusual  circumstances  and  cut  off  from  all  communi- 
cation, seems  to  me  reprehensible  in  the  extreme,  and  ought,  I think, 
to  be  looked  into. 

The  effect  of  the  fire  was  to  destroy  the  roof  of  the  magazine  and 
the  southwest  stairway,  the  woodwork  in  the  two  tiers  of  casemates, 
as  far  in  the  lower  as  the  old  sally-port. 

The  damage  done  will  not  materially  affect  the  defense  of  the 
work.  Captain  Johnson,  of  the  Engineers,  was  everywhere,  doing 
everything  that  man  could  do. 

Lieutenant  [L.  A.]  Harper,  Company  F,  Twenty-fifth  South  Caro- 
lina Y olunteers,  showed  great  gallantry  in  rescuing  burning  bodies 
from  the  smoke  and  flames.  Captain  Sellers,  of  the  same  company, 
gave  me  great  assistance  in  superintending  the  arrangement  last 
night,  at  a time  when  a slight  temporary  injury  prevented  me  from 
running  about. 

Soon  after  the  fire  became  apparent,  the  enemy  opened  fire,  throw- 
ing 143  rifled  shots,  of  which  18  missed,  and  77  mortar  shells,  of  which 

*Capt.  M.  H.  Sellers,  Twenty-fifth  South  Carolina. 


644  S.  0.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 


[Chap.  XL. 


15  missed.  The  deficiencies  in  men,  arms,  ammunition,  and  commis- 
sary stores  were  most  promptly  supplied  by  the  authorities. 

The  following  is  a list  of  the  casualties  : . 

Killed:  Capt.  Edward  D.  Frost,  assistant  commissary  of  subsist- 
ence; Sergeant  Hammond,  White’s  battalion  artillery;  Sergt.  John 
King,  Company  E,  Twenty-fifth  South  Carolina  Volunteers;  Thomas 
McEvoy,  Company  E,  Twenty-fifth  South  Carolina  V.olunteers;  B. 
Douglas,  Company  F,  Twenty-fifth  South  Carolina  Volunteers; 
Sergt.  Robert  Swanston,  Company  K,  First  South  Carolina  Artillery; 
P.  Cill,  Company  K,  First  South  Carolina  Artillery;  A.  Surten,  Com- 
pany K,  First  South  Carolina  Artillery;  W.  J.  Lee,  Company  I, 
Nineteenth  Georgia;  B.  Jones,  Company  H,  Nineteenth  Georgia;  J. 
T.  Ford,  Company  G,  Twenty-seventh  Georgia. 

Wounded:  Lieutenant-Colonel  Elliott,  slight,  in  head  and  ankle; 
Captain  [N.  B.]  Mazyck,  Company  E,  Twenty-fifth  South  Carolina 
Volunteers;  C.  F.  Vogler,  Company  E,  Twenty-fifth  South  Carolina 
Volunteers;  J.  Brennan,  Company  E,  Twenty-fifth  South  Carolina 
Volunteers  ; Sergt.  J.  E.  Prince,  Company  E,  Twenty-fifth  South 
Carolina  Volunteers;  R.  Flotwell,  Company  E,  Twenty-fifth  South 
Carolina  Volunteers;  T.  Callahan,  Company  E,  Twenty-fifth  South 
Carolina  Volunteers;  J.  H.  Hutson,  Company  E;  D.  H.  Clayton, 
Company  E;  C.  Fertic,  Company  F;  D,  J.  Avinger,  Company  F, 
Twenty-fifth  South  Carolina  Volunteers. 

Privates  [Edward]  Spigner,  Company  F,  Twenty-fifth  South  Caro- 
lina Volunteers ; M.  W.  Shuler,  Company  F,  Twenty-fifth  South 
Carolina  Volunteers;  P.  H.  Taylor,  Company  F,  Twenty-fifth  South 
Carolina  Volunteers;  R.  D.  Zimmerman,  Company  F,  Twenty-fifth 
South  Carolina  Volunteers;  W.  C.  Zimmerman,  Company  F,  Twenty- 
fifth  South  Carolina  Volunteers;  H.  Shirer,  Company  F,  Twenty-fifth 
South  Carolina  Volunteers;  B.  Buhn,  Company  B,  Nineteenth  Geor- 
gia Volunteers;  N.  C.  Jones,  Company  H,  Nineteenth  Georgia  Vol- 
unteers; Elisha  Harris,  Company  E,  Sixth  Georgia  Volunteers;  J. 
B.  Buckman,  Company  G,  Nineteenth  Georgia  Volunteers;  B.  F. 
Brooks,  Company  G,  Sixth  Georgia  Volunteers;  J.  M.  Huddleston, 
Company  E,  Nineteenth  Georgia  Volunteers;  W.  Dunning,  Com- 
pany H,  Twenty-seventh  Georgia  Volunteers;  N.  F.  Smith,  Com- 
pany C,  Nineteenth  Georgia  Volunteers;  J.  Hemphill.  Company  C, 
Twenty-seventh  Georgia  Volunteers;  H.  W.  Wells,  Company  E, 
Sixth  Georgia  Volunteers:  J.  Hodge,  Company  A,  Twenty-seventh 
Georgia  Volunteers;  J.  S.  Price,  Company  C,  Sixth  Georgia  Volun- 
teers; W.  B.  Chandler,  Company  K,  Sixth  Georgia  Volunteers;  W. 
B.  Leatherwood>  Company  I,  Nineteenth  Georgia  Volunteers;  H.  C. 
Adair,  Company  H,  Nineteenth  Georgia  Volunteers;  J.  M.  Carney, 
Company  A,  Sixth  Georgia  Volunteers;  Sergeant  Reed,  Company  K, 
Nineteenth  Georgia  Volunteers;  Private  W.  F.  Dannan,  Company 
A,  Twenty-seventh  Georgia  Volunteers;  Sergt.  J.  C.  Calhoun,  Com- 
pany A,  Twenty-seventh  Georgia  Volunteers;  Privates  L.  Mash- 
burn,  Company  K,  First  South  Carolina  Artillery;  J.  Leach,  Com- 
pany K,  First  South  Carolina  Artillery;  L.  W.  Dantzler,  Company 
F,  Twenty-fifth  South  Carolina  Volunteers;  Percival  Elliott,  signal 
corps;  B.  F.  Watson,  Company  D,  Sixth  Georgia  Volunteers. 

Recapitulation. 


Killed 11 

Wounded 41 

Total 52 


Chap.  XL.]  BOMBARDMENT  OF  FORT  SUMTER,  S.  0.  645 

[Indorsements.] 

Headquarters  Fifth  Military  District, 

Charleston , December  14,  1863. 

Respectfully  forwarded.  I would  respectfully  call  attention  to 
the  conduct  of  the  signal  corps  on  Sullivan’s  and  James  Islands, 
and  request  that  official  notice  be  taken  of  the  matter. 

ALFRED  RHETT, 

Colonel , Commanding. 

December  15,  1863. 

Have  the  conduct  of  the  signal  corps  referred  to  inquired  into  at 
once.  Have  the  names  of  the  officers  and  the  telegraph  operator,  re- 
ferred to  by  Colonel  Elliott,  mentioned  in  orders,  for  coolness  and 
zeal. 

G.  T.  B.  [BEAUREGARD], 

General,  Commanding. 

December  13. — The  steamer  did  not  communicate  last  night,  her 
commander  alleging  as  a reason  the  heavy  weather,  which  was, 
however,  not  bad  enough  to  prevent  the  passage  of  the  guard  and 
telegraph  boats. 

During  the  middle  and  latter  portions  of  the  night  the  wind  sub- 
sided and  a more  passable  opportunity  could  not  have  been  obtained. 
I am  surprised  that  movements  of  importance  should  be  left  to  the 
discretion  and  final  decision  of  irresponsible  and  timid  steamboat 
captains. 

The  passage  can  be  made  with  little  risk  by  running  down  on  the 
Sullivan’s  Island  side  until  the  light  is  shut  in  and  then  turning  for 
the  fort  and  keeping  in  its  shade  until  the  wharf  is  reached. 

I sent  by  the  guard-boat  last  night  the  report  of  yesterday  morn- 
ing and  the  day  before. 

The  passages  are  cooling  slowly;  the  gorge  wall  is  much  sunken  in 
over  the  exploded  magazine. 

We  have  no  rations  for  to-morrow.  Ho  fire  engine  has  come.  I 
would  like  the  garrison  reduced  to  the  original  number,  to-night,  if 
convenient. 

The  action  of  the  waves  has  made  the  slopes  inaccessible  at  pres- 
ent, though  at  the  loss  of  much  valuable  material.  No  firing  yes- 
terday. 


[Indorsements.] 

Headquarters  Fifth  Military  District, 

Charleston,  December  13,  1863. 

Respectfully  forwarded,  with  the  request  that  an  officer  be  put  in 
charge  of  these  boats,  at  least  until  the  emergency  is  over. 

ALFRED  RHETT, 

Colonel,  Commanding. 

Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston,  S.  C.,  December  13,  1863. 
Approved,  and  respectfully  referred  to  Major  [Hutson]  Lee  for  his 
information  and  immediate  attention. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General,  Commanding. 


S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 


tCHAP.  XL. 


646 


December  14. — I have  the  honor  to  report  that  Captain  [T.  J.] 
Abercrombie,  with  6 officers  and  100  men  from  the  Sixth,  Nineteenth, 
Twenty-seventh,  and  Twenty-third  Georgia  Regiments,  relieved  Cap- 
tain Bateman,  6 officers,  100  men,  from  Sixth,  Nineteenth,  Twenty- 
seventh,  and  Twenty-eighth  Regiments. 

The  steamer  effected  a landing  last  night  with  a supply  of  ordnance 
and  commissary  stores.  Casemates  cooling. 

December  15,  2 a.  m. — A day  of  extreme  quiet  yesterday.  Details 
from  the  garrison  were  assigned  to  the  engineer  for  the  purpose  of 
assisting  in  the  removal  of  rubbish.  The  work  of  repairs  goes  on 
well. 

December  16. — Captain  [J.  D.]  Franklin,  with  6 officers  and  100 
men  from  the  Sixth,  Twenty-third,  Twenty-seventh,  and  Twenty- 
eighth  Georgia  Regiments,  relieved  Captain  Harkey,  with  6 officers 
and  100  men  from  Sixth,  Nineteenth,  Twenty- third,  and  Twenty- 
seventh. 

Affairs  continue  quiet.  The  repair  of  the  damage  progressing. 
Transportation  and  water  were  supplied. 

December  17. — Capt.  R.  Chisolm,  with  6 officers  and  100  men  from 
the  Twenty-seventh  South  Carolina  Volunteers,  relieved  Captain 
Sellers,  with  6 officers  and  83  men  Twenty -fifth  South  Carolina  Vol- 
unteers. 

December  18. — On  my  return  to  my  post  yesterday  evening  [from 
Charleston],  I found  Captain  Johnson,  of  the  Engineers,  with  a high 
fever,  and,  as  there  were  no  comforts  here,  recommended  his  re- 
moval to  the  city  until  he  shall  have  recovered.  Mr.  Delisle  and 
Mr.  Hall,  assistant  engineers,  are  carrying  on  the  work. 

I penetrated  this  morning  to  the  portion  of  the  magazine  used  as 
a commissary  storehouse.  A small  amount  of  burning  material  is 
on  the  floor,  but,  by  the  use  of  buckets,  the  fire  will  soon  be  totally 
extinguished. 

The  work  of  revetting  and  obstructing  the  approach  to  the  works 
on  Morris  Island  is  still  going  forward. 

December  19. — We  have  still  been  unmolested  by  the  enemy,  and 
the  engineer  work  has  progressed  as  favorably  as  usual. 

December  22. — Last  night  Captain  [W.  G.  L.]  Butt,  of  the  Twenty- 
third  Georgia  Regiment,  with  6 officers  and  109  enlisted  men  of 
the  Nineteenth,  Twenty-third,  Twenty-seventh,  and  Twenty-eighth 
Georgia,  relieved  Captain  Abercrombie,  of  the  same  regiment,  and 
6 officers  with  101  enlisted  men  from  the  Sixth,  Nineteenth,  Twenty- 
third,  and  Twenty-seventh  Georgia. 

Last  night,  about  1 o’clock,  one  of  the  enemy’s  barges  appeared  off 
the  fort  and  continued  sounding  for  some  time.  It  finally  retired 
toward  Morris  Island. 

The  condition  of  the  fort  is  very  much  the  same  as  usual,  all 
changes  being  for  the  better. 

December  23,  11.30  a.  m. — I have  the  honor  to  report  quiet  this 
morning.  The  fleet  consists  of  the  Ironsides,  four  monitors,  one 
mortar-boat,  three  wooden  gunboats,  and  fourteen  sailing  vessels  in- 
side; four  blockaders  outside,  and  sixteen  craft  in  Light-House  Inlet. 
Gregg  is  undergoing  some  change,  but  its  nature  is  not  sufficiently 
developed  to  report  upon.  In  correction  of  yesterday’s  report,  I 
have  the  honor  to  state  that  the  barge  was  reported  as  taking  sound- 
ings. I am  not  certain  that  she  was  actually  engaged  in  that  work. 

December  24. — I have  the  honor  to  report  in  sight,  the  Ironsides, 
four  monitors,  four  gunboats,  two  mortar-boats,  one  of  which  was 


Chap.  XL.] 


BOMBARDMENT  OF  FORT  SUMTER,  S.  C. 


647 


concealed  yesterday;  three  tags  and  fifteen  sailing  vesssels  inside; 
four  blockaders,  one  tug  and  one  scliooner  outside,  and  twenty  ves- 
sels and  steamers  in  Light-House  Inlet.  Discrepancies  in  morning 
reports  may  arise  from  changes  in  the  grouping  of  the  vessels.  In 
some  cases  an  accurate  estimate  is  very  difficult.  One  and  sometimes 
two  monitors  come  up  on  picket  duty  at  night  within  1,400  yards  of 
the  fort.  No  perceptible  change  on  Morris  Island. 

Captain  Johnson  reported  for  duty  last  night. 

December  25. — I have  the  honor  to  report  the  Ironsides,  four  moni- 
tors, three  wooden  gunboats,  two  mortar-boats,  one  tug,  and  fourteen 
sailing  vessels  inside  this  morning.  Four  blockaders  and  eighteen 
vessels  in  Light-House  Inlet.  Heavy  firing  at  daylight  and  several 
hours  afterward  in  direction  of  Stono. 

Detachment  of  6 officers,  100  men,  from  Sixth,  Twenty-third, 
Twenty-seventh,  Twenty-eighth  Georgia  Regiments,  under  Captain 
Morse  [?],  relieved  Captain  [W.  H.]  Douglas,  6 officers,  and  100  men, 
from  Sixth,  Twenty-third,  Twenty-seventh,  Twenty-eighth  Georgia 
Regiments. 

The  accidental  explosion  of  an  old  shell  wounded  Privates  Theo- 
dore Icault  and  Joseph  Lee,  Company  K,  First  South  Carolina 
Artillery,  slightly. 

December  26. — At  12  yesterday  at  the  signals  of  a steam  whistle 
from  the  fleet  and  a gun  from  the  direction  of  Light-House  Inlet, 
the  enemy  raised  a flag  on  the  middle  battery.  It  may  be  a signifi- 
cant fact  that  at  the  first  attempt  the  bunting  went  up  union  down. 

December  27. — The  embrasure  formerly  occupied  by  the  10-inch 
columbiad  at  Gregg  is  closed  up.  The  large  Parrott  is  the  only  heavy 
gun  bearing  on  us  from  that  point;  its  embrasure  is  so  extended  as 
to  embrace  a very  large  field  of  fire. 

No  working  parties  have  been  observed  on  Morris  Island  during 
the  last  few  days. 

December  28. — I have  been  unable  to  make  a correct  estimation  of 
the  fleet  this  morning. 

Observations  yesterday  showed  only  one  light  gun  at  Gregg  bear- 
ing on  this  point,  where  there  were  four  previously. 

Captain  King,  with  41  men,  Company  D,  First  South  Carolina 
Artillery,  relieved  Captain  Gaillard,  Company  K (35  men),  last 
night. 

There  was  a good  deal  of  signaling  last  night  between  the  fleet  and 
Morris  Island. 

December  30. — The  embrasure  at  the  10-inch  columbiad  at  Gregg 
is  being  reopened. 

Captain  Hammond*  6 officers,  and  100  men,  from  Twenty-fifth 
South  Carolina  Volunteers,  relieved  Captain  Chisolm  and  force  from 
Twenty-seventh  South  Carolina  Volunteers  last  night. 

I have  the  honor  to  call  your  attention  to  the  fact  that  the  pro- 
posed iron  shield  for  the  casemate  battery  has  not  been  supplied. 

I am  led  to  the  subject  by  the  fact  that  preparations  are  on  foot 
for  mounting  guns  in  another  part  of  the  work.  The  mounting  of 
these  last  guns  implies  capacity  of  resistance  to  naval  ordnance  on 
the  part  of  our  walls. 

Observation  has  shown  that  the  effect  of  the  heavy  rifled  guns  of 
the  monitors  is  disastrous  to  our  brick  walls. 

While  the  power  of  the  fort  to  withstand  the  recent  bombardment 
was  yet  a problem  to  be  solved,  I refrained  from  pressing  the  subject, 
but  that  being  now  established,  I beg  leave  most  urgently  to  recom- 


648  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

mend  that  the  proposed  shield  he  applied  to  the  present  battery,  and 
that  another  be  prepared  for  the  battery  at  the  northwest  pan  coupe. 

The  application  of  this  armor  will  change  a position  the  most  in- 
secure, and  calculated  to  endure  but  a short  cannonade,  to  one  of 
comparative  invulnerability,  and  by  its  very  moral  effect  will  act 
most  powerfully  upon  the  enemy  in  our  favor.  I am  perfectly  con- 
fident that  this  iron  can  be  procured  by  vigorous  and  energetic 
measures. 


No.  6. 

Tabular  statements  of  shots  fired  against  Fort  Sumter , August 

12-December  31. 

AUGUST  12-SEPTEMBER  2,  INCLUSIVE* 


Date. 

Outside  the 

fort. 

Inside  the 

fort. 

m 

w 

"3 

o 

E-< 

August  12 

5 

3 

4 

12 

August  13 

6 

11 

17 

August  14 

10 

10 

August  16 

30 

10 

8 

48 

August  17  

445 

233 

270 

948 

August  18 

452 

244 

180 

876 

August  19 

408 

241 

131 

780 

August  20 

408 

296 

175 

879 

August  21 

445 

259 

219 

923 

August  22 

203 

216 

185 

604 

August  23 

282 

210 

141 

633 

August  24 

112 

14 

24 

150 

August  25 

62 

36 

77 

175 

August  26 

45 

45 

40 

130 

August  27 

4 

4 

August  28 

3 

3 

6 

August  30 

322 

168 

144 

634 

August  31  

34 

5 

17 

56 

September  1 

166 

95 

121 

382 

September  2 

12 

9 

17 

38 

Total  in  20  days 

3,450 

2,098 

1,757 

7,305 

SEPTEMBER  28-OCTOBER  3,  INCLUSIVE.t 


♦ 

Date. 

Struck. 

Missed. 

Total  fired. 

September  28 

48 

52 

100 

September  29  

34 

60 

94 

September  30 

45 

23 

68 

October  1 

75 

54 

129 

October  2 

44 

30 

74 

October  3 

78 

17 

95 

Total  X 

324 

236 

560 

| 

I 

* According  to  revised  statement  transmitted  by  Colonel  Rliett  to  department 
headquarters,  October  29,  1863. 
f Compiled  from  Elliott’s  daily  reports. 

% All  reported  as  shots  from  land  batteries. 


Cuap.  XL.] 


049 


BOMBARDMENT  OF  FORT  SUMTER,  S.  C. 

Tabular  statements  of  shots  fired  against  Fort  Sumter,  August  21-December  31— 

Continued. 

OCTOBER  26-NO YEMBER  30,  INCLUSIVE.* 


Date. 

Struck. 

Missed. 

J Total  fired. 

Shots  from  monitors. 

Shots  from  land  guns. 

Mortar  shells. 

1 

Night  shots. 

Mortar  shells  at  night. 

Total. 

Shots  from  monitors. 

Day  shots. 

Day  mortar  shells. 

Night  shots. 

Night  shells. 

Total. 

9 

165 

174 

23 

23 

197 

487 

116 

648 

93 

25 

118 

766 

72 

519 

112 

703 

88 

7 

95 

798 

120 

570 

180 

870 

88 

80 

160 

1,030 

127 

760 

56 

943 

68 

8 

76 

1,019 

October  31 

86 

382 

253 

60 

21 

802 

61 

120 

10 

12 

203 

1,005 

November  1 . . 

70 

259 

221 

47 

2 

599 

46 

87 

7 

2 

142 

741 

November  2 . . 

150 

195 

210 

51 

5 

611 

55 

135 

36 

226 

837 

November  3 .. 

114 

237 

161 

77 

589 

40 

17 

15 

72 

661 

November  4 . . 

48 

212 

90 

60 

410 

35 

42  1 

26 

103 

513 

November  5 . . 

78 

157 

173 

37 

1 

446 

43 

40 

21 

104 

550 

November  6 . . 

66 

122 

159 

39 

386 

14 

31 

34 

29 

108 

494 

November  7 . . 

56 

166 

47 

269 

15 

46 

16 

77 

346 

November  8 . . 

6 

60 

143 

42 

251 

5 

33 

45 

16 

99 

350 

November  9 . . 

18 

41 

20 

92 

132 

303 

7 

20 

5 

62 

50 

144 

447 

November  10  . . 

21 

38 

25 

20 

104 

9 

8 

25 

11 

53 

157 

November  11  . 

10 

83 

113 

3 

209 

13 

113 

33 

5 

164 

373 

November  12  . . 

2 

110 

67 

129 

172 

480 

34 

92 

51 

110 

287 

767 

November  13  . . 

65 

187 

79 

331 

9 

138 

26 

173 

504 

November  14  . . 

12 

129 

59 

129 

329 

9 

96 

39 

.... 

90 

234 

563 

November  15  . . 

10 

205 

132 

10 

357 

6 

115 

52 

2 

175 

532 

November  16  . . 

38 

245 

101 

5 

389 

5 

118 

55 

1 

179 

568 

November  17  . . 

9 

249 

122 

195 

575 

5 

117 

11 

75 

208 

783 

November  18  . . 

8 

186 

189 

3 

386 

4 

92 

96 

192 

578 

November  19  . . 

35 

249 

72 

356 

9 

113 

25 

147 

503 

November  20  . . 

10 

233 

83 

326 

8 

146 

41 

195 

521 

November  21  . . 

16 

139 

104 

259 

99 

45 

151 

410 

November  22  . . 

4 

80 

70 

154 

63 

24 

87 

241 

November  23  . . 

7 

111 

108 

226 

81 

62 

143 

369 

November  24  . . 

65 

115 

6 

186 

2 

33 

51 

11 

97 

283 

November  25  . . 

7 

8 

154 

169 

3 

3 

88 

94 

263 

November  26  . . 

18 

30 

77 

125 

5 

18 

92 

115 

240 

November  27  . . 

53 

65 

121 

239 

53 

40 

136 

229 

468 

November  28  . . 

14 

54 

15 

67 

1 

151 

8 

43 

6 

59 

116 

267 

November  29  . . 

4 

66 

70 

4 

74 

4 

82 

152 

November  30  . . 

11 

11 

11 

2 

13 

24 

Total 

1,046 

4,730 

3,978 

2, 997 

685 

13,436 

43 

| 

958 

2,090 

1,429 

364 

4,884 

18,320 

DECEMBER  1-31,  INCLUSIVE.t 


December  1 . . . 

4 

4 

2 

2 

6 

December  2. . . 

140 

35 

175 

40 

38 

78 

253 

December  3 . . . 

35 

35 

3 

3 

38 

December  4. . . 

56 

8 

26 

90 

21 

9 

29 

59 

149 

December  5... 

4 

4 

2 

2 

6 

December  9 . . . 

5 

5 

1 

1 

6 

December  11... 

125 

62 

187 

18 

15 

33 

220 

December  27. . . 

2 

2 

2 

December  31 . . . 

2 

...  1 

2 

2 



Total 

365 

109 

26 

500  .... 

89 

64  j 

29 

182 

682 

*As  corrected  by  Maj.  Stephen  Elliott,  jr.,  and  recorded  in  Journal  of  Operations 
in  Charleston  Harbor. 

f According  to  revised  statements  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Elliott. 


(350 


[Chap.  XL. 


S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

RECAPITULATION. 


Date. 

Struck. 

Missed. 

Total  fired. 

August  12-September  2 

5,548 

324 

13,436 

500 

1,757 

236 

4,884 

182 

7,305 

560 

18,320 

682 

September  28-October  3 

October  26-November  30 

December  1-31 

Grand  total 

19,808 

7,059 

26,867 

Memoranda.— The  projectiles  from  monitors  consist  of  8-inch  rifled  shells  of  the  pattern  known  as 
Schenkl.  The  shots  from  land  guns  by  day  consisted  at  first  of  10-inch  Parrott  bolts  and  percussion 
shells  and  of  100-pounder  Parrott  percussion  shells ; latterly  the  heavier  have  rarely  been  used.  The 
mortar  shells  are  exclusively  10-inch.  The  night  shots  are  30-pounder  Parrotts  with  time  fuses. 


No.  7. 

Return  of  Casualties  in  the  Confederate  forces  at  Fort  Sumter, 
August  1 2-December  11. 

[Compiled  from  nominal  lists  of  casualties,  returns,  &c.j 


Killed. 

Wounded. 

Date. 

Officers. 

Enlisted  men. 

Negroes. 

Officers. 

Enlisted  men. 

Negroes. 

Aggregate. 

August  12  

2 

7 

9 

August  17 

1 

3 

14 

18 

August  18 

3 

3 

August*  19  t-t  

1 

..... 

4 

5 

August  20  

1 

2 

August*  21  

5 

2 

7 

August  23  

1 

3 

1 

8 

Alienist,  30  

5 

5 

Spptpmlwr  1 

3 

3 

Rpptpmliftr  28  ....  

1 

1 

Sfiptp.mhftr  30  

1 

1 

OntfYhfvr  1 

1 

1 

Opf.rYhpr  96  

1 

1 

Optnhpr  97  ....  

1 

1 

flotnbpr  99  

1 

6 

7 

Optnhpr  30  

3 

3 

Optnhpr  31  

15 

4 

19 

Nnvftmhfir  1 

1 

1 

Nnvp.mbp'r  9 

1 

1 

Nnvfttnhpr  3 

6 

6 

NnvpmhflT'  6 

1 

1 

Nnvp.mhpr  6 

3 

12 

15 

Nnvpmhp.r  7 

1 

2 

3 

Nbvpmbpr  8 

2 

2 

Nrwpmbp'r  9 

1 

Nftvpmhpr  11  ....  

1 

1 

NYwpmbpr  12  

2 

1 

3 

NVwpmhpr  13  ....  

1 

1 

November  14 

3 

3 

Nnvpmhpr  15  

1 

1 

November  16 

1 

1 

November  19 

1 

Nnvpmhpr  20  

1 

3 

4 

November  21  

2 

2 

6 

10 

November  23  

1 

1 

1 

3 

November  24 

1 

1 

1 

3 

December  2 

1 

1 

Opppmhpr  11  

1 

10 

2 

39 

52 

Tnt.n.l 

1 

37 

5 

13 

129 

23 

208 

! 

Chap.  XL.] 


BOMBARDMENT  OF  FORT  SUMTER,  S.  C. 

No.  8. 


651 


Proceedings  of  a Council  of  Officers  held  at  Fort  Sumter  August  24. 

Fort  Sumter,  August  25,  18G3. 

Colonel  • I send  yon  two  copies  of  our  proceedings  of  yesterday 
afternoon,  one  for  Colonel  Gilmer  and  yourself;  the  other  please  have 

signed  and  returned.  . . , .£  , 

From  examination,  we  find  the  11-mch  gun  is  severely  if  not  seri- 
ously cracked  at  the  junction  of  the  right  trunnion  with  its  rimbase. 

Very  respectfully,  F H HARLESTON, 

Captain , First  South  Carolina  Artillery. 

Colonel  Harris, 

Corps  of  Engineers,  Charleston. 

[Inclosure.] 

Proceedings  of  a council  of  officers  convened  at  Fort  Sumter, 
Charleston  Harbor,  in  compliance  with  the  following  letter: 

Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston,  S.  C.,  August  24,  1863 — 10.30  a.  m. 

Colonel  Harris: 

Colonel  : General  Beauregard  directs  that  you  proceed  immedi- 
ately to  Fort  Sumter  (together  with  Colonel  Gilmer,  if  agreeable  to 
him),  to  confer  with  Colonel  Rhett,  his  chief  of  artillery,  and  Lieu- 
tenant Johnson,  Engineers,  to  report  upon  the  defenses  of  the  place, 
or  the  advisability  of  abandoning  the  work.  In  the  attempt  to  reach 
the  fort,  the  general  desires  that  a proper  regard  should  be  had  to 
your  own  safety.  You  must  not  undertake  the  trip  if  too  dangerous. 
Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant. 

A.  N.  TOUTANT  BEAUREGARD, 

Aide-de-Camp. 

In  compliance  with  the  above  letter,  a council  of  officers,  consist- 
ing of  Colonel  Gilmer,  C.  S.  Corps  of  Engineers ; Colonel  Rhett, 
First  South  Carolina  Artillery ; Colonel  Harris,  C.  S.  Corps  of  En- 
gineers ; Major  Blanding,  First  South  Carolina  Artillery ; Capt.  F. 
H.  Harleston,  First  South  Carolina  Artillery,  and  Lieutenant  John- 
son, Corps  of  Engineers,  met  at  Fort  Sumter,  on  the  afternoon  of 
August  24,  1863. 

Captain  Harleston  acted  as  recorder.  The  first  proposition  pro- 
posed for  consideration  was,  “The  present  offensive  condition  of  the 
fort.” 

Lieutenant  Johnson,  Engineer  Corps.  The  present  offensive  con- 
dition of  the  fort  is  very  limited;  one  very  fine  gun  (11-inch)  capable 
of  being  fired  with  advantage;  two  others  (10-inch)  at  disadvantage, 
in  consequence  of  shattered  condition  of  parapet. 

Captain  Harleston  of  same  opinion  as  Lieutenant  Johnson. 

Major  Blanding.  The  offensive  condition  of  the  fort  is  very  nearly 
destroyed;  only  one  gun  (11-inch)  that  can  be  used  with  any  advan- 
tage. 

Colonel  Harris  indorses  Lieutenant  Johnson’s  opinion. 


[Chap.  XL. 


G52  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

Colonel  Rhett.  In  action  it  would  be  impracticable  to  nse  but 
one  gun,  the  11-inch,  and  that  would  soon  be  disabled. 

Colonel  Gilmer  of  the  same  opinion  as  Lieutenant  Johnson. 

Second  proposition : Can  offensive  power  still  be  given  to  these 
guns  by  additional  cover  and  change  of  location? 

Lieutenant  Johnson.  Yes;  by  sand-bag  epaulement  and  timber 
platforms,  in  rear  of  and  between  present  platforms. 

Captain  Harleston.  Consider  it  impracticable  on  account  of  pres- 
ent shattered  condition  of  the  fort,  and  that  sufficient  time  will  not 
be  allowed. 

Major  Blanding.  Agree  with  Captain  Harleston. 

Colonel  Harris.  It  can  be  done  in  present  condition  of  fort,  if 
time  is  allowed. 

Colonel  Rhett.  Would  like  to  see  it  carried  out,  but  consider  it 
impracticable. 

Colonel  Gilmer.  It  is  entirely  within  the  capacity  of  the  engineer 
to  accomplish  the  work  in  the  manner  suggested  by  Lieutenant 
Johnson,  if  not  under  fire,  at  night  when  the  fire  ceases. 

Third  proposition : Capacity  of  the  fort  as  a defensive  position,  in 
its  present  condition,  against  a barge  attack  and  the  number  of  men 
needed. 

Lieutenant  Johnson.  I think  the  capacity  of  the  fort  sufficient, 
and  that  it  needs  300  muskets. 

Captain  Harleston.  I think  the  capacity  of  the  fort  sufficient, 
and  that  it  needs  from  250  to  300  muskets. 

Major  Blanding.  Without  outside  assistance,  in  its  present  condi- 
tion, 500  muskets  will  be  needed. 

Colonel  Harris.  Agree  with  Lieutenant  Johnson. 

Colonel  Rhett.  The  navy  will  not  be  able  to  assist  in  an  attack 
from  barges;  the  fort  can  be  held  in  its  present  condition  with  no 
less  force  than  400  effective  men,  and  a large  part  of  those  should  be 
kept  under  arms  during  the  night,  as  barges  can  come  within  50 
yards  without  being  seen. 

Colonel  Gilmer.  The  defensive  capacity  of  the  fort  is  sufficient  if 
garrisoned  with  300  effective  men,  giving  them  the  assistance  of 
splinter-proof  cover  and  sand-bag  epaulements. 

Fourth  proposition : Power  of  the  fort  to  preserve  its  present  de- 
fensive condition  against  probable  attacks. 

Lieutenant  Johnson.  Against  the  possible  combined  attacks  of 
the  fleet,  Parrott  guns,  and  mortars,  thirty-six  hours. 

Captain  Harleston.  Agree  with  Lieutenant  Johnson. 

Major  Blanding.  Against  a combined  vigorous  attack,  twelve 
hours. 

Colonel  Harris.  Cannot  undertake  to  answer  as  regards  time. 

Colonel  Rhett.  The  eastern  wall  is  much  shattered  by  the  fire  of 
7th  of  April,  and  has  never  been  repaired,  excepting  two  casemates, 
which  have  been  rebuilt  with  new  masonry;  the  wall  has  been  re- 
enforced in  the  caseinates  with  sand-bags ; it  has  also  been  seriously 
damaged  by  fire  from  the  land  batteries  on  Morris  Island.  My  opin- 
ion is  that  a fire  from  the  iron-clad  fleet  for  from  two  to  three  hours 
would  destroy  the  integrity  of  the  wall,  if  it  did  not  bring  it  down. 
A combined  fire  from  land  batteries  on  Morris  Island,  with  a mon- 
itor attack,  would  most  probably  bring  down  a large  part  of  the 
wall.  The  inner  corner  wall  of  eastern  magazine  is  now  cracked. 
The  fort  wall  adjoining  the  pier  of  the  upper  magazine  has  bfeen 
completely  shot  away,  and  I think  a concentrated  fire  of  two  hours 


Chap.  XL.]  BOMBARDMENT  OF  FORT  SUMTER,  S.  C.  653 

on  the  junction  of  the  upper  and  lower  magazines  would  render  the 
magazine  unsafe.  The  north  wall  of  the  upper  western  magazine  is 
unprotected  and  is  exposed  to  a reverse  fire  from  the  fleet,  firing  one 
or  two  points  north  of  perpendicular  to  east  face  of  fort.  A few 
shots  upon  this  wall,  striking  about  the  junction  of  upper  and  lower 
magazine,  would  render  the  magazine  unsafe.  This  place  is  now 
being  re-enforced  with  8 feet  of  sand.  The  roof  of  the  hospital  is 
now  only  protected  by  brick  arches,  that  would  be  crushed  through  by 
a few  shell. 

Colonel  Gilmer.  From  the  examination  I have  been  able  to  make 
as  to  the  effect  of  the  bombardment  up  to  this  time,  I think  the  fort 
will  remain  tenable  against  any  probable  attack  for  many  days,  if 
the  engineer  officers  be  supplied  with  the  labor  and  material  neces- 
sary to  re-enforce  points  comparatively  weak. 

ALFRED  RHETT, 

Colonel,  Commanding. 
ORMSBY  BLANDING, 

Major  First  South  Carolina  Artillery. 

F.  H.  HARLESTON, 

Captain,  First  South  Carolina  Artillery. 
JOHN  JOHNSON, 

First  Lieutenant,  Engineer  Corps,  Provisional  Army,  C.  S. 

The  foregoing  is  a correct  report  of  what  occurred  at  the  consul- 
tation of  the  officers  named,  but  we  do  not  consider  it  as  embodying 
our  opinion  in  full  as  to  “the  advisability  of  abandoning  the  work,” 
as  called  for  by  the  commanding  general  in  a letter,  a copy  of  which 
is  embraced  in  the  foregoing  proceedings. 

J.  F.  GILMER, 

Colonel,  and  Chief  of  Engineer  Bureau. 

D.  B.  HARRIS, 

Lieutenant-Colonel,  and  Chief  Engineer  of  Department. 


No.  9. 

Reports  of  Col.  Jeremy  F . Gilmer  and  Lieut.  Col.  D.  B.  Harris, 
C.  S.  Corps  of  Engineers,  of  inspections,  &c.,  August  24  and  Sep- 
tember 22,  1863. 


Office  of  the  Chief  Engineer, 
Charleston,  S.  C.,  August  25,  1863. 

General  : We  have  the  honor  to  report  that  in  compliance  with 
your  instructions  we  visited  Fort  Sumter  yesterday  afternoon,  made 
a careful  examination  of  its  condition,  and  held  a consultation  with 
a portion  of  its  officers,  a copy  of  which  we  hand  you  inclosed.  * In 
addition  to  our  answers  to  certain  questions  propounded  at  that  con- 
sultation, we  beg  leave  to  state  that,  in  our  opinion,  it  is  not  advisable 
to  abandon  the  fort  at  this  time.  On  the  contrary,  we  think  it  should 
be  held  to  the  last  extremity.  How  long  it  may  be  held  is  now  only 
a matter  of  conjecture,  but  there  are  many  elements  of  defense 
within  the  fort,  in  its  present  shattered  condition,  which,  if  properly 
used,  may  enable  a resolute  garrison  to  hold  it  for  many  days.  The 


* See  No.  8,  p.  651. 


[Chat.  XL. 


654  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

question  of  its  abandonment,  whenever  it  may  arise,  we  respectfully 
suggest  should  be  determined  by  the  commanding  general,  and  not 
left  to  the  discretion  of  the  commander  of  the  fort. 

We  have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  yours, 

J.  F.  GILMER, 

Colonel,  and  Chief  of  Engineer  Bureau. 

D.  B.  HARRIS, 

Lieutenant- Colonel,  and  Chief  Engineer  of  Department. 

General  G.  T.  Beauregard, 

Commanding,  &c. 

[Indorsement.] 

Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston,  S.  C.,  August  26,  1863. 

The  opinion  of  Colonel  Gilmer  and  Lieutenant-Colonel  Harris, 
of  the  Engineers,  is  approved.  Fort  Sumter  must  be  held  to  the 
last  extremity,  i.  e.,  not  surrendered  until  it  becomes  impossible  to 
hold  it  longer  without  an  unnecessary  sacrifice  of  human  life.  Evac- 
uation of  the  fort  must  not  be  contemplated  one  instant  without 
positive  orders  from  these  headquarters. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General,  Commanding. 

ADDENDA. 

Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston,  September  23,  1863. 

General  : In  compliance  with  your  wishes,  I visited  Fort  Sumter 
last  evening,  accompanied  by  Colonel  Harris,  chief  engineer  of  this 
department,  and  made  a special  examination  into  the  condition  of  the 
casemates  of  the  northeast  front  of  the  fort. 

I found  three  of  the  lower  casemates  to  be  in  such  condition  as  to 
justify  the  effort  to  mount  guns  in  them,  and  to  protect  them  from 
above  and  in  rear  from  the  enemy’s  shot.  For  this  purpose  the 
broken  materials  of  the  adjacent  parts  can  be  used.  A mass  of  mor- 
tar and  broken  bricks,  to  the  depth  of  7 or  8 feet,  can  be  piled  in  the 
casemates  in  the  second  tier  and  thus  give  comparative  safety  to 
guns  in  the  lower  tier  against  all  vertical  shot.  A heavy  mass  of  the 
same  materials  can  be  erected  to  form  a parados  against  reverse  shot. 
To  give  shape  to  this  structure,  it  will  be  necessary  to  use  sand-bag 
revetments,  but  the  quantity  required  can  probably  be  furnished 
from  the  supplies  on  hand  and  from  others  that  we  may  hope  to  col- 
lect. It  may  be  practicable,  also,  to  mount  a fourth  gun  in  the  pan 
coupe  between  the  east  and  northeast  faces,  and  give  it  protection 
from  direct,  reverse,  and  vertical  fires.  On  this  point  the  engineer 
officer  on  the  station  was  directed  to  make  full  examinations  and  re- 
port as  early  as  practicable.  Directions  were  given  to  the  command- 
ing officer  to  ascertain  what  guns  now  at  the  fort  are  serviceable 
and  best  suited  for  remounting. 

The  engineer  officer  was  also  instructed  by  Colonel  Harris  to  em- 
ploy a part  of  his  laboring  force  at  once  in  removing  all  rubbish  from 
the  three  casemates,  which  it  is  proposed  to  strengthen,  and  to  com- 
mence the  work  of  protecting  the  arches  above  and  building  the  cover 
in  rear. 

It  was  stated  that  at  least  one  10-inch  columbiad  was  now  available 


Chap.  XL.] 


BOMBARDMENT  OF  FORT  SUMTER,  S.  C. 


655 


at  the  fort  and  probably  two  in  serviceable  condition;  also  two  or 
three  42-pounder  rifled  guns,  banded  ; these  will  be  suitable  guns  to 
arm  the  casemates  when  placed  in  readiness.  Carriages  will  have  to 
be  repaired  and  new  ones  made,  probably,  for  the  10-inch  columbiads. 

I respectfully  state  that  I observed  through  last  evening  and  night 
more  firing  from  our  batteries  than  had  been  customary  for  three  or 
four  preceding  days.  This  is  not  in  accordance  with  the  views  ex- 
pressed by  you  to  me  yesterday.  I am  not  informed  as  to  the  cause 
of  the  increased  firing. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  F.  GILMER, 

Major-General , and  Second  in  Command . 

General  G.  T.  Beauregard. 

[Indorsement.] 

Headquarters  Department  of  South  Carolina,  &c., 

Charleston,  September  23,  1863. 

Colonel  Harris  was  this  day  ordered  verbally  to  put  in  position  in 
casemates  designated,  well  protected  from  rear  and  vertical  fires,  two 
10-inch  columbiads:  one  42-pounder  rifled:  *vne  32-pounder  rifled. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General,  Commanding . 


Hdqrs.  5th  Mil.  Dist.,  Dept.  S.  C.,  Ga.,  and  Fla., 

Charleston,  November  13,  1863. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  state  that  in  pursuance  of  the  views 
of  the  commanding  general,  having  visited  Fort  Sumter  in  com- 
pany with  Colonel  Harris,  and  consulted  with  Captain  Johnson,  of 
the  Engineer  Corps,  and  Major  Elliott,  commanding,  I have  the 
honor  to  submit  the  following  views  : 

1.  I find  that  there  are  eight  casemates  outside  of  the  bomb-proofs 

to  be  held  by  our  men,  now  capable  of  sheltering  some  500  or  600  men 
from  mortar  shell.  . 

2.  That  any  mine  capable  of  blowing  up  Abolitionists  taking  shel- 
ter in  said  casemates  and  causing  the  debris  to  fall  upon  and  crush 
them  would  be  liable  to  the  objection  that  the  blast  would  be  dan- 
gerous to  our  own  men. 

3.  That  mines  and  torpedoes  are  uncertain,  and  not  to  be  relied  on 
entirely. 

4.  That  should  they  explode  it  might  be  still  within  the  power  of 
the  enemy  to  throw  re-enforcements  of  sufficient  power  into  the 
work. 

5.  That  shell  thrown  into  a work  with  high  walls  from  a distance 
of  1,500  to  1,800  yards  (the  distance  of  our  batteries  from  Sumter), 
cannot  be  relied  on  alone  to  reduce  the  work,  as  the  loss  of  life  is  not 
as  great  as  might  be  apprehended,  as  shown  by  the  bombardment 
of  Battery  Wagner  and  of  Fort  Sumter  within  the  last  few  days. 
Twelve  hundred  and  seventy-one  have  been  fired;  826  have  struck, 
and  5 negroes  and  2 soldiers  have  been  slightly  wounded. 

6.  That  the  bomb-proofs  are  not  now  in  a condition  to  be  available 
for  offensive  operations  against  an  enemy  established  in  the  fort. 

7.  That  our  great  advantage  over  the  enemy  in  our  present  posi- 
tion is  an  effective  fire,  at  short  range,  upon  an  enemy  in  barges,  com- 


656  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

paratively  helpless,  and  attempting  to  land  npon  an  unknown  and 
defended  work  of  superior  position ; which  advantage  we  ought  not 
to  forego  unless  upon  the  moral  certainty  of  success. 

8.  That  in  the  event  of  the  commanding  general  determining  upon 
the  adoption  of  the  plan  proposed,  which  plan  might  confuse  and 
paralyze  the  enemy  from  its  daring  and  novelty,  everything  would 
depend  upon  the  skill  of  the  engineers  in  the  preparation  and  lay- 
ing of  mines  and  torpedoes,  in  the  blowing  down  of  walls  and  case- 
mates that  might  afford  protection  to  an  enemy  from  our  shell,  and 
the  arrangement  of  our  bomb-proofs  for  offensive  operations  against 
an  enemy  establishing  himself  in  the  work. 

9.  In  conclusion,  although  success  by  the  plan  proposed  would  be 
a most  brilliant  exploit,  we  take  the  great  risk  of  not  being  able 
again  to  dislodge  an  enemy,  who,  from  his  devices  and  resources  is 
more  to  be  dreaded  when  he  has  once  gained  a foothold  than  in  a 
hand-to-hand  conflict. 

Respectfully  submitted. 

ALFRED  RHETT, 

Colonel,  Commanding 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan, 

Chief  of  Staff. 

[Indorsement.] 

Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , S.  C.,  November  13,  1863. 

Respectfully  referred  to  Maj.  Gen.  J.  F.  Gilmer  and  Col.  D.  B. 
Harris,  for  their  views.  Colonel  Harris  will  submit  to  General 
Gilmer  the  plan  explained  by  me  to  Colonel  Rhett  and  himself. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General,  Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston,  S.  C.,  November  15,  1863, 

General  : In  compliance  with  instructions  contained  in  your  in- 
dorsement on  Colonel  Rhett’s  letter  of  the  13th  instant,  Colonel 
Harris  has  explained  to  me  the  plan  for  the  future  defense  at  Fort 
Sumter,  as  described  by  you  verbally  to  himself  and  Colonel  Rhett, 
and  I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  views  thereon : 

The  plan  as  described  by  Colonel  Harris  is  as  follows  : Prepare 
the  bomb-proofs  in  the  fort  so  as  to  command  all  points  within  the 
works  by  musketry  fire ; place  mines  and  torpedoes  in  the  parade; 
demolish  all  cover  not  needed  by  the  garrison,  or  else  place  mines 
within  such  cover;  prepare  batteries  on  Sullivan’s  Island  and  other 
points  to  fire  shell  into  the  fort,  and  shot  to  protect  the  approaches; 
then  reduce  the  garrison  and  withdraw  it  entirely  from  the  broken 
walls  to  the  bomb-proof  shelter  prepared  as  first  described. 

1.  By  withdrawing  the  reduced  garrison  from  the  walls  of  the  fort 
to  the  bomb-proofs  for  offensive  defense,  the  amount  of  supplies  re- 
quired would  be  less  than  at  present,  and  could  with  more  certainty 
be  delivered  at  the  fort  under  the  enemy’s  fire. 

2.  The  exposure  of  the  troops  in  this  method  of  defense,  under  the 
heavy  bombardments  of  the  enemy,  would  be  much  less  than  under 
the  present  system. 


Chap.  XL.]  BOMBARDMENT  OF  FORT  SUMTER,  S.  C.  657 

3.  But  the  reduction  in  supplies  and  the  diminished  exposure  of 
the  troops  are  obtained  at  the  great  risk  of  allowing  the  enemy  to 
enter  the  fort,  where,  with  his  facilities  and  energy,  it  is  to  be  appre- 
hended that  he  may  secure  a lodgment. 

We  also  abandon  the  great  moral  advantage  of  meeting  the  enemy 
at  a moment  when  more  or  less  confusion  is  inevitable  with  him; 
that  is,  when  the  approach  is  made  to  the  broken  walls  in  boats,  and 
the  men  are  being  transferred  to  the  unstable  and  unknown  footing 
of  broken  bricks,  stone,  and  other  material,  and  this  under  a plunging 
fire  from  our  own  troops  on  the  top  of  the  wall.  If  the  enemy  be 
allowed  to  pass  this  critical  moment  of  debarkation  unmolested,  he 
will  be  much  encouraged  and  even  stimulated  to  renewed  efforts. 

4.  The  whole  safety  of  the  place  is  made  to  depend  upon  quite  a 
limited  number  of  men,  as  arrangements  of  the  fire  of  but  few  can 
be  provided  for  in  the  bomb-proofs;  upon  mines  and  torpedoes  (which 
are  attended  with  many  uncertainties),  and  upon  the  accuracy  of 
curvated  fires,  at  distances  varying  from,  say,  1,700  to  2,400  yards. 
To  make  firing  at  these  distances  accurate,  previous  practice  is  neces- 
sary, and  even  then,  unless  the  gunners  are  very  skillful,  many  of 
the  shell  will  fall  wide  of  the  mark;  and,  further,  it  must  be  remem- 
bered that  in  this  instance  the  firing  will  probably  be  made  at  night 
and  under  the  excitement  of  a sudden  call  to  the  battery.  Nor  must 
it  be  forgotten  that  the  attack  upon  Fort  Sumter  may  be  supported 
by  a vigorous  demonstration  of  the  naval  forces  upon  the  batteries 
on  Sullivan’s  Island,  thus  distracting  their  attention  entirely  from 
the  main  attempt  upon  the  fort. 

5.  In  the  interior  of  Fort  Sumter  there  are  many  points  of  shelter 
furnished  by  piers,  arches,  and  broken  masonry,  some  of  which  may 
be  destroyed  by  blasting,  preparatory  to  the  defense  suggested ; but 
it  will  be  very  difficult,  if  not  impossible,  to  deprive  the  enemy  en- 
tirely of  cover,  if  he  be  permitted  once  to  enter  the  work.  Whatever 
is  to  be . done  to  destroy  the  shelter  should  be  done  previous  to  any 
attack,  for,  under  the  excitement  of  an  assault,  the  best  arrangements 
for  exploding  mines  are  very  liable  to  fail. 

6.  If  the  enemy  were  allowed  to  land  at  the  foot  of  the  breach  of 
the  east  front  without  resistance,  it  is  to  be  feared  that  he  might 
proceed  at  once  to  construct  cover  in  the  form  of  a traverse  that 
would  protect  him  from  all  direct  fires  coming  from  Sullivan’s 
Island,  and  then  cover  himself  in  front  toward  the  top  of  the  wall; 
in  other  words,  crown  the  crest  of  the  long  breach,  thus  placing  him- 
self in  position  to  command  the  whole  interior  of  the  fort,  making 
it  impossible  for  the  garrison  to  venture  from  one  point  of  cover  to 
another. 

The  east  front  cannot  be  seen  by  any  of  our  batteries  on  James 
Island,  and  by  only  a part  of  those  on  Sullivan’s  Island.  The  rear 
of  the  enemy  in  the  supposed  lodgment  on  this  front  would  be  per- 
fectly protected  by  his  navy  and  his  batteries  on  Morris  Island. 
He  would  soon  command  the  communication  between  Cumming’s 
Point  and  the  fort  by  bringing  his  monitors  in  such  proximity  as  to 
force  all  our  gunboats  back  toward  the  city.  Thus  he  would  be  enabled 
to  bring  up  material  to  make  his  lodgment  secure  and  permanent. 

7.  The  bomb-proof  defenses  in  Fort  Sumter  may  be  considered  as 
having  the  relation  to  the  breach  in  the  fort  that  the  redoubt  and 
cavalier  have  to  breaches  in  the  demilune  and  bastion,  in  which 
cases  a vigorous  defense  struggles  for  the  mastery  of  the  breach  to 
the  last  extremity. 

42  R R — VOL  XXVIII,  PT  I 


658  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

8.  After  a careful  and  anxious  study  of  the  whole  subject,  I must 
respectfully,  but  earnestly,  recommend  that  the  defense  of  Fort 
Sumter  be  made  in  the  future  as  in  the  past ; that  is  to  say,  by  being 
in  readiness  to  meet  the  enemy  on  his  first  approach,  thus  preserving 
to  ourselves  all  the  moral  advantages  of  meeting  him  at  the  threshold, 
and  when  he  has  gained  no  confidence  and  is  laboring  under  all  the 
disadvantages  of  confusion  and  uncertainty. 

9.  Adhering  to  the  present  method  of  defense,  I would  advise  that 
the  bomb-proofs  in  the  fort  should  be  arranged  with  loop-holes,  and 
other  conveniences  for  firing  into  the  interior  of  the  work,  as  it  may 
be  of  advantage  to  us  in  the  last  extremity.  But  these  fires  should 
not  be  our  dependence  now.  I would  also  advise  that  as  far  as  prac- 
ticable splinter-proofs  should  be  constructed  for  the  better  protection 
of  men  kept  on  the  broken  walls,  to  guard  against  the  approach  of 
the  enemy  in  barges,  and  that  the  communications  for  ascending  the 
walls  from  the  interior  should  be  made  as  numerous  and  as  con- 
venient as  possible,  so  that  the  garrison  can  be  taken  quickly  from 
the  shelter  to  meet  the  enemy  upon  the  threshold;  that  well  ar- 
ranged chevaux-de-frise  be  placed  across  all  the  breaches;  that 
broken  bottles  and  other  glass  be  thrown  upon  the  exterior  slopes, 
and  that  mines,  if  practicable,  be  placed  beneath  the  outer  ruins  for 
explosion  at  the  moment  of  assault ; also,  that  an  appeal  be  made  to 
the  naval  commanders  to  place  additional  picket-boats  east  and  south 
of  the  fort,  to  give  warning  of  the  approach  of  the  enemy. 

1 0.  If  the  enemy’s  fire  should  prevent  steamers  landing  at  the  fort, 
by  extra  exertions  the  garrison  can  be  supplied  by  row-boats,  and 
when  the  water  is  smooth  perhaps  flats  with  sweeps  might  be  em- 
ployed. 

All  of  which  is  respectfully  submitted. 

The  letter  of  Colonel  Rhett  on  this  subject  is  herewith  returned. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  F.  GILMER, 

Major-General , and  Second  in  Command. 

General  G.  T.  Beauregard, 

Commanding. 


Office  Chief  Engineer  Department, 

Charleston , November  16,  1863. 

General  : Upon  a careful  consideration  of  the  subject  of  the  pro- 
posed bomb-proof  defense  of  Fort  Sumter,  I am  of  the  opinion  that 
it  may  be  resorted  to  with  good  prospect  of  success,  whenever  cir- 
cumstances should  render  it  expedient  to  abandon  the  defense  from 
the  parapet,  and  recommend  that  all  the  necessary  preparations  for 
such  a defense  be  made  as  soon  as  practicable.  The  present  mode 
of  defense  from  the  parapets,  I think,  should  be  adhered  to  until  the 
loss  of  life  on  the  parapets,  or  our  inability  to  maintain  bomb-proof 
cover  for  the  requisite  garrison  and  working  force  for  such  a de- 
fense should  render  a resort  to  the  bomb-proof  defense  advisable. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  yours,  very  respectfully, 

D.  B.  HARRIS, 

Colonel , and  Chief  Engineer  Department. 

General  G.  T.  Beauregard, 

Commanding. 


Chap.  XL.] 


BOMBARDMENT  OF  FORT  SUMTER,  S.  C. 

No.  10. 


659 


Reports  of  Capt.  John  Johnson,  C.  S.  Engineers,  of  operations 

August  12-23. 

Fort  Sumter,  August  15,  1863. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  report  for  the  last  twenty-four  hours, 
that  a working  force  numbering  470  laborers  and  mechanics  has  been 
engaged  in  two  reliefs,  day  and  night,  upon  the  defenses  of  the  fort. 
The  work  accomplished  consisted  during  the  day  of  erecting  two  sand- 
bag traverses  on  eastern  ramparts,  and  filling  over  the  western  maga- 
zine arches.  The  traverses  were  continued  during  the  night,  and  one 
is  very  near  completion,  the  one  adjoining  the  11 -inch  Dahlgren  ; the 
other  is  brought  up  to  level  of  parapet.  The  carpenters  and  some 
force  were  also  engaged  during  day  in  sawing  up  and  taking  away 
logs  of  crib  work  under  east  scarp  wall,  in  order  to  make  blindage 
for  shelter  of  troops  under  gorge  wall  on  interior  of  fort. 

The  night  work  accomplished  was  the  discharging  of  some  3,000 
bags  of  sand,  being  all  received,  and  the  building  up  of  about  2,800 
feet  on  exterior  of  gorge  wall  to  a height  in  southwest  re-entrant 
made  by  brick  re-enforce  of  west  magazine,  of  half  the  pitch  of  sec- 
ond-story rooms.  This  level  is  sustained  for  some  50  feet  from  the 
re-entrant  eastwardly  toward  sally-port. 

The  fort  was  struck  yesterday  five  times  : twice  in  morning,  6 
o’clock,  from  land  Parrotts;  once  by  shell,  11  a.  m.,  from  gunboat ; 
twice  again,  6.30  p.  m.,  by  land  Parrotts.  For  particulars  of  damage, 
localities,  penetration,  &c. , I beg  leave  to  refer  to  memorandum  now 
preparing,  to  be  handed  up  to-morrow.  I report  with  pleasure  the 
arrival  last  night  of  two  assistant  engineers,  Messrs.  E.  J.  White  and 
Mikell. 

Respectfully  submitted. 

JNO.  JOHNSON, 

First  Lieutenant,  Engineer  Corps . 

Capt.  W.  F.  Nance,  Assistant  Adjutant-General. 


Fort  Sumter,  August  15,  1863. 

Captain  : Herewith  I have  the  honor  to  append  descriptive  memo- 
randa of  the  different  shots  received  by  the  fort  during  the  fire  from 
the  enemy’s  land  batteries  on  Morris  Island  and  from  the  wooden 
gunboats  during  the  13th  and  14th  instant. 

The  batteries  situated  to  the  north  and  at  the  foot  of  Gregg’s  Hill, 
Morris  Island,  where  the  enemy  have  their  observatory,  are  mounted 
chiefly  with  Parrott  guns  and  two  heavy  mortars.  I think  there  are 
eight  or  ten  Parrotts,  from  30-pounders  upward. 

On  the  morning  of  the  12tli  instant,  they  opened  at  not  less  than 
5,000  yards  with  one  200-pounder  Parrott,  throwing  shells  weighing 
150  pounds  into  and  over  the  fort.  A report  of  the  damage  sustained 
by  the  fort  during  that  day  was  made  by  me  to  the  chief  engineer  of 
South  Carolina,  Major  Echols.  Besides  shell  this  gun  threw  solid 
beveled-top  bolts,  weighing,  I suppose,  the  full  200  pounds,  the  cali- 
ber. being  8 inches.  The  gunboats,  two  or  three  in  number,  lie  off  the 
east  front  of  the  fort  on  the  prolongation  of  the  gorge  line,  distant 
about  4,500  yards,  apparently  in  the  entrance  of  North  Channel  and 


660 


S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  ELA. 


[Chap.  XL. 


outside  the  bar.  They  fire  sometimes  entirely  over  the  fort,  one  shot 
falling  nearly  a mile  to  the  west. 

Memoranda  of  damage  sustained  by  enemy's  fire , August  13. 

No.  1.  Fired  about  5.30  a.  m.  150-pounder  Parrott  shell  from  land 
battery;  struck  parapet  of  gorge  over  east  return  of  west  magazine 
counter-fort ; entered  and  exploded  2-J  feet  below  superior  slope, 
nearly  penetrating  and  entirely  shattering  the  wall,  throwing  inside 
a bushel  of  bricks  and  displacing  on  outside,  where  they  lodged  on  top 
of  counter-fort,  about  three  cart-loads  loosened  brick.  (Gorge  wall 
4 feet  3 inches  thick,  laid  in  section  with  lime,  mortar,  and  asphaltum 
beds.)  The  most  striking  effect  of  this  shot  was  to  hump  or  bow 
upward  for  20  inches  high  the  superior  slope  for  a length  along  the 
parapet  of  12  feet.  The  pieces  or  shell  were  taken  from  the  shat- 
tered parapet  near  the  interior  slope.  No  casualty. 

No.  2.  Soon  after,  same  kind  of  shell  from  same  gun  struck  edge 
of  wharf  below  gorge,  and  glancing  upward  struck  and  burst  close 
above  a window-sill  of  second  story,  knocking  inward  a few  bricks 
to  a depth  of  6 inches.  Damage  slight. 

No.  3.  Fired  about  11  a.  m.  from  gunboat,  probably  a 100-pounder 
Parrott  shot ; struck  the  east  scarp  wall,  second  pier,  south  of  east 
pan  coupe , about  the  level  of  first  tier  arches,  making  crater  of  2£ 
f^et  diameter  and  having  penetration  of  2 feet  3 inches.  Damage 
very  slight. 

No.  4.  Gunboat,  same  time  of  day;  passed  over  east  parapet  and 
barracks,  and  descending  exploded  immediately  under  mortar 
mounted  in  parade,  western  half.  Explosion  only  raised  one  angle 
of  platform  about  12  inches,  requiring  it  to  be  relaid. 

No.  5.  Gunboat,  same  time  of  day;  struck  top  of  east  magazine 
counter-fort,  passing  between  sand-bag  re-enforce  and  the  brick  wall 
of  gorge.  Slight  displacement  of  sand-bags,  but  none  thrown  down. 
The  bags  are  laid  on  top  of  counter-fort,  and  have  base  of  6 feet  to 
height  of  exterior  crest,  where  they  are  about  4 feet  thick. 

No.  6.  Two  Parrott  200-pounders  opened  about  5 p.  m.  Shell 
(burst  and  lying  in  hole)  struck  midway  on  west  magazine  counter- 
fort ; new  brick  masonry,  mortar  inside  still  wet  and  soft ; laid  two 
months  ago.  Struck  about  20  feet  above  wharf;  crater  4 feet  3 
inches  in  diameter;  extreme  penetration,  4 feet,  leaving  5 feet  of  new 
masonry  still  outside  of  gorge  wall  back  of  magazine.  Shell  brought 
up  on  granite  block. 

No.  7.  Same  time,  same  gun.  No  proof  of  character  of  missile. 
Struck,  glancing  upon  rounded  return  of  east  end  of  west  magazine 
counter-fort,  near  the  top,  cracking  top  of  counter-fort  back  to  old 
wall,  displacing  bricks  in  form  of  an  irregular  parallelogram  8 feet 
high,  5 feet  wide,  and  2 deep,  the  crater  running  out  to  top  of  coun- 
ter-fort and  down  to  a point  8 feet  below,  cracks  radiating  from  this* 
point  some  2 feet  lower.  This  portion  of  counter-fort  has  started 
from  main  wall  about  a quarter  of  an  inch. 

No.  8.  Shot  same  time,  same  gun.  Solid  bolt  struck  gorge  wall  8 
feet  from  center  of  last  shot  (mark  No.  7)  and  to  the  east  of  it,  on 
level  of  rampart  arches,  just  about  where  one  springs  from  the  pier; 
crater  (largest  yet)  4 feet  6 inches  high  and  4 feet  wide,  irregularly 
elliptical;  impress  of  shot  plainly  visible;  extreme  penetration,  3 
feet  6 inches,  on  slant  line  of  fire;  square  to  face  of  wall  only  3 feet. 
Shot  was  seen  to  rebound  from  wall. 


Chap.  XL.]  BOMBARDMENT  OF  FORT  SUMTER,  S.  C.  661 

No.  9.  Same  time,  same  gun.  Solid  shot,  hitting  gorge  wall  just 
under  corbels  or  on  level  of  terre-plein  ramparts,  over  sally-port ; 
crater  3 feet  6 inches  in  diameter;  penetration  appears  to  be  same. 
Impress  and  channel  cut  by  shot  visible  from  below. 

No.  10.  Same  time,  same  gun.  Shell  probably  exploded  on  strik- 
ing granite  lintel  over  second-story  loop-hole  window,  penetrating 
into  it  6 inches  and  flaking  off  a few  bricks  from  above. 

No.  11.  Same  time,  same  gun.  Shot  lodged  in  wall ; having  struck 
granite  sill  of  second-story  loop-hole  east  of  sally-port,  crashed 
through,  penetrating  into  brick  3 feet  6 inches,  making  hole  5 feet 
high  and  2 feet  wide.  # 

No.  12.  Same  time,  same  gun.  Grazed  gorge  parapet,  carried 
away  some  of  rampart  terrace  wall,  and  buried  itself  in  parade. 

No.  13.  Same  as  last. 

Of  the  3 gunboat  shots,  none  were  very  damaging.  Of  the  10 
land-battery  shots,  4 were  highly  so,  the  rest  being  more  or  less 
trifling  or  ordinary  in  their  effects.  Two  Parrott  guns  opened  from 
land  batteries  in  afternoon. 

Memoranda  of  damage  sustained  by  enemy’s  fire,  August  14. 

Shot  No.  1.  Land  battery,  8-inch  Parrott  rifle,  one  gun  only,  about 
6 a.  m.  Struck  gorge  wall  second-story  window  pier  near  edge  of 
loop-hole,  throwing  out  one-third  of  pier  from  top  of  one  to  sill  of 
other;  missile  passed  in  where  chimney  flue  is  separated  from  gorge 
wall  by  a kind  of  ventilator  communicating  from  one  room  to 
another,  and  brought  up  against  sand-bag  filling  of  interior  splay  of 
adjoining  window.* 


No  sign  of  the  missile  visible.  I think  it  must  have  dropped  down 
ventilator  to  the  level  of  window-sill,  as  from  A to  B. 

No.  2.  Same  time,  same  gun.  Missile  struck  gorge  parapet  just 
below  cornice  and  demolished,  without  carrying  away,  18  inches  from 
superior  slope  and  6 feet  along  line  of  gorge.  Extent  of  injury  not 
great,  but  bricks  completely  crushed  where  they  lay. 

No.  3.  Shell  from  gunboat,  fired  about  11  a.  m.,  exploded  in  south 
room,  third  story,  western  barracks.  A shot  from  land  battery  on 
the  12th  had  already  penetrated  the  roof  of  this  room.  The  shell 
finished  it  by  uncovering  two-thirds  of  roof  arching  and  carrying 
away  half  of  partition  wall  9 inches  thick. 


* This  sand-bag  filling  was  plainly  visible  at  the  end  of  the  opening. 


662  S.  C.  AND  a A.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 


[Chap.  XL. 


No.  4.  Land  battery,  5.30  p.  m.  Struck  gorge  wall  just  above 
lintel  of  second-story  window,  making  crater  2 by  3 feet;  penetration, 
2i  feet.  Position  is  shown  at  C on  sketch  of  No.  1. 

No.  5.  Land  battery,  same  time.  Struck  adjoining  window  at 
granite  lintel,  level  of  window  next  to  No.  4,  thus  making  3 shots 
quite  near  to  each  other. 

The  firing  from  land  battery  seemed  to  be  this  afternoon  with  but 
one  gun,  and  that  with  slightly  reduced  charges.  It  is  argued  by 
some  that  one  of  the  Parrott  guns  has  been  burst.  A shot  from  one 
of  them  was  observed  yesterday  to  drop  far  short  in  the  marsh,  and 
aft^*  that  the  Parrott  ceased  firing. 

Respectfully  submitted. 

JNO.  JOHNSON, 

Lieutenant , Engineers. 

Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Fort  Sumter,  August  17,  1863. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  report  for  the  last  twenty-four 
hours. 

A working  force  of  450  laborers  and  mechanics  has  been  employed 
in  two  reliefs,  day  and  night,  upon  the  defenses  of  this  post,  under 
my  orders.  The  sick-list  has  been  considerable,  averaging  from  20 
to  30  per  day.  The  work  accomplished  consists  of  completing,  to  a 
height  of  4 feet  above  interior  crest,  two  traverses  on  east  battery; 
restoring  and  enlarging  filling  over  west  magazine  rampart  arches  ; 
erecting  timber  blindage  under  cover  of  gorge  parade  wall;  dis- 
charging and  building  up  2,300  bags  of  sand,  being  all  received. 
The  level  obtained  in  re-entrant  made  by  west  magazine  counter-fort 
is  5 feet  below  parapet.  I started  also  a sand-bag  revetment  of  some 
7 feet  base  in  front  of  stone  (loose  rubble)  base  of  west  magazine 
counter-fort,  deeming  it  important  thus  to  secure  the  magazine  at 
the  expense  even  of  taking  bags  away  from  the  curtain.  No  bags 
to  speak  of  have  yet  been  built  upon  the  eastern  half  of  the  gorge 
wall.  The  average  height  of  revetment  on  western  half  is  within 
10  feet  yet  of  parapet.  In  the  re-entrant , and  for  50  feet  eastwardly, 
the  level  obtained  is,  as  I said,  within  5 feet  of  top  of  parapet.  The 
work  was  somewhat  interrupted  by  the  demoralizing  effects  on  the 
negroes  of  the  brisk  and  damaging  fire  from  the  land  Parrott  bat- 
teries opened  on  the  fort  at  3.45  p.  m.  and  sustained  until  dark. 
Report  on  this  is  now  preparing. 

Respectfully  submitted. 

JNO.  JOHNSON, 

First  Lieutentant,  Engineer  Corps. 

Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Sumter,  S.  C.,  August  19,  1863. 

Major  : One  rampart  arch  and  its  pier  entirely  shot  away  on 
northwest  front.  First  shot  penetrated  gorge  quarters  10.20  a.  m., 
second  story,  first  room  west  of  sally-port  (General  Ripley  passing 


Chap.  XL.]  BOMBARDMENT  OF  FORT  SUMTER,  S.  C.  663 

close  under  arch  ceiling,  from  which  sand  had  settled);  it  dropped  in 
parade.  Few  will  strike  just  at  this  level.  Eleven  a.  m.  fire  slack- 
ened; greatest  displacement  on  gorge  is  over  sally-port,  parapet  hav- 
ing fallen;  second-tier  casemate  rooms,  the  second  and  fourth  east  of 
sally-port,  partially  uncovered,  without  loss  of  sand  filling  yet ; mag- 
azine in  no  danger  ; can  stop  penetration  of  10.20  a.  m.,  very  easily 
to-night  from  outside  ; northwest  front  has  4 upper  and  3 lower  em- 
brasures more  or  less  shattered  from  reverse  fire  ; southeast  pan 
coupe  has  large  crater  under  cornice ; on  whole,  less  damage  up  to 
date  than  I expected,  &c. 

JNO.  JOHNSON, 

Lieutenant  of  Engineers. 

Major  Echols. 


Sumter,  August  20,  1863. 

Major  : Since  1 p.  m.  yesterday  the  eastern  half  of  gorge  scarp 
has  been  falling  away  from  arches.  Three  are  now  partially  uncov- 
ered; before  noon  there  will  be  four  with  their  loading  above  and 
filling  below.  The  rubbish  in  falling  is  piled  up  to  level  of  window- 
sills second  story,  or  about  15  feet  high;  we  may  count  upon  its 
covering,  when  all  down,  to  a height  of  20  feet,  upon  which  „ I can 
drop  sand-bags  from  ramparts  at  night,  and  make  lower  story  of 
this,  as  well  as  western  half,  secure  from  battering.  The  demolition 
of  these  rampart  arches  and  piers,  with  filling  of  rooms,  will  occupy 
at  least  one  week  longer.  The  gorge  arches  to  west  of  and  over 
sally-port  are  now  nearly  covered  from  fire  by  mass  of  sand-bags 
and  rubbish.  I think  we  may  count  on  the  prolonged  stability  of 
these,  together  with  their  loading  above  and  filling  below,  thus  se- 
curing, longer  than  I can  estimate,  the  safety  of  western  magazine. 
East  magazine  can  stand  battering  also  a week,  but  as  no  sand-bag 
revetment  can  be  used  there,  it  will  have  to  be  given  up.  Last  night 
worked  on  hospital  traversing,  filling  tightly  between  sand  and 
under  side  of  arches,  in  two  most  exposed  rooms  of  east  half  gorge, 
and  enlarging  re-enforce  of  west  magazine. 

Respectfully,  &c., 

JNO.  JOHNSON, 

First  Lieutenant  of  Engineers. 

Maj.  W.  H.  Echols, 

Charleston , S.  C. 


Sumter,  August  21,  1863—10  a.  m. 

(Received  1.10  a.  m.) 

Major  : Some  large  holes  opened  through  northwest  scarp  by  re- 
verse firing  to-day ; six  upper  embrasures  and  three  lower  shattered ; 
one  opening  8 by  10  feet;  east  scarp,  as  before,  damaged  very  slightly. 
Southeast  pan  coupe  battered  under  traverse,  and  one-half  parapet 
in  its  front  fallen.  East  magazine  re-enforce  stone  work  damaged, 
slight.  Northwest  covered  by  loose  brick  from  upper  port,  which 
is  half  gone ; same  way  rubbish  from  above  has  covered  sand  and 
cotton  filling  reported  exposed  this  morning  by  falling  of  scarp, 
upper  5 feet  of  the  four  exposed  rooms  being  all  now  visible.  Worst 
effect  to-day  is  demolishing  some  7 feet  of  arch  rampart  for  length 


664  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

of  30  feet  along  east  half  of  gorge;  this  occurs  over  second  and 
third  rooms  east  of  sonth  port.  The  rubbish  all  along  accumulated 
favorably,  and  if  supplied  nightly  with  sand  in  bags  half  full,  I 
can,  perhaps,  save  the  arches  yet.  West  half  of  gorge  is  all  right; 
so  is  magazine.  No  fire  directed  to-day  on  that  side. 

JNO.  JOHNSON, 

First  Lieutenant  of  Engineers. 

Major  Echols. 


Sumter,  August  23,  1863. 

Major  : The  monitors  engaged  fort  3.15  to  5.30,  firing  on  line  pan 
coupe  and  magazine  time  fuse  and  rifled  shell;  4 hit  in  vicinity  of 
upper  magazine,  1 sending  particle  of  shell  into  ordnance  store,  sec- 
ond tier,  and  north  of  magazine ; another  bursting  up  in  King’s 
mess-room,  sending  sand  from  bags  below  into  magazine;  third 
struck  near  and  west  of  ventilator.  No  damage  of  consequence  done 
by  any  of  them.  Fog  stopped  the  firing  half  hour  ago.  Sullivan’s 
Island  and  Battery  Simkins  opened.  Monitors  fired  thirty  to  forty 
times. 


Major  Echols. 


JNO.  JOHNSON, 

Lieutenant  of  Engineers. 


Sumter,  August  23,  1863. 

Major  : Northwest  front  has  now  five  arches  with  ramparts  fallen 
in.  Northeast  barbette  battery  unserviceable.  East  front  scarp  all 
much  scaled  by  slant  fire,  with  large  craters  under  traverses ; prin- 
cipal injury  at  level  of  arches  and  terre-plein. 

Southern  two-thirds  of  wall  east  magazine  damaged;  to  main 
outer  wall,  trifling. 

Stone  revetment  protected  by  rubbish  and  previously  unhurt. 
Gorge  not  materially  damaged  since  yesterday. 

Another  shot  penetrated  above  sand  filling  of  second-story  rooms, 
making  three  since  attack  began.  East  barbette  battery  parapet  much 
loosened  and  undermined,  though  not  displaced;  11 -inch  gun  and  one 
10-inch  gun  untouched. 

Brooke  gun  carriage  shattered,  one  10-inch  trunnion  gone,  one  10- 
inch  gun  chassis  rail  shattered,  another  elevating  screw  broken;  this 
last  is  to  be  repaired  to-night. 

The  Brooke  gun  could  be  easily  mounted  on  a 10-inch  carriage, 
but  it  will  not  be  done;  excuse  is,  blocks  have  been  sent  away,  and 
no  blacksmith  shop.  I know  it  is  practicable  without  these.  If  not 
mounted,  there  will  be  only  three  guns  to  fight  in  east  battery  and 
two  in  casemate  second -tier  salient.  No  fire  to-night.  No  casualty 
to-day. 

JNO.  JOHNSON, 

Lieutenant  of  Engineers. 

Major  Echols. 

[Indorsement.] 

See  inside  about  remounting  Brooke  gun;  give  orders  accordingly. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


Chap.  XL.] 


C. 


665 


Fort  Sumter,  November  14,  1863. 

Colonel  : Although  I expressed  myself  to  you  lust  night  as  fully 
prepared  to  execute  cheerfully  any  plans  proposed  under  the  new 
project  of  defense,  I take  this  opportunity  to  record  one  or  two  diffi- 
culties which  have  suggested  themselves  to  my  mind  as  connected 
with  its  execution.  The  advantages  of  the  change  are,  if  I remember 
rightly,  two — the  ease  of  the  garrison,  and  the  promise  of  a more  com- 
plete capture  of  the  attacking  force. 

The  lirst  is  no  doubt  attainable,  hut,  if  the  result  be  adverse,  will 
have  been  a fatal  concession  to  the  troops.  The  second  is,  I must 
believe,  very  problematical,  judging  from  the  safety  with  which  the 
boats,  large  and  small,  have  for  nights  past  landed  on  the  west  front 
of  the  fort  and  the  known  expertness  of  the  enemy’s  boat-crews. 

Again,  the  advantage  of  meeting  the  attack  on  the  parapet  does  not 
seem  to  me  a thing  to  be  thrown  away.  Under  the  circumstances,  I 
respectfully  give  it  as  my  opinion  that  there  is  no  impracticability 
in  a combination  of  the  old  and  new  plans  of  defense,  and  that  both 
be  tried  if  perfect  success  be  desired.  There  would  be  but  little 
more  difficulty  in  changing  from  a parapet  to  a bomb-proof  defense 
in  the  first  than  in  the  last  plan.  Notice  must  be  given  in  both  of 
the  enemy’s  approach  and  of  the  withdrawal  of  our  men  into  the 
bomb-proofs  ; and  the  enemy  in  either  case  will  surely  calculate  on 
'the  contingency  of  having  to  attack  in  the  bomb-proofs,  and  even 
perhaps  under  the  fire  which  they  know  as  well  as  we  it  would  then 
be  practicable  for  us  to  open  upon  the  fort  from  the  harbor  batteries. 

I remain,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JNO.  JOHNSON, 

Captain  of  Engineers. 

Col.  D.  B.  Harris, 

Chief  Engineer. 


Fort  Sumter,  November  20,  1863 — 10  p.  m. 

Major  : I have  the  honor  to  report  the  firing  last  night  was  as 
follows : 

Rifled  shots,  97,  of  which  25  missed.  The  working  force  was  en- 
gaged upon  filling  passages  to  east  magazine  and  casemate,  preparing 
two  casemates  over  hospital  for  loop-holed  musketry  defense  and 
repairing  top  of  central  bomb-proof. 

The  working  force  of  130,  under  Overseer  McNeill,  was  relieved  by 
fresh  force  of  119  under  Overseer  Mikell.  The  transfer  occupied 
about  an  hour,  and  was  effected  without  any  casualty. 

At  3 a.  m.  musketry  firing  from  the  parapets  creating  an  alarm,  the 
force  was  withdrawn.  Three  or  four  boats  from  the  enemy  had  been 
discovered  on  the  sea  front,  and  when  fired  on  were  seen  to  return 
the  fire.  The  James  Island  and  Sullivan’s  Island  batteries  opened 
in  our  support,  also  the  gunboat  off  Fort  Johnson.  The  alarm  sub- 
sided in  an  hour. 

During  the  night  two  slight  casualties.  The  enemy’s  light  was 
shown  during  the  alarm,  but  their  fire  was  suspended  a half  hour. 
The  firing  to-day  was  heavy,  and  as  follows  : 

Rifles,  18,  of  which  8 missed;  mortars,  379,  of  which  146  missed; 
total,  397,  of  which  154  missed. 

About  10.30  a.  m.  a mortar  shell,  descending  at  entrance  to  east 
end  of  center  bomb-proof,  cut  through,  without  much  smashing,  the 


tCHAP.  XL. 


666  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  A ND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 


timber  blindage,  just  erected,  and,  exploding,  wounded  severely  one 
of  my  carpenters  and  slightly  another,  while  a third  man  of  the 
garrison  was  mortally  wounded,  and  is  since  dead. 

The  extra  mortar  firing  is  due  to  the  new  mortars  reported  by  me 
yesterday.  I would  respectfully  suggest  the  propriety  of  shelling 
them  from  Battery  Simkins,  as  they  are  favorably  situated  on  that 
side  of  Gregg. 

Respectfully  submitted. 


JNO.  JOHNSON, 

Captain  of  Engineers. 

Maj.  W.  H.  Echols, 

Chief  Engineer , South  Carolina . 


[Indorsements.] 

Office  of  Chief  Engineer, 

Charleston , November  21,  1863. 

Respectfully  forwarded  for  the  information  of  the  commanding 
general,  with  the  recommendation  of  Captain  Johnson’s  suggestion 
that  the  enemy’s  new  mortar  battery  near  Gregg  be  shelled  from 
Battery  Simkins,  if  the  supply  of  ammunition  will  justify  it. 

D.  B.  HARRIS, 
Colonel , and  Chief  Engineer.  . 

November  21,  1863. 

The  want  of  shell  precludes  the  firing  suggested. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General , Commanding. 


No.  11. 

Reports  of  Capt.  J.  T.  Champneys,  C.  S.  Corps  of  Engineers. 

Fort  Sumter,  September  6,  1863 — 10  a.  m. 

Major  : I have  the  honor  to  make  you  the  following  report : 

Thursday , September  3. — I came  over  in  the  engineer’s  boat,  with 
Major-General  Gilmer  and  Colonel  Harris,  who,  dropping  me  at 
Fort  Sumter,  proceeded  to  Cumming’s  Point  and  to  Battery  Wagner. 

I presented  my  orders  and  relieved  Captain  Gregorie,  of  the  En- 
gineers, who  returned  to  headquarters  the  same  night.  Previous  to 
his  departure,  I accompanied  him  and  Mr.  Hall,  assistant  engineer, 
over  the  fort,  revised  the  work  done,  and  received  orders  from  him 
as  to  its  further  completion.  General  Gilmer  and  Colonel  Harris  re* 
turning,  I accompanied  them  over  the  ground,  and  received  instruc- 
tions. The  hands  having  worked  during  the  day,  nothing  was  done 
upon  the  work  to-night. 

No  firing  from  the  enemy  during  this  night. 

Friday,  September  4. — I detailed  20  hands  for  night  work,  relieving 
them  from  day  duty.  The  entire  force  consisted  of  65,  with  one  over- 
seer, Mr.  Hyns.  Forty-five  I continued  at  work,  and  finished  the 
traverse  in  front  of  arch  No.  1,  in  the  second  tier,  and  began  to  fill  in 
arch  No.  1,  second  tier,  and  secured  the  timber  sent  for  the  purpose 
of  erecting  splinter-proofs.  No  firing  from  the  enemy  during  the 
day.  Friday  night,  Maj.  Stephen  Elliott,  jr.,  relieved  Colonel  Rliett 
in  the  command.  The  Charleston  Battalion,  Maj.  Julius  A.  Blake 


Chap.  XL.] 


BOMBARDMENT  OF  FORT  SUMTER,  S.  0. 


667 


commanding,  arrived,  relieving  the  volunteers  here  upon  duty.  Sand 
and  sand-bags  were  to-night  removed  from  the  parapet  to  fill  in  the 
arch  mentioned. 

No  firing  from  the  enemy  to-night.  Seventy-six  hands  with  Mr. 
Reid,  overseer,  reported  at  1 a.  m. 

Saturday , September  5. — I continued  all  hands  but  50,  whom  I de- 
tailed for  night  duty,  to  bring  sand  from  the  parapet,  work  which 
could  not  be  done  by  day,  upon  the  arches  Nos.  1,  2,  and  3,  and  hauled 
in  the  timber  for  splinter-proofs,  a necessity  existing  for  their  im- 
mediate removal.  I also,  at  the  order  of  Major  Elliott,  commanding, 
attended  to  the  police  duty  incumbent  from  the  occupation  of  the 
negroes.  A few  shots  fired  at  Battery  Gregg  ricochetted  over  the 
fort,  but  there  was  no  immediate  firing  at  it. 

Le  Page,  overseer,  who  had  been  absent  on  sick  leave,  reported 
yesterday. 

Saturday  night  I began  the  work,  filling  in  the  arches,  with  50  men, 
but  at  12  o’clock  I turned  out  the  entire  force  in  order  to  hasten  the 
work  to  completion,  the  difficulty  of  obtaining  sand  rendering  its 
progress  somewhat  slower  than  I had  anticipated. 

I to-night  drove  stakes  into  the  floor  of  the  hospital  and  put  up 
braces  against  the  shutters  of  the  embrasure  windows  to  prevent  en- 
trance in  case  of  assault. 

Mr.  William  Mathewes,  assisting  me,  was  to-night  taken  down 
with  fever.  The  overseer,  Le  Page,  reported  sick. 

A furious  bombardment  against  Batteries  Wagner  and  Gregg  was 
kept  up  all  day  by  the  land  batteries  of  the  enemy,  and  the  Ironsides. 
To-night  mortar  shells  are  thrown  into  Wagner  and  two  monitors 
are  firing  grape  and  shell  into  the  channel  between  this  fort  and  Sul- 
livan’s Island  and  Morris  Island.  The  rate  of  fire  is  one  in  five  min- 
utes. Some  of  the  shot  strike  the  fort. 

I find  great  scarcity  of  lamps  and  oil  and  wicks,  much  needed  for 
night  work. 

I remain,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  T.  CHAMPNEYS, 

Captain  of  Engineers , in  Charge. 


Major  Echols, 

Chief  Engineer,  S.  C.  Engineer  Bureau,  Charleston. 


Office  Chief  Engineer, 

Charleston,  October  29,  1863. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  forward,  for  the  information  of  the 
commanding  general,  a copy  of  the  report  of  Captain  Champneys, 
dated  Fort  Sumter,  October  27,  1863. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

D.  B.  HARRIS, 
Colonel,  and  Chief  Engineer. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  and  Chief  of  Staff. 

[Indorsement.] 


v October  29,  1863. 

Colonel  Harris  will  repair  to-night  to  Sumter,  to  examine  dam- 
ages and  give  necessary  instructions  for  repairs.  He  will  deter- 


[Chap.  XL. 


668  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 


mine,  with  the  commanding  officers  and  local  engineers,  what  is  the 
minimum  garrison  and  force  of  laborers  that  should  be  kept  in  the 
fort. 


G.  T.  B.  [BEAUREGARD], 

General , Commanding. 

[Inclosure.] 


Fort  Sumter,  October  27,  1863—11  p.  m. 

Major  : I have  the  honor  to  state  that  the  enemy  opened  fire  upon 
Fort  Sumter  to-day  at  7 a.  m.,  from  Gregg,  Wagner,  and  the  low 
battery  to  the  east  of  Gregg.  Up  to  dark  this  afternoon,  625  shots 
were  fired;  all  but  90  struck.  The  interval  between  the  cessation  and 
the  resumption  of  fire  was  short. 

Since  reopening,  two  guns,  apparently  from  Gregg,  with  an  occa- 
sional shot  from  a monitor,  have  been  playing  upon  us  at  the  rate 
of  2 shots  in  five  minutes,  and  lately  with  the  addition  of  a mortar 
from  the  battery  to  the  east  of  Gregg.  Shrapnel  has  occasionally 
been  fired,  and  grape  in  the  channel,  to  prevent  approach  and  recon- 
naissances around  the  walls.  The  entire  sea  face  has  been  very  much 
injured,  the  arches  of  the  second  tier  being  all  breached  and  the  ma- 
terial falling  outside.  This  was  done  by  the  monitors,  Gregg,  and 
the  battery  east,  both  batteries  having  an  enfilading  fire  upon  it.  The 
gorge  wall  has  also  received  much  damage,  several  shells  and  solid 
shots  coming  through  and  exploding  and  dropping  beneath.  This  is 
east  of  the  old  sally-port.  The  remains  of  the  north  wall  have  been 
breached  in  several  places.  The  southeast  and  southwest  angle  have 
also  been  hit  as  many  as  one  hundred  times.  Two  guns  appear  to 
direct  their  entire  attention  at  the  southwest  angle.  Many  shells  from 
the  monitors  dropped  immediately  to  the  north  of  the  new  sally-port 
or  guard  room  and  in  the  interior,  generally  on  the  inner  slope. 
Lieutenant  [A.  P.]  Brown,  Twelfth  Georgia  Battalion,  was  killed 
this  afternoon  by  the  explosion  of  a 15-inch  monitor  shell,  which 
penetrated  the  top  of  the  first  arch  of  the  second  tier  east.  He  was 
apparently  struck  by  a brick. 

If  the  shelling  continues  through  the  night  and  to-morrow  as  vio- 
lently as  it  has  to-day,  there  will  be  some  breaches  in  the  gorge  wall 
near  the  southwest  angle  through  the  re-enforce.  The  traverse  over 
the  hospital  on  the  west  side,  which  was  shot  away  yesterday  and  put 
up,  was  again  nearly  shot  away  to-day.  There  is  all  probability  that 
the  arches  there  will  fall  to-morrow,  if  the  monitors  attack,  although 
Gregg  plumps  them  full.  No  work  has  been  done  to-day,  with  the 
exception  of  that  on  the  northeast  angle  at  the  new  magazine,  in  which 
an  arch  has  been  entirely  filled.  The  work  is  progressing  there  to- 
night, that  angle  being  screened  from  the  fire  of  the  batteries.  Had 
I material  piled  away  under  cover,  as  I intended,  I could  use  it  to  ad- 
vantage, but  the  supply  has  been  too  limited  and  was  consumed  at  the 
time.  The  only  safe  place  in  the  fort  now  is  under  the  bomb-proof 
of  the  old  sally-port,  and  in  that  of  the  new  one  immediately  in  rear, 
recently  erected. 

I am  afraid  we  will  not  have  shelter-proofs  sufficient  for  the  num- 
ber here.  The  splinter-proofs  for  the  negroes  I find  to  answer  admira- 
bly. I regret  that  opportunity  has  not  been  given  to  cover  them 
with  sand.  They  would  make  admirable  bomb-proofs. 

The  enemy,  in  large  numbers,  congregated  upon^he  sand-hills 
and  beach  of  Morris  Island,  to  witness  the  fire  on  Sumter.  Our  bat- 
teries were  occasionally  heard  through  the  day,  but  faintly,  and  the 


Chap.  XL.] 


669 


BOMBARDMENT  OF  FORT  SUMTER,  S.  C. 

enemy  did  not  pay  much  attention  to  their  shots.  Our  sharpshooters 
from  the  parapet  with  Whitworth  guns  annoyed  the  gunners,  who 
after  1 or  2 shots  appeared  to  pay  attention  to  them..  Our  post-boat 
was  fired  into  in  her  passage  from  the  city  to  the  fort  by  one  of  our 
gunboats. 

I remain,  your  obedient  servant, 

, J.  T.  CHAMPNEYS, 

Captain  of  Engineers , in  Charge. 

Maj.  W.  H.  Echols, 

Chief  Engineer , South  Carolina. 


Fort  Sumter,  October  29,  1863—2  a.  m. 

Major  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  the  enemy  opened  yes- 
terday (28th),  at  7 a.  m.,  and  fired  up  to  dark  679  shots,  all  striking 
but  88.  Three  hundred  and  200  pounder  Parrotts,  mortars,  and  30- 
pounder  Parrotts  were  fired  from  their  batteries.  Two  monitors 
came  up  early  in  the  day,  but  withdrew  in  the  afternoon.  The  faces 
of  three  arches  of  the  sea  wall  have  fallen  in,  a portion  into  the 
parade,  a portion  directly  on  top  of  the  arches  beneath,  but  so  much 
outward  that  it  can  be  easily  scaled  on  a gentle  slope.  Many  shots 
struck  the  north  wall  and  upon  the  interior  at  its  base,  doing  no 
damage,  as  it  was  already  in  such  a state  that  unless  the  debris  fell 
outwardly  it  would  be  of  advantage.  Several  shots  fell  to  the  north 
of  the  present  sally-port  at  the  head  or  interior  of  the  new  wharf, 
being  of  advantage  in  crushing  the  fallen  mass.  The  southeast 
angle  has  been  almost  shot  away,  many  300-pounder  shell  and  shot 
crushing  it  and  falling  within  the  parade  ; that  portion  is  not  ten- 
antable.  The  entire  gorge  wall  has  been  struck  and  many  holes 
made  in  it  from  the  point  just  above  the  fallen  mass  to  the  top. 
Some  shot  and  shell  came  through  just  above  the  filling  of  the  arches 
of  the  second  tier,  they  not  having  been  filled  to  the  top  of  the  arches. 
The  re-enforce  wall  upon  the  south  has  been  so  often  hit  plumb  that 
the  entire  distance  between  the  sand-bags  and  the  stone  wharf  has 
been  chipped,  and  just  above  the  sand-bags  3 shots  struck  almost  in 
the  same  hole  made  by  2 of  yesterday’s  bombardment.  The  hole 
now  there  is  deep  and  directly  in  the  middle  of  the  re-enforce  wall. 
The  shell-room  above  and  the  magazine  below  are  directly  in  rear  of 
this. 

# * ifi  :js  :Jc 


I remain,  very  truly,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  T.  CHAMPNEYS, 
Captain,  Corps  of  Engineers. 

Maj.  W.  H.  Echols, 

Chief  Engineer. 


Fort  Sumter,  November  1,  1863. 

Major  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  the  enemy  opened  fire 
regularly  this  morning  at  daylight,  and  fired,  according  to  the  ac- 
count kept,  670  shots,  nearly  all  striking.  I am  inclined  to  think 
that  the  account  is  incorrect,  as  the  bombardment  appeared  to  those 
here  as  heavy  as  that  of  yesterday.  Last  night  103  were  fired  ; 70 


[Chap.  XL. 


670  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 


rifled  and  33  mortar  shots.  The  firing  to-day  has  been  directed  at  the 
southwest  angle.  Two  arches  have  been  breached  to-day ; these  will 
be  partially  filled  to-night.  The  firing  of  the  monitors  was  particu- 
larly hot,  nearly  every  shot  telling  upon  the  west  wall,  which  is  fast 
being  chipped  away  in  the  direction  of  the  parapet.  Many  shots 
struck  low  down  in  the  interior  west  arches,  and  at  the  new  sally- 
port and  beyond.  They  are  filled  at  the  interior  with  the  fallen  mass, 
which  is  of  advantage.  Several  shots  struck  the  traverse  protecting 
the  hospital,  both  above  and  below ; one  on  the  second  tier  was  shot 
away  at  the  top  in  the  same  place  at  which  it  was  formerly;  this  will 
be  put  up  to-night.  The  mortar  shells  fell  generally  in  the  south- 
west corner;  they  did  some  injury  to  the  traverse  in  rear  of  the  sally- 
port, at  the  cistern,  and  to  the  bomb-proofs.  These  will  also  be  re- 
paired to-night,  with  the  traverse  over  the  stairway  in  the  parapet  on 
the  southwest,  shot  away  to-day.  There  is  great  danger  of  shells 
tearing  away  this  traverse  and  coming  down  the  stairs.  I think  it 
advisable  to  fill  up  this  entirely,  and  I would  have  done  so  before, 
but  it  was  the  wish  of  the  major  commanding  to  leave  it  open  for 

the  purpose  of  easy  ascent  to  the  parapet. 

^ * * 


I remain,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  T.  CHAMPNEYS. 


Captain  of  Engineers. 


Maj.  W.  H.  Echols, 

Chief  Engineer,  South  Carolina. 


No.  12. 

Reports  of  Brig.  Gen.  T.  L.  Clingman,  C.  S.  Army,  command- 
ing on  Sullivan’s  Island,  of  operations  August  23. 

Headquarters  Sullivan’s  Island, 

August  23,  1863. 

Captain  : The  torpedo-boat  has  not  gone  out.  I do  not  think  it 
will  render  any  service  under  its  present  management. 

T.  L.  CLINGMAN, 

Brigadier - General. 

Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Sullivan’s  Island, 

August  23,  1863. 

Captain  : The  torpedo-boat  started  out  at  sunset,  but  returned, 
as  they  state,  because  of  an  accident.  Whitney  says  that  though 
McClintock  is  timid,  yet  it  shall  go  to-night  unless  the  weather  is 
bad.  I did  not  learn  that  the  men  of  the  Sixty-first  [North  Caro- 
lina! had  been  improperly  excused  until  late  in  the  evening. 

T.  L.  CLINGMAN, 

Brigadier-  General. 

Capt.  W.  P.  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant-General. 


671 


Chap.  XL.]  BOMBARDMENT  OF  FORT  SUMTER,  S.  C. 

Sullivan’s  Island,  S.  C., 

August  23,  1863. 

Captain  : I liave  to  report  that  this  morning,  about  3 o’clock,  some 
of  the  enemy’s  monitor  iron-clads  came  into  the  entrance  of  the 
harbor,  immediately  between  Fort  Moultrie  and  Battery  Gregg. 

They  opened  fire  upon  Fort  Sumter,  but  the  fog  was  so  heavy  that 
I could  not  ascertain  their  precise  position,  after  the  most  careful 
observation.  At  dawn  of  day  they  were  visible,  one  of  them  being 
about  1,000  yards,  as  near  as  I could  judge,  from  this  island.  Our 
guns  at  once  opened  on  her.  She  did  not  return  our  fire,  and  re- 
mained perfectly  stationary.  When  we  began  to  fire  on  her,  two 
other  monitors  came  up  in  line  with  her,  at  a greater  distance,  how- 
ever. For  several  minutes  we  kept  a constant  fire  on  her.  The  fog, 
however,  unfortunately  closed  down  on  her,  and  rendered  her  com- 
pletely invisible.  It  remained  for  more  than  an  hour,  and  thus  pre- 
vented a continuance  of  our  fire.  The  enemy’s  ships  remained  silent. 

As  the  vessel  nearest  to  us  remained  perfectly  stationary,  I think  it 
is  almost  certain  that  she  was  aground.  Had  the  fog  kept  off  for 
half  an  hour,  I feel  confident  that  she  would  have  been  destroyed  by 
our  fire.  After  it  raised,  five  monitors  were  seen  moving  out  as  rapidly 
as  possible.  Our  fire  was  resumed,  but  from  the  length  of  the  range 
it  was  not  very  effectual.  While,  however,  the  monitor  was  station- 
ary, I saw  that  she  was  repeatedly  struck  and  probably  injured. 

The  report  of  Colonel  Butler,*  which  I send  to  you,  will  advise 
you  of  the  number  of  shots  fired  by  our  batteries. 

Very  respectfully,  yours,  &c., 

T.  L.  CLINGMAN, 

Brigadier-  General. 

Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant-General. 


No.  13. 

Reports  of  Col.  William  Butler,  Third  South  Carolina  Artillery, 
commanding  artillery  on  Sullivan’s  Island,  of  operations  August 
23  and  31  and  September  1-2. 


Headquarters  Artillery, 
Sullivan’s  Island,  S.  €.,  August  23,  1863. 

Sir  : Last  night  (about  3 a.  m. ) the  batteries  on  this  island  were 
manned,  in  consequence  of  the  firing  at  Fort  Sumter  from  an  appar- 
ently new  direction.  A few  moments  later  I received  a dispatch 
from  the  commanding  officer  of  Fort  Sumter,  stating  that  the  fleet  of 
the  enemy  was  coming  in.  Nothing,  however,  could  be  seen  of  it  at 
that  time,  in'  consequence  of  the  darkness  of  the  night,  and  a dense 
fog  which  prevailed.  Toward  the  dawn  of  day  the  fog  cleared  away 
for  a short  time,  when  three  of  the  monitors  were  discovered  oppo- 
site Fort  Moultrie,  the  nearest  one,  I think,  about  1,200  yards  dis- 
tant. It  was  thought  this  boat  was  for  a short  time  aground. 

A rapid  fire  was  opened  upon  the  nearest  boat  from  Fort  Moultrie 
and  the  batteries  adjacent,  manned  by  Companies  K and  D,  First 
South  Carolina  [Regular]  Infantry,  to  the  right  and  left,  and  Bat- 
tery Beauregard. 


See  following  report. 


672 


S.  0.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 


[Chap.  XL. 


I think  in  less  than  ten  minutes  the  fog  again  obscured  them  from 
view,  when  the  firing  ceased,  excepting  an  occasional  shell  from  Fort 
Moultrie,  which  was  thrown  near  the  obstructions  to  annoy  and 
drive  away  the  enemy’s  launches,  if  in  the  vicinity. 

About  6.30  a.  m.  the  fog  again  drifted  away,  and  the  fleet,  includ- 
ing six  monitors  and  the  Ironsides,  was  seen  drifting  in  the  direction 
of  their  present  position,  about  2,000  yards  distant  from  Fort  Moul- 
trie; the  batteries  mentioned  before  again  opened  fire  upon  it  and 
continued  until  it  was  beyond  effective  range,  when  firing  ceased, 
the  fleet  moving  rapidly  off. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

WM.  BUTLER, 
Colonel , Commanding. 


Capt.  Edward  White, 

Assistant  Adjutant-General. 


Headquarters  Artillery, 

Sullivan’s  Island , September  1,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  on  yesterday,  about  12  m.,  a 
monitor  moved  up  to  within  or  about  1,700  or  1,800  yards  of  Fort 
Moultrie,  and  opened  fire  upon  that  fort ; the  fire  was  returned,  and 
the  monitor,  after  firing  2 or  3 shells,  which  burst  short,  returned. 

Between  2 and  3 p.  m.  four  monitors  approached,  perhaps  200 
yards  nearer,  and  opened  fire  upon  Fort  Moultrie  with  rifled  and  15- 
inch  guns.  The  fort  mentioned,  with  Battery  Beauregard  and  the 
batteries  adjoining  Fort  Moultrie,  engaged  them  for  some  two  hours, 
when  they  withdrew.  The  enemy  fired,  I think,  40  or  50  shots  with- 
out doing  damage  to  the  batteries  or  inflicting  injury  upon  officers 
or  men. 

I will  forward  a report  of  the  amount  of  ammunition  expended. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

WM.  BUTLER, 
Colonel,  Commanding. 

Capt.  Edward  White, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  Artillery, 

Sullivan’s  Island,  September  2,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  on  last  night,  a short  time 
before  11  o’clock,  six  monitors  came  within  range  of  the  guns  of 
Fort  Moultrie  and  the  batteries  to  the  right  and  left,  manned  by 
Companies  D and  K,  First  South  Carolina  [Regular]  Infantry,  and 
opened  fire  at  close  range  upon  Fort  Sumter.  Fire  was  opened  upon 
them  from  the  batteries  mentioned  and  Fort  Moultrie,  and  as  it  was 
distinctly  seen  that  many  shot  struck  them,  the  fire  was  continued 
until  they  withdrew,  just  before  daylight  this  morning,  being  under 
fire  about  five  hours. 

I think  they  were  struck  at  least  one  hundred  times,  fire  being 
generally  concentrated  on  the  nearest  vessel,  and  in  every  instance 
when  the  fire  was  at  all  rapid  causing  it  to  withdraw. 


Chap.  XL.] 


BOMBARDMENT  OF  FORT  SUMTER,  S.  C. 


673 


A report  of  the  amount  of  ammunition  expended  will  be  duly  for- 
warded. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

WM.  BUTLER, 
Colonel , Commanding. 

Capt.  Edward  White, 

Assistant  Adjutant-General. 


No.  14. 


Reports  of  Maj.  Robert  De  Treville,  Third  South  Carolina  Artil- 
lery, commanding  Fort  Moultrie , of  operations  August  IV -Sep- 
tember 6. 


Headquarters  Fort  Moultrie, 

August  17,  1863. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  the  Ironsides  having 
come  within  range  this  morning,  we  opened  fire  on  her  from  this 
fort  with  10-inch  columbiads.  Up  to  this  time  (8.30  a.  m.)  we  have 
fired  about  8 shots,  1 of  which,  from  Captain  [B.  J.]  Witherspoon’s 
battery,  is  known  to  have  taken  effect. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

ROBERT  DE  TREYILLE, 

Major,  Commanding. 

Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Charleston,  S.  C. 


Headquarters  Fort  Moultrie, 

August  18,  1863. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  the  fire  from  this  bat- 
tery was  continued  until  about  10.30  a.  m.  yesterday,  from  10-inch 
columbiads.  Effect  not  known.  No  reply  from  enemy.  Nothing 
else  to  report. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

ROBERT  DE  TREVILLE, 

Major,  Commanding. 

Capt.  W.  F.  Nance. 


Headquarters  Fort  Moultrie,  S.  C., 

August  23,  1863. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  on  a signal  from  Fort 
Sumter,  this  morning  at  about  3 o’clock,  the  alarm  was  sounded,  and 
all  the  guns  manned. 

Owing  to  the  darkness  of  the  night  and  the  density  of  the  fog,  it 
was  some  time  after  daylight  before  any  enemy  could  be  discovered, 
but  on  a partial  clearing  away  of  the  mist  we  could  occasionally  get 
glimpses  of  the  enemy’s  monitors,  lying  between  this  post  and  Bat- 
tery Wagner.  I ordered  fire  opened  from  all  the  batteries,  and  kept 
it  up  as  long  as  the  enemy  could  be  distinguished,  when  the  fog  again 
43  R R— VOL  XXVIII,  PT  I 


674  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 


[Chap.  XL. 


thickening  we  were  compelled  to  cease  firing.  About  one  and  a half 
hours  afterward  I found  the  enemy  endeavoring  to  escape  under 
cover  of  the  fog,  and  again  opened  fire,  but  the  range  being  too  great,, 
after  firing  a few  10-inch  shots,  ceased  entirely.  The  enemy  fired 
only  a few  shots  at  us,  all  of  which  were  harmless. 

About  8 a.  m.  the  Yankee  fleet  occupied  nearly  their  original 
ground,  the  Ironsides  firing  an  occasional  shot  at  Battery  Wagner. 

The  details  of  the  engagement  will  be  furnished  in  the  official  re- 
port of  the  action. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

ROBERT  DE  TREVILLE, 

Major , Commanding. 


Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


\ 


Headquarters  Fort  Moultrie,  S.  C., 

August  27,  1863. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  about  1 a.  m.  the  senti- 
nels at  this  post  reported  the  approach  of  the  Yankee  monitors.  The 
alarm  was  given  and  batteries  promptly  manned.  After  firing  a few 
shots  (the  enemy  being  scarcely  visible),  the  vessels  promptly  retired 
beyond  range.  Nothing  further  to  report. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

ROBERT  DE  TREVILLE, 

Major , Commanding. 


Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Fort  Moultrie,  S.  C., 

September  1,  1863. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  yesterday  morning,  be- 
tween 11  and  12  o’clock,  one  of  the  enemy’s  iron-clads  approached 
this  fort,  and  when  within  range  I opened  fire  on  her.  The  enemy 
replied  at  long  range,  principally  with  shrapnel,  all  of  which  fell 
short.  After  about  an  hour’s  engagement,  the  monitor  withdrew. 

A little  before  2 o’clock,  the  enemy  again  approached,  this  time 
with  four  monitors,  and  found  us  ready  to  receive  them.  We  opened 
on  them,  and  kept  up  a steady  fire,  firing  in  all  132  shots,  to  which 
the  enemy  replied  with  15-inch  and  rifled  shells,  firing  in  all,  as  near  as 
can  be  estimated,  about  sixty  times.  The . fort  was  struck  six  times 
by  15-inch  shells,  and  in  several  places  by  fragments,  but  received  no 
injury.  Many  of  their  shells  fell  short,  and  a number  burst  on  each 
side  and  among  the  neighboring  buildings.  Not  the  slightest  injury 
of  any  kind  happened  to  either  officers  or  men. 

Particulars  of  the  engagement  will  be  furnished  in  an  official  re- 
port. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

ROBERT  DE  TREVILLE, 

Major,  Commanding * 

Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Chap.  XL.] 


BOMBARDMENT  OF  FORT  SUMTER,  S.  C. 


(375 


Headquarters  Fort  Moultrie, 

September  2,  1863. 

Lieutenant  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  last  night,  at  11 
o’clock,  six  monitors  and  the  Ironsides  came  in,  and  soon  after  we 
opened  fire,  which  was  kept  up  frequently  by  battery  until  4 a.  m. 
The  moon  being  very  bright,  we  could  distinctly  see  the  enemy’s 
vessels,  and  at  almost  every  discharge,  both  of  bolts  and  shots,  it  could 
be  plainly  seen  that  the  vessels  were  struck. 

During  the  whole  night  the  firing  was  excellent,  and  we  have 
every  reason  to  believe  it  was  effectual.  About  2.30  a.  m.  one  of  the 
monitors  withdrew,  and  at  daylight  all  followed. 

The  enemy  fired  but  few  times  at  this  island,  their  attention  being 
directed  principally  against  Fort  Sumter.  We  fired  in  all  two  hun- 
dred and  ninety-one  times. 

No  casualties  to  report. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

ROBERT  DE  TREVILLE, 

Major , Commanding. 


Lieut.  M.  King, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  Fort  Moultrie,  S.  C., 

September  6,  1863. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  yesterday,  about  2 p.  m., 

one  of  the  [ ] steamed  up  and  fired  a charge  of  shrapnel  at  a 

party  of  negroes  working  immediately  in  front  of  the  fort,  but  with- 
out doing  any  injury. 

Last  night,  at  an  early  hour,  the  guns  were  manned,  and,  by  order, 
at  12.15  p.  [a.]  m.  I fired  at  the  enemy  s monitors  from  two  10-inch 
columbiads,  to  which  they  replied,  but  again  without  injury.  An 
attack  having  apparently  commenced  at  Battery  Gregg,  I fired  shells 
up  Vincent’s  Creek,  as  previously  directed,  firing  in  all  twenty-nine 
times. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

ROBERT  DE  TREVILLE, 

Major,  Commanding. 

Capt.  W.  F.  Nance. 


No.  15, 

Reports  of  Capt.  T.  A.  Huguenin , Third  South  Carolina  Artillery , 
commanding  Battery  Beauregard,  of  operations  August  23,  30, 
and  31. 


Battery  Beauregard, 
Sullivan’s  Island,  August  23,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  nothing  of  importance  oc- 
curred at  this  post  during  the  past  twenty-four  hours,  until  3 o’clock 
this  morning,  when,  from  the  firing  of  the  enemy,  we  ascertained 
that  they  had  approached  within  range.  The  garrison  was  imme- 
diately ordered  to  battery,  and  just  about  daylight  the  enemy  were 


[Chap.  XL. 


676  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

discovered  near  Fort  Moultrie.  I opened  fire  with  a 32-pounder  rifle, 
but  after  4 shots  the  fog  became  so  dense  as  to  obscure  the  fleet  from 
view. 

At  7.30  a.  m.  the  fog  lifted,  and  fire  was  opened  upon  the  monitors 
at  easy  range,  and  continued  until  they  were  out  of  range. 

At  8 a.  m.  ceased  firing. 

The  enemy  did  not  return  our  fire.  Seventeen  shots  were  fired 
from  this  battery. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

T.  A.  HUGUENIN, 
Captain,  Commanding. 

Lieut.  William  D.  Gaillard, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Battery  Beauregard, 

August  31,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  yesterday  I succeeded  in  ad- 
justing some  pieces  of  wood  under  the  breech  of  the  Brooke  gun  at 
this  post,  and  was  enabled  to  fire  her  with  great  ease.  I fired  37 
percussion  shells  from  the  Brooke  gun  at  the  stockade  on  Morris 
Island,  and  am  inclined  to  believe  that  most  of  thp  shots  did  good 
execution.  I have  only  a limited  supply  of  projectiles  for  the  Brooke 
gun,  and  will  be  obliged  if  some  more  could  be  furnished.  I partic- 
ularly desire  some  time-shells,  as  the  percussion  does  not  appear  to 
burst  in  striking  the  sand. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

T.  A.  HUGUENHST, 
Captain , Commanding . 

Lieut.  M.  King, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


[Indorsement.] 

Headquarters  First  Military  District, 

September  1,  1863. 

Respectfully  forwarded,  with  the  remark  that  the  shells  asked  for 
will  be  sent  as  soon  as  possible. 

R.  S.  RIPLEY, 

Brigadier-  General,  Commanding. 


Battery  Beauregard, 

September  1,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  yesterday  this  battery  engaged 
the  enemy’s  fleet  of  monitors  (four)  for  one  hour  and  a half.  Forty 
shots  were  fired  from  this  post,  which,  however,  were  not  returned 
by  the  enemy.  The  fire  of  the  Brooke  gun  was  directed  with  effect 
upon  the  Yankee  stockade  on  Morris  Island  once  every  two  hours. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

T.  A.  HUGUEKDsT, 

Captain,  Commanding  Battery  Beauregard . 

Lieut.  M.  King, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General, 


Chap.  XL.] 


BOMBARDMENT  OF  FORT  SUMTER,  S.  C. 

No.  16. 


677 


Reports  of  Capt.  C.  H.  Rivers,  Third  South  Carolina  Artillery,  of 
operations  August  23  and  31. 

Sullivan’s  Island, 

August  23,  1861. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  all  quiet  at  this  battery*  up  to  the 
hour  of  3 a.  m.,  when  the  Ironsides  and  monitors  were  discovered 
between  this  battery  and  Cumming’s  Point,  firing  on  Sumter. 

As  soon  as  it  became  light  enough,  this  battery  opened  its  fire  on 
them,  firing  36  shots,  and  striking  them  repeatedly.  After  firing 
for  awhile,  a heavy  fog  hid  them  from  view  for  an  hour.  When  the 
fog  cleared  away,  they  were  discovered  retiring  to  their  old  position 
off  Battery  Wagner. 

Yours,  very  respectfully, 

C.  H.  RIVERS, 

Captain,  Commanding  Battery  K. 

Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Sullivan’s  Island, 

September  1,  1863. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  yesterday  morning,  at 
about  12  o’clock,  two  monitors  appeared  in  long  range  of  our  guns, 
and  that  we  opened  upon  them,  when  they  retired  in  about  one  hour 
after. 

At  about  2 o’clock,  four  monitors  moved  up  in  line  of  battle,  and 
the  action  was  very  general  until  5 o’clock,  when  they  retired  out  of 
range.  They  were  seen  to  have  been  hit  repeatedly  from  my  battery. 
I estimate  that  about  50  shots  were  fired  from  the  enemy  over  this 
island;  128  shots  were  fired  from  my  battery  in  the  morning  and 
evening  engagements. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

C.  H.  RIVERS, 

Captain,  Commanding  Battery  K. 

Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  17. 

Reports  of  Lieut.  R.  Y.  Dwight,  Third  South  Carolina  Artillery, 
of  operations  September  1. 

Battery  D,  Sullivan’s  Island, 

September  1,  1863. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  fire  was  opened  from 
the  Brooke  gun  of  this  battery  f about  12.30  p.  m.,  upon  a monitor 
which  came  within  about  2,500  yards  of  our  works.  Ten  shots  were 

* Battery  K,  Third  South  Carolina  Artillery. 

\ Battery  D,  Third  South  Carolina  Artillery. 


[Chap.  XL. 


678  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

fired,  2 or  more  of  wliicli  struck  tier  deck.  She  then  withdrew.  At 
2.30  p.  m.  four  monitors  came  in,  and  fire  was  opened  from  the  Brooke 
gun  and  the  two  10-inch  columbiads  of  this  battery,  the  latter  under 
the  immediate  command  of  Lieutenant  [R.  R.  ] Singleton.  Twenty- 
three  rounds  were  fired  from  the  Brooke  gun  with  14-pound  charges 
and  15  and  16  from  Nos.  23  and  1689  columbiads,  respectively. 

Owing  to  the  northeast  wind  prevailing,  the  smoke  from  the  Fort 
Moultrie  batteries  very  often  obscured  the  point  of  falling  of  the 
bolts,  and  thereby  rendered  the  practice  uncertain.  Many  of  those 
observed  fell  very  near  the  monitors  at  which  they  were  aimed.  A 
lack  of  uniformity  in  the  range  attained,  at  the  same  elevation  and 
charge,  observed  in  the  firing  of  the  earlier  part  of  the  day,  was,  I 
think,  confirmed  by  the  firing  later  in  the  afternoon.  The  firing  was 
such  as  to  encourage  the  belief  that  at  closer  range  the  effect  would 
be  damaging  to  the  enemy,  the  firing  being  more  accurate. 

Respectfully,  &c., 

R.  Y.  DWIGHT, 

Lieutenant , Commanding. 

Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant-General. 


Battery  D,  Sullivan’s  Island, 

September  2,  1863. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  at  a few  minutes  after 
11  o’clock  last  night,  we  manned  the  guns  of  this  battery,  the  mon- 
itors of  the  enemy  being  discovered  entering  between  this  point  and 
Morris  Island.  Fire  was  opened  from  the  Brooke  gun  and  the  two 
10-inch  columbiads,  and  was  kept  up,  with  occasional  intermissions, 
until  the  enemy  withdrew  at  daylight.  The  shots  from  the  Brooke 
gun  were  not  effective,  while  the  distance  of  the  monitors  was  con- 
siderable, but  quite  late  in  the  action  one  of  them  was  fairly  struck, 
with  the  gun  at  an  elevation  of  4-J°.  Immediately  after  this  they 
withdrew  to  a much  greater  distance  for  awhile,  but  upon  returning, 
they  took  up  a position  closer  than  ever,  and  the  first  shot  struck  the 
nearest  fairly,  being  fired  at  an  elevation  of  only  1^°.  The  second  shot 
subsequent  to  this  also  struck  fairly,  making  2 effective  shots  of  the 
3 fired  after  they  took  up  their  nearest  position,  while  but  1 struck 
of  about  30  fired  at  longer  range. 

In  my  report  yesterday,  I stated  that  the  range  did  not  appear 
to  be  uniform,  but  varied  considerably,  charge  and  elevation  being 
the  same.  The  probable  explanation  of  this  may  be  that  the  car- 
tridges used,  being  composed  of  two  kinds  of  powder,  one  large  and 
the  other  smaller  grained,  and  being  moved  about  a great  deal  became 
shaken  together,  the  two  kinds  of  powder  more  or  less  mixed,  the 
mixture  being  more  complete  in  some  than  in  others.  Thus  no  two 
cartridges  would  be  exactly  alike,  and  the  ranges  would  likewise 
vary. 

I respectfully  urge  that  this  gun  be  used  only  at  very  close  range, 
on  the  ground  that  the  uncertainty  of  striking  the  monitors  at  any- 
thing more  than  very  short  range  (1,000  or  1,500  yards)  renders  the 
expenditure  of  ammunition  inexpedient,  and  the  wear  and  tear  of 
this  gun  is  not  compensated  by  the  injury  likely  to  be  inflicted  upon 
the  enemy  at  such  ranges.  This  is  particularly  the  case  at  night. 


Chap.  XL.]  BOMBARDMENT  OF  FORT  SUMTER,  S.  C. 


679 


The  wind  continued  to  blow  from  the  northeast  during  the  whole 
action,  and,  as  on  Monday,  very  seriously  embarrassed  us  in  obtain- 
ing the  ranges,  settling  right  in  front  of  our  battery,  and  in  neany 
every  case  obscuring  the  point  of  fall.  I also  respectfully  suggest 
that  the  gun,  being  on  a ship  carriage  and  very  much  exposed,  be 
well  protected  by  sand -bag  traverses,  which  could  be  quickly  re- 
moved at  the  critical  juncture. 

It  is  due  Lieutenant  Singleton  to- state  that  his  practice  from  the 
two  10-inch  columbiads  under  his  immediate  command  was  admira- 
ble, many  of  his  shots  striking  fairly.  Thirty-eight  shots  were  fired 
from  the  Brooke  gun,  21  14-pounder  cartridges  and  17  17-pounder 
cartridges,  23  cast-iron  bolts  and  5 wrought  iron.  Of  the  3 which 
struck,  2 were  cast  and  1 wrought  iron. 

From  columbiad  No.  23,  20  rounds  were  fired,  and  from  No. 
1689,  35. 

The  men  at  the  guns  acted  with  great  spirit,  evincing  both  pride 
and  hearty  interest  in  the  action.  The  Brooke  gun  is  worked  with- 
out difficulty  on  its  ship  carriage. 

The  enemy  fired  very  few  shots  at  the  island,  confining  his  fire 
chiefly  to  Sumter. 

Respectfully,  &c., 


R.  Y.  DWIGHT, 

Lieutenant , Commanding  Battery  D. 


Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


[Indorsement.] 

Headquarters  Artillery, 

Sullivan’s  Island , September  2,  1863. 

Respectfully  forwarded.  Lieutenant  Dwight’s  orders  were  not  to 
fire  except  when  it  could  be  done  with  effect. 

WILLIAM  BUTLER, 

Colonel,  Commanding. 


AUGUST  19,  1863.— Capture  of  Signal  Station  at  Saint  John’s  Mill,  Fla.* 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  A H.  McCormick , Second  Florida  Cavalry. 

Camp  Finegan,  Fla., 

August  20,  1863. 

The  enemy  captured  my  signal  station  and  all  the  men  (5)  at  Saint 
John’s  Mill  last  night.  The  next  station  below,  all  safe  this  morn- 
ing. 

Respectfully, 

A.  H.  McCORMICK, 

Lieutenant-Colonel,  Commanding  Post. 

Capt.  W.  Call, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

* By  boats  from  the  U.  S.  S.  Hall  and  Norwich,  under  command  of  Acting  Master 
Charles  F.  Mitchell. 


G80  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

[Indorsements.] 

Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

August  26,  1863. 

Respectfully  forwarded.  The  system  of  signals  has  lately  been 
changed  in  this  department,  owing  to  the  recent  desertion  of  some 
operators.  An  investigation  of  all  the  circumstances  has  been 
directed. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General , Commanding, 

Signal  Office,  September  4,  1863. 

Respectfully  returned  to  the  Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 
Notice  of  this  occurrence  had  already  been  received  at  this  office, 
from  the  signal  officer  in  charge  of  the  line,  and  proper  precautions 
have  been  taken  to  prevent  the  enemy  deriving  any  benefit  from  it. 

JAMES  CAREY, 

Lieutenant,  and  Acting  Chief  of  Signal  Corps. 


AUGUST  20-21,  1803. — Attempt  to  Destroy  the  U.  S.  S.  Ironsides,  off 

Charleston  Harbor,  S.  C. 

Report  of  Capt.  J.  Carlin,  commanding  Torpedo  Ram. 

Charleston,  August  22,  1863. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  I attacked  the  Ironsides 
on  the  night  of  the  20th,  but  regret  to  say,  however,  it  was  not  ac- 
companied with  any  beneficial  result. 

I communicated  with  Fort  Sumter  at  10  p.  m.  and  obtained  a guard 
of  11  men,  under  command  of  Lieutenant  [E.  S.]  Fickling.  At 
11.30  p.  m.  I passed  the  obstructions,  and  at  12  sighted  the  Ironsides 
lying  at  anchor  in  the  channel  off  Morris  Island,  with  five  monitors 
moored  immediately  in  a south-southwest  direction  from  her,  and 
about  300  yards  distant.  One  monitor  was  anchored  in  the  direction 
bearing  upon  Battery  Gregg,  and  about  half  a mile  distant.  When 
I came  within  quarter  of  a mile  of  the  Ironsides  I lowered  the  tor- 
pedoes and  proceeded  directly  for  the  ship,  feeling  at  the  same  time 
fully  confident  of  striking  her  in  the  right  place.  At  this  time  she 
was  lying  across  the  channel  and  heading  for  Morris  Island.  I 
steered  up,  keeping  the  object  on  our  port  bow,  and,  when  within 
40  yards  from  the  ship,  I stopped  the  engine  and  ordered  the  helm 
put  hard  a starboard. 

I attribute  my  failure  to  the  want  of  proper  execution  of  this 
order.  I noticed  the  slow  obedience  of  the  ship  to  her  helm,  and 
again  gave  the  order,  repeating  it  three  times.  It  was  a moment  of 
great  anxiety  and  expectation,  and  not  doubting  but  I would  strike 
her,  I was  obliged  to  attend  to  the  proper  command  of  the  officers 
and  men,  and  restrain  any  undue  excitement.  In  this  I was  ably 
assisted  by  the  cool,  courageous  bearing  of  Lieutenant  Fickling, 
who  commanded  the  force  stationed  for  defense.  I discovered,  as 
we  ranged  up  alongside,  that,  in  consequence  of  the  Ironsides  being 
»in  the  act  of  swinging  to  the  ebb,  we  must  miss  with  our  torpedoes, 


Chap.  XL.]  ATTEMPT  TO  DESTROY  U.  S.  STEAMER  IRONSIDES.  681 

but  feared  that  her  chain  cable  would  either  ignite  them  or  detain 
us  alongside.  In  either  case  we  must  have  been  captured.  A kind 
Providence,  however,  intervened  and  saved  our  little  band  from  such 
disaster.  When  about  50  yards  distant  we  were  hailed  “Ship  ahoy ! ” 
After  deliberating  whether  I should  not  give  him  some  warning,  I 
felt  so  sure  of  striking  him,  I finally  answered  “Hello,”  and  in  an 
official  and  stern  tone  as  possible.  Another  hail,  “What  ship  is 
that?”  I answered,  almost  immediately,  “The  steamer  Live  Yan- 
kee.” 

We  were  still  moving  slowly  past  the  bow.  I gave  the  order  to  go 
ahead  with  the  engine,  and  was  informed  at  the  same  time  that  the 
enemy  were  boarding  us.  Without  looking  to  see  whether  such  was 
the  case,  I gave  the  order  to  defend  the  ship,  and  got  my  arms  ready 
in  time  to  prevent  the  firing  upon  some  sailors  that  were  looking  at 
us  from  the  ports.  I saw  they  were  not  boarding,  and  I immediately 
ordered  the  men  to  hold  and  not  fire.  They  dropped  immediately, 
showing  specimen  of  the  effect  of  good  discipline.  Just  at  this  time 
he  hailed  again,  “ Where  are  you  from  ?”  Answered,  “Port  Royal.” 
I found  that  we  had  ranged  just  clear  of  his  bow  and  out  of  danger 
of  being  boarded  except  by  launches.  I then  went  to  the  engine-room 
to  see  what  was  the  matter,  as  fully  two  minutes  had  elapsed  since 
the  order  had  been  given  to  go  ahead.  I found  that  the  engine  had 
caught  upon  the  center,  and  notwithstanding  a continued  effort  for 
at  least  four  or  five  minutes,  they  failed  to  get  started  ahead.  I was 
again  hailed,  “What  ship  is  that ?”  Answered,  “The  United  States 
steamer  Yankee.” 

I again  went  to  the  engine-room,  and  by  encouragement  to  the 
engineers  found  her  in  the  act  of  starting.  Another  hail  and  another 
called  me  to  the  deck,  and  as  none  of  my  officers  heard  the  question, 
I surmised  it  to  be  an  order  to  come  to  anchor  or  to  surrender.  I 
answered,  “Ay,  ay,  sir  ; I’ll  come  on  board.”  I found  we  were  mov- 
ing ahead  slowly,  and  in  two  minutes  must  have  passed  out  of  his 
sight,  as  he  commenced  firing  in  the  opposite  direction.  He  after- 
ward fired,  sweeping  the  horizon,  2 shots  passing  on  either  side 
about  20  feet  off. 

It  was  my  intention  to  attack  one  of  the  monitors,  but  after  the 
experience  with  the  engine  I concluded  it  would  be  almost  madness 
to  attempt  it.  I therefore  steered  back  to  the  city. 

General,  in  consequence  of  the  tests  to  which  I have  put  the  ship 
in  the  two  late  adventures,  I feel  it  my  duty  most  unhesitatingly  to 
express  my  condemnation  of  the  vessel  and  engine  for  the  purposes 
it  was  intended,  and  as  soon  as  she  can  be  docked  and  the  leak 
stopped,  would  advise  making  a transport  of  her. 

I beg  to  remain,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  CARLIN. 

General  G.  T.  Beauregard, 

Commanding  at  Charleston , S.  C. 

[Indorsement.] 

Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

August  20  [23],  1863. 

Captain  : Your  report  of  operations  in  the  attempt  to  destroy  the 
Ironsides  during  the  night  of  the  18th  [20th]  instant  has  been  re- 
ceived. I regret  exceedingly  that  you  should  have  met  with  so  many 
difficulties  in  your  disinterested  and  praiseworthy  enterprise ; but  I 


682  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 


[Chap.  XL, 


am  happy  to  learn  that  you  are  still  willing  to  retain  the  command 
of  the  torpedo  ram,  for  I know  no  one  to  whose  skill  and  experience  I 
would  sooner  trust  the  boat  on  so  bold  and  gallant  an  undertaking. 
I feel  convinced  that  another  trial  under  more  favorable  circum- 
stances will  surely  meet  with  success,  notwithstanding  the  known 
defects  of  the  vessel. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General , Commanding. 

Capt.  James  Carlin, 

Commanding  Torpedo  Ram,  Charleston,  S.  C. 


AUGUST  21-DECEMBER  31,  1863. — Bombardment  of  Charleston,  S.  C. 

REPORTS.* 

No.  1. — Maj.  Henry  Bryan,  Assistant  Inspector-General,  C.  S.  Army. 

No.  2. — Col.  Alfred  Rhett,  First  South  Carolina  Artillery. 

No.  1. 

Report  of  Maj.  Henry  Bryan,  Assistant  Inspector- General , C.  S. 

Army. 

Charleston,  January  6,  1864. 

Colonel  : In  compliance  with  inclosed  order,  I have  the  honor  to 
make  the  following  report  on  the  bombardment  of  Charleston  by  the 
Abolition  army  up  to  this  date  : 

The  general  result  has  been  the  injury  of  a large  number  of  dwell- 
ings and  stores,  and  many  banks,  public  halls,  churches,  &c. , by  the 
percussion  and  explosion  of  the  shells  thrown;  the  burning  of  six 
buildings  and  a cotton  press  December  25, 1863,  by  a fire  originating 
from  the  explosion  of  a shell,  and  the  destruction  of  some  medical 
stores,  August  21, 1863,  by  a shell  bursting  in  the  medical  purveyor’s 
office  and  setting  fire  to  it.  It  has  further  caused  considerable  social 
distress  by  obliging  thousands  of  persons  in  the  lower  part  of  the 
city,  in  order  to  avoid  danger,  to  leave  their  homes  and  close  their 
hotels,  and  seek  refuge  in  the  upper  portion  of  the  city  or  in  the 
interior  of  the  State.  This  will  expose  valuable  property  to  theft, 
and  to  injury  from  the  elements.  The  effect  upon  military  opera- 
tions here  has  been  comparatively  unimportant,  and  has  occasioned 
no  loss  of  materiel,  excepting  the  medical  stores,  worth  about  $1,500. 
As  a matter  of  prudence,  all  military  headquarters,  offices,  and  hos- 
pitals have  been  moved  out  of  range  to  the  upper  portions  of  the 
city,  the  signal  corps  remaining  at  its  post,  which  is  out  of  the  line 
of  fire.  As  equally  good  buildings  have  been  found  in  the  upper 
part  of  the  city  for  these  offices,  hospitals.  See.,  their  removal  cannot 
be  considered  an  injury  to  the  army.  The  movements  of  harbor 
transportation  have  been  much  inconvenienced,  but  not  practically 
impeded  by  this  bombardment. 

The  casualties  have  been  remarkably  few,  and  fallen  almost  en- 
tirely upon  the  civilians  who  clung  to  their  homes.  The  whole  result 

* See  also  reports  of  Gillmore  and  Beauregard,  pp.  3,  55,  and  Gillmore  to  Hal- 
leck,  August  24,  in  "‘Correspondence,  etc.,”  Part  II,  p.  57. 


Chap.  XL.]  BOMBARDMENT  OF  CHARLESTON,  S.  C.  683 

has  so  far  been  utterly  inadequate  to  the  labors  and  boasts  of  the 
besieging  forces.  That  they  should  attempt  to  intimidate  the  people 
of  Charleston  into  a surrender  of  their  city  is  not  to  be  wondered 
at;  but  having  plainly  seen  that  the  destruction  of  property  did  not 
shake  their  determination,  it  is  difficult  to  imagine  what  usage  of 
civilization  would  justify  them  in  continuing  it. 

Damage  to  property. — This  will  be  large,  owing  to  the  impractica- 
bility of  repairs  and  consequent  action  of  the  elements  on  buildings 
laid  open  to  it.  The  immediate  damage  from  the  shells  cannot  be 
considered  large  in  proportion  to  the  area  within  the  enemy’s  range. 
From  Saint  Michael’s  steeple,  which  commands  a full  view,  there  is 
but  a small  appearance  of  destruction  visible.  By  a rough  inspec- 
tion of  the  city  yesterday  with  an  intelligent  local  editor,  who  had 
already  been  taking  accounts  of  the  effects  of  the  shelling,  I learned 
that  126  buildings  (including  kitchens)  had  been  struck  by  shells, 
about  85  being  much  injured  and  41  only  slightly.  I presume  that 
three-fourths  of  the  houses  struck  can  be  repaired  without  pulling 
down  any  main  wall;  but  a portion  have  rafters,  joists,  or  corners 
very  badly  shattered— the  South  Carolina  Hall  (near  Saint  Michael’s 
Church),  for  instance,  having  been  struck  three  times  through  the 
roof. 

Damage  to  life. — Five  deaths  have  resulted  from  the  bombardment, 
viz,  Mrs.  Hawthorne,  1ST o.  70  Church  street,  wounded  by  shell  in 
right  side,  and  died  six  weeks  after  ; Miss  Plane,  corner  Meeting  and 
Market,  left  foot  crushed  by  shell,  and  died  in  six  days ; Mr.  William 
Knighton,  corner  Meeting  and  Market,  right  leg  taken  off,  and  died 
in  four  days  ; Mr.  John  Doscher,  of  German  Fire  Company,  wounded 
at  fire  of  December  25,  and  since  died ; Rebecca,  slave  of  Mr.  Lind- 
say, No.  5 Beaufain  street,  killed  instantly  by  shell.  At  the  fire  of 
December  25,  there  were  1 fireman,  1 policeman,  and  4 soldiers 
slightly  wounded.* 

Number  of  shots. — The  number  fired  at  the  city  from  August  21, 
1863,  to  January  5, 1864,  as  noted  by  the  observer  in  Saint  Michael’s, 
is  472.  Of  these,  27  were  thrown  on  August  21,  22,  and  24,  and  3 on 
October  27.  The  regular  bombardment  may  be  said  to  have  begun 
on  November  17,  from  which  date  to  January  5, 1864,  442  are  reported. 
Out  of  the  472  shells  thrown  at  the  city,  28  are  reported  to  have  fallen 
short,  making  about  444  which  struck  in  the  city;  but  in  my  inspec- 
tion and  inquiry,  I could  only  learn  of  some  225,  viz  : 


Shells  striking  houses 145 

Shells  striking  yards 19 

Shells  striking  in  the  streets  and  on  the  edge  of  burned  district 61 

Total 225 


There  were  certainly  a considerable  number  which  had  struck  in 
the  burned  district,  and  probably  in  deserted  yards,  of  which  I could 
get  no  account.  I hand  with  this  a map  f of  Charleston  (drawn  by 
that  skillful  artist,  Lieutenant  [George  E.]  Walker,  C.  S.  Engi- 
neers), in  which  I have  designated  roughly  by  specks  of  red  paint  the 
locality  where  each  shell  fell,  the  extreme  points  where  shells  struck 
being  connected  by  straight  red-ink  lines. 

Average  number  of  shots  per  day. — During  the  three  shellings  in 
August  (21st  to  24th),  four  days,  about  7 per  day.  None  in  Septem- 
ber. In  October  only  3 shells  were  thrown,  all  in  one  day.  From 

*See  Journal  of  Operations  in  Charleston  Harbor.  f Not  found. 


684  S.  C.  AND  GA..  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 


[Chap.  XL. 


November  17,  1863,  to  January  5,  1864,  fifty  days,  about  9 shells  per 
day. 

Proportion  of  shells  which  hurst. — The  records  of  this  are  very 
imperfect,  and  the  general  opinion  seems  to  be  that  only  one-third 
of  the  shells  thrown  at  the  city  have  burst.  The  observer’s  records 
for  December  are  316  shells  thrown,  of  which  20  fell  short.  Of  these, 
123  are  reported  as  not  exploded,  equal  to  about  39  per  cent,  of  the 
number  thrown,  or  42  per  cent,  of  the  number  which  struck  the  city. 

On  January  2,  1864,  12  shells  were  thrown,  of  which  one-half 
failed  to  explode. 

What  part  of  the  city  most  frequently  struck. — I have  indicated  this 
on  the  accompanying  map  * by  a dotted  red-ink  line.  It  is  nearly 
bounded  north  by  Market  street  from  East  Bay  to  Meeting,  down 
Meeting  to  Horlbeck’s  alley,  and  along  Horlbeck’s  alley  to  King 
street;  west  by  King  street  from  Horlbeck’s  alley  to  Tradd  street; 
south  by  Tradd  street  from  corner  of  King  to  Church  street;  down 
Church  street  to  Longitude  lane,  and  along  that  lane  to  East  Bay,  and 
east  by  East  Bay  street.  Mr.  [T.  S.j  Hale,  the  observer  at  Saint 
Michael’s,  reports  that  “the  enemy’s  principal  line  of  fire  upon  the 
city  has  been  Saint  Michael’s  Church  steeple,  radiating  to  the  north- 
eastward as  far  as  Saint  Philip’s  Church,”  and  generally  limited 
westwardly  in  its  range  to  Archdale  street.  “ Since  January  1 the 
enemy  appears  to  have  made  Saint  Philip’s  Church  steeple  their  line 
of  fire,  hence  the  shells  striking  higher  up  in  the  city.”  On  the 
map  accompanying,  the  wards  are  marked  in  separate  colors,  and  the 
district  burned  in  1861  by  a dark-brown  tint.  The  shells  first  thrown 
at  the  city  were  200-pounder  Parrotts,  but  afterward  the  100-pounder 
Parrotts. 

People  are  occasionally  found  living  in  the  lower  part  of  the  city 
apparently  indifferent  to  the  danger  of  the  enemy’s  fire.  I think 
there  are  a good  many  west  of  Meeting  street.  The  Blakely  gun 
battery  appears  to  be  the  only  one  in  the  line  of  fire. 

Respectfully  submitted. 

HENRY  BRYAN, 

Major,  and  Assistant  Inspector-General . 

Lieut.  Col.  A.  Roman, 

Assist.  Insp.  Gen.,  Dept,  of  S.  C.,  Ga.,  and  Fla. 


No.  2. 

Reports  of  Col.  Alfred  Phett,  First  South  Carolina  Artillery. 

Hdqrs.  5th  Mil.  Dist.,  Dept,  of  S.  C.,  Ga.,  and  Fla., 

Charleston , January  1,  1864. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  make  the  following  report: 

On  the  morning  of  the  25th  instant  [ultimo],  at  12.30  a.  m.,  the 
enemy  commenced  to  shell  the  city,  firing  briskly.  This  shelling 
continued  up  to  1 p.  m.  of  the  same  date,  the  enemy  having  fired 
150  shells,  134  of  which  struck  in  the  city  and  16  fell  short. 

About  1.10  a.  m.  a fire,  supposed  to  be  occasioned  by  the  enemy’s 
shells,  broke  out  in  a building  on  the  north  side  of  Broad  street,  near 


*Not  found. 


Chap.  XL.] 


BOMBARDMENT  OF  CHARLESTON,  S.  C. 


685 


Church  street.  This  house,  together  with  the  one  adjoining,  were 
consumed.  The  sparks  ignited  the  house  at  south  corner  of  Church 
street  and  Saint  Michael’s  alley.  This  house,  three  adjoining,  and 
the  cotton  press  in  Church  street  were  consumed.  The  sparks  also 
ignited  a house  in  Tradd  street,  which  fire  was  soon  suppressed.  The 
regular  members  of  the  fire  department  were  rather  tardy  in  their 
attendance,  owing  to  some  mistake  in  ringing  the  bell,  but  on  their 
appearance  rendered  good  service.  I immediately  ordered  out  200 
men,  First  Regiment  State  Troops,  who  afterward  appeared  accom- 
panied by  Col.  T.  B.  Roberts.  The  fire  still  gaining  ground,  a de- 
tachment from  Company  A,  Lucas’  battalion,  Captain  [E.  B.]  CoL- 
houn,  and  Company  D,  First  Regiment  South  Carolina  Artillery, 
Capt.  McMillan  King,  were  ordered  out.  These  men  promptly  ap- 
peared and  rendered  material  aid  in  supressing  the  fire.  The  correct 
range  was  gained  by  one  gun  of  the  enemy,  which  threw  several 
shells  in  proximity  to  the  engines  and  the  fire. 

I beg  leave  to  call  your  attention  to  the  coolness  displayed  by  the 
men  working  the  A£tna  and  Marion  fire-engines,  especially  those  on 
the  former.  A shell  burst  very  near  the  engine,  but  the  men  con- 
tinued working  and  rendered  good  service. 

Casualties  occasioned  by  the  enemy’s  shells : Mr.  Knighton,  a 
man  eighty-three  years  old,  right  leg  shot  off  below  the  knee  by  a 
shell ; Miss  Plane,  wounded  on  foot  by  shell,  both  residing  in  house 
at  the  corner  Meeting  and  Market  streets ; Jerry  Murray,  a member 
of  Charleston  Fire  Engine  Company,  wounded  in  leg  by  a brick ; 
Sergt.  H.  P.  McClemons,  Company  H,  First  State  Troops,  contusion 
on  left  arm  by  a fragment  of  stone;  Thomas  R.  Brown,  private,  Com- 
pany H,  First  Regiment  State  Troops,  painfully  wounded  on  right 
hip  and  on  neck  by  a fragment  of  stone;  E.  Ballinger,  private,  Com- 
pany H,  First  Regiment  State  Troops,  arm  and  thigh  flesh  wound ; 
W.  Meadows,  Company  H,  First  Regiment  State  Troops,  contusion, 
thigh. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

ALFRED  RHETT, 

Colonel , Commanding. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan, 

Chief  of  Staff. 

[Indorsements.] 

January  2,  1864. 

If  the  men  referred  to  by  Colonel  Rhett  belong  to  the  service,  have 
the  act  mentioned  in  orders. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General , Commanding. 


It  seems  that,  from  the  letter  of  Colonel  Rhett,  the  men  who  worked 
the  engine  AStna  were  firemen.  Does  the  general  desire  these  to  be 
mentioned  in  orders  ? 

JNO.  M.  OTEY, 

Assistant  Adjutant-General. 


No  ; but  request  Colonel  Rhett  to  address  a note  on  the  subject  to 
the  mayor  of  the  city. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 


General , Commanding 


686  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

Hdqrs.  5th  Mil.  Dist.,  Dept,  of  S.  C.,  Ga.,  and  Fla., 

[March  4,  1864.] 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  report  herewith  the  total  number 
of  shots  fired  at  this  city  since  November  16.  Some  few  (say  301 
were  fired  previous  to  this  date. 

I here  take  occasion  to  call  to  your  attention  the  conduct  of  the  fire 
department  since  the  commencement  of  the  siege.  Since  November 
16,  fires  have  frequently  (almost  daily)  occurred,  and  the  promptitude 
and  the  alacrity  with  which  the  fire  department  has  responded  can- 
not be  too  much  praised.  The  enemy  has  always  shelled  rapidly 
whenever  a fire  has  occurred;  but  this  has  not  deterred  the  firemen 
from  the  discharge  of  their  duties. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

ALFRED  RHETT, 

Colonel,  Commanding. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan. 

[Inclosure.] 


Report  of  the  number  of  shots  fired  at  the  city  from  the  enemy's  batteries  on  Morris 

Island  up  to  date. 


Date. 

t 

Reached  city. 

Fell  short. 

Date. 

Reached  city. 

Fell  short. 

November  16  1863 

10 

5 

January  21,  1864  

59 

44 

ICnvember  1ft  1863 

10 

5 

January  22,  1864  

11 

Nov0ml^or  2^  1 , r T - - T 

15 

January  23,  1864  

9 

Novom^pr  21  186ft  - .-  TTt T t 

20 

January  24,  1864  

15 

November  22,  1863  

17 

January  26,  1864  

13 

November  27,  1863  

5 

January  28,  1864  

5 

.Ta  n ii  a ry  31  1864  . , 

89 

Total 

77 

10 

Total 

990 

533 

r)ppArnhpr  1 Iftfift 

g 

T)ftr*ftmhp.r  2 1863  

19 

February  1,  1864  

97 

3 

Deoemher  3 1863  

32 

February  2,  1864  

136 

18 

Deoemher  B 1863  . _ 

8 

February  3,  1864  

134 

124 

Deoemher  8 1863  

6 

February  4,  1864  

54 

43 

December  11  1863  .... 

8 

February  5,  1864  

27 

53 

Deoemher  12  1863  

4 

February  8,  1864  

5 

32 

Deoemher  14  1863  

7 

February  10,  1864  

11 

Dpppmhpr  15  1863  

10 

February  12,  1864  

4 

1 

Dpppmhpr  16  1863  

1 

1 

February  13,  1864  

1 

1 

Dpppmhpr  20  1863  

20 

11 

February  15,  1864  

4 

18 

Dpppmhpr  26  1863  

134 

16 

February  16,  1864  

11 

Dpppmhpr  28  1863  , 

5 

5 

February  18,  1864  

35 

63 

Dpppmhpr  29  1863  

8 

February  19,  1864  

14 

103 

Dpppmhpr  30  1863  

7 

February  20,  1864  

74 

18 

December  31  1863 

6 

February  21 , 1864  

3 

19 

February  22  1864  t 

6 

42 

Total  

283 

33 

February  23,  1864  

65 

58 

February  25  1864  

22 

53 

January  3 l^fi4  . - - - * - , 

13 

February  26,  1864  

31 

81 

January  5 1864  

16 

February  27,  1864  

72 

33 

January  9 18fi4  » t . 

38 

7‘ 

February  28,  1864  

100 

January  11  1864  

10 

February  29,  1864  

58 

Tannarv  12  1864 

33 

13 

January  13  1864  * , _ T t . 

97 

157 

Total 

964 

763 

Tannarv  14  1864 

111 

42 

January  15  1864  t . t t _ t 

119 

61 

March  1,  1864 

68 

36 

January  16  1864 

68 

8 

March  2,  1864 

146 

January  17  1864 

1*10 

10 

March  3,  1864 

22 

53 

Tannarv  18  1864 

88 

20 

January  19  1864 

67 

56 

Total ... 

236 

89 

January  20,  1864  

29 

105 

£hap.  XL.l  SINKING  OF  CONFEDERATE  TRANSPORT  SUMTER.  687 


RECAPITULATION. 


Month. 

Reached  city. 

Fell  short. 

Total  fired.  j 

77 

10 

87 

283 

33 

316 

990 

533 

1,523 

964 

763 

1,727 

236 

89 

325 

2,550 

1,428 

3,978 

Charleston,  March  4,  1864. 


[ALFRED  RHETT], 
Colonel , Commanding. 


ADDENDA. 


Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston,  S.  C.,  January  3,  1864. 

Col.  Alfred  Rhett,  Fifth  Military  District : 

Colonel  : I am  directed  by  the  commanding  general  to  request 
that  you  address  the  mayor  of  the  city  of  Charleston,  and  report  to 
him  the  efficient  manner  in  which  the  firemen  who  worked  the  en- 
gines JEi tna  and  Marion  performed  their  duty,  and  the  coolness  dis- 
played by  said  firemen  whilst  under  fire,  on  the  morning  of  the  25th 
ultimo. 

I am,  colonel,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JNO.  M.  OTEY, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


AUGUST  31,  1863. — Sinking  of  the  Confederate  Transport  Sumter  bj 
Batteries  on  Sullivan's  Island,  S.  C. 

REPORTS. 

No.  1. — Maj.  Gen.  Jeremy  F.  Gilmer,  C.  S.  Army. 

No  2. — Lieut.  Col.  Alfred  Roman,  Assistant  Inspector-General,  Department  of  South 
Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida. 

No.  3. — Lieut.  Col.  John  F.  Lay,  Assistant  Inspector-General,  C.  S.  Army. 

No.  4. — Maj.  Motte  A.  Pringle,  Quartermaster,  C.  S.  Army. 

No.  5. — Brig.  Gen.  Roswell  S.  Ripley,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  First  Military 
District. 

No.  6. — Brig.  Gen.  T.  L.  Clingman,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  on  Sullivan’s  Island. 
No.  7. — Col.  William  Butler,  First  South  Carolina  Infantry,  commanding  artillery. 
No.  8. — Maj.  Robert  De  Treville,  First  South  Carolina  Infantry,  commanding  Fort 
Moultrie. 

No.  9. — Col.  Alfred  Rhett,  First  South  Carolina  Artillery,  commanding  Fort  Sumter. 

No.  1. 

Report  of  Maj.  Gen.  Jeremy  F.  Gilmer,  C.  S.  Army. 

Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

x Charleston,  S.  C.,  September  22,  1863. 

General  : On  a review  of  all  the  papers  submitted  to  me  relative 
to  the  firing  into  the  steamer  Sumter  by  the  batteries  on  Sullivan’s 


688  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

Island,  the  night  of  the  30th  of  August  last,  I have  been  led  to  the 
following  conclusions,  viz : 

1.  The  steamer  Sumter  was  employed  on  the  30th  of  August,  1863, 
by  Maj.  Motte  A.  Pringle,  quartermaster  in  charge  of  transportation, 
to  convey  troops  from  the  city  of  Charleston  to  Morris  Island  and  to 
bring  others  from  that  island  to  the  city. 

2.  The  troops  were  landed  directly  from  the  steamer  near  Cum- 
ming’s  Point,  because  the  naval  boats  could  not  be  had  as  usual,  in 
consequence  of  an  expected  attack  from  the  enemy’s  fleet  that  night. 

3.  The  evening  of  the  30th  of  August,  a dispatch  was  sent  from  the 
headquarters  of  the  First  Military  District  of  this  department  to  the 
commander  at  Sullivan’s  Island,  enjoining  unusual  vigilance  against 
any  attempt  on  the  part  of  the  enemy  to  run  by  the  batteries.  In 
consequence,  officers  and  men  were  required  to  sleep  at  their  guns. 

4.  The  command  was  thus  on  the  alert,  looking  for  the  advance  of 
the  enemy’s  fleet,  which  might  be  expected  at  any  moment.  At  half 
past  1 o’clock  in  the  morning,  August  31,  a vessel  or  boat  was  seen 
approaching  from  the  direction  of  the  enemy  and  in  the  track  fol- 
lowed by  the  monitors  in  previous  attacks. 

5.  When  the  troops  that  were  to  be  brought  from  Morris  Island 
the  night  of  the  30th  ultimo  were  on  board  the  Sumter,  the  tide  had 
fallen  so  low  that  the  steamer  could  not  return  to  the  city  by  the  di- 
rect track  she  had  followed  in  going  to  the  island.  In  consequence, 
the  officer  in  charge  of  transportation  decided  to  return  by  passing 
around  the  Morris  Island  buoy  and  up  the  ship-channel. 

6.  No  notice  or  warning  of  this  decision  was  given  to  the  officers 
commanding  at  Fort  Sumter  and  on  Sullivan’s  Island,  nor  was  any 
light  provided  to  be  exhibited  on  board  the  steamer,  as  had  been  the 
custom  when  friendly  vessels  were  to  go  in  or  out  of  this  harbor. 

7.  The  vigilant  garrison  on  Sullivan’s  Island  opened  fire  on  the  ves- 
sel they  saw  approaching  along  the  ship-channel  from  the  direction 
of  the  enemy.  The  vessel  proved  to  be  the  Sumter. 

8.  An  effort  was  made  on  board  the  Sumter  to  exhibit  a light  after 
the  first  3 or  4 shots  had  been  fired,  but  nothing  better  than  a com- 
mon tallow  candle  could  be  found  for  the  purpose.  After  burning 
this  for  a short  time  it  was  put  out,  by  order  of  Lieut.  Col.  O.  M. 
Dantzler,  commanding  Twentieth  Regiment  South  Carolina  Volun- 
teers, as  he  feared  it  only  served  as  a mark  for  the  batteries,  without 
accomplishing  the  purpose  of  letting  them  know  that  the  boat  was 
a friendly  one.  It  was  lighted  again,  but  the  boat  was  now  in  a sink- 
ing condition. 

9.  No  blame  should  attach  to  the  officers  commanding  the  bat- 
teries. 

10.  To  the  failure  to  give  prior  notice  of  the  intention  to  bring  the 
steamer  Sumter  into  harbor  around  the  Morris  Island  buoy  and  up 
the  ship-channel,  or  to  exhibit  a distinct  light  on  board  as  she  ap- 
proached, must  be'attributed  the  loss  of  the  steamer.  Unfortunately, 
with  the  Sumter  were  lost  the  lives  of  several  brave  men  who  had 
served  nobly  in  defense  of  our  common  cause. 

11.  The  officer  whose  duty  it  was  to  give  notice  to  the  batteries 
of  the  intention  to  bring  the  steamer  Sumter,  with  the  troops  on 
board,  into  harbor  along  the  ship-channel,  should  be  held  to  a strict 
responsibility  for  the  disaster. 

12.  Does  this  responsibility  rest  on  the  officer  in  charge  of  the 
transportation  of  troops,  or  on  some  one  else?  If  the  statements  on 
this  point  bo  not  conclusive;  further  investigation  ought  to  be  insti- 


Chap.  XL.]  SINKING  OP  CONFEDERATE  TRANSPORT  SUMTER.  689 

tuted,  so  as  to  leave  no  doubt  as  to  whose  duty  it  was  to  give  the 
notice. 

The  papers  submitted  to  me  seem  to  place  this  duty  upon  the  officer 
charged  with  the  transportation. 

I have  the  honor  to  return  herewith  the  papers  bearing  upon  this 
subject  which  have  been  submitted  to  my  notice.* 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  F.  GILMER, 

Major-General,  Second  in  Command. 

General  G.  T.  Beauregard, 

Commanding  Department. 


[Indorsement.] 

Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 
Charleston,  S.  C.,  September  24,  1863. 

It  is  apparent  the  cause  of  the  disaster  referred  to  rests  mainly  on 
Major  Pringle,  post  quartermaster  in  charge  of  the  transportations 
that  night,  who  has  already  been  admonished  on  the  subject  from 
these  headquarters  on  the  11th  instant.  Major  Pringle’s  zeal,  energy, 
and  valuable  services  in  keeping  up  nightly  communications  with 
Morris  Island,  from  the  10th  of  July  last  to  the  7th  of  September,  es- 
pecially during  the  night  of  the  evacuation  of  the  island,  alone  shield 
him  from  trial  by  court-martial  for  neglecting  to  communicate  by  tele- 
graph to  the  batteries  on  Sullivan’s  Island  that  his  transport  steamer 
was  about  to  return  into  the  harbor,  passing  outside  of  Fort  Sumter. 
The  loss  of  the  boat  and  of  several  valuable  lives  were  necessarily 
the  consequence  of  his  oversight,  and  should  admonish  him  that 
vigilance  and  presence  of  mind  are  as  indispensable  as  zeal  and  energy 
to  those  placed  in  responsible  positions. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General,  Commanding. 


No.  2. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  Alfred  Roman,  Assistant  Inspector- General, 
Department  of  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida. 

Assistant  Inspector-General’s  Office, 

Charleston,  S.  C.,  September  6,  1863. 

General  : After  a careful  examination  of  the  evidence  offered  by 
Colonel  Butler  and  other  officers  of  Fort  Moultrie;  of  Colonel  Rhett, 
in  command  of  Fort  Sumter;  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Dantzler,  of  the 
Twentieth  South  Carolina  Regiment;  of  Major  Pringle,  assistant 
quartermaster,  and  others,  in  connection  with  the  sinking  of  the 
steamer  Sumter,  on  the  morning  of  the  31st  of  August  last,  by  the 
batteries  of  Moultrie,  I have  the  honor  to  report  as  follows  : 

That  many  unfortunate  circumstances  seem  to  have  concurred  on 
the  night  of  the  30th  of  August  to  render  almost  unavoidable  the  loss 
of  the  steamer  Sumter  and  of  the  lives  of  several  of  our  men. 

First.  The  want  of  a regular  system  of  night  signals  between  our 
transports  and  our  harbor  batteries. 

* See  the  reports  and  their  inclosures  following. 

44  R R — VOL  XXVIII,  PT  I 


[Chap.  XL. 


690  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

Second.  Small  boats,  intended  to  be  employed  that  night  for  the 
transportation  of  troops  to  and  from  Morris  Island  could  not  be 
used,  the  navy  failing  to  furnish  their  accustomed  aid,  on  account  of 
an  expected  attack. 

Third.  The  steamer  Sumter,  with  the  relief  troops  on  board,  had 
succeeded  in  running  almost  directly  from  Fort  Johnson  to  Cum- 
ming’s Point,  but  on  returning,  the  tide  being  low,  was  compelled  to 
change  her  course  and  to  follow  the  channel  around  the  Cumming's 
Point  buoy. 

Fourth.  Strict  orders  had  been  issued  from  district  headquarters, 
enjoining  upon  both  officers  and  men  extra  vigilance  against  any 
attempt  of  the  enemy  to  pass  our  batteries  under  cover  of  night. 

Fifth.  The  steamer  had  left  the  Cumming’s  Point  landing,  with- 
out giving  any  notice  either  to  Sumter  or  Moultrie  of  her  intention 
of  rounding  Cumming’s  Point  buoy. 

Sixth.  She  was  approaching  from  the  very  direction  of  the  enemy’s 
fleet,  from  which  several  monitors  had  been  seen  previously  to  come. 

Seventh.  The  steamer  had  no  light  displayed,  and  it  was  reason- 
able to  suppose  her  one  of  the  enemy’s  fleet,  in  view  of  the  expecta- 
tion that  they  would  attempt  to  enter  the  harbor  by  this  very  channel. 

It  was  acting  upon  this  suspicion,  or  belief,  that  the  commanding 
officer  of  Moultrie  opened  his  batteries  upon,  what  seemed  to  him,  a 
vessel  of  the  enemy.  The  statements  made  by  the  officers  of  Moul- 
trie (see  Exhibits  A,  C,  D,  E,  F,  G,  H,  &c.  *)  show  that  no  fault  lies 
with  them.  They  did  not  hear  the  whistle  of  the  steamer;  they 
saw  but  a dim  light,  which  was  soon  put  out ; and  the  lights  on  Bat- 
tery Gregg  and  Fort  Sumter  were  only  displayed  when  the  steamer 
had  already  been  fired  into  several  times.  Lieutenant-Colonel  Dantz- 
ler,  then  on  the  steamer,  and  in  command  of  the  Twentieth  South 
Carolina  (see  Exhibit  Bf),  says  that  the  whistle  was  blown,  but 
neither  clearly  nor  loudly ; and  he  doubts  whether  it  could  have 
been  heard  on  the  island  amid  the  roaring  of  the  guns.  The  officers 
at  the  fort  did  not  hear  it.  True  it  is  that  Private  A.  J.  Brock, 
Company  E,  Twentieth  South  Carolina,  on  detached  service  in  the 
commissary  department,  says  he  saw  a light,  heard  something  like 
a whistle,  and  also  the  hallooing  of  men;  but  he  said  nothing  to  any 
of  the  officers  at  the  batteries,  and  did  not  even  leave  the  commissary 
house.  Corporal  [James  A.]  Bigby,  of  the  same  company  and  regi- 
ment, saw  the  same  light  and  heard  the  same  whistle ; but  he  also 
was  silent,  and  only  knew  of  the  fatal  result  the  next  morning.  Pri- 
vate [ J.  N.  ] Corbett,  of  Company  G,  Twentieth  South  Carolina  Regi- 
ment, on  detached  service  at  quartermaster’s  department,  saw  a boat 
coming,  but  thought  it  was  a monitor;  saw  a light  after  the  firing 
had  commenced,  but  heard  no  sounds.  The  cry  of  distress,  he  says, 
was  distinctly  heard  by  several  persons  on  the  island,  but,  as  the  belief 
was  that  it  came  from  a boat  belonging  to  the  enemy’s  fleet,  no  further 
notice  of  it  was  taken  by  him  or  others.  In  ordinary  circumstances, 
and  in  the  absence  of  all  orders  as  to  the  intention  of  the  enemy  to 
effect  a passage  that  night  in  the  harbor,  it  is  more  than  likely  that 
the  officers  in  command  at  Moultrie  would  have  been  less  precipitate 
and  less  excited,  and  would  not  have  opened  their  fire  as  soon  as  they 
did. 

But,  on  the  other  hand,  excess  of  prudence  under  the  existing  cir- 
cumstances might  have  led  to  a far  greater  disaster  than  that  which 
has  befallen  us,  and,  to  the  utter  shame  of  the  Moultrie  garrison,  a 


Exhibits  printed  as  inclosures,  following. 


f See  p.  695. 


Chap.  XL.]  SINKING  OF  CONFEDERATE  TRANSPORT  SUMTER.  691 

Federal  gunboat  or  a monitor  might  have  been  allowed  to  enter  the 
Charleston  Harbor  without  being  interfered  with. 

Having  thus  exonerated  the  officers  of  Fort  Moultrie  from  all 
criminality,  it  remains  to  ascertain  what,  if  any,  blame  should  at- 
tach to  the  parties  connected  with  the  steamer  and  responsible  for 
her  movements. 

Lieutenant-Colonel  Dantzler  was  the  ranking  officer  on  board, 
but  from  the  statement  of  both  himself  and  Major  Pringle  (see 
Exhibits  B*  and  Sf)  it  seems  that  the  latter  had  the  actual  com- 
mand of  the  boat. 

Major  Pringle,  whose  zeal  and  activity  from  the  beginning  of  this 
siege  to  the  present  moment  have  been  so  highly  creditable,  was, 
indeed,  in  a perplexing  situation.  He  had  been  compelled  to  use  a 
steamer,  instead  of  small  boats  as  usual,  to  convey  the  relief  troops 
to  Morris  Island.  The  delays  apparently,  always  unavoidable  with 
volunteer  troops,  caused  him  to  arrive  at  Cumming’s  Point  landing 
when  the  tide  was  already  falling.  To  return  with  the  troops  relieved 
he  had  to  do  one  of  two  things,  either  to  wait  for  the  tide  and  then 
be  exposed  to  the  enemy’s  fire  in  broad  daylight,  or  to  run  in  the 
channel  around  the  Cumming’s  Point  buoy.  He  preferred  the  latter 
course,  and  acted  accordingly.  I must  say  here,  however,  that  Major 
Pringle,  who  knew  he  was  taking  an  unusual  way  of  returning  to 
the  city  with  the  steamer,  should  not  have  left  the  Cumming’s  Point 
landing  without  notifying  Sumter  and  Moultrie  of  the  course  it  was 
his  intention  to  follow.  That  omission  of  his  was  certainly  a very 
unfortunate  occurrence,  for  he  knew,  or  ought  to  have  known,  that 
rumors  of  an  attack  by  the  Federal  fleet  that  very  night  was  the 
common  topic  of  the  town.  Had  he  called  on  the  signal  station  at 
Cumming’s  Point,  and  sent  a dispatch  to  Fort  Sumter,  the  disaster 
we  all  so  deeply  deplore,  and  which  the  major,  when  it  occurred,  did 
so  much  to  lessen  by  his  exertions  on  the  steamer  (see  Exhibit  B and 
U),  would  certainly  not  have  happened.  My  conviction,  however, 
is  that  Major  Pringle,  who  is  liable  to  that  measure  of  blame  which 
I have  stated  above — that  is,  of  imprudence,  of  oversight — is  not  the 
party  to  whom  all  the  blame  should  attach.  The  general  in  com- 
mand of  the  First  Military  District  ought  to  have  organized  long 
since  a regular  concerted  system  of  night  signals  between  our  trans- 
ports and  our  harbor  batteries,  and  somewhat  similar  to  the  one 
existing,  as  I am  officially  informed  (see  Exhibit  W),  with  regard  to 
the  navy.  It  cannot  for  a moment  be  doubted  that  such  a system, 
had  it  been  properly  established  and  rigidly  enforced,  would  have 
prevented  this  most  unfortunate  loss  of  property  and  life. 

Respectfully, 

ALFRED  ROMAN, 

Lieutenant- Colonel,  and  Assistant  Inspector- General. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan,  Chief  of  Staff. 


No.  3. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  John  F.  Lay,  Assistant  Inspector -General, 

C.  S.  Army. 

Charleston,  S.  C.,  September  4,  1863. 
Colonel  : In  obedience  to  instructions,  I visited  Sullivan’s  Island 
yesterday  with  reference  to  a full  investigation  of  all  the  facts  and 

*See  p.  694. 


f See  p.  700. 


692  S.  C.  AND  GrA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

circumstances  connected  with  the  firing  into,  and  sinking,  the  trans- 
port steamer  Sumter,  by  our  batteries  on  that  island.  I sought  out 
parties,  and  invited  full  statements  from  all  who  could  shed  any 
light  upon  the  subject,  and  believe  I have  gathered  every  material 
fact  within  reach.  I submit  statements  of  officers,  marked,  respect- 
ively, as  Exhibits  A,  B,  C,  D,  E,  F,  G,  H,  I,  K,  L,  M,  N,  O,  and  P, 
being  from  the  commanding  officers,  officers  of  batteries,  and  others 
who  had  full  opportunities  of  observation.  I also  add  statements  of 
a few  parties,  taken  down  by  me. 

1.  Lieut.  B.  H.  Barton,  Company  B,  Twentieth  Regiment  South 
Carolina  Volunteers,  states  that  he  was  on  the  steamer,  which  left 
Cumming’s  Point  about  2 a.  m.  on  Monday,  31st  ultimo.  The  boat 
was  crowded,  and  he  was  ordered  by  Major  Pringle  to  take  his  com- 
pany upon  the  upper  deck,  which  he  did.  The  boat  started  and  steered 
out  past  the  sand-bar  from  Sumter,  and  was  proceeding  up  the  ship- 
channel  when  he  heard  some  one  cry  out  that  we  were  being  fired  upon. 
He  soon  heard  the  ball,  and  saw  it  splash  upon  the  water  ; he  then 
heard  some  one  call,  “Blow  the  whistle.”  He  was  standing  near  the 
whistle.  No  one  that  he  could  see  came  to  do  so,  and  a sergeant  of 
his  company  blew  the  whistle.  After  the  second  shot  had  been  fired, 
which  also,  he  thinks,  missed  the  boat,  the  sergeant  blew  the  whistle 
very  rapidly,  evidently  showing  that  he  was  unacquainted  with  it 
or  its  use.  He  ordered  him  to  stop  and  let  the  negro  pilot,  who 
knew  how,  come  and  blow  it ; the  negro  came  and  blew  it  a little; 
said  something  about  its  being  out  of  order,  and  left.  During  this 
time,  several  shots  had  been  fired,  the  boat  struck,  and  one  man 
killed.  Major  Pringle  had  come  out  with  a lantern,  with  a candle 
in  it,  for  a few  seconds.  Another  shot  was  fired,  and  he  saw  him 
put  it  down  and  leave  ; a private  of  his  company  took  it  up  and  held 
it  up  as  high  as  he  could,  and  at  times  waved  it.  He  heard  an  offi- 
cer call  out  the  boat  was  sinking,  and  saw  him  wading  from  the 
boat;  he  could  not  swim,  but  jumped  off  and  made  his  way  as  best 
he  could  to  Fort  Sumter.  He  thinks  the  boat  was  from  800  to  1,000 
yards  from  Fort  Sumter  when  first  struck,  and  also  thinks  the  boat 
stopped  at  the  first  fire,  but  does  not  recollect  that  she  let  off  steam. 
After  jumping  off  he  saw  a light  on  Fort  Sumter. 

2.  Private  Brock  states  that  he  is  detailed  in  the  commissary  de- 

partmeii'  11  1 ™ 1 J he  came  out  when  the 


called  him,  saying  he 


second 


heard  a noise  like  a monitor  coming  in  ; he  saw  a light  from  the 
boat.  Bigby  said  he  thought  they  were  signaling  the  other  boats  to 
come  up  ; the  light  was  a common  one,  held  high  up,  and  he  heard 
something  like  a steam  whistle  blown,  and  thought  he  could  hear 
men  hallooing ; he  saw  no  light  from  Sumter  ; he  could  see  an  object, 
but  could  not  make  it  out  ; thought  it  was  a boat,  but  could  not 
tell  what  kind.  He  did  not  leave  the  commissary  house. 

3.  Corporal  Bigby  states  that  he  was  up  most  of  the  night  in 
question  on  duty,  and  saw  the  boat  before  she  was  fired  into;  he  looked 
at  it  for  some  time,  but  did  not  know  what  to  make  of  it;  it  was  light 
enough  to  see  it  was  a boat,  but  too  dark  to  discover  its  description. 
It  seemed  to  be  coming  across  toward  Fort  Moultrie.  Very  soon  it 
was  fired  on,  and  he  called  Mr.  Brock.  After  the  first  shot,  he  saw  a 
small  light  waving  on  the  boat,  and  heard  a great  deal  of  hallooing; 
he  saw  a shot  strike  and  seem  to  go  through  the  boat,  and  thought 
somebody  was  hurt  ; he  thought  it  was  an  enemy’s  boat,  as  it  made 
a noise  like  a monitor  when  it  blew  its  whistle.  He  was  at  the  com- 


Chap.  XL.]  SINKING  OF  CONFEDERATE  TRANSPORT  SUMTER. 


693 


missary  house  near  to  the  beach,  and  just  above  Battery  Bee.  After 
the  firing  had  commenced,  he  saw  a light  on  Fort  Sumter  and  asked 
what  it  meant.  He  did  not  find  out  it  was  our  boat  until  the  next 
morning. 

4.  Private  Corbett  states  that  he  is  detailed  in  the  quartermaster 
department;  that  on  the  night  in  question  he  was  sitting  on  the 
piazza  (that  his  eye-sight  is  not  very  good),  and  saw  what  appeared 
to  him  to  be  a monitor,  stationary  after  the  firing  had  commenced; 
he  saw  a light  upon  her  but  heard  no  sounds.  He  was  just  in  rear 
of  Captain  Rivers’  battery,  but  that  the  cry  of  distress  was  dis- 
tinctly heard  by  many  who  were  lower  down  on  the  island,  and 
farther  from  the  batteries.  Others  were  sitting  with  me,  and  no 
doubt  was  expressed  as  to  its  being  a monitor.  The  boat  was  flat 
in  front  and  rear,  and  the  moonlight  falling  upon  it,  gave  it  the 
appearance  of  a turret  and  smoke-stack  in  front  of  it. 

5.  Private  [Nathan]  Porter  states  that  he  sleeps  in  a room  ad- 
joining the  signal  corps.  Fifteen  minutes  before  the  firing  com- 
menced he  heard  the  sentinel  trying  to  rouse  up  some  members  of 
the  corps,  and  after  the  firing  had  commenced  still  heard  him  mak- 
ing the  effort;  he  heard  him  ringing  the  bell,  and  calling  out  loudly, 
and  heard  some  one  go  in  the  house  in  the  effort  to  rouse  them  up. 
He  and  others  with  him  say  that  “no  member  of  the  signal  corps 
roused  up  or  came  out  until  after  the  firing  had  ceased.” 

6.  Corporal  [J.  F.]  North  states  that  he  was  awake  half  an  hour 
before  the  firing  commenced,  and  about  fifteen  minutes  before  it 
commenced  he  heard  the  sentinel  calling  up  the  signal  corps  ; that 
the  ringing  of  the  bell  and  calling  out  continued  while  the  firing 
lasted,  and  when  it  was  over  they  were  not  up.  He  heard  the  sen- 
tinel call  to  them  that  there  was  a light  on  the  Point  and  a light 
on  Sumter.  After  the  firing  was  over,  he  heard  one  of  the  signal 
men  curse  the  sentinel,  and  ask  him  what  the  h— 11  he  was  ringing 
that  bell  for.  He  could  see  the  boat  they  were  firing  at,  but  could 
not  tell  what  kind  of  boat  she  was ; he  saw  no  light  upon  her,  nor 
heard  any  sound  from  her;  until  after  going  into  his  house  he  thought 
he  heard  men  hallooing;  he  saw  light  on  Cumming’s  Point,  and  upon 
Fort  Sumter,  shortly  after  the  firing  commenced  ; he  heard  the  sen- 
tinel call  out  that  the  light  was  on  the  point  before  the  firing  com- 
menced. 

This  concludes  all  the  testimony  which  I could  learn  of.  Much  of 
this  is  irrelevant  to  the  main  question.  The  testimony  in  behalf  of 
the  steamboat  and  those  upon  it  has  been  taken  by  yourself,  with 
the  exception  of  that  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Dantzler  and  Lieutenant 
Barton,  taken  by  me. 

Taking  the  statements  from  Sullivan’s  Island,  and  in  the  main 
they  agree,  I can  see  no  just  foundation  to  attach  criminality  to  the 
firing  into  the  Sumter,  under  all  the  circumstances.  It  seems  to  have 
been  a sad  result,  wrought  out  by  a combination  of  circumstances, 
and  where  the  motives  of  all  parties  were  pure  and  beyond  question. 
The  night,  though  not  dark,  was  moonlight  obscured  by  clouds. 
The  boat  approached  from  a direction  from  which  the  enemy  were  ex- 
pected, and  from  its  peculiar  make,  in  the  dim  haze,  presented  the 
appearance  of  a monitor.  No  system  of  signals  prevailed  in  the 
harbor.  The  expectation  of  the  enemy’s  fleet,  and  the  orders  for 
vigilance,  had  aroused  a degree  of  natural  excitement.  Perhaps  in 
* a time  of  less  excitement,  when  more  calm  deliberation  would  have 
prevailed,  some  suspicion  might  have  been  aroused  as  to  the  charac- 


[Chap.  XL. 


694  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

ter  of  the  vessel,  and  a greater  caution  in  firing  have  prevailed,  and 
the  suggestion  of  Major  De  Treville  to  Colonel  Butler  might  have 
caused  an  immediate  suspension  of  fire;  but  under  the  natural  excite- 
ment of  the  moment,  and  the  feeling  of  pride  involved  in  allowing 
perhaps  an  enemy’s  boat  unmolested  to  pass  the  fort,  and  the  great 
doubt  as  to  her  character,  this  firing,  however  sad  and  unfortunate 
in  its  results,  cannot,  in  my  opinion,  reflect  criminally  upon  the  gar- 
rison engaged  in  it. 

It  is  very  evident,  from  the  testimony  given  above,  supported  by 
statement  of  Captain  Woodward,  assistant  quartermaster  (Exhibit 
G),  that  the  signal  corps  upon  the  island,  under  its  present  system, 
cannot  be  relied  upon,  and  that  great  reform  is  needed  to  render 
their  services  of  any  value. 

Respectfully  submitted. 

JNO.  F.  LAY, 

Acting  Inspector- General, 

Lieut.  Col.  A.  Roman, 

Assistant  Inspector-General. 


[Inclosure  No.  1.] . 

Hdqrs.  Twentieth  Regiment  South  Carolina  Vols., 

Sullivan’s  Island , September  3,  1863. 

Col.  J.  F.  Lay: 

Colonel  : I was  on  board  of  the  steamer  Sumter,  in  command  of 
the  Twentieth  South  Carolina  Volunteers,  when  she  was  proceeding 
from  Morris  to  Sullivan’s  Island  on  the  night  of  the  30th  of  August. 
When  she  had  gotten  to  a point  nearly  opposite  to  the  Sullivan’s 
Island  batteries,  in  or  near  ship-channel,  she  was  fired  upon  by  one 
of  those  batteries.  Being  the  senior  officer  present,  I immediately 
ordered  a light  to  be  displayed,  which  was  done  for  four  or  five  min- 
utes, but  nothing  better  than  a common  tallow  candle  could  be  had. 

The  firing  continued  rapidly,  and  with  more  accuracy  after  the 
light  was  put  up  than  before,  and  I therefore  ordered  it  to  be  put 
out.  The  whistle  was  also  blown,  but  from  some  cause  it  did  not 
blow  clearly  or  loudly ; I doubt  if  it  could  be  heard  at  Sullivan’s 
Island  amidst  the  noise  of  manning  the  batteries.  A brilliant  light 
was  also  displayed  on  the  parapet  of  Fort  Sumter  and  at  Battery 
Gregg. 

A pretty  brisk  fire  was  kept  up  on  the  steamer  until  a small  boat, 
which  I dispatched  for  this  purpose,  arrived  at  Sullivan’s  Island  and 
gave  information  that  we  were  friends.  The  steamer  came  to  a dead 
halt,  within  20  yards  at  farthest,  after  she  was  first  fired  on,  by  run- 
ning aground,  and  there  remained.  The  night  was  a moonlight  one, 
but  the  atmosphere  was  a little  hazy.  I think  that  the  boat  might 
have  been  distinguished  from  a monitor,  but  of  this  I am  not  sure. 
The  Moultrie  House  and  others  on  Sullivan’s  Island  were  quite  dis- 
tinct from  the  steamer. 

Maj.  Motte  A.  Pringle,  assistant  quartermaster,  was  on  board  of 
the  steamer,  but  whether  or  not  he  was  in  command  I do  not  know. 
He  displayed  great  coolness  on  the  occasion,  and  was  very  active 
in  his  efforts  to  save  the  men  from  the  wreck.  I desire  to  say  em- 
phatically that  I had  not  the  remotest  idea  that  the  steamer  was 
going  by  the  ship-channel,  or  certainly  would  not  have  allowed  it 


Chap.  XL.]  SINKING  OF  CONFEDERATE  TRANSPORT  SUMTER.  695 

before  first  signaling  to  Sumter  and  Moultrie.  I was  in  the  captain’s 
cabin  and  did  not  notice  the  direction.  There  were  three  casualties 
in  the  Twentieth  Regiment,  2 killed  and  1 wounded.  None  drowned. 

O.  M.  DANTZLER, 

Lieutenant- Colonel,  Twentieth  South  Carolina  Volunteers. 

P.  S. — The  first  shot  fired  struck  some  distance  behind  the  boat. 

Hdqrs.  Twentieth  South  Carolina  Volunteers, 

Sullivan’s  Island,  September  4,  1863. 

Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General : 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  while  the  Twentieth 
Regiment  South  Carolina  Volunteers  was  being  conveyed  from  Mor- 
ris Island  to  this  place,,  on  Sunday  night  last,  August  30,  on  board  of 
the  steamer  Sumter,  she  was  fired  upon  by  the  batteries  on  Sulli- 
van’s Island.  The  whistle  was  immediately  blown,  but,  from  some 
cause,  the  sound  was  not  clear  or  loud;  and  I doubt  if  it  could  be 
heard  at  Sullivan’s  Island,  amidst  the  noise,  &c.,  of  manning  the 
guns.  A light  was  also  displayed  for  several  minutes,  but  as  it 
seemed  only  to  serve  as  a guide  or  mark  for  the  batteries,  I ordered 
it  to  be  put  out.  It  was  a tallow  candle  (there  being  no  other  light 
on  board),  and  it  may  not  have  been  observed  at  the  batteries,  though 
I thought  it  was  at  the  time.  A brilliant  light  was  displayed  in  the 
meanwhile  at  Battery  Gregg,  and  on  the  parapet  of  Fort  Sumter.  The 
boat  came  to  a dead  halt  as  soon  as  fired  upon,  running  aground  before 
she  proceeded  20  yards  after  being  first  fired  upon.  I would  judge  that 
some  30  shots  were  fired,  and  3 took  effect,  2 striking  her  below  low- 
water  mark,  and  the  third  cutting  down  2 of  the  men  of  the  Twentieth, 
on  the  lower  deck,  and  wounding  another.  The  men  were  relieved  by 
small  boats  and  barges,  which  were  sent  from  Fort  Sumter  and  Fort 
Johnson,  but  lost  nearly  all  of  their  guns,  accouterments,  and  am- 
munition. I had  some  70  guns  gathered  up  on  the  upper  deck  by 
a boat’s  crew  after  the  men  got  off.  I have  made  requisition  for 
the  guns,  &c.,  needed,  and  solicit  your  aid  in  having  us  speedily 
supplied. 

I should  have  stated  that  the  batteries  on  Sullivan’s  Island  did 
not  cease  firing  until  the  arrival  there  of  a small  boat  which  I had 
dispatched  to  give  notice  that  we  were  friends. 

The  boat  went  under  water  as  the  tide  rose,  and  capsized  a few 
hours  after  she  was  abandoned.  I saw  all  the  troops  safe  on  board 
of  the  transports  before  leaving  the  wreck. 

Respectfully  submitted. 

O.  M.  DANTZLER, 

Lieutenant-  Colonel,  Commanding. 

[Indorsement.] 

Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

September  5,  1863. 

Respectfully  referred  to  Lieutenant-Colonel  Roman,  in  connection 
with  the  other  papers  on  the  same  subject. 

By  command  of  General  Beauregard  : 

JOHN  F.  O’BRIEN, 

Major , and  Assistant  Adjutant- General, 


[Chap.  XL. 


696  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

[Inclosure  No.  2.] 

Battery  D,  Sullivan’s  Island,  September  3,  1863. 
Colonel  Lay,  Assistant  Inspector- General,  dec. : 

Colonel  : I have  the  honor  to  make  the  following  statement  in 
reference  to  the  firing  into  the  steamer  Sumter  : 

On  the  night  on  which  it  occurred — I have  forgotten  whether  it 
was  Sunday  or  Monday  night — officers  and  men  were  all  sleeping  in 
the  batteries,  I at  the  Brooke  gun  and  Lieutenant  Singleton  at  the 
10-inch  columbiads.  At  12  o’clock  we  had  been  roused  by  the  sen- 
tinel observing  a small  boat  some  distance  off  the  grillage,  in  front 
of  my  battery.  I had  the  guns  all  manned,  and  sent  a man  to  the 
beach  to  hail.  The  boat  proved  to  be  a post-boat,  with  Captain 
Adams,  coming  from  Sumter.  I mention  this  to  show  that  we  were 
on  the  lookout.  Some  time  after  2 a.  m.  I was  aroused  by  hearing 
the  sergeant  waking  the  detachment,  and  saying  that  a vessel  was 
running  in.  It  was  shown  to  me  as  soon  as  I got  upon  the  battery, 
and  very  soon  after  a shot  was  thrown  from  Moultrie  or  Battery  K, 
and  the  firing  soon  became  general,  all  three  of  the  guns  of  my  bat- 
tery firing.  Very  soon  after  the  alarm  was  given,  Colonel  Butler 
came  on  the  battery  and  encouraged  us  to  fire  carefully  but  rapidly. 
I never  doubted  for  a second  that  she  was  a hostile  vessel,  for  I had 
no  glass,  could  see  no  light,  and  all  those  around  me  seemed  to  have 
no  doubt  of  it.  I only  fired  2 shots  from  the  Brooke  gun.  Lieuten- 
ant Singleton,  in  charge  of  the  columbiads,  fired  9.  I never  saw 
any  light  on  board  the  steamer,  heard  no  whistle;  but,  after  the 
firing  ceased,  I heard  her  apparently  letting  off  steam.  I think  the 
night,  though  moonlight,  was  cloudy ; certainly  nothing  more  than 
a dark,  shapeless  object  could  be  descried  with  the  naked  eye.  The 
hour  was  between  2 and  3 a.  m.  I saw  a light  on  Sumter  just  before 
the  firing  ceased.  The  steamer  did  not  move  from  the  time  I first 
saw  her  to  the  end  of  the  affair. 

Respectfully, 

R.  Y.  DWIGHT, 

Lieutenant,  First  S.  C.  [ Regular ] Infantry,  Comdg.  Battery . 

[Inclosure  No.  3.] 

Fort  Moultrie,  September  3,  1863. 

I hereby  certify  that  very  soon  after  the  fire  was  opened  from  this 
fort  on  the  steamer  Sumter  I was  on  the  parapet,  and  remained  there 
until  the  firing  ceased ; that  I saw  no  light  shown  from  the  boat, 
nor  did  I hear  any  whistle  blow.  There  was  nothing  attending  the 
whole  affair  that  indicated  to  the  officer  in  command  of  this  fort 
that  it  was  one  of  our  steamers  until  a small  boat  was  discovered 
coming  ashore,  at  which  time  the  firing  ceased. 

W.  T.  FARROW, 

Chaplain,  First  South  Carolina  [ Regular ] Infantry. 

[Inclosure  No.  4.] 

Statement  of  Benjamin  Hernandez,  cockswain  on  the  harbor  trans- 
port. 

Inspector-General’s  Office, 

Charleston,  S.  C.,  September  4,  1863. 

Benjamin  Hernandez,  a private  in  the  Charleston  Battalion,  now 
on  detached  service  as  cockswain  on  the  harbor  transport,  makes  the 


Chap.  XL.]  SINKING  OF  CONFEDERATE  TRANSPORT  SUMTER.  697 

• 

following  statement  as  regards  the  sinking  of  the  steamer  Snmter 
on  the  31st  of  August  last : 

He  was  asleep  when  the  steamer  left  Cumming’s  Point  with  the 
troops  that  had  been  relieved  from  Morris  Island.  Just  before  the 
steamer  reached  the  Cumming’s  Point  buoy,  he  was  awakened  by 
order  of  Major  Pringle,  and  went  to  the  pilot-house,  where  shortly 
afterward  he  saw  the  buoy  on  the  starboard  bow.  The  first  shot 
from  Moultrie  was  fired,  he  thinks,  before  the  boat  rounded  the  buoy. 
After  2 or  3 shots  were  fired  he  had  the  whistle  blown;  it  was  twice. 
But  as  it  appeared  to  do  no  good,  he  then  thought  of  having  the 
small  boat  sent  to  Sullivan’s  Island,  to  have  the  firing  stopped. 

Looking  for  the  boat,  he  found  that  Captain  Riley  was  getting  it 
ready.  He  left,  with  Captain  Riley,  and  when  about  half  way  to- 
ward Sullivan’s  Island,  saw  a light  on  the  steamer,  just  between  the 
wheel  and  pilot  house  on  the  starboard  side.  He  had  seen  no  light 
on  the  steamer  before  that  time.  The  fort  was  still  firing,  however ,t 
and  continued  to  until  the  small  boat  had  actually  reached  the  beach. 

He  accompanied  Captain  Riley  to  Fort  Moultrie,  and  the  officers 
were  informed  that  the  steamer  they  were  firing  into  was  the  Sum- 
ter, one  of  our  own  harbor  boats.  He  went  back  with  Captain  Riley 
to  the  steamer,  and  afterward  used  the  small  boat  to  go  to  Fort 
Johnson,  with  the  hope  of  getting  the  steamer  Chesterfield  to  come 
to  the  assistance  of  the  troops  on  board  the  SumteT.  The  Chester- 
field being  out  of  order,  he  collected  what  small  boats  he  could  get, 
and  the  navy  furnishing  a few,  he  made  way  again  toward  the  Sum- 
ter. It  was  then  about  6 a.  m.  The  troops  were  transferred  from 
the  steamer  to  Fort  Sumter,  and  about  two  boat-loads  to  Sullivan’s 
Island. 

All  the  troops  being  then  removed,  and  it  being,  as  far  as  he  can 
judge,  about  9 a.  m.,  he  came  back  to  Charleston. 

BENJAMIN  HERNANDEZ. 


[Inclosure  No.  5.] 

Battery  Bee,  September  3,  1863. 

Lieutenant-Colonel  Lay  : 

Colonel  : In  obedience  to  your  request,  I have  the  honor  to  make 
the  following  statement  in  regard  to  the  steamer  Sumter  on  the 
night  of  the  30th  August,  1863  : 

I was  aroused  during  the  night  of  the  30th  of  August,  and  from 
habit  looked  over  the  bay  to  see  if  there  was  any  change  in  the 
condition  of  things  ; thought  I observed  a dark  object  in  the  direc- 
tion of  Cumming’s  Point ; brought  a strong  glass  and  thought  I 
made  out  one  of  our  river  steamers  ; went  to  bed.  Some  time  after 
heard  firing;  examined  again  with  the  glass,  made  out  the  same 
steamer  very  far  toward  the  fleet;  observed  her  for  some  time, 
and  thought  she  was  turning  to  come  in.  She  showed  a light, 
and  I heard  what  I thought  was  a feeble  whistle ; concluded  it  was 
one  of  our  steamers,  and,  not  feeling  myself  responsible,  went  to 
bed  again.  I did  not  know  until  the  next  day  that  our  fire  was  at 
that  boat. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

JNO.  G.  K.  GOURDIN, 

Lieutenant,  First  South  Carolina  [ Regular ] Infantry. 


LChap.  XL. 


698  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

' [Inclosure  No.  6.] 

Statement  of  J.  R Riley , captain  of  steamer  Sumter . 

Inspector-General’s  Office, 
Charleston , S.  C.,  September  3,  1863. 

James  R.  Riley,  captain  of  the  steamer  Sumter,  sunk  during  the 
night  of  August  30,  1863,  by  the  firing  of  Fort  Moultrie,  makes  the 
following  statement : 

It  was  low  tide  when  he  left  Morris  Island  with  the  troops  that 
had  been  relieved.  The  steamer  could  not  come  back  from  point  to 
point,  but  had  to  go  round  the  channel  way,  which  is  at  Cumming’s 
Point  buoy.  As  he  rounded  that  buoy,  and  at  about  50  yards  from 
it,  Fort  Moultrie  opened  fire  upon  the  steamer.  The  first  shot  fell 
short,  the  second  went  over  the  steamer,  and  the  third  struck  her 
hull  under  the  starboard  water  wheel.  The  fourth  shot  killed  2 
men  ; he  does  not  know  how  many  were  wounded.  After  the  third 
shot,  he  steered  his  boat  ashore  on  the  east  end  of  fort  reef.  He  then 
lowered  his  small  boat  and  went  to  Fort  Moultrie,  to  stop  the  firing. 
The  fort  kept  firing  until  he  landed  on  the  beach.  When  he  did  so 
he  begged  the  officers  to  stop  their  firing ; that  the  steamer  ahead 
was  the  Sumter,  one  of  our  harbor  transports.  A light,  called  bull’s- 
eye  light,  was  shown  on  the  steamer  after  the  first  shot  was  fired.  It 
was  held  in  front,  on  the  upper  deck,  and  on  the  starboard  side  of 
the  pilot-house,  by  Major  Pringle  in  person.  That  light  was  so  held 
even  after  he  got  on  the  Moultrie  shore,  and  was  very  distinct  from 
that  point.  Besides  the  light,  the  whistle  was  blown  also,  imme- 
diately after  the  first  shot.  It  was  blown  in  the  usual  way,  three 
blasts  in  succession,  as  when  signals  are  made  to  Fort  Sumter.  He 
had  never  received  orders  on  that  or  any  other  occasion  to  use  sig- 
nals for  Fort  Moultrie.  After  speaking  to  the  officers  of  Fort 
Moultrie,  he  went  back  to  the  steamer  and  sent  a small  boat  to 
Fort  Sumter  in  charge  of  Mr.  Benjamin  Hernandez,  with  orders  to 
telegraph  immediately  to  Charleston  for  assistance. 

When  he  reached  his  steamer  after  having  been  at  Moultrie,  as 
stated  above,  he  found  most  of  the  troops  still  on  board.  Some, 
however,  had  jumped  overboard,  and  were  standing  in  the  water 
about  2 feet  deep.  Small  boats,  nine  or  ten  in  all,  and  one  of  them 
from  Sullivan’s  Island,  in  charge  of  Captain  Pinckney,  came  to 
assist  the  troops.  It  was  about  5 a.  m.  Several  trips  were  made 
from  the  steamer  to  Fort  Sumter,  and  as  the  enemy’s  batteries  had 
begun  to  open  on  the  fort,  the  troops  rescued  from  the  steamer  were 
transferred  from  Fort  Sumter  to  Sullivan’s  Island.  Lieutenant-Col- 
onel Dantzler,  Major  Pringle,  and  he — the  captain  of  the  steamer — 
left  only  when  all  the  troops  were  moved.  It  was  then  about  8 a.  m. 
The  steamer  was  a perfect  wreck,  with  about  4 feet  water  on  the 
lower  deck. 

JAMES  R.  RILEY. 


[Inclosure  No.  7.] 

Statement  of  John  A.  Wilson,  adjutant. 

Twentieth  South  Carolina  Volunteers, 

Sullivan’s  Island,  September  2,  1863. 
This  is  to  certify  that  before  leaving  Cumming’s  Point,,  on  the 
steamer  Sumter,  on  the  night  of  August  30,  1863,  I heard  Maj.  M.  A. 
Pringle,  quartermaster,  remark  that  he  wished  Lieutenant-Colonel 


Chap.  XL.]  SINKING  OF  CONFEDERATE  TRANSPORT  SUMTER. 


699 

Dantzler  (then  in  command  of  the  Twentieth  Regiment  South  Caro- 
lina Volunteers,  stationed  in  the  sand-hills  of  Morris  Island)  would 
hurry  down,  as  thd  tide  was  low,  and  if  he  did  not  hurry  up  the 
water  would  be  too  shallow  to  go  straight  to  Fort  Sumter,  and, 
therefore,  would  have  to  follow  the  ship-channel,  which  was  dan- 
gerous. 

Respectfully  submitted. 

JOHN  A.  WILSON, 

Adjutant  Twentieth  South  Carolina  Regiment. 

[P.  S.] — The  above  was  not  communicated  to  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Dantzler,  to  my  knowledge. 


[Inclosure  No.  8.] 

Office  A.  Q.  M.,  Twentieth  South  Carolina  Vols., 

. September  3,  1863. 

Colonel  Lay  : 

Colonel  : I am  the  assistant  quartermaster  of  the  Twentieth  South 
Carolina  Volunteers;  was  upon  Sullivan’s  Island,  in  Fort  Moultrie, 
on  the  night  of  the  30th  August.  Slept  in  the  fort  at  the  request  of 
Lieut.  D.  B.  De  Saussure,  who  informed  me  that  the  boats  of  the 
enemy  were  expected  in  that  night,  being  promised  the  command  of 
a gun  in  case  they  came.  An  order  was  issued  requiring  officers  and 
men  to  sleep  at  the  guns. 

I retired  to  bed  in  Lieutenant  De  Saussure’s  room,  he  promising  to 
awaken  me  should  anything  occur.  Between  the  hours  of  12  and 
1 a.  m.,  as  I supposed,  I was  aroused  by  the  sound  of  voices  and 
footsteps  inside  the  fort . Arose  at  once  and  hurried  to  the  battery 
commanded  by  Captain  [ J.  ] V alentine.  Found  officers  in  consulta- 
tion in  reference  to  a boat,  which  was  pointed  out  to  me,  and  which 
was  approaching  cautiously  from  the  direction  of  the  usual  anchor- 
age of  the  enemy’s  fleet.  The  vessel,  as  seen  through  a glass,  was 
flat  at  each  end  and  low  in  the  water,  while  amidships  she  presented 
the  appearance  of  a monitor. 

At  this  time  a shot  was  fired  from  a 10-inch  gun  in  Captain 
Valentine’s  battery,  the  shot  passing  very  near  the  boat.  I noticed 
that  it  continued  its  course  slowly,  other  shots  following,  each  dis- 
charge making  the  boat  more  indistinct,  as,  in  addition  to  the  moon 
being  obscured  by  clouds,  the  wind  was  blowing  immediately  from 
us  to  the  boat,  so  that  the  smoke  drifted  away  in  that  direction.  I 
noticed  lights  signaling  from  Cumming’s  Point,  and  also  a light  at 
Fort  Sumter,  and,  after  some  ten  or  twelve  discharges,  discovered  a 
small  and  very  dim  light  upon  the  boat.  It  seemed  to  me  that  it 
was  shining  through  a small  hole  or  crack  in  the  boat. 

I omitted  to  state  that  at  the  fourth  or  fifth  discharge  I noticed 
that  sparks  were  emitted  from  the  bow  of  the  boat,  showing  clearly 
that  iron  was  struck  by  the  ball.  After  this  the  firing  was  more 
rapid,  as  no  doubt  seemed  to  exist  as  to  her  being  an  iron-clad. 
After  the  light  was  discerned,  the  fact  was  passed  around,  and  the 
firing  ceased,  but  was  afterward  resumed,  and  continued  until  a small 
boat  was  seen  approaching  the  fort  from  the  boat,  when  all  firing 
was  hushed  as  quickly  as  possible.  The  small  boat  contained  an 
officer  of  the  Twentieth  Regiment,  the  captain  of  the  boat,  a ne- 
gro, and  a boy.  They  gave  the  first  satisfactory  information  as  to 
the  character  of  the  boat.  I heard  no  cries  nor  whistle,  but,  after 
all  firing  had  ceased,  heard  steam  escaping  from  the  boat. 


[Chap.  XL. 


700  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

Some  time  after  the  small  boat  arrived,  a dispatch  by  signal 
was  handed  Major  De  Treville  from  Colonel  Rhett,  announcing 
the  character  of  the  boat.  The  captain  of  the  boat  promised, 
upon  his  return  to  the  boat,  to  wave  his  light  twice  if  all  was 
right.  After  waiting  a sufficient  time  for  his  return  to  the  boat, 
and  seeing  no  light,  I hurried  to  the  signal  station  for  the  purpose 
of  learning  the  nature  of  the  disaster,  and  of  dispatching  to  the  city, 
if  need  be.  When  I had  approached  within  a hundred  yards,  more 
or  less,  of  the  station,  I heard  a hand  bell  ringing  furiously,  and 
heard  the  sentinel  at  the  guard-house,  between  the  fort  and  the  sta- 
tion, say,  “ Why  don’t  somebody  drag  those  signal  men  out  of  bed  ? 
that  bell  has  been  ringing  this  half  hour.”  The  bell  appears  to  have 
been  in  the  hands  of  a sentinel,  whose  business  it  was  to  notice  for 
lights,  and  ring  when  any  appeared.  When  I arrived  at  the  signal- 
house  I discovered  that  the  inmates  were  all  asleep,  and  had  to  be 
aroused  by  myself. 

Your  obedient  servant, 

T.  W.  WOODWARD, 

Captain , A.  Q.  M.,  Twentieth  South  Carolina  Volunteers. 


No.  4. 

Reports  of  Mqj.  Moite  A.  Pringle , Quartermaster , C.  S.  Army. 

Quartermaster’s  Office, 
Charleston , S.  C.,  August  31,  1863. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  in  obedience  to  para- 
graph   , Special  Orders,  I proceeded  last  night  in  the  steamer 

Chesterfield  to  Fort  Johnson,  for  the  purpose  of  embarking  the 
troops  intended  for  Morris  Island.  On  my  way  there  I called  on  the 
Chicora  for  the  usual  assistance  in  small  boats.  I was  informed  that 
Commodore  Tucker  had  given  strict  orders  that  no  boat’s  crew 
should  leave  the  vessel.  My  own  crew  were  not  sufficient  to  perform 
the  transportation,  and  nothing  was  left  me  but  to  take  advantage 
of  the  obscure  night  and  proceed  directly  to  Morris  Island.  The 
steamer  Chesterfield  having  broken  down  at  Fort  Johnson  wharf,  I 
was  obliged  to  use  the  Sumter. 

The  troops  and  all  their  supplies  were  landed  on  Morris  Island, 
and  those  that  were  relievecf  were  taken  on  board  without  any 
molestation  whatever  from  the  enemy,  although  the  night  had 
changed  into  an  exceedingly  bright  one,  and  at  the  upper  end  of  the 
island  there  was  a powerful  calcium  light.  The  tide  had  become 
so  low  that  we  were  unable  to  cross  directly  over  from  Morris 
Island,  and  we  were  obliged  to  go  a considerable  distance  around 
Fort  Sumter.  The  commanding  officer  of  Fort  Moultrie  opened 
upon  us.  We  immediately  stopped  the  steamer,  blew  the  whistle, 
and  waved  a light  vigorously,  but  although  all  these  were  seen  and 
heard  by  several  of  the  officers  on  Sullivan’s  Island,  the  fort  con- 
tinued firing  until  the  vessel  was  sunk.  Two  men  were  killed,  and 
several  wounded.  I had  in  the  meantime  dispatched  a small  boat 
ashore  to  inform  them  who  we  were.  This  boat  fortunately  got  there 
in  time  to  prevent  the  entire  battery  opening  upon  us,  in  which 
event  the  loss  of  life  would  have  been  terrible. 


Chap.  XL.]  SINKING  OF  CONFEDERATE  TRANSPORT  SUMTER. 


701 


I would  respectfully  request  that  charges  be  preferred  against  the 
commanding  officer,  for  ignorance  and  incompetency,  inasmuch  as  he 
should  have  known  that  no  enemy’s  vessel  would  have  made  the 
signals  which  the  Sumter  did.  She  did  not  attempt  to  proceed  on  the 
way ; the  cries  of  the  men  were  distinctly  heard  on  the  island,  as  well 
as  the  other  signals — as  said  before,  seen  and  heard — and  the  approach 
of  a miserable  little  flat  like  the  Sumter  should  not  have  created  so 
great  a panic  in  an  officer  competent  to  take  charge  of  so  important 
a fortification. 

By  the  extraordinary  course  pursued  by  the  officer,  valuable  lives 
were  lost,  for  I [have]  no  doubt  many  men  were  drowned  in  their 
attempt  to  wade  and  swim  to  Fort  Sumter,  and  the  most  useful 
transport  under  my  charge  destroyed.  I further  state  that,  although 
there  were  in  the  cove  at  Sullivan’s  Island  several  small  boats,  no 
effort  was  made  on  the  part  of  the  officers  and  soldiers  of  that  island 
to  afford  us  any  assistance  whatever,  and  we  were  indebted  entirely 
to  the  officers  and  crew  of  the  gunboat  for  our  removal  from  the 
sunken  vessel. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

MOTTE  A.  PRINGLE, 

Major,  and  Quartermaster . 


Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Quartermaster’s  Office, 

Charleston,  September  3,  1863. 

Colonel  : In  compliance  with  your  communication  of  this  date,  I 
have  the  honor  to  state  the  following  facts  in  relation  to  the  sinking 
of  the  steamer  Sumter,  on  the  night  of  the  30th  of  August : 

Having  been  refused  any  assistance  from  the  gunboats,  and  my 
own  crews  not  being  sufficient  to  man  enough  row-boats  to  effect  the 
transportation  which  I was  ordered  to  carry  out,  nothing  remained 
for  me  to  do  but  to  run  the  steamer  directly  to  Cumming’s  Point. 
I would  here  state  that  I was  detained  two  hours  at  Fort  Johnson  for 
the  infantry  which  was  to  relieve  that  already  on  Morris  Island,  and 
that  the  Twentieth  South  Carolina  Regiment,  being  on  picket  duty, 
a delay  of  two  hours  also  occurred  before  they  could  be  relieved. 

After  successfully  landing  the  ordnance  and  commissary  supplies, 
and  disembarking  and  embarking  the  troops,  I found  that  the  tide 
had  fallen  so  low  as  to  render  it  impossible  for  me  to  bring  the  steamer 
over  the  flats  between  Forts  Sumter  and  Johnson.  It  remained  for 
me  either  to  keep  the  boat  at  Cumming’s  Point  till  daylight,  and  run 
the  risk  of  being  shelled  by  the  enemy,  or  to  pursue  the  course  out- 
side of  Fort  Sumter.  Little  dreaming  of  being  fired  into  by  our 
friends,  I of  course  adopted  the  latter  alternative.  When  approach- 
ing Fort  Sumter,  and  abreast  of  Fort  Moultrie,  not  very  far  from 
shore,  I was  surprised  to  hear  a shot  whizzing  over  our  heads.  I im- 
mediately ordered  the  steamer  stopped,  the  whistle  to  blow,  and  my- 
self waved  the  best  lantern  (an  oil  one),  I could  find,  toward  the  fort. 
Finding  that  the  first  shot  was  rapidly  followed  by  others,  I ordered 
the  captain  ashore  in  the  small  boat,  in  order  to  inform  the  command- 
ing officer  of  the  nature  of  the  boat  they  were  firing  into  ; also  ordered 
the  steamboat  to  blow  off  steam,  as  an  additional  evidence  that  we 
did  not  mean  to  proceed  on  our  way  or  withdraw. 


[Chap.  XL. 


702  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  fN  MID.  AND  E.  FI 


LA. 


Shortly  after  the  commencement  of  the  firing,  the  wheelman  de- 
serted his  helm,  and  the  boat  drifted  on  a shoal,  where  she  grounded, 
and  it  proved  a fortunate  circumstance  for  the  safety  of  the  troops. 
Before  many  shots  were  fired,  Fort  Sumter  displayed  a bright  light 
on  the  rampart,  which  was  the  signal  generally  used  that  a friendly 
boat  was  passing.  I am  credibly  informed  that  all  the  signals 
which  I have  enumerated  were  distinctly  heard,  or  seen,  by  many 
officers  and  men  on  the  island,  and  also  the  screams  of  the  men  beg- 
ging, “for  God’s  sake,”  not  to  shoot,  were  heard.  The  commanding 
officer  at  Fort  Moultrie  has  said  that  a dim  light  was  exhibited  but 
for  a short  time,  and  that  he  ceased  firing  till  it  disappeared.  I can 
bring  evidence  to  prove  that  the  same  light  continued  until  my  small 
boat  reached  the  shore,  and  was  pointed  out  to  the  officers  by  those 
on  board  of  her.  I would  state  that  it  never  has  been  the  habit  of 
adopting  a regular  system  of  lights  between  the  forts  and  steam- 
boats ; that  upon  frequent  occasions  a shot  has  been  fired  across  their 
bow,  and  that  upon  the  same  signals  being  made  which  were  made 
the  other  night,  permission  was  given  to  proceed ; that  it  was  im- 
possible to  adopt,  as  suggested  by  the  commanding  officer  of  the  fort, 
the  plan  of  having  a light  on  board,  or  throwing  up  rockets  at  Cum- 
ming’s  Point.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  all  important  to  do  everything 
in  our  power  to  conceal  our  movements  from  the  enemy  as  much  as 
possible. 

I would  further  state  that  about  the  fourth  from  the  last  shot 
killed  and  wounded  the  men,  and  that  the  boat  was  not  hurt  until  the 
firing  had  for  some  time  continued,  so  that  if  our  signals  had  been 
respected  as  soon  as  observed,  no  damage  would  have  been  done. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

MOTTE  A.  PRINGLE,* 

Major,  and  Quartermaster. 

Lieut.  Col.  A.  Roman, 

Assistant  Inspector-General. 


Quartermaster’s  Office, 

Charleston , September  4,  1863. 

Colonel  : I have  the  honor  to  state,  in  addition  to  my  former  state- 
ment, that  there  is  no  established  code  of  signals  between  the  trans- 
ports and  either  Sumter  or  Sullivan’s  Island.  As  we  repeatedly  pass 
closely  by  the  former  we  generally  blow  the  whistle,  and  hail,  in 
order  to  save  time. 

I am,  most  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

MOTTE  A.  PRINGLE, 

Major,  and  Quartermaster. 


Lieut.  Col.  A.  Roman, 

Assistant  Inspector-General. 


No.  5. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Rosivell  S.  Ripley , C.  S.  Army,  command- 
ing First  Military  District 

Charleston,  August  31,  1863. 

General  : I regret  to  report  that  while  the  relief  of  the  troops 
from  Morris  Island  was  being  effected,  the  steamer  Sumter,  being 


Chap.  XL.]  SINKING  OF  CONFEDERATE  TRANSPORT  SUMTER.  703 

on  her  return  from  Cumming’s  Point,  was,  by  some  mistake — either 
not  showing  a signal,  or  its  not  being  discerned — fired  upon  by  the 
batteries  on  Sullivan’s  Island.  Some  3 or  4 men  were  killed"  and 
knocked  overboard,  and  the  steamer  disabled.  She  now  lies  on  the 
shoal  east  of  Fort  Sumter,  and  I fear  will  soon  prove  a loss.  It  is 
barely  possible  that  she  may  be  gotten  off  to-night.  The  men  got 
ashore  at  Fort  Sumter,  and  have  been  in  great  part  transported  to 
Ifymt  Johnson.  The  telegraph  line  between  Sumter  and  Sullivan's 
Island  was  not  in  working  order.  Colonel  Rhett  telegraphed  the 
, circumstance  of  the  firing  to  the  city,  and  the  quartermaster’s  de- 
' partment  was  directed  to  send  a steamer  to  her  assistance,  but  none 
were  available  of  the  proper  draught  of  water. 

The  accident  is  a serious  one,  and  I shall  cause  inquiries  to  be 
made  as  to  its  cause.  'The  firing  on  our  own  steamers,  and  the  loss  of 
a valuable  transport,  cannot  be  too  much  regretted;  and  if  fault  there 
is,  I shall  hold  those  who  have  committed  it  to  a strict  accounta- 
bility. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

R.  S.  RIP  LEY, 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan, 

Chief  of  Staff. 

ADDENDA. 

Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , S.  C.,  September  11,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  R.  S.  Ripley, 

Commanding  First  Military  District,  South  Carolina: 

General  : On  a review  of  the  investigation  made  concerning  the 
firing  into  the  steamer  Sumter,  it  would  appear  that  that  untoward 
casualty  resulted  from  the  omission  of  several  ordinary  precautions, 
which  should  have  been  taken,  to  wit : 

The  officer  having  charge  of  the  movements  of  the  steamer,  when 
finding  that  he  must  re-enter  the  harbor  by  an  unusual  channel,  ought 
to  have  caused  a notification  of  his  purpose  to  be  transmitted  by  sig- 
nal from  Battery  Gregg.  There  was  a signal  station  at  the  battery, 
and  this  simple  precaution,  which  was  in  his  power,  would  have 
averted  the  accident.  Major  Pringle’s  efficiency  and  zeal,  and  his 
general  attention  to  his  duties  during  the  operations  in  this  harbor, 
are  at  the  same  time  fully  appreciated  by  the  commanding  general, 
who  regrets  to  find  any  reason  for  blame. 

Had  a system  of  signals  for  transports  been  arranged  for  such  an 
emergency,  this  vessel  would  have  been  provided  with  the  means  of 
making  known  her  true  character  in  time  to  have  prevented  her  loss, 
or  any  serious  injury.  Hereafter  all  transport  steamers  should  be 
provided  with  some  system  of  signals. 

It  is  apparent  that  while  the  Sumter  was  mistaken  for  a monitor, 
under  circumstances  well  calculated  to  induce  that  belief,  yet  she 
was  fired  at  and  sunk  when  at  a range  from  the  Sullivan’s  Island 
batteries  which  the  commanding  general  believes  could  not  possibly 
have  resulted  in  the  least  damage  to  any  monitor.  It  is  highly  sat- 
isfactory to  observe  that  officers  are  alert  and  vigilan*  , but  the  com- 
manding general  can  but  regret  to  see  a somewhat  persistent  dispo- 
sition on  the  part  of  battery  commanders  to  fire  their  guns  at  ranges 
which  make  them  really  impotent  against  monitors. 


704  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  ELA. 


[Chap.  XL 


The  evidence  further  shows  that  there  was  a dereliction  on  the  part 
of  the  signal  corps  stationed  on  Sullivan’s  Island  on  this  occasion; 
that  is , no  signal  officer  or  man  was  at  his  post  to  read  the  signals’ 
from  Fort  Sumter  in  time. 

Please  communicate  the  substance  of  this  communication  to  those 
whom  it  may  concerm 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

THOMAS  JORDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff. 


No.  6. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen . T.  L.  Clingman,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  on 

Sullivan’s  Island. 

Sullivan’s  Island,  S.  C., 

August  31,  1863. 

Captain  : I inclose  to  you  the  reports  of  Colonel  Butler  and  others 
in  relation  to  the  firing  into  the  steamer  Sumter  by  the  batteries  on 
this  island. 

I must  say,  in  addition,  that  this  steamer  appeared  in  the  channel 
to  be  approaching  Fort  Sumter  just  as  the  monitors  had  done  on  the 
morning  of  the  23d  and  26th  instant,  and  in  the  darkness  could  not 
be  distinguished  from  the  enemy’s  ships.  The  shoal  on  which  she 
grounded  and  sunk  was  on  precisely  the  same  line  between  Fort 
Moultrie  and  Battery  Gregg  as  that  on  which  the  enemy’s  monitors 
grounded,  as  stated  in  my  report  of  the  occurrences  of  the  23d.  In 
fact,  at  one  time  that  morning,  three  of  the  enemy’s  monitors  were 
on  this  line,  but  all  nearer  than  the  Sumter  was  to  us. 

I cannot  see  that  our  artillerists  were  in  any  respect  to  blame  in  the 
matter.  Had  the  captain  of  the  boat  detained  her  until  he  had  sent 
a dispatch  to  this  island,  such  a disaster  would  have  been  prevented. 
To  guard  against  such  occurrences  in  future,  I would  respectfully 
repeat  what  has  heretofore  been  suggested,  that  a small  boat  or  two 
from  the  harbor  be  stationed  opposite  Cumming’s  Point,  to  give  notice 
of  the  approach  of  the  enemy’s  vessels  by  rockets,  or  other  signals, 
and  thus  enable  our  artillerists  to  know  when  to  fire.  In  this  mode 
we  might  have  earlier  notice  of  the  approach  of  the  enemy’s  moni- 
tors, and  also  avoid  such  unfortunate  occurrences  in  future. 

Very  respectfully,  &c., 

T.  L.  CLINGMAN, 

Brigadier- General. 

Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


No.  7. 

Reports  of  Col.  William  Butler,  First  South  Carolina  f Regular] 
Infantry,  commanding  artillery. 

Headquarters  Artillery, 

Sullivan’s  Island,  August  31,  1863. 
Sir  : I have  but  little  to  add  to  the  reports  of  the  battery  com- 
manders in  reference  to  the  occurrence  last  night,  which  resulted  in 


Chap.  XL.]  SINKING  OF  CONFEDERATE  TRANSPORT  SUMTER. 


705 


the  sinking  of  a harbor  steamer  in  the  channel  and  the  wounding 
of  several  of  our  men.  I myself  thought  that  the  vessel  was  one 
of  the  enemy’s,  the  indistinct  outlines  of  which  were  seen  moving  up 
the  main  channel  from  the  direction  of  the  fleet.  It  has  been  cus- 
tomary to  give  notice  to  the  batteries  on  this  island  when  a vessel 
was  expected  to  run  in  or  out  of  the  harbor  (even  before  Charleston 
was  immediately  threatened),  and  signals  were  agreed  upon.  No  such 
notice  in  this  case  was  given,  nor  did  the  boat  exhibit  any  light  when 
first  seen.  Some  time  after  fire  opened  upon  it,  a small  light  was 
shown,  when  the  firing  was  discontinued,  although  I considered  that 
there  was  some  risk  incurred  in  doing  so.  Soon  after  the  order  was 
given  to  cease  firing,  a small  boat  came  from  the  boat  fired  into  and 
reported  that  it  was  one  of  our  own.  I regret  the  unnecessary  sac- 
rifice. 


Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

WILLIAM  BUTLER, 

Colonel,  Commanding. 


Capt.  Edward  White, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


Headquarters  Artillery, 
Sullivan’s  Island,  September  1,  1863. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  respectfully  request  that  if  any 
blame  is  to  be  attached  to  the  officers  of  this  command  for  the  acci- 
dent which  resulted  in  the  sinking  of  a harbor  steamer  night  before 
last,  an  investigation  be  had  of  the  matter. 

The  order  was  given  to  fire  upon  the  steamer,  supposing  that  the 
practice,  which  has  heretofore  been  observed,  of  notifying  the  bat- 
teries on  the  island  when  a friendly  vessel  was  to  run  into  or  out  of 
the  harbor,  would  not  be  neglected  at  a time  when  Charleston  was 
threatened  with  a night  attack. 

Friendly  vessels  running  the  blockade  have  always,  upon  entering 
the  harbor,  shown  a light  that  could  be  distinctly  seen  ; and  if  this 
had  been  the  case  with  the  boat  in  question,  it  would  not  have  been 
fired  ufjon.  The  night  was  cloudy,  with  a fog  prevailing,  and  the 
monitors,  on  two  occasions,  had  chosen  such  a night  to  enter  the  har- 
bor. Without  knowing  who  is  to  blame,  I beg  leave  to  say  that  while 
it  is  our  duty  to  accept  any  position  to  which,  as  soldiers,  we  may  be 
properly  assigned,  we  are  unwilling  to  be  held  responsible  for  the 
gross  neglect  of  duty  or  recklessness  of  others. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

WILLIAM  BUTLER, 

Colonel  1st  S.  C.  [ Regular ] Infantry,  in  Command. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan* 

Chief  of  Staff. 


Headquarters  Artillery,  # 
Sidlivan’s  Island,  September  3,  1863. 

Colonel  : The  harbor  steamer  which  was  sunk  a few  nights  since 
was  fired  upon  with  my  authority,  under  the  following  circum- 
stances : 

The  steamer  came  in  through  the  main  ship-channel  from  the 
direction  of  the  enemy’s  iron-clad  fleet,  and  as  no  friendly  vessel  has 
45  R R — VOL  XXVIII,  PT  I 


706  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

ever  come  in,  to  my  knowledge,  since  the  war  began,  without  show- 
ing some  light  or  giving  some  signal  by  which  some  suspicion  of  her 
friendly  character  might  be  suggested,  and  as  the  city  was  threatened 
by  a night  attack,  and  I had  received  orders  to  be  particularly  vigi- 
lant on  the  night  on  which  it  occurred,  my  natural  conclusion  was 
that  it  was  a monitor  repeating  its  visit  to  the  harbor.  The  night  was 
dark,  being  somewhat  cloudy.  Soon  after  the  firing  commenced,  I 
went  into  Fort  Moultrie  the  second  time,  and  was  informed  by  the 
commanding  officer,  Major  De  Treville,  that  the  boat  was  showing  a 
small  light.  Without  believing  then  that  it  w^as  a friendly  boat,  I 
nevertheless  authorized  him  to  cease  firing,  and  soon  after  directed 
the  other  batteries  to  discontinue  firing  for  a time.  A few  moments 
later  a small  boat  came  from  the  boat,  and  brought  a report  of  what 
it  was.  I did  not  send  assistance  to  the  boat,  as  I was  informed,  by 
an  officer  who  came  on  the  small  boat  referred  to,  that  it  had  not 
been  struck,  and  only  directed  a signal  to  be  made  that  we  under- 
stood her  character. 

Very  respectfully, 

WILLIAM  BUTLER, 

Colonel  First  South  Carolina  [ Regular ] Infantry . 

Lieut.  Col.  John  F.  Lay, 

Assistant  Inspector- General. 


No.  8. 

Reports  of  Maj.  Robert  De  Treville , First  South  Carolina  Infantry, 
commanding  Fort  Moultrie. 

Fort  Moultrie,  August  31,  1863. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  pursuant  to  orders  re- 
ceived at  this  post,  the  batteries  were  manned  early  last  night,  and 
officers  and  men  required  to  be  at  their  post.  About  3 a.  m.  the 
officer  of  the  day  reported  one  of  the  enemy’s  vessels  approaching, 
and  on  going  out  I saw  a low,  black  steamer  coming  in  from  the  di- 
rection of  the  enemy’s  fleet.  As  soon  as  she  was  in  easy  range,  I 
ordered  fire  opened,  and  she  apparently  stopped  her  course.  I sup- 
posed it  might  be  one  of  our  own  boats,  and  waited  for  a signal  of 
some  kind,  but  seeing  none,  fired  again.  After  about  4 or  5 shots 
had  been  fired,  a small  light,  apparently  from  a candle,  was  seen  on 
board,  and  I directed  the  fire  to  cease,  when  the  light  disappeared. 
Still  in  doubt  as  to  the  character  of  the  vessel,  I had  a few  guns 
more  fired,  when  a small  boat  was  seen  coming  ashore,  and  we  ceased 
firing. 

This  morning  the  steamer  is  plainly  seen  off  Morris  Island,  sunk, 
and  I am  reliably  informed  that  2 men  of  the  Twentieth  South  Caro- 
lina Volunteers  were  killed.  The  steamer  sunk  is  said  to  be  the  C. 
S.  transport  Rebel.  Great  blame  must  be  attached  to  some  one  for 
so  unfortunate  an  occurrence.  Not  a word  of  warning  was  given 
to  {-my  one  of  the  batteries  that  a steamer  laden  with  our  own  men 
would  be  coming  in  at  that  hour  from  the  very  direction  from  which 
we  momentarily  expected  the  approach  of  an  enemy.  Not  only  could 
the  disaster  have  been  prevented  by  the  exhibition  of  lights,  but  a 
telegraphic  signal  from  Cumming’s  Point,  five  minutes  before  the 
boat  left,  would  have  warned  us  of  her  approach.  Had  this  fort 
opened  with  all  its  guns,  the  result  would  have  been,  indeed,  disas- 


Chap.  XL.]  SINKING  OF  CONFEDERATE  TRANSPORT  SUMTER. 


707 


trous.  As  it  is,  we  have  cause  of  congratulation  that  the  neglect  of 
the  officer  in  charge  of  the  boat  to  use  the  necessary  precautions 
has  resulted  in  so  small  a loss. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

ROBERT  DE  TREVILLE, 

Major,  Commanding. 


Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Fort  Moultrie,  September  3,  1863. 

[Colonel:]  On  the  night  of  the  30th  of  August,  a dispatch  was  sent 
to  this  post  from  district  headquarters  enjoining  unusual  vigilance 
against  any  attempt  on  the  part  of  the  enemy  to  run  by  the  batteries 
under  cover  of  night.  Officers  and  men  were  required  to  sleep  at 
the  guns,  and  at  1.30  a.  m.  I was  informed  by  the  officer  of  the  day 
of  the  approach  of  one  of  the  enemy’s  boats.  On  looking  out  from  the 
parapet,  we  could  easily  observe  a low,  dark  boat  coming  in  from  the 
direction  of  the  enemy’s  fleet,  and  exactly  in  the  course  in  which  the 
monitors  had  come  on  two  preceding  nights.  The  boat  being  then 
to  the  south  of  Morris  Island,  I waited  until  she  came  in  nearer,  to  be 
sure  of  our  range,  and  ordered  fire  opened  from  a 10-inch  columbiad. 
After  3 or  4 shots  had  been  fired,  the  boat  appeared  to  stop,  and  I 
then  for  the  first  time  saw  what  I supposed  to  be  a candle-light. 
Supposing  it  might  be  intended  as  a signal,  I ordered  firing  to  cease, 
when  even  this  light  disappeared,  and  I again  ordered  fire  opened. 
After  firing  awhile,  I saw  a signal  light  on  Cumming’s  Point,  when 
I again  ceased  firing.  After  the  fire  had  ceased,  I saw  a light  on 
Fort  Sumter.  A small  boat  then  came  ashore,  and  the  captain  of 
the  steamer  came  into  the  fort.  I asked  him  why  he  had  not  showed 
a signal?  He  said  he  4 4 did  not  have  a light  on  board,  but  that  a 
candle  had  been  shown.”  I asked  him  why  he  had  come  in  that 
way  ? He  said  he  had  been  delayed  at  Cumming’s  Point,  and  told 
the  officer  in  charge  he  would  have  to  come  in  round  the  buoy. 
The  night,  though  dark,  was  starlit,  and  when  the  boat  was  first 
seen  she  was  below  Morris  Island.  Not  a light  of  any  kind — except 
what  I have  described— was  seen.  Not  a sound  of  a whistle,  or  escape 
of  steam,  heard ; not  a cry  or  sound  of  any  kind.  After  the  captain 
had  been  here  some  minutes  a telegram  from  Sumter  arrived. 

We  are  not  allowed  to  pass  in  or  out  a boat  of  any  kind,  either 
by  day  or  night,  without  having  received  notice,  and  on  preconcerted 
signals.  This  boat  was  coming  from  the  direction  of  the  enemy,  in 
the  track  always  pursued  by  the  enemy,  and  while  we  were  expect- 
ing an  enemy,  we  had  had  no  notice  and  saw  no  light  or  signal  of 
any  kind.  I could  see  with  a glass  that  the  steamer  was  not  a moni- 
tor, but  beyond  that  could  not  tell  anything,  and  had  it  not  been  for 
the  light  on  Cumming’s  Point,  which  made  me  suspect  her  character 
(together  with  the  fact  that  Cumming’s  Point  was  not  firing),  I 
would  very  soon  have  opened  from  all  the  guns,  when  the  loss  of 
life  must  have  been  far  greater. 

ROBERT  DE  TREVILLE, 

Major,  Commanding  Fort  Moultrie. 

[Lieut.  Col.  John  F.  Lay.] 

[P.  S.] — After  I had  first  ceased  firing,  Colonel  Butler  came  into 
the  fort  and  told  me  to  resume  firing.  I fired  a few  shots  more,  and 


708  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

told  Colonel  Butler  I was  afraid  it  was  our  own  boat.  He  replied 
that  if  it  was  she  had  no  business  there  without  giving  us  notice, 
but  if  I believed  it  was  our  boat  I had  better  cease  firing.  He  then 
left  the  fort,  and  with  the  aid  of  a glass  I saw  a small  boat  coming. 
I then  again  ordered  the  fire  to  cease,  which  was  instantly  done. 

[Inclosure  No.  1.] 

Fort  Moultrie,  September  3,  1863. 
Major  De  Treville,  Commanding  Fort  Moultrie: 

Major  : I have  the  honor  to  make  the  following  statement  in  con- 
nection with  the  firing  into  the  steamer  Sumter  on  the  morning  of 
the  31st  of  August: 

For  weeks  past  the  garrison  at  this  post  had  been  on  the  alert  for 
the  approach,  at  night,  of  the  enemy’s  iron-clad  fleet.  On  the  night 
of  the  30th,  about  tattoo,  a dispatch  was  received  from  district  head- 
quarters, enjoining  extra  vigilance,  as  it  was  probable  the  monitors 
would  make  another  demonstration.  Consequently  officers  and  men 
were  sleeping  at  their  guns,  when,  about  1 a.  m.  on  the  31st,  a boat 
was  discovered  at  the  distance  of  about  3,000  yards  approaching  from 
the  direction  of  the  enemy’s  fleet.  Previously  the  monitors  had  been 
seen  to  approach  from  the  same  direction,  and  about  the  same  hour 
of  the  morning ; and  taking  into  consideration  the  facts  that  no  boats 
are  allowed  to  pass  the  fort  at  night,  that  special  vigilance  had  been 
enjoined,  and  that  with  the  aid  of  a glass  the  precise  nature  of  the 
boat  could  not  be  determined,  it  was  of  course  thought  to  come 
from  the  enemy.  Fire  was  immediately  opened,  when,  after  4 or  5 
shots,  a.  small  light  (apparently  a candle)  was  seen  for  awhile,  then 
disappeared.  The  boat  gave  no  other  signal  that  could  be  seen  or 
heard,  not.  even  that  of  an  ordinary  blockade-runner.  But  as  Bat- 
tery-Gregg  was  silent  and  displayed  a signal  light,  and  as  the  boat 
had  stopped,  the  firing  had  for  the  most  part  ceased,  when  a small 
boat,  came  ashore,  bringing  the  intelligence  that  it  was  the  Sumter 
with  troops  from  Morris  Island.  Subsequently  to  the  arrival  of  the 
small  boat,  a dispatch  came  from  Sumter  to  the  following  effect ; 
“ You  are  firing  upon  the  Chesterfield  from  Fort  Moultrie.” 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

CHAS.  M.  CRESWELL, 

Lieutenant,  and  Ordnance  Officer,  Sullivan’s  Island. 

[Inclosure  No.  2.] 

Fort  Moultrie,  September  3,  1863. 
Maj.  R.  Be  Treville,  Commanding  Fort  Moultrie  : 

Major  : Sunday  morning  last,  the  30th  August,  the  long  roll  was 
sounded  at  Fort  Moultrie,  where  I was  located  at  the  time,  and  a 
boat  was  distinctly  seen  by  me  from  the  parapet  of  the  fort.  I could 
not  discern  any  lights  or  signals  of  any  description,  either  from  the 
boat  or  from  Fort  Sumter.  I had  been  informed  the  evening  pre- 
vious that  a telegram  had  been  received  from  the  brigadier-general 
commanding  to  keep  a sharp  lookout  for  vessels  coming  in.  I heard 
no  whistle,  or  noise  of  any  kind  that  would  designate  the  vessel  to 
be  a friendly  one  until  the  captain  of  the  boat  landed,  when  the  firing 
ceased. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  S.  MOWRY, 

Ordnance  Officer,  Drayton’s  Brigade . 


Chap.  XL.]  SINKING  OF  CONFEDERATE  TRANSPORT  SUMTER.  709 

[Inclosure  No.  3.]  ' 

Battery  K,  Sullivan’s  Island, 

September  3,  1863. 

Major  De  Treville,  Fort  Moultrie: 

Major  : I would  state  in  reference  to  the  firing  into  the  steamer 
Sumter,  that  the  sentinels  reported  a vessel  coming  in  from  the  di- 
rection of  the  fleet.  I then  observed  a vessel,  which  appeared  to  me 
to  be  a monitor,  moving  toward  Fort  Sumter.  I had  my  guns 
manned.  1 saw  no  light  on  board  the  steamer,  nor  did  I hear  any 
whistle  or  other  noise  proceeding  from  her  which  could  give  me 
any  intimation  of  her  being  one  of  our  steamers.  When  first  seen  she 
was  in  the  direction  of  the  3,000-yard  buoy.  After  having  fired  for 
about  ten  minutes,  I heard  the  pickets  on  the  beach  call  out,  “ Cease 
firing,”  and  as  soon  as  this  was  heard  I ordered  the  firing  to  cease. 
As  well  as  I can  remember,  it  was  between  2 and  2.30  o’clock  in  the 
night  when  we  first  opened  on  her.  There  was  nothing  in  her  ap- 
pearance to  give  us  any  idea  that  she  was  one  of  our  own  boats;  on 
the  contrary,  she  appeared  in  the  very  same  course  that  the  monitors 
took  when  they  entered  the  harbor  at  night,  and  after  Fort  Moultrie 
fired  the  first  shot,  and  not  seeing  any  signal  shown,  I was  firmly 
under  the  belief  that  it  was  an  enemy’s  vessel,  and  opened  fire  im- 
mediately. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

C.  H.  RIVERS, 

Captain , Commanding  Battery  K. 

N.  B. — I would  state  that  when  I was  ordered  to  fire  I knew  it  was 
not  a monitor,  but  supposed  it  to  be  one  of  the  enemy’s  vessels. 

[Inclosure  No.  4.] 

Fort  Moultrie,  September  3,  1863. 
W.  J.  Marshall,  Adjutant  of  Post: 

Sir  : Being  at  the  battery  on  the  night  of  the  30th  of  August,  where 
officers  and  men  were  required  to  be,  at  their  guns,  the  alarm  was 
sounded  and  our  guns  were  promptly  manned. 

On  looking  out  from  the  parapet,  I distinctly  saw  what  I supposed 
to  be  a monitor  coining  in  rear  of  Morris  Island.  She  showed  no 
lights  whatever,  neither  did  I hear  a whistle  of  any  kind,  nor  did  I 
see  any  light  from  Sumter.  I was  ordered  to  open  fire,  which  I did 
from  my  10-inch  columbiad.  After  firing  1 or  2 shots,  I discovered  a 
very  dim  light,  but  only  for  a moment,  when  it  again  disappeared. 
I heard  no  noise,  nor  did  I see  anything  to  warrant  that  she  was  not 
an  enemy’s  vessel. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  VALENTINE, 
Captain , Commanding  Battery. 

[Inclosure  No.  5.] 

Fort  Moultrie,  September  3,  1863. 
Lieut.  W.  J.  Marshall,  Adjutant  of  Post: 

Sir  : At  the  request  of  Major  De  Treville,  I make  the  following 
statement  in  reference  to  the  firing  into  the  steamer  Sumter  on  the 
morning  of  the  30th  of  August:  1 got  up  after  the  firing  had  com- 


710  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA..  [Chap.  XL. 

menced  and  went  immediately  down  to  the  battery  commanded  by 
Lieutenant  Dwight.  I there  met  Colonel  Butler.  I could  see  dimly 
a boat,  which  at  the  time  I did  not  take  to  be  a monitor.  I saw  no 
light  at  all  from  the  vessel,  nor  did  I hear  her  blow  her  whistle. 
Colonel  Butler  told  me  she  had  shown  a light,  and  that  he  was  afraid 
she  was  one  of  our  own  boats.  He  very  soon  after  ordered  the  firing 
to  cease,  before  the  small  boat  from  the  steamer  reached  the  shore. 
The  steamer  when  I saw  her  was  very  far  out,  farther  than  I have 
ever  seen  boats  go  in  passing  between  the  city  and  Morris  Island. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  A.  WARDLAW, 

Capt.,  A.  Q.  M.,  First  South  Carolina  [ Regular ] Infantry. 


[Inclosure  No.  6.] 

Fort  Moultrie,  September  3,  1863. 
Maj.  Robert  De  Treville  : 

Major:  In  obedience  to  orders  from  you  requiring  a full  state- 
ment of  what  took  place  on  Saturday  night  last,  the  30th  of  August, 
I have  the  honor  to  report  the  following : 

I was  officer  of  the  day  on  Saturday  night,  and  was  relieved  on 
Sunday  morning  last.  Upon  going  on  duty  I received  the  following 
order,  in  addition  to  the  usual  orders  : 

Orders,  No.  — .]  Headquarters  Fort  Moultrie, 

August  27,  1863. 

I.  Pursuant  to  Orders,  No.  47,  headquarters  artillery,  dated  August  24,  1863,  the 
officer  of  the  day  will  be  required  to  be  at  all  times  on  or  near  the  sea  face  of  the 
fort,  to  observe  and  give  notice  of  the  movements  of  the  enemy  when  in  sight. 

II.  Should  any  suspicious  or  threatening  movements  of  the  enemy  be  observed — 
if  at  night,  a shot  will  be  fired  as  a signal  of  alarm  and  the  long-roll  sounded,  when 
all  the  batteries  will  be  instantly  manned  and  prepared  for  action  ; if  by  day,  a shot 
will  be  fired,  when  the  officer  of  the  day  will  direct  his  immediate  attention  to  the 
enemy’s  fleet,  which  if  seen  coming  in,  will  have  the  long-roll  sounded  and  the  bat- 
teries manned. 

By  order  of  Major  De  Treville  : 

WM.  J.  MARSHALL, 
Lieutenant,  and  Adjutant  of  Post. 

At  about  1.30  a.  m.  I was  walking  on  the  parapet  on  the  sea  face 
of  the  fort,  when  I descried  something  looking  very  much  like  a 
monitor  at  or  near  the  3,000-yard  buoy.  I immediately  reported  it 
to  you.  You  told  me  to  inform  Colonel  Butler,  who  was  inside  the 
fort.  I did  so,  and  then  ordered  the  long-roll  sounded,  and  got  per- 
mission to  omit  firing  the  gun,  as  it  was  so  far  out,  and  might  not 
be  really  coming  in.  I then  went  to  the  guard-house  to  turn  out  the 
guard,  as  is  customary,  and  while  there  the  fort  opened  fire.  Being 
also  in  command  of  a company  and  battery,  I hastened  through  and 
repaired  to  the  parapet.  The  boat  had  not  quite  got  in  range  of  the 
guns  under  my  command,  and  I therefore  did  not  fire,  but  was  only 
waiting  to  see  her  a little  better,  to  do  so.  I saw  no  light  until  after 
the  firing  was  nearly  over,  and  then  it  was  very  dim,  and  seemed  as 
but  a casual  thing.  I heard  no  whistle  blow,  nor  any  noise  from  that 
direction,  until  a small  boat  came  ashore  from  her.  The  persons  in 
the  small  boat  made  a great  noise,  and  cried  for  us  not  to  fire.  I was 
then  ordered  by  you  to  go  and  see  what  boat  that  was.  I went  im- 
mediately, and,  upon  finding  them  to  be  friends,  turned  and  cried 
out  as  loud  as  I could:  “ Friends;  don’t  fire;”  but  do  not  think  Cap- 
tain Rivers  heard  me,  as  he  still  continued  to  fire.  The  fort  had 


Chap,  XL.]  SINKING  OF  CONFEDERATE  TRANSPORT  SUMTER.  711 

stopped  some  time  before,  the  small  boat  coming  np  having  been 
reported.  Anything  more  that  I know  being  only  from  what  I have 
heard,  I omit  reporting. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  MITCHELL  WHALEY, 
Lieutenant , and  Officer  of  the  Day . 

[Inclosure  No.  7.] 

Fort  Moultrie,  September  3,  1863. 
Lieut.  W.  J.  Marshall,  Adjutant  of  Post: 

Lieutenant  : Being  called  upon  for  a statement  of  facts  in  rela- 
tion to  the  firing  into,  and  sinking  of,  the  steamer  Sumter,  I have 
the  honor  to  make  the  following  report : 

Between  the  hours  of  1 and  2 (as  well  as  I recollect),  on  last  Sunday 
night  I was  aroused  by  the  sound  of  the  long-roll.  I immediately 
reported  to  the  battery,  and  saw  coming  in  from  the  direction  of  the 
enemy’s  fleet  a vessel  which  looked  very  suspicious,  the  vessel  showing 
no  lights.  I was  ordered  to  open  fire  from  my  battery  upon  her; 
but  owing  to  the  hazy  night  and  the  smoke  from  other  guns,  I could 
not  see  the  vessel  distinctly.  By  this  time  Fort  Sumter  and  Battery 
Gregg  had  displayed  lights,  and  I also  observed  a pale  light  on  the 
vessel.  At  this  time  our  batteries  were  ordered  to  cease  firing.  A 
small  boat  was  then  observed  coming  ashore,  which  proved  to  con- 
tain the  captain  of  the  vessel.  I heard  no  whistle  blow  or  any  other 
noise.  As  soon  as  lights  were  displayed,  this  fort  ceased  firing. 

Respectfully, 

B.  J.  WITHERSPOON, 

Capt.  Co.  C,  1st  S.  C.  [ Regular ] Inft.,  Comdg.  Battery. 


No.  9. 

Report  of  Col.  Alfred  Rhett,  First  South  Carolina  Artillery , com- 
manding Fort  Sumter. 

Fort  Sumter,  September  4,  1863. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  make  the  following  report  in  rela- 
tion to  the  sinking  of  the  steamer  Sumter : 

On  the  morning  of  the  31st  of  August,  at  2.30  o’clock,  the  officer  of 
the  day  reported  rapid  firing  from  Fort  Moultrie  and  the  batteries  on 
Sullivan’s  Island ; and  on  making  observations,  with  the  assistance  of 
an  opera-glass,  the  object  at  which  the  firing  was  directed  appeared 
to  be  the  steamer  Sumter,  aground,  and  I was  confident  that  she  had 
troops  aboard.  I sent  out  all  the  small  boats  at  my  command  to 
render  all  the  assistance  possible,  and  at  the  same  time  waved  a 
bright  light  from  the  parapet  as  a signal  to  induce  the  batteries  to 
cease  firing ; but,  not  succeeding,  I called  the  signal  officers  and  sent 
a dispatch  over  to  Colonel  Butler  to  the  effect  that  he  was  firing  on 
the  steamer  Sumter.  The  steamer  also  showed  a dim  light  for  a 
short  while.  I am  unable  to  tell  accurately,  but  probably  there 
were  as  many  as  40  shots  fired  by  the  batteries  before  they  were 
aware  of  their  mistake.  I learn  that  several  men  were  killed,  and, 
among  those  who  endeavored  to  escape  by  wading  and  swimming,  a 
few  were  drowned.  The  steamer  was  outside  the  sand-bar,  off  the 
fort,  and  was  near  the  position  usually  occupied  by  the  monitors, 


[Chap.  XL. 


712 


S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 


and  I understand  she  showed  no  light  previous  to  being  fired  on. 
( hie  shot  penetrated  the  hull,  and  in  about  four  hours  all  the  men 
aboard  were  gotten  off.  Very  soon  afterward  the  steamer  went  to 
pieces. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

ALFRED  RHETT, 

Colonel,  Commanding . 

Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


SEPTEMBER  7,  1863. — Affair  on  Battery  Island,  S.  C. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  William  B.  Taliaferro,  C.  8.  Army. 

Royal’s,  September  8,  1863 — 5 p.  m. 
Captain  : Attacked  the  enemy’s  pickets  on  Battery  Island  last 
night.  Drove  them  off  and  destroyed  the  bridge  and  landing,  so  can- 
not get  to  Horse  Island. 

WM.  B.  TALIAFERRO. 

Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


SEPTEMBER  7-8,  1863. — Engagement  in  Charleston  Harbor,  S.  C. 

REPORTS.* 

No.  1. — General  G.  T.  Beauregard,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  Department  of  South 
Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida. 

No.  2. — Maj.  Stephen  Elliott,  jr.,  C.  S.  Artillery,  commanding  Fort  Sumter. 

No.  3. — Col.  William  Butler,  Third  South  Carolina  Artillery,  commanding  artillery 
on  Sullivan’s  Island. 

# 

No.  4. — Major  Robert  De  Treville,  Third  South  Carolina  Artillery,  commanding  Fort 
Moultrie. 

No.  5.— Capt.  B.  S.  Burnet,  Third  South  Carolina  Artillery. 

No.  6. — Lieut.  R.  Y.  Dwight,  Third  South  Carolina  Artillery. 

No.  7. — Capt.  Thomas  A.  Huguenin,  Third  South  Carolina  Artillery. 

No.  8. — Capt.  C.  H.  Rivers,  Third  South  Carolina  Artillery. 

No.  9. — Capt.  JohnC.  Mitchel,  First  South  Carolina  Artillery,  commanding  artillery 
at  Fort  Johnson  and  Battery  Simkins. 

No.  1. 

Report  of  General  G.  T.  Beauregard,  C.  8.  Army,  commanding 
Department  of  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida. 

Charleston,  S.  C., 
September  9,  1863 — 7 a.  m. 

A determined  attack  on  Moultrie  and  Sullivan’s  Island  batteries 
was  made  yesterday  by  the  Ironsides  and  five  monitors,  sixth  monitor 
being  aground  off  Cumming’s  Point.  The  attack  lasted  five  hours, 

* For  reports  of  Rear-Admiral  Dalilgren,  Capt.  S.  C.  Rowan,  and  Commander 
E.  R.  Colhoun,  U.  S.  Navy,  see  Annual  Report  of  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy, 
December  7,  1863. 


Chap.  XL.]  ENGAGEMENT  IN  CHARLESTON  HARBOR,  S.  C.  713 

resulting  in  repulse  of  iron-clads,  the  Ironsides  and  several  monitors 
appearing  more  or  less  damaged.  Our  works  suffered  hut  little;  our 
casualies  about  40.  • 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector- General,  Richmond , Va. 

ADDENDA. 

Return  of  Casualties  in  the  Confederate  forces  on  Sullivan's  Island  ( Third  South 
Carolina  Artillery),  September  8. 


[Compiled  from  nominal  lists  of  casualties,  returns,  &c.] 


Command. 

Killed. 

Wounded. 

Aggregate. 

Officers. 

Enlisted  men. 

Officers. 

Enlisted  men. 

Battery  Beauregard  ....  

1 

1 

1 

2 

2 

2 

46 

50 

Battery  Bee  

1 

26 

Fort  Moultrie 

18 

Total  

1 

18 

4 

27 

1 

No.  2. 

Reports  of  Maj.  Stephen  Elliott , jr. , C.  S.  Artillery,  commanding 

Fort  Sumter. 

Headquarters  Fort  Sumter,  September  7,  1863. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  make  the  following  report  : 

Up  to  this  time  no  direct  shots  have  been  fired  upon  this  fort. 
Heavy  firing  was  kept  up  continuously  during  yesterday  and  until 
2 o’clock  this  morning.  Two  monitors  had  moved  up  under  cover 
of  the  darkness,  and,  about  the  time  the  Morris  Island  movement 
commenced,  commenced  throwing  random  shots  up  the  harbor  ap- 
proaches, which  they  continued  during  the  night.  The  Morris  Island 
movement  was  accomplished  successfully,  so  far  as  this  post  was 
concerned. 

At  8 this  morning  the  Ironsides  and  five  monitors  were  near  this 
post ; one  of  the  latter  quite  near.  There  being  a fog  seaward,  the 
number  of  vessels  inside  the  bar  and  at  the  other  points  cannot  be 
accurately  counted,  but  there  is  no  perceptible  change  since  yester- 
day. Two  monitors  have  been  employed  this  morning  in  sounding 
along  Morris  Island.  They  have  taken  convenient  positions  for  firing 
at  short  range  at  this  fort.  I received  a communication  from  Com-  - 
mander  Dalilgren,  through  Lieutenant  [R.  J.]  Bowen,  C.  S.  Navy, 
demanding  the  surrender  of  this  fort.  An  answer  has  been  sent 
stating  that  a definite  reply  would  be  returned  as  soon  as  I could 
communicate  with  the  commander  of  the  department.  Some  valu- 
able time  has  thus  been  gained. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

STEPHEN  ELLIOTT,  Jr., 

Maj.  Art.,  Provisional  Army  C.  S.,  Commanding  Post. 

Capt.  W E.  Nance,  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


[Chap.  XL. 


714  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

Sumter,  September  8,  1863 — 7 a.  m. 

Captain  : The  monitor  near  Cumming’s  Point  is  evidently  aground. 
Her  deck  is  now  4 feet  above  water  and  will  be  some  2 feet  higher  at 
low  water.  Fire  should  be  opened  on  her,  as  the  thin  part  of  her  hull 
is  probably  exposed. 

STEPHEN  ELLIOTT,  Jr. 

Captain  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant-General. 

[Indorsements.] 

Attended  to. 

W.  G.  M. 


This  monitor  is  being  fired  at  from  Sullivan’s  Island  and  Fort 
Johnson. 


NANCE, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Sumter,  September  8 — 9.45  a.  m. 
Captain  : The  monitor  has  been  hit  three  times  on  water  line.  No 
change  apparent  in  obstructions. 

STEPHEN  ELLIOTT,  Jr. 

Captain  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Sumter,  September  8 — 10.35  a.  m. 

Captain  : The  monitors  have  been  hit  repeatedly.  Those  next 
Moultrie  have  drawn  her  fire  from  the  one  aground,  which  is  to  be 
regretted.  The  Ironsides  is  1,460  yards  from  this  fort. 

STEPHEN  ELLIOTT,  Jr. 

Captain  Nance. 


Sumter,  September  8 — 11.15  a.  m. 

Captain  : Ironsides  was  heavily  hit  just  now,  throwing  great  deal 
sand  off  her  deck.  Enemy  very  busy  at  their  old  works  on  Morris 
Island.  One  Parrott  gun  from  there  opened  on  fort  just  now. 

STEPHEN  ELLIOTT,  Jr. 

Captain  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant-General. 


Sumter,  September  8 — noon. 


Captain  : Fragments  of  Ironsides  torn  away  by  shot  from  Sulli- 


van’s Island  just  now. 


STEPHEN  ELLIOTT,  Jr. 


Captain  Nance. 


Chap.  XL.]  ENGAGEMENT  IN  CHARLESTON  HARBOR,  S.  C.  715 

Sumter,  September  8 — 1.05  p.  m. 
Captain  : The  Ironsides  is  withdrawing.  One  of  the  monitors 
has  her  smoke-stack  badly  bent. 

STEPHEN  ELLIOTT,  Jr. 

Captain  Nance. 


Sumter,  September  8 — 2.10p.  m. 

Captain  : The  Ironsides  has  been  injured,  but  it  is  thought  not 
seriously.  One  monitor  has  her  smoke-stack  bent  down,  and  appears 
to  be  disabled.  Another  is  aground  on  Morris  Island,  and  could  be 
destroyed  by  our  batteries  if  they  would  fire  at  her.  She  has  been 
shelling  this  fort  without  injury  to  us. 

STEPHEN  ELLIOTT,  Jr. 

Captain  Nance. 


[Indorsement.] 

Have  ordered  the  rifle  guns  on  Sullivan’s  Island  and  James  Island 
to  continue. 

NANCE, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General . 


Headquarters  Fort  Sumter, 

September  8,  1863. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  of  making  the  following  report : 

During  yesterday  the  enemy’s  land  batteries  were  silent.  Early  in 
the  morning  two  monitors  came  up  within  short  range  of  the  fort, 
the  Ironsides  and  the  remaining  four  monitors  taking  position  near 
the  outer  buoy. 

About  8 a.  m. , a flag  of  truce  was  sent  by  the  enemy’s  fleet,  which 
was  met  by  Lieutenant  Bowen,  C.  S.  Navy.  A reply  to  the  commu- 
nication received  was  subsequently  sent  by  flag  of  truce  from  this 
fort. 

At  7 p.  m.  the  Ironsides  and  six  monitors  engaged  Fort  Moultrie, 
throwing  an  occasional  shot  at  this  post,  which  did  no  damage,  ex- 
cepting tearing  away  a small  portion  of  the  parapet  on  the  west  face. 
During  the  night,  the  noise  of  hammering  could  be  distinctly  heard 
from  the  parapet,  indicating  that  one  of  the  monitors  had  been  in- 
jured and  was  repairing  damages.  One  of  the  monitors  appears  to 
be  aground  about  1,200  yards  from  Sumter.  There  are  thirty-six 
vessels  inside  the  bar,  including  the  Ironsides  and  six  monitors. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

STEPHEN  ELLIOTT,  Jr., 

Major , Commanding. 

Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  Fort  Sumter, 

September  9,  1863. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  of  making  the  following  report : 
About  8 o’clock  yesterday  morning  the  Ironsides  and  five  moni- 
tors took  positions  close  to  Sullivan’s  Island  and  engaged  Fort  Moul- 


716  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

trie  and  the  batteries  on  that  island.  They  kept  up  a very  severe 
fire  for  several  hours,  our  batteries  replying  promptly.  Yesterday 
morning  a monitor  was  evidently  aground  near  Morris  Island.  On 
reporting  the  fact,  Fort  Moultrie  opened  on  her,  hitting  her  effect- 
ively at  least  twice.  Her  deck  was  6 feet  above  the  water-line, 
leaving  her  sides  exposed.  Shell  Point  Battery  also  fired  on  her.  It 
is  to  be  regretted  that  our  fire  was  not  more  general  and  continuous. 
At  high  water  in  the  afternoon  she  got  off.  In  the  engagement  of 
the  fleet  with  Fort  Moultrie  the  monitors  were  frequently  struck, 
and  the  Ironsides  had  her  deck  hit  twice,  one  of  the  shots  tearing 
away  a large  portion  of  her  upper  bulwarks.  She  lay  alongside  of 
a transport  all  the  afternoon,  evidently  undergoing  repairs.  * 

* * * * * * * 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

STEPHEN  ELLIOTT,  Jr., 

Major  Artillery , Provisional  Army  C.  S.,  Commanding 

Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  3. 

Report  of  Col.  William  Butler , Third  South  Carolina  Artillery, 
commanding  Artillery  on  Sullivan’s  Island. 

Headquarters  Artillery, 
Sullivan’s  Island,  September  12,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  make  the  following  report  of  the  action 
between  the  batteries  on  this  island  and  the  iron-clad  fleet  of  the 
enemy  on  the  7th  and  8th  of  this  month  : 

On  the  afternoon  of  the  7th,  about  6 o’clock,  five  monitors  and  the 
frigate  Ironsides  engaged  the  batteries  until  after  dark,  resulting 
only  in  1 casualty  at  our  batteries. 

First  Lieut.  E.  A.  Erwin  was  killed  by  a shell  at  Beauregard  Bat- 
tery. Lieutenant  Erwin  had  just  returned  from  service  at  Morris 
Island  and  escaped  unhurt  to  meet  death  at  a less  exposed  position. 
He  was  more  than  ordinarily  intelligent,  brave,  and  conscientious. 
The  regiment  has  lost  in  him  one  of  its  best  officers. 

The  Ironsides  continued  to  fire  an  occasional  shot,  after  we  had 
ceased  firing,  until  about  9 p.  m.  It  was,  however,  so  dark  that  the 
vessels  could  not  be  seen. 

On  the  morning  of  the  8th,  one  of  the  monitors,  supposed  to  be  the 
W eehawken,  which  had  the  day  previous  taken  a position  very  near 
the  beach  of  Morris  Island,  in  the  channel  leading  to  Cumming’s 
Point,  nearly  opposite  to  Fort  Moultrie,  was  observed  to  show  so 
much  of  her  hull  as  to  lead  to  the  belief  that  the  boat  vxas  aground. 
I received  also,  early  in  the  morning,  a dispatch  from  Major  Elliott, 
commanding  Fort  Sumter,  giving  his  belief  that  the  boat  was 
aground  and  could  be  destroyed.  Learning  from  a conversation 
with  General  Clingman,  commanding  Sullivan’s  Island,  that  it  would 
meet  with  his  sanction,  I directed  a slow  fire  to  be  opened  upon  the 
monitor  from  the  treble-banded  Brooke  gun  and  10-inch  columbiads; 
I think  with  some  effect.  The  fire  was  returned,  and  about  9 a.  m. 


* For  portion  here  omitted,  see  Boat  Attack  on  Fort  Sumter,  p.  725. 


Chap.  XL.] 


ENGAGEMENT  IN  CHARLESTON  HARBOR,  S.  C. 


717 


five  other  monitors,  with  the  Ironsides,  were  seen  approaching, 
whether  to  shield  the  boat  that  was  thought  to  be  aground,  or 
whether  it  was  a preconcerted  move,  I am  unable  to  say.  About 
this  time  a shot  or  shell  from  the  W eehawken  struck  the  muzzle  of 
an  8-inch  columbiad  in  Fort  Moultrie  and  glanced  into  some  shell 
boxes  which  were  protected  by  a traverse,  producing  an  explosion, 
killing  16  [15]  and  wounding  12  men  of  Company  E,  First  South 
Carolina  Infantry,  [Third  Artillery,]  Capt.  R.  Press.  Smith,  jr.  This 
disaster  rendered  it  necessary  to  replace  Company  E by  Company  F, 
Capt.  B.  S.  Burnet,  which  arrived  under  fire  from  the  Beauregard 
Battery.  The  Ironsides  took  a position  some  1,500  yards  distant,  and 
opened  a very  heavy  fire  from  her  broadsides.  The  monitors  took 
positions  varying  from  900  to  1,400  yards,  all  directing  their  fire  upon 
Fort  Moultrie  and  the  batteries  adjoining.  Batteries  Bee  and  Beau- 
regard also  received  a portion  of  their  fire.  The  batteries  replied, 
hut,  owing  to  the  scant  amount  of  ammunition  on  hand,  the  fire  was 
not  so  rapid  as  that  of  the  fleet.  After  the  action  had  continued 
about  five  hours,  the  fleet  withdrew,  one  of  the  monitors,  I think, 
disabled,  the  Weehawken  remaining  in  the  same  position  it  occupied 
in  the  morning. 

Besides  the  loss  produced  by  the  explosion  before  referred  to,  3 
men  were  killed,  2 officers  (Capt.  G.  A.  Wardlaw  slightly,  and  Lieut. 
D.  B.  De  Saussure  severely)  and  14  men  wounded  at  Fort  Moultrie  ; 
at  Battery  Bee  1 officer  and  1 man  were  slightly  wounded,  and  at 
Battery  Beauregard  1 officer  (Lieut.  Edward  [W.]  Macbeth)  slightly 
wounded. 

Two  guns  in  Fort  Moultrie  were  disabled,  the  8-inch  columbiad, 
before  referred  to,  and  one  rifled  32-pounder,  which  had  the  right 
trunnion  knocked  off  by  a shot  or  shell  from  the  enemy.  No  other 
material  damage  was  done  to  the  batteries. 

I regret  to  say  that  the  treble-banded  Brooke  gun  gave  way  dur- 
ing the  action,  a crack  being  made  in  the  band  in  rear  of  the  vent 
and  through  the  breech.  I beg  leave  to  refer  to  the  report  of  Lieu- 
tenant Dwight  for  an  explanation  of  the  circumstances  attending  the 
loss  of  this  valuable  gun. 

The  firing  at  the  several  batteries  on  the  island  was  accurate  and 
deliberate,  and  it  affords  me  great  pleasure  to  commend  the  conduct 
of  both  officers  and  men  of  my  command. 

I inclose  herewith  the  reports  of  battery  commanders,  with  a list 
of  killed  and  wounded. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

[WILLIAM  BUTLER,] 

Colonel , Commanding . 

Capt.  Edward  White, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  4. 

Reports  of  Maj.  Robert  De  Treville,  Third  South  Carolina  Arlil- 
lery,  commanding  Fort  Moultrie. 

Headquarters  Fort  Moultrie,  S.  C., 

September  7,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  this  evening  about  6 o’clock, 
five  monitors  and  the  Ironsides  were  reported  approaching  the  fort. 


[Chap.  XL. 


718 


S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  £.  FLA. 


The  guns  were  manned,  and,  when  within  range,  fire  was  opened.  All 
the  boats  replied  rapidly,  striking  the  fort  a number  of  times,  but 
without  any  other  damage  than  destroying  a portion  of  the  barracks. 
The  fire  continued  very  rapidly  and  with  precision  from  the  boats, 
our  guns  replying  steadily  for  about  two  hours,  when  the  enemy 
withdrew.  No  casualties  to  report. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

ROBERT  DE  TREVILLE, 

Major , Commanding . 

Lieut.  M.  King, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  Fort  Moultrie,  S.  C., 

September  9,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  yesterday  morning,  8th  in- 
stant, one  of  the  monitors  (the  Weehawken)  was  observed  to  be 
aground  opposite  this  post,  and  fire  was  at  once  opened  on  her  with 
effect,  many  of  our  shots  having  been  seen  to  strike  the  hull,  of  which 
a large  portion  was  exposed  by  the  lowness  of  the  tide.  The  steamer 
promptly  replied,  and  soon  brought  to  her  assistance  the  Ironsides 
and  five  other  monitors.  At  about  8 a.  m.  the  Ironsides  came  to 
anchor  about  1,200  yards  from  the  fort,  and  the  monitors  took  their 
position  higher  up  the  river,  and  at  about  1,800  yards,  and  together 
opened  a terrific  fire  from  rifled  and  15-inch  guns,  using  shot,  shell, 
shrapnel,  grape,  and  incendiary  shell. 

I regret  to  announce  here  an  accident  most  terrible  in  its  effect, 
and  but  for  which  our  casualties  would  have  been  but  slight.  A 15- 
inch  shell  from  the  Weehawken  struck  the  muzzle  of  an  8-inch  co- 
lumbiad,  and,  glancing  off,  exploded  among  a number  of  shell-boxes 
and  ammunition  chests  which  had  been  placed  behind  a traverse  (and 
at  which  a number  of  the  men  of  Captain  Smith’s  company  were 
stationed),  killing  instantly  16  men  and  wounding  12  others.  Cap- 
tain [R.  P.]  Smith,  jr.,  himself  narrowly  escaped  by  leaping  from 
the  parapet  into  the  ditch  in  front  of  the  fort. 

The  fire  from  the  enemy  now  became  furious,  and  broadside  after 
broadside  from  the  Ironsides  would  tear  through  the  buildings  of  the 
fort,  sending  fragments  of  every  description  in  every  direction,  and 
rendering  it  almost  impossible  to  pass  from  one  portion  of  the  fort 
to  another;  but  nobly  did  officers  and  men  remain  at  their  guns  and 
return  their  fire.  Captain  Burnet’s  company  came  from  the  Beau- 
regard Battery  under  a storm  of  shot  and  shell  and  relieved  Captain 
Smith,  whose  men  had  been  nearly  all  killed  or  wounded  by  the 
explosion  already  mentioned. 

Lieut.  D.  G.  Calhoun  deserves  great  credit  for  the  manner  in  which 
he  discharged  his  duties  as  officer  of  the  day,  in  carrying  out  the  ar- 
rangements for  the  removal  of  the  dead  and  wounded,  and  frequently 
in  extinguishing  fires  in  different  parts  of  the  fort  during  the  most 
severe  part  of  the  bombardment. 

Capt.  G.  A.  Wardlaw,  assistant  quartermaster,  volunteered  his 
services  at  one  of  the  gnns,  and  was  conspicuous  for  his  coolness  and 
the  manner  in  which  he  handled  his  piece,  but  was  himself  knocked 
down  by  a piece  of  one  of  the  traverses,  which,  fortunately,  inflicted 
no  other  damage  than  a momentary  unconsciousness  and  some  slight 
bruises. 


Chap.  XL.]  ENGAGEMENT  IN  CHARLESTON  HARBOR,  S.  C.  719 

Lieutenant  De  Saussure,  while  gallantly  fighting  his  gun,  was 
struck  by  a large  fragment  of  stone,  which  fractured  his  collar- 
bone and,  it  is  feared,  inflicted  some  internal  injury. 

Our  fire  was  kept  up  steadily  until  2 p.  m. , when  the  enemy  with- 
drew, and  one  of  the  monitors,  being  evidently  damaged,  was  towed 
out  by  two  others. 

The  fire  from  the  fort  was  deliberate  and  remarkably  accurate, 
nearly  every  shot  striking  the  boat  at  which  it  was  aimed. 

As  I cannot  mention  any  one  more  conspicuous  for  gallantry  than 
another,  I must  content  myself  with  simply  saying  that  officers  and 
men  did  their  whole  duty,  and  submit  the  names  of  the  officers  and 
companies  engaged.  The  battery  on  the  east  was  commanded  by 
Captain  [Jacob]  Valentine,  Company  G,  with  Lieutenant  De  Saus- 
sure; the  battery  next  on  the  west  was  commanded  by  Captain  [B. 
J.]  Witherspoon,  Company  C,  and  the  next  battery  by  Captain  [R. 
Press.]  Smith,  jr.,  Company  E,  with  Lieutenants  [D.  G.]  Calhoun 
and  [E.  C.]  Edgerton,  and  afterward  by  Captain  [B.  S.J  Burnet, 
Company  F,  with  Lieutenants  [W.  D.]  Gaillard,  [E.  M.]  Whaley, 
and  [William  J.]  Marshall. 

Lieutenant  [L.  W.]  Perrin  rendered  very  efficient  services  as  ord- 
nance officer,  and  Surgeon  [Flournov]  Carter  and  Assistant  Surgeon 
[E.  H.]  Kellers  assiduously  supplied  the  demands  of  the  wounded. 

Two  of  the  guns  of  the  fort  were  placed  hors  de  combat — the  one 
an  8-inch  columbiad,  already  referred  to,  and  the  other  a rifled  32- 
pounder,  the  trunnion  of  which  was  knocked  off  by  a piece  of  shell. 

About  1 o’clock  this  morning,  on  the  signal  that  an  attack  was  be- 
ing made  on  Fort  Sumter,  we  again  opened  fire  with  shell  and  grape, 
firing  so  as  to  pass  closely  to  the  right  and  left  of  the  fort,  and  on  a 
signal  of  “all  right”  again  ceased  firing. 

I have  the  honor  to  submit  herewith  a report  of  the  casualties,* 
the  number  of  wounded  being  far  smaller  than  was  at  first  reported, 
many  of  the  wounds  being  slight  and  the  men  returned  to  duty  : 


Command,  &c. 


Company  C,  Capt.  B.  J.  Witherspoon  : 

Non-commissioned  officers 

Enlisted  men 

Company  E,  Capt.  R.  Press.  Smith,  jr. : 

Non-commissioned  officers 

Enlisted  men 

Company  F,  Capt.  B.  S.  Burnet : 

Enlisted  men 

Company  G,  Capt.  J.  Valentine  : 

Commissioned  officers 

Enlisted  men 

Total 


Killed. 

i 

Wounded. 

3 

H 

2 

2 

9 

11 

1 

1 

2 

14 

11 

25 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

2 

3 

18 

27 

45 

All  of  which  is  respectfully  submitted. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

ROBERT  DE  TREVILLE, 

Major , Commanding. 


Lieut.  M.  King, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


* Nominal  list  omitted. 


[Chap.  XL. 


720  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

No.  5. 

Report  of  Capt.  B.  S.  Burnet , Third  South  Carolina  Artillery . 

Battery  Beauregard,  September  8,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  about  6 o’clock  yesterday  after- 
noon the  iron-clad  fleet,  consisting  of  the  Ironsides  and  five  mon- 
itors, having  moved  up  the  harbor,  when  within  about  1,700  yards 
I opened  fire  from  the  Brooke  gun  at  this  battery,  and  struck  her 
fairly  upon  her  starboard  quarter  near  the  bow,  bursting  the  per- 
cussion shell.  Another  percussion  shell  was  exploded  on  her  deck  ; 
besides  which  she  was  repeatedly  struck  by  shell  (which  exploded) 
from  the  same  gun.  The  other  two  guns  on  the  sea  face  (a  rifled 
32-pounder  and  8-inch  columbiad)  were  used  with  accuracy  and 
effect. 

I fired  33  shots  in  all,  at  ranges  varying  from,  say,  1,700  to  1,400 
yards,  all  directed  against  the  Ironsides.  In  reply,  she  opened  and 
kept  up  a vigorous  and  well-directed  fire,  frequently  exploding  shell 
above,  in,  and  around  the  work,  which,  however,  has  not  in  any  way 
injured  it. 

Fortunately,  we  sustained*  but  one  serious  casualty.  Lieutenant 
Erwin,  of  Company  A,  was  struck  by  a fragment  of  shell,  which 
tore  off  his  left  arm  near  the  shoulder  and  a considerable  portion  of 
the  left  breast.  He  lingered  senseless  for  about  forty  minutes,  and 
died.  Lieutenants  [E.  W.]  Macbeth  and  [J.  L.]  Wardlaw,  of  Com- 
pany A,  were  slightly  contused  by  the  bursting  of  a shell. 

When  dark  came  on,  I ordered  the  firing  to  cease. 

Nothing  else  of  importance  has  occurred  at  this  post  since  my  last 
report. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

B.  S.  BURNET, 
Captain,  Commanding  Battery. 

Lieut.  M.  King, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  6. 

Report  of  Lieut.  R.  Y.  Dwight,  Third  South  Carolina  Artillery. 

Sullivan’s  Island,  September  9,  1863. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  the  action  of  yesterday 
prevented  my  making  the  usual  morning  report. 

On  Monday  afternoon,  at  about  5.30  [o’clock],  the  Ironsides  and 
monitors  steamed  in  toward  our  works,  and  fire  was  opened  upon  the 
nearest  monitor  by  the  guns  of  this  battery.  The  Brooke  gun  struck 
the  nearest  monitor  repeatedly,  and  just  before  dark  three  times  suc- 
cessively with  wrought-iron  bolts  and  20-pounder  cartridges,  she 
lying  within  the  distance  prescribed  for  the  use  of  this  charge.  Im- 
mediately after  being  struck  these  three  successive  times,  she  went 
out,  but  it  was  then  too  dark  to  see  what  injury  had  been  inflicted. 
Eleven  shots  were  fired  during  the  afternoon.  I omitted  to  state 
that  during  the  morning  I fired  13  shells  at  the  enemy  on  Cumming’s 
Point  and  at  Battery  Wagner,  most  of  which  struck,  and  burst  fairly 
in  the  works. 


Chap.  XL.] 


ENGAGEMENT  IN  CHARLESTON  HARBOR,  S.  C. 


721 


On  Tuesday  morning,  at  8.30  [o’clock],  Coionel  [William]  Butler 
ordered  me  to  open  fire  upon  the  monitor  aground  off  Cumming’s 
Point,  which  was  done,  and  continued  until  11  shots  had  been  fired. 
By  this  time  a second  monitor  had  come  within  closer  range  than 
any  had  ever  before  ventured,  and  I turned  my  fire  upon  her  with 
20-pounder  cartridges  and  wrought-iron  bolts.  I continued  to  fire 
deliberately  at  this  monitor  until  I received  an  order  from  Colonel 
Butler  to  open  on  the  Ironsides,  when  she  got  in  range,  with  the 
wrought-iron  bolts.  I think  I fired  5 or  6 shots  at  her  at  about  from 
4°  to  5°  elevation,  when  I discovered  that  the  band  through  which  the 
vent  passes  had  given  way  about  8 or  10  inches  below  the  vent  on  the 
right,  and  the  next  band  in  rear  of  this  had  given  way  on  the  left 
near  the  breach  trunnion  band.  I ceased  firing  and  reported  the  fact 
to  Colonel  Butler. 

In  the  afternoon,  by  General  Ripley’s  order,  I fired  at  her  with  a 13- 
pounder  cartridge  at  the  grounded  monitor,  and  struck  her  directly 
upon  her  bow  deck.  The  shot  seemed  to  have  penetrated,  for  it  was  not 
observed  to  ricochet.  U nf ortunately , however,  this  discharge  cracked 
the  breach  open  in  a plane  passing  vertically  through  the  vent. 

Respectfully, 

R.  Y.  DWIGHT, 

Lieut.  1st  S.  C.  [ Regular ] Inf.,  [3d  Art.,]  Comdg.  Battery . 


Captain  [W.  F.]  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


[p.  S.] — I omitted  to  state  that  the  columbiads  under  immediate 
charge  of  Lieutenant  Singleton  have  done  admirable  firing  in  the 
late  actions  with  the  enemy.  I opened  fire  from  one  of  these  two 
guns  upon  the  enemy  assaulting  Fort  Sumter  at  2 o’clock  this  morn- 
ing. The  crank  and  gear  attachment  for  traversing  being  out  of 
order,  prevented  the  other  being  traversed  so  far  to  the  west. 


[Indorsement.] 

Sullivan’s  Island,  September  9,  1863. 

Respectfully  forwarded.  Lieutenant  Dwight  states  in  this  report 
that  I sent  an  order  to  him  to  use  wrought-iron  bolts.  This  is  a mis- 
take. I sent  a message  to  him  by  Lieutenant  Creswell,  ordnance 
officer,  to  turn  his  gun  upon  the  Ironsides  if  she  came  nearer.  This 
vessel  was  then  moving  in  about  1,500  yards  distant.  I sent  only 
such  a message  as  I would  have  done  with  reference  to  any  other 
gun,  supposing  that  he  would  be  guided  by  the  instructions  that  he 
had  received  concerning  this  gun.  If  the  officer  who  bore  the  mes- 
sage gave  any  other  directions,  it  was  done  without  my  authority. 

WILLIAM  BUTLER, 

Colonel,  Commanding. 


No.  7. 

Report  of  Capt.  Thomas  A.  Huguenin , Third  South  Carolina  Ar- 
tillery. 


Beauregard  Battery,  September  9,  1863. 
Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  yesterday  morning  the 
enemy’s  fleet  of  iron-clads,  consisting  of  the  Ironsides  and  six  inoni- 
46  R R— VOL  XXVIII,  PT  I 


1CHAP.  XL. 


722  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 


tors,  were  in  position  and  commenced  an  action  which  lasted  until 
about  3.30  p.  m. 

The  fire  directed  at  this  post  was  continuous,  though  not  very- 
severe.  It  was  returned  slowly  until  about  10.30  a.  m.,  when  it 
ceased  by  order  of  General  Clingman.  I resumed  it,  however,  about 
the  end  of  the  action,  when  I saw  the  enemy  were  endeavoring  to 
get  off  a disabled  monitor. 

The  only  casualty  at  this  post  was  Lieutenant  Macbeth,  who  was 
severely  stunned. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

T.  A.  HUGUENIN, 

Captain , Commanding. 


Lieut.  M.  King, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant-General. 


No.  8. 

Report  of  Capt.  C.  H.  Rivers,  Third  South  Carolina  Artillery. 

Sullivan’s  Island, 

September  9,  1863. 

Captain  : I have  honor  to  report  that  yesterday,  at  about  9 o’clock, 
six  monitors  and  the  Ironsides  moved  up  within  easy  range  of  our 
guns.  We  opened  fire  principally  on  the  Ironsides,  and  the  engage- 
ment was  continued  without  cessation  until  about  3 o’clock,  when  the 
Ironsides  moved  out,  taking  in  tow  one  of  the  monitors.  Immedi- 
ately afterward  the  other  iron-clads  moved  out,  with  the  exception 
of  one  monitor  which  was  aground  off  Morris  Island.  At  about  5 
o’clock  she  succeeded  in  getting  off. 

There  were  no  casualties  of  importance  among  my  men.  Two 
were  slightly  wounded  by  fragments  of  shell,  but  are  on  duty  at 
present. 

Eighty  shots  were  fired  from  my  battery  during  the  engagement. 

Both  officers  and  men  behaved  with  coolness  and  worked  their 
guns  with  energy. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

C.  H.  RIVERS, 

Captain,  Commanding  Battery  K. 

Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant-General. 


No.  9. 

Report  of  Capt.  John  C.  Mitchel,  First  South  Carolina  Artillery, 
commanding  artillery  at  Fort  Johnson  and  Battery  Simkins. 

Artillery  .at  Fort  Johnson  and  Battery  Simkins, 

September  9,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  having  been  ordered  yesterday 
morning  to  concentrate  all  available  fire  on  a monitor  aground  at 


Chap.  XL.]  ENGAGEMENT  IN  CHARLESTON  HARBOR,  S.  C.  723 

Cumming’s  Point,  I first  turned  on  it  the  8-inch  naval  shell  gnn  on 
the  right  of  Battery  Simians,  and  then  the  three  10-inch  sea-coast 
mortars,  which,  with  the  10  inch  columbiad,  had  been  previously 
keeping  up  a steady  fire  on  Morris  Island. 

The  8-inch  naval  shell  gun  was  mounted  on  a shattered  carriage, 
and  could  only  be  fired  slowly  and  with  the  utmost  caution.  It  was 
impossible  to  do  accurate  shooting  with  it,  but  I struck  her  from  it 
seven  or  eight  times  with  round  shot. 

The  mortars  are  mounted  on  perfectly  frightful,  utterly  worn-out, 
platforms,  and  could,  of  course,  do  no  spot  shooting.  I ceased  firing 
from  them  in  the  evening. 

About  3 o’clock  I had  a portion  of  the  left  traverse  of  the  10-inch 
columbiad  in  same  battery  cut  away,  and  made  some  good  shooting 
on  the  monitor  before  her  escape. 

The  Brooke  gun  on  the  right  was  mounted  during  the  day,  but 
only  succeeded  in  firing  4 shots  on  the  monitor  before  she  got  off, 
one  of  which  I think  took  effect. 

About  dark  I temporarily  ceased  firing  (to  allow  of  some  alter- 
ation to  the  traverse  of  10-inch  columbiad,  and  because  I did  not 
think  that  the  8-inch  naval  shell  gun  could  stand  many  more  dis- 
charges, and  wished  to  reserve  her  for  any  emergency  during  the 
night)  from  the  mortars,  because  I wished  to  lay  in  a further  sup- 
ply of  shell,  of  which  I was  out,  and  to  rest  my  almost  tired  out 
men. 

At  about  2 o’clock  last  night,  the  signal  of  an  attack  on  Fort  Sum- 
ter was  observed,  when,  as  soon  as  practicable,  I opened  fire,  accord- 
ing to  previously  received  directions,  from  the  8-inch  naval  shell 
gun,  the  6.40-inch  Brooke,  and  from  the  three  10-inch  columbiads,  at 
Fort  Johnson. 

This  fire  was  kept  up  irregularly  for  about  an  hour.  Fire  was  kept 
up  from  that  time  until  this  morning  from  Battery  Simkins,  from 
two  guns  and  one  mortar  on  Battery  Gregg,  and  from  two  mortars  on 
Battery  Wagner,  at  intervals  of  about  five  minutes  between  each 
shot. 

Altogether  there  were  fired  from  Shell  Point,  from  9 a.  m.  on  the 
8th  until  9 a.  m.  on  the  9th,  68  columbiad  shots  (8  and  10  inch)  and 
118  mortar  shells  and  about  11  Brooke  bolts,  besides  some  8 or  9 co- 
lumbiad solid  shots  from  Fort  Johnson. 

I have  the  honor  to  remain,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  serv- 
ant, 

JOHN  0.  MITCHEL, 

Captain , Commanding. 

Lieut.  J.  M.  Schnierle, 

Adjutant  Artillery  Command -. 


[Indorsement.] 

Headquarters  First  Military  District, 

Charleston , September  10,  1863. 

Respectfully  forwarded  for  information  of  the  commanding  gen- 
eral.^ It  was  thought  on  the  9th  instant  that  these  batteries  were 
not  firing  sufficiently,  and  this  direct  report  was  asked  for  from  these 
headquarters. 

R.  S.  RIPLEY, 

Brigadier - General,  Commanding. 


[Chap.  XL. 


724  S.  C.  AND  G A.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

SEPTEMBER  8-9,  1863. — Boat  Attack  on  Fort  Sumter,  S.  C. 

REPORTS.* 

No.  1. — General  G.  T.  Beauregard,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  Department  of  South 
Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida. 

No.  2. — Ma,j.  Stephen  Elliott,  jr.,  C.  S.  Artillery,  commanding  Fort  Sumter. 

No.  1. 

Reports  of  General  G.  T.  Beauregard , C.  S.  Army,  commanding 
Department  of  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida. 

Charleston,  S.  C.,  September  9,  1863—11  a.  m. 

During  night,  thirty  enemy’s  launches  attacked  Fort  Sumter. 
Preparations  had  been  made  for  such  an  event.  At  concerted  signal, 
all  batteries  bearing  on  Sumter,  assisted  by  one  gunboat  ram  prop- 
erly located,  opened  on  exterior  of  fort.  Fire-balls  and  hand-gre- 
nades were  thrown  out.  Garrison  behaved  with  gallantry  and  cool- 
ness. Major  Elliott,  commanding  post.  Enemy  was  completely  re- 
pulsed, leaving  125  prisoners  (13  officers  included),  four  boats,  and 
three  colors.  Nobody  hurt  on  our  side. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General,  Commanding . 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General,  Richmond,  Va. 


Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston,  September  22,  1863. 

Sir  : During  the  night  of  the  8th  instant  thirty  or  more  of  the 
enemy’s  launches,  containing  about  800  men,  attacked  Fort  Sumter, 
defended  by  the  Charleston  Battalion,  under  Major  Blake,  Major 
Elliott,  being  in  command  of  the  post.  Preparations  had  been 
made  for  such  an  event,  and,  at  a concerted  signal,  all  the  batteries 
bearing  on  the  works,  assisted  by  the  gunboat  Chicora,  properly  lo- 
cated, opened  fire  on  the  exterior  of  the  fort.  Fire-balls  and  hand- 
grenades  were  thrown  out  by  the  garrison,  which  behaved  with  cool- 
ness and  gallantry.  In  less  than  half  an  hour  the  enemy  was  de- 
cisively repulsed,  leaving  in  our  hands  125  prisoners  (13  officers 
included),  five  launches,  and  five  colors.  His  additional  loss  in 
killed,  wounded,  and  drowned  must  have  been  large.  Fortunately 
we  had  no  casualties. 

Among  the  colors  taken  was  an  old  garrison  flag,  weather-worn, 
stained,  and  tattered,  which  was  reported  by  some  of  the  prisoners 
to  be  the  one  that  had  been  lowered  to  us  when  Fort  Sumter  was 
surrendered  by  the  United  States  on  April  13,  1861.  The  appearance 

*For  reports  of  Rear-Admiral  Dahlgren,  Capts.  J.  F.  Green,  C.  W.  Pickering, 
and  Charles  Steedman,  Commander  T.  H.  Stevens,  Lieut.  Commanders  Francis  M. 
Bunce  and  E.  P.  Williams,  Lieut.  F.  J.  Higginson,  Acting  Lieut.  Edgar  Broadhead, 
Acting  Masters  John-C.  Carr  and  Benjamin  C.  Dean,  Ensign  James  Wallace,  Act- 
ing Ensign  William  Knapp,  and  Acting  Masters’  Mates  Thomas  Hollins  and  J.  F. 
Kavanaugh,  U.  S.  Navy,  and  Capt.  C.  G.  McCawley  and  Lieut.  John  C.  Harris,  U. 
S.  Marine  Corps,  see  Annual  Reports  of  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy,  December  5, 
1863,  and  December  7,  1864. 


Chap.  XL.] 


BOAT  ATTACK  ON  FORT  SUMTER,  S.  C. 


725 


of  this  flag,  and  the  circumstances  under  which  it  was  found,  sat- 
isfy me  that  really  it  is  the  same  one  that  Major  [Robert]  Anderson 
was  permitted  to  remove,  and  which  our  adversary  hoped  to  replace 
above  the  shattered  walls  of  that  fortress  as  a dramatic  surcease  to 
his  humiliation.  With  the  sanction  of  the  War  Dapartment,  I have 
the  honor  to  present  it  through  Your  Excellency  to  the  State  of  South 
Carolina,  as  the  fitting  custodian  of  a flag  that  was  designed  to  mark 
and  make  memorable  the  discomfiture  of  your  people,  in  the  face  of 
your  wives,  children,  and  servants.  I also  send  you,  herewith,  a set 
of  photographs  of  Fort  Sumter,  showing  its  condition  at  the  time  of 
the  assault. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant-, 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General . 


His  Excellency  M.  L.  Bonham, 

Governor  of  the  State  of  South  Carolina. 


No.  2. 

Reports  of  Maj.  Stephen  Elliott , jr. , C.  S.  Artillery , commanding 

Fort  Sumter. 

Headquarters  Fort  Sumter,  September  9,  1863. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  of  making  the  following  report  :* 

* * * * * * * 

Having  for  several  nights  expected  a boat  attack,  I had  one-third 
of  the  garrison  under  arms  on  the  parapet  and  the  remainder  so 
posted  as  to  re-enforce  with  promptness. 

At  1 o’clock  this  morning  I saw  a fleet  of  barges  approaching  from 
the  eastward.  I ordered  the  fire  to  be  reserved  until  they  should  ar- 
rive within  a few  yards  of  the  fort.  The  enemy  attempted  to  land 
on  the  southeastern  and  southern  faces.  He  was  received  by  a well- 
directed  fire  of  musketry  and  by  hand-grenades,  which  were  very 
effective  in  demoralizing  him ; fragments  of  the  epaulement  were 
also  thrown  down  upon  him.  The  crews  near  shore  sought  refuge 
in  the  recesses  at  the  foot  of  the  scarp,  those  farther  off  in  flight.  * 
The  repulse  was  decided  and  the  assault  was  not  renewed.  His 
force  is  reported  to  have  been  400  men,  but  it  is  believed  to  have 
been  much  larger. 

His  loss  is  4 men  killed,  2 officers  and  17  men  wounded,  and  10 
officers  and  92  men  captured.  We  secured  five  stand  of  colors  and  five 
barges ; others  were  disabled  and  drifted  off.  One  gunboat,  and  Fort 
Johnson  and  the  Sullivan’s  Island  batteries  enfiladed  our  faces  and 
contributed  to  prevent  a renewal  of  the  assault.  Many  of  the  shot 
struck  the  fort. 

The  garrison,  consisting  of  the  Charleston  Battalion,  behaved  ad- 
mirably. All  praise  is  due  to  Major  Blake,  his  officers  and  men,  for 
the  promptness  and  gallantry  displayed  in  the  defense. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

STEPHEN  ELLIOTT,  Jr., 

Major  Artillery,  Provisional  Army,  C.  S.,  Commanding. 

Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


* For  portion  here  omitted,  see  p.  G22. 


[Chap.  XL. 


726  S.  0.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

Headquarters  Fort  Sumter, 

September  12,  1863. 

Captain  . I have  tlie  honor  to  submit  a report  of  the  late  action  at 
this  post. 

On  the  4th  instant,  pursuant  to  Special  Orders,  Ho.  298,  headquar- 
ters First  Military  District,  Department  of  South  Carolina,  Georgia, 
and  Florida,  I assumed  command,  with  the  Charleston  Battalion  of 
Infantry  (commanded  by  Maj.  J.  A.  Blake)  as  a garrison.  All  the 
available  guns  having  been  already  dismounted,  the  defense  was  to 
be  conducted  by  infantry. 

The  condition  of  the  work  was  as  follows  * The  gorge  A had  been 
so  cut  by  the  enemy’s  artillery  that  the  scarp  had  assumed  the  form 
of  an  Inclined  plane  with  a dip  of  about  45°.  The  wall  of  the  east 
face  had  been  shot  away,  leaving  the  arches  (which  had  been  filled 
with  sand)  exposed.  The  northeast  face  was  comparatively  secure. 
The  northwest  contained  several  serious  breaches,  and  one  of  very 
considerable  size,  B.  This  was  defended  by  a barricade.  The  others 
were  securely  obstructed.  The  west  face  was  uninjured,  the  lower 
tier  of  embrasures  being  merely  closed  by  their  usual  shutters.  The 
main  sally-port  in  this  face  had  been  pierced  for  musketry,  and  com- 
manded the  wharf. 

Dispositions  similar  to  the  following  were  habitually  made  : Cap- 
tain [J.  W.]  Hopkins’  company  (D),  43  men,  lay  on  their  arms  on 
the  parapet  of  the  gorge  and  Captain  [F.  T.]  Miles’  company  (E), 
12  men,  at  the  breach  in  the  northwest  face.  The  guards,  excepting 
the  sentinels  on  post,  were  to  defend  the  sally-port.  Captain  [T.  Y.  j 
Simons’  company  (B),  28  men,  lay  at  the  entrance  on  the  west  face. 
In  case  of  an  alarm,  Captain  [S.]  Lord’s  company  (F),  42  men,  was 
to  occupy  the  southwest  angle  and  support  Captain  Hopkins  on  the 
right.  Lieutenant  [J.  C.]  Saltus’  company  (A),  12  men,  at  the  south- 
east, was  to  support  him  on  the  left.  Lieutenant  [J.  G.]  Harris’  com- 
pany (G),  25  men,  was  to  occupy  the  northeast  angle.  Captain  [J. 
M.]  Mulvaney,  Company  C,  43  men,  was  to  support  Captain  Miles. 
In  case  their  services  should  not  be  needed,  the  last  four  companies 
were  to  remain  formed  on  the  parade  below  their  respective  positions, 
so  as  to  be  ready  to  move  to  any  weak  point. 

I had  procured  from  Charleston  a supply  of  hand-grenades  and  fire- 
balls. Detachments  of  men  for  each  of  these  kinds  of  service  were 
kept  constantly  in  position  at  three  different  points  of  the  parapet. 

I requested  Captain  Champneys,  the  engineer  in  charge,  to  plant- 
two  fougasses  in  the  wharf  leading  from  the  gorge.  During  the 
attack  he  kindly  superintended  their  delivery. 

At  la.  m. , while  observing  a monitor  which  had  taken  a position 
near  the  fort,  I saw  the  enemy  pulling  up  from  the  eastward  in  two 
columns,  the  head  of  the  one  directed  upon  the  northeast,  that  of  the 
other  upon  the  southeast,  angle  of  the  fort.  I ordered  up  three  com- 
panies within  supporting  distance,  and  reserved  our  fire  until  they 
had  deployed  and  commenced  to  land.  The  outer  boats  replied  rap- 
idly for  a few  minutes. 

The  crews  of  those  that  had  effected  a landing  sought  refuge  from 
the  galling  fire  under  the  projecting  masses  of  the  wall,  whence 
grenades  and  fire-balls  soon  dislodged  them. 

The  fire  of  the  Chicora,  lying  at  a short  distance  to  the  northward; 
of  Sullivan’s  Island,  to  the  northeast,  and  of  Fort  Johnson,  to  the 
westward,  encircled  the  work  and  effectually  assisted  to  prevent  any 
re-enforcements  coming  up. 


Chap.  XL.]  BOAT  ATTACK  ON  FORT  SUMTER,  S.  C.  727 

The  enemy — with  some  of  his  boats  disabled  by  hand-grenades  and 
masses  of  masonry  (convenient  weapons  to  the  ready  hands  of  our 
garrison),  and  overwhelmed  by  our  own  and  the  lire  of  our  sup- 
ports— called  for  quarter,  and  were  ordered  in  detail  to  make  their 
way  to  the  gorge,  whence  they  were  transferred  to  a place  of  security. 

Not  one  of  our  men  was  injured.  The  whole  force  engaged  on  our 
side  consisted  of  80  riflemen  and  24  men  detached  for  service  of  the 
grenades  and  fire-balls.  The  remainder  of  the  garrison  were  ready 
for  action  and  remained  in  position. 

The  force  of  the  enemy  exceeded,  according  to  the  statements  of 
captured  officers,  400  men.  Captured  papers  would  indicate  it  to 
have  been  870. 

His  ascertained  loss  was  6 killed,  15  wounded,  and  106  prisoners, 
of  whom  11  were  officers. 

We  captured  also  five  barges,  five  stand  of  colors  (among  them  a 
flag,  said  by  the  prisoners  to  be  the  flag  borne  from  the  fort  by  Maj. 
Robert  Anderson  in  1861),  and  a small  quantity  of  arms  and  ac- 
couterments. Most  of  the  latter  were  thrown  overboard  by  the 
prisoners  and  lost.  Several  boats  drifted  off  with  dead  and  wounded 
men. 

The  action  was  brief  and  decisive,  as  they  found  us  prepared,  and 
were  themselves  surprised  at  meeting  more  than  a nominal  resist- 
ance. 

The  Charleston  Battalion  fully  sustained  its  well-earned  reputation 
by  cheerfully  enduring  the  hardships  of  their  position  and  moving 
forward  with  energy  in  the  moment  of  danger. 

All  the  officers  performed  their  duties  well.  The  adjutant  of  the 
battalion,  Lieut.  W.  Mason  Smith,  rendered  me  throughout  great 
assistance. 

I have  the  honor  to  refer  you  to  the  accompanying  papers,  contain- 
ing lists*  of  killed,  wounded,  and  prisoners,  and  of  captured  arms 
and  other  property,  and  also  a sketch  of  the  fort,  f showing  the  po- 
sitions of  the  interior  communications  and  the  dispositions  of  the 
troops. 

I cannot  omit  to  mention  the  services  of  Capt.  J.  T.  Champneys, 
of  the  Engineer  Corps,  who  has  shown  great  zeal  and  ability  in  con- 
ducting the  defenses  of  this  work. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

STEPHEN  ELLIOTT,  Jr., 

Major  Artillery,  Provisional  Army  C.  S. , Commanding. 

Capt.  W.  F.  Nance, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

[Inclosure  No.  1.] 

List  of  articles  captured  on  the  morning  of  September  9, 1863,  at  Fort  Sumter. 


Boats 5 

Stand  of  colors 5 

Anchors 3 


STEPHEN  ELLIOTT,  Jr., 

Major,  Commanding. 

* The  list  of  “ Abolition  prisoners  ” captured  (Inclosure  No.  1 with  original)  shows 
11  officers  and  110  men  captured,  1 officer  and  14  men  being  reported  as  “ wounded, 
in  hospital.” 
f Not  found. 


[Chap.  XL. 


728  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 


[Inclosure  No.  2.] 

Received,  Charleston,  S.  C.,  September  11,  1863,  from  Sergt.  A.  C. 
Colson,  Company  D,  Charleston  Battalion,  the  following  ordnance 
and  ordnance  stores,  &c.  . 


Muskets 28 

Pistols ’ ’ 2 

Bayonets ig 

Bayonet  scabbards  ! 2 

Cartridge-boxes 15 

Cap-boxes 2 

Waist-belts  . . . * 7 

Straps  \2 

Cutlasses  15 

Sword  ........  1 


C.  C.  PICKNEY, 

Captain , and  Acting  Ordnance  Officer. 

ADDENDA. 

Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , S.  C.,  September  9,  1863. 

Maj.  Stephen  Elliott,  Jr., 

Comdg. , &c. , Fort  Sumter , Charleston  Harbor,  S.  C. : 

Major  . The  general  commanding  directs  me  to  compliment  yon 
and  yonr  garrison  on  the  brilliant  success  of  this  morning.  He 
hopes  that  all  future  attempts  of  the  enemy  to  take  Sumter  will 
meet  with  the  same  result.  The  general  will  endeavor  to  have  the 
prisoners  removed  in  the  course  of  the4  day  or  to-night.  Should 
the  enemy  meanwhile  bombard  Sumter,  and  you  have  not  enough 
cover  for  your  command,  you  will  expose  the  prisoners,  instead  of 
your  troops,  to  the  enemy’s  fire. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

A.  N.  TOUTANT  BEAUREGARD, 

Aide-de-Camp. 


SEPTEMBER  13-14,  1863. — Capture  of  Union  Telegraph  Party  near 
Lowndes’  Mill,  Combahee  River,  S.  C. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  William  Stokes , Fourth  South  Carolina  Cavalry . 

Headquarters  Third  Military  District, 

McPhersonville,  S.  C.,  September  17,  1863. 
Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan, 

Chief  of  Staff,  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General : 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  inclose  the  report  of  Lieut.  Col. 
William  Stokes,  commanding  sub-district  between  Combahee  and 
Ashepoo,  of  the  pursuit  and  capture  of  a telegraphic  party  of  the 
enemy.  I commend  to  the  favorable  attention  of  the  general  com- 
manding the  active  and  energetic  measures  of  this  efficient  officer, 
resulting  in  the  frustration  of  a bold  and  partly  successful  scheme 
*.or  obtaining  information  of  our  movements. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  S.  WALKER, 
Brigadier - General,  Commanding. 


Chap.  XL.]  AFFAIR  NEAR  LOWNDES’  MILL,  S.  C.  729 

Green  Pond,  September  16,  1863. 

Captain  : On  Saturday  evening,  a little  after  3 o’clock,  it  was  re- 
ported to  me  by  Mr.  [J.  H.  j Buckhalter,  roadmaster,  that  there  was 
a small  force  of  the  enemy  about  a mile  south  of  this  station,  and  that 
they  had  attached  a wire  to  the  telegraph  line.  I immediately 
ordered  up  Captain  [W.  P.]  Appleby’s  company,  stationed  2 miles 
below  here,  which  reported  very  promptly.  I then  ordered  Captain 
Appleby  to  dismount  15  of  his  men  and  to  proceed  on  the  train,  then 
at  the  depot,  to  the  point  at  which  the  enemy  had  attached  his  wire 
for  the  purpose  of  intercepting  dispatches  from  Charleston  and  Sa- 
vannah, and  to  engage  the  enemy,  if  he  found  them ; if  not,  to  pursue 
them. 

The  enemy  having  gone  before  he  arrived,  he  immediately  com- 
menced the  pursuit.  I ordered  First  Lieutenant  [J.  W.  R.]  Berry, 
with  the  remainder  of  Captain  Appleby’s  company,  to  proceed  by 
the  way  of  Ballouville  and  to  skirmish  the  woods  between  Whitehall 
and  this  place.  With  my  other  cavalry  company,  First  Lieutenant 
fW.  E.]  Hewitt  commanding,  which  I ordered  to  report  to  me  on  the 
Combahee  ^nd  Ashepoo  Ferry  road,  and  6 men  from  Lieutenant  [J. 
J.]  Guerard’s  section — Company  C,  Eleventh  Regiment  Infantry, 
South  Carolina  Volunteers,  in  charge  of  the  battery  at  Lowndes’ 
Mill— I picketed  the  Combahee  and  Ashepoo  Ferry  road  from  Colo- 
nel Heyward’s  place  to  the  Chehaw  road,  as  I felt  certain  I was  below 
them,  and,  Captain  Appleby  pursuing,  they  would  have  to  cross  that 
road  at  some  point. 

Just  at  dark,  Corporal  [T.]  Myers  and  2 privates,  of  Company  C, 
Eleventh  Regiment  Infantry,  South  Carolina  Volunteers,  stationed 
at  the  corner  of  Colonel  Heyward’s  fence,  allowed  the  enemy  (6  in 
number  he  states,  but  since  ascertained  to  be  11)  to  pass  them  with- 
out either  halting  or  firing  on  them.  Had  these  pickets  have  done 
their  duty,  the  whole  party  would  certainly  have  been  captured 
at  this  point,  as  Captain  Appleby  with  his  small  detachment,  that 
had  pursued  them  for  about  6 miles  through  dense  swamps,  lagoons, 
and  rice-fields,  were  only  about  200  yards  behind  them.  When  Cap- 
tain Appleby  came  up  to  these  pickets  they  acted  so  badly  that  he 
mistook  them  (owing  to  the  darkness  of  the  night)  for  the  enemy, 
and  ordered  his  men  to  fire  on  them,  when  they  ran  off.  Fortunately, 
none  of  them  were  hit. 

The  darkness  of  the  night  rendering  farther  pursuit  useless,  I had 
the  Combahee  River  well  guarded,  and  on  Sunday  morning  I again 
commenced  the  pursuit  with  a detachment  of  Captain  Appleby’s 
company  at  the  point  where  he  stopped  the  night  previous,  and  when 
I had  gotten  nearly  into  Mr.  Lowndes’  rice-field,  on  the  Combahee 
River,  I heard  the  report  of  the  rifled  gun  in  battery  at  Lowndes’ 
Mill.  I immediately  drew  off  the  detachment  and  proceeded  there, 
thinking  that  a boat  might  be  coming  up  the  river.  On  arriving  at 
the  battery  Lieutenant  Guerard  informed  me  that  he  had  heard  a 
noise  at  Mr.  Lowndes’  mill,  immediately  on  the  river  bank,  and  had 
thrown  a few  shells  near  there,  thinking  it  might  be  the  enemy 
trying  to  cross  the  river.  I ordered  Lieutenant  [F.  R.  M.]  Sineath, 
Company  C,  with  6 men  of  Lieutenant  Guerard’s  section,  to  proceed 
to  the  mill,  where  the  noise  had  been  heard,  and  to  investigate  the 
cause,  and  Captain  Appleby  back,  to  follow  out  the  trail  with  his  de- 
tachment, which  he  did  through  the  rice-field  to  the  above-mentioned 
place.  Lieutenant  Sineath  on  arriving  there  found  a small  raft  that 
the  enemy  had  constructed  of  old  planks  to  cross  the  river  on,  and 


[Chap.  XL. 


730  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

which  they  had  abandoned  on  his  approach.  He  pursued  them  and 
soon  caught  the  chaplain  (who  was  in  command  of  the  party),  first 
lieutenant,  and  a negro  of  the  First  South  Carolina  (Negro)  Regi- 
ment, secreted  in  the  marsh  on  the  river. 

My  thanks  are  due  to  Colonel  [C.  J.]  Colcock,  who  kindly  sent  me 
down  his  negro  dogs  on  the  train  on  Sunday,  and  the  party  I sent  out 
with  them  from  Captain  Appleby’s  company  caught  the  operator  that 
afternoon  in  the  marsh  near  the  river.  I again  sent  the  dogs  out  on 
Monday  morning  and  caught  a negro  of  the  party,  the  property  of 
the  late  Col.  William  C.  Heyward. 

From  information  gathered  from  the  two  negroes  caught,  I ascer- 
tained that  the  enemy  had  sent  a negro  company  temporarily  to 
Williman’s  Island  to  support  their  expedition,  and  knew  that  they 
could  be  captured  if  I could  get  there  before  they  abandoned  it. 

I made  the  necessary  arrangements,  and  proceeded  on  the  night  of 
the  14th,  with  30  men  of  my  command  and  the  50  sent  me  by  the 
brigadier-general  commanding,  from  Pocotaligo,  under  Lieutenant 
[L.  J.]  Walker,  of  the  Rutledge  Mounted  Rifles  and  Horse  Artillery, 
for  the  purpose,  and,  with  the  assistance  of  Mr.  Merwin  as  a guide,  I 
arrived  on  the  island,  after  a long  and  rugged  march  through  the 
marsh,  about  daylight.  I found  evident  signs  of  the  island  having 
been  occupied  by  the  enemy,  and  advanced  upon  the  houses  in  which 
they  were  said  to  be  quartered,  and  found  that  they  had  apparently 
abandoned  the  island  only  the  day  before.  They  had  holes  cut  in 
the  houses  that  they  were  quartered  in,  to  shoot  through,  evidently 
expecting  to  be  attacked  if  found  out.  Six  of  the  negroes  who  ac- 
companied the  enemy’s  telegraphic  party  have  either  made  their 
escape  or  are  still  in  the  Combahee  marshes,  which  I am  still  hav- 
ing hunted  with  negro  dogs,  although  I must  say  that,  owing  to  the 
dense  growth  of  briars,  &c. , on  the  check-dams,  it  is  next  to  an  im- 
possibility for  man  or  dogs  to  get  through. 

I neglected  to  mention  that  over  a mile  of  very  fine  gutta-percha 
wire  was  captured  about  a half  mile  from  the  railroad  on  Saturday 
evening,  which  I will  send  to-day,  by  the  order  of  the  brigadier- 
general  commanding,  to  General  G.  T.  Beauregard. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

WM.  STOKES, 

Lieutenant- Colonel,  Commanding . 

Capt.  James  Lowndes, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


SEPTEMBER  15,  1863.— Explosion  at  Battery  Cheves,  James  Island,  S.  C. 

Report  of  Capt.  W.  W.  Billopp,  Twenty-ninth  Georgia  Infantry , 

commanding. 

Battery  Cheves,  September  16,  1863. 
Lieutenant  : I have  the  honor  to  report  a very  sad  accident  at 
this  post  yesterday,  the  explosion  of  the  magazine  and  death  of  5 
men  and  a lieutenant. 

How  it  was  caused  it  is  impossible  to  tell.  A sentinel  was  always 
kept  at  the  entrance,  with  strict  orders  to  allow  no  pipes  or  fire  in 
any  shape  near  it,  nor  allow  any  one  but  ordnance  men  and  commis- 


Chap.  XL.]  ATTEMPT  TO  BLOW  UP  U.  S.  S.  NEW  IRONSIDES. 


731 


sioned  officers  to  enter  without  leave.  Although  I am  not  positive 
how  it  occurred,  I feel  confident,  and  it  is  my  opinion,  that  it  was 
caused  by  a shell  exploding  while  the  fuse  was  being  extracted.  We 
have  had  a great  number  of  live  shell  sent  to  us  with  short  fuses, 
which  we  have  had  to  extract  and  replace  them  with  longer  ones. 
My  reason  for  believing  that  it  was  caused  in  this  way  is,  that  I 
know  one  of  the  ordnance  men  was  working  on  a shell  of  this  de- 
scription (5-second  fuse)  near  the  entrance  to  the  magazine,  and  the 
first  thing  heard  of  the  explosion  was  the  report  of  a single  shell  at 
that  place,  which  ignited  others,  and  I presume  some  fuses  or  quick 
matches  were  blown  into  the  magazine,  the  door  of  which  was  open, 
causing  the  explosion. 

There  were  about  1,200  pounds  of  powder  burned,  together  with  25 
shells.  All  the  tools,  &c.,  in  these  [buildings]  were,  of  course,  lost. 

The  casualties  were  as  follows,  viz  : Second  Lieut.  S.  J.  Lastinger, 
of  Company  G,  Twenty-ninth  Georgia  V olunteers,  killed  by  a tree 
falling  on  him,  which  was  blown  down  by  the  explosion ; Sergt.  H. 
E.  With  worth,  ordnance  sergeant  Company  A,  Twenty-ninth  Geor- 
gia'Volunteers ; Sergt.  James  Graham,  ordnance  sergeant  Company 
C,  Twenty-second  Battalion  Georgia  Volunteers;  Corpl.  Henry 
Scrott,  assistant  ordnance  sergeant  Company  C,  Twenty-second 
Battalion  Georgia  Volunteers;  Private  William  Griffirs,  assistant 
ordnance  sergeant  Company  C,  Twenty-second  Battalion  Georgia 
Volunteers.  None  were  seriously  wounded. 

The  above-named  enlisted  men  are  all  the  ordnance  men  in  this 
command.  When  the  magazine  is  rebuilt,  I shall  have  to  ask  for  an 
ordnance  sergeant  to  take  charge  of  it. 

I have  the  honor,  lieutenant,  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  W.  BILLOPP, 

Captain , Commanding, 

Lieutenant  [J.  M.]  Schnierle, 

Adjutant,  &c. 


OCTOBER  5,  1863. — Attempt  to  Blow  up  the  U.  S.  S.  New  Ironsides,  off 

Charleston  Harbor. 

REPORTS.* 

No.  1. — General  G.  T.  Beauregard,  C.  S.  Army. 

No.  2. — Acting  First  Assistant  Engineer  J.  H.  Toombs,  C.  S.  Navy. 

No.  3. — Capt.  Francis  D.  Lee,  C.  S.  Engineer  Corps. 

No.  4. — Extract  from  Journal  of  Operations  in  Charleston  Harbor,  S.  C.,  Septem- 
ber 1,  1863-January  21,  1864. 

No.  1. 

Report  of  General  G.  T.  Beauregard,  C.  S.  Army. 

Charleston,  October  6,  1863—7.12  p.  m. 
Last  night  Lieutenant  Glassell,  C.  S.  Navy,  gallantly  attempted  to 
blow  up  the  Ironsides  with  the  small  cigar  torpedo-boat  David.  Ex- 
plosion occurred  at  proper  time,  but  either  charge  was  too  small  or 

A For  reports  of  Rear-Admiral  John  A.  Dahlgren  and  Capt.  S.  C.  Rowan,  U.  S. 
Navy,  see  Annual  Report  of  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy,  December  7,  1863. 


[Chap.  XL. 


732  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

torpedo  too  near  surface  water.  Damage  thus  far  not  apparent. 
Lieutenant  Glassell  and  1 man  were  captured;  other  2 returned 
safely  with  boat.  Commotion  on  board  the  Ironsides  reported  very 
great. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 

General  S.  Cooper. 


No.  2. 

Report  of  Acting  First  Assistant  Engineer  J.  II.  Toombs , C.  S. 

Navy. 

Flag-ship  Charleston, 
Charleston , S.  C.,  October  6,  1863. 

General  G.  T.  Beauregard, 

Commanding , &c. , Charleston , S.  C.  : 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  inclose  copy  of  the  report  of  Act- 
ing First  Assistant  Engineer  J.  H.  Toombs,  C.  S.  Navy,  who  accom- 
panied Lieutenant  Glassell  in  his  expedition  against  the  Ironsides. 
The  report  of  Mr.  Toombs  is  strictly  correct  and  reliable. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  R.  TUCKER, 
Flag-Officer,  Commanding . 

Charleston,  S.  C.,  October  6,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  on  Monday  evening,  5th 
instant,  Lieut.  W.  T.  Glassell,  Confederate  Navy,  in  charge  of  the 
propeller  David  (a  small  submerged  steamer),  with  the  follow- 
ing crew,  viz,  James  H.  Toombs,  acting  first  assistant  engineer ; 
Walker  Cannon,  pilot ; James  Sullivan,  second  fireman,  started  from 
the  city  and  proceeded  down  the  main  ship-channel,  passing  through 
the  entire  fleet  of  the  enemy’s  vessels  and  barges,  until  we  arrived 
abreast  of  the  U.  S.  frigate  Ironsides,  at  8.30  p.  m.  We  then  stood 
off  and  on  for  thirty  minutes  waiting  for  the  flood  tide  to  make. 

At  9 p.  m.,  everything  being  favorable  and  every  one  in  favor  of 
the  attack,  we  headed  for  the  Ironsides.  When  within  50  yards  of 
her  we  were  hailed,  which  was  answered  by  a shot  from  a double- 
barreled  gun  in  the  hands  of  Lieutenant  Glassell.  In  two  minutes 
we  struck  the  ship  (we  going  at  full  speed)  under  the  starboard 
quarter,  about  15  feet  from  her  stern-post,  exploding  our  torpedo 
about  6i  feet  under  her  bottom.  The  enemy  fired  rapidly  with  small- 
arms,  riddling  the  vessel,  but  doing  us  no  harm.  The  column  of 
water  thrown  up  was  so  great  that  it  recoiled  upon  our  frail  bark  in 
such  force  as  to  put  the  fires  out  and  lead  us  to  suppose  that  the  little 
vessel  would  sink.  The  engine  was  reversed  for  backing,  but  the 
shock  occasioned  by  the  jar  had  been  so  great  as  to  throw  the  iron 
ballast  among  the  machinery,  which  prevented  its  working.  During 
this  delay  the  vessel,  owing  to  the  tide  and  wind,  hung  under  the 
quarter  of  the  Ironsides,  the  fire  upon  us  being  kept  up  the  whole 
time.  Finding  ourselves  in  this  critical  position,  and  believing  our 
vessel  to  be  in  a sinking  condition,  we  concluded  that  the  only  means 
of  saving  our  lives  was  to  jump  overboard,  trusting  that  we  would 
be  picked  up  by  the  boats  of  the  enemy.  Lieutenant  Glassell  and 


Ohap.  XL.]  ATTEMPT  TO  BLOW  UP  U.  S.  S.  NEW  IRONSIDES.  733 

the  fireman  (James  Sullivan)  swam  off  in  the  direction  of  the  enemy’s 
vessels,  each  being  provided  with  a life-preserver,  and  were  not 
seen  afterward.  The  pilot  stuck  to  the  vessel,  and  I being  over- 
board at  the  time  and  finding  that  no  quarter  would  be  shown,  as  we 
had  called  out  that  we  surrendered,  1 concluded  it  was  best  to 
make  one  more  effort  to  save  the  vessel.  Accordingly  I returned 
to  her  and  rebuilt  my  fires  ; after  some  little  delay,  got  up  steam 
enough  to  move  the  machinery.  The  pilot  then  took  the  wheel 
and  we  steamed  up  channel,  passing  once  more  through  the  fleet 
and  within  3 feet  of  a monitor,  being  subjected  the  whole  time  to 
one  continuous  fire  of  small-arms,  the  Ironsides  firing  two  11 -inch 
shot  at  us. 

The  pilot  (Mr.  Cannon)  has  won  for  himself  a reputation  that  time 
cannot  efface,  and  deserves  well  of  his  country,  as,  without  his  val- 
uable aid,  I could  not  have  reached  the  city. 

The  conduct  of  Lieutenant  Glassell  was  as  cool  and  collected  as  if 
he  had  been  on  an  excursion  of  pleasure,  and  the  hope  of  all  is  that 
he  may  yet  be  in  safety. 

The  fireman  (James  Sullivan)  acted  in  a manner  that  reflected 
credit  upon  himself,  having  remained  at  his  post  until  relieved  by  me. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  H.  TOOMBS, 

Acting  First  Assistant  Engineer , C.  S.  Navy . 

Flag-Officer  J.  R.  Tucker, 

Commanding  Naval  Forces  Afloat,  Charleston,  S.  C. 

[Indorsement.] 

Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston,  S.  C.,  October  7,  1863. 

Respectfully  forwarded  for  information  of  War  Department.  It 
is  probable  the  failure  to  blow  up  the  Ironsides  is  due  to  the  small- 
ness of  the  charge  of  the  torpedo  (70  pounds),  considering  the  thick- 
ness of  the  sides  of  that  vessel,  reported  at  least  5 feet  at  the  depth 
where  struck;  that  is,  about  6^  feet  below  the  surface  of  the  water. 
The  sides  of  this  vessel  are  nearly  vertical  to  below  that  depth. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General,  Commanding . 


No.  3. 

Report  of  Capt.  Francis  D.  Lee,  C.  S.  Engineer  Corps. 

Charleston,  October  7,  1863. 

General  : On  making  special  inquiry  of  experts  as  to  the  probable 
thickness  of  timber  at  that  point  of  the  Ironsides  struck  by  the  tor- 
pedo carried  by  the  little  steamer  David,  I have  learned  that  by  com- 
paring the  dimension  of  the  Ironsides  with  our  own  rams,  the  solid 
material  could  not  have  been  much  short  of  20  feet.  I do  not  believe 
that  the  charge  used  (70  pounds  of  musket  powder)  could  break  en- 
tirely through  such  a thickness  at  such  depth;  but  I do  believe  that 
serious  damage  must  have  been  done. 

It  is  reported  that  the  torpedo-steamer  did  not  feel  the  explosion 
and  was  entirely  unharmed  by  it.  There  is,  therefore,  no  reason  why 
the  charge  may  not  be  greatly  increased;  although  at  the  same  time  I 
cannot  for  one  moment  doubt  the  efficiency  of  the  charge  used,  when 


734  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

fired  in  contact  with  the  side  of  the  Ironsides,  and  not  in  close  prox- 
imity to  the  bow  or  stern,  where  there  is  an  enormous  mass  of  timber. 

I have  just  seen  the  engineer  of  the  David,  who  expresses  great 
confidence  in  the  boat  and  in  the  torpedo,  and  who  desires  me  to  pre- 
pare a torpedo  of  larger  size,  i.  e.,  a capacity  of  100  pounds  rifle 
powder,  which  will  be  submerged  to  a depth  of  about  8 feet,  with 
which  he  proposes  to  renew  the  attempt. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

FRANCIS  D.  LEE, 
Captain  of  Engineers . 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan,  Chief  of  Staff. 

[Indorsement.] 

Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston , October  8,  1863. 

Respectfully  forwarded  to  the  War  Department  for  its  informa- 
tion. I am  still  of  the  opinion  that  the  true  way  to  destroy  the  en- 
emy’s iron-clads  is  to  use  against  them  steamers  armed  with  sub- 
marine torpedoes. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General , Commanding. 


No.  4. 

Extract  from  Journal  of  Operations  in  Charleston  Harbor,  S.  C., 
September  1,  1863 -January  21,  1864. 

Charleston,  S.  C.,  October  6,  1863. 

REPORT  OF  AN  ATTEMPT  TO  DESTROY  THE  FEDERAL  IRON-MAILED 

FRIGATE  IRONSIDES. 

Lieut.  W.  T.  Glassell,  C.  S.  Navy,  in  charge  of  the  propeller 
David  (a  small  submerged  steamer),  with  the  following  crew  : James 
H.  Toombs,  acting  first  assistant  engineer;  Walker  Cannon,  pilot, 
and  James  Sullivan,  second  fireman,  started  from  the  city  and  pro- 
ceeded down  the  main  ship-channel,  passing  through  the  enemy’s 
fleet  of  vessels,  barges,  &c.  Arriving  abreast  of  the  United  States 
frigate  Ironsides  at  8. 30  p.  m. , the  David  stood  off  and  on  for  thirty 
minutes  waiting  for  the  flood  tide. 

At  9 p.  m. , everything  being  favorable,  the  vessel  was  directed  to- 
ward the  Ironsides.  When  within  50  yards  of  her  they  were  hailed, 
and  answered  by  a shot  from  a double-barrel  shot-gun  in  the  hands 
of  Lieutenant  Glassell,  and  in  two  minutes  afterward  the  David 
struck  the  Ironsides  under  the  starboard  quarter,  about  16  feet  from 
the  stern  post,  exploding  the  torpedo  about  6£  feet  under  the  bottom 
of  the  Ironsides.  The  enemy  immediately  commenced  firing  rapidly 
with  small-arms,  riddling  the  vessel,  but  injuring  no  one.  The 
column  of  water  thrown  up  by  the  explosion  of  the  torpedo  was  so 
great  as  to  recoil  upon  the  David,  put  out  the  fires,  and  induce  the 
belief  that  she  would  sink.  The  shock  also  disarranged  some  of  the 
iron  ballast,  which,  becoming  entangled  with,  the  machinery,  pre- 
vented its  working. 

In  the  meantime,  the  enemy  had  kept  up  their  musketry  fire ; ffhe 
crew  of  the  David,  with  the  exception  of  the  pilot,  therefore  jumped 


Chap.  XL.] 


ENGAGEMENT  AT  FORT  BROOKE,  FLA. 


735 


overboard  in  the  hope  that  they  would  be  picked  up  by  the  enemy’s 
boats.  Engineer  Toombs,  finding  no  quarter  was  being  given  by  the 
enemy,  returned  to  the  vessel,  rebuilt  the  fires,  got  up  steam,  and,  with 
the  assistance  of  the  pilot,  brought  the  vessel  back  to  the  city,  after 
running  the  gantlet  of  the  enemy’s  fleet,  passing  within  3 feet  of  one 
of  the  monitors,  and  subjected  during  the  whole  time  to  a continuous 
fire  of  small-arms.  Lieutenant  Glassell  and  James  Sullivan,  fireman, 
were  last  seen  swimming  in  the  direction  of  the  enemy’s  vessels,  and 
it  is  believed  were  captured. 

The  conduct  of  all  engaged  in  this  affair  is  deserving  of  commen- 
dation, and  though  the  attempt  to  destroy  the  Ironsides  was  not  suc- 
cessful, the  practicability  at  some  future  period  was  demonstrated. 
The  want  of  success  is  believed  to  be  owing  to  the  small  charge  of 
70  pounds  of  powder  used  in  the  torpedo. 


OCTOBER  16,  1863. — Engagement  at  Fort  Brooke,  Fla. 

Report  of  Capt.  John  Westcott , Second  Florida  Battalion.  * 

• Tampa,  October  18,  1863. 

I arrived  here  on  Monday,  12th,  and  assumed  command  on  Wed- 
nesday, 14th.  On  Thursday  two  gunboats  made  their  appearance 
above  Gadsden’s  Point.  On  Friday  early  they  moved  up  and  shelled 
the  whole  day,  throwing  126  shells  in  all,  30,  64,  and  200  pounder 
Parrott  guns  maintaining  their  positions. 

On  Friday  night  at  11  o’clock  they  landed  130  men  at  Ballast  Point — 
120  men  and  20  guides,  traitors  and  negroes.  From  the  landing  they 
marched  through  the  woods  (drawing  a boat  2 miles  and  abandoned 
it)  to  the  steamer  of  Captain  Blakeny,  about  4 miles  above  here. 
Our  men  burned  the  boat  [A.  B.  Noyes].  They  were  disappointed 
and  attempted  to  march  back,  but  before  they  got  to  and  into  their 
boats  they  were  badly  whipped,  the  boats  shelling  our  battery  during 
the  time. 

I have  5 prisoners;  1 died  this  morning  and  1 is  severely  wounded. 
We  killed  and  wounded,  it  is  believed,  about  50  while  they  were  get- 
ting to  and  into  their  barges.  Fifty-seven  rifles,  spy -glasses,  rockets, 
&c. , have  been  picked  up.  One  dead  body  floated  ashore  to-day. 

Captain  [A.  A.]  Semmes,  of  the  Tahoma,  sent  a flag  to-day  to  in- 
quire about  his  men  in  my  possession.  The  steamer  Adela  has  had 
her  colors  at  half-mast  the  whole  day.  Both  have  hauled  off  and 
gone  below.  My  force  here  is  too  small.  I may  be  overpowered, 
but  will  fight  them  to  the  last.  I will  report  in  detail  by  next  mail. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JNO.  WESTCOTT, 

Capt.  Co.  A , 2 d Batt.  Fla.  Vols. , Comdg.  Fort  Brooke , Tampa,  Fla. 

Lieut.  J.  R.  Finegan, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

P.  S. — My  judgment  did  not  fail  me  in  the  whole  movement,  and 
if  I had  had  more  men  I could  have  captured  the  whole  concern. 

*For  report  of  Acting  Rear-Admiral  Theo^orus  Bailey,  U.  S.  Navy,  see  Annual 
Report  of  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy,  December  7,  1863. 


736  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 


[Chap.  XL.. 


[Indorsements .] 


IIdqrs.  Districts  of  Middle  and  East  Florida, 

Lake  City,  October  28,  1863. 

Respectfully  forwarded  for  tlie  information  of  the  commanding 
general. 

JOS.  FINEGAN, 

Brigadier -General,  Commanding. 


When  General  Finegan  requires  assistance  let  him  call  on  Briga- 
dier-General Gardner.  Give  them  orders  to  mutually  support  each 
other. 


G.  T.  B.  [BEAUREGARD.] 


OCTOBER  19,  1863. — Affair  at  Murrell’s  Inlet,  S.  C. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  J.  H.  Trapier,  C . Sr  Army,  commanding 
Fourth  Military  District. 

Hdqrs.  4th  Military  District  of  South  Carolina, 

Georgetown,  October  22,  1863. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  report  the  capture,  by  a detachment 
belonging  to  Company  B,  Twenty-first  Battalion  Georgia  Cavalry, 
under  the  command  of  Lieutenant  [Ely]  Kennedy,  of  10  of  the  en- 
emy (a  lieutenant  and  9 men),  at  Murrell’s  Inlet,  on  the  afternoon  of 
the  19th  instant,  under  the  following  circumstances  : 

About  a week  ago  a schooner,*  attempting  to  run  the  blockade  into 
that  inlet,  was  driven  ashore  near  by.  Her  cargo  was  landed  in  safety 
upon  the  beach  and  removed  behind  the  sand-hills  immediately  in 
rear  for  greater  security.  The  vessel  was  then  burned  by  the  crew. 
It  is  presumed  that  the  object  of  the  enemy’s  demonstration  on  the 
19th  was  the  destruction  of  this  cargo.  He  approached  the  shore  in 
two  barges,  one  of  them  carrying  a howitzer.  \ His  blockading  ves- 
sel lay  off  about  500  yards  from  the  beach.  Seventeen  men,  armed 
with  rifles  and  pistols,  landed  and  approached  the  sand-hills.  Be- 
hind these  hills  Lieutenant  Kennedy  had  concealed  a portion  of  hi$ 
men,  dismounted.  Another  body  (mounted)  was  ordered  to  make  a 
dash  upon  the  enemy’s  rear  as  soon  as  fire  was  opened  upon  them  in 
front,  and  cut  off  their  retreat.  The  orders  were  executed  with 
promptness  and  precision,  and  the  result  was  as  I have  reported, 
without  a single  casualty  on  our  side,  notwithstanding  that  the 
enemy  opened  fire  from  his  gunboat  as  well  as  his  barges.  None  of 
his  dead  or  wounded  fell  into  our  hands,  but  several  men  were  seen 
to  fall  when  the  retreating  barges  were  fired  upon. 

The  little  affair  reflects  much  credit  upon  the  skill  and  judgment 
of  the  young  officer  in  command,  as  well  as  upon  the  courage  and 
coolness  of  his  men. 

Major  [W.  P.]  White,  commanding  on  Waccamaw  Neck,  says  in 
his  official  report : “ Every  man  engaged  in  the  affair  deserves  com- 
mendation.” He  mentions  particularly  Sergt.  W.  H.  Crawford,  who 

* The  Rover. 

f For  report  of  Acting  Ensign  Myron  W.  Tillson,  U.  S.  Navy,  commanding  this 
expedition,  see  Annual  Report  of  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy,  December  5,  1864. 


Chap.  XL.]  DEMONSTRATION  ON  JOHN'S  ISLAND.  737 

received  the  sword  of  the  captured  officer.  The  prisoners  leave  to- 
day under  guard  for  the  headquarters  of  the  department. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  verv  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  H.  TRAPIER, 
Brigadier-General,  Commanding. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan, 

Chief  of  Staff,  &c. 

[Indorsement.] 

Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston,  S.  C.,  October  25,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  J.  H.  Trapier  : 

General  : Please  express  to  Lieutenant  [Ely]  Kennedy  and  his 
command  the  high  sense  which  the  commanding  general  has  of  the 
good  conduct  which  characterized  their  affair  on  the  afternoon  of  the 
19th  instant,  at  Murrell’s  Inlet,  with  the  enemy’s  barges,  which  re- 
sulted in  the  capture  of  a lieutenant  and  10  men  of  the  enemy’s  force. 
The  commanding  general  is  further  pleased  to  thank  Sergt.  W.  H. 
Crawford  for  the  part  he  took  in  the  transaction,  as  specially  noticed 
by  his  commanding  officer.  Officers  and  men  on  outpost  service,  by 
coolness,  vigilance,  subordination,  and  resolution,  may  frequently 
render  signal  service  by  successful  small  encounters  with  the  enemy. 
Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

[G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General,  Commanding.'] 


NOVEMBER  15,  1863. — Demonstration  on  John’s  Island,  S.  C. 

Reports  of  Maj . John  Jenkins,  Third  South  Carolina  Cavalry. 

John’s  Island,  November  15,  1863. 

Captain:  Agreeably  to  orders,  Lieutenant  [W.  G.]  Whilden, 
with  detachment  of  Washington  Artillery,  leaves  here  to-morrow 
morning.  The  section  of  artillery  sent  to  relieve  them  have  three 
howitzers.  The  enemy  have  Parrott  guns,  which  threw  shells  from 
Kiawah  Island  (near  the  bridge)  to  the  Haulover  Cut.  I had  the 
howitzers  in  our  skirmish  this  afternoon  well  advanced  toward  the 
woods,  which  I was  endeavoring  to  enter,  with  a view  to  destroy  the 
bridge  connecting  Seabrook  and  Kiawah  Islands,  when  (although 
Lieutenant  [P.  ] Houstoun  exploded  a shell  in  the  very  head  of  the 
column  which  was  advancing  upon  us  at  the  double-quick,  and  which 
must  certainly  have  killed  and  wounded  many  of  them)  the  enemy 
opened  a flanking  fire  upon  us  from  Kiawah  with  guns  which  com- 
manded our  position,  from  which,  on  account  of  the  inferior  range  of 
the  howitzers,  we  could  not  retaliate.  Lieutenant  Whilden,  with  his 
Parrott  gun,  from  another  point  returned  the  fire  and  made  good 
practice.  Under  the  condition  of  things  developed  since  this  morn- 
ing, it  would  be  eminently  desirable  to  keep  the  Parrott  gun  and 
this  section  of  the  Washington  Artillery  over  here,  and  the  mat- 
ter is  respectfully  submitted  to  the  consideration  of  the  brigadier- 
general  commanding.  Whether  the  enemy  have  landed  merely  to 
protect  their  observatory,  and  which  now  towers  above  the  trees  on 
47  R R— VOL  XXVIII,  PT  I 


[Chap.  XL. 


738  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

Clark’s  Bay  and  is  still  going  up,  or  with  a view  to  occupy  this 
island  and  erect  batteries  to  enfilade  the  new  lines  erected  on  James 
Island  should  they  wish  to  repeat  their  former  attempt  on  James 
Island,  they  have  certainly  two  regiments  and  two  companies  on 
Seabrook  Island ; that  much  shown — probably  a much  larger  force. 
They  occupy  all  their  old  picket  posts  and  new  ones  besides,  and  they 
are  rebuilding  the  bridge  from  Kiawah,  where  they  have  from  time 
to  time  (as  reported)  been  landing  troops  from  steamers.  They  will 
then  have  no  difficulty  in  crossing  their  troops  over  to  Seabrook 
Island  at  any  time  of  tide.  All  chance  of  attacking  the  gunboats 
and  destroying  the  observatory  has  been  lost,  and  I now  respectfully 
request  that  another  company  (Captain  [P.  W.]  Goodwyn’s)  be  sent 
to  re-enforce  the  force  over  here— reduced  nearly  one-half  by  absence 
from  sickness  during  the  course  of  the  past  sickly  season — and  that  I 
be  allowed  to  retain,  at  least  temporarily,  this  section  of  theartiliery. 

Respectfully, 

JOHN  JENKINS, 

Major , Commanding  Advanced  Forces. 

Captain  [Charles]  Wood, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

P.  S. — I omitted  to  mention  that  we  drove  in  their  pickets  to  the 
woods. 


Camp  Fripp,  November  15,  1863. 

Captain  : The  enemy  have  reoccupied  Seabrook  Island  in  large 
force,  and  came  near  capturing  our  pickets  this  morning.  They 
landed  troops  from  a steamer  which  came  in  the  North  Edisto  last 
night.  They  also  crossed  from  Kiawah  Island  at  low  water.  They 
are  repairing  the  bridge  which  connects  Kiawah  with  Seabrook 
Island.  I advanced  with  all  the  men  I could  muster,  with  the  hope 
of  being  able  to  interrupt  their  work  on  the  bridge  and  also  to  destroy 
it,  but  they  occupied  the  woods  near  the  bridge  with  too  heavy  a 
force  for  my  feeble  command  to  effect  that  object.  They  advanced 
from  the  woods  as  we  approached,  but  a shell  bursting  among  them 
checked  their  advance.  They  fired  with  howitzers  and  Parrott  guns 
from  Kiawah  Island,  near  the  bridge. 

I was  informed  this  morning,  while  on  my  way  to  headquarters,  by 
the  courier,  that  one  company  had  advanced  to  capture  our  pickets 
this  morning.  I did  not  think  it  worth  while  to  trouble  you  about 
so  small  a matter,  and  did  not  ascertain  their  strength  until  they  un- 
masked it  to  some  extent  this  afternoon.  Two  stand  of  colors  were 
shown;  5 field  officers  (with  one  regiment)  on  horseback.  This  is  an 
explanation  of  my  not  having  sent  dispatches  earlier  in  the  day. 

The  report  from  Stono  is  that  at  8. 30  o’clock  a schooner  left,  going 
north;  at  10  o’clock  a small  steamer  and  schooner  left,  going  north; 
at  1 o’clock  a small  steamer  carried  troops  to  Kiawah  Island.  There 
are  eleven  schooners,  three  steamers,  three  brigs,  and  two  gunboats 
in  the  harbor. 

Respectfully, 

JOHN  JENKINS, 

Major, 


Oapt.  Charles  Wood, 

Amstmt  Adjutant-  Qemm ?. 


Chap.  XL.]  ENGAGEMENT  BETWEEN  MONITORS  AND  BATTERIES.  739 

NOVEMBER  16,  1863. — Engagement  between  the  U.  S.  Monitors  and  the 
Sullivan’s  Island  Batteries. 

REPORTS.* 

No.  1.— Brig.  Gen.  Roswell  S.  Ripley,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  First  Military 
District. 

No.  2.— Capt.  Thomas  B.  Lee,  C.  S.  Corps  of  Engineers. 

No.  3. — Maj.  William  S.  Basinger,  Eighteenth  Georgia  Battalion,  commanding 
Battery  Marion. 

No.  4. — Capt.  C.  H.  Rivers,  Third  South  Carolina  Artillery,  commanding  Battery 
Rutledge. 

No.  5. — Capt.  Jacob  Valentine,  Third  South  Carolina  Artillery,  commanding  Fort 
Moultrie. 


No.  1. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Roswell  S.  Ripley , C.  S.  Army , command- 
ing First  Military  District. 

Sullivan’s  Island,  November  16,  1863 — 11.15  a.  in. 
General  : Enemy  sent  in  Nantucket  and  two  tugs  to  support 
Gregg  last  night.  Colonel  Butler  was  directed  to  pay  particular  at- 
tention to  them  this  morning,  which  he  did.  Nantucket  got  aground 
and  remains  there.  Three  other  monitors  came  to  her  relief.  Unless 
she  gets  off  within  twenty  minutes  she  must  remain  over  the  tide. 
Have  directed  the  firing  to  he  slow  until  tide  falls,  when,  if  she  re- 
mains, will  endeavor  to  finish  work.  One  rifled  32-pounder  dis- 
mounted in  Fort  Moultrie  ; 1 man  killed  and  3 wounded. 

R.  S.  RIPLEY, 

Brigadier-General  Jordan, 

Chief  of  Staff. 


No.  2. 

Report  of  Capt.  Thomas  B.  Lee , C.  S.  Corps  of  Engineers. 

Engineer’s  Office, 
Sullivan’s  Island,  November  16,  1863. 

Major  : To-day  Fort  Moultrie  and  Battery  Rutledge  opened  fire, 
and  continued  it  from  7 a.  m.  to  11  a.  m.,  on  four  monitors,  about  1 
mile  distant.  One  monitor  being  aground,  did  not  reply  to  our  fire. 
Fifty  shots  were  fired  at  our  batteries  from  the  boats,  20  of  which 
struck  Fort  Moultrie  and  1 the  east  mortar  battery.  A shot  struck 
the  muzzle  of  the  32-pounder  rifled  gun  west  of  the  flag-staff  on 
Moultrie,  carrying  away  10  inches  of  it  and  throwing  the  gun  in  a 
vertical  position  on  its  breech.  The  escarpment  of  the  front  was 
struck  four  times,  the  merlons  five  times,  and  1 shot  struck  the 
magazine.  All  damage  done  was  repaired  in  one  hour  by  20  hands. 
A 15-inch  shell  entered  the  large  traverse  on  east  salient  and  ex- 
ploded, making  a crater  9 feet  by  4 feet.  It  should  be  remarked 
that  this  shell  entered  3 feet  below  the  top  surface  of  the  traverse. 
The  shot  that  struck  the  magazine  did  no  damage  whatever.  Up  to 
this  time  I have  been  unable  to  trace  the  enemy’s  mortar  shells  lower 

*For  reports  of  Rear-Admiral  Dahlgren  and  Commander  A.  Bryson,  V.  S.  fiavy* 
Annual  Report  of  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy,  December  5, 1804. 


7 40  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

than  a depth  of  4 feet  in  the  sand.  When  they  exploded  at  a depth 
of  4 feet,  fragments  were  traced  1 i feet  deeper. 

Respectfully, 

T.  B.  LEE, 

Captain  of  Engineers. 

Maj.  W.  H.  Echols,  Chief  Eng.,  State  of  South  Carolina. 


No.  3. 

Report  of  Maj.  William  S.  Basinger,  Eighteenth  Georgia  Battalion, 
commanding  Battery  Marion. 

Battery  Marion,  November  17,  1863. 
Lieutenant  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  during  the  affair 
yesterday  between  Fort  Moultrie  and  the  enemy’s  iron  vessels  Pri- 
vate J.  C.  Fowke,  Company  C,  Eighteenth  Georgia  Battalion,  was 
slightly  wounded  in  the  side  by  a fragment  of  a shell.  There  is 
nothing  else  to  report  for  the  last  twenty-four  hours. 

Very  respectfully, 

WM.  S.  BASINGER, 

Major,  Commanding. 

Lieut.  E.  C.  Edgerton,  A.  A.  A.  G. 


No.  4. 

Report  of  Capt.  C.  H.  Rivers , Third  South  Carolina  Artillery,  com- 
manding Battery  Rutledge. 

Battery  Rutledge,  November  16,  1863. 

Lieutenant  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  this  morning,  at 
about  7 o’clock,  I opened  on  a monitor  which  was  aground  off  Mor- 
ris Island.  Soon  after  the  engagement  began,  three  monitors  came 
in  to  protect  her,  and  the  engagement  became  general.  Eighty-nine 
solid  shots  and  33  shells  were  fired  from  three  of  the  guns  of  my  bat- 
tery bearing  on  the  enemy.  I ceased  firing  at  about  11  o’clock.  No 
shots  were  fired  at  this  battery.  The  monitor  succeeded  in  getting 
off  at  high  water,  apparently  not  injured. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

C.  H.  RIVERS, 
Captain,  Commanding  Battery. 

Lieutenant  Edgerton,  A.  A.  A.  G. 


No.  5. 

Reports  of  Capt.  Jacob  Valentine,  Third  South  Carolina  Artillery, 
commanding  Fort  Moultrie. 

Headquarters  Fort  Moultrie,  November  16,  1863. 
Lieutenant  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  there  was  discovered, 
about  7 a.  m.,  opposite  this  post,  on  the  Morris  Island  side,  one  of 
the  enemy’s  monitors  aground.*  We  immediately  opened  fire  on  her 
from  this  post,  seemingly  with  g;ood  effect,  as  she  commenced  to  sig- 
nal to  the  fleet,  and  very  soon  brought  to  her  assistance  three  more 
monitors,  f which  immediately  opened  fire  upon  us  in  return.  One 


*The  Lehigh. 


f The  Montauk,  Nahant,  and  Passaic, 


Chap.  XL.]  ENGAGEMENT  BETWEEN  MONITORS  AND  BATTERIES.  741 

shell  fired  from  one  of  them  exploded  in  the  sally-port,  wounding 
Private  Amos  Helms,  Company  C,  First  South  Carolina  [Regular] 
Infantry,  lacerated  wound  of  thigh  and  face,  thigh  amputated  and 
since  dead ; Sergeant  Hamilton,  Company  G,  First  South  Carolina 
[Regular]  Infantry,  contusion  of  the  face,  slight ; Private  J.  L. 
Dawson,  Company  G,  First  South  Carolina  [Regular]  Infantry, 
lacerated  wound  of  face  and  arm,  severe ; Private  Thomas  Scott, 
Company  E,  First  South  Carolina  [Regular]  Infantry,  lacerated 
wound  of  face,  severe. 

One  32-pounder  rifle  was  dismounted  by  a shell  from  one  of  the 
monitors.  * 

We  fired  in  all  189  shots.  Our  principal  fire  was  directed  on  the 
monitor  aground. 

The  enemy  fired  73  shots,  52  of  which  were  from  the  monitors  and 
21  from  the  land  batteries. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  VALENTINE, 

Captain , Commanding  Post. 

Lieut.  E.  C.  Edgerton,  A.  A.  A.  G. 

[Indorsement.] 

Headquarters  Artillery, 

West  End  Sullivan’s  Island,  November  16,  18G3. 

Sir  : I have  only  to  add  to  the  foregoing  statement  that  the  mon- 
itor, after  remaining  for  three  or  four  hours  under  a slow  fire  from 
Fort  Moultrie  and  Battery  Rutledge,  was  at  high  tide  drawn  off  into 
deep  water  by  the  monitors  which  had  come  up  to  her  assistance, 
not,  however,  before  a considerable  amount  of  stores  (supposed  to  be 
ordnance  stores)  had  been  thrown  overboard.  The  monitor,  while 
aground,  was  struck  a number  of  times,  and  must  have  been  some- 
what damaged.  It  became  necessary  to  reply  to  the  fire  of  the  three 
monitors  which  came  to  the  assistance  of  the  grounded  one,  in  order 
to  prevent  the  dismounting  of  our  guns. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

WILLIAM  BUTLER, 

Colonel,  Commanding. 

Capt.  W.  F.  Nance,  A.  A.  G. 


Headquarters  Fort  Moultrie,  November  17,  1863. 

Lieutenant  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  on  the  morning  of 
the  16th,  about  7.15  o’clock,  a monitor  was  discovered  to  be  aground 
opposite  this  post.  Fire  was  immediately  opened  upon  her  with 
effect,  many  shots  having  been  seen  to  strike.  She  made  no  reply, 
but  began  to  signalize  the  fleet,  when  three  other  monitors  came  to 
her  assistance,  and,  taking  position  about  1,800  or  2,000  yards  dis- 
tant, opened  fire  from  rifled  and  15-inch  guns,  using  shot,  shell,  and 
grape.  The  greater  portion  of  our  fire  was  directed  at  the  monitor 
aground,  but,  owing  to  her  greater  distance,  we  were  enabled  to  be- 
stow some  attention  to  each  of  the  others.  One  hundred  and  seven- 
ty-nine shots  were  fired,  to  which  the  enemy  replied  with  73,  52  from 
their  monitors  and  21  from  their  land  batteries  on  Morris  Island. 
Five  additional  shots  from  land  battery  were  fired  at  this  fort  at 
5. 30  p.  m. 

The  guns  at  this  post  were  manned  by  three  companies  First  South 


[Chap.  XL. 


742  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 


Carolina  [Regular]  Infantry:  Company  C,  Captain  [B.  J.]  Wither- 
spoon commanding,  assisted  by  Lieutenant  [Vincent  F.J  Martin; 
Company  F,  Lieutenant  [E.  M.]  Whaley  commanding,  and  Com- 
pany G,  Lieutenant  [J.  C.]  Minott  commanding.  The  guns  in  the 
battery  manned  by  Company  F could  not  be  brought  to  bear,  and 
consequently  were  not  engaged. 

The  conduct  of  both  officers  and  men  under  the  fire  was  highly 
creditable  to  themselves  and  satisfactory  to  me. 

But  for  the  dismounting  of  a 32-pounder  rifled  gun  by  the  bursting 
of  a 15-inch  shell,  and  the  wounding  of  4 men  by  the  explosion  of 
another  in  the  sally-port,  this  post  would  have  escaped  without  cas- 
ualty of  any  kind,  although  repeatedly  struck. 

I have  the  honor  to  add  a list  of  wounded : Private  Amos  Helms, 
Company  C,  lacerated  wound  of  thigh  and  face,  since  died;  Sergeant 
[T. ] Hamilton,  Company  G,  contusion  of  face,  slight;  Private  J.  L. 
Dawson,  Company  G,  lacerated  wound  of  face  and  arm,  severe; 
Private  Thomas  Scott,  Company  E,  lacerated  wound  of  face,  severe. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  VALENTINE, 

Captain , Commanding  Post. 

Lieut.  E.  C.  Edgerton,  A.  A.  A.  C. 


[Indorsement.] 

Headquarters  Artillery, 

West  End  Sullivan’s  Island , November  17,  1863. 
Respectfully  forwarded.  The  monitor  aground  was  distant  from 
the  fort  about  2,300  yards. 

WILLIAM  BUTLER, 

Colonel , Commanding. 


NOVEMBER  19-20,  1863. — Boat  Demonstration  upon  Fort  Sumter. 

reports.* 

No.  1.— Maj.  Stephen  Elliott,  jr.,  C.  S.  Artillery,  commanding  Fort  Sumter. 

No.  2.— Maj.  William  S.  Basinger,  Eighteenth  Georgia  Battalion,  commanding  Bat- 
tery Marion. 

No.  3.— Capt.  Jacob  Valentine,  Third  South  Carolina  Artillery,  commanding  Fort 
Moultrie. 

No.  4.— Capt.  Warren  Adams,  Third  South  Carolina  Artillery,  commanding  Battery 
Bee. 

No.  5.— Capt.  R.  Press.  Smith,  jr.,  Third  South  Carolina  Artillery,  commanding 
Brooke  Gun  Battery. 

No.  1. 

Report  of  Maj.  Stephen  Elliott,  jr.,  C.  S.  Artillery,  commanding  Fort 

Sumter. 

Fort  Sumter,  November  20,  1863. 
Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  make  the  following  daily  report : 

Rifles  fired  last  night,  97,  of  which  25  missed. 

At  2.30  [a.  m.],  the  moon  being  down  and  the  weather  very  favor- 

* See  also  Terry’s  dispatch  of  November  20,  inclosed  with  Gillmore’s  report  of 
that  date,  p.  606. 


Chap.  XL.] 


BOAT  DEMONSTRATION  UPON  FORT  SUMTER. 


743 


able  for  an  attack,  I aroused  and  placed  the  whole  garrison  under 
arms.  Before  visiting  Captain  Harleston’s  quarters,  I found  that 
he  had  taken  the  same  precaution. 

At  3 o’clock  a detachment  of  the  enemy’s  barges,  variously  esti- 
mated at  from  four  to  nine  in  number,  approached  within  300  yards 
of  the  fort  and  opened  fire  with  musketry.  Most  of  the  troops  got 
into  position  very  rapidly,  but,  in  spite  of  all  instructions,  com- 
menced a random  fire  into  the  air  on  the  part  of  many  and  at  the 
distant  boats  on  the  part  of  others.  The  troops  stationed  in  the 
center  bomb-proof  for  the  most  part  refused  to  ascend  the  parapet, 
though  encouraged  by  the  example  of  Lieutenant  Mironell  and  a few 
other  brave  men. 

I have  sent  a dispatch  to  General  Taliaferro,  asking  him  to  relieve 
two  lieutenants  who  did  not  behave  well.  I have  not  evidence 
enough  to  convict  them,  but  do  not  want  them  here  longer.  I have 
taken  measures  which  I trust  may  insure  better  conduct  in  the  future. 

No  rockets  were  sent  up,  because  positive  attack  was  not  made. 
The  ricochet  practice  from  Sullivan’s  Island  was  very  handsome. 
The  fire  from  Johnson  was  very  bad,  the  balls  passing  directly  over  the 
fort.  Private  T.  Wheeler,  Company  D,  First  South  Carolina  Artil- 
lery, was  wounded  slightly  in  the  head  yesterday  evening  by  a brick. 

I respectfully  request  that , if  practicable,  Captain  Harleston  be 
retained  here  until  the  dark  nights  have  entirely  passed  by. 

His  removal  just  at  this  time  will  be  a great  misfortune  to  me,  as 
I am  greatly  dependent  on  his  watchfulness  and  ability. 

Very  respectfully, 

STEPHEN  ELLIOTT,  Jr., 

Major , Commanding  Post. 

Lieut.  S.  C.  Boyleston, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

[Indorsement.] 

November  21. 

Paragraph  marked  [in  italics]  is  approved. 

G.  T.  B.  [BEAUREGARD.] 


No.  2. 

Report  of  Maj.  William  S.  Basinger,  Eighteenth  Georgia  Bat- 
talion, commanding  Battery  Marion. 

Battery  Marion,  November  20,  1863. 
Lieutenant  : About  3 o’clock  last  night  the  enemy’s  boats  ap- 
proached Fort  Sumter.  The  prescribed  signals  were  not  made  to 
indicate  an  attack.  There  were  frequent  discharges  of  musketry, 
however,  between  the  fort  and  the  boats.  The  guns  of  this  battery 
were  directed  and  fired  as  if  to  repel  such  an  attack.  When  it  ap- 
peared that  the  attempt  was  not  pursued,  the  firing  ceased.  It  could 
not  be  discovered  what  was  the  effect  of  the  fire.  There  were  13 
shots  and  7 mortar  shells  discharged. 

Very  respectfully, 

WM.  S.  BASINGER, 

Major  Eighteenth  Georgia  Battalion,  Commanding • 
Lieut.  E.  C.  Edgerton, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant-General. 


744  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 


[Chap.  XL. 


No.  3. 

Report  of  Capt.  Jacob  Valentine , Third  South  Carolina  Artillery , 
commanding  Fort  Moultrie. 

Fort  Moultrie,  November  20,  1863. 

Lieutenant  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  this  morning,  quarter 
to  3 o’clock,  the  enemy  made  an  attack  on  Fort  Sumter,  with  what 
force  could  not  be  ascertained.  The  night  being  dark,  we  could  not 
discern  any  object.  Our  guns  were  pointed  and  manned  and  we 
were  enabled  to  aim  with  greater  accuracy  by  the  flashes  of  the 
enemy’s  fire  around  the  fort.  The  firing  lasted  about  one  hour, 
when  a dispatch  from  Sumter  announced  all  was  well.  There  were 
16  shots  fired  from  this  post  yesterday.  The  enemy  fired  657  shots  at  • 
Sumter,  and  15  shots  supposed  to  be  at  the  city;  there  were  6 shots 
fired  at  this  post,  doing  no  injury. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  VALENTINE, 

Captain,  Commanding  Post. 

Lieut.  E.  C.  Edgerton, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  4. 


Report  of  Capt.  Warren  Adams,  Third  South  Carolina  Artillery, 
commanding  Battery  Bee. 


Headquarters  Battery  Bee,  November  20,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  most  respectfully  to  report  that  during  the 
firing  from  this  battery  last  night  Private  [J.  B.]  Eskew,  Company  I, 
First  South  Carolina  [Regular]  Infantry,  was  killed,  and  Private 
[M.  ] Cooney,  of  same  company,  was  severely  wounded,  both  hap- 
pening on  account  of  premature  explosion  of  the  gun.  Capt.  K.  G. 
Billings  was  in  command  of  the  gun,  and  reports  no  visible  care- 
lessness on  the  part  of  either  gunner  or  cannoneers  who  were  loading 
the  piece. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

WARREN  ADAMS, 
Captain,  Commanding  Post. 


Lieut.  E.  C.  Edgerton, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  5. 

Report  of  Capt.  R.  Press . Smith , jr.,  Third  South  Carolina  Ar- 
tillery, commanding  Brooke  Gun  Battery. 

Headquarters  Brooke  Gun  Battery, 

November  20,  1863. 

Sir:  I have  the*  honor  to  report  that  between  2.30  and  3 o’clock 
this  morning  rapid  and  heavy  discharges  of  small-arms  were  seen  and 
heard  in  and  around  Fort  Sumter.  I fired  the  Brooke  gun  three 
times  with  shrapnel  and  once  with  a hollow  shot,  in  the  manner  pre- 


Chap.  XL.] 


745 


SKIRMISH  NEAR  CUNNINGIIAm’s  BLUFF,  S.  C. 

scribed  in  case  of  an  assanlt  on  Fort  Sumter.  The  Brooke  gun  was 
also  fired  twice  during  the  day  with  hollow  shot  for  the  purpose  of 
getting  the  range  around  Fort  Sumter.  The  mortars  were  fired  eight 
times  this  morning  at  Cumming’s  Point. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

R.  PRESS.  SMITH,  Jr., 

Captain,  Commanding  Post. 

Lieut.  E.  C.  Edgerton, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


NOVEMBER  24,  1863 — Skirmish  near  Cunningham’s  Bluff,  S.  C. 

REPORTS. 

No.  1.— Brig.  Gen.  Rufus  Saxton,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  on  Port  Royal  Island. 
No.  2. — Brig.  Gen.  W.  S.  Walker,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  Third  Military  Dis- 


Peport  of  Brig.  Gen.  Rufus  Saxton,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  on 

Port  Royal  Island. 

Headquarters  U.  S.  Forces, 

Beaufort,  S.  C.,  November  30,  1863. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  on  Monday  evening 
last  I dispatched  a force  under  the  command  of  Capt.  J.  E.  Bryant, 
Eighth  Maine  Volunteers,  to  the  vicinity  of  Pocotaligo,  for  the 
double  purpose  of  bringing  away  some  30  slaves  there,  belonging  to 
a Mr.  Heyward,  and  capturing  the  enemy’s  picket  opposite  Barnwell 
Island.  The  force  consisted  of  a detachment  of  30  men,  Company 
E,  First  South  Carolina  Volunteers,  under  command  of  Captain 
Heasley,  and  another- of  30  men  of  Company  K,  same  regiment,  com- 
manded by  Captain  Whitney. 

It  gives  me  pleasure  to  report  that,  under  the  skillful  guidance  of 
Captain  Bryant,  the  details  of  the  affair  were  admirably  arranged 
and  the  expedition  was  a complete  success.  The  pickets,  2 in  num- 
ber, with  their  horses,  were  captured.  Sergt.  Harry  Williams,  of 
Company  K,  went  with  a party  and  liberated  27  slaves  on  the  Hey- 
ward plantation,  6 miles  in  advance  of  our  force  and  within  4 miles 
of  the  enemy’s  headquarters.  Great  credit  is  due  this  dusky  war- 
rior for  the  skill  with  which  he  managed  his  part  of  the  affair. 

Everything  was  now  completed  and  the  party  would  have  returned 
in  safety,  but,  a dense  fog  coming  on,  their  boats,  under  command  of 
Lieutenant  Cass,  were  unable  to  find  the  point  agreed  upon  for  de- 
barkation. While  they  were  waiting  for  their  boats  a company  of 
the  enemy’s  cavalry,  supposed  to  be  about  100  in  number,  preceded 
by  a pack  of  five  bloodhounds,  attacked  Captain  Heasley,  who  was 
guarding  a road  leading  to  the  landing.  They  attacked  in  great 
fury,  urging  their  dogs  on  in  advance.  Captain  Heasley  allowed 
them  to  approach  within  a few  feet  of  his  men  and  then  ordered  a 
charge,  which  they  did  most  gallantly,  killing  three  of  the  blood- 
hounds with  the  bayonet.  At  the  same  time  a well-directed  volley 
threw  the  enemy  into  disorder  and  he.  retreated  amid  the  groans  of 
his  wounded. 

He,  however,  soon  rallied.  The  situation  now  seemed  to  be  very 


74G  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

precarious,  as  the  enemy  were  in  front  in  large  force  with  artillery. 
At  this  time,  Captain  Whitney,  who,  with  10  men  in  ambush,  had 
been  directed  to  guard  a piece  of  woods  through  which  our  force 
must  retreat,  was  attacked  by  another  company  of  the  enemy’s  cav- 
alry. He  opened  fire  upon  them,  killing,  among  others,  the  com- 
mander of  the  company  and  the  remaining  bloodhounds. 

To  those  who  doubt  whether  the  negro  soldiers  will  fight,  this  dar- 
ing act  of  Captain  Whitney  and  his  little  band  of  10,  opening  fire 
unhesitatingly  upon  a full  company,  not  less  than  100  of  the  enemy’s 
cavalry,  and  repulsing  them,  this  will  be  a startling  fact. 

Captain  Bryant  reports  that  his  men  retreated  fighting  as  coolly  as 
if  they  had  been  on  dress-parade.  None  of  Captain  Bryant’s  men 
were  killed  arid  but  7 wounded.  Five  of  the  enemy  are  known  to 
have  been  killed,  and  it  is  supposed  many  more.  It  is  admitted  by 
the  enemy  that  he  had  1,000  men  in  the  vicinity  of  the  fight.  Of 
the  2 prisoners  captured  by  Captain  Bryant,  1 was  killed  by  the  en- 
emy during  the  fight.  I regard  the  expedition  of  Captain  Bryant  as 
a most  daring  one,  and  its  whole  conduct  reflects  great  credit  upon 
his  bravery  and  skill. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

R.  SAXTON, 

Brigadier - General,  Commanding. 

Maj.  Gen.  Q.  A.  Gtllmore, 

Commanding  Department  of  the  South. 


No.  2. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  W.  S.  Walker , C.  S.  Army,  commanding  Third 

Military  District. 

POCOTALIGO,  November  26,  1863. 

General  : Early  on  the  morning  of  the  24th  some  30  or  40  negro 
soldiers  succeeded  in  penetrating  our  lines,  and  took  off  about  20 
slaves  belonging  to  Mr.  Daniel  Heyward. 

They  were  closely  pursued  by  Captain  [J.  T.]  Foster,  with  25  men 
of  Rutledge’s  regiment  of  cavalry.  The  negroes  took  shelter  in  a 
very  dense  thicket  near  Cunningham’s  Bluff  (opposite  Hall’s  Island). 
Captain  Foster  dismounted  his  command  and  charged  them,  in  skir- 
mishing order.  The  negroes  broke  into  several  parties,  and,  after  a 
pursuit  that  resembled  a fox  chase,  succeeded  in  getting  off  with  Mr. 
Heyward’s  slaves.  Other  forces  under  Colonel  Rutledge  had  come 
up,  but  were  baffled  in  their  pursuit  by  the  dense  thicket  and  the 
darkness  of  a misty  morning.  They  captured  2 of  our  pickets,  one  of 
whom  escaped  during  Captain  Foster’s  attack.  The  picket  reports 
that  2 of  the  negro  soldiers  were  badly  wounded  at  our  first  fire,  1, 
he  thinks,  mortally.  He  judges  that  more  must  have  been  hit  after 
he  escaped.  Three  of  our  men  were  wounded,  none  seriously.  This 
is  the  first  time  the  men  of  this  portion  of  the  command  have  been 
under  fire.  Colonel  Rutledge  reports  that  the  whole  command  moved 
with  rapidity  and  showed  commendable  eagerness.  I will  send  a 
detailed  report  of  Captain  Foster  and  Colonel  Rutledge  when  sent  in. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  S.  WALKER, 
Brigadier-  General,  Commandi ng. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan,  A.  A.  G. 


Chap.  XL.] 


ATTACK  OK  THE  U.  S.  S.  MARBLEHEAD. 


747 


DECEMBER  5,  1863.— Affair  at  Murrell’s  Inlet,  S.  C. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  J.  H.  Trapier , C.  S.  Army , commanding  Fourth 

Military  District .* 

Hdqrs.  Fourth  Military  District  South  Carolina, 

Georgetown , December  8,  1863. 

General  : On  the  5th  instant  a party  of  the  enemy  (16  in  nnmher) 
from  the  man-of-war  blockading  off  Murrell’s  [or  Murray’s]  Inlet, 
landed  upon  Magnolia  Beach,  near  that  inlet,  for  the  purpose,  as  is 
supposed,  of  burning  a small  schooner  lying  therein.  They  were 
promptly  and  vigorously  attacked  by  a portion  of  Company  B, 
Twenty-first  Battalion  Georgia  Cavalry,  under  the  command  of  Cap- 
tain [H.  K.]  Harrison,  and  the  whole  party,  with  but  one  exception, 
taken,  with  most  of  their  arms.  Two  of  the  men  are  badly  wounded. 
I regret  to  add  that  Captain  Harrison  lost  1 man  killed  and  2 severely 
wounded.  Fourteen  of  the  prisoners  have  been  conducted  to  these 
headquarters.  Twelve  of  them  will  he  sent  hence  to-morrow  to  the 
headquarters  of  the  commanding  general.  They  consist  of  3 officers 
and  9 men.  The  2 wounded  men  are  retained  in  hospital.  The  mis- 
sing prisoner  is  not  yet  officially  accounted  for. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  H.  TRAPIER, 
Brigadier-  General , Commanding . 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan, 

Chief  of  Staff , &c.,  Charleston , S.  C. 

[Indorsement.] 

December  11,  1863. 

Compliment  Captain  Harrison  and  men  for  their  success. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General , Commanding. 


DECEMBER  25, 1863. — Attack  on  the  U.  S.  S.  Marblehead,  in  Stono  River,  S.  C. 

REPORTS.t 

No.  1. — Brig.  Gen.  George  H.  Gordon,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  division. 

No.  2. — General  G.  T.  Beauregard,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  Department  of  South 
Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida. 

No.  3. — Brig.  Gen.  Henry  A.  Wise,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  Sixth  Military  District. 
No.  4. — Col.  P.  R.  Page,  Twenty-sixth  Virginia  Infantry. 

No.  1. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  George  H.  Gordon , TJ.  S.  Army , commanding 

division. 


Folly  Island,  S.  C.,  December  31,  1863. 
General  : I have  the  honor  to  report  as  follows : 

About  6 o’clock  on  the  morning  of  the  25th  of  December,  1863,  a 
rebel  battery  of  six  guns  opened  on  the  U.  S.  gunboat  Marblehead. 

*For  report  of  Acting  Ensign  George  Anderson,  U.  S.  Navy,  see  Annual  Report 
of  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy,  December  5,  1864. 

f For  reports  of  Rear-Admiral  Dahlgren,  Commander  Georg  > B.  Balch,  Lieut. 
Commander  Richard  W.  Meade,  jr.,  and  Acting  Maste--  S.  N.  Freeman,  see  Annual 
Report  of  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy,  December  5,  1864. 


[Chap.  XL. 


748  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

Tliis  vessel  was  off  Legareville  at  the  time,  and  was  so  posted  as  to 
afford  protection  to  a small  body  of  infantry  of  my  division  within 
the  town. 

The  course  of  the  Stono  opposite  Legareville  is  about  southwest 
and  northeast.  The  Kiawah  River,  connecting  the  Stono  with  the 
North  Edisto,  runs  in  a southerly  course,  and  meets  the  former  about 
1,700  yards  south  of  Legareville. 

From  this  village  a causeway  runs  in  a southwesterly  direction 
about  1,000  yards;  then  turning  south  it  follows  the  edge  of  the  marsh 
that  borders  the  Kiawah  to  the  bank  of  the  North  Edisto.  Between 
this  causeway  and  the  Stono  is  a marshy  tract,  with  here  and  there  a 
few  patches  of  timber.  These  are  approached  from  the  causeway 
by  artificial  roadways. 

The  attack  upon  the  gunboat  was  made  from  several  points.  One 
gun  was  in  position  on  the  causeway,  not  more  than  600  yards  in  a 
southerly  direction  from  Legareville.  Four  or  six  guns  were  in  posi- 
tion witliin  a patch  of  timber  approached  through  the  marsh,  distant 
about  800  yards  from  Legareville  and  the  same  from  the  Stono. 
Shots  passed  the  town  on  the  north  side,  making  it  evident  that 
other  guns  were  posted  in  favorable  positions.  At  the  time  of  the 
attack,  the  Pawnee  was  in  the  Stono,  south  of  the  Kiawah.  Getting 
under  way  without  delay,  she  took  a position  in  the  Kiawah  which 
exposed  the  rebel  gunners  to  a flank  and  rear  fire.  Here  she  poured 
in  her  broadsides  from  a powerful  battery  of  9-inch  guns  and  50  and 
100  pounder  rifles.  The  Marblehead  seemed  the  principal  object  of 
the  enemy’s  attack.  All  his  fire  was  directed  upon  her.  Slipping 
her  cable  at  the  first  gun,  she  moved  leisurely  up  and  down  the  river, 
always  within  range,  delivering  her  fire  coolly  yet  rapidly  and  with 
telling  effect.  The  parapet  of  earth  behind  which  the  rebel  guns 
were  sheltered  protected  their  guns  in  a great  measure  from  the  fire 
of  the  Marblehead. 

The  enemy  opened  on  the  Marblehead  at  about  6 a.  m.  The  fight 
lasted  about  one  hour.  The  position  taken  by  the  Pawnee  rendered 
the  rebel  position  untenable.  I reached  Legareville  while  the  gunboats 
were  still  engaging  the  enemy.  I soon  ascertained  that  the  garrison 
had  suffered  no  loss.  The  Pawnee  moved  up  to  Legareville  as  my 
boat  came  to  anchor  off  the  town.  From  the  deck  of  the  Pawnee, 
Captain  Balch  showed  me  a rebel  gun  in  position  in  the  piece  of 
woods  described.  The  enemy  had  fled.  I determined  to  send  a force 
of  infantry  to  capture,  and,  if  possible,  bring  off  the  gun. 

Returning  to  Folly  Island,  I ordered  the  Seventy-fourth  Regiment 
Pennsylvania  Volunteers,  Capt.  H.  Krauseneck,  to  proceed  to  Le- 
gareville in  the  ferry-boat  Philadelphia.  This  command,  about  250 
strong,  moved  with  little  delay. 

I again  proceeded  to  the  scene  of  action,  and  arrived  before  the 
troops  had  disembarked.  I ordered  Colonel  Gurney,  commanding 
first  brigade,  to  accompany  the  troops  and  make  all  proper  arrange- 
ments. I directed  the  troops  to  deploy  and  cover  the  movement 
along  the  causeway,  to  enter  the  woods  across  the  marsh,  seize  the 
gun,  and  bring  it  off. 

The  movement  was  carried  out  as  ordered  ; five  guns  were  found 
in  the  wooded  patch,  8-inch  siege  howitzers  for  sea-coast  defense.  The 
troops  had  approached  this  position  across  the  marsh,  but  the*  arti- 
ficial roadway  that  led  to  the  mainland  was  in  a southerly  direction. 
It  would  have  been  necessary  to  haul  these  guns  more  than  3,000 
yards  to  get  them  on  to  the  causeway.  Colonel  Gurney  reported 


Chap.  XL.] 


ATTACK  ON  THE  U.  S.  S.  MARBLEHEAD. 


749 


that  it  was  impracticable  to  bring  the  guns  away  with  his  force,  and 
that  they  could  not  be  brought  across  the  marsh,  as  there  was  but 
one  hour  of  daylight.  I directed  him,  if  it  was  utterly  impossible 
to  bring  off  the  guns,  to  spike  them  and  destroy  the  carriages. 

I again  returned  to  the  Pawnee  to  see  if  it  was  not  possible  to  send 
boats  up  a creek  or  bayou  running  from  the  woods  to  the  Stono. 
Captain  Balch  thought  not,  but  sent  up  a crew,  who  reported  100 
yards  of  marsh  between  the  creek  and  the  woods.  The  lookout  from 
the  Pawnee  now  reported  a large  body  of  infantry,  given  as  2,000, 
making  their  way  down  the  causeway  toward  Legareville.  As  night 
had  come  on,  I ordered  the  troops  to  fall  back  after  doing  the  guns 
all  the  damage  possible. 

My  command  brought  in  about  fifty  shovels  and  a half  dozen  or 
more  knapsacks,  thrown  away  by  the  rebels  in  their  flight.  They 
reported  two  guns,  the  second  a little  to  the  south  of  the  first,  6 dead 
horses,  and  1 dead  rebel.  The  guns  were  dismounted,  the  wheels 
taken  from  the  carriages,  and  such  dismantling  as  rendered  removal 
by  the  rebels  impossible. 

Upon  my  return,  I reported  the  movement  to  the  major-general 
commanding.  It.  was  not  thought  best  to  make  another  effort  to  se- 
cure the  guns  on  the  succeeding  day.  On  the  day  after,  the  com- 
mander of  the  Pawnee  discovered  a creek  leading  directly  to  the 
guns.  With  his  boats  he  was  enabled  to  land  within  a few  yards  of 
one  of  them  and  within  a few  hundred  yards  of  the  other.  By 
flanking  the  position  with  one  gunboat  up  the  Kiawah,  he  was  easily 
enabled  to  bring  off  the  guns. 

It  gives  me  pleasure  to  bear  testimony  to  the  gallant  conduct  of 
the  navy  upon  this  occasion.  I regret  that  the  darkness  prevented 
my  overcoming  difficulties  attendant  upon  dragging  the  guns  into 
Legareville,  and  then  presenting  to  the  navy  those  trophies  which 
their  valor  had  so  well  earned ; a few  hours  of  daylight  would  have 
discovered  the  creek  through  which  the  guns  were  ultimately  brought 
away. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

GEO.  H.  GORDON, 

Brigadier -General,  Commanding  Division. 

Brigadier-General  Turner, 

Chief  of  Staff. 


No.  2. 


Report  of  General  G.  T.  Beauregard,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding 
Department  of  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida. 

Charleston,  S.  C., 
December  26,  1863 — 11.30  a.  m. 

Expedition  to  destroy  two  gunboats  in  the  Stono  yesterday  failed 
through  bad  firing  of  our  batteries.  We  had  1 man  killed  and  5 
wounded;  8 horses  disabled.  I will  try  another  plan. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General,  Richmond,  Va. 


[Chap.  XL. 


750  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 

No.  3. 

j Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Henry  A.  Wise , C.  S.  Army,  commanding 
Sixth  Military  District. 

Hdqrs.  6th  Mil.  Dist.,  Dept,  of  S.  C.,  Ga.,  and  Fla., 

December  25,  1863 — 6.15  p.  m. 

General  : Every  preparation  was  duly  made  against  Legareville 
and  tlie  gunboats.  The  batteries  were  completed  and  everything 
ready  and  in  position  by  daylight,  and  our  fire  opened  at  the  ap- 
pointed time  upon  the  Marblehead,  about  300  yards  from  the  wharf 
of  the  village  landing.  The  enemy’s  force  on  land  was  about  200; 
not  in  the  village,  but  on  a little  island  with  a narrow  defile  leading 
to  it.  Colonel  Page  determined  to  attack  with  a field  battery  and 
the  infantry;  but  to  do  so  waited  for  our  siege  guns  to  drive  the 
gunboat  from  the  wharf.  !j>he  didn’t  open  for  twenty  minutes  after 
our  fire  commenced.  Our  fire  was  kept  up  for  about  an  hour  at  1,000 
yards  distance  without  making  the  least  impression,  or,  as  Colonel 
Page  thinks,  even  hitting  her  at  all. 

In  the  meantime,  the  Pawnee  and  a mortar  boat  ran  up  the  Kiawah 
and  opened  fire  on  flank  and  rear  of  our  lower  batteries,  killing  1 
private,  severely  wounding  5 others  (2  supposed  mortally),  and  kill- 
ing 8 horses.  Colonel  Page  instantly  withdrew  and  fell  back,  the 
infantry  to  Roper’s  and  the  artillery  to  Walpole’s. 

On  hearing  the  heavy  firing  this  morning,  I hastened  in  person  to 
the  ground  and  met  Colonel  Page  at  the  latter  place.  Learning  the 
above  from  him,  and  that  two  howitzers  (heavy)  and  the  body  of  the 
1 private  were  left  on  the  ground,  I approved  of  Colonel  Page’s 
resolve  before  I reached  him  to  remain  until  to-morrow,  and  I or- 
dered him  to  regain,  if  possible,  to-night  the  guns  and  the  dead.  He 
has  rations  and  forage  until  Sunday  next,  the  27th.  His  official  report 
will  be  made  as  soon  as  the  expedition  is  ended.  I regret  its  failure. 

I am,  general,  your  obedient  servant, 

HENRY  A WISE, 
Brigadier-  General,  Commanding. 

General  G.  T.  Beauregard,  Commanding,  &c. 


No.  4. 

Report  of  Col.  P.  R.  Page,  Twenty-sixth  Virginia  Difantry. 

Walpole’s,  December  25,  1863. 

Captain  : I am  sorry  to  say  to  the  general  that  the  expedition  has 
been  a failure.  We  opened  the  attack  at  daylight  this  morning, 
according  to  instructions,  the  Marblehead  alone  being  in  Stono.  The 
vessel  was  never  touched  by  the  artillery.  The  Pawnee  and  a mortar- 
boat  soon  came  up  the  Kiawah,  flanking  our  lower  batteries,  and  we 
were  compelled  to  withdraw  with  the  following  casualties  in  the  artil- 
lery, as  reported  by  Colonel  [Del.]  Kemper  : One  man  killed  and  5 
severely  wounded,  and  Captain  [B.  C.]  Webb  slightly;  8 artillery 
horses  killed,  and  1 ambulance  mule  from  the  Twenty-sixth  Regi- 
ment. There  were  no  casualties  in  the  infantry. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

P.  R.  PAGE, 

Colon  el,  Commanding, 

0a.pt.  J,  H.  PbaroSj  Am$kmtA<tyutwbQemml, 


Chap.  XL.]  AFFAIR  ON  JOHN’S  ISLAND,  S.  C.  751 

DECEMBER  25,  1863. — Engagement  at  Fort  Brooke,  Fla. 

Report  of  Capt.  John  Westcott , Second  Florida  Battalion . 

Tampa,  December  26,  1863. 

Sir  : The  enemy’s  gunboat  Tahoma  and  a small  schooner  came  up 
the  bay  and  anchor ed  in  front  of  the  garrison  on  Thursday  night,  the 
24th  instant,  the  Tahoma  firing  one  gun  (a  shell)  about  11.30  p.  m. 

On  the  morning  of  the  25th,  the  schooner  altered  her  position  to 
the  main  channel.  About  9 o’clock  the  Tahoma  opened  fire  upon 
the  garrison  and  continued  it  for  two  hours  at  intervals,  throwing 
150  and  32  pounder  shells  into  the  town  and  garrison.  The  schooner 
was  not  able  to  get  up  within  range  of  her  guns  on  account  of  the 
tide  and  wind,  but  shelled  the  shore  to  the  northern  and  eastward  of 
her  as  long  as  she  remained  there.  They  kept  out  of  range  of  our 
guns.  We  were  ready,  however,  to  have  received  them  properly  if 
they  had  attempted  a landing.  About  12  o’clock  they  drew  off  and 
proceeded  down  the  bay.  None  of  my  men  or  any  of  the  citizens 
were  injured. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOHN  WESTCOTT, 

Captain , Commanding  Post  Fort  Brooke , Tampa . 

Lieut.  Col.  T.  W.  Brevard, 

Commanding  Gulf  Forces. 


DECEMBER  28,  1863. — Affair  on  John’s  Island,  S.  C. 

Report  of  Maj.  John  Jenkins,  Third  South  Carolina  Cavalry  * 

Headquarters  Third  Sub-District, 

John’s  Island,  December  28,  1863.  . 

Captain  : At  9.30  this  morning  the  gunboats  shelled  in  the  neigh- 
borhood and  in  front  of  the  batteries  for  half  an  hour,  after  which 
they  landed  about  200  men  at  the  Lady’s  Island  battery  from  a flat. 
They  came  up  Deep  Creek,  which  touches  the  high  land  immediately 
in  the  rear  of  the  battery.  The  enemy  had  thrown  forward  their 
pickets  to  the  second  hedge  from  the  village  and  in  advance  of  the 
batteries.  There  were  about  200,  who  appeared  to  be  working  at  the 
guns  left  on  the  25th  instant,  which  I fear  are  now  finally  lost.  The 
sling-carts  arrived  too  late  for  me  to  attempt  the  removal  last  night, 
and  to-day  they  have  their  gunboats  as  near  to  the  batteries  as  they 
can  get,  while  the  Pawnee  went  up  Kiawah  River  and  took  a position 
to  command  all  approaches  and  to  prevent  any  advance  on  our  part. 
She,  after  the  shelling  was  over,  was  relieved  by  another  armed  ves- 
sel and  resumed  her  position  near  the  batteries.  It  will  be  impossi- 
ble, then  (the  enemy  occupying  the  batteries  in  stronger  force  than 
I can  bring  against  them,  with  their  pickets  also  between  and  covered 
by  intervening  embankment  and  immediately  protected  by  four  gun- 
boats), to  do  anything  to  recover  the  guns. 

Three  steamboats  left  Legareville  to-day,  but  the  atmosphere  was 
so  thick  it  could  not  be  ascertained  whether  there  were  troops  aboard. 

*For  report  of  Lieut.  Commander  Richard  W.  Meade,  ji\,  U,  8,  Jfavy,  see  Am 

nml  Report  of  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy,  December 


752 


S.  0.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 


[Chap.  XL. 


Twenty  men  landed  on  Seabrook  Island  from  the  gunboat,  who 
carried  off  lumber  from  their  old  encampment.  They  remained  on 
shore  about  two  hours. 

Respectfully, 

JOHN  JENKINS, 

Major , Commanding , &c. 


Capt.  J.  H.  Pearce. 


DECEMBER  30,  1863. — Skirmish  near  Saint  Augustine,  Fla. 

REPORTS. 

No.  1. — Col.  Francis  A.  Osborn,  Twenty-fourth  Massachusetts  Infantry. 

No.  2. — Capt.  J.  J.  Dickison,  Second  Florida  Cavalry. 

No.  1. 

Report  of  Col.  Francis  A.  Osborn , Twenty -fourth  Masssachusetts 

Infantry. 

Headquarters  U.  S.  Forces, 

Saint  Augustine,  Fla.,  January  1,  1864. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  report  the  particulars  of  a skir- 
mish which  took  place  at  this  post,  under  the  following  circum- 
stances : 

During  the  past  month  it  has  been  necessary  to  send  the  wood- 
choppers  about  2 miles  outside  the  lines  to  procure  fire- wood,  the 
supply  within  the  lines  having  become  exhausted.  At  first,  hav- 
ing learned  from  my  scouts  that  there  were  no  rebel  forces  east  of 
the  Saint  John’s  River,  I furnished  them  with  a guard  of  only  10 
men.  About  three  weeks  ago,  however,  I heard  rumors  that  some 
cavalry  were  expected  to  cross  the  river  very  soon  for  conscripts 
and  deserters,  and  I accordingly  increased  the  guard  to  30  men,  re- 
quiring the  20  choppers  to  carry  arms  also,  making  50  armed  men, 
which,  after  careful  consideration,  I deemed  an  ample  force.  I con- 
stantly sent  out  scouts  to  ascertain  whether  the  enemy  had  crossed 
the  river,  intending,  if  he  should  come  in  this  neighborhood,  to  go 
out  and  attack  him.  On  Wednesday  morning  (30th  ultimo),  one  of 
the  scouts  came  in  and  reported  to  me  that  he  could  find  no  indica- 
tions of  any  cavalry  in  the  vicinity.  On  that  very  morning,  however, 
the  guard,  which  was  moving  cautiously  out  to  its  position,  with  an 
advance  thrown  out,  was  suddenly  attacked  by  a party  on  their 
right  and  front,  who  had  been  lying  concealed  in  the  low  palmetto 
shrubs  with  which  the  whole  country  is  covered,  and  which  fur- 
nishes such  perfect  concealment  that  a man  might  pass  within  20 
feet  of  such  a party  and  never  suspect  its  presence.  The  guard 
halted,  faced  toward  the  enemy,  and  prepared  to  return  the  fire, 
when  they  received  another  volley  from  a corresponding  position 
on  the  left  of  the  line  of  march.  This,  unfortunately,  dangerously 
wounded  Lieut.  Oliver  H.  Walker,  Twenty-fourth  Massachusetts 
Volunteers,  who  was  in  charge  of  the  party,  which  threw  them  into 
some  confusion.  At  this  moment  a body  of  cavalry  was  seen  on 
each  flank,  riding  rapidly  to  get  into  their  rear.  This  increased  the 
disorder  caused  by  the  loss  of  their  officer,  and  they  commenced 


Chap.  XL.] 


SKIRMISH  NEAR  SAINT  AUGUSTINE,  ELA. 


753 


falling  back.  In  doing  tbis,  having  about  2 miles  to  go  before  they 
reached  the  outposts,  and  being  closely  pursued  by  the  cavalry,  they 
became  somewhat  scattered,  and  lost  24  men  taken  prisoners.  . News 
of  this  affair  having  been  brought  to  me  on  brigade  drill,  in  less 
than  an  hour  after  I received  the  report  of  the  scout  mentioned 
above,  I immediately  went  out  with  the  Twenty-fourth  Massachu- 
setts Volunteers,  but  the  enemy  had  gone.  As  they  had  two  hours 
the  start  of  me,  I did  not  pursue  them.  If  I had  had  a company  of 
cavalry,  I am  confident  I could  have  overtaken  them,  and  not  only 
have  rescued  my  own  men,  but  also  have  captured  some  besides,  for 
from  their  trail  they  were  mounted  on  small  horses. 

I deeply  regret  to  report  such  an  unsatisfactory  result  of  this 
affair,  but  I impute  it  all  to  the  unfortunate  circumstances  of  Lieu- 
tenant Walker’s  being  wounded.  Had  he  remained  unhurt,  I am 
confident  that  he  would  have  beaten  the  enemy  off,  for  he  is  a brave 
and  skillful  officer,  and  had  his  men  well  in  hand  when  he  fell.  I 
am  grieved  to  say  that  his  wound  is  considered  a very  serious  one 
by  the  surgeon  in  attendance. 

The  loss  of  the  enemy  is  not  known,  as  they  carried  off  all  their 
dead  and  wounded.  I append  a list  of  casualties  in  my  command.  * 
Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

F.  A.  OSBORN, 

Colonel  Twenty -fourth  Mass.  Vols.,  Comdg.  Post. 

Brig.  Gen.  J.  W.  Turner, 

Chief  of  Staff , Department  of  the  South. 


No.  2. 

Report  of  Capt.  J.  J.  Dickison , Second  Florida  Cavalry. 
EXTRACT  FROM  JOURNAL  OF  OPERATIONS  IN  CHARLESTON  HARBOR, 

s.  c. 

On  the  29th  instant,  crossed  on  east  side  of  the  Saint  John’s  River, 
with  detachments  from  Companies  C and  H,  Second  Florida  Cav- 
alry, consisting  of  68  privates,  1 sergeant,  1 corporal,  and  2 lieuten- 
ants, and  marched  to  vicinity  of  Saint  Augustine.  Arriving  at  Fort 
Peaton  same  night,  he  posted  pickets  at  all  the  roads  leading  to  the 
city. 

At  3 o’clock  next  morning  marched  for  Hurlbut’s  place,  crossing 
above  the  bridge,  and  placed  his  men  from  300  to  400  yards  from  the 
bridge  on  the  road  leading  to  the  Fairbanks. 

About  9 the  enemy  made  their  appearance,  and  their  advance 
guard  had  passed  part  of  our  force,  when  they  discovered  our  horses 
placed  in  the  rear  under  cover  of  a swamp.  Captain  Dickison  de- 
manded a surrender,  to  which  they  replied  by  firing  into  Company 
H,  which  then  charged.  Company  C now  opened  fire  upon  the  main 
force  of  the  enemy,  who,  after  firing  one  or  two  rounds,  retreated. 

Our  men  mounted,  and  charged  most  gallantly,  capturing  24  pris- 
oners and  wounding  6 — 3 mortally,  left  on  the  field.  One  of  the 
wounded  was  a lieutenant,  who  was  paroled  on  the  field.  The  others 
could  not  be  found,  having  concealed  themselves  in  the  thick  scrub 

*Not  found, 

48  R R— VOL  XXV] II,  PT  I 


754  S.  C.  AND  GrA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Chap.  XL. 

of  the  hillocks.  Some  of  the  men  were  captured  inside  of  the  en- 
emy’s lines.  Captain  Dickison  also  secured  21  Springfield  and  En- 
field rifles,  21  cartridge-boxes  and  accouterments,  containing  30 
rounds  each,  and  1 sword. 

Lieutenant  [W.  H.]  McCardell,  Lieutenant  [Samuel  C.]  Reddick, 
and  men  are  reported  to  have  acted  most  gallantly.  The  strength  of 
the  enemy  in  the  engagement  (as  reported  by  the  wounded  lieuten- 
ant) was  60  men.  They  had  four  wagons  in  the  rear  for  hauling 
wood  which  they  had  cut,  but  they  were  so  far  behind  that  they 
made  good  their  escape. 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  District  of  East  Florida, 

No.  1.  \ Lake  City , January  7,  1864. 

I.  The  brigadier-general  commanding  has  again  the  pleasure  of 
calling  the  attention  of  the  troops  in  this  district  to  another  brill- 
iant exploit  of  Capt.  J.  J.  Dickison,  with  Lieutenants  McCardell  and 
Reddick,  and  detachment  of  Companies  C and  H,  of  the  Second  Reg- 
iment of  Florida  Cavalry.  This  little  force,  on  the  morning  of  the 
30th  ultimo,  made  an  attack  on  a superior  force  of  the  enemy,  and 
even  within  the  limits  of  their  own  lines  not  only  defeated  them,  but 
captured  24,  and  killed  and  wounded  6,  including  their  commanding 
officer,  and  secured  all  their  arms  and  accouterments,  and  without 
any  casualties  to  our  own  men. 

Were  this  the  first  of  these  achievements,  their  success  might  be 
attributed,  by  those  ignorant  of  these  gallant  men,  to  chance  or  cir- 
cumstances, but  time  and  again  have  these  men  been  the  subject  of 
praise  from  their  district  commander,  and  their  many  acts  of  hero- 
ism evince  how  easy  it  is  for  willing  and  resolute  men  to  annoy  and 
injure  our  enemy. 

II.  For  his  gallantry  on  the  occasion,  the  sword  captured  in  the 
fight  will  be  presented  to  Sergeant  [ J.  S.  ] Poer,  of  Captain  Dickison’ & 
company,  and  with  it  he  will  receive  the  thanks  of  the  whole  people 
of  the  district,  for  there  are  none,  however  craven,  who  do  not  love 
to  honor  brave  men. 

By  order  of  Brigadier-General  Finegan,  commanding : 

R.  B.  THOMAS, 

Colonel , and  Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


APPENDIX, 


Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Alfred  H.  Terry,  U.  S.  Army,  of  engagement 
near  GrimbalVs  Landing,  James  Island,  S.  C.,  July  16,  1863.* 

Headquarters  First  Division,  Tenth  Corps, 

James  Island,  S.  C.,  July  16,  1863. 

Major  : This  morning  at  about  4 o’clock,  the  enemy  made  an  at- 
tack upon  the  forces  under  my  command  and  upon  the  vessels  of  war 
in  the  Stono  River.  They  first  brought  down  into  the  woods  near 
Grimball’s  what  I suppose  to  have  been  two  field  batteries,  and 
opened  fire  upon  the  Pawnee.  Immediately  thereafter  they  advanced 
four  regiments  of  infantry,  accompanied  by  artillery,  upon  the  right 
of  my  line,  drove  in  the  outposts  and  supports,  and  commenced  a 
severe  fire  from  their  guns.  At  the  same  time,  a strong  body  of  in- 
fantry and  cavalry,  with  a battery,  drove  in  our  outposts  on  the 
left  beyond  the  causeway  leading  to  Grimball’s,  and  attempted  to 
debouch  in  front  of  my  left.  My  troops  were  speedily  under  arms, 
and  as  soon  as  the  pickets  were  in,  I opened  on  the  enemy  from  Rock- 
well’s battery  and  the  armed  transports  Mayflower  and  John  Adams. 

The  naval  vessels  also  opened  a most  effective  fire  upon  my  left. 
The  enemy,  unable  to  endure  the  concentric  fire  to  which  they  were 
exposed,  fell  back,  and  retreated.  I have  now  re-established  my  out- 
posts on  the  old  ground.  I learn  from  prisoners  now  in  my  hands  that 
the  attacking  force  on  my  right  consisted  of  the  Sixth,  Nineteenth, 
Fifty-fourth,  and  Fifty-sixth  Georgia  Regiments  ; that  on  my  left  of 
North  Carolina  and  perhaps  South  Carolina  troops.  I have  as  yet 
no  detailed  report  of  casualties,  but  I think  our  loss  is  about  50 
killed  and  wounded. 

I desire  to  express  my  obligations  to  Captain  Balch,  U.  S.  Navy, 
commanding  the  naval  forces  in  the  river,  for  the  very  great  assist- 
ance he  rendered  to  me,  and  to  report  to  the  commanding  general  the 
good  services  of  Captain  Rockwell  and  his  battery,  and  the  steadi- 
ness and  soldierly  conduct  of  the  Fifty-fourth  Massachusetts  Regi- 
ment, who  were  on  duty  at  the  outposts  on  the  right,  and  met  the 
brunt  of  the  attack. 

I am,  major,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

ALF.  H.  TERRY, 

Brigadier-  General,  Commanding  Division . 

Maj.  E.  W.  Smith, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Department  of  the  South. 


* See  Gil] more’s  reference  to  this  report,  p.  201 ; and  other  reports  of  the  engage- 
ment, p.  581. 


(755) 


ALTERNATE  DESIGNATIONS 


OF 

ORGANIZATIONS  MENTIONED  IN  THIS  VOLUME.* 


Abbott’s  (Joseph  C.)  Infantry.  See  New  Hampshire  Troops , 7 th  Regiment. 

Adams’  (Warren)  Heavy  Artillery.  S ee  South  Carolina  Troops , Confederate , 'id  Reg- 
iment, Battery  H. 

Alston’s  (J.  J.)  Heavy  Artillery.  See  South  Carolina  Troops , Confederate,  1st  Regi- 
ment, Battery  E. 

Anderson’s  (Edward  C.,  jr.)  Cavalry.  See  Georgia  Troops,  24 tli  Battalion. 
Anderson’s  (Robert  H.)  Cavalry.  See  Georgia  Troops,  5tli  Regiment. 

Appleby’s  (W.  P.)  Cavalry.  See  South  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  \th  Regiment. 
Ashcroft’s  (James  E.)  Artillery.  See  New  York  Troops,  3 d Regiment,  Battery  F. 
Askew’s  (T.  A. ) Artillery.  See  Chatham  Artillery,  post. 

Atwell’s  (Seager  S.)  Infantry.  See  Connecticut  Troops,  7th  Regiment. 

Ballenger’s  (M.  R.)  Infantry.  See  Georgia  Troops,  23 d Regiment. 

Barton’s  (William  B.)  Infantry.  See  New  York  Troops,  48tli  Regiment. 

Basinger’s  (W.  S.)  Infantry.  See  Georgia  Troops,  18ih  Battalion. 

Beaufort  Artillery.  See  South  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate. 

Beck’s  (Benjamin)  Infantry.  See  Georgia  Troops,  9th  Regiment. 

Berchmire’s  (Paul)  Artillery.  See  New  York  Troops,  3 d Regiment,  Battery  B. 
Blake’s  (F.  D.)  Heavy  Artillery.  See  South  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  1st  Regi- 
ment, Battery  A. 

Blake’s  (Julius  A.)  Infantry.  See  Charleston  Infantry,  post. 

Bray  ton’s  (Charles  R.)  Heavy  Artillery.  See  Rhode  Island  Troops,  3d  Regiment , 
Battery  C. 

Brown’s  (Jack)  Infantry.  See  Georgia  Troops,  59 th  Regiment. 

Buckner’s  (James  T.)  Infantry.  See  Georgia  Troops,  63 d Regiment. 

Burnet’s  (B.  S.)  Heavy  Artillery.  See  South  Carolina  Troops,  3d  Regiment,  Battei'y  F. 
Bush’s  (George  P.)  Heavy  Artillery.  See  South  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  2 d 
Regiment,  Battery  G. 

Bussey’s  (H.)  Infantry.  See  Georgia  Troops,  27 th  Regiment. 

Butler’s  (William)  Heavy  Artillery.  See  South  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  3d 
Regiment. 

Capers’  (Henry  D.)  Heavy  Artillery.  See  Georgia  Troops,  12 th  Battalion. 

Carson’s  (J.  M.)  Infantry.  See  South  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  25th  Regiment. 
Chandler’s  Cavalry.  See  South  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  5th  Regiment. 
Charleston  Infantry.  See  South  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate. 

Charleston  Siege  Train,  Heavy  Artillery.  See  South  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate, 
18 th  Battalion. 

Chatfield’s  (John  L.)  Infantry.  See  Connecticut  Troops,  6th  Regiment. 

Chatham  Artillery.  See  Georgia  Troops. 

Chesnut  Artillery.  See  Palmetto  Artillery,  Battei'y  F,  post. 

Chestatee  Artillery.  See  Georgia  Troops. 

Chichester’s  (Charles  E.)  Artillery.  See  Gist  Guard  Artillery,  post. 


* References,  unless  otherwise  indicated,  are  to  index  following. 


(757) 


758  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 


[Ciiai*.  XL. 


Chisolm’s  (R.)  Infantry.  See  South  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  27th  Regiment. 
Clinton’s  (James  B.)  Artillery.  See  Connecticut  Troops,  1st  Battery. 

Colhoun’s  (E.  B.)  Heavy  Artillery.  See  South  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  15 th 
Battalion,  Battery  A. 

Comstock’s  (Joseph  J.,  jr.)  Heavy  Artillery.  See  Rhode  Island  Troops,  3 d Regiment, 
Battery  M. 

Crawford’s  (W.  P.)  Infantry.  See  Georgia  Troops,  28th  Regiment. 

Crawley’s  (D.  L.)  Heavy  Artillery.  See  Georgia  Troops,  22 d Battalion,  Battery  A. 
Dandy’s  (George  B.)  Infantry.  See  Neiv  York  Troops,  169th  Regiment. 

Dantzler’s  (O.  M.)  Infantry.  See  South  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  20th  Regiment. 
Dargan’s  (A.  T.)  Infantry.  See  South  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  21st  Regiment. 
Davenport’s  (A.  C.)  Infantry.  See  Georgia  Troops,  1st  Regiment,  Volunteers. 

De  Pass’  (W.  L.)  Artillery.  See  Palmetto  Artillery,  Battery  G,post. 

Devane’s  (W.  S.)  Infantry.  See  North  Carolina  Troops,  61s(  Regiment. 

Dickison’s  (J.  J.)  Cavalry.  See  Florida  Troops,  2d  Regiment. 

Dickson’s  (B.  E.)  Heavy  Artillery.  See  South  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  2d  Regi- 
ment, Battery  E. 

Dugger’s  (J.  E.)  Infantry.  See  North  Carolina  Troops,  8ih  Regiment. 

Duke’s  (R.  T.  W.)  Infantry.  See  Virginia  Troops,  46th  Regiment. 

Dwight’s  (R.  Y.)  Heavy  Artillery.  See  South  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  3 d Regi- 
ment, Battery  D. 

Edwards’ (J.  C.)  Cavalry.  See  South  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  5th  Regiment. 
Elliott’s  (Stephen,  jr.)  Infantry.*  See  Charleston  Infantry,  ante. 

Emery’s  (Sabine)  Infantry.  See  Maine  Troops,  9th  Regiment. 

Enfans  Perdus  Infantry.  See  Neiv  York  Troops. 

Erwin’s  (W.  E.)  Heavy  Artillery.  See  South  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  ls(  Regi- 
ment, Battery  K. 

Eutaw  Infantry.  See  South  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  25 th  Regiment. 

Fleming’s  (David  G.)  Heavy  Artillery.  See  South  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  ls( 
Regiment,  Battery  B. 

Furman’s  (James  F.)  Artillery.  See  Palmetto  Artillery,  Battery  A, post. 

Gaillard’s  (Alfred  S.)  Heavy  Artillery.  See  South  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  1st 
Regiment,  Battery  K. 

Gaillard’s  (P.  C.)  Infantry.  See  Charleston  Infantry,  ante. 

Gantt’s  (F.  H.)  Infantry.  See  South  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  11th  Regiment. 
Gardner’s  (James)  Infantry.  See  Georgia  Troops,  27th  Regiment. 

Gary’s  (John  H.)  Heavy  Artillery.  See  South  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  15 th 
Battalion,  Battery  A. 

Georgia  Siege  Train,  Heavy  Artillery.  See  Georgia  Troops,  12th  Battalion. 
Gilchrist’s  (Robert  C.)  Artillery.  See  Gist  Guard  Artillery,  post. 

Gist  Guard  Artillery.  See  South  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate. 

Glover’s  (John  Y.)  Infantry.  See  South  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  25th  Regiment. 
Goode’s  (J.  Thomas)  Heavy  Artillery.  See  Virginia  Troops,  4th  Regiment. 
Gooding’s  (J.  J.)  Infantry.  See  South  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  11th  Regiment. 
Goodwyn’s  (P.  W.)  Cavalry.  See  South  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  6th  Regiment. 
Graham’s  (Robert  F.)  Infantry.  See  South  Carolina  Troops,  21  si  Regiment. 

Gray’s  (Sylvester  H.)  Infantry.  See  Connecticut  Ti'oops,  7th  Regiment. 

Green’s  (James  M.)  Infantry.  See  New  York  Troops,  48 th  Regiment. 

Greene’s  (Albert  E.)  Heavy  Artillery.  See  Rhode  Island  Troops,  3 d Regiment,  Bat- 
tery B. 

Gregg’s  (Charles  E.)  Heavy  Artillery.  See  South  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate , 18 th 
Battalion,  Battery  C.. 

Gregg’s  (Thomas  E.)  Heavy  Artillery.  See  South  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  18th 
Battalion,  Battery  C. 


Temporarily  commanding. 


Ciiap.  XL.]  ORGANIZATIONS  MENTIONED.  759 

Grimball’s  (W.  H.)  Heavy  Artillery.  See  South  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  Is/ 
Regiment,  Battery  E. 

Hallo  well’s  (Edward  N.)  Infantry.  See  Massachusetts  Troops,  54  tli  Regiment. 

Hammond’s  (S.  L.)  Infantry.  See  South  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  25 th  Regiment. 

Hanvey’s  (G.  M. ) Heavy  Artillery.  See  Georgia  Troops,  12 th  Battalion. 

Harding’s  (Henry)  Infantry.  See  North  Carolina  Troops,  61*/  Regiment. 

Harleston’s  (Francis  H.)  Heavy  Artillery.  See  South  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate, 
1*/  Regiment,  Battery  D. 

Harrison’s  (George  P.,  jr.)  Infantry.  See  Georgia  Troops,  32 d Regiment. 

Harrison’s  (H.  K.)  Cavalry.  See  Georgia  Troops , 21  st  Battalion. 

Hartley’s  (A.  J.)  Heavy  Artillery.  * See  South  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  18 th 
Battalion,  Battery  B. 

Haskell’s  (Charles  T.,  jr.)  Heavy  Artillery.  See  South  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate, 
'.id  Regiment,  Battery  D. 

Hayne’s  (T.  B.)  Heavy  Artillery.  See  South  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  15th  Bat- 
talion, Battery  C. 

Henry’s  (Guy  V.)  Artillery.  See  Union  Troops,  Regulars,  1st  Regiment,  Battery  B. 

Hewitt’s  (W.  E.)  Cavalry.  See  South  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  4th  Regiment. 

Higginson’s  (Thomas  W.)  Infantry.  See  South  Carolina  Troops,  Union,  1 si  Regiment. 

Holbrook’s  (Henry)  Heavy  Artillery.  See  Rhode  Island  Troops,  3 d Regiment,  Bat- 
tery M. 

Holtzclaw’s  (Thomas  A.)  Artillery.  See  Palmetto  Artillery,  Battery  H,post. 

Hopkins’  (J.  Ward)  Infantry.  See  South  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  27  th  Regiment. 

Horlbeck’s  ( J.  Moultrie)  Heavy  Artillery.  See  South  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate, 
3d  Regiment,  Battery  D,post. 

Horsey’s  (Samuel  G.)  Artillery.  See  Washington  Artillery,  post. 

Howell  s (Joshua  B.)  Infantry.  See  Pennsylvania  Troops,  85tli  Regiment. 

Huger’s  Cavalry.  See  South  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  5th  Regiment. 

Humbert’s  (J.  B.)  Heavy  Artillery.  See  South  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  2d  Regi- 
ment, Battery  I. 

Hunter’s  (W.  M.)  Heavy  Artillery.  See  South  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate , 2d  Regi- 
ment, Battery  A. 

Hutchins’  (Andrew  J.)  Infantry.  See  Georgia  Troops,  19 th  Regiment. 

Jackson’s  (John  H.)  Infantry.  See  New  Hampshire  Troops,  3d  Regiment. 

Jeffords’  (R.  J.)  Cavalry.  See  South  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  5th  Regiment. 

Jeter’s  (B.  A.)  Artillery.  See  Macbeth  Artillery,  post. 

Johnson’s  (J.  D.)  Artillery.  See  Palmetto  Artillery,  Battery  E,post. 

Kanapaux’s  (C.  E.)  Artillery.  See  Palmetto  Artillery,  Battery  D,post. 

Keitt’s  (Lawrence  M.)  Infantry.  See  South  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  20 th  Regi- 
ment. 

Kennady’s  (W.  H.)  Heavy  Artillery.  See  South  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  2d 
Regiment,  Battery  H. 

Kennedy’s  (Ely)  Cavalry.  See  Georgia  Troops,  21*/  Battalion. 

King’s  (McMillan)  Heavy  Artillery.  See  South  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  Is/ 
Regiment,  Battery  D. 

Kirk’s  (M.  J.)  Partisan  Rangers.  See  South  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate. 

Knight’s  (Charles  W.)  Infantry.  S ee  North  Carolina  Troops,  31*/  Regiment. 

Krauseneck’s  (Henry)  Infantry.  See  Pennsylvania  Troops,  74 th  Regiment. 

Le  Gardeur’s  (G.,  jr.)  Artillery.  See  Orleans  Guard  Artillery, post. 

Legare’s  (Thomas  K.)  Heavy  Artillery.  See  South  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate, 
2d  Regiment,  Battery  F. 

Lesesne’s  (Henry  R.)  Heavy  Artillery.  See  South  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  1st 
Regiment,  Battery  H. 

Littell’s  (John  S.)  Infantry.  See  Pennsylvania  Troops,  7 6th  Regiment. 


Temporarily  commanding. 


760  S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA. 


[Chap.  XL. 


Little’s  (F.  H.)  Infantry.  See  Georgia  Troops , 11  th  Regiment. 

Lloyd’s  (E.  W.)  Infantry.  See  South  Carolina  Troops,  Confedei'ate , 25 th  Regiment. 

Lofton’s  (John  T.)  Infantry.  See  Georgia  Troops,  6th  Regiment. 

Lowndes’  (Edward)  Heavy  Artillery.  See  South  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  1st 
Regiment , Battery  K. 

Lucas’  (J.  J.)  Heavy  Artillery.  See  South  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  15 th  Bat- 
talion. 

Macbeth  Artillery.  See  South  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate. 

Macbeth's  (J.  R.)  Heavy  Artillery.  See  South  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  1st 
Regiment,  Battery  E. 

Mclver’s  (George  W.)  Infantry.  See  South  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  21st  Regi- 
ment. 

McKethan’s  (Heetor)  Infantry.  See  North  Carolina,  Troops,  51st  Regiment. 

Manigault’s  (Edward)  Heavy  Artillery.  See  South  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate, 
18 th  Battalion. 

Marion  Artillery.  See  South  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate. 

Mathewes’  (John  R.)  Artillery.  See  South  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate. 

Mathews’  (W.  P.)  Infantry.  See  Georgia  Troops,  6th  Regiment. 

Meeker’s  (Lorenzo)  Infantry.  See  Connecticut  Troops,  6th  Regiment. 

Mickler’s  (John  H.)  Infantry.  See  South  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  llih  Regi- 
ment. 

Miles’  (F.  T.)  Infantry.  See  Charleston  Infantry,  ante. 

Millar’s  (Robert  S.)  Heavy  Artillery.  See  South  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  2d 
Regiment,  Battery  A. 

Minott’s  ( J.  C.)  Heavy  Artillery.  See  South  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  3 d Regi- 
ment, Battery  G. 

Mitchel’s  (John  C.)  Heavy  Artillery.  See  South  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  1st 
Regiment,  Battery  I. 

Mitchell’s  Cavalry.  See  South  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  6th  Regiment. 

Montgomery’s  (James)  Infantry.  See  South  Carolina  Troops,  Union,  2d  Regiment. 

Morrison’s  (J.  T.)  Infantry.  See  South  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  1 1th  Regiment. 

Murdoch’s  (Robert)  Artillery.  See  Marion  Artillery , ante. 

Myrick’s  (John  R.)  Artillery.  See  Union  Troops,  Regulars,  3d  Regiment,  Battery  E. 

Nelson’s  (P.  H.)  Infantry.  See  South  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  7th  Battalion. 

Ogier’s  (William  G.)  Heavy  Artillery.  See  South  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate , 15 th 
Battalion,  Battery  A. 

Olmstead’s  (Charles  H.)  Infantry.  See  Georgia  Troops,  1st  Regiment,  Volunteers. 

Orleans  Guard  Artillery.  See  Louisiana  Troops. 

Osborn’s  (Francis  A.)  Infantry.  See  Massachusetts  Troops,  24 th  Regiment. 

Page’s  (P.  R.)  Infantry.  See  Virginia  Troops,  26th  Regiment. 

Palmer’s  (Samuel  B.)  Artillery.  See  Chatham  Artillery,  ante. 

Palmetto  Artillery,  See  South  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate. 

Parker’s  (C.  W.)  Heavy  Artillery.  See  South  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  1st 
Regiment,  Battery  C. 

Parker’s  (Edward  L.)  Artillery.  See  Marion  Artillery,  ante. 

Peronneau’s  (William  H.“)  Heavy  Artillery.  See  South  Carolina  Troops,  Confeder- 
ate, 1st  Regiment,  Battery  G. 

Plaisted’s  (Harris  M. ) Infantry.  See  Maine  Troops,  11th  Regiment. 

Pond’s  (Francis  B.)  Infantry.  See  Ohio  Troops,  62 d Regiment. 

Pressley’s  (J.  G.)  Infantry.  See  South  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  26th  Regiment. 

Pringle’s  (J.  R.)  Heavy  Artillery.  See  South  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  1st  Regi- 
ment, Battery  EL. 

Pringle’s  (Robert)  Heavy  Artillery.  See  South  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  15 th 
Battalion,  Battery  B. 

Pruden’s  (W.  FI.)  Infantry.  See  Georgia  Troops,  32 d Regiment . 


Chap.  XL.] 


ORGANIZATIONS  MENTIONED. 


761 


Purviance’s  (Henry  A.)  Infantry.  See  Pennsylvania  Troops , 85 th  Regiment. 
Putnam’s  (Haldimand  S.)  Infantry.  See  Neiv  Hampshire  Troops,  7tli  Regiment. 
Radcliffe’s  (James  D.)  Infantry.  See  North  Carolina  Troops,  Gist  Regiment. 
Randlett’s  (James  F. ) Infantry.  See  New  Hampshire  Troops,  3 d Regiment. 

Rawls’  (Morgan)  Infantry.  See  Georgia  Troops,  54 th  Regiment. 

Raysor’s  (T.  E.)  Infantry.  See  South  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  11/ h Regiment. 
Rentfro’s  ( W.  H.)  Infantry.  See  Georgia  Troops,  27th  Regiment. 

Rhett’s  (Alfred)  Heavy  Artillery.  See  South  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  1st  Regi- 
ment. 

Rhodes’  (J.  J.)  Artillery.  See  Beaufort  Artillery,  ante. 

Richardson’s  (S.  M.)  Artillery.  See  Palmetto  Artillery,  Battery  K,  ante. 

Rion’s  (James  H.)  Infantry.  See  South  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  7th  Battalion. 
Rivers’  (C.  H.)  Heavy  Artillery.  See  South  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  3d  Regi- 
ment, Battery  K. 

Roberts’  (T.  B.)  Infantry.  See  South  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  1st  Regiment,  State. 
Rockwell’s  (Alfred  P.)  Artillery.  See  Connecticut  Troops,  1st  Battery. 

Rodman’s  (Daniel  C.)  Infantry.  • See  Connecticut  Troops,  7tli  Regiment. 

Rutledge’s  (B.  Huger)  Cavalry.  See  South  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  4 th  Regi- 
ment. 

Rutledge  Mounted  Rifles,  Artillery.  See  South  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate. 
Ryan’s  (William  H. ) Infantry.  See  Charleston  Infantry,  ante. 

Sellers’  (M.  H.)  Infantry.  See  South  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  25 th  Regiment. 
Sellmer’s  (Charles)  Infantry.  See  Maine  Troops,  11th  Regiment. 

Shaw’s  (H.  M.)  Infantry.  See  North  Carolina  Troops,  8th  Regiment. 

Shaw’s  (Richard  G.)  Heavy  Artillery.  See  Rhode  Island  Troops,  3 d Regiment,  Bat- 
tery D. 

Shaw’s  (Robert  G.)  Infantry.  See  Massachusetts  Troops,  54 th  Regiment. 

Skinner’s  (Benjamin  F.)  Infantry.  See  Connecticut  Troops,  7th  Regiment. 

Sleeper’s  (Gilman  E.)  Infantry.  See  New  Hampshire  Troops,  Ath  Regiment. 

Smith’s  (George  W.)  Infantry.  See  Georgia  Troops,  28 th  Regiment. 

Smith’s  (R.  Press,  jr.)  Heavy  Artillery.  See  South  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate, 
3 d Regiment,  Battery  E. 

Smith’s  (S.  Porcher)  Heavy  Artillery.  See  South  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  18th 
Battalion,  Battery  B. 

South  Carolina  Siege  Train,  Heavy  Artillery.  See  South  Carolina  Troops,  Con- 
federate, 18 th  Battalion. 

Stallings’  (G.  W.)  Heavy  Artillery.  See  South  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  2d 
Regiment,  Battery  G. 

Strahan’s  (Charles  G.)  Heavy  Artillery.  See  Rhode  Island  Troops,  3 d Regiment , 
Battery  1. 

Strawbridge’s  (DeWittC.)  Infantry.  See  Pennsylvania  Troops,  76th  Regiment. 
Tabb’s  (William  B.)  Infantry.  See  Virginia  Troops,  59 th  Regiment. 

Tatom’s  (W.  T.)  Heavy  Artillery.  See  South  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  3 d Regi- 
ment, Battery  I. 

Towers’  (John  R.)  Infantry.  See  Georgia  Troops,  8tli  Regiment. 

Trenholm’s  (W.  L.)  Artillery.  See  Rutledge  Mounted  Rifles,  Battery  A,  ante. 
Valentine’s  (Jacob)  Heavy  Artillery.  See  South  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  3 d 
Regiment,  Battery  G. 

Voris’  (Alvin  C.)  Infantry.  See  Ohio  Troops,  67 th  Regiment. 

Walter’s  (George  H.)  Artillery.  See  Washington  Artillery,  post. 

Wardlaw’s  (J.  L.)  Heavy  Artillery.  See  South  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate , 3d 
Regiment,  Battery  A. 

Washington  Artillery.  See  South  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate. 

Way’s  (Charlton  H.)  Infantry.  See  Georgia  Troops,  GAth  Regiment. 


762 


S.  C.  AND  GA.  COASTS,  AND  IN  MID.  AND  E.  FLA.  [Ciiai'.  XL. 

Whaley’s  (E.  M.)  Heavy  Artillery.  See  South  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  3d  Regi- 
ment, Battery  F. 

Wheaton’s  (John  F.)  Artillery.  See  Chatham  Artillery,  ante. 

Whilden’s  (W.  G.)  Artillery.  See  Washington  Artillery,  ante. 

White’s  (E.  B.)  Artillery.  See  Palmetto  Artillery,  ante. 

White’s  (Thomas  G.)  Artillery.  See  Palmetto  Artillery,  Battery  F,  ante. 

White’s  (W.  W.)  Infantry.  See  Georgia  Troops,  7th  Regiment. 

Whitson’s  (J:  M.)  Infantry.  See  North  Carolina  Troops,  8th  Regiment. 

Wilkins’  (M.  L.)  Artillery.  See  Marion  Artillery,  ante. 

Williams’  (J.  H.)  Infantry.  See  South  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  5th  Regiment, 
State. 

Witherspoon’s  (B.  J.)  Heavy  Artillery.  See  South  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  3 d 
Regiment,  Battery  C. 

Woodbery’s  (W.  D.)  Infantry.  See  South  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  ^Ast  Regiment. 
Yellowley’s  (E.  C.)  Infantry.  See  North  Carolina  Troops,  8th  Regiment. 


INDEX 


Brigades,  Divisions,  Corps,  Armies,  and  improvised  organizations  are  “ Mentioned  ” under  name  of  command- 
ing officer  ; State  and  other  organizations  under  their  official  designation.  (See  Alternate  Designations, 
pp.  757-762.) 


Page. 

Abbott,  Joseph  C. 

Mentioned - 15,347 

Report  of  operations  on  Morris  Island,  S.  C.,  July  10-Sept.  7,  1863 363 

Abercrombie,  T.  J.  Mentioned 183,646 

A.  B.  Noyes,  Barge.  Mentioned 735 

Abraham,  Clark.  Mentioned 50 

Adair,  H.  C.  Mentioned 644 

Adams,  John,  Steamer.  Mentioned 194,195,755 

Adams,  La  Rue  P.  Mentioned 45 

Adams,  M.  Mentioned 484,490 

Adams,  Matthew.  Mentioned 270,290,292,301 

Adams,  Warren. 

Mentioned 418, 420, 430, 535, 696 

Reports  of 

Fort  Sumter,  S.  C.  Boat  demonstration  upon,  Nov.  19-20, 1863 744 

Morris  Island,  S.  C.  Operations  on,  July  10-Sept.  7,  1863 535 

Adela,  Steamer.  Mentioned 735 

Adger,  J.  E.  Mentioned 485 

Adjutant  apd  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A. 

Correspondence  with 

Beauregard,  G.  T 63, 68, 79-83, 109, 115, 116, 680 

Carey,  James 680 

Davis,  Jefferson 115 

War  Department,  C.  S 109, 110 

Orders,  General,  series  1863:  Nos.  93,  131,  579. 

Orders,  General,  series  1864  : No.  64,  580. 

Aiken,  H.  K.  Report  of  engagement  at  Willstown  Bluff,  PonPon  River,  S.  C., 

July  10,  1863  196 

Albert,  John  C.  Mentioned 211 

Alexander,  F.  Mentioned 620 

Alford,  Samuel  M.  Mentioned # 366 

Allen,  David  A.  Mentioned 194 

Alston,  J.  J.  Mentioned f 368, 409, 410, 462,  467, 470-473, 494, 497, 577 

Altmon,  W.  J.  Mentioned ! 476 

Anderson,  E.  C.  Mentioned 376 

Anderson,  Edward  C.,  jr. 

Mentioned 193 

Report  of  expedition  to  Ossabaw  Island,  Ga.,  July  3,  1863  193 

Anderson,  George.  Mentioned 747 

Anderson,  George  T.  Mentioned 128,129,142,403 

Anderson,  J.  W.  Mentioned 630 


(763) 


764 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Anderson,  Robert.  Mentioned 4,403,725,727 

Anderson,  Robert  H. 

Correspondence  with  Thomas  L.  Clingman 543 

Mentioned 128 

Anderson,  S.  W.  Mentioned 631 

Andrews,  William  S.  Mentioned 48 

Anyan,  Lionel.  Mentioned 338 

Appleby,  W.  P.  Mentioned 729 

Appleton,  John  W.  M.  Mentioned 363 

Arms,  Ammunition,  etc.  Supplies  of.  See  Munitions  of  War. 

Armstrong,  William.  Mentioned 534 

Army  Headquarters.  Correspondence  with  Quincy  A.  Gillmore 12,20,21 

Ashcroft,  James  E.  Mentioned 216 

Ashe,  S.  A.  Mentioned 411, 465 

Askew,  T.  A.  Mentioned 448, 449, 451, 454, 465, 500 

Atlanta  (Fingal),  C.  S.  S.  Capture  of,  in  Warsaw  Sound,  Ga.,  June  17,  1863. 
Communications  from 

DuPont,  Samuel  F 190 

Halpine,  Charles  G... 191 

Navy  Department,  U.  S 191 

Mentioned 189-192 

Reports  of 

Halpine,  Charles  G 189 

Mercer,  Hugh  W 191 

Atwell,  Seager  S.  Mentioned 22,216 

Autry,  Robert.  Mentioned 160,638 

Avinger,  D.  J.  Mentioned 644 

Axson,  J.  W.  Mentioned 471 

Bacon,  George.  Mentioned 229 

Bailey,  James  E.  Mentioned 14,  343, 350 

Bailey,  Theodorus.  Mentioned 735 

Baker, . Mentioned * 506 

Baker,  Henry  W.  Mentioned 211 

Baker,  Scolly  D.  Mentioned 607 

Balch,  George  B. 

Correspondence  with  Albert  J.  Myer 583 

Mentioned * 7, 13, 50, 581-583, 747-749, 755 

Baldwin,  James  S. 

Correspondence  with  Thomas  B.  Brooks 297 

Mentioned 235, 239, 270, 272, 289, 292, 294, 297 

Baldwin,  William  H.  Mentioned 238,239 

B alien ger,  M.  R.  Mentioned 448,449,500 

Ballinger,  Elijah.  Mentioned 185,685 

Banks,  C.  Mentioned 640 

Banks,  Nathaniel  P.  Mentioned 6,95 

Bannon,  Patsey.  Mentioned 468 

Banskett,  John.  Mentioned  199 

Barnett.  C.  P.  Mentioned 611 

Barnum, . Mentioned 123 

Barnwell,  Bowie  W.  Mentioned 159 

Barnwell,  G.  Henry.  Mentioned 195 

Barnwell,  R.  H.  Mentioned 374, 418, 420 

Barnwell,  S.  E.  Mentioned 628 


INDEX. 


7G5 

Page. 


Barnwell’s  Island,  S.  C.  Expedition  to,  July  30,  1863.  Report  of  William 

S.  Walker 592 

Barringer,  William.  Mentioned 610 

Barton,  B.  H.  Mentioned 692,693 

Barton,  William  B.  Mentioned 15,  41, 42, 190,  344, 346, 348,  355 

Basinger,  William  S. 

Mentioned 169, 414, 420, 467, 494-497 

Reports  of 

Fort  Sumter,  S.  C.  Boat  demonstration  upon,  Nov.  19-20, 1863  743 

Sullivan’s  Island  batteries.  Engagement  between  U.  S.  Monitors  and, 

Nov.  16,  1863 740 

Bateman,  J.  M.  Mentioned - 179, 642, 646 

Bates,  Aaron.  Mentioned 635 

Battery  Cheves,  James  Island,  S.  C.  Explosion  at,  Sept.  15, 1863.  Report 

of  W.  W.  Billopp 730 

See  also  Journal  of  Operations,  p.  128. 

Battery  Gregg,  Morris  Island,  S.  C. 

Boat  expeditions  against,  Sept.  4-6,  1863.  See  Morris  Island,  S.  C.  Opera- 
tions on,  July  10 -Sept.  7,  1863.  Reports  of 


Lesesne,  Henry  R.  Manigault,  Edward.  Ripley,  Roswell  S. 

See  also  general  report  of  Beauregard,  p.  87. 

Evacuation  of,  by  tbe  Confederates,  and  occupation  of,  by  the  Union  forces, 
Sept.  6-7, 1863.  See  Morris  Island,  S.  C.  Operations  on,  July  10- 
Sept.  7,  1863.  Reports  of 

Brooks,  Thomas  B.  Keitt,  Lawrence  M.  Ripley,  Roswell  S. 

Gillmore,  Quincy  A.  Pinckney,  C.  C.  Turner,  John  W. 

Huguenin,  Thomas  A. 

See  also  general  reports  of  Gillmore,  p.  27 ; Town,  p.  49;  Beauregard,  p.  90 
et  seq . 

Battery  Island,  S.  C.  Affair  on,  Sept.  7,  1863.  Report  of  William  B.  Talia- 
ferro   

Battery  Wagner,  Morris  Island,  S.  C. 

Evacuation  of,  by  the  Confederates,  and  occupation  of,  by  the  Union  forces, 
Sept.  6-7,  1863.  See  Morris  Island,  S.  C.  Operations  on,  July 
10 -Sept.  7,  1863.  Reports  of 

Brooks,  Thomas  B.  Keitt,  Lawrence  M.  Ripley,  Roswell  S. 

Gillmore,  Quincy  A.  Pinckney,  C.  C.  Turner.  John  W. 

Huguenin,  Thomas  A. 


See  also  general  reports  of  Gillmore,  p.  27 ; Town , p.  49 ; Beauregard,  p.  90 
et  seq. 

First  assault  on,  July  11,  1863.  See  Morris  Island , S.  C.  Operations  on, 
July  10 -Sept.  7,  1863.  Reports  of 
Abbott,  Joseph  C.  Hatfield,  Townsend  L.  Seymour,  Truman. 

Graham,  Robert  F.  Jackson,  Richard  H.  Strong,  George  C. 

Gray,  Sylvester  H.  Ripley,  Roswell  S. 


See  also  general  reports  of  Gillmore,  p.  12  ; Town,  p.  46  ; Beauregard,  p.  73. 
Second  assault  on,  July  18,  1863.  See  Morris  Island,  S.  C.  Operations  on, 
July  10 -Sept.  7,  1863.  Reports  of 


Abbott,  Joseph  C. 
Adams,  Warren. 
Blake,  Julius  A. 
Crawley,  D.  L. 

De  Pass,  W.  L. 
Gaillard,  P.  C. 


Gillmore,  Quincy  A. 
Hallowell,  Edward  N. 
Hatfield,  Townsend  L. 
Knight,  Charles  W. 
McKethan,  Hector. 


Meeker,  Lorenzo. 
Rhett,  Alfred. 

Ripley,  Roswell  S. 
Seymour,  Truman. 
Taliaferro,  William  B. 


See  also  general  reports  of  Gillmore,  p.  15 ; Town,  p.  47 ; Beauregard,  p.  76, 


712 


766 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Battery  Wagner,  Morris  Island,  S.  C.— Continued. 

Siege  of,  July  18-Sept.  7,  1863.  See  Morris  Island , S.  C.  Operations  on, 

July  10 -Sept.  7,  1863.  Reports  of 

Brooks,  Thomas  B.  Gregorie,  J.  W.  Pringle,  Eobert. 

Brvan,  Henry.  Hagood,  Johnson.  Kipley,  Eoswell  S. 

Champneys,  J.  T.  Harrison,  George  P.,  jr.  Seymour,  Truman. 

Chichester,  C.  E.  Huguenin,  Thomas  A.  Taliaferro,  William  B. 

Colquitt,  Alfred  H.  Keitt,  Lawrence  M.  Warley,  Frederick  F. 

Gillmore,  Quincy  A. 

See  also  general  reports  of  Gillmore,  p.  5,  et  seq.  ; Town,  p.  43,  et  seq. ; Beau- 
regard, p.  75,  et  seq. 

Sortie  from,  July  14-15,  1863.  See  Morris  Island,  S.  C.  Operations  on, 

July  10 -Sept.  7,  1863.  Reports  of 

Kion,  James  H.  Eipley,  Eoswell  S.  Taliaferro,  William  B. 

Baxter,  James.  Mentioned 238,239.275 

Baxter,  Janies  H.  Mentioned 211 

Beadling,  William.  Mentioned 211 

Bearden,  R.  H.  Mentioned 631 

Beauregard,  A.  N.  Toutant.  Mentioned 587 

For  correspondence  as  A.  D.  C.,  see  G.  T.  Beauregard. 

Beauregard,  G.  T. 

Correspondence  with 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A t 63, 

68,  79-83, 109, 115, 116, 680 

Brown,  Isaac  N 161 

Carlin,  James 681 

Davis,  Jefferson 68,69 

Elliott,  Stephen,  jr 123, 124, 178, 728 

Finegan,  Joseph 736 

Gilmer,  Jeremy  F 656 

Guerin,  H.  C 163 

Harris,  D.  B 89, 103, 380, 445, 537, 553, 556, 651, 656, 666, 667 

Jenkins,  Micah 82 

Johnson,  Thomas  H 117 

Jordan,  Thomas 502,593 

Keitt,  Lawrence  M 89, 108, 121 

Lee,  Hutson 645 

Manigault,  Edward 129 

Mercer,  Hugh  W 193 

Otey,  John  M -• 685 

Rhett,  Alfred 618,645,655,687 

Rhett,  T.  S 137 

Ripley,  Roswell  S 71, 

94,  96,  106,  108,  109,  172,  378-380, 423, 429,  432, 434,  435, 455, 460,462, 
463, 466, 480, 497, 498, 501, 502, 553, 556, 564, 573, 574, 625, 676,  703, 723 

Roman,  Alfred 695 

Sellers,  M.  H 595 

Simonton,  Charles  H 73, 143 

Taliaferro,  William  B - 124,379,381,423 

Trapier,  J.  H 737 

Tucker,  John  R 382,732 

Walker,  William  S 111,112,728 

War  Department,  C.  S 59, 66, 67, 94, 375, 378, 733, 734 

Warley,  A.  F 595 


INDEX. 


767 

Pago. 


Beauregard,  G.  T. — Continued. 

Extract  from  journal  of  operations  in  Charleston  Harbor,  S.  C.,  Sept.  1- 

Dec.  31,  1863 116 

Mentioned 12, 21, 23, 55, 60-62, 96, 100, 102, 108-111, 114-116, 121, 

123, 127, 134, 137, 145, 148, 153, 155, 156,  164, 166, 171, 172, 175, 177, 181, 188, 
191,  367, 370,  377,  379, 380, 382,  384,  387,  393-395,  400,  401,  410,  412, 428,  433, 
440, 441,  446, 455, 459, 470,  491, 501, 553, 555, 559, 574, 581,  593, 595, 599, 615, 
618, 631, 636, 651, 653-656,  666, 667, 682, 687, 703,  723, 728, 730, 736, 737, 747 
Reports  of 

Charleston  Harbor,  S.  C. 

Attempt  to  blow  up  the  U.  S.  S.  New  Ironsides  off,  Oct.  5, 1863  731 

Engagement  in,  Sept.  7-8, 1863  712 

Fort  Sumter,  S.  C.  Boat  attack  on,  Sept.  8-9, 1863 724 

South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida,  Department  of.  Operations  in, 

June  13-Dec.  30, 1863 55, 57, 60, 63, 92 

Stono  River,  S.  C.  Attack  on  the  U.  S.  S Marblehead  in,  Dec.  25, 1863..  749 

Resolution  of  thanks  of  C.  S.  Congress  to,  for  defense  of  Charleston,  S.  C ..  116 

Bechtel,  Robert.  Mentioned 50,341 

Beck,  B.  Mentioned - 129 

Becker,  August.  Mentioned 270 

Bee,  John  S.  Mentioned.. 368,370,406,408,527,528 

Beiter,  Carl.  Mentioned 303 

Bell,  E.B.  Mentioned . 138 

Bell,  Louis.  Mentioned 275 

Bell,  W.  R.  Mentioned 526 

Bender,  Oscar  N.  Mentioned 50,341 

Benharn,  Henry  W.  Mentioned - 5 

Bennett,  Alfred  N.  Mentioned 211 

Bennett,  John.  Mentioned 611 

Bennett,  Martin  C.  Mentioned 281 

Benton,  John.  Mentioned 635 

Benton,  Mary,  Steamer.  Mentioned 46,226 

Benton,  N.  P.  Mentioned 638 

Berchmire,  Paul.  Mentioned 216 

Berry,  J.  W.  R.  Mentioned 729 

Berry,  P.  Mentioned 277 

Bigby,  James  A.  Mentioned ( 90,692 

Billings,  K.  G.  Mentioned 744 

Billopp,  W.  W. 

Mentioned 404, 567 

Report  of  explosion  at  Battery  Cheves,  James  Island,  S.  C.,  Sept.  15, 1863..  730 

Blake,  F.  D.  Mentioned 591 

Blake,  Julius  A. 

Mentioned 400, 404, 499, 544, 666, 724-726 

Report  of  operations  on  Morris  Island,  S.  C.,  July  10-Sept.  7, 1863 544 

Blakeny, . Mentioned 735 

Blanding,  Ormsby. 

Correspondence  with  Roswell  S.  Ripley 454 

Mentioned 137, 147, 391, 404, 454, 608, 629, 651, 652 

Bluett,  A.  J.  Mentioned 171,641 

Blum,  Robert  A.  Mentioned 400, 408, 409, 487, 490 

Boardman,  Mary  A.,  Steamer.  Mentioned 581 

Bonaparte,  Napoleon.  Mentioned 230 

Bond,  John  H.  Mentioned  ...It 412,459,465,487 


768 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Bonham,  M.  L.  Mentioned 60, 62, 74, 156, 167, 430, 593, 725 

Boston,  Steamer.  Mentioned 583 

Bowen,  Robert  J.  Mentioned 623,713,715 

Boykin,  Manly.  Mentioned 466 

Boylston,  S.  Cordes.  Mentioned 395,615,616,622 

Braddock,  Ellerbee.  Mentioned 474 

Bragg,  Braxton.  Mentioned 134, 142 

Bragg,  Henry  M.  Mentioned 277 

Brayton,  Charles  R.  Mentioned 219,353 

Brennan,  J.  Mentioned 644 

Brigham,  Charles  P.  Mentioned 50 

Broadhead,  Edgar.  Mentioned 724 

Brock,  A.  J.  Mentioned 690,692 

Brodie,  Paul. 

Mentioned 41, 44, 46, 47, 50, 583 

Report  of  engagement  near  Grimball’s  Lauding,  James  Island,  S.  C.,  July 

16, 1863  581 

Brooke,  Fort.  See  Fort  Brooke,  Fla. 

Brooks,  B.  F.  Mentioned 644 

Brooks,  John  G.  Mentioned 291 

Brooks,  Thomas  B. 

Correspondence  with 

Baldwin,  James  S 297 

Comstock,  Joseph  J.,jr 289 

Farrand,  Hiram 330 

Gillmore,  Quincy  A 282, 284, 291, 297, 323, 326 

Graef,  Frederick  E 294 

McGuire,  Patrick 301 

Michie,  Peter  S 299 

Reese,  Chauncey  B 298 

Suess,  JohuL 297,299 

Talcott,  Edward  N.  Kirk 285 

Walker,  Joseph 299-301,329 

Journal  of  engineer  operations  on  Morris  Island,  S.  C. , J uly  12-Sept.  7, 1863.  271 

Mentioned 14, 17, 18, 20, 228, 236, 291 , 339, 340, 345 

Notes  to  journal  of  engineer  operations 303-335 

Report  of  operations  on  Morris  Islaud,  S.  C.,  July  10-Sept.  7, 1863 264,265 

Brown  [?],  Colonel.  Mentioned 194 

Brown,  Andrew  P.  Mentioned 630,668 

Brown,  Cyrus.  Mentioned 212 

Brown,  David.  Mentioned 123 

Brown,  F.  B.  Mentioned 485,539,540 

Brown,  Isaac  N. 

Correspondence  with  G.  T.  Beauregard 161 

Mentioned 161 

Brown,  Jack.  Mentioned * - 129 

Brown,  J.  Welsman.  Mentioned 383, 385, 391, 396, 410-412, 463, 518, 555 

Brown,  M.  A.  Mentioned 637 

Brown,  Nelly,  Schooner.  Mentioned 131 

Brown,  Thomas  R.  Mentioned 185, 685 

Brown,  Warren  E.  F.  Mentioned 211 

Brown,  William.  Mentioned 620 

Brown,  W.  P.  Mentioned 640 

Brownell,  George  S.  Mentioned  211 


INDEX. 


769 


Page. 

Brux,  J.  A.  Mentioned  . .? 560 

Bruyn,  Wilson.  Mentioned 41,42,44,47,50,52 

Bryan,  E.  K.  Mentioned 554 

Bryan,  Henry. 

Correspondence  with  Charles  S.  Hill 411 

Mentioned 391, 459,  461,  462, 465, 472, 485,  487, 489, 537 

Reports  of 

Charleston,  S.  C.  Bombardment  of,  Aug.  21-Dec.  31,  1863 682 

Morris  Island,  S.  C.  Operations  on,  July  10-Sept.  7,  1863  409,412 

Eor  correspondence  as  A.  A.  G.,  see  Lawrence  M.  Keilt. 


Bryant,  J.  E.  Mentioned 745,746 

Bryant,  Perley  B.  Mentioned 211 

Bryson,  A.  Mentioned 739 

Buckhalter,  J.  H.  Mentioned 112,729 

Buckheister,  W.  C.  Mentioned 171,641 

Buckland,  Latham  L.  Mentioned 270 

Buckman,  J.  B.  Mentioned 644 

Buckner,  James  T.  Mentioned 371, 374,  418,  420, 428, 430 

Buerkle,  Frederick.  Mentioned 291 

Buhn,  B.  Mentioned 644 

Bull,  William.  Mentioned 587 

Bunce,  Francis  W.  Mentioned 11,  42, 344, 345,  354,  355, 724 

Burdick,  Theodore.  Mentioned 211,359 

Burke,  Thomas  A.  Mentioned 420 

Burley,  N.  A.  Mentioned 168, 639 

Burn,  O.  J.  Mentioned 631 

Burnet,  B.  S. 

Mentioned 717, 719 

Report  of  engagement  in  Charleston  Harbor,  S.  C.,  Sept.  7-8,  1863 720 

Burrows,  F.  M.  Mentioned 631 

Burrows,  S.  L.  Mentioned 631 

Bush,  George  P.  Mentioned 497 

Bussey,  H.  Mentioned 618 

Butler,  Lewis.  Mentioned 348 

Butler,  William. 

Correspondence  with  Roswell  S.  Ripley 679, 721,  741, 742 

Mentioned 383, 


388,  394,  404,  405,  450,  671,  689,  694,  696,  704,  707,  708,  710,  711,  721,  739 


Reports  of 

Charleston  Harbor,  S.  C.  Engagement  in,  Sept.  7-8,  1863 716 

Fort  Sumter,  S.  C.  Bombardment  of,  Aug.  17-Dec.  31,  1863 671,672 

Sumter,  Confederate  transport.  Sinking  of,  by  batteries  on  Sullivan’s 

Island,  S.  C.,  Aug.  31,  1863  704,705 

Butler,  W.  T.  Mentioned 635 

Butt,  R.  F.  Mentioned 228,236 

Butt,  Richard.  Mentioned 226,238 

Butt,  W.  G.  L.  Mentioned 183,646 

Butterfield, . Mentioned 138, 626, 627 

Cain,  David.  Mentioned 547 

Calder,  James.  Mentioned 631 

Calhoun,  D.  G.  Mentioned 718,719 

Calhoun,  J.  C.  Mentioned 644 

Callahan,  T.  Mentioned ,rrt ,,  * 644 

49  R R—VQL  XXVIII,  PT  I 


770 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Campbell,  Edward.  Mentioned tt 353 

Campbell,  Isaac.  Mentioned 495 

Campbell,  W.  H.  Mentioned 175, 177, 182 

Campbell,  W.  J.  Mentioned 550 

Cannon,  Walker.  Mentioned 732-734 

Capers,  H.  D.  Mentioned 414,420 

Carey,  James.  Correspondence  with  Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office, 

C.  S.  A 680 

Carlin,  James. 

Correspondence  with  G.  T.  Beauregard 681 

Mentioned 404 

Report  of  attempt  to  destroy  U.  S.  S.  New  Ironsides,  off  Charleston  Harbor, 

S.  C.,  Aug.  20-21,  1863 680 

Carney,  J.  M.  Mentioned 644 

Carney,  William  H.  Mentioned 362 

Carr,  John  C.  Mentioned 724 

Carrique,  Thomas  H.  Mentioned 42, 44, 45, 47, 49, 50 

Carson,  J.  M.  Mentioned 136 

Carter,  Flournoy.  Mentioned 719 

Carter,  Henry  A.  Mentioned 497 

Cass,  Henry  W.  Mentioned 745 

Cassiday,  J.  H.  Mentioned 495 

Castlebury,  H.  C.  Mentioned  - 631 

Casualties  in  Action.  See  Confederate  Troops  and  Union  Troops. 

Cate,  Virgil  H.  Mentioned 211 

Cathcart,  W.  R.  Mentioned 643 

Chadwick,  Peter  R.  Mentioned 348 

Chamberlain,  Valentine  B.  Mentioned 359 

Chambers,  James.  Mentioned 155,634 

Chambliss,  N.  R.  Mentioned 189 

Champneys,  J.  T. 

Mentioned 444, 501, 580, 606, 621, 635, 667, 726, 727 

Reports  of 

Fort  Sumter,  S.  C.  Bombardment  of,  Aug.  17-Dec.  31,  1863  666, 668, 669 

Morris  Island,  S.  C.  Operations  on,  July  10-Sept.  7,  1863 503 

Chandler,  Sergeant.  Mentioned 492 

Chandler,  David  M.  Mentioned ..  292 

Chandler,  W.  B.  Mentioned 1 644 

Charles,  Patrick.  Mentioned 610 

Charleston,  C.  S.  S.  Mentioned 401,485 

Charleston,  S.  C. 

Bombardment  of,  Aug.  21-Dec.  31,  1863. 

Communication  from  G.  T.  Beauregard 687 

Report  of  number  of  shots  fired  from  Morris  Island,  S.  C 686 

Reports  of 

Bryan,  Henry 682 

Rhett,  Alfred 684, 686 

See  also  general  report  of  Gillmore,  p.  23.  Also  Morris  Island,  S.  C.  Op- 
erations on,  July  10 -Sept.  7,  1863.  Reports  of 
Olmstead,  Charles  H.  Ripley,  Roswell  S.  Turner,  John'W. 

Defenses  of.  See  general  report  of  Beauregard , p.  112. 

Resolution  of  thanks  of  C.  S.  Congress  to  G.  T.  Beauregard  and  command 
for  defense  of 


\ 


116 


INDEX 


771 


Page. 

Charleston  Harbor,  S.  C. 

Engagement  in,  Sept.  7-8,  1863. 

Casualties.  Returns  of . Confederate  Troops 713 

Reports  of 

Beauregard,  G.  T 712 

Burnet,  B.  S 720 

Butler,  William 716,721 

De  Treville,  Robert 717,718 

Dwight,  R.  Y 720 

Elliott,  Stephen,  jr 713-715 

Huguenin,  Thomas  A • 721 

Mitchel,  John  C 722 

Rivers,  C.  H 722 

See  also  Morris  Island , S.  C.  Operations  in,  July  10-$ep£  7, 1863.  Reports  of 
Ripley , p.  402 ; Manigault.  p.  563.  Also  Journal  of  Operations , pp. 

122, 123.  Also  New  Ironsides,  U.  S.  S.  Also  Fort  Sumter. 

Chatfield,  John  L.  Mentioned  .......... — — - 15,16,211,344,346,348,354,356,35/ 

Chesterfield,  Steamer. 

Attack  on,  at  Cumming’s  Point,  S.  C.,  Aug.  2,  1863.  See  Morris  Island , 

S.  C.  Operations  on,  July  10 -Sept.  7,  1863.  Reports  of  Ripley,  p. 

381 ; Eeitt,  p.  456. 

Mentioned 369, 381, 384, 456, 476, 572, 576, 619, 697, 700, 708 

Cheves,  Battery.  See  Battery  Cheves. 

Cheves,  Langdon.  Mentioned 58,370 

Chichester,  C.  E. 

Mentioned — 370,374,375,391,414,420, 

459, 465,  467, 468,  470, 471, 475, 477, 478, 493, 498, 516, 518, 527, 530, 531, 580 
Reports  of  operations  on  Morris  Island,  S.  C.,  July  10-Sept.  7,  1863..  511,515,517 

Chicora,  C.  S.  S.  Mentioned 123,  401-403, 405, 551, 623, 700, 724, 726 

Chisolm,  R.  Mentioned 180,188,646,647 

Cill,  P.  Mentioned  644 

Clark,  Elisha.  Mentioned 181 

Clark,  Samuel.  Mentioned - 276,338 

Clarkson,  William.  Mentioned 545 

Clayton,  D.  H.  Mentioned - 644 

Clinch,  D.  L.  Mentioned 192 

Clingman,  Thomas  L. 

Correspondence  with  Robert  H.  Anderson 543 

Mentioned 60, 

61, 66, 74, 110, 113, 115, 129, 172, 369, 371, 377, 384, 404, 447, 454, 513, 716, 722 
Reports  of 

Fort  Sumter,  S.  C.  Bombardment  of,  Aug.  17-Dec.  31,  1863  670,671 

Sumter,  Confederate  transport.  Sinking  of,  by  batteries  on  Sullivan’s 

Island,  S.  C.,  Aug.  31,  1863  704 

Clinton,  A.  J.  Mentioned 161,638 

Clinton,  James  B.  Mentioned 194 

Coan,  William  B.  Mentioned 348 

Cobb,  Howell.  Mentioned 81 

Coe,  Richard  W.  Mentioned 238, 270 

Colcock,  C.  J.  Mentioned 730 

Coleman,  J.  A.  F.  Mentioned 168,640 

Colhoun,  E.  B.  Mentioned  470,473,547,685 

Colhoun,  E.  R.  Mentioned 712 

Collins,  John.  Mentioned 495 


772 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Colored  Troops.  Military  fitness  of.  Communications  from 

Brooks,  Thomas  B 328 

Farrand,  Hiram 330 

Walker,  Joseph 329 

Colquitt,  Alfred  H. 

Correspondence  with  James  D.  Morgan 449 

Mentioned 74, 78, 81, 82, 91, 100, 101, 118, 145, 

371, 372, 374, 377, 39(3-400, 404, 426, 479,  501, 511-513, 529,  586, 588, 589, 617 

Reports  of 

Grimball’s  Landing,  James  Island,  S.  C.  Engagement  near,  July  16, 

1863  587 


Morris  Island,  S.  C.  Operations  on,  July  10-Sept.  7, 1863 445-448, 450-453 


Colson,  A.  C.  Mentioned 728 

Colwell,  A.  W.  Mentioned 22,213 

Commodore  McDonough,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 229 

Comstock,  Joseph  J.,  jr. 

Correspondence  with  Thomas  B.  Brooks 289 

Mentioned . 21,213,289,346 

Confederate  Troops. 

Casualties.  Returns  of. 

Charleston  Harbor,  S.  C.  Engagement  in,  Sept.  7-8, 1863 713 

Fort  Sumter,  S.  C.  Bombardment  of,  Aug.  17-Dec.  31, 1863 650 

Grimball’s  Landing,  James  Island,  S.  C.  Engagement  near,  July  16, 

1863  588 

Morris  Island,  S.  C.  Operations  on,  July  10-Sept.  7, 1863 406-409 

Mentioned.  For  Volunteers,  see  respective  States. 

Organization,  strength,  etc. 

Morris  Island,  S.  C 434, 

439, 448,  449, 451-453, 467, 480, 492,  494-497, 499, 500, 520 

South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida,  Department  of 110,  111 

Congress,  C.  S. 

Act  of,  granting  medals  and  badges 579 

Resolution  of  thanks  to  G.  T.  Beauregard  and  his  command  for  their  de- 


fense of  Charleston,  S.  C 116 

Connecticut  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Artillery,  Light — Batteries : 1st,  194, 585, 755. 

Infantry — Regiments : 6th,  15,  210,340,344,  346,  347,  354,  356-359,  364,  392; 

7th,  15,  210,  214-216,  346,  354-361,  392,  607 ; 10th,  192,  210,  327,  362,  392, 

585,  607  ; 17th,  210. 

Connelly,  James.  Mentioned 613 

Conner,  Corporal.  Mentioned - 525 

Conneway,  Corporal.  Mentioned 420 

Conroy,  Robert  D.  Mentioned 270 

Cooke,  John  R.  Mentioned 65, 66 

Cooley,  N.  Saxton.  Mentioned 41,44,45 

Cooney,  M.  Mentioned 744 

Cooper,  Samuel.  Mentioned 65,69,375,680 

For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Adjutant  and  Inspector  General's  Office,  C.  S.  A. 


Corbett,  J.  N.  Mentioned 690,693 

Cosby,  J.  M.  S.  Mentioned 193 

Cosmopolitan,  Steamer.  Mentioned 147 

Cotter,  Cornelius.  Mentioned 50,341 

Crane,  C.  H.  Mentioned 202 


prane,  William  L . Mentioned. 


• f*  • f f *f  •••••••  •••••* 


292 


INDEX 


773 


Tage. 

Crane,  W.  T.  Mentioned 599 

Crawford,  E.  A.  Mentioned 160,637,640 

Crawford,  W.  H.  Mentioned 736,737 

Crawford,  W.  P.  Mentioned 451-453,483,484 

Crawley,  D.  L.  Report  of  operations  on  Morris  Island,  S.  C.,  July  10-Sept.  7, 

1863 - 570 

Creswell,  Charles  M. 

Correspondence  with  Robert  De  Treville 708 

Mentioned 721 

Cross,  Charles  F.  Mentioned 41, 44, 46, 47, 50, 342, 343 

Cruse,  Captain.  Mentioned L63 

Cruso,  Frederick  H.  Mentioned 238,270 

Cullum,  . Mentioned 563,564 

Cunningham,  Major.  Mentioned 606 

Cunningham,  H.  C.  Mentioned 420,427,562 

Cunningham’s  Bluff,  S.  C.  Skirmish  near,  Nov.  24, 1863.  Reports  of 

Saxton,  Rufus 745 

Walker,  William  S 746 

Currie,  N.  D.  Mentioned 157, 634 

Cuyler,  R.  R.  Mentioned 112 

Dahlgren,  John  A. 

Correspondence  with 

Gillmore,  Quincy  A 117, 120, 122, 146, 163, 164, 178, 454 

Turner,  John  W 141, 164, 165 

Mentioned 7, 12, 13, 15, 19, 21, 28, 30, 38, 45, 48, 117, 122, 123, 141, 178, 

217, 218, 234, 383, 402,  403, 600,  602, 605, 612, 623, 712, 713, 724, 731, 739, 747 

Dalrymple,  T.  H.  Mentioned 406,408 

Dana,  Gustavus  S.  Mentioned 41,44,45,49,50,342 

Dandy,  George  B.  Mentioned 15, 264, 290, 299, 344, 347, 348, 351, 352, 355 

Dannan,  W.  F.  Mentioned 644 

Dantzler,  L.  W.  Mentioned  644 

Dantzler,  O.  M. 

Correspondence  with 

Lay,  John  F 694 

Ripley,  Roswell  S 695 

Mentioned 391,420, 

440, 448, 449, 454, 459, 461, 463, 464,  469, 485, 487, 500, 688-691, 693, 698, 699 

Dargan,  A.  T.  Mentioned 391, 446, 458, 460, 461, 464, 469 

Dargan,  T.  George. 

Mentioned 510, 533 

Report  of  operations  on  Morris  Island,  S.  C.,  July  10-Sept.  7,  1863  532 

Darien,  Ga.  Destruction  of  the  Hudson  Place  Salt-Works,  near,  Sept.  22, 

1863*  1 

Davenport,  A.  C.  Mentioned 467,471,494-497 

David,  Torpedo-boat.  Mentioned 731-734 

Davis,  Ezra.  Mentioned 212 

Davis,  Greenleaf  P.  Mentioned.... 584 

Davis,  Henry.  Mentioned 395,616 

Davis,  Jefferson. 

Correspondence  with 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 115 

Beauregard,  G.  T 68, 69 

59,110 


War  Department,  C.  S 


Mentioned 57, 68, 110, 115, 116, 154-156, 375, 579 


*No  circumstantial  reports  on  file. 


774 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Davis,  Jonathan  W.  Mentioned 41 

Davis,  William  W.  H. 

Mentioned 209, 583, 606 

Reports  of  engagement  near  GrimbalPs  Landing,  James  Island,  S.  C.,  July 

16,  1863 583,585 

Dawson,  J.  L.  Mentioned 741,  742 

Dean,  Benjamin  C.  Mentioned 724 

Dean,  Enoch,  Steamer.  Mentioned 194,195 

De  Chambord,  Alphonse.  Mentioned 270 

De  Ford,  Tug.  Mentioned 176 

De  Kalb,  Steamer.  Mentioned 578 

Delisle, . Mentioned 646 

Dennis,  J.  Ben.  Mentioned 217 

De  Pass,  W.  L. 

Mentioned 371, 374, 406, 418, 420, 545 

Report  of  operations  on  Morris  Island,  S.  C.,  July  10-Sept.  7,  1863  549 

De  Saussure,  D.  B.  Mentioned 403,699,717,719 

De  Treville,  Robert. 

Correspondence  with 

Creswell,  Charles  M 708 

Mo  wry,  E.  S 708 

Rivers,  C.H 709 

Valentine,  Jacob 709 

Wardlaw,  G.  A 709 

Whaley,  E.  Mitchell 710 

Witherspoon,  B.  J 711 

Mentioned 694, 700, 706, 709 

Orders,  series  1863:  Aug.  27,  710. 

Reports  of 

Charleston  Harbor,  S.  C.  Engagement  in,  Sept.  7-8,  1863 717,718 

Fort  Sumter;  S.  C.  Bombardment  of,  Aug.  17-Dec.  31,  1863  673-675 

Sumter,  Confederate  transport.  Sinking  of,  by  batteries  on  Sullivan’s 

Island,  S.  C.,  Aug.  31,  1863  706,  707 

Devane,  W.  S.  Mentioned 396, 444, 499, 500 

De  Veaux,  J.  P.  Mentioned 156 

Devereux,  N.  F.  Mentioned 611 

DeWitt,  William.  Mentioned 360 

Dickison,  J.  J. 

Mentioned . 753,754 

Report  of  skirmish  near  Saint  Augustine,  Fla.,  Dec.  30,  1863 753 

Dixon,  A.  W.  Mentioned 193 

Dixon,  W.  J.  Mentioned 374,418,420 

Dixon’s  Island,  S.  C.  Affair  on,  June  21,  1863.  Report  of  Charles  H.  Simon- 

ton 192 

Doolittle,  Edwin  D.  Mentioned 239 

Doscher,  John.  Mentioned 683 

Dotterer,  W.  A,  Mentioned. 595 

Douglas,  B.  Mentioned 644 

Douglas,  W.  H.  Mentioned 647 

Downes,  John,  jr.  Mentioned 190 

Drayton,  Percival.  Mentioned 35 

Drew,  Jeremiah  D.  Mentioned 275 

Du  Barry,  W.  D.  Mentioned 374,580 

Dugger,  J.  E.  Mentioned 448,494,499,500 

Duke,  R.  T.  W.  Mentioned 131 


INDEX. 


775 


Pago. 

Dumphries,  William.  Mentioned 614 

Dunning,  W.  Mentioned 644 

Du  Pont,  Samuel  F. 

Correspondence  with  Charles  G.  Halpine 190 

Mentioned 5, 35, 42, 56, 68, 189-191 

Dutch,  John  C.  Mentioned 53,55 

Dutcher,  Charles  H.  Mentioned 278 

Dwight,  R.  Y. 

Correspondence  with  John  F.  Lay 696 

Mentioned 118, 679, 710, 717, 721 

Reports  of 

Charleston  Harbor,  S.  C.  Engagement  in,  Sept.  7-8,  1863  720 

Fort  Sumter,  S.  C.  Bombardment  of,  Aug.  17-Dec.  31, 1863  677,678 

Eason,  Thomas  D.  Mentioned 374 

Easterling,  N.  A.  Mentioned 461 

East  Florida,  District  of. 

Orders,  General,  series  1864  : No.  1,  754. 

Eates,  William  B.  Mentioned 634 

Eaton,  Samuel  C.  Mentioned 229,235,238,269,287 

Echols,  William  H. 

Correspondence  with  Edward  Manigault 592 

Mentioned 504,659 

Report  of  bombardment  of  Legare’s  Point,  S.  C.,  July  20,  1863 592 

Eddy,  Wilson.  Mentioned 50 

Edge,  Simeon  B.  Mentioned 456,457 

Edgerton,  E.  C.  Mentioned 719 

Edgerton,  J.  E.  Mentioned 374,580 

Edisto  Island,  S.  C.  Skirmish  on,  June  18,  1863.  Report  of  Thomas  G.  Ste- 
venson  192 

Edwards,  J.  C.  Mentioned 591 

Edwards,  Nathaniel  M.  Mentioned 230, 234, 236, 239, 270 

Edwards,  Robert  S.  Mentioned 211 

Edwards,  William.  Mentioned 212 

Egleston,  George.  Mentioned 493 

Ehbrenstein,  Sergeant.  Mentioned _ 443 

Elder,  P.  Mentioned 493 

Elkins,  H.  A.  Mentioned 471,472 

Ella  Morse,  Steamer.  Mentioned 51, 147 

Elliot,  Stephen  F.  Mentioned 355 

Elliott,  B.D.  Mentioned 495 

Elliott,  J.  R.  Mentioned 457 

Elliott,  Percival.  Mentioned 644 

Elliott,  Stephen,  jr. 

Correspondence  with 

Beauregard,  G.  T 123, 124, 178, 728 

Johnson,  John 636,638-641 

Mentioned  . . 119, 120, 122, 

124, 125, 129, 130, 132, 134, 136, 140, 141, 152, 153, 158, 166-171, 176-178, 181, 
186, 400, 402-405, 606, 621, 624, 628, 643-645, 648,  649,  655, 666, 667, 716, 724 
Reports  of 

Charleston  Harbor,  S.  C.  Engagement  in,  Sept.  7-8,  1863 713-715 

Fort  Sumter,  S.  C. 

Boat  attack  on,  Sept.  8-9, 1863  725, 726 

Boat  demonstration  upon,  Nov.  19-20, 1863 742 

Bombardment  of,  Aug.  17-Dec.  31 , 1863  622 


776 


INDEX, 


Elston,  William  R.  Mentioned 581,  5»2 

Emerson,  J.  D.  Mentioned 48,50,343 

Emery,  James  D.  Mentioned .% 635 

Emery,  Sabine.  Mentioned 15,346,354 

Emilio,  Luis  F.  Mentioned 362 

Enoch  Dean,  Steamer.  Mentioned 194,195 

Erwin,  E.  A.  Mentioned 125,402,716,720 

Erwin,  W.  E.  Mentioned 442,473,499 

Eskew,  J.  B.  Mentioned 744 

Estes,  William  B.  Mentioned 155 

Etheridge,  Charles.  Mentioned 640 

Etiwan,  Steamer.  Mentioned 578,611,612,617-621,627,629 

Evans,  Joseph.  Mentioned 167 

Evans,  Nathan  G.  Mentioned 67,80-82,124,148,172,403 

Farley,  J.  P.  Mentioned 343,350 

Farrand,  Hiram. 

Correspondence  with  Thomas  B.  Brooks 330 

Mentioned 226, 239, 269, 274-276, 280, 281, 283, 284, 289, 292, 294, 301 

Farrell,  James.  Mentioned 211 

Farrow,  W.  T.  Statement  of  sinking  of  Confederate  transport  Sumter  by 

batteries  on  Sullivan’s  Island,  S.  C.,  Aug.  31,  1863 696 

Felter,  Joshua.  Mentioned 286 

Fenner,  Milton  M.  Meationed 40,41,44-48,50 

Ferguson,  Thomas  B.  Mentioned 196 

Fertic,  B.  Mentioned 595 

Fertic,  C.  Mentioned 644 

Fickling,  Eldred  S.  Mentioned 395, 615, 616, 680 

Fiene,  Henry.  Mentioned 291 

Finegan,  Joseph. 

Correspondence  with  G.  T.  Beauregard 736 

Mentioned 111,736,754 

Fingal,  C.  S.  S.  See  Atlanta,  C.  S.  S. 

Fink,  William.  Mentioned 611 

Flambeau,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 161 

Fleming,  D.  G.  Mentioned 119, 390, 391, 613, 615, 621 

Flinn, . Mentioned 418 

Florida  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Cavalry— Regiments:  2d,  753,754. 

Flotwell,  R.  Mentioned 644 

Fludd,  Augustus.  Mentioned 198 

Flynn,  John.  Mentioned 544 

Foote,  Andrew  H.  Mentioned 56.68 

Ford,  James  G.  Mentioned 50,341 

Ford,  J.  D.  Mentioned 473 

Ford,  Joseph  W.  Mentioned 222.". 527 

Ford,  J.  T.  Mentioned 644 

Fort  Brooke,  Fla.  Engagements  at. 

Oct.  16, 1863.  Report  of  John  Westcott 735 

Dec.  25, 1863.  Report  of  John  Westcott 751 

Fort  Sumter,  S.  C. 

Boat  attack  on,  Sept.  8-9, 1863. 

Communication  from  G.  T.  Beauregard 728 

Lists  of  articles  captured 727, 728 


INDEX.  777 

Paso. 

Fort  Sumter,  S.  C. — Continued. 

Boat  attack  on,  Sept.  8-9,  1863. 

Reports  of 

Beauregard,  G.  T 724 

Elliott,  Stephen,  jr 725,726 

See  also  general  report  of  Town,  p.  49 ; Journal  of  Operations,  p.  125. 

Also  Morris  Island,  S.  C.  Operations  on,  July  10 -Sept.  7,  1863. 

Report  of  Ripley,  p.  403. 

Boat  demonstration  upon,  Nov.  19-20,  1863.  Reports  of 

Adams,  Warren - 744 

Basinger,  William  S 743 

Elliott,  Stephen,  jr 742 

Smith,  R.  Press,  jr 744 

Valentine,  Jacob 744 

See  also  Journal  of  Operations,  p.  167. 

Bombardment  of,  Aug.  17-Dec.  31,  1863. 

Casualties.  Returns  of. 

Con  federate  Troops 650 

Union  Troops - 607 

Communications  from 

Beauregard,  G.  T 618,632,633,651,654,655 

Elliott,  Stephen,  jr 123,124 

Gillmore,  Quincy  A , 21, 117, 122, 612 

Harleston,  Francis  H 651 

Johnson,  John 84,86,87,636,638-641 

Rhett,  Alfred 655 

Terry,  Alfred  H 606 

Turner,  John  W 598,599 

Congratulatory  Orders.  Gillmore 39 

Newspaper  extract 606 

Proceedings  of  Council  of  Officers,  Aug.  24,  1863 651 

Reports  of 

Butler,  William 671,672 

Champneys,  J.  T 666,668,669 

Clingman,  Thomas  L 670,671 

De  Treville,  Robert 673-675 

Dwight,  R.  Y 677, 678 

Elliott,  Stephen,  jr 622 

Gillmore,  Quincy  A 596,598,600,602,604,605 

Gilmer,  Jeremy  F 653,655,656 

Harris,  D.  B 653,658 

Huguenin,  Thomas  A 675,676 

Johnson,  John 659, 662-665 

Parker,  Foxhall  A 607 

Rhett,  Alfred 608, 612-614 

Rivers,  C.  H 677 

Sketches 25,29,597,601,603 

Tabular  statements  of  shots  fired  during 23, 648-650 

See  also  general  reports  of  Halleck,  p.  3;  Gillmore,  p.  16;  Town,  p.  46; 
Beauregard , p.  82.  Also  Morris  Island,  S.  C.  Operations  on,  July 
10-£epf.  7, 1863.  Reports  of  Brooks,  p.  265 ; Ripley,  p.  384. 


INDEX. 


778 


Fort  Sumter,  S.  C. — Continued. 

Fire  opened  on,  from  Morris  Island  batteries,  Aug.  17,  1863. 

See  Morris  Island,  S.  C.  Operations  on,  July  10-Sept.  7,  1863.  Reports  of 
Brooks,  Thomas  B.  Rhett,  Alfred.  Turner,  John  W. 

Michie,  Peter  S.  Ripley,  Roswell  S. 

See  also  general  reports  of  Gillmore,  p.  21;  Town,  p.  48;  Beauregard,  p. 


82. 

Fort  Wagner.  See  Battery  Wagner. 

Foshee,  R.  B.  Mentioned 620 

Foster,  C.  B.  Mentioned 171,641 

Foster,  John  G.  Mentioned 2,21,67,204 

Foster,  J.  T.  Mentioned 746 

Foster,  Robert  S.  Mentioned 366 

Fouts,  Andrew  J.  Mentioned 212 

Fowke,  J.  C.  Mentioned 740 

Fowler,  A.  J.  Mentioned 50 

Fowler,  James.  Mentioned 642 

Fox,  Charles  E.  Mentioned 212 

Fox,  Gustavus  V.  Mentioned 5 

Francis,  Mary,  Steamer.  Mentioned 609 

Franklin,  J.  D.  Mentioned 180,646 

Freeman,  A.  D.  Mentioned 631 

Freeman,  S.  N.  Mentioned 747 

Freer, . Mentioned 491 

Fripp,  D.  A.  Mentioned 175 

Frost,  Edward  D.  Mentioned 177,644 

Frost,  Henry  W.  Mentioned 527 

Fulton,  Steamer.  Mentioned 342 

Funderburk,  John.  Mentioned 167 

Furman,  James  F.  Mentioned 518 

Gage,  R.  S.  Mentioned 391 

Gaillard,  Alfred  S.  Mentioned 176, 187, 390, 613, 647 

Gaillard,  P.  C. 

Mentioned 372, 374, 391, 395, 417-419, 428, 441, 458, 461, 464 

Report  of  operations  on  Morris  Island,  S.  C.,  July  10-Sept.  7,  1863  543 

Gaillard,  W.  D.  Mentioned 719 

Galbraith,  Malcolm.  Mentioned 455 

Gantt,  F.  H.  Mentioned 145 

Garahan,  James.  Mentioned 153,632 

Gardner,  Sergeant.  Mentioned 463 

Gardner,  James.  Mentioned 400,451-453,483-485,490,491,531 

Gardner,  J.  B.  Mentioned 408 

Gardner,  William  M.  Mentioned 111,736 

Gary,  J.  H.  Mentioned 387, 407, 409, 431, 494, 495 

General  Hunter,  Steamer.  Mentioned 581 

General  Meigs,  Steamer.  Mentioned 226 

George,  W.  H.  Mentioned 50,341 

Georgia  Troops.  Mentioned. 


Artillery,  Heavy — Battalions : 12th,  73,  98,  145,  152,  153,  371,  387,  406-408, 
414,415,467,  469,  494-497,541,  542,  551,  629,  630,  632;  12th  ( Batteries ),  C, 
175;  22d  ( Batteries ),  A,  570. 

Artillery,  Light — Batteries  : Chatham,  375,  383,  448,  449, 451-454,  458, 467, 
479, 494-497, 500, 514, 588, 590 ; Chestatee,  162. 

Cavalry — Battalions:  21st,  736,737,747 ; 24th,  193,  194.  Regiments:  5th, 
144. 


INDEX. 


779 


Page. 

Georgia  Troops.  Mentioned — Continued. 

Infantry — Battalions : 18th,  73,  98,  371,  406-408,  414,  415,  467,  469,494-497, 

541, 542, 551.  Regiments : 1st  Volunteers,  73, 98, 368, 371, 390, 406-408, 414, 

415, 467,  469-472, 474,  476, 494-497,  551 ; 6th,  154,  157, 160, 166, 179, 180, 183, 
375,445,447, 587, 588, 634, 635, 637, 639,  642, 646,  647, 755 ; 7th, 8th, 9th,  11th, 

129 ; 19th,  154, 160, 166, 171, 179, 180, 183!  383,  385,  395,  411,  454,  455,  458,  459, 

461,  463,  465,  587, 588,  634, 637, 639,  641-643,  646,  755  ; 23d,  154, 166, 171, 179, 

180,  183,  398,408,  447-450,  499,  500,619,634,  639,  641-643,  646,647;  27th, 

119,  154,  157,  166,  171,  179,  180,  183,  398,  400,  408,  450-453,  480,  483-485, 

490,  532,  618,  622,634,635,  639,641-643,  646,  647;  28th,  119,  154,157,160, 

166,  171,  179,  180,  183,398,400,408,  450-453,480,483,484,  490,491,622,634, 

635, 637,  639,  641-643,  646,  647  ; 32d,  77, 369,  373, 379,  397, 399, 406-408,  419, 

425,  448-453,  479,  480,  587;  54th,  375,  381,  384,  396,  397,408,444,447,448, 
454-457,  465,499,  500,  515,  559,588,589,755;  56th,  755;  57th,  144;  59th, 

129 ; 63d,  * 73,  76, 80, 98, 371, 406, 408, 428. 

Gerrald  Levi.  Mentioned 494 

Gibbs,  Milton.  Mentioned  632 

Gibson,  W.  E.  Mentioned  631 

Gilchrist,  R.  C. 

Mentioned  - 440, 441, 492, 499 

Report  of  operations  on  Morris  Island,  S.  C.,  July  10-Sept.  7,  1863 548 

Giles,  Calvin.  Mentioned  154,634 

Gilliland,  A.  Mentioned  418,544 

Gillmore,  Quincy  A. 

Assignment  to  command  

Congratulatory  Orders. 

Fort  Sumter,  S.  C.  Bombardment  of,  Aug.  17-Dec.  31,  1863  ... 

Morris  Island,  S.  C.  Operations  on,  July  10-Sept.  17,  1863 

Correspondence  with 

Army  Headquarters  

Brooks,  Thomas  B 282,284,291,297,323,326 

Dahlgren,  John  A 117, 120, 122, 146, 163, 164, 178, 454 

Hawley,  Joseph  R 132 

Serrell,  Edward  W 228,230,236,256 

Seymour,  Truman 148, 155 

Terry,  Alfred  H 324, 606 

Turner,  John  W 122, 141, 144, 145, 383, 598, 599 

Vogdes,  Israel 132 


1 

39 

39 

12, 20,21 


Mentioned  3,22,27,39-41,43-47,49,51,54,68,69,78, 

85, 92, 93, 117, 122, 148, 178, 194, 208,212, 217, 219, 226, 228-231, 233, 236, 237, 
256, 271-278, 280-285, 287-291, 295, 297, 299, 300, 303, 342, 343, 345-349, 351- 
354,  358, 367, 376, 378, 393,  430, 440, 446, 454, 581, 596, 607,  682, 742, 749, 755 
Reports  of 

Fort  Sumter,  S.  C.  Bombardment  of,  Aug.  17-Dec.  31, 1863  596, 

598, 600, 602, 604, 605 


Morris  Island,  S.  C.  Operations  on,  July  10-Sept.  7,  1863 93,201-207 

South,  Department  of  the.  Operations  in,  April  7-Dec.  31,  1863 3 

Gillon,  Alexander.  Mentioned 473,509 

Gilmer,  Jeremy  F. 

Correspondence  with  G.  T.  Beauregard 656 


Mentioned 91, 100, 102, 615, 616, 618, 621, 651-654, 656, 666 

Reports  of 

Fort  Sumter,  S.  C.  Bombardment  of,  Aug.  17-Dec.  31,1863  653,655,656 

Sumter,  Confederate  transport.  Sinking  of,  by  batteries  on  Sullivan’s 

Island,  S.  C.,Aug.  31,1863 687 


Also  designated  Heavy  Artillery. 


780 


INDEX, 


Page. 

Gist,  S.  R.  Mentioned...,  65,67 

Glassell,  W.  T.  Mentioned 731-735 

Glover,  John  V. 

Correspondence  with  Edward  Manigault 567 

Mentioned 424-426, 556, 559 

Reports  of  operations  on  Morris  Island,  S.  C.,  July  10-Sept.  7, 1863 567,568 

Goggins,  Thomas.  Mentioned 614, 631 

Gonzales,  A.  J.  Mentioned 425,427,556,562 

Goode,  J.  T.  Mentioned 131 

Gooding,  J.  J.  Mentioned 131 

Goodwin,  Amaziah  N.  Mentioned 212 

Gordon,  George  H.  Report  of  attack  on  U.  S.  S.  Marblehead  in  Stono  River, 

S.  C.,  Dec.  25,  1863 747 

Gorgas,  Josiah.  Mentioned 127,137 

Gourdin,  John  G.  K. 

Correspondence  with  John  F.  Lay 697 

Mentioned 535,536 

Governor  Milton,  Tug.  Mentioned 194, 195 

Graef,  Frederick  E. 

Correspondence  with  Thomas  B.  Brooks 294 

Mentioned 235, 238, 269, 273, 275, 276, 287, 292, 294 

Graham,  James.  Mentioned 731 

Graham,  John.  Mentioned 573 

Graham,  Robert  F. 

Correspondence  with  Roswell  S.  Ripley 571 

Mentioned 63, 

72,123,125,367,  369,370,374,  375,380,  386,406,  415,416,  430,525,529,530 

Reports  of  operations  on  Morris  Island,  S.  C.,  July  10-Sept.  7, 1863 413,  414 

Grant, . Mentioned 146, 235, 284 

Grant,  U.  S.  Mentioned 6 

Gray,  M.  M. 

Mentioned 479 

Report  of  operations  on  Morris  Island,  S.  C.,  July  10-Sept.  7, 1863 523 

Gray,  Sylvester  H. 

Mentioned 22, 214, 222, 346 

Report  of  operations  on  Morris  Island,  S.  C.,  July  10-Sept.  7, 1863 357 

Greek  Fire.  Use  of.  Report  of  Alfred  Mordecai  on 33 

Green,  James  M.  Mentioned 211, 354 

Green,  J.  F.  Mentioned 724 

Green,  July.  Mentioned 195 

Greene,  Albert  E.  Mentioned 22,213,215 

Greene,  Charles  J.  Mentioned 358,361 

Gregg,  Battery.  See  Battery  Gregg. 

Gregg,  Charles  E.  Mentioned 467,494-497 

Gregg,  Thomas  E.  Mentioned 454,461,465,514,518,547 

Gregorie,  J.  W. 

Correspondence  with  Lawrence  M.  Keitt 547 

Mentioned 437, 472-474, 476, 504, 512, 547, 666 

Reports  of  operations  on  Morris  Island,  S.  C.,  July  10-Sept.  7,  1863 502,503 

Griffin,  B.  W.  Mentioned 631 

Griffirs,  William.  Mentioned 731 

Grimball,  A.  Mentioned 374,580 

Grimball,  J.  C.  Mentioned 162,638 

Grimball,  W.  H.  Mentioned 492,495,496,527,621 


INDEX. 


781 


Page. 

Grimball’s  Landing,  Janies  Island,  S.  C.  Engagement  near,  July  16, 1863. 
Casualties.  Returns  of. 

Confederate  Troops 588 

Union  Troops a 585 

Communication  from  George  B.  Balch  583 

Reports  of 

Brodie,  Paul - 581 

Colquitt,  Alfred  H - 587 

Davis,  William  W.  H 583,585 

Hagood,  Johnson 586 

Jeffords,  R.J 591 

Radcliffe,  James  D 590 

Terry,  Alfred  H - 755 

Way,  Charlton  H 588 

Grimke,  Thomas  S.  Mentioned 435 

Gude,  Steamer.  Mentioned 146 

Guerard,  E.  L.  Mentioned 391, 412, 465, 476 

Guerard,  J.  J.  Mentioned 729 

Guerin,  H.  C. 

Correspondence  with  G.  T.  Beauregard 163 

Mentioned 163, 177, 465 

Gurney,  William.  Mentioned 748 

Habersham,  J.  C.  Mentioned 420 

Hadden,  W.  J.  Mentioned 161,638 

Haddock,  Herbert  H.  Mentioned 211 

Hagood,  Johnson. 

Correspondence  with 

Hill,  Charles  S 479 

Kemper,  Del 432 

Molony,  P.  K 439 

Ripley,  Roswell  S 380, 503 

Taliaferro,  William  B 554 

Mentioned 67,75,77-79,91,100, 

101, 141, 145, 147, 151, 154, 169, 177, 187, 188, 368,  369, 371-374, 376, 377 ? 380, 
383, 385, 386,  390, 391, 393, 394, 396, 404, 406,  409, 411, 412, 421, 424, 429, 433, 
462, 463, 477, 492, 493, 499, 504, 506, 510, 558, 559,  561, 563, 587, 588,  590, 591 
Reports  of 

GrimbalFs  Landing,  James  Island,  S.  C.  Engagement  near,  July  16, 

1863  586 

Morris  Island,  S.  C.  Operations  on,  July  10-Sept.  7, 1863 428- 

433, 435-437, 439, 441-443, 445 

Haines,  J.  R.  Mentioned 400, 408, 487, 490 

Hale,  T.  S.  Mentioned 125, 126, 158, 184, 185, 684 

Hall,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 679 

Hall, . Mentioned 646,666 

Hall,  F.  Mentioned 195 

Hall,  T.  M.  Mentioned 118, 620 

Halleck,  Henry  W. 

Mentioned 5,12,20,21,23,682 

Report  of  operations  in  the  Department  of  the  South,  April  7-Nov.  15, 

1863  2 

For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Army  Headquarters. 

Hallett,  W.  Mentioned...... 633 


782 


INDEX. 


Page. 


Hallowell,  Edward  N. 

Mentioned 362 

Report  of  operations  on  Morris  Island,  S.  C.,  July  10-Sept.  7,  1863  362 

Halpine,  Charles  G. 

Correspondence  with 

Du  Pont,  Samuel  F 190 

Navy  Department,  U.  S 191 

Mentioned 41, 42 


Report  of  capture  of  C.  S.  S.  Atlanta  (Fingal)  in  Warsaw  Sound,  Ga.,  June 


17,  1863 

For  correspondence  as  A.  A.  G.,  see  John  A.  Dix. 

Hamilton,  D.  H.  Mentioned 

Hamilton,  T.  Mentioned 


189 


. 154 

741,742 
. 465 

. 644 


Hamilton,  W.  F.  Mentioned 

Hammond,  Sergeant.  Mentioned 

Hammond,  Samuel  Le  Roy. 

Memoranda  of.  Operations  on  Morris  Island,  S.  C.,  July  10-Sept.  7,  1863..  569 

Mentioned 86, 133, 188, 647 

Reports  of  operations  on  Morris  Island,  S.  C.,  July  10-Sept.  7,  1863 568,569 

Hamner,  W.  H.  Mentioned 40,41 

Hanvey,  G.  M.  Mentioned 145, 420, 467, 469, 494-497, 629 

Harding,  Henry.  Mentioned 492,590 

Harkey,  R.  A.  Mentioned 180,642,646 

Harleston,  Francis  H. 

Correspondence  with  D.  B.  Harris 651 

Mentioned 384, 391, 410, 458, 514, 515, 577, 613, 638, 640, 651, 652, 743 


Harper,  L.  A.  Mentioned 

Harral,  William  W.  Mentioned 
Harris,  D.  B. 

Correspondence  with 

Beauregard,  G.  T 

Harleston,  Francis  H 

Mentioned 


643 

355 


89, 103, 380, 445, 537, 553, 556, 651, 656, 666, 667 

651 

75, 

78, 89,  91,  100-102, 114, 176,  374,  375,  380,  419,  424,  433, 443, 445, 472, 473, 
480, 491, 504, 507, 537, 553, 556, 615, 616, 618, 621, 651, 652,  654-656, 666, 667 
Reports  of  bombardment  of  Fort  Sumter,  S.  C.,  Aug.  17-Dec.  31,  1863. ..  653,658 

Harris,  Elisha.  Mentioned 644 

Harris,  John  C.  Mentioned 724 

Harrison,  George  P.,  jr. 

Mentioned.  91, 144, 153, 164, 175, 374, 386, 387, 390, 396, 397, 404, 437, 444, 466, 501, 506 
Reports  of  operations  on  Morris  Island,  S.  C.,  July  10-Sept.  7,  1863..  492,494-500 

Harrison,  H.  K.  Mentioned 747 

Harrold,  James  H.  Mentioned 238,239,270,287 

Hart, . Mentioned 193 

Hart,  John.  Mentioned 457 

Hartley,  A.  J.  Mentioned 499 

Hartmann,  Charles  F.  Mentioned 51,236,257 

Hartness,  John  A.  Mentioned 496 

Haskell,  Charles  T.,  jr.  Mentioned 71,97,370,406,408,413,527,528,530 

Hasker,  Charles  H.  Mentioned 391,402 

Hatcher,  Edward.  .Mentioned 611 

Hatfield,  Townsend  L. 

Mentioned 41, 44-47, 49, 50, 52, 355 

Report  of  operations  on  Morris  Island,  S.  C.,  July  10-Sept.  7, 1863  340 


INDEX. 


783 


Page. 

Hawkins,  Marshal  P.  Mentioned 41, 44, 46, 47, 50, 52, 54 

Hawksworth,  George.  Mentioned 50 

Hawley,  Joseph  R. 

Correspondence  with  Quincy  A.  Gillmore 132 

Mentioned 151 

Hawthorne,  Mrs.  Mentioned 683 

Hayne,  T.  B.  Mentioned 499 

Haynsworth,  George  B.  Mentioned 509 

Head,  John  M.  Mentioned 41,42,44,50 

Healy,  Thomas  M.  Mentioned 507 

Heasley,  Alexander.  Mentioned 745 

Helms,  Amos.  Mentioned 741, 742 

Hemphill,  J.  Mentioned 644 

Henry,  Guy  V.  Mentioned 216,346 

Heriot,  John  O.  Mentioned 462,466 

Hernandez,  Benjamin. 

Mentioned 696, 698 

Statement  of  sinking  of  Confederate  transport  Sumter  by  batteries  on  Sul- 
livan’s Island,  S.  C.,  Aug.  13, 1863  696 

Hewitt,  W.  E.  Mentioned 729 

Heyward,  Daniel.  Mentioned 746 

Heyward,  James  S.  Mentioned 622 

Heyward,  J.  G.  Mentioned 527,528 

Heyward,  William  C.  Mentioned 730 

Hibben,  Steamer.  Mentioned 387,579,608 

Hickok,  Edwin  H.  Mentioned 41,44-47,50,340,341,355 

Hicks,  Ira  E.  Mentioned 359,361 

Higginson,  F.  J.  Mentioned 724 

Higginson,  Thomas  W. 

Menti  oned 8 

Report  of  engagement  at  Willstown  Bluff,  Pon  Pon  River,  S.  C.,  July  10, 1863  194 

Hill,  Charles  S. 

Correspondence  with 

Bryan,  Henry 411 

Hagood,  Johnson 479 

Mentioned 391, 410, 411, 444, 469, 493, 498, 533, 580 

Hill,  D.  H.  Mentioned 66 

Hill,  Frank.  Mentioned 167 

Hines,  Michael.  Mentioned 550 

Hitt,  W.  M.  Mentioned 153,632 

Hobson,  C.  B.  Mentioned 419,525,526 

Hodge,  J.  Mentioned 644 

Hogan, . Mentioned... 462 

Holbrook,  Henry.  Mentioned 22, 212, 213, 217, 346 

Holcombe,  E.  L.  Mentioned 90, 391, 412, 420, 485, 486, 532 

Holland,  J.  F.  Mentioned 549, 550 

Hollins,  Thomas.  Mentioned 724 

Holms,  Z.  Mentioned 611 

Holt,  Charles  V.  Mentioned 348 

Holt,  J.  C.  A.  Mentioned 494 

Holtzclaw,  T.  A.  Mentioned 177 

Homans,  William  H.  Mentioned 363 

Honour,  F.  H.  Mentioned 632 

Honour,  T.  A.  Mentioned 632 


784 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Hood,  G.  M.  Mentioned 630 

Hopkins,  John  D.  Mentioned 471 

Hopkins,  J.  Ward.  Mentioned 174,640,642,726 

Horlbeck,  J.  Moultrie.  Mentioned 414,416 

Hornbuckle,  Thomas  J.  Mentioned 640 

Horsey,  Samuel  G.  Mentioned 196,199 

Hounslow,  Roper.  Mentioned 357 

House,  Jerome  B.  Mentioned 212 

Houstoun,  P.  Mentioned 737 

Howell,  Joseph  C.  Mentioned 278 

Howell,  Joshua  B.  Mentioned 209,288,343,344 

Huddleston,  J.  M.  Mentioned 644 

Hudson  Place  Salt-Works,  Ga.  See  Darien,  Ga.  Destruction  of  Hudson  Place 
Salt-Works,  near,  Sept.  22,  1863. 

Huebbers,  William.  Mentioned . 291 

Huger,  Sergeant.  Mentioned 448,449,451-453,500 

Huger,  C.  K.  Mentioned... 432 

Huger,  F.  K.  Mentioned 374,405,580 

Hughes,  David  J.  Mentioned 632 

Hughes,  H.  M.  Mentioned 473 

Huguenin,  Thomas  A. 

Mentioned 90, 482, 483, 485-487, 521 

Plan  of  operations  of  rear  guard  in  the  evacuation  of  Battery  Wagner,  S.  C.  539 
Reports  of 

Charleston  Harbor,  S.  C.  Engagement  in,  Sept.  7-8,  1863  721 

Fort  Sumter,  S.  C.  Bombardment  of,  Aug.  17-Dec.  31, 1863  675,676 

Morris  Island,  S.  C.  Operations  on,  July  10-Sept.  7,  1863  536,538,540 

Humbert,  J.  B.  Mentioned 564 

Hume,  William.  Mentioned 411 

Hunley,  F.  L.  Mentioned * 145 

Hunter,  General,  Steamer.  Mentioned 581 

Hunter,  David. 

Mentioned 41-43,55,56,67,68,190 

Superseded  in  command  of  Department  of  the  South  by  Quincy  A.  Gillmore.  1 

Hunter,  W.  M.  Mentioned 454, 520, 541 

Hurst,  Frederick.  Mentioned 212 

Hutchins,  Andrew  J.  Mentioned 454,461,587,588 

Hutchison,  A.  M.  Mentioned 168, 640 

Hutson,  J.  H.  Mentioned 644 

Hutson,  J.  R.  Mentioned 457 

Hyatt, . Mentioned 506 

Hyns, . Mentioned 666 

Icault,  Theodore.  Mentioned 647 

Illinois  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Infantry — Regiments : 39th,  210, 286, 352, 353, 607. 

Indian  Queen,  Steamer.  Mentioned 161 

Ingerton,  William.  Mentioned 550 

Ingraham,  D.  N.  Mentioned 382 

Ironsides,  U.  S.  S.  See  New  Ironsides. 

Isaac  P.  Smith,  Steamer.  Mentioned 556 

Jackson,  Charles  N.  Mentioned 348 

Jackson,  J.  H.  Mentioned 15, 346, 354 

Jackson,  Richard  H. 

Mentioned 14, 343-346, 348, 352 

Report  of  operations  on  Morris  Island*  §»  Jnty  40-§ept?  7,  1863. . T. * ....  349 


INDEX. 


785 


Page. 

James,  Garth  W.  Mentioned 362 

James,  Giles.  Mentioned 360 

James,  J.  D.  Mentioned * 168,640 

Jeffords,  R.  J 

Mentioned 586 

Report  of  engagement  near  Grimball’s  Landing,  James  Island,  S.  C.,  July 

16, 1863  591 

Jenkins,  John. 

Mentioned 127, 136, 158, 164, 175, 177, 182, 186-188 

Reports  of  John’s  Island,  S.  C. 

Affair  on,  Dec.  28,  1863  751 

Demonstration  on,  Nov.  15, 1863  737, 738 

Jenkins,  Micah. 

Correspondence  with  G.  T.  Beauregard 82 

Mentioned 82 

Jeter,  B.  A.  Mentioned 124 

Jewett,  Richard  H.  L.  Mentioned 363 

John  Adams,  Steamer.  Mentioned 194, 195, 755 

John’s  Island,  S.  C. 

Affair  on,  Dec.  28,  1863.  Report  of  John  Jenkins 751 

Demonstration  on,  Nov.  15, 1863.  Report  of  John  Jenkins 737,738 

Johnson,  E.  Mentioned 161,638 

Johnson,  John. 

Correspondence  with  Stephen  Elliott,  jr 636,638-641 

Mentioned 118, 

388, 391, 392, 405, 610, 611, 620, 635-638, 640, 643, 646, 647, 651, 652,  655,  666 
Reports  of  bombardment  of  Fort  Sumter,  S.  C.,  Aug.  17-Dec.  31, 1863. . 659, 662-665 

Johnson,  John  D.  Mentioned 451,453,480,520,541 

Johnson,  Perley  B.  Mentioned 211 

Johnson,  Samuel  P.  Mentioned 457,461,465 

Johnson,  Thomas  H. 

Correspondence  with  G.  T.  Beauregard 117 

Mentioned 117, 118, 120, 128, 146, 158 

Johnston,  Dr.  Mentioned 193 

Johnston,  Joseph  E.  Mentioned 56,57,68.80 

Jones,  B.  Mentioned 644 

Jones,  Edward  L.  Mentioned 363 

Jones,  Howell.  Mentioned 635 

Jones,  J.  W.  Mentioned 631 

Jones,  N.  C.  Mentioned 644 

Jordan,  Elmer  C.  Mentioned 359 

Jordan,  Thomas. 

Correspondence  with  G.  T.  Beauregard 502  593 

Mentioned 100, 102, 126, 163, 167, 367, 382, 572, 618, 621, 624, 628, 63l|  633 

For  correspondence  as  Chief  of  Staff,  see  G.  T.  Beauregard. 

Jordan,  W.  J.  Mentioned 171,641,643 

Jowers,  J.  E.  Mentioned 457 

Juno,  C.  S.  S.  Mentioned 463  509 

Kanapaux,  C.  E.  Mentioned 90,485,539,540,541 

Kavanagh,  James.  Mentioned 211 

Kavanaugh,  J.  F.  Mentioned 724 

Kearny,  E.  For  correspondence  as  A.  A.  A.  G.,  see  G.  T.  Beauregard. 

Keith,  John  A.  Mentioned 441 

50  R R— VOL  XXVIII,  PT  l 


78  G 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Keitt,  Lawrence  M. 

Correspondence  with 

Beauregard,  G.  T 89, 108, 121 

Gregorie,  J.  W 547 

Pringle,  Robert 534 

Rhett,  Alfred 454 

Ripley,  Roswell  S 102, 103, 106-108, 481, 532-534, 547 

Mentioned. . 84, 89-93, 102, 108, 109, 118, 120, 121, 206, 377, 380, 383-385, 387, 390, 391, 
393, 399-401, 404,  407,  409, 411, 437, 453, 480, 498, 521, 531, 532,  538-540,  551 

Reports  of  operations  on  Morris  Island,  S.  C.,  July  10-Sept.  7, 1863 453- 

458, 460, 462, 464, 466, 468-470, 472, 474, 476, 477, 479-483, 488 

Kellers,  E.  H.  Mentioned 719 

Kemper,  Del. 

Correspondence  with  Johnson  Hagood 432 

Mentioned 181, 186, 372, 586, 590, 750 

Kennady,  W.  H.  Mentioned 476, 499 

Kennard,  J.  S.  Mentioned 192 

Kennedy,  Ely.  Mentioned 736, 737 

Keokuk,  IJ.  S.  S.  Mentioned 5 

Killed  and  Wounded.  See  Confederate  Troops  and  Union  Troops.  Returns  of 
Casualties. 

King,  John.  Mentioned 644 

King,  McMillan.  Mentioned 187, 571, 647, 685 

Kingfisher,  Bark.  Mentioned 55 

Kingman,  O.  H.  Mentioned 456 

Kirk,  M.  J.  Mentioned 592 

Klein,  Daniel.  Mentioned : 348 

Knapp,  William.  Mentioned 724 

Knight,  Charles  W. 

Mentioned 417 

Report  of  operations  on  Morris  Island,  S.  C.,  July  10-Sept.  7,  1863  524  » 

Knight,  J.  F.  Mentioned 457 

Knight,  Thomas  Dorr.  Mentioned 584,585 

Knighton,  William.  Mentioned 185,683,685 

Knoop,  Henry  C.  Mentioned 211 

Krauseneck,  Henry.  Mentioned 748 

Lacoste,  A.  D.  Mentioned 384,563 

Lake,  Edmund.  Mentioned 165,639 

Lake,  Felix.  Mentioned 555 

Lance,  W.  S.  Mentioned 374 

Lane,  Andrew  J.  Mentioned 211 

Lane,  James  A.  Mentioned 635 

Langdon,  Loomis  L.  Mentioned 14,343,346,348,350 

Langford,  Wales  S.  Mentioned 160,637 

iarender,  A.  Mentioned 156 

Lastinger,  S.  J.  Mentioned 128, 731 

Latta,  J.  R.  Mentioned 526 

Lavender,  A.  Mentioned 634 

Lawrence,  H.  M.  Mentioned 635 

Lawrence,  S.  C.  Mentioned 635 

Lay,  John  F. 

Correspondence  with 

Dantzler,  O.  M 694 

Dwight,  R.Y ...  696 


INDEX. 


787 


Page. 

Lay,  John  F. — Continued. 

Correspondence  with 

Gourdin,  John  G.  K 697 

Woodward,  Thomas  W 699 

Mentioned 557, 558 

Report  of  sinking  of  Confederate  transport  Sumter  by  batteries  on  Sul- 
livan’s Island,  S.  C. , Aug.  31, 1863 691 

Leach,  J.  Mentioned 644 

Leathe,  John  M.  Mentioned 411, 459, 462, 465, 481, 487, 538 

Leatherwood,  W.  B.  Mentioned 644 

Leavitt,  Henry  B.  Mentioned - — 212 

Lee,  C.  H.  Mentioned 150 

Lee,  Francis  D. 

Mentioned 89, 103, 121, 484, 486, 487, 492, 532 

Report  of  attempt  to  blow  up  U.  S.  S.  New  Ironsides  off  Charleston,  S.  C., 

Oct.  5,  1863  733 


Lee,  H.  D.  Mentioned 457 

Lee,  Hutson. 

Correspondence  with  G.  T.  Beauregard 645 

Mentioned - 645 

Lee,  Joseph.  Mentioned 647 

Lee,  L.  S.  Mentioned 631 

Lee,  Thomas  B. 

Mentioned 479, 482, 489, 491 , 492, 508, 537, 557 

Report  of  engagement  between  U.  S.  Monitors  and  Sullivan’s  Island  bat- 
teries, Nov.  16, 1863.- 739 

Lee,  W.  J.  Mentioned 644 

Legare,  S.  E.  Mentioned 175 

Legare,  T.  K.  Mentioned 448,449,451-453,500 

Legare,  W.  W.  Mentioned 559 

Legare’s  Point,  S.  C.  Bombardment  of,  July  20, 1863. 

Communication  from  G.  T.  Beauregard 592 

Report  of  William  H.  Echols 592 

Le  Gette,  H.  Mentioned 460 

Lehigh,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 740 

Lent,  Louis  H.  Mentioned 211, 345, 355 

LePage, . Mentioned 667 

Lesesne,  Henry  R. 

Correspondence  with  Alfred  Rhett 571 

Mentioned 90,370, 

373,  374,  387,  400,  410,  412, 482,  484-487, 490,  492,  494-496,  510,  530, 571, 573 

Report  of  operations  on  Morris  Island,  S.  C.,  July  10-Sept.  7, 1863  531 

Lewis,  G.  Mentioned *. 193 

Libby,  Alvan  H.  Mentioned 211,355 

Liggett,  Daniel  C.  Mentioned 212 

Littell,  John  S.  Mentioned 346 

Littings,  Sergeant.  Mentioned 341 

Little,  F.  H.  Mentioned 129 

Littlejohn,  W.  H.  Mentioned 525 

Lofton,  John  T.  Mentioned 587,588 

Longto,  Joseph.  Mentioned 291 

Lopez,  J.  H.  Mentioned 558 

Lorrigan,  Christopher  J.  Mentioned 270 


Losses  in  Action.  See  Confederate  Troops  and  Union  Troops.  Returns  of  Cas- 
ualties. 


788 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Louisiana  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Artillery,  Light — Batteries : Orleans  Guard,  160, 162, 163. 

Lowndes,  Edward.  Mentioned 634 

Lowndes’  Mill,  Combahee  River,  S.  C.  Capture  of  Union  telegraph  party 
near,  Sept.  13-14, 1863. 

Communication  from  William  S.  Walker 728 

Report  of  William  Stokes 729 

See  also  Journal  of  Operations , p.  128. 

Lucas,  F.  C.  Mentioned 442 

Luguire,  Hugh.  Mentioned 618 

Lyon, . Mentioned 360 

Maag,  George.  Mentioned 50,341 

Macbeth,  E.  Wister.  Mentioned 125,401,491,532,717,720,722 

Macbeth,  J.  R.  Mentioned 370, 527, 528 

McCabe,  W.  G.  Mentioned 405, 483 

McCall, . Mentioned 563, 564 

McCardell,  W.  H.  Mentioned 754 

Me  Cawley,  C.  G.  Mentioned 724 

McClellan,  George  B.  Mentioned 2 

McClemons,  H.  P.  Mentioned 185,685 

McClintock, . Mentioned 670 

McConihe,  John.  Report  of  operations  on  Morris  Island,  S.  C.,  July  10-Sept. 

7,  1863 366 

McCormick,  A.  H.  Report  of  capture  of  signal  station  at  Saint  John’s  Mill, 

Fla.,  Aug.  19,  1863  679 

McDonald,  J.  R.  Mentioned  419, 458 

McDonough,  Commodore,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 229 

McEvoy,  Thomas.  Mentioned  644 

McGuire,  Patrick. 

Correspondence  with  Thomas  B.  Brooks  301 

Mentioned  239,270,274,275,301,335,338,352 

Mclver,  George  W.  Mentioned  413,414 

Mackay,  W.  A.  Mentioned  162 

McKenna,  Charles  F.  Mentioned 229,234,239 

McKenzie,  Robert  C.  Mentioned  355 

McKethan,  Hector. 

Mentioned  419,454,457,458,467,494-497 

Report  of  operations  on  Morris  Island,  S.  C.,  July  10-Sept.  7,  1863  524 

McKin,  James.  Mentioned  477,547 

McLean,  C.  Mentioned  457 

McLeroy,  W.  J.  Mentioned  570 

McMillan,  G.  Mentioned  457 

McNall,  Thomas.  Mentioned \ 479 

McNeill,  Mentioned  665 

McTureous,  B.  W.  Mentioned  591 

Madders,  Walker.  Mentioned  185 

Magee,  Frank  J.  Mentioned  355 

Magee,  J.  J.  Mentioned  159, 174 

Magrath,  S.  E.  Mentioned 175 

Maine  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Infantry — Regiments : 9th,  15, 208, 210, 346,  354-356, 360, 392, 607 ; 11th,  210, 

214,  219, 234. 

Mallett,  Edward.  Mentioned  443,444,505 

Mallett,  J.  W.  Mentioned  557 


INDEX, 


789 


Tafia, 

Mallory,  Stephen  R.  Mentioned  <. - 80,85,88,102 

Malloy,  John  D.  Mentioned  526 

Mandeville,  Theodore.  Mentioned  229,278 

Manigault,  Steamer.  Mentioned  371,534,546,577,594 

Manigault,  Edward. 

Correspondence  with 

Beauregard,  G.  T 129 

Echols,  William  H 592 

Glover,  John  Y 567 

Extracts  from  diary  of.  Operations  on  Morris  Island,  S.  C.,  July  10-Sept. 

7,  1863  554, 555, 557, 560 

Mentioned  119,121,123,125,127- 

129, 131, 132, 134, 152,  *56-159, 172, 175,  404, 424,  427, 433,  553, 554, 567, 592 

Report  of  operations  on  Morris  Island,  S.  C.,  July  10-Sept.  7,  1863  552 

Marblehead,  U.  S.  S. 

Attack  on,  in  Stouo  River,  S.  C.,  Dec.  25,  1863.  Reports  of 

Beauregard,  G.  T - 749 

Gordon,  George  H 747 

Page,  P.  R 750 

Wise,  Henry  A 750 

See  also  Journal  of  Operations,  p.  185. 

Mentioned  177-182,184,185,747,748,750 

Margaret  and  Jessie,  Steamer.  Mentioned 573 

Markoe,  F. , jr.  Mentioned 374, 375, 478 

Marshall,  William  J.  Mentioned 719 

For  correspondence  as  adjutant  of  Fort  Moultrie,  see  Robert  Be  Treville. 

Marston,  William  S.  Mentioned 50 

Martin,  B.  Mentioned 444 

Martin,  E.  H.  Mentioned 374,580 

Martin,  Vincent  F.  Mentioned 742 

Martin,  W.  Mentioned 631 

Mary  A.  Boardman,  Steamer.  Mentioned 581 

Mary  Benton,  Steamer.  Mentioned i 46,226 

Mary  Francis,  Steamer.  Mentioned  609 

Mashburn,  L.  Mentioned 644 

Mason,  Henry  W.  Mentioned 50 

Massachusetts  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Cavalry — Regiments  : 1st,  585. 

Infantry — Regiments  : 24th,  49, 137, 204,  210,  296,  327,  585,  753;  40th,  210  ; 

54th,  15, 77, 210, 270, 298,  346,  347,  362,  363,  372, 373,  376, 419,  585, 586, 607, 

755;  55tn, 51, 53, 55;  150th  [?],  392. 

Masterman,  A.  H.  Mentioned 545 

Mathewes,  Edward.  Mentioned 535,536 

Mathewes,  J.  Fraser.  Mentioned „ 87, 

117, 119, 132, 133, 385, 397, 399, 487, 593, 617, 618, 620, 621 

Mathewes,  John  R.  Mentioned 370,374,414,420,492 

Mathewes,  William.  Mentioned 620,625,631,667 

Matthews,  W.  P.  Meutioued 157,635 

Maury,  Dabney  H.  Mentioned 57 

Mayflower,  Steamer.  Mentioned 358,755 

Mayo,  G-.  H.  Mentioned 160,638 

Mazyck,  Edmund. 

Mentioned 420, 433, 459, 461-463, 465, 483, 485, 521, 527, 538, 539 

Report  of  operations  on  Morris  Island,  S.  C.,  July  10-Sept.  7, 1863 522 


790 


INDEX. 


Paste. 

Mazyck,  N.  B.  Mentioned 644 

Meade,  Richard  K.  Mentioned 420 

Meade,  Richard  W.,  jr.  Mentioned 747, 751 

Meadows,  W.  Mentioned 685 

Means,  Waddy  T.  Mentioned 535 

Medals  and  Badges. 

Act  of  C.  S.  Congress  granting 579 

Roll  of  Honor  in  lieu  of,  ordered 579 

Meeker,  Lorenzo.  Report  of  operations  on  Morris  Island,  S.  C.,  July  10- 

Sept.  7,  1863  356 

Mehles,  Henry.  Mentioned 238, 239, 270, 284 

Mehrtens,  H.  Mentioned 476 

Meigs,  General,  Steamer.  Mentioned % 226 

Mellichamp,  R.  E.  Mentioned 560 

Melton,  C.  D.  Mentioned 167 

Ment,  William.  Mentioned 638 

Mercer,  Hugh  W. 

Correspondence  with  G.  T.  Beauregard 193 

Mentioned 78,  80, 81, 109,  111,  124, 144 

Report  of  capture  of  C.S.  S.  Atlanta  (Fingal),  in  Warsaw  Sound,  Ga., 

June  17, 1863 191 

Merwin, . Mentioned 730 

Meyers,  John  W.  Mentioned 632 

Michie,  Peter  S. 

Correspondence  with  Thomas  B.  Brooks 299 

Mentioned 14, 17, 19, 266, 269, 299, 345,  349-352 

Report  of  operations  on  Morris  Island,  S.  C.,  July  10-Sept.  7,  1863 335 

Mickler,  John  H.  Mentioned 561 

Middleton,  J.  Motte.  Mentioned ....  374,376,391 

Middleton,  John.  Mentioned.... 388,610,611 

Mike  11, . Mentioned 609,659,665 

Miles,  F.  T.  Mentioned 454,459,465,471,518,726 

Miles,  William  Porcher.  Mentioned 60, 63 

Millar,  Robert  S.  Mentioned 487, 539, 541 

Miller,  A.  E.  C.  Mentioned 50,341 

Miller,  L.  P.  Mentioned 196 

Mills, . Mentioned 195 

Milton,  Governor,  Tug.  Mentioned 194, 195 

Minott,  J.  C.  Mentioned 742 

Mitchel,  John  C. 

Extracts  from  diary  of.  Operations  on  Morris  Island,  S.  C.,  July  10-Sept. 

7,  1863  564 

Mentioned 71, 370, 374, 387, 404, 413, 414, 444, 494, 527, 530, 550, 554, 564, 571, 573 

Reports  of 

Charleston  Harbor,  S.  C.  Engagement  in,  Sept.  7-8,  1863  722 

Morris  Island,  S.  C.  Operations  on,  July  10-Sept.  7,  1863  563 

Mitchell,  Corporal.  Mentioned 494 

Mitchell,  Charles  F.  Mentioned 679 

Mitchell,  J.  K.  Mentioned 123 

Mitchell.  R.  M.  Mentioned 166,169,639,640,642 

Mironell  [?],  Lieutenant.  Mentioned 167,743 

Moffatt, . Mentioned 341 

Moffett,  G.  H.  Mentioned 689 


INDEX. 


791 


Page. 

Mohawk,  Steamer.  Mentioned 41 

Molony,  P.  K. 

Correspondence  with  Johnson  Hagood 439 

Mentioned ?91, 412, 444, 554 

For  correspondence  as  A.  A.  G.,  see  Johnson  Hagood. 

Monitor,  No.  1.  Mentioned 125,149 

Monitor,  No.  2.  Mentioned 125,146,149 

Monitor,  No.  3.  Mentioned 149 

Monitor,  No.  4.  Mentioned - 149,179 

Monitor,  No.  5.  Mentioned 140,149,170 

Monitor,  No.  6.  Mentioned 149 

Monitor,  No.  7.  Mentioned 146, 149 

Montauk,  U,  S.  S.  Mentioned 740 

Montgomery,  H.,  jr.  Mentioned 408,409,487,489 

Montgomery,  James.  Mentioned 209,584 

Montgomery,  S.  Mentioned 157,634 

Mordecai,  Alfred. 

Mentioned 14, 32, 33, 207, 217, 346, 352 

Report  of,  on  use  of  Greek  fire 33 

Morgan,  James  D.  Correspondence  with  Alfred  H.  Colquitt 449 

Morisey,  Samuel  B.  Mentioned 457 

Morrell,  John.  Mentioned 635 

Morrill,  Frank  L.  Mentioned 52,53,55 

Morris,  B.  F.  Mentioned , 155,634 

Morris,  J.  R.  Mentioned 155,634 

Morris  Island,  S.  C.  Operations  on,  July  10-Sept.  7,  1863. 

Assault  on  Confederate  rifle-pits,  Aug.  25,  1863.  See  reports  of 

Brooks,  Thomas  B.  Hagood,  Johnson.  Olmstead,  Charles  H. 

Champneys,  J.  T.  Manigault,  Edward.  Ripley,  Roswell  S. 

See  also  general  imports  of  Gillmore,  p.  24 ; Town,  p.  49 ; Beauregard , p.  85. 

Board  of  Officers  convened  to  decide  upon  feasibility  of  longer  holding 

north  end  of  island 100 

Capture  of  Confederate  rifle-pits,  Aug.  26,  1863.  See  reports  of 

Brooks,  Thomas  B.  Harrison,  George  P.,  jr.  Ripley,  Roswell  S. 

Champneys,  J.  T.  Manigault,  Edward. 

See  also  general  reports  of  Gillmore,  p.  24;  Town , p.  49;  Beauregard,  p.  85. 
Casualties.  Returns  of. 

Confederate  Troops 406-409 

Union  Troops 210-212, 392 

Communications  from 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 68 

Anderson,  Robert  H 543 

Baldwin,  James  S 297 

Beauregard,  G.  T 62, 66-69, 79-83, 94, 

104, 106, 108, 375, 378-382, 423, 460, 462, 488, 491, 498, 501, 519, 537, 553, 642 

Brooks,  Thomas  B 282,291,297,298,323 

Dahlgren,  John  A 454 

Davis,  Jefferson * 59, 68 

Gillmore,  Quincy  A 10-12, 20, 21, 27, 120, 122, 132, 144, 148, 208, 228, 297, 324 

Graef,  Frederick  E 294 

Graham,  Robert  F 571 

Gregorie,  J.  W 547 

Hagood,  Johnson 380,503 


792 


INDEX. 


Morris  Island,  S.  C.  Operations  on,  July  10-Sept.  7,  1863— Continued. 
Communications  from 


Page. 


Harris,  D.  B 

Keitt,  Lawrence  M 

Lesesne,  Henry  R 

McGuire,  Patrick 

Manigault,  Edward 

Michie,  Peter  S 

Pringle,  Robert 

Ripley,  Roswell  S 

Serrell,  Edward  W 

Seymour,  Truman 

Simonton,  Charles  H 

Suess,  John  L 

Talcott,  Edward  N.  Kirk 

Taliaferro,  William  B 

Tucker,  John  R 

Turner,  John  W 

Vogdes,  Israel 

Walker,  Joseph 

Wampler,  J.  Morris 

War  Department,  C.  S 

Yates,  Joseph  A 

Congratulatory  Orders.  Gillmore 
Extracts  from  diaries  of 


89,103,553 

89, 102, 103, 107, 108, 121, 517, 532-534,  537, 547 

571 

301 

567 

299 

534 

71, 96, 106, 109, 379, 380, 435, 455, 502 

230,236 

148 

143 

297,299 

285 

124,542 

382 

454 

156 

299-301 

516 

59,63,66,67,94 

571 

39 


Manigault,  Edward 554, 555, 557, 560 

Mitchel,  John  C 564 

Instructions  for  third  assault  on  Battery  Wagner 208 

Journal  of  engineer  operations.  Brooks 271 

List  of  ordnance  abandoned  on  evacuation  of 523 

Memoranda  of  Samuel  Le  Roy  Hammond 569 

Notes  to  journal  of  Thomas  B.  Brooks 303-335 

Organization,  strength,  etc. 

Confederate  Troops  on. 

Aug.  7,  1863.  434 

Aug.  15, 1863 467 

Aug.  21, 1863 439 

Aug.  29,  1863 448 

Aug.  30,  1863 449 

Aug.  31,  1863 451 

Sept.  1,1863  452 

Sept.  2,  1863  453 

Sept.  3,  1863  480,520 

Union  Troops  on.  See  Part  II. 

Plan  of  operations  of  rear  guard  in  the  evacuation  of  Battery  Wagner 539 

Reports  of 

Abbott,  Joseph  C 363 

Adams,  Warren 535 

Blake,  Julius  A 544 

Brooks,  Thomas  B 264, 265 

Bryan,  Henry 409,412 

Champneys,  J.  T 503 

Chichester,  C.  E 511,515,517 


INDEX. 


71)3 


Page. 

Morris  Island,  S.  C.  Operations  on,  July  10-Sept.  7,  1863 — Continued. 

Reports  of 

Colquitt,  Alfred  H 445-448, 450-453 

Crawley,  D.  L 570 

Dargan,  T.  George 532 

De  Pass,  W.  L 549 

Gaillard,  P.  C 543 

Gilchrist,  R.  C 548 

Gillmore,  Quincy  A 3,93,201-208 

Glover,  John  V 567, 568 

Graham,  Robert  F 413,414 

Gray,  M.M 523 

Gray,  Sylvester  H 357 

Gregorie,  J.  W 502, 503 

Hagood,  Johnson 428-433,  435-437, 439,  441-443, 445 

Hallo  well,  Edward  N 362 

Hammond,  Samuel  Le  Roy 568,569 

Harrison,  George  P.,  jr 492,494-500 

Hatfield,  Townsend  L 340 

Huguenin,  Thomas  A 536,538,540 

Jackson,  Richard  H 349 

Keitt,  Lawrence  M 453- 

458, 460,  462,  464, 466, 468-470, 472, 474, 476, 477, 479-483,  488 

Knight,  Charles  W 524 

Lesesne,  Henry  R 531 

McConihe,  John 366 

McKethan,  Hector 524 

Manigault,  Edward / 552 


Mazyck,  Edmund 


522 


Meeker,  Lorenzo 356 

Michie,  Peter  S 335 

Mitchel,  John  C 563 

Niles,  Peter  H 341 

Olmstead,  Charles  H 550 

Pinckney,  C.  C 520 

Pringle,  James  R 533, 534 

Pringle,  Robert 545-547 

Rhett,  Alfred 571,573,574 

Rion,  James  H 541 

Ripley,  Roswell  S 367-370, 375,  376, 381-384, 393 

Serrell,  Edward  W 225 

Seymour,  Truman 343,345 

Strong.  George  C 354, 355 

Taliaferro,  William  B 415,416,421 

Tennent,  William,  jr 508 

Turner,  John  W 212, 219 

Vogdes,  Israel 350,352 

Warley,  Frederick  F 518-520 

Weber,  Thomas  E 366 

Yates,  Joseph  A 526, 528, 529 

See  also  general  reports  of  Halleck,  p.  2;  Gillmore,  p.  3;  Beauregard , p.  57. 

Roll  of  Honor  (Confederate).  List  of  names  inscribed  on  580 

Sketches 241-255, 258-263, 305-307, 309, 311, 320, 321, 332-334 


794 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Morris  Island,  S.  C.  Operations  on,  July  10-Sept.  7,  1863 — Continued. 


Statement  of  number  of  Parrott  guns  which  burst  during  bombardment . . . 224 

Tabular  statement  of  firing  at  Fort  Wagner,  Sept.  5 and  6 28 

Union  forces  occupy  the  south  end  of,  July  10,  1863.  See  reports  of 

Abbott,  Joseph  C.  Meeker,  Lorenzo.  Strong,  George  C. 

Graham,  Robert  F.  Ripley,  Roswell  S.  Vogdes,  Israel. 

Gray,  Sylvester  H.  Serrell,  Edward  W.  Tates,  Joseph  A. 

Hatfield,  Townsend  L.  Seymour,  Truman. 

See  also  general  reports  of  Gillmore , p.  8;  Town , p.  44;  Beauregard,  p.  72. 

Morrison,  J.  T.  Mentioned 592 

Morse  [?],  Captain.  Mentioned 647 

Morse,  Ella,  Steamer.  Mentioned 51,147 

Moses,  F.  J.  Mentioned 469,480 

Moultrie,  Steamer.  Mentioned 188 

Mowry,  E.  S.  Correspondence  with  Robert  De  Treville 708 

Mulvaney,  J.  M.  Mentioned 726 

Munitions  of  War.  Supplies  of,  etc.  Communications  from 

Hill,  Charles  S 411,479 

Kemper,  Del 432 

Ripley,  Roswell  S 432, 480 

Murdoch,  Robert.  Mentioned 196, 198, 409, 410, 492 

Murphy,  W.  F.  Mentioned 526 

Murray,  Jerry.  Mentioned 185, 685 

Murrell’s  Inlet,  S.  C.  Affairs  at. 

Oct.  19, 1863. 

Communication  from  G.  T.  Beauregard 737 

Report  of  J.  H.  Trapier 736 

Dec.  5,  1863.  Report  of  J.  H.  Trapier 747 

Myer,  Albert  J. 

Correspondence  with  George  B.  Balch 583 

Mentioned .* 50, 342, 582 

Myers,  T.  Mentioned 729 

Myrick,  John  R.  Mentioned 346 

Nahant,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 190,740 

Nance,  William  F.  Mentioned 374, 391, 405, 412, 421, 454, 528, 550, 622 

For  correspondence  as  A.  A.  G.,  see  Boswell  S.  Bipley. 

Nantucket,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 165,739 

Navy  Department,  U.  S.  Correspondence  with  Charles  G.  Halpine 191 

Nelly  Brown,  Schooner.  Mentioned 131 

Nelson,  P.  H.  Mentioned 420 

Nesbit,  Ralph.  Mentioned 558,559 

New  Hampshire  Troops.  Mentioned. 


Infantry — Regiments : 3d,  15, 208,  210,  228, 289,  296,  299,  346, 354,  355,  392  ; 
4th,  208, 210, 270, 275, 281, 287, 352, 607  ; 7th,  15, 210, 344,  346, 352, 353, 355, 
363-365, 392. 

New  Ironsides,  U.  S.  S. 

Attempt  to  blow  up,  off  Charleston  Harbor,  Oct.  5,  1863. 

Communications  from 


Beauregard,  G.  T 733, 734 

Tucker,  John  R 732 

Turner,  John  W 141 


Extract  from  journal  of  operations  in  Charleston  Harbor,  S.  C.,  Sept. 
1,  1863- Jan.  21,1864 


734 


INDEX. 


795 


New  Ironsides,  U.  S.  S. — Continued. 

Attempt  to  blow  up,  off  Charleston  Harbor,  Oct.  5,  1863. 

Reports  of 

Beauregard  G.  T 

Lee,  Francis  D 

Toombs,  James  H 

See  also  Journal  of  Operations,  p.  141. 

Attempt  to  destroy,  off  Charleston  Harbor,  S.  C.,  Aug.  20-21, 1863. 

Communication  from  G.  T.  Beauregard 

Report  of  James  Carlin 

See  also  Morris  Island , 8.  C.  Operations  on,  July  10-/S^.  7,  1863.  Report 
of  Ripley,  p.  404. 


Page. 


731 
733 

732 


681 

680 


Mentioned 26, 38, 75-78, 83, 84, 87, 117- 

136, 138-141, 143, 145, 146, 149, 152, 154-159, 161, 168-170, 172, 173, 175, 179, 
183, 184, 186, 218,  300,  301,  346,  372, 379,  388-390, 393, 394,  399,  400,  402, 404, 
417,  433, 438-442,  452, 470-473,  475, 477,  478,  481,  482, 488,  489,  491, 495, 503, 
505, 513, 514, 531,  533,  540, 541, 547, 548, 555, 561-563, 572-576, 610,  612,  615, 
619, 623-630, 646, 647, 667, 672-675, 677, 680,  681, 712-718, 720-722,  731-735 
New  York  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Artillery,  Light — Regiments:  3d,  352;  3d  ( Batteries ),  B,  192,210,216;  F, 


210, 216, 349. 


Engineer — Regiments  : 1st,  210, 270, 273, 275, 287, 289, 291,  326, 352. 

Infantry — Battalions:  Enfans  Perdus, 210, 353, 607 ; Regiments:  47th,  210, 

607 ; 48th,  15, 210, 344,  346,  347, 354,  355, 363, 392  ; 56th,  583,  584  ; 100th, 

10, 15, 210  213, 264, 290, 299, 344, 347, 352, 353, 355, 363, 364, 392, 583, 593, 607 ; 

144th,  157th,  210;  178th,  213,215. 

Nicol,  William.  Mentioned 610 

Niles,  Peter  H. 

Mentioned 47 

Report  of  operations  on  Morris  Island,  S.  C.,  July  10-Sept.  7,  1863 341 

Nix,  J.  A.  Mentioned 457 

Norris,  William.  Mentioned 155 

North  Carolina  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Infantry — Regiments : 8th,  371,  375,  383,  385,  386, 396,  399, 407-410,  434, 435, 

439,  447-453,  463,  478,  479,492,  494,  500,501;  31st,  74,  76, 77,  371,  372, 408, 
417-419,524,588,589;  51st,  74,  76,  77,  371,  375,384,388,  399,  406-408,417- 
419, 454,  457, 458, 466, 467, 494-497, 524-526, 541, 542,  570 ; 61st,  85, 371, 375, 

385, 393, 396,  397,  407-410, 434,  444,  492, 499, 500, 590,  591, 670. 

North,  J.  F.  Mentioned 693 

Norton,  Patrick.  Mentioned 608 

Norwich,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 679 

Noyes,  A.  B.,  Barge.  Mentioned 735 

O’Brien,  John  F.  For  correspondence  as  A.  A.  G.,  see  G.  T.  Beauregard. 

Oestricher,  C.  F.  Mentioned. 50 

Ogier,  W.  G.  Mentioned 467,495-497 

Ohio  Troops.  Mentioned. 


Infantry — Regiments  : 62d,  15, 210,  344, 347, 352, 353, 363, 364, 392, 607 ; 67th, 

15, 210,  344,  347, 352,  353,  363, 364,  392  ; 75th,  210. 

Olmstead,  Charles  H. 

Mentioned 73, 98, 130, 135, 145,  371, 372,  374, 386, 388,  414, 420,  427,  435, 445 

Report  of  operations  on  Morris  Island,  S.  C.,  July  10-Sept.  7, 1863 550 

O’Neil,  Henry.  Mentioned 614 


796 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Organization,  Strength,  etc. 

Confederate  Troops 110, 

111,  434,  439, 448, 449, 451-453, 467, 480, 492,  494-497, 499, 500, 520 


See  also  Part  II. 

Union  Troops.  See  Part  II. 

Osborn,  Francis  A. 

Mentioned  50, 296 

Report  of  skirmish  near  Saint  Augustine,  Fla.,  Dec.  30,  1863  752 

Ossabaw  Island,  Ga.  Expedition  to,  July  3,  1863. 

Communication  from  Hugh  W.  Mercer 193 

Report  of  Edward  C.  Anderson,  jr 193 

Osteen,  Henry.  Mentioned 616 

Otey,  John  M.  Correspondence  with  G.  T.  Beauregard 685 

For  correspondence  as  A.  A.  G.,see  G.  T.  Beauregard. 

Otis,  Norman.  Mentioned 53 

Owens,  W.  C.  Mentioned 631 

Page,  J.  M.  Mentioned 635 

Page,  P.  R. 

Mentioned 131, 185, 750 

Report  of  attack  on  U.  S.  S.  Marblehead  in  Stono  River,  S.  C.,  Dec.  25,  1863  . 750 

Palmer,  B.  W.  Mentioned 471 

Palmer,  Samuel  B.  Mentioned... 467,494-497 

Palmetto  State,  Steamer.  Mentioned 401,405 

Parker,  Allen  B.  Mentioned 408,524 

Parker,  C.  W.  Mentioned 458,  461 

Parker,  Edward  L.  Mentioned 493,587 

Parker,  Foxhall  A. 

Mentioned 19, 22, 213 

Report  of  bombardment  of  Fort  Sumter,  S.  C.,  Aug.  12-Dec.  31,  1863  607 

Parsons,  Charles  B.  Mentioned 227,234,235,239,270,289-291 

Parsons,  Thomas  C.  Mentioned 581,582 

Passaic,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned  48, 509, 740 

Patrick,  J ohn  L . Mentioned 493 

Patterson,  W.  N.  Mentioned 631 

Paul,  Joseph  M.  Mentioned 211 

Pawnee,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 13, 42, 46, 50, 75, 119, 123, 

124, 126, 141, 177-181, 184, 185,  187,  372, 374, 428, 581-583, 586, 590, 748-751 

Paxson,  James  O.  Mentioned....' : 212 

Payne,  Lieutenant.  Mentioned 391 

Payne,  Lewis  S.  Mentioned 284, 352, 593 

Peal,  Henry  F.  Mentioned  362 

Peconic,  Steamer.  Mentioned 51,53,54 

Pemberton,  John  C.  Mentioned 58,63,66,67,96,110 

Pennsylvania  Troops.  Mentioned. 


Infantry. — Regiments : 52d,  210,583;  55th,  392  ; 74th,  748;  76th,  15,210, 
346, 354-356, 358, 360, 392 ; 85th,  210,  264, 293, 299, 344, 352, 353, 607  ; 97th, 
137, 208, 210, 327, 607 ; 104th,  210, 583, 584, 607 ; 174th,  176th,  203. 


Perkins,  James  A.  Mentioned 211 

Perenneau,  William  H.  Mentioned 176,430,431,634,638 

Perrin,  John  S.  Mentioned 103 

Perrin,  L.  W.  Mentioned 719 

Philadelphia,  Steamer.  Mentioned 748 

Phillips,  James  A.  Mentioned 

Phillips,  William  E.  Mentioned 361 


INDEX. 


797 


* Page. 

Pickering,  C.  W.  Mentioned 724 

Pinckney,  Captain.  Mentioned 693 

Pinckney,  C.  C. 

Mentioned 374, 391, 405, 485, 480, 538 

Report  of  operations  on  Morris  Island,  S.  C.,  July  10-Sept.  7,  1863  520 

Pitts,  T.  A.  Mentioned 555 

Plane,  Miss.  Mentioned 185,683,685 

Plimpton,  Josiah  I.  Mentioned 347, 348, 355 

Poer,  J.  S.  Mentioned 754 

Poget,  . Mentioned 507 

Pond,  Francis  B.  Mentioned 15, 344, 347 

Pope,  George.  Mentioned 363 

Porter,  Horace  P.  Mentioned 359 

Porter,  Nathan.  Mentioned 693 

Pound,  J.  G.  Mentioned 161,638 

Powe,  J.  H.  Mentioned 420,535,536 

Powers,  Thomas.  Mentioned - 614 

Powhatan,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 463 

Pratt,  J.  Albert.  Mentioned j 363 

Pratt,  Wheelock.  Mentioned 270,291-294,301 

President,  C.  S.  See  Jefferson  Davis. 

Pressley,  John  G.  Mentioned 453, 483, 484, 487, 491, 538, 540, 587, 588 

Price,  J.  S.  Mentioned - 644 

Prince,  J.  E.  Mentioned 644 

Pringle,  James  R. 

Mentioned  467,475,497,534,546 

Reports  of  operations  on  Morris  Island,  S.  C.,  July  10-Sept.  7, 1863 533,534 

Pringle,  Motte  A. 

Mentioned - 374, 

385, 391, 405, 458, 468, 476, 485,  630, 638, 688,  689, 691,  692, 694, 697, 698, 703 
Reports  of  sinking  of  Confederate  transport  Sumter  by  batteries  on  Sulli- 
van’s Island,  S.  C.,  Aug.  31, 1863 700-702 

Pringle,  Robert. 

Correspondence  with  Lawrence  M.  Keitt 534 

Mentioned 393, 408, 409, 438, 470, 471, 474, 475, 477, 511, 518, 534, 535, 547 

Reports  of  operations  on  Morris  Island,  S.  C.,  July  iO-Sept.  7, 1863 545-547 

Probst,  Jacob.  Mentioned 611 

Froudman,  James  D.  Mentioned 50 

Fruden,  W.  H.  Mentioned 449, 451-453, 587 

Purviance,  Henry  A.  Mentioned 211,298,299 

Putnam,  Haldimand  S.  Mentioned 15, 16, 211, 341, 344, 346-348, 355, 364, 365 

Radcliffe,  James  D. 

Mentioned 586 

Report  of  engagement  near  GrimbalFs  Landing,  James  Island,  S.  C.,  July 

16, 1863 590 

Ramsay,  David.  Mentioned 369,373,418,419,544 

Ramsay,  William  H.  Mentioned 50 

Ramsey,  William.  Mentioned 500 

Ramsey,  W.  M.  Mentioned 374,423,512,514 

Randle,  James.  Mentioned . 397, 447 

Randlett,  James  F.  Mentioned 289,296,299,300 

Randolph,  Steamer.  Mentioned 629, 635 

Raney,  John.  Mentioned 457 

Ravenel,  William  C.  Mentioned 486, 490 


798 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Rawls,  Morgan.  Mentioned 448,454,499,500,559 

Read,  B.  H.  Mentioned 374,405,587 

Readick,  William  E.  Mentioned 418 

Rebel,  Steamer.  Mentioned 578,706 

Reddick,  Samuel  C.  Mentioned 754 

Reed,  Sergeant.  Mentioned 644 

Reese,  Chauncey  B. 

Correspondence  with  Thomas  B.  Brooks 298 

Mentioned 14,265,298,339 

Reid, . Mentioned 667 

Rentfro,  William  H.  Mentioned : 157, 166, 635, 639 

Respess,  J.  T.  Mentioned 580 

Revely,  W.  W.  Mentioned 522 

Reynolds,  William.  Mentioned 40,47 

Rhett,  Alfred. 

Correspondence  with 

Beauregard,  G.  T 618, 645, 655, 687 

Keitt,  Lawrence  M 454 

Lesesne,  Henry  R 571 

Mentioned 78, 92,  111,  119, 120, 185, 368, 373, 378, 383, 387, 388, 390, 391, 398, 400, 

404,  478,  494, 564, 573, 608, 621, 648, 651, 652, 656, 658, 666, 685, 689, 700, 703 
Reports  of 

Charleston,  S.  C.  Bombardment  of,  Aug.  21-Dec.  31,  1863 684,686 

Fort  Sumter,  S.  C.  Bombardment  of,  Aug.  17-Dec.  31,  1863 608,612-614 

Morris  Island,  S.  C.  Operations  on,  July  10-Sept.  7,  1863  571,573,574 

Sullivan’s  Island,  S.  C.  Sinking  of  Confederate  transport  Sumter  by 

batteries  on,  Aug.  31,  1863 711 

Rhett,  Julius  M.  Mentioned 388,399,610,621 

Rhett,  T.  S. 

Correspondence  with  G.  T.  Beauregard 137 

Mentioned 137 

Rhinehart,  G.  D.  Mentioned 50 

Rhoades,  Stephen  W.  Mentioned 55 

Rhode  Island  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Artillery,  Heavy — Regiments:  3d,  175,  210,213,352;  3d  ( Batteries ),  B,  215, 
346,349;  C,  210,  228,  346,  349;  D,  213,  215,  346,  349,  350;  H,  213;  I,  213, 

346, 349 ; M,  213, 349. 

Rhodes,  J.  J.  Mentioned . 592 

Rieley,  S.  M.  Mentioned 50 

Riley,  James  R. 

Mentioned 697, 698 

Sumter,  Confederate  transport.  Sinking  of,  by  batteries  on  Sullivan’s 

Island,  S.  C.,  Aug.  31,  1863 698 

Rion,  J ames  H. 

Mentioned 75, 119, 123, 126, 372, 414, 415, 417, 543 

Report  of  operations  on  Morris  Island,  S.  C.,  July  10-Sept.  7,  1863  541 

Ripley,  Roswell  S. 

Correspondence  with 

Beauregard,  G.  T 71,94,96, 

106,  108,  109,  172,  378-380,  423,  429,  432,  434,  435,  455, 460,  462,  463, 
466,  480,  497,  498,  501,  502,  553,  556,  564,  573,  574,  625,  676,703,723 

Blanding,  Ormsby 454 

Butler,  William 679,721,741,742 

Dantzler,  O.  M 695 


INDEX.  799 

Page. 

Ripley,  Roswell  S. — Continued. 

Correspondence  with 

Graham,  Robert  F = = 571- 

Hagood,  Johnson 380,503 

Keitt,  Lawrence  M 102, 103, 106-108, 481, 532-534, 547 

Taliaferro,  William  B 542, 555, 560 

Yates,  Joseph  A 571 

Mentioned 60-62, 71, 75, 77, 78, 80- 

83,89,91,100, 102, 105,  111,  124, 142, 163, 164, 172, 177, 178, 187, 367,  375,  382, 
392,  407,  408, 412, 416,  420, 421, 423-425,  427-430,  434,  435,  444,  454, 485,  488, 
490,  492,  498, 511, 519, 529, 558, 564, 571, 593, 594, 612, 616, 621, 662, 708, 721 
Reports  of 

Morris  Island,  S.  C.  Operations  on,  July  10-Sept.  7, 1863 367- 

370, 375, 376, 381-384,  393 

Sumter,  Confederate  transport.  Sinking  of,  by  batteries  on  Sullivan’s 

Island,  S.  C.,  Aug.  31,  1863  702 

Sullivan’s  Island  batteries.  Engagement  between  U.  S.  Monitors  and, 

Nov.  16,  1863 739 

Vincent’s  Creek,  S.  C.  Affair  at  the  mouth  of,  Aug.  4,  1863 593 

Rivers,  C.  H.  v 

Correspondence  with  Robert  Do  Treville 709 

Mentioned 710 

Reports  of 

Charleston  Harbor,  S.  C.  Engagement  in,  Sept.  7-8,  1863 722 

Fort  Sumter,  S.  C.  Bombardment  of,  Aug.  12-Dec.  31,  1863  677 

Sullivan’s  Island  batteries.  Engagement  between  U.  S.  Monitors  and, 

Nov.  16,  1863  740 

Robert,  W.  F.  Mentioned 115 

Roberts,  A.  S.  Mentioned 396,408,444 

Roberts,  T.  B.  Mentioned 685 

Robertson,  Beverly  H.  Mentioned 109,111,113,114,164 

Robertson,  H.  Mentioned ' 614 

Robertson,  J.  W.  Mentioned 146 

Roby,  J.  R.  Mentioned 457 

Rochelle,  James  H.  Mentioned 123,166 

Rockwell,  Alfred  P.  Mentioned 755 

Rodgers,  C.  R.  Perry.  Mentioned 84,190,191 

Rodgers,  George  W.  Mentioned 48 

Rodgers,  John.  Mentioned 189,190 

Rodman,  Daniel  C.  Mentioned 354,356,358,359,361 

Roe,  J.  A.  Mentioned _ 171,641 

Rogers,  Hugh  Hamilton.  Mentioned 374,405 

For  correspondence  as  A.  D.  C.,  see  Boswell  S.  Ripley. 

Rogers,  Robert  C.  Mentioned 477,547 

Roll  of  Honor  (Confederate). 

List  of  names  inscribed  on.  Operations  on  Morris  Island,  S.  C.,  July  10- 

Sept.  7,  1863 «...  580 

Ordered  in  lieu  of  medals  and  badges 579 

Roman,  Alfred. 

Correspondence  with  G.  T.  Beauregard 695 

Mentioned 412,558,695 

Report  of  sinking  of  Confederate  transport  Sumter  by  batteries  on  Sulli- 
van’s Island,  S.  C.,  Aug.  31,  1863  689 

Ross,  James  A.  Mentioned 521,538 


800 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Rourke,  Thomas.  Mentioned 193 

Rover,  Schooner.  Mentioned 736 

Rowan,  Stephen  C.  Mentioned 26,38,712,731 

Rowe,  William  F.  Mentioned 455 

Ruby,  Steamer.  Mentioned 71,279,281,286 

Ruddell,  Dr.  Mentioned 193 

Rudisill,  John  W.  Mentioned 630 

Runckle,  Charles  H.  Mentioned • 211 

Rush,  C.  C.  Mentioned 564 

Rushby,  Thomas  F.  Mentioned 40 

Russell,  Cabot  J.  Mentioned 211,362 

Russell,  David.  Mentioned 581 

Rutledge,  B.  H.  Mentioned 746 

Rutledge,  John.  Mentioned , 470 

Ryan,  William  H.  Mentioned 369,373,406,409,419,544 

Saint  Augustine,  Fla.  Skirmish  near,  Dec.  30,  1863. 

Communication  from  Joseph  Finegan 754 

Reports  of 

Dickison,  J.  J 753 

Osborn,  Francis  A 752 

Saint  John’s  Mill,  Fla.  Capture  of  signal  station  at,  Aug.  19,  1863. 
Communications  from 

Beauregard,  G.  T 680 

Carey,  James 680 

Report  of  A.  H.  McCormick 679 

Salley,  A.  S.  Mentioned 457 

Salter,  James  L.  Mentioned 635 

Sampson,  William  W.  Mentioned 195 

Satterfield,  William.  Mentioned 475 

Saunders,  J.  R.  Mentioned 175 

Saxton,  Rufus. 

Mentioned - 51,202 

Report  of  skirmish  near  Cunningham’s  Bluff,  S.  C.,  Nov.  24,  1863  745 

Scanlan,  Charles  Anthony.  Mentioned 395,615,616 

Scarborough,  W.  D.  Mentioned 541 

Schaeffer,  Theodore.  Mentioned 612,618 

Schnierle,  J.  M.  Mentioned 374, 461, 465, 588 

Scott,  Robert.  Mentioned 288 

Scott,  Thomas.  Mentioned 741,742 

Scrott,  Henry.  Mentioned 731 

Seabrook,  Ephraim  M.  Mentioned 161,391,405 

Seabrook,  W.  H.  Mentioned 405 

Seddon,  James  A.  Mentioned 63,65-67,85,88,94,102,109,121,150,375 

For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  War  Department , C.  S. 

Sellers,  M.  H. 

Correspondence  with  G.  T.  Beauregard 595 

Mentioned 174, 180, 385, 593, 595, 642, 643, 646 

Report  of  affair  at  the  mouth  of  Vincent’s  Creek,  S.  C.,  Aug.  4,  1863  594 

Sellmer,  Charles.  Mentioned 22,214,219,234 

Semmes,  A.  A.  Mentioned 735 

Serrell,  Edward  W. 

Correspondence  with  Quincy  A.  Gillmore 228,230,236,256 

Mentioned 11, 14, 17, 19, 38, 51, 54, 219, 271, 278, 345 

Report  of  operations  on  Morris  Island,  S.  C.,  July  10-Sept.  7,  1863....,, ..  225 


INDEX. 


801 


Page. 

Seymour,  Truman. 

Correspondence  with 

Gillmore,  Quincy  A 148, 155 

Vogdes,  Israel 148, 156 

Mentioned 10-13, 15, 45, 46, 54, 151, 336, 341, 351-353, 364 

Reports  of  operations  on  Morris  Island,  S.  C.,  July  10-Sept.  7, 1863 343,345 

Shannon,  William  M.  Mentioned 167 

Sharp,  T.  R.  Mentioned 167 

Shaw,  Chester  B.  Mentioned 211 

Shaw,  H.  M.  Mentioned ..  463, 492 

Shaw,  R.  G.  Mentioned 22,213,215 

Shaw,  Robert  G.  Mentioned 15, 16, 211, 346, 348, 362, 419 

Shelton,  William.  Mentioned 418,544 

Shirer,  H.  Mentioned 644 

Short, . Mentioned 33,34 

Shuler,  M.  W.  Mentioned - 644 

Simkins,  J.  C.  Mentioned 369,372,373,406,408,418,420 

Simmons,  Robert  J.  Mentioned 362 

Simmons,  W.  C.  Mentioned -- 405,527 

Simons,  Thomas  Y.  Mentioned - 545 

Simonton,  Charles  H. 

Correspondence  with  G.  T.  Beauregard 73, 143 

Mentioned 73, 136, 143, 157, 170, 368, 425, 588 

Report  of  affair  on  Dixon’s  Island,  S.  C.,  June  21, 1863  192 

Simpkins,  William  H.  Mentioned — — 211,362 

Sineath,  F.  R.  M.  Mentioned 729 

Singleton,  R.  R.  Mentioned - 678,679,696,721 

Sketches. 

Fort  Sumter, S.  C.  Bombardment  of,  Aug.  17-Dec.  31, 1863  ...  25, 29, 597, 601, 603 

Morris  Island,  S.  C.  Operations  on,  July  10-Sept.  7, 1863  241-255, 

258-263, 305-307, 309, 311, 320, 321, 332-334 

Skinner,  Benjamin  F.  Mentioned 22,215,217 

Sleeper,  Gilman  E.  Mentioned 275,287 

Smallwood,  Green  B.  Mentioned 496 

Smedes,  Cornelius  H.  Mentioned 50, 341 

Smith, . Mentioned 146 

Smith,  Clifton  H.  For  correspondence  as  A.  A.  G.,  see  G.  T.  Beauregard. 

Smith,  Ed.  W.  For  correspondence  as  A.  A.  G.,see  Quincy  A.  Gillmore. 

Smith,  George  W.  Mentioned 157, 635 

Smith,  Isaac  P.,  Steamer.  Mentioned 556 

Smith,  J.  A.  Mentioned 155,634 

Smith,  John.  Mentioned 468 

Smith,  N.  F.  Mentioned 644 

Smith,  N.  W.  Mentioned 405 

Smith,  Orrin  E.  Mentioned 363 

Smith,  R.  Press,  jr. 

Mentioned 129,520,717-719 

Report  of  boat  demonstration  upon  Fort  Sumter,  S.  C.,  Nov.  19-20, 1863 744 

Smith,  S.  Forcher.  Mentioned 157, 409, 410, 448, 450, 492, 555, 556, 558-560 

Smith,  T.  H.  Mentioned 405 

Smith,  Walter.  Mentioned 277 

Smith,  Washington  I.  Mentioned 493 

Smith,  W.  G.  Mentioned 591 

Smith,  W.  Mason.  Mentioned 727 

51  R R— VOL  XXVIII,  PT  I 


802 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Smoke,  J.  W.  Mentioned 466 

Sonoma,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 185 

South  Carolina.  Operations  in,  June  1K-Dec.  31, 1863.  Communications  from 

Adjutant  and  Inspector- General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 115 

Beauregard,  G.  T 112,114,116 

Davis,  Jefferson 110 

Walker,  William  S Ill 

South  Carolina  Troops.  Mentioned.  (Confederate.) 

Artillery,  Heavy — Battalions  : 15th,  377,  406-409,  425;  15th  ( Batteries ),  A, 

406,  467,  494-497,  685;  B,  439,  446,  470,  471,  512,  518;  C,  375,  442,  499; 

18th,  175,  383,  407-409,  557;  18tli  {Batteries),  A,  554;  B,  409,  434,  449, 
451-453,  463,  492,  499,  556;  C,  375,  439,  454,  458,  461,  467,  494-497,  518. 
Regiments : 1st,  185,  371,  392,  400,  406-408;  1st  ( Batteries ),  A,  406,  549, 
550,590;  B,  613,621;  C,  396,  461,  577,  617 ; D,  160,  187,  384,  397,  577, 

613,  614,618,  629,  638,  647,  685;  E,  370,  407,  409,  414,  434,  462,  467,  469,  470, 

492,  494-497,  527,  528,  577,  612 ; F,  396,  617  ; G,  155,  160,  176,  375,  634,  638  ; 

H,  370,  407,  409,  414,  434,  439,  467,  492,  494-497,  528,  577 ; I,  370,  414,  527, 

528,  573 ; K,  155,  176,  187,  393,  439,  442,  499,  615,  628,  634,  647 , 2d,  407, 

408;  2d  ( Batteries ),  A,  383,  385,  454,  461,  479,  520,  538-541  ; E,  565;  F, 

448,  449,  451-453,  479,  500  ; G,  467,494-497,  564,  565  ; H,  390,  439,  442,  476, 

499  ; I,  564  ; 3d,#  76,  402,  404,  406,  409,  415,  536,  713  ; 3d  {Batteries),  A, 

408,  485,  538,  539,  541 ; C,  376,  673,  711,  719,  742  ; D,370,  406,413,  414,  527, 

528,  530,  671,  672,  677-679,  696,  720,  721  ; E,  402,  520,  717-719  ; F,  402,  717- 
719,  742  ; G,  699,  709,  719,  742  ; H,  372,  535,  536  ; I,  535,  536  ; K,  671,  672, 

677,  693,  696,  709,  722. 

Artillery,  Light— Battalions:  Palmetto,  406-409,425;  {Batteries),  A,  407, 
439,518;  D,  479,  485,  490,  520,  538-541 ; E,  398,451-453,  480,  481,520,538, 

541  ; F,  196-198;  G,  148,  445,  549,  550;  H,  175,  181;  K,  175,181.  Beau- 
fort, 592, 628 ; Gist  Guard,  370,  372, 383, 385, 407-409, 411, 414, 434, 463,  492, 

499,  500,  511,551;  Macbeth,  124;  Marion,  74,  98,  196,198,  383,  407,  409, 

434,  463,  492,  499,587;  Mathewes,  370,383,385,398,407,409-411,414,434, 

450, 463, 492, 500, 551, 619 ; Rutledge  Mounted  Rifles,  A,  637  ; Washing- 
ton, 196, 198, 199, 737. 

Cavalry — Companies:  Kirk’s  Partisan  Rangers,  592.  Regiments:  4th,  729, 
730,746;  5th,  386,  435,  439,  448,  492,  494,499,  500,588,  591;  6th,  196,  199, 


738. 

Infantry — Battalions:  7th,  72,  73,  98,  368,370,372,379,392,406,414,415,530, 
541-543;  Charleston,!  76, 119, 131, 367,  372,  381, 383-385, 390, 392,  395, 400, 

404.406- 409,417-419,428,439,454-456,  458,  459,  461,  471,  476,499,518,543- 
545, 577, 621, 666, 724-727.  1st  State,  685 ; 5th  State,  114 ; 11th,  74, 98, 

111 , 124, 131, 136, 139, 145, 592, 627,  629,  729 ; 20th,  372, 375, 379,  380, 383-385, 

387,  393,  396,  398,  406-409,439,448-450,454,455,458,  459,  461,466,  468,  469, 
474,478,500,501,541,542,619,695,701;  21st,  72,  73,  370,  371,  379,383,384, 

388.392.406- 409,413-415,432,  434,435,439,458-461,  463,  469,  474,  478,  496, 
497,530,550,551;  22d,  124;  25th,  81,  136,  139,  154,  180,188,385,399,408, 

409,  425, 426,  452,  453, 479-485, 490, 491, 538, 539, 552,  559,  563,  587,  588,  593- 
595,  627,633,  634,  646,  647;  27th,  174,  180,188,640,  646,647. 

South  Carolina  Troops.  Mentioned.  (Union.) 

Infantry — Regiments:  1st,  194,195,745,746;  2d,  324,584,585. 

South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida,  Department  of. 

Confederate  Troops  in.  Organization,  strength,  etc.,  Nov.  1,1863...  — . 110,111 
Operations  in,  June  13-Dec.  30, 1863.  Reports  of  G.  T.  Beauregard.  55,  57,  60,  63,  92 


*Also  called  1st  Regular  Infantry, 
f Sometimes  called  l^t  Battaliop, 


INDEX. 


803 


Page. 

South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida,  Department  of— Continued. 

Orders,  Circulars,  series  1863:  Nov.  25,  114. 

Orders,  General,  series  1863  : No.  87,  62. 

Orders,  Special,  series  1863  : No.  176,  104. 

South,  Department  of  the.  (Union.) 

Gillmore,  Quincy  A.,  supersedes  Hunter  in  command  of 1 

Operations  in. 

April  7-Dec.  31,  1863.  Report  of  Quincy  A.  Gillmore 3 

April  7-Nov.  15, 1863.  Report  of  Henry  W.  Halleck 2 

May  29,  1863-Jan.  10, 1864.  Reports  of  Franklin  E.  Town 40,  43, 44, 51 

Orders,  series  1863:  July  8,  10 ; July  9,  11 ; July  13,  39,  208 ; Aug.  22,  291. 
Orders,  Circulars,  series  1863:  Aug.  22,  292  ; Sept.  10,  328. 

Orders,  General,  series  1863:  Sept.  15,  39;  No.  70,  298. 

Orders,  Special,  series  1863:  No.  9,  13;  No.  481,  21;  No.  513,  27. 

Southerland,  E.  Mentioned 525 

Spaulding,  Steamer.  Mentioned 394,617 

Spigner,  Edward.  Mentioned 644 

Spilker,  Charles.  Mentioned 291 

Stallings,  G.  W.  Mentioned 494-496,564 

Stanford,  Z.  Mentioned 631 

Stanley,  Thomas  E.  Mentioned 462 

Stanton,  Edwin  M.  Mentioned 5 

Starr, . Mentioned 193 

Steedman,  Charles.  Mentioned- 724 

Steinhilber,  Jacob.  Mentioned 287 

Stephens,  I.  R.  Mentioned 634 

Stevens,  J.  A.  Mentioned 631 

Stevens,  Stephens.  Mentioned 211,348 

Stevens,  T.  H.  Mentioned 724 

Stevenson,  Thomas  G. 

Mentioned 44, 208, 209, 341,  347, 348, 364, 584 

Report  of  skirmish  on  Edisto  Island,  S.  C.,  June  18,  1863 192 

Stewart, . Mentioned 473, 476, 640 

Stewart,  Cockswain.  Mentioned 611 

Stewart,  John  A.  Mentioned 485,487,489 

Stickle,  Cyrenius  R.  Mentioned 291 

Stiles,  R.  M.  Mentioned . 107, 458-460, 462, 476, 480, 483, 484, 486, 487, 490-492, 532, 592 
Stokes,  William. 

Mentioned 128, 129, 156, 728 

Report  of  capture  of  Union  telegraph  party  near  Lowndes’  Mill,  Combahee 

River,  S.  C.,  Sept.  13-14,  1863  729 

Stoney,  S.  R.  Mentioned 162 

Stoney,  W.  E.  Mentioned 414,420,435 

For  correspondence  as  A.  A.  G.,  see  Robert  F.  Graham. 

Stono  River,  S.  C.  Attack  on  U.  S.  S.  Marblehead  in,  Dec.  25,  1863.  See 
Marblehead,  U.  S.  S. 

Stoubelfield,  Henry.  Mentioned 635 

Strahan,  Charles  G.  Mentioned 21,213 

Strawbridge,  De  "Witt  C.  Mentioned 15,354 

Strength  of  Troops.  See  Organization,  Strength,  etc. 

Strong,  George  C. 

Mentioned 10-13, 15, 16,  39, 

44,  45,  47,  50,  77, 208, 212, 227,  340,  343-348, 350,  352, 353,  358-364,  367,  419 
Reports  of  operations  on  Morris  Island,  S.  C.,  July  10-Sept.  7,  1863  354,355 


804 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Stroop,  George.  Mentioned 41,47,49,50,52 

Suber,  C.  H.  Mentioned 374,591,405 

Suess,  John  L. 

Correspondence  with  Thomas  B.  Brooks 297,  299 

Mentioned 228, 238, 264, 269, 272, 274, 278, 282, 285, 287, 289-291, 293, 297-299 

Sullivan,  James.  Mentioned 732-735 

Sullivan’s  Island  Batteries.  Engagement  between  U.  S.  Monitors  and,  Nov. 


16,  1863. 

Communication  from  William  Bntler 741 

Reports  of 

Basinger,  William  S 740 

Lee,  Thomas  B 739 

Ripley,  Roswell  S 739 

Rivers,  C.  H 740 

Valentine,  Jacob 740,741 


See  also  Journal  of  Operations , p.  165. 

Sumter,  Confederate  transport. 

Sinking  of,  by  batteries  on  Sullivan’s  Island,  S.  C.,  Aug.  31,  1863. 


Communications  from 

Beauregard,  G.  T , 689,703 

Creswell,  Charles  M 708 

Dantzler,  O.  M 694,695 

Dwight,  R.  Y 696 

Gourdin,  John  G.  K 697 

Mowry,  E.  S 708 

Rivers,  C.  H 709 

Valentine,  Jacob 709 

Wardlaw,  G.  A 709 

Whaley,  E.  Mitchell 710 

Witherspoon,  B.  J 711 

Woodward,  Thomas  W 699 

Reports  of 

Butler,  William i 704,705 

Clingman,  Thomas  L 704 

De  Treville,  Robert 706, 707 

Gilmer,  Jeremy  F - 687 

Lay,  John  F 691 

Pringle,  Motte  A 700-702 


Rhett,  Alfred 711 

Ripley,  Roswell  S 702 

Roman,  Alfred 689 

Statements  of 

Farrow,  W.  T 696 

Hernandez,  Benjamin 696 

Riley,  James  R 698 

Wilson,  John  A 698 

See  also  Morris  Island , S.  C.  Operations  on,  July  10 -Sept.  7,  1863.  Reports 
of  Ripley,  p.  397 ; Colquitt,  p.  450. 

Mentioned 86, 379, 388,  397, 398, 408, 430, 450, 503, 508, 515, 

551, 573,  577, 578, 606, 611, 612, 619, 687-690,  692-698, 700-704, 708, 709, 711 
Sumter,  Fort.  See  Fort  Sumter. 

Surten,  A.  Mentioned 644 

Suter,  Charles  R.  Mentioned 14, 17, 228, 240, 271, 335, 351,  352 

Swain,  R.  J.  Mentioned 153, 632 


INDEX. 


805 


Page. 

Swanston,  Robert.  Mentioned 475, 644 

Swinton,  Lieutenant.  Mentioned 638 

Tabb,  W.  B.  Mentioned 131 

Tafft,  Henry  S.  Mentioned 40 

Taft,  R.  M.  Mentioned * 485 

Tahoma,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 735,751 

Talcott,  Edward  N.  Kirk. 

Correspondence  with  Thomas  B.  Brooks 285 

Mentioned 239,  269, 280, 281, 283, 285, 292 

Taliaferro,  J.  IT.  Mentioned 630 

Taliaferro,  William  B. 

Correspondence  with 

Beauregard,  G.  T 124,379,381,423 

Hagood,  Johnson 554 

Ripley,  Roswell  S 642,555,560 

Mentioned 60-62, 75-77,  79,  91,  111,  114, 124, 129, 130, 136, 141, 158,  369, 371-375, 

377-380,  384, 404, 406,  424,  431, 446, 511, 541, 542, 544,  557-559, 562, 569, 743 
Reports  of 

Battery  Island,  S.  C.  Affair  on,  Sept.  7,  18C3 712 

Morris  Island,  S.  C.  Operations  on,  July  10-Sept.  7,  1863  415,416,421 

Taliaferro,  W.  T.  Mentioned 420,562 

Tatom,  W.  T.  Mentioned 369,373,406,409,418,535,536 

Taylor,  J.  L.  Mentioned 175 

Taylor,  J.  M.  Mentioned 457 

Taylor,  P.  H.  Mentioned. 644 

Tennent,  William,  jr. 

Mentioned 411 

Report  of  operations  on  Morris  Island,  S.  C.,  July  10-Sept.  7, 1863.. 508 

Tennessee  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Artillery,  Heavy—  Regiments : 1st,  150. 

Terry,  Adrian.  For  correspondence  as  A.  A.  G.,  see  Alfred  H.  Terry. 

Terry,  Alfred  H. 

Correspondence  with  Quincy  A.  Gillmore 324,606 

Instructions  for  third  assault  on  Battery  Wagner,  Morris  Island,  S.  C 208 

Mentioned 8, 10, 11, 13, 24, 27, 44, 46, 47, 49,  50, 132, 

158,  201,  234, 264, 270, 287, 290, 295, 300, 324, 343,  367, 419, 581-585, 605, 742 
Report  of  engagement  nerr  Grimhall’s  Landing,  James  Island,  S.  C.,  July 

16,  1863 755 

Terry,  P.  E.  Mentioned 592 

Thayer,  Coote.  Mentioned 640 

Thompson,  G.  W . Mentioned 406, 408, 525 

Thompson,  Seth.  Mentioned 211 

Tilley,  John.  Mentioned 50,581,582 

Tillson,  Myron  W.  Mentioned 736 

Toombs,  James  H. 

Mentioned 733,734,735 

Report  of  attempt  to  blow  up  U.  S.  S.  New  Ironsides  off  Charleston  Har- 


bor, S.C.,  Oct.  5,  1863. 


732 

312 

211 

129 


Totten,  Joseph  G.  Mentioned 

Tourtelotte,  Marshall  J.  Mentioned 

Towers,  John  R.  Mentioned  

Town,  Franklin  E. 

Mentioned 342 

Reports  of  operations  in  Department  of  the  South,  May  29,  1803-Jan.  10, 

1864  40,43,44,51 


806 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Tracy,  Carlos.  Mentioned 376,430,444 

Tracy,  H.  Mentioned 341 

Tracy,  Thomas.  Mentioned 50 

Trapier,  J.  H.  ^ 

Correspondence  with  G.  T.  Beauregard 737 

Mentioned Ill 

Reports  of  affairs  at  Murrell’s  Inlet,  S.  C. 

Oct.  19,  1863 736 

Dec.  5,  1863 747 

Trezevant,  J.  T.  Mentioned 81, 126, 164 

Trowbridge,  Charles  T.  Mentioned 194 

Tucker,  Charles  E.  Mentioned 363 

Tucker,  John  R. 

Correspondence  with  G.  T.  Beauregard 382, 732 

Mentioned 81,  82, 102, 105, 154, 177, 3-2,  384, 470, 485, 593, 612,  700 

Tupper,  James,  jr.  Mentioned 171,641 

Turner,  John  W. 

Correspondence  with 

Dahlgren,  John  A...„ 141,164,165 

Gillmore,  Quincy  A 122,141,144,145,383,598,599 

Mentioned 14, 30, 44,  45,  48, 49, 277, 279, 286,  303, 367, 598, 599 

Reports  of  operations  on  Morris  Island,  S.  C.,  July  10-Sept.  7, 1863 212,219 

Statement  of  number  of  Parrott  guns  which  burst  during  operations  on 

Morris  Islaud  and  against  Fort  Sumter,  S.  C 224 

For  correspondence  as  Chief  of  Staff,  see  Quincy  A.  Gillmore. 

Twiggs,  H.  D.  D.  Mentioned 420 

Tyler,  J.  J.  Mentioned 457 

Unfug,  Casper.  Mentioned 493 

Union  Troops. 

Casualties.  Returns  of. 

Fort  Sumter,  S.  C.  Bombardment  of,  Aug.  17-Dec.  31,  1863. 607 

Grimball’s  Landing,  James  Islaud,  S.  C.  Engagement  near,  July  16, 

1863  ... 585 

Morris  Island,  S.  C.  Operations  on,  July  10-Sept.  7,  1863  210-212,392 

Mentioned. 

Artillery,  Light — Regiments:  1st,  352;  1st  ( Batteries ),  B,  210,216, 

274, 344  ; C,  210, 214, 217,  349  ; 3d  ( Batteries ),  E,  210, 216,  346, 349. 

Infantry — Regiments:  3d  ( Colored ),  210,270,290,298,607. 

For  Volunteers,  see  respective  States. 

Organization,  strength,  etc.  See  Part  II. 

Valentine,  Jacob. 

Correspondence  with  Robert  De  Treville 709 

Mentioned 169, 171,699,719 

Reports  of 

Fort  Sumter,  S.  C.  Boat  demonstration  upon,  Nov.  19-20,  1863 744 

Sullivan’s  Island  batteries.  Engagement  between  U.  S.  Monitors  and, 

Nov.  16,  1863 740,741 

Van,  S.  Mentioned 618 

Van  Brunt,  George.  Mentioned 194 

Vance,  Robert.  Mentioned - - 635 

Vanderrault,  John.  Mentioned > 60 

Van  Keuren,  John.  Mentioned 369 

Verdier,  William  S.  Mentioned 196 

Vidal,  Theodore  C.  Mentioned 44,46,47,49,50,366 


INDEX. 


807 


Vincent’s  Creek,  S.  C.  Affair  at  the  month  of,  Aug.  4,  1863. 
Communications  from 

Beauregard,  G.  T 

Warley,  A.  F 

Reports  of 

Ripley,  Roswell  S 

Sellers,  M.  H 


Pape. 


f,93, 595 
..  595 


593 

594 


See  also  report  of  Ripley , p.  385. 

Virginia  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Artillery,  Heavy — Regiments:  4th,  131. 

Infantry — Regiments:  26th,  46th,  59th,  131. 

Vogdes,  Israel. 

Correspondence  with 

Gillmore,  Quincy  A 132 

Seymour,  Truman 148, 156 

Mentioned 7, 10,  39, 45,  47, 78, 208, 275, 291,  335,  342-346, 355, 376 

Reports  of  operations  on  Morris  Island,  S.  C.,  July  10-Sept.  7,  1863 350,352 

Vogler,  C.  F.  Mentioned 644 

Voris,  Alvin  C.  Mentioned 15,344,347 

Wabash,  Frigate.  Mentioned 213,629 

Waddy,  J.  R.  Mentioned 132, 164 , 502, 559, 562 

Wadlie,  Andrew  J.  Mentioned 219,235 

Wagner,  Battery.  See  Battery  Wagner. 

Wagner,  Fort.  See  Battery  Wagner. 

Wagner,  W.  H.  Mentioned 374,405 

Walker,  George  E.  Mentioned 683 

Walker,  Joseph. 

Correspondence  with  Thomas  B.  Brooks 299-301, 329 

Mentioned 238, 264, 269, 279-281, 283, 287-291, 293, 296, 297, 299-301, 340 

Walker,  L.  J.  Mentioned 730 

Walker,  M.  W.  Mentioned 632 

Walker,  Oliver  H.  Mentioned 752,753 

Walker,  William  H.  T.  Mentioned 65,67 

Walker,  William  S. 

Correspondence  with  G.  T.  Beauregard * - . . Ill,  112, 728 

Mentioned 67, 109-112, 114, 128, 159, 174, 175, 730 

Reports  of 

Barnwell's  Island,  S.  C.  Expedition  to,  July  30,  1863 592 

Cunningham's  Bluff,  S.  C.  Skirmish  near,  Nov.  24,  1863  746 

Wallace,  James.  Mentioned 295,724 

Walpole,  J.  B.  L.  Mentioned 123, 126, 129, 130, 132 

Walter,  George  H. 

Mentioned 196 

Report  of  engagement  at  Willstown  Bluff,  Pon  Pon  River,  S.  C.,  July  10, 

1863  199 

Walters,  William  W.  Mentioned 281 

Wampler,  J.  Morris.  Mentioned 84, 388, 407,  408, 468, 469, 471, 472 

War  Department,  C.  S.  Correspondence  with 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General's  Office,  C.  S.  A 109, 110 

Beauregard,  G.  T 59, 66, 67, 94, 375, 378, 733, 734 

Davis,  Jefferson 59, 110 

Ward,  F.  Mentioned 619 

Ward,  W.  H.  Mentioned 391 


808 


INDEX. 


Page. 


Wardlaw,  G.  A. 

Correspondence  with  Robert  De  Treville 709 

Mentioned 403,717,718 

Wardlaw,  J.  Lewis.  Mentioned 125,539,541,720 

Waring,  P.  H.  Mentioned 406,408,420 

Warley,  A.  F. 

Correspondence  with  G.  T.  Beauregard 595 

Mentioned 385, 461, 593-595 

Warley,  Frederick  F. 

Mentioned  206, 


375, 383,  385, 391,  396,  400,  444,  456,  459,  463-465, 477,  478, 480,  487, 515 

Reports  of  operations  on  Morris  Island,  S.  C.,  July  10-Sept.  7,  1863 518-520 

Warsaw  Sound,  Ga.  Capture  of  C.  S.  S.  Atlanta  in.  See  Atlanta  ( Fingal ), 

C.  S.  S.  Capture  of,  in  Warsaw  Sound,  Ga.,  June  17,  1863. 

Warthen,  G.  W.  Mentioned 617 

Waties,  T.  Davis.  Mentioned 158, 369, 371, 420, 545, 549, 550, 635 

Watson,  B.F.  Mentioned 644 

Watts,  Thomas  H.  Mentioned 635 

Way,  Charlton  H. 

Mentioned 586, 591 

Report  of  engagement  near  Grimball’s  Landing,  James  Island,  S.  C.,  July 


16, 1863  588 

Webb,  Benjamin  C.  Mentioned 157,562,750 

Weber,  Thomas  E. 

Mentioned 41,44,45,50,52 

Report  of  operations  on  Morris  Island,  S.  C.,  July  10-Sept.  7,  1863 366 

Weehawken,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 84, 125, 170, 178, 190, 402, 716-718 

Weimer,  Peter.  Mentioned 303 

Welch,  D.  H.  Mentioned 470, 471,  473 

Welles,  Gideon.  Mentioned 189, 190, 581, 712, 724, 731, 735, 736, 739,  747, 751 

For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Navy  Department,  U.  S. 

Wells,  H.  W.  Mentioned 644 

Werner,  Claus.  Mentioned 406,408 

West,  James  B.  Mentioned 194 

Westcott,  John.  Reports  of  engagements  at  Fort  Brooke,  Fla. 

Oct.  16,  1863  735 

Dec.  25, 1863  751 

Whaley,  E.  Mitchell. 

Correspondence  with  Robert  De  Treville 710 

Mentioned 719,  742 

Wheaton,  J.  F.  Mentioned 590,591 

Wheeler,  T.  Mentioned 743 

Whilden,  W.  G.  Mentioned 737 

White,  Edward.  For  correspondence  as  A.  A.  G.,  see  Thomas  L.  Clingman. 

White,  E.  J.  Mentioned 509, 609, 659 

White,  Thomas  G. 

Mentioned 196 

Report  of  engagement  at  Willstown  Bluff,  Pon  Pon  River,  S.  C.,  July  10, 


1863  197 

White,  W.  P.  Mentioned 736 

White,  W.  W.  Mentioned 129 

Whiting,  William  H.  C.  Mentioned 60 

Whitney, . Mentioned 670, 683 

Whitney,  Hemy  A.  Mentioned 195,745,746 


INDEX. 


809 


Whitson,  J.  M.  Mentioned 

Wigg,  W.  H.  Mentioned 

Wilcken,  Charles  L.  Mentioned 

Wilkins,  M.  L.  Mentioned 

Willard,  Samuel.  Mentioned 

Williams, . Mentioned 

Williams,  Augustus.  Mentioned  . . . 

Williams,  E.  P.  Mentioned 

Williams,  Harry.  Mentioned 

Williams,  John  R.  Mentioned 

Williamson,  Joseph.  Mentioned 

Willis,  J.  T.  Mentioned 

Willstown  Bluff,  PoriPon  River,  S. 
ports  of 


Page. 

451-453,500 

163 

239, 269, 275, 276, 279, 280, 284, 289-291, 296, 303 

: 499 

362 

457 

631 

724 

745 

420 

192 

457 

C.  Engagement  at,  July  10, 1863.  Re- 


Aiken,  H.K 196 

Higginson,  Thomas  W 194 

Walter,  George  H 199 

White,  Thomas  G 197 

Wilson,  George.  Mentioned 362 

Wilson,  James  E.  Mentioned 22, 214, 217, 270-272, 275, 335 

Wilson,  J.  C.  Mentioned 193 

Wilson,  John  A.  Statement  of  sinking  of  Confederate  transport  Sumter  hy 

batteries  on  Sullivan’s  Island,  S.  C.,  Aug.  31, 1863  698 

Wilson,  John  H.  Mentioned 211 

Wilson,  J.  R.  Mentioned 638 

Winemore,  Henry.  Mentioned 580 

Wirtz,  H.  R.  Mentioned 14 

Wise,  Henry  A. 

Mentioned 109,  111,  114, 131, 148, 185, 187 

Report  of  attack  on  U.  S.  S.  Marblehead  in  Stono  River,  S.  C.,  Dec.  25, 1863.  750 

Witherspoon,  B.  J. 

Correspondence  with  Robert  De  Treville 7ll 

Mentioned 719, 742 

Withworth,  H.  E.  Mentioned 731 

Wolverton,  John  C.  Mentioned 50, 341 

Wood,  Henry  O.  Mentioned 635 

Wood,  Peter.  Mentioned 635 

Woodbery,  W.  D.  Mentioned 449,451-453,495-497 

Woodruff,  Joseph.  Mentioned 607 

Woodward,  Thomas  W. 

Correspondence  with  John  F.  Lay 699 

Mentioned 391, 465, 694 

Woolright,  A.  E.  Mentioned 619 

Worcester,  John  H.  Mentioned 212 

Worsham,  J.  P.  Mentioned 481 

Wylly,  R.  H.  Mentioned 193 

Wyman,  Edward  F.  Mentioned 355 

Yarborough,  Benjamin.  Mentioned 465 

Yates,  Joseph  A. 

Correspondence  with  Roswell  S.  Ripley 571 

Mentioned 71, 123, 124, 367, 370-372, 374, 384.  386, 390, 

404,  411,414,420,  424,  427,455,456,511,514,551,559,562,566,571,572,617 
Reports  of  operations  on  Morris  Island,  S.  C.,  July  10-Sept.  7,  1863..  526,528,529 


810 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Yellowley,  E.  C.  Mentioned 448,449 

Yocum,  Aaron  D.  Mentioned 352 

Young,  W.  G-.  Mentioned 627 

Youngblood,  Jacob.  Mentioned 535,536 

Zimmerman,  R.  D.  Mentioned 644 

Zimmerman,  W.  C.  Mentioned 644 

o 


it 


\ 


V* 


I 


K 


■ 


