# Wiley Britton, The Civil War on the Border, volume II: Camden Expedition passages, v1

## transcription-note

Digital OCR of a University of California Libraries scan (Internet Archive civilwarborder02britrich); not verified against print. Whitespace collapsed; all other characters retained, including OCR errors, split words, running headers, page numbers and map-caption debris. Local headings are editorial. Bounded passages: the title page and preface, and Chapters XVII-XIX on the Camden Expedition, omitting the guerrilla anecdote on pp.256-257 between the opening and the Okolona and Elkin's Ferry passage.

## title-and-preface

THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER A NARRATIVE OF MILITARY OPERATIONS IN MISSOURI, KANSAS, ARKANSAS, AND THE INDIAN TERRITORY, DURING THE YEARS 1863-65, BASED UPON OFFICIAL REPORTS AND OBSERVATIONS OF THE AUTHOR i-.Y WILEY BRITTON LATE OF THE WAR DEPARTMENT MEMBER AMERICAN ASSOCIATION FOR THE ADVANCEMENT OF SCIENCE VOLUME II G. P. PUTNAM'S SONS NEW YORK LONDON 37 WFST TWKNTY-THIKU STREET 24 BEDFORD STRHTVr. STRAND "Cbe Tkntcfccrbochcr press 1899 COPYRIGHT, 1898 BY WILEY BRITTON TTbe TRnic'-crbocfccr {press, IRew f otfe PREFACE. THE first volume of my " Civil War on the Bor der " met with such favorable reviews by the lead ing journals of the country, and the demand for it by the public has been such, that it has appeared to me advisable to issue the second volume of the work, the two volumes covering the field of opera tions in that section during the war. In saying that I am the only writer who has attempted to cover that particular field of operations during the war, I do not mean that other writers have not covered, more or less completely, particular campaigns in that section. My diaries of events relating to the war in that section for the years 1863-65 cover in outline the operations described. In the examination of several thousand witnesses in that section since the war while in the Govern ment service investigating property and pension claims, many important facts w.ere obtained by making extracts from depositions and using the matter where it had an appropriate bearing. A good many of the chapters consist almost entirely PREFACE. of material drawn from officers and soldiers who par ticipated in the events described and whose state ments were taken down with the care of taking a deposition. The descriptions of the larger opera tions are mainly based upon the official reports as published by the Government, and these reports have also been used in verifying the accounts of minor operations as far as practicable. Having participated in the operations described, and having subsequently for years travelled over that section sifting the testimony of witnesses relating to the war, I may perhaps justly claim special advantages for doing the work which I have undertaken. A number of gentlemen who have manifested an interest in the work have furnished me valu able data for its preparation. I am particularly indebted to Colonel George S. Grover, of St. Louis, Missouri, who loaned me his manuscript notes of the Shelby Raid of 1863 and the Price Raid of 1864, on which I have drawn in connection with other material. The substance of some of the chapters has ap peared from time to time in the National Tribune, Washington, a paper that has given a great deal of space to the literature of the war, having as con tributors nearly all the leading Federal Generals of the late war. It has not been an easy matter to fix a limit to PREFA CE. V the field of operations described in this work. After some consideration, I determined to embrace in the work the operations of the Army of the Frontier, even if that army should go beyond the limits of the territory appropriately designated as the Border, meaning by the Border the western parts of the States of Missouri and Arkansas and the eastern parts of Kansas and the Indian Terri tory. When, therefore, the Army of the Frontier was merged into and became a part of the Seventh Army Corps, and was officially known as the Fron tier Division of that corps, it seemed appropriate that I should describe its operations. I have therefore described the Camden Expedition and given one chapter to the Building of the Red River Dam for the passage of the gunboats, because these operations were intimately connected with the operations in which the Frontier Division was actively engaged. WILEY BRITTON. WASHINGTON, 1898.

## camden-opening

CHAPTER XVII. THE CAMDEN EXPEDITION. THE opening of the Mississippi River through the dis turbed section, and the occupation of Little Rock and Fort Smith by the Federal forces, with the control of the Arkansas River from the head of navigation to its mouth, imposed upon the Commander-in-Chief of the Army the duty of deciding upon definite plans of further operations for an aggressive campaign early in the spring. In the early part of January, after obtaining the views of general officers who were familiar with military operations in the West, he determined to order the concentration of a large force on Red River for the defence of Northern and Western Louisiana, and for the purpose of operating against Texas, using the Red River as a base, with the cooperation of the navy. The troops selected for this movement were from the Department of the Gulf, under General Banks ; a detachment of the Sixteenth and Seven teenth Army Corps, under General A. J. Smith, from Vicksburg, and from the Department of Arkansas, under General F. Steele. In the plan of the campaign the troops of General Banks and General Smith, with the co operation of the Mississippi Squadron, under Admiral Porter, were to concentrate at Alexandria, Louisiana, on Red River, by the middle of March, when General Banks would assume command of the land forces of the expedi tion. The next objective point of the campaign was 253 254 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. Shreveport, on Red River, where the combined forces, including the troops under General Steele, from Little Rock, were to concentrate by the 1st of May. On the loth of March, the force of 9,200 men, under General Smith, left Vicksburg in a fleet of transports, and arrived at Alexandria on the i6th and iQth, being convoyed by Admiral Porter's fleet from the mouth of Red River. A day or so afterwards, General Banks' troops, under the im mediate command of General Franklin, commenced to arrive, and by the 26th had all got in. In a few days afterwards the movement of the troops in the direction of Shreveport was commenced, while the fleet of gunboats worked their way up Red River with some difficulty. On the 23d of March, General Steele left Little Rock with two divisions of troops for Arkadelphia, about one hundred miles southwest, where Brigadier-General John M. Thayer was ordered to join him with the Frontier Division from Fort Smith. When General Thayer joined him he would have about twelve thousand men, infantry, cavalry, and artillery, and with this force he proposed to push on and take Camden, a strongly fortified town on the Washita River, and then to march to Red River to join Banks. The next day after he left Little Rock a hard rain made the road very heavy, particularly in the creek and river bottoms, which rapidly exhausted the strength of the mules in the train and the artillery horses. The road across the bottoms of some of the streams was in such bad condition that it had to be corduroyed in places before all the train could get over. After leaving Benton, his advance skirmished with the enemy continu ally until he arrived at Arkadelphia on the 29th. On arriving at this place he was unable to hear anything about the movements of the Frontier Division after leaving Fort Smith, and couriers sent out to communi cate with General Thayer returned without being able to find him. Having the longer march to make to form THE CAMDEN EXPEDITION. 2$$ a junction with Steele's forces at Arkadelphia, General Thayer left Fort Smith on the 2ist, but on account of bad roads and the difficulty of getting forage for his transportation and artillery animals, he was obliged to abandon the route agreed upon and take another, pre senting fewer difficulties, but less direct and requiring several days more than the estimated time for making the march. On leaving Fort Smith his command con sisted of the Twelfth Kansas, the First and Second Kan sas Colored Infantry, the Eighteenth Iowa, and the First and Second Arkansas Union Infantry; detachments of the Second, Sixth, and Fourteenth Regiments Kansas Cavalry ; Rabb's Second Indiana Battery, Starks' Battery First Arkansas Light Artillery, and two twelve-pounder mountain howitzers attached to the Sixth Kansas Cavalry, the whole force of about five thousand men, with twelve field-guns and two howitzers, being divided into two brigades of infantry, commanded respectively by Colonel John Edwards, of the Eighteenth Iowa, and Colonel Charles W. Adams, Twelfth Kansas Infantry, and one cavalry brigade, commanded by Lieutenant-Colonel Owen A. Bassett, Second Kansas Cavalry. When Steele's forces left Little Rock and Fort Smith, the Confederate forces under General Sterling Price, commanding the District of Arkansas, consisted of three divisions of about twelve thousand men, occupying Arkadelphia, Washington, and Camden, the latter place being well fortified and a large depot for army sup plies.

## okolona-and-elkins-ferry

The Frontier Division arrived at Rockport, on the Little Rock and Arkadelphia road, about a week after General Steele had passed that place, and then pushed forward as rapidly as the condition of the roads would permit to overtake him. After waiting several days at Arkadelphia for the Fort Smith troops, General Steele marched to Okolona, about twenty miles southwest, thinking that Thayer must have struck a route west of the one at first proposed. In making this movement his rear-guard, under Brigadier-General S. A. Rice, was at tacked about twelve o'clock, April 2cl, by General Shelby, with fifteen hundred men and two pieces of artillery, on Gentry Creek, a few miles east of Okolona. When the attack was made, Colonel Thomas H. Benton, Jr., Twenty-ninth Iowa Infantry, was in command of the rear-guard, and immediately deployed his regiment in line, and ordered into position a section of Captain Voegele's battery. He repulsed the enemy after a few 2$8 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. volleys and then retired about half a mile to the ridge overlooking Terre Noir Creek and nearer the rear of the train, and formed in line again. General Rice, commanding the brigade in charge of the supply, pontoon, and brigade trains, now came on the field and directed the movements of his troops. He soon ascertained that Shelby was preparing for another attack, and then ordered up the Fiftieth Indiana Infantry to re inforce the Twenty-ninth Iowa. The Fiftieth Indiana had just arrived on the ground when the firing com menced again with artillery and small-arms. The Con federate force being mounted, and by making a slight detour to the right, had taken possession of the ridge on the Federal left by the time the Federal line was fully formed. While his section of artillery kept up a hot fire on the Confederate battery, General Rice ordered his in fantry to charge, and drove the enemy from their position at all points. The time consumed in the two actions had made quite an interval of space between his troops and the moving train, and as it was reported that the train was threatened by another force of the enemy, under General Cabell, moving from the south on the Washing ton road, General Rice withdrew his troops the moment the enemy were driven from the field and marched rapidly to overtake the train. In resuming the march, the Fiftieth Indiana, under Lieutenant-Colonel S. T. Wells, covered the rear, and for the next two miles and until he arrived at the junction of the Camden and Wash ington roads his command was constantly skirmishing with the enemy, who at times pressed forward with a good deal of determination. Near the junction of the Camden and Washington roads, Colonel Wells' command was relieved by four companies of the Ninth Wisconsin Infantry, under Colo nel C. E. Salomon. This force, in retiring, continued to engage the Confederates for the next half-mile, when THE CAM DEN EXPEDITION. Shelby dismounted part of his command and formed line of battle and placed his artillery in a favorable position for a desperate assault. In a few moments after the action commenced, General Rice arrived with the Fiftieth Indiana, and threw them into line on the right of the Ninth Wisconsin Infantry, and formed the Twenty-ninth Iowa in line in reserve, with the section of the battery in the centre so that its fire would sweep the road. These dispositions were hardly completed when the enemy showed themselves in greater numbers, and the fire from their small-arms and artillery increased in intensity. After firing a few rounds, General Rice ordered his troops to charge the enemy, which they did in gallant style, again driving them from the field in disorder. The Fed eral troops again faced to the front and resumed the march, but had not advanced more than half a mile when Shelby rallied his men and moved forward to another attack. Colonel Wells and Colonel Salomon again changed front to rear, and, charging, drove the enemy off, and as darkness was approaching, they withdrew from the contest without getting a single team from the Fed eral trains. The cavalry under General Carr were several miles in advance of the army that day, so that the in fantry were kept constantly in motion, marching, form ing in line, and in protecting their flanks. They set the grass and leaves on fire in a number of places, which had the effect of annoying the Confederates a good deal with smoke and dust, and several times disarranged their ad vancing line. It was nearly ten o'clock when the Federal rear-guard got into camp near Okolona that night, and the men were so much exhausted from constant marching and fighting the last ten hours that food and rest were never more welcome. General Rice reported his loss dur ing the day at eight killed and thirty-two wounded. The Confederate loss was perhaps somewhat heavier than the Federal loss from the fact that their attacks were made 260 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. upon infantry who were placed in defensive positions as far as practicable before opening fire upon their assailants. It was the policy of the Confederate commander to use his numerous cavalry in making vigorous attacks on the Federal flanks, front, and rear, to impede the march of the Federal troops as much as possible until they arrived at the Little Missouri River, when he proposed to con centrate his scattered forces on the south side of that stream to oppose General Steele's crossing it. In accord ance with this policy, General Shelby made an attack about nine o'clock on the morning of the 4th on the Federal picket about a mile north of camp on the Wash ington road. When the attack was made, Colonel Adolph Engelmann, who was under orders to inarch back to Hollywood, fourteen miles, with the Third Brigade, Third Division, and with a brigade of cavalry under Colonel Ritter, to find and establish communication with the Frontier Division, under General Thayer, was still in camp, and was just getting ready to move. He at once ordered Colonel Krez to reinforce the picket with two companies of the Twenty-seventh Wisconsin In fantry, in the absence of the cavalry, which was out on a reconnoissance on the Little Missouri River, and would not be due for several hours. In a short time the Con federates were attacking the reinforced picket with so much energy that Colonel Engelmann ordered forward Colonel Krez with the other companies of his regiment, with instructions to clear the woods of the enemy for two miles northeast of Okolona, if possible. Leaving one company in camp, and collecting the other companies of his regiment not already on the picket-line, Colonel Krez moved forward with his men deployed in line, and soon came in sight of the enemy, and opened fire upon them, and drove them from their position in a thicket to the opposite side of a clearing in the timber, where they made a stand and fired several rounds of grape and can- THE CAM DEN EXPEDITION. 26 1 ister from their two guns, and several shot and shell, into Colonel Engelmann's position in camp. A section of Vaughn's battery of Engelmann's brigade was brought out, and after throwing a few shells at the Confederate guns, caused them to change their position beyond the range of the pieces of the Federal batteries. After the skirmishing had lasted an hour or so without any decided advantage to either side, General Shelby made a movement that threatened to flank Colonel Krez on his left. When advised of this movement, Colonel Engelmann sent two companies of the Seventy-seventh Ohio Infantry to form on the left of Colonel Krez, and two companies of the same regiment to form in his rear as a reserve. A severe rainstorm now came up, accom panied with heavy thunder and vivid flashes of lightning, which interrupted operations for a short time on both sides. Directly after the storm passed over, Colonel Krez got the separated companies of his regiment into position so that he could direct their movements to better advantage, and when he extended his line on his right and left and began to move forward, threatening to outflank them, the Confederates withdrew from his front, firing a few shots as they retired. At times the firing on the skirmish-line was quite animated, and during the day's operations Colonel Krez lost three men killed and three wounded. When the firing became heaviest along the picket-line, Colonel Engelmann ordered into line the troops of his brigade who had not been sent to the front. It did not, however, become necessary for them to move out. Only the Twenty-seventh Wisconsin, two com panies of the Forty-third Illinois, two companies of the Fortieth Iowa, and two companies of the Seventy-seventh Ohio Infantry were engaged in the action on the picket- line that day. The Federal cavalry under Colonel Ritter did not arrive at Okolona from the Little Missouri River until two o'clock, too late to be employed in the pursuit 262 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. of the Confederates, who had just withdrawn from Colo nel Engelmann's front. It was four o'clock when the Colonel had drawn in his pickets and had his troops in motion on the march back to Hollywood. When he arrived at the Washington and Arkadelphia road, dark ness was coming on, and running into the Confederate pickets he bivouacked in line of battle until the next morn ing, when, finding that the Confederate pickets had been withdrawn, he resumed the march to Hollywood, arriving there at four o'clock. He sent out detachments of his cavalry beyond that point in the direction of Arkadelphia, and also on the Fort Smith road ; but they all returned without being able to obtain any information of General Thayer's movements. After waiting until ten o'clock of the 5th for reports from his detachments of cavalry, he faced to the front again, and rejoined General Steele near Elkins' Ferry on the Little Missouri River that evening after dark, having made a hard day's march of twenty-two miles over bad roads, terribly cut up by the passage of the large trains. On starting out from Little Rock, Brigadier-General E. A. Carr, commanding the cavalry division, led the advance of the army under General Steele, and had fre quent skirmishes with the enemy on the flanks and in front. When the Federal forces arrived at Arkadelphia, the Confederate commander in front supposed that their next objective point would be either Camden or Wash ington, the two most important points held by the Con federates in the State. The Confederate general officers understood the gen eral plan of the campaign proposed by the Federal authorities, which was for the forces of Banks and Steele to unite at some point on Red River, perhaps at Shreve- port. If General Steele desired to strike Red River at Fulton, the nearest point, Washington would be on his direct line of march from Arkadelphia; or if he desired THE CAMDEN EXPEDITION. 263 to strike Red River lower down, near Shreveport, still the route via Washington would be the nearest and most practicable. But his instructions were to reach Red River via Camden, which was the best fortified town in the State, as well as one of the most important, the Washita River being navigable to that point about two thirds of the year. And then it was not considered a good policy to leave such a strongly fortified place, pro visioned and occupied by the enemy, in the Federal rear. General Steele determined, if practicable, to manoeuvre the Confederate forces under Price out of Camden and occupy the place without a general battle. He was satisfied that if he marched from Arkadelphia directly towards Camden, Price would concentrate his forces from Washington and Camden to oppose him on that line; or if he marched towards Washington that Price would concentrate his forces to oppose him on that line. Camden was southeast of Arkadelphia and Washington southwest, and the three places were nearly equally dis tant from each other — about sixty miles. When General Steele marched out twenty miles southwest from Arka delphia on the Washington road, the Confederate gen erals did not doubt but that his next objective point in the campaign was Washington, and at once commenced concentrating their forces on the military road near the Little Missouri River to oppose his crossing that stream. But about nine miles southwest of Hollywood there was a road leading off from the Arkadelphia and Washington road to the south, through Okolona to Elkins' Ferry en the Little Missouri River, and thence to Camden, which General Steele's forces took, except part of his cavalry that had been thrown forward on the Washington road to cover his movements. When he turned off on this road he directed General Carr, commanding the cavalry division, to move forward and occupy a position com manding the crossing at Elkins' Ford or Ferry. 264 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. General Carr arrived at the ford at three o'clock on the 2d, and, finding the river fordable, posted a mounted picket on the south side, placed his four howitzers in position on the north side to command the ford, and sent a message back to General Steele, describing the situation and suggesting that a regiment of infantry and a rifled battery be sent forward to strengthen the position. He found that a considerable force of the enemy had crossed the river at the ford that day, going south, and he skirmished with a small force south of the ford, and did not doubt but General Marmaduke would send a strong force there at the earliest practicable moment for the purpose of dislodging him if possible. The holding of the ford was considered so important that General Salomon while on the march in the afternoon of the 2d sent forward part of the Second Brigade of his division, under Colonel William E. McLean, Forty-third Indiana Infantry, who, by making a forced march, reached the ford and crossed to the south side of the river about nine o'clock that night, and went into camp near the ferry. On April 3d, the balance of General Steele's army, ex cept Colonel Engelmann's brigade, which had been sent back to Hollywood, moved forward from Okolona to Elkins' Ferry and went into camp on high ground on the north side of the Little Missouri River. In the early part of that day some of Marmaduke's mounted detachments discovered the Federal pickets near the ford, on the south side of the river, and a courier was hastily sent to him at the place on the military road a few miles south of the Little Missouri River where he was concentrating his forces, advising him of the situation. He at once ordered forward Lieutenant-Colonel Preston, with his regiment of Colonel Colton Greene's brigade, to make a reconnois- sance and ascertain whether the main part of Steele's army had crossed to the south side of the river at Elkins' Ford. The Federal cavalry picket, about four miles THE CAMDEN EXPEDITION. 26$ south of the ford on the Prairie d'Ane road, was en countered by Colonel Preston, and driven back nearly two miles upon the infantry outposts. Here, Lieutenant- Colonel F. M. Drake, of the Thirty-sixth Iowa Infantry, who had been sent forward with three companies of his own regiment and three companies of the Forty-third Indiana Infantry, arrived and deployed his men in line and checked the Confederates, who retired a few miles to await the arrival of the forces under General Marmaduke. The Federal and Confederate pickets had a skirmish south of the ford before the arrival of Colonel Preston, and in that skirmish Major W. W. Norris, of the Forty- third Indiana Infantry, came to the assistance of the cavalry picket with four companies of his regiment, and deploying them in line, soon routed the enemy, driving them some two miles and capturing sixteen Confederate soldiers. In reconnoitring on the picket-line that evening, Colo nel Drake became satisfied that the Confederates were directly in his front in strong force, preparing to make an attack that night or early the next morning, and so advised Colonel McLean, commanding the brigade. Colonel Drake was ordered to take command of all the troops at the front, deploy them on each side of the road, watch the movements of the enemy, if attacked, resist them as far as he might consider advisable, and to retire on his reserves if the enemy advanced in force. His cavalry picket consisted of two companies of the First Iowa Cavalry, with vedettes in advance. About two hundred yards in the rear of his cavalry, he deployed three companies of the Thirty-sixth Iowa Infantry on the right of the road, and three companies of the Forty- third Indiana Infantry on the left of the road, with an interval of one hundred yards between each company, with instructions for a few men of each company to keep vigilant watch while the others slept on their arms until 266 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. four o'clock next morning, when all should be aroused to breakfast from their haversacks. A section of the Second Missouri Light Artillery, under Lieutenant Charles Peetz, was posted about two hundred yards in the rear of his centre companies so as to sweep the approaches from the front and flanks as soon as the picket retired. In a few hours after sending forward the regiment under Colonel Preston, General Marmaduke followed him with the bal ance of Greene's brigade and General Cabell's brigade and four pieces of artillery, and bivouacked in line that night on the edge of the Little Missouri River bottom in front of the Federal pickets, prepared to attack the Federal position in the morning at daylight. When daylight came he moved forward his troops to the attack, Greene's brigade in advance, and part of Cabell's brigade being placed in position in reserve. In a short time the Federal cavalry picket were driven in, firing upon the enemy as they fell back upon the in fantry companies deployed by Colonel Drake. The Con federates continuing to advance, with most of their force dismounted, the firing became brisk along the skirmish- line. As soon as the Confederates came up within range, Lieutenant Peetz opened upon them with the section of his battery, checking them for a short time and until Marmaduke ordered his guns into position. The roar of artillery was then continuous for an hour, with very little intermission of firing between the opposing skirmish-lines. Early in the action the Confederates endeavored to flank the Federal skirmish-line on the left, but Colonel Drake extended his line in that direction and drove them back beyond the range of his small-arms. Colonel Greene then sent a mounted force against the Federal right, where his men were driven back by a detachment of the First Iowa Cavalry, with the assistance of Colonel Drake's infantry. He then advanced his skirmish-line, supported by three dismounted regiments, and forced Colonel THE CAM DEN EXPEDITION. 267 Drake's front line back about fifty yards, the firing from the opposing lines being quite heavy at times. At this point in the action, General Marmaduke came onto the field to direct the operations of his troops in person, and brought with him Monroe's regiment and a section of a battery of Cabell's brigade, and placed them in position, the regiment on his right, and the two guns so as to cross-fire the Federal line. He then ordered his entire line forward, and in the charge forced Colonel Drake's line back upon the infantry reserves, two regi ments of which had been brought over from the north side of the river under General Rice early in the action to strengthen Colonel McLean's brigade holding the advance. Colonel C. W. Kittredge, Thirty-sixth Iowa Infantry, had moved up with seven companies of his regiment to the rear of the skirmishers on the left of the road, and when he saw the left of Colonel Drake's line retiring across an open field in his front, he formed his companies in line behind a rise of ground on the left of the section of the battery, and ordered his men to lie down. The enemy were firing and advancing rapidly, and he was satisfied that they were charging the battery. When they advanced into the open ground and came up within range, he ordered his men to rise and fire, which had the effect of instantly checking the Confederate line. He then ordered his men to give the enemy a few well- directed volleys, which caused them to fall back as hastily as they had just advanced. When that part of Colonel Drake's line on the left of the road fell back across the field, he retired with the companies on the right of the road, in good order, con testing every step of the ground, to a position nearly parallel with Colonel Kittredge's line, where he made a stand and repulsed the enemy on that part of the field. The section of the battery under Lieutenant Peetz, when it appeared to be endangered by the charge of the enemy, 268 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. was withdrawn across Howard's Creek, a short distance in the rear, and placed in a good position, where it con tinued to play upon the enemy's line until it fell back out of range. This repulse of the enemy ended the fight with the exception of a few rounds from their artillery, a grape shot from which slightly wounded General Rice just as he had come onto the field to make disposition of the two regiments which he had brought over from the north side of the river to the assistance of Colonel Mc Lean, but which took no part in the action, the enemy having retired. After his repulse, General Marmaduke retreated to a strong position about four miles south of Elkins' Ferry, and felled trees to obstruct the Federal advance, and threw up temporary defences nearly three miles in length, made of logs and earth, but abandoned them the next morning, and fell back to the south side of Prairie d'Ane.

## prairie-dane-and-camden

When the fight was over and the enemy had retreated, General Steele strengthened his outposts south of the ferry, and moved his troops and trains which were encamped on the north side to the south side of the Little Missouri River on the 6th of April, and advanced to the high ground some three miles south of the ford. He waited in this position for several days for General Thayer's Frontier Division, which he did not hear from until the 7th, and which was at Rockport on the 5th, arriving at the Little Missouri River on the Qth. In the meantime a heavy rain had fallen, raising the Little Missouri about three feet, so that it covered the lower bottoms, making it necessary to lay down the pontoon bridge and to corduroy about three miles of road across the bottom, to get the troops and trains of the Frontier Division over to the south side. On the loth, having concentrated the three divisions of his army on the high ground south of the Little Mis souri River, General Steele moved forward six miles south through pine forests to the northern edge of Prairie THE CAM DEN EXPEDITION. 269 d'Ane, where his advance, under Colonel Engelmann, about four o'clock encountered the Confederate skirmish ers occupying a ridge at the edge of the prairie, running east and west, and covered with low brush thick enough in places to conceal them from the view of the advancing Federal line. The main Confederate force, under Gen erals Shelby, Dockery, and Greene, was formed in line on a ridge running parallel with the one on which their skirmishers had formed, about half a mile south of it. Colonel Engelmann ordered up Captain Vaughn's Bat tery A, Third Illinois Artillery, deployed the Forty- third Illinois Infantry, under Lieutenant-Colonel Adolph Dengler, on the left, the Fortieth Iowa Infantry, under Colonel John A. Garrett, on the right, to support the battery, with the Twenty-seventh Wisconsin Infantry, under Colonel Conrad Krez, in reserve, and sent forward companies from his front line to ascertain the strength and position of the enemy. When it was found that only the Confederate skir mishers occupied the nearest ridge, General Salomon came up and ordered Colonel Engelmann to deploy his two front regiments, under Colonels Garrett and Dengler, as skirmishers, and then to advance and drive the enemy from their position in the brush, which they did in gallant style, carrying the ridge in a few minutes. The day was now far advanced, and desiring to hold the position which had been gained at the point of the bayonet, General Salomon ordered forward the brigades of his division, Colonel Engelmann 's brigade, with Vaughn's battery, forming his right, General Rice's brigade, with Voegelc's battery, forming his left, with McLean's brigade in re serve. While Vaughn's battery and the Twenty-seventh Wisconsin Infantry, which was supporting it, were being placed in position on the summit of the ridge just gained, the Confederate battery from the ridge in front opened a hot fire upon the Federal troops. This battery, however, 2/0 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. was soon obliged to leave the position it occupied, for it had fired only a few rounds when it was receiving the concentrated fire of Vaughn's battery on the Federal right and of Voegele's battery on the Federal left. Having driven the Confederate battery from its posi tion, General Salomon ordered another advance, and his troops from Rice's brigade on the left to Engelmann's in the centre and Caldwell's cavalry brigade on the ex treme right moved forward and drove the Confederates steadily before them and from the second ridge which their main force occupied when the fight opened. Night was now coming on, and it was too late to pur sue the enemy, who retreated over the prairie and dis appeared in the darkness in a southwest direction. The Federal troops bivouacked in line on the edge of the prairie, and as it was a cold, frosty night, they suffered much discomfort, being unable to have fire or shelter. They were kept standing in ranks or on the skirmish-line until nearly twelve o'clock that night, for General Shelby before nine o'clock posted two pieces of Collins' battery just behind the ridge in the prairie, about half a mile dis tant, and opened fire with shot and shell on the Federal position, lasting upwards of two hours. Vaughn's bat tery replied, sweeping the ridge around the Confederate guns with a storm of shot and shell. There was also some small-arms firing between the opposing skirmish- lines. The roar of the artillery in the stillness of the night, and the bursting of shells over the heads of the troops, made an impressive scene for the participants of both sides. About eleven o'clock that night, General Shelby formed a brigade of cavalry in line in a grove in front of the Federal right, and swept over the prairie in a charge on Vaughn's battery. When this charging force of cavalry came thundering over the prairie and within range of the Twenty-seventh Wisconsin and Fortieth Iowa Infantry, forming the front line of Colonel Engel- THE CAMDEN EXPEDITION. 2? I mann's brigade, Colonels Krez and Garrett, command ing those regiments, ordered their men to open fire upon the enemy, which they did, giving them several effective volleys before they had passed out of range. Almost at the same instant that the infantry opened fire, the guns of Vaughn's battery belched forth in several volleys a perfect storm of canister into the charging cavalry, and sent them back over the prairie in so much disorder that they made no further demonstrations against the Federal front that night. The next morning at daylight skirmishing commenced again between the outposts of the opposing forces, and in the afternoon General Steele ordered the Third Divi sion in line of battle on the prairie, and it advanced to within a mile of the Confederate fortified position in the edge of the forest skirting the southwest part of Prairie d'Ane. General Price, who had concentrated his avail able forces behind his works, and who commanded in person, declined to be drawn outside of them to accept the gage of battle offered by General Steele. Part of General Rice's brigade drew the fire of the Confederate artillery; but after some movements on the field in front of the Confederate works, to ascertain their position, it was too late to make an assault that evening, and General Steele's troops were withdrawn after dark to very nearly the position they had occupied the night before. The Confederates had taken up a strong defensive position. They had rifle-pits nearly a mile in length, with posi tions for artillery, and on the flanks they had made breast works of logs and felled trees nearly a mile in length, which would have been a great protection in an assault. Having by his reconnoissance in force ascertained the position of the rifle-pits and breastworks behind which the Confederate troops had been forced to retire, General Steele ordered another advance of the three divisions of his army early on the morning of the I2th, with the view 272 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. of attacking Price in his works. In this movement, Gen eral Rice's brigade on the right, Colonel Engelmann's brigade on the left, with General Carr's cavalry on either flank, formed General Steele's line of battle. The Fron tier Division, under General Thayer, formed the reserve of the army. With colors flying, and with the batteries of the different brigades in proper positions, the troops moved forward over the beautiful prairie, breathing valor all, with the determination of carrying the fortifications of the enemy by assault. When the movement com menced, a heavy line of skirmishers, consisting of one or two companies from each regiment, covered the advance of each brigade, and soon came upon the Confederate line of skirmishers and steadily drove them back to their intrenchments, when they disappeared. The Federal line continued to advance until the troops came in sight of the Confederate works, when General Steele, with Rice's brigade and a brigade of cavalry, turned Price's left flank, and without resistance he abandoned his forti fications and fell back to within eight miles of Washing ton. He was still under the impression that Steele desired to reach that point, and to conceal his real movement as long as possible, Steele sent part of his cavalry several miles in pursuit of the retreating Confederates, while with the rest of his army he turned to the left and marched for Camden as rapidly as practicable, General Carr, with a brigade of cavalry under Colonel Ritter, taking the advance. The road General Steele was moving on intersected the Washington and Camden road on the prairie in front of the intrenchments, so that his troops and trains on coming to the junctions of those roads took the left-hand road to Camden, the head of his column encamping on Terre Rouge Creek that night. The recent heavy rains having made the road crossing the bottom of this stream impassable for the trains and artillery, the pioneer corps, THE CAM DEN EXPEDITION. 2?$ under Captain J. B. Wheeler, Chief Engineer, was sent forward with heavy details to repair it. As long stretches of the road had to be corduroyed and bridges repaired, much time was expended in collecting rails and timber for the purpose, so that the movement of the army was delayed until noon the next day. On the morning of the 1 3th, General Price was informed that, instead of pursuing him vigorously after he was manoeuvred out of his in- trenchments at Prairie d'Ane, the Federal forces had turned to the left and were marching rapidly for Camden. There were three roads leading from Washington to Cam- den, the most northern of which the Federal forces were marching on. When, therefore, Price found that he had been deceived as to the intentions of the Federal com mander, he sent forward most of his cavalry and some light batteries, under General Marmaduke, on the middle Camden road, to get in front of the Federal forces and contest their advance on Camden, while he took the divisions of Maxey and Fagan and moved forward rapidly and attacked General Steele's rear under General Thayer, commanding the Frontier Division, near the little village of Moscow on the south side of Prairie d'Ane. General Dockery came upon and attacked and drove in General Thayer's outposts about one o'clock on the I3th, while General Steele's Third Division was crossing the Terre Rouge Creek bottom. The Frontier Division had encamped in the timber near the prairie, and the teams of the trains were hitched up and the troops in readiness to move when the attack was made. The Confederates advanced over the prairie and deployed to the right and left of the road in such large numbers that General Thayer saw that he must make disposition of his troops at once for battle. He had hardly completed the forma tion of his line and placed his batteries in position, with his cavalry on his flanks, when Price opened with his artillery and threw forward a brigade under Dockery, VOL. II. — 17 274 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. which made a furious charge in the direction of the Second Indiana Battery with the intention of taking it. When this charging force came up within range, the Fed eral infantry poured several volleys of musketry into their ranks, with fatal precision, and the twelve guns in the batteries of Thayer's division also swept their ranks and the field in front with a storm of grape and canister, causing them to retire hastily with a heavy loss of killed and wounded. There was an almost incessant roar from the artillery firing from one until five o'clock in the after noon, with several sharp conflicts with small-arms between the opposing forces, when the Confederates were driven from the field and pursued about three miles. In this action the Second Indiana Battery fired 210 solid shot and shell, besides a number of rounds of grape and canister. When General Thayer's troops returned from the pur suit that evening, his division resumed the march and marched all that night through the swamp and over the terrible road across the Terre Rouge bottom. Although the road had been repaired and corduroyed across most of this bottom, there were places in it where the rails and timber laid down had sunk out of sight in the mud from the weight of the loaded wagons of the trains and the artillery which had already passed over it. While the troops and trains of the Frontier Division were floun dering in the swamps and mud of Terre Rouge bottom, General Steele's advance was delayed at Cypress Bayou until the pioneer corps could repair several bridges and corduroy the road in places across the low bottom-land of that stream. Having received information on the I4th that a large Confederate force of cavalry and artillery was marching on the middle Washington and Camden road to get in his front at the junction of that road with the one he was moving on, General Steele sent forward part of his cavalry under General Carr, and a brigade of THE CAMDEN EXPEDITION. 275 infantry and Battery E, Second Missouri Light Artillery, under General Rice, to reach the junction of the roads, fourteen miles northwest of Camden, if practicable, before the enemy. This force marched to White Oak Creek that evening and encamped that night. On arriving at that point, General Carr sent forward 250 cavalry to make a reconr oissance to the junction of the roads, four miles farther on, and 250 cavalry to make a reconnoissance to the middle Washington and Camden road by turning to the right on a cross-road a mile or so in advance. These detachments of Federal cavalry met and skirmished with the Confederate cavalry after dark, killing one and wounding and capturing two men who belonged to Mar- maduke's command. From these prisoners it was ascer tained that Shelby's and Greene's brigades had arrived at the junction of the northern and middle Washington and Camden roads that evening, and were prepared to oppose the Federal advance. The next morning, the 1 5th, Steele's advance, under Generals Carr and Rice, marched only a few miles when they met the Confederate skirmishers near the junction of the northern and middle Washington and Camden roads, and drove them nearly two miles, when they joined Marmaduke, who had formed two brigades on each side of the road, and who at once had five pieces of his artil lery open fire upon the Federal advance. General Carr had been using his mountain howitzers to drive the Con federate skirmishers from several positions, but when the Confederate field-guns opened upon him, Captain Stange's battery, Second Missouri Light Artillery, under Lieuten ant Peetz of General Rice's brigade, was brought to the front, supported by the Twenty-ninth Iowa on the left, and Thirty-third Iowa Infantry on the right, and replied very effectively to the Confederate guns. When the cannonading had lasted nearly two hours, with some skirmishing with small-arms, General Rice or- 2/6 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. dered Colonel Salomon, commanding the Ninth Wisconsin Infantry, to turn the left flank of the enemy, the nature of the ground not admitting of the formation of cavalry on that part of the field. While this movement was being made, Marmaduke withdrew his battery and fell back in the direction of Camden, closely pursued by the Federal forces, making only a few feeble efforts to check their advance. He was pushed so closely by Generals Rice and Carr that when within three miles of Camden he turned to the right and moved over on to the lower Wash ington and Camden road, leaving one regiment under Colonel Lawther to skirmish with the Federal advance into the city. Generals Carr and Rice marched into Cam den before dark, with their commands; but the last of the troops and the trains of the Third Division did not get in until nearly midnight, and General Thayer's Fron tier Division did not enter the city until the next day. At that time Camden was the second town in population and in importance in the State, and, until the near ap proach of General Steele's army, had been the headquar ters of General Price, commanding the Confederate forces in the District of Arkansas. It was a beautiful little place, situated on high ground on the south bank of the Washita River, which was navigable for good-sized steam boats to that point the greater part of the year. It had for several months been the base of supplies for the Southern forces in all that section, and the Confederate authorities had constructed nine forts for the defence of the place at a great cost of money and labor. General Steele had executed a brilliant movement, for in manoeu vring Price out of his intrenchments at Prairie d'Ane, he also manoeuvred him out of his strong fortifications at Camden, and took the place without a general battle. When Price saw that he had been outgeneralled, he made every possible effort, by attacking the Federal forces in rear and front, to detain them until he could hurry his THE CAMDEN EXPEDITION. 277 mounted infantry and artillery over the lower Washing ton and Camden road, and get to Camden and reoccupy the works before the arrival of his adversary. But his interposing force was unable to check the Federal advance more than a few hours.

## poison-spring

CHAPTER XVIII. THE BATTLE OF POISON SPRING, ARKANSAS. ON General Steele's arrival at Camden, information had been received there by telegraphic despatches that General Banks had been defeated above Natchitoches and obliged to fall back in the direction of Grand Ecore and Alexandria. This information by telegraph, which had come through Southern sources, was soon confirmed by the return and report of one of General Steele's spies, who had been sent to communicate with General Banks. A day or so later an officer on the staff of General Banks arrived with despatches confirming the reports of his de feat, and that he was falling back to Alexandria. When it was definitely known that Banks had been defeated and was falling back, General Steele saw that it was use less for him to advance any farther in the direction of Red River. His column was a cooperating one, and the point upon which the several columns were converging was now a point from which the other columns were re treating. At that time there were twenty-four feet of water in the channel of the Washita River at Camden, and General Steele thought that he might make that place his base of supplies if he could get a gunboat to convoy steamers up the river. But a crisis was rapidly approaching when he must either get supplies up the Washita, or fall back with his army to Little Rock or Pine Bluff on the Arkansas River. Already there were 2/3 BATTLE OF POISON SPRING. 279 rumors that General E. Kirby Smith had promised to send General Price eight thousand infantry and the complement of artillery from the troops who had been operating against General Banks in Louisiana. In the march from Little Rock to Camden, General Steele found that the country had been nearly exhausted of supplies by the Confederate troops during the past winter and spring, and that they had destroyed all the forage on the Federal line of march, as far as practicable, which they could not use or take away. His troops had been on half rations of bread since he started out upon the expe dition, and less than that proportion of the meat ration had been issued to them. His cavalry, artillery, and transportation animals, numbering as many as ten thou sand, required a large amount of forage, and on account of the short ration and hard service imposed upon them, many of them were daily becoming unserviceable. In deed, the bread ration was so nearly exhausted that a part of the corn ration for the animals was turned over to the commissary department to be ground into meal for the troops. As the Confederates were driven back they destroyed nearly all the best mills in that section, to pre vent the Federal troops from using them, so that most of the meal made had to be ground by the soldiers with hand-mills. The large steamer Homer, with a cargo of four thousand bushels of corn, was captured by General Steele's cavalry, under Colonel Ritter, on the Washita, thirty miles below Camden, on the night of the i6th, and brought back up the river to the city and unloaded, and the corn issued to the army, relieving the present situation. There were a few Union people in Camden, and they reported to Captain C. A. Henry, chief quartermaster of the expedition, how much corn they could spare, and he purchased it and paid them for it. He also ascertained that there were considerable quantities of corn at a num ber of plantations in the vicinity of Camden, and made 280 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. arrangements to secure it. In that section very few of the slaves had left their masters on the arrival of the Federal troops, and the last year the planters and small farmers had raised an increased acreage of corn, and a decreased acreage of cotton, for the demand for corn to supply subsistence and forage for the Southern army and for home consumption had increased, while the market for cotton had become more uncertain. The Confederate officers had made it a point to use up and destroy the forage in the disputed territory occupied by the outposts of the two armies between Arkadelphia and Little Rock, up to the time General Steele's expedi tion started out, and had drawn as sparingly as possible on the supplies of the citizens in the vicinity of Camden. When the people found that the Confederates were burn ing the forage likely to fall into the hands of the Federal troops, a good many of them endeavored to secrete their corn. In the advance on Camden, Captain Henry had ascertained that there was a large amount of corn, esti mated at from four to five thousand bushels, at several plantations near the road on which the Federal troops had passed, out about eighteen miles, and on the morn ing of the i/th made up a train of 198 wagons, and asked for an escort for it of a regiment each of cavalry and in fantry, and a section of artillery, to send out and get this forage. General Thayer was instructed to detail troops from his division for the escort. He directed Colonel James M. Williams, First Kansas Colored Infantry, to take command of the escort, which consisted of the Colonel's own regiment, under Major Richard G. Ward, 195 cavalry of the Second, Sixth, and Fourteenth Kan sas Regiments, and two pieces of the Second Indiana Battery, under Lieutenant William W. Haines — in all, 695 men. Although the road near which the forage would be found was the one over which the Federal troops had just passed, it was by no means the rear of BATTLE OF POISON SPRING. 28 1 the army — was, in fact, as much the front as the rear. It was contrary to the general policy of military com manders to forage to the front. But in the face of this sound military maxim, the train and escort were sent out, and upwards of one hundred of the wagons loaded with corn that evening and during the early part of the night. The next morning details were sent out with teams, and the empty wagons were to be loaded with forage from plantations on either flank, with instructions to join the loaded part of the train en route to Camden. The balance of the troops of the escort and the loaded part of the train were at once put in motion on the road to Cam- den, and about four miles east of the point where they had encamped during the night, near Poison Spring, met a reinforcement, under Captain William M. Duncan, of 383 men of the Eighteenth Iowa Infantry, 90 cavalry of the Second, Sixth, and Fourteenth Kansas Regiments, and two twelve-pounder mountain howitzers attached to the Sixth Kansas, under Lieutenant A. J. Walker of that regiment. This reinforcement halted until the train passed and then became a part of the rear-guard. About a mile east of this point the advance-guard came up to and fired upon the Confederate picket in the road and pursued it nearly a mile, when it joined the Confederate line of skirmishers which occupied a good position in the pine woods on each side of the Camden road. When the Federal train and escort left Camden, Gen eral Price's headquarters were at Woodlawn, sixteen miles southwest, and about ten miles southeast of the place where Colonel Williams encamped that night. The Confederate scouts had watched the movement of the train and escort from the moment they left Camden until they went into camp that night, and knew the number of wagons in the train and approximately the num ber of troops in the escort, and reported all this to Gen eral Marmaduke near Woodlawn that evening. Later in 282 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. the evening these scouts also reported to General Mar- maduke the advance of the troops under Captain Duncan which left Camden in the afternoon of the day the train and escort left there in the morning to reinforce Colonel Williams. With this information it was determined that night by General Marmaduke to make an effort to cap ture the train, and preparations were made to start early the next morning with picked men from three divisions — the divisions of Marmaduke, Cabell, and Maxey, with a four-gun battery to each division — the whole force of thirty-seven hundred men and twelve pieces of artillery to be under the command of General S. B. Maxey, the senior officer of the three brigadier-generals who were to direct the movements of the troops. In the plan of attack, Marmaduke's division was to form on the right, with a battery near his centre; Cabell's division in the centre, with a battery near his centre; and Maxey's division of Texans and Indians on the left of the Con federate line, with a battery near his centre. In taking their positions on the field, Marmaduke's and Cabell's lines faced west, covering the Federal front, and Maxey's line faced north, covering the Federal right. Of course, when his advance-guard fired upon and drove in the Confederate picket, Colonel Williams knew nothing about these dispositions of the Confederate troops in his front and on his flanks, nor of the strength of the force confronting him. But from what he saw of the move ments and boldness of the Confederate skirmish-line, he suspected that the situation might be a serious one, and one that demanded of him extreme caution. Up to that moment it was thought that if an attack should be made on the train, it would more likely be made on the rear than in front, and in consequence most of his troops who were not out with his forage details were in the rear of the train. He ordered the train halted and parked, and forming in line the small force of his cavalry advance, BATTLE OF POISON SPRING. 283 directed Lieutenant Haines, commanding the section of the battery, to open fire upon the Confederate position for the purpose of ascertaining whether the enemy had artillery, and that the sound of the artillery firing might warn his forage details which were out to come in. The fire of his two guns did not have the effect of at once drawing a response from the Confederate artillery, but the Confederate skirmishers opened a brisk fire of mus ketry at long range, doing very little damage. The moment the Confederate skirmish-line was ob served, Colonel Williams ordered his colored infantry, under Major Ward, to the front. As they came up they formed in line on each side of the road at the top of a hill, the right of the line overlooking the north end of a field which was a hundred yards or so in front. The field may have had twenty to thirty acres in it, and the north end of it was about two hundred yards south of the Camden road. Nearly all the high ground in that section not in cultivation was covered with pine timber, and in some places with a young growth of pine, making it impossible to see objects more than a hundred yards or so in front. While the Confederate commander was making dis position of his troops on his left, most of Colonel Wil liams' forage details which were out, on hearing the cannonading of the first skirmish, hastily came in, and Lieutenant Robert Henderson, of the Sixth Kansas, who had been out with a train of eighteen wagons, on return ing turned them over to the quartermaster, and then marched to the front and reported. Colonel Williams had just noticed through openings in the pine woods a movement of Confederate infantry towards his right ; but, still desiring to know the nature of the force in his front, sent forward from his right Lieutenants Henderson and Mitchell with their cavalry, with instructions to press the Confederate line, and if possible ascertain the position 284 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. and strength of the enemy. While moving along the north end of the field in the pine woods between the field and road, and just as it was nearing the northeast corner, this cavalry received a heavy volley of musketry from the enemy posted in the brush in front, wounding Lieuten ant Henderson severely, who was held on his horse and taken to the rear. On returning the fire with their car bines this cavalry was driven back upon the line of colored infantry, and were then ordered to take a posi tion on the extreme right of that regiment. On bringing up the colored infantry, a skirmish-line was thrown for ward about a hundred yards in front, covering the left wing. This skirmish-line was kept out upwards of half an hour, exchanging shots with the Confederate skir mishers, and was called in only when it was evident that the Confederate infantry were on the point of advancing against the Federal right. In a short time after the cavalry under Lieutenants Henderson and Mitchell were driven in on the Federal right, the batteries of Marmaduke's and Cabell's divisions in the Federal front, and the battery of Maxey's division on the right of the Federal position, opened a heavy cross-fire of shot and shell upon the Federal line, lasting perhaps for half an hour. During this heavy cannon ade, Major Ward ordered his men to lie down on the ground just behind the crest of the hill, and though exposed to the storm of shot and shell from this terrible cross-fire, his line suffered very few casualties. This was due to the fact that the pine woods concealed the exact location of his line from the view of the Confederate artil lery officers. In the course of this fierce artillery contest, a piece of shell struck one of the colored infantry between the shoulders, and he jumped up and spun around for a moment in great agony. A mounted Confederate officer near his battery in front, through an opening in the woods, saw the wounded soldier jump up, disclosing BATTLE OF POISON SPRING. 285 the position of the Federal line, and at once turned his guns in that direction and swept nearly every foot of the ground a few paces in front of the colored infantry with a storm of shot and shell. Colonel Williams sat on his horse a few paces in the rear of his line with his field-glass in his hands, looking through it and carefully watching every movement of the enemy as far as could be seen through the openings in the woods, and while a storm of shot and bursting shell were flying thickly around him, cautioned his men to keep their eyes to the front. Even before the Confederate battery had opened fire on his right, he had noticed through openings in the pine forest heavy masses of Confederate infantry moving to his right, and, feeling satisfied that he would soon be attacked from that quarter, directed Major Ward to form the right wing of his regiment facing south. To guard against a flank ing movement on his left front, Lieutenant Josephus Utt was posted on his extreme left, with seventy-five men of the Fourteenth Kansas Cavalry. Captain Duncan, com manding the rear-guard of the train, when it was found that the enemy were advancing against the Federal front and right flank, formed his men of the Eighteenth Iowa Infantry in line south of the road, facing southeast, with the section of howitzers, under Lieutenant Walker, and the cavalry, under Lieutenant R. L. Phillips, Sixth Kan sas, on his right. When the Confederate artillery ceased firing, the Con federate infantry advanced through the pine woods on the left and right of the road in front, through the field south of the road, and through the brush southwest of the field, and came up at a trail-arms within one hundred yards of the Federal line, when Major Ward gave the order and the colored infantry rose from the ground and commenced firing from the right of each wing, and then along the entire line, and kept it up, firing four or five volleys, using buck and ball, until the Confederates re- 286 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. tired out of range, having also fired several volleys. Generals Cabell and Marmaduke in front, and General Maxey on the Federal right, re-formed and reinforced their assaulting columns, and in a few moments moved forward in another charge, coming up within seventy-five yards of the line of colored infantry, when a fierce con flict with small-arms took place between the opposing lines, lasting perhaps twenty minutes, when the Confed erates again retired out of range. In this second assault the men of the opposing lines were near enough to hear each other talking, and part of General Maxey's line on the Federal right introduced themselves as the Twenty- ninth Texas, and called out, " You First Nigger, now buck to the Twenty-ninth Texas." The Twenty-ninth Texas and the First Kansas Colored Infantry were op posed to each other in the battle of Honey Springs, Indian Territory, and in that fight the Texans were driven off the field in much confusion and with a heavy loss in killed and wounded. After the charge, Colonel Williams saw from the overwhelming forces hurled against him, supported by twelve pieces of artillery posted so as to cross-fire his position, that there was no reasonable prospect of defeating the enemy; but he determined to defend the train as long as possible, hoping that the roar of the battle would bring out reinforcements from Cam- den to his assistance. He kept the section of the Second Indiana Battery steadily at work on the Confederate positions in his front and on his right from the first skir mish, now nearly two hours, and he did not doubt but that this continuous cannonading would notify the offi cers and troops at Camden, ten miles distant, that he was heavily engaged. In order to strengthen his left centre, which had twice been driven back, General Maxey ordered Greene's bri gade of Marmaduke's division on the right to take position in the centre between Maxey's and Cabell's divisions, and I. BATTLE OF POISOI? SPRING. 28? then the Confederate forces moved forward, four lines deep, in a third charge, their continuous shouting at times rising above the roar of musketry. They were permitted to approach within easy musket range, when Major Ward ordered his men to open fire upon them, to which the Confederates replied with vigor, but were again obliged to retire out of range after a sharp conflict of fifteen to twenty minutes. Every time the Confederate infantry retired out of range to lower ground, the Con federate batteries, from elevated positions, firing over their heads, cross-fired the Federal position with a perfect storm of shot and shell. Just at the close of the third assault the two pieces of the Second Indiana Battery having nearly exhausted their shell and canister, and nearly all the gunners of the right piece being wounded and disabled, Lieutenant Haines was ordered to report with that piece to Captain Duncan, commanding the rear guard, and number one on the left was limbered towards the rear on the north side of the road. In the three desperate assaults which the enemy had made on his lines, Colonel Williams saw that his right and front had suffered so heavily in killed and wounded that he could not sustain another charge, for which the Confederates were preparing, without too great a sacri fice, and started to ride to the rear to form the Eighteenth Iowa in a favorable position for the colored infantry to fall back upon, when his horse was shot under him. Major Ward immediately gave him his horse, and he mounted it and rode back and formed the Eighteenth Iowa in line facing in the direction from which the enemy were advancing; but he had hardly completed this duty when the Confederates made their fourth charge, forcing the line of colored infantry, which from the first assault had been a curved line, with the centre of the curve out ward, back about one hundred yards, close upon the train. At this time the smoke was so dense along the line of 288 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. battle that the troops could see each other distinctly only a few yards distant, making it difficult to keep a perfect alignment. Two companies of the colored regiment which had at first formed the left of the left wing, under Lieutenant W. C. Gibbons, on the north side of the road, on retiring on that side of the road became sepa rated from the other companies by the train, which was now between them. But as the Confederates were also pressing forward on the Federal left, Lieutenant Gibbons had all he could do to keep them off until his men joined their comrades north of the road near the rear of the train. Early in the action Colonel Williams was convinced from the movements of the Confederates and from in formation obtained from a Confederate soldier, who rode into his line inquiring for Colonel De Morse, that their main attack was going to be directed against his front and right flank, and, to strengthen this part of his line, and to be prepared for the charge which he knew was coming, ordered up from the rear four companies of the Eighteenth Iowa. In the meantime Colonel Tandy Walker's Choctaw Indian Brigade had formed in line on General Maxey's left about half a mile south of the rear of the train, on Captain Duncan's right when his line faced east, but directly in his front when he changed his line facing south, and in view of the situation he sent a message to Colonel Williams, stating that he was so closely pressed by the enemy that he could not spare the men called for. Though Captain Duncan was threatened by this Indian brigade in his front while the desperate conflict was going on in front and on the right of the train, his command did not become heavily engaged until the line of colored infantry was broken, and the retreat had commenced. After the line of colored infantry was forced back in the fourth assault, the Confederate com mander rapidly drew his lines closer around the Federal position, and his troops, seeing that success was assured, k K •2 BATTLE OF POISON SPRING. 289 went into the closing scenes of the fight with a wild hurrah, shooting down the colored wounded soldiers as they came upon any who were left on the field. With desperate valor and contesting every inch of ground, the colored infantry were forced from their position back to the rear of the train and formed on the left of the Eighteenth Iowa, pouring volley after volley into the lines of the exulting foe as they retired. The Federal troops and train were now entirely sur rounded, and the firing of small-arms and artillery, the crashing of shot and bursting shell in among the teams of the large train, the roar of the battle, and the shout ing of the victorious Confederate troops soon caused a scene of great confusion. Colonel Williams now saw that it was impossible to save the train, and that it would re quire heroic courage to save his troops who were not already left on the field, killed and wounded. In a few moments after part of the colored infantry formed on the left of the Eighteenth Iowa, the united commands were compelled by overpowering numbers of the enemy to retire to the north side of the Camden road, where a stand was made for a short time to enable the section of the battery to move to the rear, which was then north of the road. When forced from this position the Federal troops retired through an open field, and in the timber on the north side of it formed in line again, and after a few volleys checked the Confederates, who were advancing with yells from the front and left and right flanks. In falling back to this position, this main part of the com mand was joined by quite a number of the colored soldiers who had fallen back from the front on the north side of the train under Lieutenant Gibbons, and by others who made their way between the teams to the north side of the road when Colonel Williams' front and right flank were forced back after the fourth charge. Of course it was now the purpose of the Federal troops to retreat to VOL. II. — 19 2QO THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. Camden by the most direct route practicable. Closely pressed by the enemy from all sides, and retreating through timber and thick brush and over ground cut up by ravines, over which it was impracticable to move artil lery, it became necessary to cut the horses loose from the two pieces of the Second Indiana Battery and the two howitzers of the Sixth Kansas, and abandon the guns. Near the field north of the Camden road, Colonel Williams rallied part of his cavalry, under Lieutenant Phillips, Sixth Kansas, and held them in line long enough to enable his wounded colored soldiers who had fallen in the rear to come up and reach a swamp which lay in his front and get away. After leaving the position behind the field in the timber, the Confederate infantry did not again get up within range of the Federal troops ; but the Confederate cavalry continued the pursuit about two miles, frequently pressing closely upon Colonel Williams' flanks and rear, so that his troops were obliged to form four or five times, face to the rear, and give the enemy a volley each time to hold them off. As General Maxey wished to secure the large train and the abandoned guns, and fearing that a large Federal force would come out from Camden and attack him, he very soon called off his troops from the pursuit and placed part of them in posi tion on the Camden road east of the train. It was about two o'clock when the Confederate cavalry disappeared from the rear and flanks of the retreating Federal troops, after which, by toilsome marching through swamps and pine woods, they reached Camden that night about eight o'clock, without further interruption, in a nearly ex hausted condition. On account of the repeated threats which the Confed erates had made that they would show no quarter to colored soldiers, and having that day seen the Confed erates shooting and bayoneting the wounded colored soldiers where they had fallen, every colored soldier who was wounded in the fight and who could walk came off BATTLE OF POISON SPRING. 29 1 the field with the troops in the retreat. Some who were too badly wounded to walk, lay on the field, and when the Confederates came near them, feigned being dead, and crawled off the field after dark, and endeavored to make their way back to camp, marching while they had strength and then lying down in the grass and weeds to rest. Several colored soldiers who were badly wounded, and who from weakness and loss of blood were obliged to march and rest at intervals, were bitten by poisonous snakes while lying down in the grass or weeds during the night, and when they got into camp the next day their bodies were horribly swollen from the effect of the poison which had spread through their systems. One of the colored soldiers who was wounded and lay on the field until night feigning death, and then crawled off and made his way into camp, stated that he saw the Confederates shooting the wounded colored soldiers who were left on the field, and that Confederate soldiers went over the field after the battle, calling out and answering each other, " Where is the First Nigger now ? " " All cut to pieces and gone to hell by bad management." The Federal loss in the battle was 122 men killed, 97 wounded, and 81 missing. In the fight and in the re treat, the colored regiment had 117 men and officers killed and 65 wounded. When separated from their com mand or cut off from it, the colored soldiers were shot down without mercy. General Cabell reported that one of his regiments, stationed east of the battle-field on the Camden road, killed at least 80 negroes. General Maxey reported his loss, from incomplete re turns of casualties in his different commands, at 17 men killed and 88 wounded. His officers reported only 4 colored men captured. Immediately after the fight was over he commenced removing the train, artillery, and captured property from the scene of the conflict to the Confederate camp near Woodlawn, the last of the troops not leaving the field until nearly dark.

## marks-mills

CHAPTER XIX. BATTLE OF JENKINS' FERRY. IN all the movements of his troops up to the occupa tion of Camden General Steele had shown extreme caution against being drawn into a position from which he could not give blow for blow if attacked. He had kept out heavy cavalry reconnoissances miles in his front and on his flanks, with a strong infantry rear-guard. When the train left Camden he knew that all Price's forces were in his immediate vicinity, and if he did not know their exact position, a cavalry reconnoissance might have discovered it and prevented the Poison Spring disaster. In view of his habitual caution it seems probable that his attention was not called by his chief quartermaster to the distance and direction the forage he desired to secure was from Camden. When he heard of the disaster, he stated that he was opposed to foraging to the front. The loss of this large train and artillery was seriously felt by him, and would necessarily cripple his future operations, while the success of the Confederates in the enterprise would stimulate the leaders to still greater exertion to throw their forces upon his line of communication with his base of supplies at Little Rock and Pine Bluff. His hopes of getting the assistance of the gunboats on the Washita were dissipated by information brought to him by one of his messengers from General Banks that Red River had fallen so rapidly that part of the gunboats of Admiral Porter's 292 BATTLE OF JENKINS' FERRY. 293 fleet had grounded, and that none of them would prob ably be able to get back over the falls above Alexandria. His troops had hardly got into camp at Camden from the field of Poison Spring, when his spies and scouts reported that General E. Kirby Smith had arrived at General Price's headquarters on the iQth, to direct in person the further operations of the Confederate forces, and that on the next and following days the divisions of Walker, Churchill, and Parsons, from Louisiana, numbering about eight thousand men and artillery, would be up. A supply train of 150 wagons, loaded with commissary and ordnance stores, was due from Pine Bluff, and Gen eral Steele sent out a brigade of infantry, under Colonel Thomas H. Benton, Jr., Twenty-ninth Iowa Infantry, to meet it and guard it into Camden. Colonel Benton met the train out about seventeen miles, and brought it in safely on the 2Oth, and half rations for ten days were issued to the troops. As soon as unloaded, the train was sent back to Pine Bluff for further supplies, guarded by a brigade of infantry, four hundred cavalry of the First Iowa, and four pieces of the Second Missouri Light Artil lery, all under command of Lieutenant-Colonel Francis M. Drake, Thirty-sixth Iowa Infantry. To guard against a surprise, General Steele had sent out his cavalry, under General Carr, to scout the country for a distance of thirty miles below Camden and an equal distance above and in the direction of Pine Bluff and Little Rock, and before the train started back, his officers who had been on this scouting service reported that they could not hear of any Confederate force north of the Washita River. On his arrival in the vicinity of Camden, and having assumed command of the Confederate forces in person, General Smith sent out an expedition, under General Fagan, of four thousand picked cavalry and several bat teries of light artillery, with instructions to cross to the north side of the Washita River and destroy General 2Q4 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. Steele's supplies at Little Rock and Pine Bluff, and then to make such disposition of his force as to effectually in terrupt the communication of the Federal commander with those points. The expedition under General Fagan left the Confederate camp, a few miles south of Camden, on the 22d, the same day that the Federal supply train under Colonel Drake crossed to the north side of the Washita en route for Pine Bluff. To attract General Steele's attention from Fagan's movement, General Price moved up part of his troops and batteries and opened a heavy cannonade upon the Federal outposts at Camden, lasting several hours. General Fagan crossed the Washita thirty to forty miles below Camden, and by making a forced march got his troops in position to attack the es cort to the train under Colonel Drake in front and rear at Marks' Mill, near the Moro Swamp, on the morning of the 25th. After a desperate battle of nearly five hours, the Fed eral troops were overwhelmed and nearly all the infantry killed, wounded, and captured, Colonel Drake, the gallant commander, being severely wounded in the thigh and hip. The train of 211 wagons and the four pieces of artillery also fell into the hands of the Confederates. The Federal troops fought the battle under great disad vantages, the force in front being separated from the one in the rear by the length of the train, probably nearly two miles, besides being outnumbered as four to one by the enemy, who were stripped for the fight. General Fagan reported that his killed and severely wounded would not exceed 150 men. General Cabell, however, reported that his brigade alone had over 200 men wounded. In his report of the battle, Colonel Drake stated that his chief surgeon informed him that he had about 250 men killed and wounded. He also stated that after the fight that day it was estimated that there were 800 to 900 dead and wounded men on the battle-field ; BATTLE OF JENKINS' FERRY. 295 that about one half of these were Confederates, and that a large proportion of the others were Arkansas refugees and negroes who were going along with the train to Pine Bluff, and who had been inhumanly murdered. A good many of the colored men, however, when they saw that the train was going to be captured, fled to the swamps and got away, and in a few days reached Pine Bluff and Little Rock. Very few of the cavalry were captured, and those who were in the rear of the train fell back in the direction of Camden, some of the men reaching that point early that night to inform General Steele of the disaster.

## jenkins-ferry

A council of war was held at General Steele's head quarters that night, and it was the opinion of nearly all the general officers present that the army should evacuate Camden and abandon the line of the Washita at once and fall back to Little Rock; that the supply line from Little Rock or Pine Bluff was too long to keep up in view of the fact that General Kirby Smith had brought large re inforcements from Louisiana and could pass to the Fed eral rear and cut the army off from its base of supplies. The greater part of Price's force was cavalry, or rather mounted infantry, and could be moved very rapidly to any given point to make an attack, and was very effective in operating against the Federal supply line. On his arrival at Camden, General Steele had directed Captain Wheeler, his chief engineer, to lay down the pontoon bridge across the river opposite the city, con necting with the Pine Bluff road, so that it was ready for immediate use when it was determined to evacuate the place. The next day, the 26th, the baggage trains and artillery crossed the bridge over the river to the north side, the troops keeping their respective positions until an hour or so after dark, when they, too, were quietly withdrawn, without attracting the attention of the citi zens, to the north side. When daylight came the next 296 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. morning the pontoon bridge had been taken up, and the Federal troops and trains were on the march to Little Rock by way of Princeton. In the movement of the troops, General Steele left Colonel William F. Cloud, Second Kansas Cavalry, commanding the cavalry brigade of the Frontier Division, in charge of the rear-guard. The steamer Homer, which the Federal cavalry had captured with a cargo of corn, was left in the river at the landing after the army had moved out, and it was with great reluctance that the Colonel did not destroy the boat, for he felt certain that it would be used by Generals Smith and Price on their arrival at Camden, to cross their troops and artillery over the Washita to take up the pursuit. But having special instructions from General Steele not to destroy it, he marched away leaving it uninjured, as far as he knew. It may, however, have been disabled for use by the removal of some parts of its machinery, for when the Confederate troops arrived in town the next day, a raft bridge was constructed to cross them and their artillery over the river at that point. As soon as they got their troops and artillery over the river at Camden, Generals Smith and Price pushed forward in pursuit of the retreating Federal army, marching day and night, with a few hours' intervals for rest, hoping to overtake it before it crossed the Saline River. At two o'clock in the afternoon of the 2Qth, General Steele's advance arrived at Jenkins' Ferry on the Saline River. That stream was too deep to ford, and the pon toon train was hurried up and the pontoon bridge laid in less than three hours. Nearly all the cavalry and part of the wagon trains crossed the river on the bridge that evening before dark, and the balance of the trains and artillery crossed over during the night and the next morn ing. There was a steady downpour of rain all the after noon and nearly all night, so that the next morning the Saline River was out of its banks in places, and the low BA TTLE OF JENKINS ' FERR Y. 297 bottom lands on each side of it for two miles covered with from two to three inches to nearly a foot of water, requiring the greatest efforts for troops and animals to pass over the ground after a few trains in advance had worked it into a deep mud. In the afternoon of the 2Qth, m BATTLE-FIELD OF JENKINS' FERRY, ARKAN6AS. Greene' s brigade of Price's command came up with and attacked General Steele's rear-guard under Colonel Engel- mann, bringing up a battery to rake the road on which the Federal troops were marching. The attacks of the Confederates were so persistent that Colonel Engelmann 298 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. formed part of his brigade in line facing to the rear, and, with a section of Vaughn's battery, skirmished with them until they retired out of range. When he resumed the march his rear was covered by two companies of the Fortieth Iowa Infantry, deployed as skirmishers, and he had no further annoyance from the enemy until his command arrived on the high ground overlooking Saline River Valley, about three miles from the ferry. At this point he was instructed to leave as a picket a regiment of infantry, two companies of the Sixth Kansas Cavalry, under Captain John Rogers, and a section of Vaughn's battery, under Lieutenant C. W. Thomas. Lieutenant-Colonel Adolph Dengler, Forty-third Illi nois Infantry, had just formed the two battalions of his regiment, one on each side of the section of the battery, behind the crest of the hill, facing to the rear, with cavalry vedettes a short distance back on the road upon which the enemy were advancing, when the Confederates again came in sight and commenced using their artillery in throwing shot and shell. After a few rounds from the section of Vaughn's battery, the Confederate guns were limbered to the rear. The skirmish-line which Colonel Dengler sent forward, covering both wings of his regi ment, and the detachment of cavalry on his flanks en gaged the Confederates with small-arms until dark, when the firing ceased. While this skirmishing was going on, Colonel John A. Garrett, Fortieth Iowa Infantry, was ordered to march back and form his regiment a short dis tance in the rear of the Forty-third Illinois and to throw out skirmishers on his right and left flanks, and to use the utmost vigilance to guard against surprise. As night was drawing a mantle of darkness over the wet, hungry, and tired troops and animals, the section of Vaughn's battery was withdrawn to a less exposed posi tion. The Forty-third Illinois was also relieved from picket duty on the hill by the Thirty-third Iowa Infantry, BATTLE OF JENKINS' FERRY. 299 under Colonel C. H. Mackey, who kept his men standing in line in the rain until four o'clock the next morning. He then received orders to retire his regiment about three quarters of a mile in the direction of the river, so as to cover the crossing of the troops and trains on the pontoon bridge. He made this movement before it was fairly light, and took up a position a few yards west of the field south of the main road near the foot of the hill, where his skirmishers engaged the skirmish-line of Greene's brigade, composed of the same troops who had skirmished with the Federal rear-guard the previous evening. He held the Confederates in check for half an hour, when his regiment was relieved by the Twenty- seventh Wisconsin Infantry. His regiment and the men of several other regiments who had stood in line all night were marched to the second field south of the road nearest the crossing, where they were halted and made fires to prepare coffee for their breakfast, and if possible get a few moments of needed rest. The demonstrations against his rear-guard up to dark on the 29th convinced General Salomon, whose division was in the rear, that an attack in force by the Confeder ates might be anticipated during the night or the next morning. His troops were therefore posted so as to be in readiness to meet an assault at any moment. But in the skirmishes his rear-guard had not captured any of the enemy from whom he could obtain information as to the strength of the forces in his rear, and who was in command of them. General Steele supposed that they were General Pagan's troops, who only a few days before had captured the Federal train at Marks' Mill, less than a day's march distant, and who that day had crossed the Federal line of march near Princeton only two or three hours before the Federal advance came along. The heavy rain nearly all night had made the crossing of the trains over the river on the pontoon bridge very slow 300 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. and tedious, and at daylight on the 3Oth there were still nearly two miles of trains and artillery on the west side to be crossed over. General Salomon, commanding the Third Division, was left on the west side to cover the crossing of these trains, and made such disposition of his troops as to withdraw them as rapidly as the trains moved forward on the road to the bridge. His picket had prevented the Confederates from posting artillery on the bluffs during the night within range of the Federal troops, and he now desired to retire his line far enough in the direction of the bridge so that it would still be out of range of batteries planted on the hills west of the Saline Valley. After his troops were withdrawn into the valley, his right flank was protected by a deep, narrow stream, or bayou, known as Toxie Creek, on the north side of the road, and that ran parallel with it and emptied into the Saline at Jenkins' Ferry, and on his left, when facing to the rear, south of the field nearest the ferry was a swamp in the heavy timber, covered with water by the incessant rains, and impassable for infantry, artillery, or cavalry. While the Twenty-seventh Wisconsin and Fiftieth In diana Infantry were holding the first line behind the field at the foot of the hill, after they had relieved the Thirty- third Iowa Infantry, General Rice formed a second line with the Twenty-ninth Iowa and Ninth Wisconsin In fantry, just east of that field, in the timber. When this line was completed, his first line was retired behind it. On the retiring of the first line, the Confederates under Greene again moved up and attacked the second Federal line, first driving in the skirmishers. In the meanwhile Gen eral Rice formed the Fiftieth Indiana, under Lieutenant- Colonel Wells, on his left, and sent the detachment of the Second Brigade and two companies of the Twenty- ninth Iowa Infantry to the north side of Toxie Creek on his right to check a movement of the enemy on that part BATTLE OF JENKINS' FERRY. 30! of the field. At eight o'clock the Confederate division of General T. J. Churchill arrived on the field; his four brigades, under Brigadier-Generals Tappan, Hawthorn, and Dockery and Colonel Gause were deployed in line of battle, and with one regiment deployed as skirmishers and two regiments in reserve he moved forward and attacked the Federal position. In this movement part of Greene's brigade formed on the right of Churchill's division and part on the left. On Churchill's division descending from the hill to the Saline bottom, Dockery's brigade was detached by Gen eral Smith to advance down on the north side of Toxie Creek and to attack any Federal troops posted on that side. The Confederate skirmish-line under General Tap- pan came upon the Federal skirmishers in the field nearest the river, and at once engaged them and drove them in upon the main Federal line posted in the timber east and south of the field. General Rice, commanding the ad vance Federal line, had posted his troops with excellent judgment, so that when the Confederates were crossing the field, which was about a quarter of a mile long and wide, and were nearing the eastern edge of it, his men poured a terribly destructive fire into their ranks from the front and from the southeast side of the field, suddenly checking their advance. General Tappan brought up his reserve regiments and threw them into action, but the volleys of the Federal musketry increased in intensity, and were wasting his ranks so rapidly that he called on General Churchill for reinforcements to enable him to hold his position. General Hawthorn's brigade was sent to his support and formed on his left, and then the roar of musketry that went up along the opposing lines was terrific. The Confederate attack which, up to this time, had been directed mainly against the Federal right and centre was now being directed against the Federal left and centre with great energy, and succeeded in forcing 302 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. back the Thirty-third Iowa, under Colonel Mackey, which had been brought up to the support of the Fiftieth Indiana on the extreme left of the line, about two hundred yards. While the Thirty-third Iowa were retiring from their position, Colonel Garrett came up with four companies of his regiment, the Fortieth Iowa Infantry, from Colonel Engelmann's brigade, and formed his men a few paces to the left and in front of the position lately occupied by the Thirty-third Iowa, and opened fire upon the enemy. When he got his men in position he noticed that there was quite a gap between the right of his line and the left of the line of the troops on his right, which if not closed up at once might endanger his command. He therefore moved forward and to the right, firing as he advanced, until his right joined the left of the Twenty-seventh Wisconsin, which had also been sent forward by Colonel Engelmann, at the request of General Rice, to support the Thirty-third Iowa. The entire Federal line now advanced, driving the Confederates before it about a quarter of a mile, pouring volley after volley into them as they retired, and passing over their dead and wounded. The battle was now assuming such proportions that, at the request of General Salomon, General Steele sent back to him three regiments, the Twelfth Kansas Infantry, under Lieutenant-Colonel J. E. Hayes, the Second Kan sas Colored Infantry, under Colonel Samuel J. Crawford, and part of the First Arkansas Infantry, under Lieuten ant-Colonel E. J. Searle, from General Thayer's Frontier Division, which had not yet crossed the river. The Twelfth Kansas arrived on the field and formed on the left of Colonel Garrett on the extreme left of the Federal line in time to participate in the advance in which the Confederates were driven back across the field. While the battle was thus raging with great fierceness in and around the field nearest the river on the south BATTLE OF JENKINS' FERRY. 303 side of Toxie Bayou, General Dockery's brigade of sharp shooters had moved down on the north side of that bayou, accompanied by Lieutenant E. Cunningham, Aide-de-Camp on General Smith's staff, and attacked Gen eral Rice's extreme right on that side, consisting of the Forty-third Illinois, a detachment of the Second Brigade, two companies of the Twenty-ninth Iowa, two companies of the Fortieth Iowa Infantry, and two companies of the Second Kansas Colored Infantry. After the fighting on that side of the bayou had lasted upwards of an hour, the Confederates were driven back some distance, and then withdrew to the south side of the stream, but before re tiring they advanced near the bank of the bayou and directed their fire against General Rice's right on the south side near the corner of the field. When the enemy were reported to have retired from the north side of the bayou, General Salomon ordered all his troops, except the two companies of the Twenty-ninth Iowa, from that to the south side, and they were obliged to again plunge in and wade the swollen stream waist deep. After Churchill's division had been driven off the field, a calm prevailed along the Federal front for nearly half an hour, during which time the troops who had been fighting in the front line, and who had expended nearly all their ammunition, replenished their cartridge-boxes from boxes brought up by mounted troops from the ordnance train across the river. When Generals Smith and Price saw that Churchill's division had been repulsed with heavy loss, Parsons' division was hurried forward to his support. On coming to the strip of timber between the fields, General Parsons' First Brigade, under General Clark, was posted on the left of Churchill's reserve brigade under Gause, and his Second Brigade, under Colonel Burns, was posted on the right of Gause. When these dispositions had been made, this second line moved forward to the support of the two 304 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. brigades of Tappan and Hawthorn in the first line. In this order the whole force moved forward and again at tacked the Federal position. To meet this assault, Gen eral Rice placed the Second Kansas Colored Infantry on his right, the right of the regiment resting on Toxie Bayou, or Creek, and the left joining the right of the Twenty-ninth Iowa Infantry. The Ninth Wisconsin formed his right centre, and the Thirty-third Iowa In fantry his left centre. And the Twenty-seventh Wis consin formed the right, four companies of the Fortieth Iowa the centre, and the Twelfth Kansas Infantry the left, of his left wing. His second line, naming the regi ments from the left, consisted of part of the Second Arkansas, part of the Fortieth Iowa, the Forty-third Illi nois, the Fiftieth Indiana Infantry, and a detachment of McLean's Second Brigade. The regiments of this line were near enough to support any part of the front line in a few minutes. The moment the heavy masses of the Confederates advanced within range of the Federal line, a sheet of flame burst forth along the entire length of the opposing lines with a terrific roar of musketry. As General Rice knew every foot of the ground the Confederates would be obliged to pass over, his troops were posted so that their fire would be as effective as possible. His line was by no means straight, but parts of it stood at such angles as to enfilade and cross-fire the advancing Confederates. General Clark's brigade, in attempting to charge across the field, when they got about two thirds over met a terrific fire from the Second Kansas Colored and the Twenty-ninth Iowa Infantry, which checked them and in a short time sent them back in some confusion into the timber to re-form. It was on this part of the field that a Confederate battery had taken position near the road and had commenced to furiously assail the Federal line, when Colonel Crawford requested permission of General Rice to charge it with BATTLE OF JENKINS' FERRY. 305 his regiment, the Second Kansas Colored Infantry. The request was granted, and Colonel Crawford ordered his men to fix bayonets, and they moved forward steadily with a cheer, firing as they advanced, and shooting down the artillery horses and part of the men of the battery before they could remove the guns, and they were cap tured and drawn off the field by the men with ropes. The lieutenant of the battery and most of his men were also captured. In the Federal centre the Ninth Wiscon sin and Thirty-third Iowa Infantry were being hotly pressed by Cause's Confederate brigade; the Thirty- third Iowa had expended their ammunition and were relieved by the Forty-third Illinois Infantry from the second line, which moved forward under Colonel Den- gler, firing as they advanced, and soon commenced driv ing the Confederates, and drove them almost to the foot of the bluff. The Forty-third Illinois then retired to their former position. While the Federal right and centre were thus engaged, the Twenty-seventh Wisconsin, four companies of the Fortieth Iowa, and the Twelfth Kansas Infantry on the Federal left were having a fierce conflict with the Con federate brigades of Burns and Tappan opposed to them, and forced them to retire about the time the Confederate centre gave way. The battle was not yet ended. Lieutenant-General Smith still had Major-General J. G. Walker's Texas division of infantry, which had just arrived, to place in action to dislodge or capture the Federal force opposed to him on the west side of the river. His advance brigade, under Brigadier-General Waul, had moved forward only a short distance, when Major-General Price was met bringing the Missouri and Arkansas divisions of Parsons and Churchill off the field in a demoralized condition. Proceeding to the field, General Walker formed his line of battle, General Waul's brigade on his left, and the VOL. II.— 20 306 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. brigades of Brigadier-Generals Scurry and Randall in his centre and on his right. As he advanced to the scene of conflict, a heavy line of skirmishers was thrown forward, covering his entire front. Having repulsed and driven the divisions of Churchill and Parsons from the field, General Rice made some changes in his line. The Second Kansas Colored In fantry, having expended their ammunition, had retired to replenish their cartridge-boxes, and were then placed in position in the centre of his front line, their right join ing the left of the Ninth Wisconsin and their left connect ing with the right of the Fiftieth Indiana Infantry, which had been brought up from the second line to relieve the Twenty-seventh Wisconsin. Farther to his left were the Thirty-third Iowa, four companies of the Fortieth Iowa, and the Twelfth Kansas Infantry, the last-named regiment on his extreme left. The attack of General Walker was directed mainly against the Federal centre and left, his troops moving forward with much steadiness. His left, under General Waul, came in sight of part of the Federal line as it was crossing the field and driving before it the last of the retreating troops of Churchill's and Parsons' divisions. The troops of the Federal line retired to their positions in the timber east and south of the field, and when General Waul's brigade had advanced about two thirds across the field, poured a terrific fire of musketry into it from the front and enfiladed his line from the direction of the bayou on his left, and from the south side of the field on his right. In a few moments more the other two brigades of Walker's division, which had come upon the field on a road from the south west, attacked the Federal left, and then the devour ing flames of the battle swept along the opposing lines with tremendous fury for more than three quarters of an hour. An order had been given to charge the Federal line, BATTLE OF JENKINS' FERRY. 307 but while preparing the troops for its execution, Briga dier-Generals Scurry and Randall fell, mortally wounded, and General Waul was severely wounded. Colonel Watson, of the Eighteenth Texas Infantry, was also killed, and Colonel Overton Young, of the Eighth Texas Infantry, was severely wounded, besides a number of other officers. General Waul was able to stay in his saddle on the field for some time, but the loss of the other two brigade commanders and the heavy loss in regimental commanders soon caused great confusion among the troops of those brigades, who were still receiving a terrible fire from the Federal left, and the whole division was withdrawn from the field to the strip of timber between the two fields, where it occupied a defensive position until the Federal troops resumed the march. In the early part of this fight with Walker's division, General Rice received a wound in the foot while directing the movement of his troops on his left, which disabled him temporarily from active service. This attack on the Federal left was so determined that troops of the second line had to be ordered up to support those of the first line. Indeed, nothing could surpass the bravery and determination and deliberation with which the Federal troops delivered their volleys in resisting the three des perate assaults made upon their line. After Generals Churchill and Parsons had taken their divisions out to the foot of the hill, collected their numer ous stragglers, re-formed their lines, and supplied their troops with ammunition, they were ordered to return to the field to the support of Walker's division. But when they returned to the field they found that Walker's division had withdrawn from the conflict, his troops were in confusion, and the battle was over. The Federal troops were in no condition to follow up their success, for their rations were exhausted that morning, with no hope of getting supplies until they arrived at Little 308 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. Rock ; and their artillery horses and train animals were starving for forage. Having effectively repulsed every assault of the Con federates, and being in no condition to assume the offensive, General Steele withdrew his troops from the field, and crossed them over the river on the pontoon without interruption. As many of his severely wounded as he could furnish transportation for were gathered up from the field and brought along. Those who were too badly wounded to bring along with the army were taken up and removed to a house near the field, which was turned into a field hospital, and surgeons and at tendants, with medical supplies, left with them to take care of them. The infantry as they passed over the bridge were formed on the east bank of the river, sup ported by artillery, to protect the rearmost troops in the event of pursuit by the enemy. It was about half-past twelve o'clock when General Walker's division withdrew from the fight, and shortly after two o'clock the last of the Federal troops, except the severely wounded, had crossed the bridge to the east side of the Saline. The battle was fought almost entirely by infantry. Where the ground was not covered with water, it was so saturated with the continuous rain that it was almost im practicable to move artillery on any part of the field. Only a single section of the Federal batteries was left on the west side of the river during the battle, and it fired only a single shot to reassure the troops. Two Confed erate batteries were brought on the field, one of which was captured a few minutes after its arrival, and the other was withdrawn before it had fired a dozen rounds. The Federal loss in the battle was 86 men killed, 500 wounded, and 61 missing. Lieutenant E. Cunningham, on General Smith's staff, stated that the Confederate loss was about 800 killed and wounded. Incomplete returns of casual ties of Price's three divisions show a loss of 99 killed and BATTLE OF JENKINS' FERRY. 309 437 wounded. The loss in Walker's veteran division was probably nearly as large as in Price's three small divisions. On the Federal side there were only two officers, a cap tain and a lieutenant, killed. On the Confederate side there were two brigadier-generals, three colonels, and a large number of field and line officers killed. The Con federates had also two brigadier-generals, Waul and Clark, wounded. General Steele did not have more than 4000 men on the field, the balance of his troops having crossed to the east side of the river. General Smith had ten brigades, including Colonel Colton Greene's brigade of Marmaduke's division, in the fight, and estimating 1000 men to the brigade, which is a very low estimate, he must have had nearly 10,000 men in the battle. The Federal troops occupied a good position in the timber, and they protected themselves as much as possi ble. The bayou on their right and the swamp on their left made it necessary for the enemy to approach their position across the open field. Every time the Confed erates advanced to near the centre of the field, a sheet of flame burst from the east side and from the east halves of the north and south sides, which no troops could stand very long without being cut down almost to a man. As showing how busily employed the Federal troops were during the action, Colonel Garrett, who commanded part of his regiment on the left, stated that his men used sixty to one hundred rounds of cartridges each during the fight. When the last of the Federal troops had passed over the pontoon bridge it was destroyed, the mules being so much weakened for want of forage that they were unable to draw the wagons over the terrible road across the bottom for upwards of two miles. It was necessary to double the teams to the artillery, to the wagons of the ammunition train, and to the wagons of all the trains that were brought through. For long stretches of the road across the bottom the wagon wheels sank to the THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. hubs in the mud, and the mules floundered and struggled in the mud without being able to touch solid ground for their feet. A large number of wagons, therefore, got hopelessly stuck in the mud and were abandoned. The CONfTDCRATE. BATTLE OF JENKINS' FERRY, ARKANSAS. FIRST FEDERAL POSITION IN THE MORNING. Confederates were in so much confusion that they did not venture to come to the river until an hour and a half after the Federal troops had crossed. Nearly all General Steele's cavalry, under General Carr, crossed the river on the pontoon on the evening BA TTLE OF JENKINS' FERR Y. 311 and night of the 29th, with instructions to proceed to Little Rock by the most direct route practicable by rapid marches, to intercept a Confederate force under General Fagan, which was reported by prisoners just captured to be marching on that point, by way of Benton, to destroy the Federal supplies. But General Fagan was unable to cross the Saline above Jenkins' Ferry on account of high water, and returned and joined General Smith on the battle-field just as the battle was over. After crossing the Saline bottom, General Steele met with no further interruption in his march to Little Rock.
