# John G. Nicolay, The Outbreak of Rebellion: Manassas, Bull Run and Retreat passages, v1

## transcription-note

Digital OCR of a University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign scan (Internet Archive outbreakofrebell00nico); not verified against print. Whitespace collapsed; all other characters retained, including OCR errors, split words, running headers, page numbers, footnotes interleaved with the text and garbled map captions. Local headings are editorial. Bounded passages from Chapters XIV-XVII.

## manassas-armies

The enterprise did not escape the usual fate of unforeseen delay ; it marks gi'eat energy in McDowell that his expedi- 174 THE OUTBREAK OF REBELLION. tion was only deferred a little over a week beyond the ap- pointed time. On the 16tL of July he issued his orders to march that afternoon. His anny was organized as follows : Fii-st Division, commanded by Tyler: an aggregate of 9,936 men, divided into foui' brigades, respectively under Keyes, Schenck, SheiTuan, and Kiehardson. Second Division, commanded by Huntee : an aggregate of 2,648 men, divided into two brigades, under Porter and Biumside. Thii'd Division, commanded by Hetxtzelsian : an aggie- gate of 9,777 men, divided into thi-ee brigades, under Frank- lin, "Wilcox, and Howard. Foiu-th Division, commanded by Kunvon : an aggi'egate of 5,752 men ; no brigade commanders. Fifth Division, commanded by Miles : an aggregate of 6,207 men, di^dded into two brigades, under Blenker and Davies. Thus, the total of his command, not including four regi- ments left in the Alexandiia and Aiiington forts, was 34,320 men. Fi'om this number, however, Eunyon's division may at once be deducted ; it was left behind to guard his com- munications, its most advanced regiment being seven miles in rear of Centreville. McDowell's actual moving column may therefore be said to have consisted of 28,568 * men, in- cluding artilleiy, a total of forty-nine guns, and a single bat- talion of cavahy. * From this number it is entirely just to make yet another deduction. The period of enlistment of the Fourth Tennsylvania Regiment, and of Captain Va- rian"s Battery of (New York) Light Artillery having expired, they were dis- charged by official order at Centreville, July 20th, the day before the battle. It will thus be seen that, insteal of the thirty thousand he asked for, McDowell had, perhaps, less than twenty-eight thousand nion, with forty-nine guns ; and official reports show that, instead of the thirty-five thousand rebels he expected to meet at ilanassjis, there were on the field thirty-two thousand men, with fifty-seven guns -less than his estimate, but about three thousand more than Lis own army. MANASSAS. 175 Of all machines, an army develops, perhaps, the greatest inefficiency from mere friction, or the greatest usefulness fi'om action and thoroughness of organization. The value of a veteran consists as much of his habitual expertness in the routine of camp and march, as of coolness and confidence under fire. Two principal causes rendered the advance very slow. The first was the want of practice in marching. " They stopped every moment to pick blackberries or get water," says McDowell ; " they would not keep in the ranks, order as much as you pleased ; when they came where water was fresh, they would pour the old water out of theii- can- teens, and fill them with fresh water ; they were not used to denying themselves much ; they were not used to journeys on foot." The second cause was, j)erhaps, yet more potent. " The affair of Big Bethel and Vienna had created a great outcry against rushing into places that people did not know anything about. I think the idea of every one was that we were to go into no such things as that — that we were to feel our way," again says McDowell. Precaution on this point was j)articularly emphasized in his instructions. " The three following things," says his marching order, " will not be par- donable in any commander : 1st, to come upon a battery or breastwork without a knowledge of its position; 2d, to be surprised; 3d, to fall back." Moving forward with such isainful wariness, a surpiise of the enemy was, of course, equally out of the question. In obedience to Beauregard's orders, his outposts everywhere retired, though, in several instances, with such precipitation as to leave their tents, knapsacks, and even their freshly cooked rations behind. Manassas Junction lies thirty-five miles southwest of Washington, on a high, open jjlateau ; there the rebels had some slight field-works, armed with fourteen or fifteen heavy guns, and garrisoned by about two thousand men. 176 THE OUTBREAK OF REBELLION. Bull Pwun flows iu a southeasterly direction, some three miles east of Manassas, with wooded heights coming gen- erally close up to its west bank. The stream is winding and sluggish, and, though here and there it has steep, sometimes precipitous and rocky banks, it is fordable in many places. Beauregard's main army, increased now to over twenty thou- sand, was posted at the various fords of Bull Run, in a line some eight miles long, and extending from the Manassa*: Kaih'oad to the Stone Bridge on the WaiTenton turnpike.* * At Union iti'.ls Ford, E'veU's brigade of thre? reRiraents : at McLean's Ford, Jones' brigade of three regiments; at B'.actburn's Ford, Longstreet's brigade of five regiments ; above MilcJielCx Ford, Bonham's brigade of Ave regiments ; at LewiH' Fcrd, Cocke's brigade of portions of six regiments ; at Stone Bi idge, Evans' demi-brigade of a regiment and a half ; Early's brigade of four regiments was posted as a reserve in reur and support of Longstrcet and Jones. All the above, together with some seven other regiments and portions, not brigaded, con- stituted Beauregard's "Army of the Potomac." His official report states the total effective, on the morning of the battle (July 21st), to have been 21,S33, and 29 guns. Holmes' brigade, an independent command ordered up from Acquia Creek, consisted of two regiments, reported by Beauregard at a total of l,o55, and 6 guns. It was posted as a support for Ewell. Johnston's ''Army of the Shenandoah" consisted of Jackson's brigade of five regiments, posted as a support for Bonham ; and Bee's brigade of four regiments, posted as a support for Cocke. These had arrived and were in camp on the morning of the battle (July 21st). Beauregard reports their round number?, ready for action, at 6,000 men and 20 guns. In addition, there arrived at Manassas about noon, and on the battle-field between two and four o'clock, Fisher's Sixth North Carolina, Ki4, and Kirby Smith's brigade (afterward led by Elzey), of 1,700 men and 2 guns ; and also Hill's Virginia Regiment, 550. Men. Guns. Recapitulation: Beauregard's array 21.S.33 29 Johnston's army 8,884 22 Holmes' brigade 1,355 6 32,073 57 To which may be added sundry detachments, the numbers of which are not given in official reports.

## blackburns-ford

Tyler moved upon Centreville, but, arriving there at nine o'clock, he found that it, too, had been evacu- ated, and that Beauregard's entire amiy was behind Bull Eun. Centreville being situated on a hill, Tyler could see the whole valley spread out before him, with Manassas on 13 178 THE OUTBREAK OF REBELLION. the high jJateau beyond. The main body of the enemy, ho learned, had retired down the road i-uuniug dii-ectly toward that jjoint, crossing the stream at Mitchell's and Blackbuni'^ fords. Tyler's unopi^osed advance had jaerhaps inspii*ed him and his offieei"s with an over-confidence or undue elation ; per- haps it suggested the belief that the enemy did not feel strong enough to make a stand. Under instnictions to " obsen'e well the roads," but to biing on no engagement, it occurred to him to make a reconnoissance in the direction of the retreat. As often hapjjens under such circumstances, the spiiit of combat overcame discretion. Accompanied by Bichardson, one of his brigade commanders, Tyler fii-st went out with a squadron of cavalry and two companies of light infantry. Finding a favorable situation to try artillery, they sent back for a batteiy, and EicharcLson's brigade to support it. Aboub noon of the 18th they were within a mile of Blackburn's ford. Then followed the ever-recuning experience of such aifuirs. First, an exiDeiimental cannonade fi'om a couple of field- pieces, before which the enemy's giuis retii'ed; next the advance of a skii-mish-line, before which the enemy's skir- mishers retired ; then an advance of some of the field-pieces and the planting of a stronger battery ; the posting of a regiment to support the skirmishers, and, soon after, the posting of the eutu-e brigade to support the regiment, fol- lowed by calling up a resei-ve brigade to supjiort the first. Thus the afternoon's work drifted quickly from a reconnois- sance to a skiimish, and from a skiimish to a preliminaiy battle. It was not until some sixty men had fallen, until the two exposed field-pieces were with ililliculty extricated, until one regiment had retreated in confusion and the other MANASSAS. 179 three were deployed iu line of battle to make a new cliarge, that Tyler heeded his instructions, and withdrew his reluc- tant officers and men from the fight, partly demoralized and generally exasperated, and returned to Centreville. In point of fact, the loss, the damage, the demoralization, had been eqiial on both sides. The rebel reports show that three regi- ments of Longstreet's brigade, which bore the first assault, were so much shaken that Early's reserve brigade of three fresh regiments was called uj) and relieved them, that one of these regiments was thrown into confusion, and that the rebel loss was sixty-three killed and wounded. Undecisive as it was, the battle of Blackburn's Ford had an important effect. It confirmed Beauregard in his previous impression that the Ijrincipal Union attack would be made at that point on the centre of his long line. On the other hand, McDowell, receiv- ing from his officers reports of rifle-pits and breastworks, be- came convinced that a direct assault was unwise. The affair of Blackburn's Ford thus proved something more than a pre- liminary defeat ; it augmented the causes of a gi-eat disaster. Upon hearing the cannonade, McDowell had immediately ordered all the divisions forward to Centreville. He had already in his own mind given up the plan of turning the enemy's right, because of the unfavorable nature of the ground and roads. The necessity of finding an unfortified crossing seemed now also demonstrated. Meeting his division com- manders at Centreville, that same night of Thursday, July 18th, McDowell informed them confidentially that he had abandoned his original plan, and had resolved to make the attack by marching northward and turning Beauregard's left flank instead of his right. As an incident of this resolve, however, it was even more essential than before to contiaue to threaten the enemy's 180 THE OUTBREAK OF REBELLION. centre ; and thus Eichardson's brigade was once more posted in the direction of Blackbnm's Ford. Meanwliile the engi- neers were busy all of Friday and Saturday in efforts to find an unfortified ford over Bull Run. They were not success- ful till a late hour on Saturday ; and this delay deferred the main battle till Sunday, July 21st. Could a similar attack have been made a day earlier, the result would probably have been altogether different.

## bull-run

CHAPTEE XV. BULL RUX. At CentreTille, on Satiu'dav niglit, McDowell called his officers together and announced to them his jDlan of battle for the following day. The Wai-renton turnpike i-an almost dii'ectly west fi-om Centre-s-ille to Gaines\dlle station on the railroad. He was yet unaware that Johnston had joined Beaiu'egard, and sought to prevent such junction by seizing Gainesville. Beauregard's army lay in detachments behind Bull Run, at five different fords, along a line of eight miles. His left and northernmost flank was at the stone bridge where Wan-enton turnpike crosses Bull Eun, though Mc- Dowell supj)osed it to extend to the first ford above. The bridge was a solid stone stmcture of two arches, of consider- able size and height, connecting the precipitous and rocky eastern bank of the stream with a broad jiiece of level bottom- land on the west. The bridge was thought to be defended in force, and said to be prej)ared for blovring up. The en- gineers had infonnation, however, that Sudley Ford, two or three miles above, could be readily earned and crossed by an attacking column. McDowell therefore ordered that Tyler, with the heaviest division, should advance fi'om Cen- treville directly to Stone Bridge, thi-ee and a haK miles dis- tant, and make a feigned attack ; while Hunter and Heintzel- man should make a secret and circuitous night march north- 182 THE OUTBREAK OF REBELLION. ward, cross Suclley Ford, and, rapidly descending on the enemy's side of Bull Eiin, should clear away the batteries at the stone bridge by a rear attack, and thus enable Tylei-'s di^'ision to cross and join in the combined march on Gaines- ville, or continue the attack on Beauregard's left. If the stone bridge were blown up, the engineers had timbers ready to repair it. The di%-ision of Miles should remain in reserve at Centreville, and the brigade of Eichardson con- tinue to threaten Blackburn's Ford. In the rebel camji, the Confederate commanders were at the same time equally intent on a scheme of their own to attack and surprise McDowell. No sooner had Johnston arrived at Manassas with the second detachment of the Ai-my of the Shenandoah, about noon of Satiu-day, July 20th, than Beauregard explained to him the character and course of Bull Eun, and the situation of the five principal fords be- hind which his various brigades were posted ; and since a l^racticable road from each of these five fords converged upon Centreville, he i^roposed a simultaneous advance and attack on the Union army, in its camj^s, early Sunday morning, Johnston, who now as ranking officer assumed command, adopted Beauregard's plan. Part of the Ai-my of the Shen- andoah had anived before and with him ; the remainder was expected that night. He had every reason to sujjpose that Patterson would promptly follow him to join McDowell. To secure the fniit of his own movement, he miist therefore crush McDowell before Patterson could arrive. The orders for such an advance and attack were duly MTitten out, and Johnston signed his approval of them in the gi'ay twilight of Sunday morning. An hour or two, however, revealed to him the uselessness of these orders, on which the ink was scarcely dry. At sun- rise he heai'd Tyler's signal-guns, and soon received notice BULL RUN. 183 that McDowell had taken the offensive. The remainder of his Army of the Shenandoah had not arrived, as he hoped. Under these circumstances his plan of attack must be aban- doned. Beauregard thereupon proposed a modification of the plan — to attack with theii* right from the region of Blackburn's Ford, and to stand on the defensive with their left in the neighborhood of the stone bridge. This sugges- tion, again, Johnston adopted and ordered to be carried out. But the Union forces had already taken the initiative. A little past midnight McDowell's army was astii-, and the three designated divisions started. Unluckily, at the very outset, Hunter and Heintzelman were delayed two or three hours by the first division not getting out of its camps in time, and failing to clear the road for them. The route proved unexpectedly long ; it was nine o'elbck when the ad- vance reached Sudley Ford. The crossing, however, was not opiDOsed, and was easily efiected. From the ford the Sudley road ran south toward Manassas, crossing the "War- renton turnpike at right angles about a mile and a quarter west of the stone bridge. A little stream, called Young's Branch, also crosses both roads at this intersection, makes a circle to the northeast, and, returning, flows to the southeast into Bull Eun. This was the destined battle-field. It happened that the stone bridge was but slenderly de- fended. The timber had been felled to form a hea'vy abattis behind the bridge ; but Evans, the rebel officer in charge, had only a regiment and a half, with foiir guns, for his en- tii-e guard. Tyler api^eared in force before the bridge, and began his demonstration ; but made it so feebly that Evans soon became convinced no real assault was intended ; and haidng learned the actual crossing at Sudley Ford, he at about nine o'clock withdrew all but foiu- companies and two guns from the bridge, and hastened to the rear to throw 184 THE OUTBREAK OF REBELLION. liimself across Hunter's path. The Union ajjproach having become plainly discernible, Evans posted his eleven com- panies on the ridge immediately north of the Warrenton turni^ike and Young's Branch, his left resting on the Sud- ley road, with one gun at his left, and the other some dis- BuU Run — Battle of the Forenoon.* tance behind his right, on the point of a hill south of Young's Branch. * In these maps the topographical features are copied from the accurate ofHcial maps published by the Engineer Bureau of the War Department. The position of the troops is of course only conjectural, but based on the defecriptions and inferences in the official reports of both armies. BULL RUN. 185 At ten o'clock Hunter's advance emerged from tlie woods into open fields, abont a mile north of the Wan'enton turn- pike, the scattering shots of the skirmishers ha\TJig already opened the conflict. On both sides evei-ything was raw and awkward — officers and men, staft' and line. There was undue excitement and impetuosity, mixed with unnecessaiy confusion and delay. None of the reports specify how the battle began ; the mere momentum of the march seems to have carried the advance regiments under the first shower of rebel shells and bullets at distances varying from five hun- dred to one thousand yards. A preliminary artillery duel sjjrang up, under which Burnside led his four regiments after his battery into the fields to the left of the Sudley road. With a little more deliberation and a united onset, these would easily have brushed away Evans' thin line ; but, in the delay incident to the first actual exiDeriment of battle, the rebels gained opportunity to bring up substantial rein- forcements. Four regiments and two companies of John- ston's Ai'my of the Shenandoah, under General Bee, hurried up and formed to the right and a little in advance of Evans' original line, while Imboden's battery of four guns took l^osition on a hill in the rear, south of the Warrenton turn- j)ike. Thus disi^osed, with little disparity in strength be- tween attack and defence, the first stubborn contest of the day appears to have taken place, lasting perhaps from eleven o'clock till noon. The Union troojjs pressed foi-ward with determined courage ; the rebels resisted with such spirit that Burnside became aj^prehensive for his Rhode Island battery, and Sykes' battalion of regulars was sent to strengthen his left. By this time Hunter had sent Porter's brigade into the fields to the right of the Sudley road, where Griffin's battery could engage the rebel field-pieces ; Heintzelman was hurrying uj) with an advance regiment and 186 THE OUTBREAK OF REBELLION. Kicketts' battery. Under this combined pressure the Con- federate line wavered, yielded, and finally broke. Their left retreated stubbornly down the hill, and, rallying again, endeavored to make a stand behind a stone house at the intersection of the two roads ; but a vigorous Union charge down the Sudley road completed their dispei-sion. The whole first formation of the enemy was swept southward more than half a mile, entirely across and out of the valley of Young's Branch. But the advantage was not won with- out considerable damage to the Union troops, the demoraliza- tion of several regiments, and the serious loss of valuable offi- cers. General Hunter himself was wounded by a shell at the veiy beginning of the action, compelling his retirement from the front, and devohTJig the command of his di\"ision on Porter. McDowell, who came upon the field by way of Sudley Ford as the battle began, had already sent back word to Tyler to press his attack at the stone bridge. Such an attack, ho-n'^ ever, was now no longer necessaiy. We have seen how Evans had withdrawn to oppose Hunter ; and the four companies he left behind had also retired southward. Avoiding the bridge with its abattis, Tyler led Sherman's and Keyes' bri- gades across Bull Run half a mile above, where the stream "was fordable for infantiy, and, marching over a mile of level bottom-land, so directed their course by the filling that they efi'ected a safe junction with Hunter's division, Keyes remain- ing on the extreme left. They approached the morning's bat- tle-field from the northeast ; Sherman reported to McDowell, and joined the general pursuit, directing his march to the right. Keyes remained on the left, and under Tyler's personal orders ; and thus it turned out that this single brigade became and re- mained an indejiendent detachment during the whole day, sep- amted by a wide intei-val from the main battle in the afternoon, and not being in a position to receive orders from McDowell. BULL RUN. 187 It has been explained that the first rebel line was com- posed mainly of Johnston's troops. As they retreated np the hill south of Young's Branch, Jackson's brigade of five regiments, also of Johnston's army, 'svas just arriving there on its Avay to guard the stone bridge, and only at that mo- ment learning the tme state of afi'airs. This hill south of Young's Branch was a higher and stronger position than that from which Evans and Bee had been driven. Its crest ran in a westerly cui-ve from the Robinson house, near the Wan-enton turnpike, past the Henry house near the Sudley road, both being within the southeastern angle of the inter- section. The two roads cross in the valley at Young's Branch, and from their crossing ascend gently to the east, west, north, and south. On this crest, Jackson, with the ready instinct of combat, formed a new line. His five regiments and two batteiies, stretched from the Bobinson to the Heniy houses, formed a solid-looking protection, behind which some of the flying rebels gathered coui'age and rallied in little driblets. Bee's five regiments had shiTink to about foui" companies, and the remaining fugitives were moving in hoj^eless panic down the Sudley road toward Manassas, spreading dii-eful tidings of disaster. Jackson's line was rendered yet stronger by hav- ing Hampton's battalion — that morning an-ived fi-om Rich- mond— on its extreme right in the turnpike before the Robinson house ; and behind these, Bee's fragments were gathered into a sheltering ra\Tne. At this period of the day, a little after noon, the advan- cing Union columns had theii' best co-operation and strong- est momentum. Keyes' brigade was advancing on the left toward the Robinson hill. Sherman was moving diagonally across the centre of the morning's field. Porter's still aggressive brigade was j)ushing down the Sudley road. 188 THE OUTBREAK OP REBELLION. The compact bi-igades of Franklin and "Wilcox were coming to the fi-out on the right. Moreover, Griffin's and Ricketts' batteries had obtained favorable positions near the Dogan house, with an enfilading fii'e against Hampton. Toward two o'clock two regiments of Keyes' brigade made a charge UY) the Eobinson hill and drove Hampton out of the tangle of fences and hedges about the Robinson House, though newly planted rebel batteries farther to the rear made it impossible to hold the i^osition. The whole Union line swung forward to the Warrenton tui-npike ; and while the rebel reports pass it over with the merest allusions, it seems probable that, like Hamilton, other portions of Jackson's line were moved somewhat farther back, to find better shelter from the annoying fire of the Union batteries. This mid- day Union success seemed, and was, sweeping and complete ; but it proved seriously deceptive in the further operations of the afternoon, which it natui'ally suggested and provoked. A little before this time the Confederate commanders woke U15 to the true nature of the conflict. Beauregard was yet waiting im^iatiently to hear that his right was advancing on Centreville, when, toward eleven o'clock, word came that, through a miscarriage of orders, that enterprise was just being commenced. Realizing now that McDowell's attack was not a mere feint, they countermanded the Centreville movement, ordered all available reserves forward to the main battle, and themselves huniedly galloped to the front. Here they now put their personal exertions, encoui'agement, and example, into the somewhat unpromising task of miti- gating a disastrous defeat, rather than •with even remote hope of turning the scale to victory. The Confederates had been literally driven into the woods, the edge of which formed a sort of semicircle on the second ridge south of Warrenton turnpike and east of the Sudley BULL RUN. 189 road. But this reverse brought certain important advan- tages. Their retreat not only concentrated their regiments ; it also, for the first time during the day, concentrated their artillery, thirteen pieces of which were posted near together to the centre and right, so as to give a partial cross-fire at Bull Run — Battle of the Afternoon. a distance of three hundred to six hundred yards over the whole open plateau or hill about the Henry house and to- ward the Robinson house. Under the personal directions of Johnston and Beauregard, they now formed their line along this semicircular edge of woods, with the advantage of a fiinge of second-gi'owth pines in their fi-ont to afford 100 THE OUTBREAK OF REBELLION. lliem almost perfect concealment. Their right extended to where the hill descends to Young's Branch ; their left reached nearly to the Sudley road. It is needless to specify the several corps in detail ; the nearest reinforcements were already aniving ; Johnston's report sums up the strength of this completed line at twelve regiments, twenty-two giins, and two companies of cavaliy. The formation well begun, Beauregard took j^ersonal command, while Johnston, as chief, returned to the rebel headquai'ters to keep his eye on the entire field. Eeduced by losses, McDowell's numbers were now little, if auy, superior to the enemy ; for the brigade of Keyes was separated from him, working its way southward along Young's Branch in the hope to make a flank attack on the rebel right ; in reality it rendered no further sxibstautial helji. Howard's brigade, held back as a reserve, was not yet at hand. McDowell's effective force consisted of the brigades of Porter, Franklin, Wilcox, and Sherman, a total of fourteen regiments, but several of which were akeady seriously demoralized ; these were massed in sheltered situ- ations in the valley along the turnpike and Young's Branch, mainly west of the intersection of the roads. All the advan- tages of position diiring the day had been with McDowell ; now they were suddenly tiu'ued against him by the very success he had gained. The enemy was on the height, he at the foot of the hill. The enemy needed only to defend a stationary line ; he must move forward under a prepared fire. They were concealed in chosen jjositions ; he must mount into open view. They could repel in combination ; he must risk successive assaults. His men had been under anns since midnight — most of them had made a march of ten miles tlu-ough the swelteiing July heat. They were flushed with vietoiy, but also lulled thereby into the false BULL RUN. 191 seciuity of thinking tlieir work accomi^lished, when in reality its sternest effort was merely about to begin. The situation naturally dictated an attack on the rebel centre and left flank, and, had this been unitedly and solidly made, it must unquestionably have succeeded even against the disadvantage ah-eady mentioned. But right here the want of proiDer staff organization and discipline, and the rawness of the troo^is in manoeuvi-e, i:)roved a fatal defect ; and the severe conflict of the next hour and a half resolved itself into a somewhat spasmodic and intermittent struggle on both sides. ^Tien, at about half-jiast two o'clock, the batteries of Eicketts and Giifiin were ordered to move forward fi'om the Dogan heights across the valley to the top of the Heruy hill, they did so with the feeling that the two regiments ordered to follow and supi^ori them were tardy, inadequate, and un- reliable. Other regiments, moving forward to the flank at- tack, could not well be observed, because of the uneven ground and the intervening woods and bushes. The rebels had disappeared ; there was a complete lull in the battle. But danger was no less at hand. Hardly had Ricketts taken his post before his cannoneers and horses began to fall under the accurate fij-e of near and well-concealed rebel shai-jishooters. Death j)uffed from bushes, fences, build- ings ; and yet the jets of flame and wreaths of smoke were the only visible enemy to assail. Ofiicers and cannoneers held on with a desperate courage ; some moved to new po- sitions to foil the rebel range. Giiflin's battery came and took place alongside ; eleven Union guns and thirteen Con- federate guns were confronted at short range in a stubborn and exciting duel. But now the rebel regiments, seeing the dangerous exposiu-e of the Union batteries, were tempted to swarm out of theii* cover. They pressed cautiously but 192 THE OUTBREAK OF REBELLION. tenaciously upon Eicketts. Griffin, absorbed in directing the fire of two of his guns against tlie rebel battei-ies, was suddenly startled at seeing a regiment advancing boldly on bis riglit, in open view. Their vei"y audacity puzzled him. They could hardly be friends, he thought ; yet was it pos- sible that foes were so near and would take such a risk ? Instinctively he ordered his guns to be charged with canister and trained upon them. Yet at the di-eadful thought of pouring such a volley upon a Union regiment, he once more hesitated, and held a brief colloquy with Major Bany, chief of artilleiy. " Captain," said Barry, " they are your battery support." " They are Confedei-ates," rejilied Griffin, in in- tense excitement ; " as certain as the world, they are Confed- erates." " No," answered BaiTy ; " I know they are your batteiT support." Giiffin spurred forward, and told his officer not to fire. The mistake proved fatal. During this intei-val of doubt the Confederate regiment had approached to point-blank range, and levelled theii- muskets just as Griffin gave his order to desist. Griffin's canister would have annihilated the regiment ; but now the tables were turned, and in an instant the regiment's volley had annihi- lated Griffin's and Eicketts' batteries. Officers and men fell smitten with death and wounds, and horses and caissons went tearing in wild disorder down the hill, brealdng and scatteiing the ascending line of battle. Under this sudden catastrophe the supporting regiment stood a while spell- bound with mingled astonishment and terror. They were urged forward to repel the advance on the guns ; but the un- expected disaster ovemwed them ; under the continued and still advancing volleys of the same rebel regiment, they fired their muskets, turned, and fled. These disabled batteries, visible to both aimies, now be- came the centre and coveted prize of an iiTegular contest, BULL RUN. 193 wliicli surged back and forth over tlie plateau of tlie Henry hill ; but, whether because of confusion of ordei"s, or the broken surface of the ground, or more probably the mere reciprocal eagerness of captui-e and rescue, the contest was carried on, not by the whole line, biit by single regiments, or at most by two or three regiments moving accidentally rather than designedly in concert. Several times the fight raged past and over the ^jrostrate body of Ricketts, lying wounded among his guns, and who was finally carried away a prisoner to Richmond. The rebels would dash forward, capture the batteries, and endeavor to turn the pieces on the Union lines ; then a Union regiment would sweep up the hill, drive them back, and essay to drag the guns down into safe ijossession. And a similar shifting and intennitting fight went on, not merely on this single spot, but also among the low concealing pines of the middle groxind in front, as well as in the oak-woods on the Union right, where at times friend became intermingled with foe, and where both sides took occasional ijrisoners near the same place. In this prolonged and wasteful stmggle the Union strength was slowly and steadily consumed. Ai'nold's battery crossed the valley to the support of Griffin and Ricketts, but found itself obliged to again withdraw. The Rhode Island battery took part in the contest as well as it might from the hill north of Young's Branch. Brigade after brigade — Sher- man's, Franklin's, Wilcox's, and finally Howard's reserve, jwere brought forward — regiment after regiment was sent up the hill — three times the batteries were recovered and again lost. It speaks volumes for the courage of the raw, undisciplined volunteers, that, in the face of these rejDeated failures, they continued to go perseveringly against what seemed to them a hidden and unattainable banier, until a stronger wav^ of rebel bullets or bayonets, surging suddenly 13 194 THE OUTBREAK OF REBELLION. forward in the pine thicket, would meet and force them back. In the endeavor to outflank and envelop the rebel left, the Union right had become so strongly turned southward that it was nearly parallel to the Sudley road. Near the beginning of this final contest, Johnston received notice that the long-expected remainder of his Ai'my of the Shenan- doah had at length come ; and before it was half over, Elzey, "with Kirby Smith's brigade of three regiments, arrived near the battle-field fi'om Manassas by the Sudley road. By this time, too, four other regiments, two from Cocke's and two from Bonham's brigades, also came up from the nearer fords. These seven fresh regiments, thi'own opportunely by the rebel commander into the woods west of the Sudley road, directly against the exposed Union right flank, created a numerical overweight, which affords sufficient explanation of the Union repulse at that point. But now, at half -past foui- in the afternoon, when the Union reinforcements were exhausted, the rebel accessions still continued : Early with thi'ee regiments arrived from the lower fords ; Holmes with two regiments, and Ewell with three others, were rapidly approaching. Before the anival of these last the battle was ali-eady decided. Early's brigade was sent cautiously thi-ough the woods, still farther to the rebel left, and suddenly ajipeared with Beckham's battery on the heights near the Chinn house, three-quarters of a mile west of the Sudley road, and entirely beyond and in the rear of the Union right. The Union troops, having approached the second stage of the battle in such a flush of success, and with such an appar- ent assurance of victoiy, could not for a time realize the stem fact that the contest was turning against them. Offi- cers of experience and sagacity, indeed, became seriously BULL RUN. 195 alarmed for tlie fimal result, when Griffin's and Ricketts' batteries were destroyed ; but for the greater part it was looked upon as an untoward accident, and operated rather to inspire the already related eiforts for their recovery. The feeling of course gradually changed with the successive fail- ures to gain and permanently hold the hill. As brigade after brigade melted away in the rejjeated efforts, even the men in the ranks could not omit to note the rapid dimiiiu- tion of the available strength. Some of the repulsed regi- ments kept their organization and returned heroically to the charge. Others, on the contrary, not having that slowly acquired force of discipline which makes cohesion a second nature of the soldier and creates an instinctive reliance on mutual support as the surest means of safety, considered theii' duty done with a single charge, and, once diiven back, went to pieces like the adjournment of a mass meeting. In this shortcoming, officers were as culpable as the men, for war combines art with science, and the superior work of the veteran comes through long years of ju-aetice. It must be remembered that these were only tlu-ee months volunteers, and besides, as such, the most impulsive and independent men in their several communities, whose innate promptness of thought and action had brought them- to the very fore- front of the civil war. Lacking long di-ill and discipline, they acted uijon individual judgment and impulse, rather than as organized bodies merely executing the orders of their officers. This explains to us the remarkable statement of CaiJtain Woodbury, that ,"at four o'clock, on the 21st, there were more than twelve thousand vohmteers on the battle-field of Bull Run who had entirely lost their regi- mental organization. They could no longer be handled as troops, for the officers and men were not together. Men and officers mingled together liromiscuously ; and it is 196 THE OUTBREAK OF REBELLION. worthy of remark that this disorganization did not result from defeat or fear." One other fact miist be remembered in extenuation : that with the long night march, the burning heat of the day, and the new and intense excitements of the battle-field, the men, famished with hunger and thii-st, were becoming physically exhausted. When, therefore, at half-past four o'clock, the two fresi Confederate brigades had repulsed the Union flank attack west of the Sudley road, and Early's rebel brigade with Beckham's battery suddenly burst through the woods near the Chinn house, still farther to the west, with a vigorous and startling attack on the Union flank and rear, thi'owing into quick confusion and retreat a detachment of Union cavalry stationed in apparent retirement and safety, the battle came to a speedy termination by a sori of universal consent ; a realization and acknowledgment of coming de- feat pervaded the whole army, and found instant expression in increased disorganization and immediate movement to- ward a general retreat. Whatever may have been the other discouragements, the main impulse of this movement came from the universal belief that Johnston's anny had now anived, and that success had thereby become hopeless. The question of Johnston's possible presence in the battle had mn thi'oiigh the Centreville camj^s, and there were rumors of his coming on Saturday night; but the ai-my ai:)15arently had no suspicion that it was fighting him all day Sunday, till the moment of the attack on the extreme left by one of Beauregard's brigades. That attack from an unexpected quarter seemed convincing proof of the j^resence^ of a new and additional force, and therefore roused the quick instinct of retreat, not so much in acknowledgment of actual defeat, as in prudent avoidance of iiTesistible slaugh- ter or capture by overwhelming numbei"s.

## retreat-and-losses

CHAPTEE XVI. THE RETREAT. The suddenness of tlieir victory vraa entii-ely unexpected by tlie rebels. Signs of disaster to themselves were as strong as to the Federals to the very last. Intense curiosity and solicitude had brought Jefferson Davis from Richmond. It is related that, as he was riding to the battle-field from Manassas, at about four o'clock that afternoon, he met such a stream of panic-stricken rebel soldiers, and heard such direful tidings from the front, that his companions were thoroughly con-sdneed the Confederates had lost the day, and implored him to turn back for j^ersonal safety. He went on, against their advice, to find that the conflict was ah'eady over, and to learn, with mingled amazement and joy, that the Union army had, by a sudden and unexplained impulse, ceased fighting, and half marched, half run from the field. McDowell was no less astounded at his own overwhelming reverse. A little before Elzey and Early appeared on his right to outflank him, there had been a lull in the Confed- erate firing that led him to hope the enemy was giving way. At the very worst there seemed no doubt of his ability to "hold the Warrenton turnpike and stone bridge and. main- tain free communication with Centreville. For this abun- dant resources were yet available. Biu-nside's brigade had remained in reserve on the morning's battle-field, and, after 103 THE OUTBREAK OF REBELLION. four hours' rest, was vet capable of effective service. Keyes' brigade beyond the hiU, on his left, was substantially un- hamied. Schenck had an almost fresh brigade at the stone bridge. Miles had a brigade at Centre\ille, which could be replaced from Eunyon's division near Vienna. The engi- neei-s had cleared away the ahattis at the stone bridge. The hills north of the TVarrenton turnpike were excellent defen- sive positions. It needed but morale among the troops to hold the battle-gi'ound, and holding this would have com- l^elled the enemy to retreat. Unfortunately the Union army had lost its morale. The mere disorder of the final repulse was slight ; but the de- moi-alization and loss of discipline had been growing during tho whole afternoon, until, of a sudden, the army was half- dissolved. The impulse of retreat once started, there was no checking or controlling it. Despite the efforts and ap- peals of McDowell and his officei-s, the various detachments began moving from the field. The commander yielded to necessity, made the best dispositions he could to cover the retreat, and passed the word to reassemble in the old camps at Centre^'ille, not doubting that he could there make a i-ally. The way thither by the Wanenton turnpike was open and straight ; the distance four and a half miles. But, through the perversity of fate, each detachment now retreated by the same road over which it had come. Thus the bulk of the anny — the brigades of Porter, Burnside, Franklin, Wilcox, and Howard — went back over the long detoiir of ten miles round by Sudley Ford; these had with them, as yet, two batteries — a total of ten field-pieces ; for only the batteries of Ricketts and Griffin were lost in the main battle. Sher- man's brigade, on the other hand, marched eastward, over the ground of the morning's conflict, and recrossed Bull THE RETREAT. 199 Bun at the ford, half a mile above the stone bxidge, by which they had approached. Keyes' brigade, becoming aware of the general retreat, also returned by that route. These two, with Schenck's brigade, soon reached the War- renton road, making a comparatively easy march to Centre- vUle. It also becomes necessary to mention here that, while the main battle of the afternoon was going on, a second engage- ment had been fought at Blackburn's Ford. The brigades of Bichardson and of Davies were sent there in the morning, to make such demonstrations as would mask McDowell's real movement. In the afternoon, however, their pui'pose became ajiparent ; and to relieve the stress of the main bat- tle, the Confederate commander sent orders to Jones' bri- gade to cross Bull Bun and make a demonstration. At about four o'clock, Jones, with his three regiments, crossed at McLean's Ford, and endeavored, by a flank movement, to capture Hunt's battery stationed with Davies' brigade. Da- vies quietly watched the oncoming rebel regiments, rear- ranged his lines, and held his fire in resei-ve till the enemy were deploying to form line of battle. They had advanced within five hundred yards, only, however, to fijid themselves emban-assed by woods and broken ground. In this situa- tion and dilemma Davies ordered Hunt's battery of six guns to open upon them with grape and canister. The rebel of- ficial report characteiizes it as a " murderous shower," and, no doubt, correctly. It scattered the attacldng column as if by enchantment ; in thirty minutes there was not a soldier of them to be seen, and Jones modestly reports a loss in the affair of fourteen killed and sixty-two wounded. It was now near sundown. Miles, commanding at Centre- ville, either through illness or drunkermess, had become in- capable of duty — a situation whose serious consequences 200 THE OUTBREAK OF REBELLION. were averted by the prudence and good behavior of the three brigade commanders. But, from this cause, prema- ture orders were received by the two brigades of Dalies and Richardson to fall back on Centre\Tlle ; while to Blenker the more judicious order was given to advance his brigade toward Stone Bridge, which he did, deploying it in line of battle across the "Warrenton turnpike, half-way between Centreville and Cub Run. As soon as Jolinston and Beauregard had suflBciently re- covered from their astonishment at seeing the Union army in unmistakable retreat, they ordered pui-suit to be made, but, as it would seem, with the greatest caution. In tnith, McDowell's vanquished brigades marched from the imme- diate battle-field only half -disbanded ; there remained, in most instances, a little nucleus at least of each organization, which yet, for a time, held together, while several of the brigades were nearly intact. Thus it happened that, while the battalion of rebel cavalry under Sttiait was ordered to piirsue along the Sudley road, they found the Union forces generally so compact, and the rear so well protected, that they could only dash in here and there and pick up or scat- ter isolated squads of stragglers. Another resei-ve battalion of rebel cavalry under Radford was sent in jiursuit from the vicinity of Ball's Ford up toward the turnpike ; while John- ston also sent orders to Bonham to take the remainder of liis own and Longstreet's brigades, and move against the line of retreat at Centreville. Radford, like Stuai-t, saw that the retreating brigades of Sherman, Keyes, and Schenck were too formidable to attack ; and Bonham, on nearing Centre- \'ille, found the brigades of Blenker, Richardson, and Davies so well posted, and so superior in numbers, that he was quite content to stop with a mere reconnoissance, and at nightfall returned to his camps behind Mitchell's and Blackburn's THE RETREAT. 201 Fords. Meanwhile, though the Confederate pursuit coukl nowhere venture a serious assault, an accident served to greatly enlarge their harvest of trophies. The business of war was such a novelty, that McDowell's army accumulated an extraordinary number of camp-fol- lowers and non-combatants. The vigilant newspapers of the chief cities sent a cloud of correspondents to chronicle the incidents of the march and conflict. The volunteer regi- ments carried with them j)ersonal sympathies and compan- ionships unknown to regular armies. Congress had met in special session ; and senators and representatives, full of the patriotic hope and i^ride of their several States, no less than their own eager political solicitude, in several instances joined in what many rashly assumed would be a mere tri- umphal parade. McDowell's unoi^posed and api^arently ir- resistible advance through the enemy's outposts lured them on to Centreville in a false security ; and the unifonnly favorable reports w^hich went back to Washington even brought out a fresh accession of the same material on Sun- day morning of the battle. By that time, however, the situation had become more serious, and generally made the non-combatants somewhat circiimsj)ect. Only a few of hardier courage followed to the battle-field ; most of them remained at Centreville until the cannonade announced the beginning of the fight, and then drifted gradually down the turnjoike toward the stone bridge, not nearer than a mile and a half to the actual fight- ing, but where they could hear the volleys, see the smoke and dust, and perhaps the occasional mancEuvres of Schenck's and Keyes' brigades. In a certain sense they were under fire, because the long-range shells of the field-pieces ren- dered even that locality somewhat dangerous. From this situation were wiitten many highly sensational, but purely C02 THE OUTBREAK OF REBELLION. iinaginarr and most gi'otesquelv confused accounts of the battle, first publislied in the newsjiapers. A famous corre- spondent of the London Times, who earned the sobriquet of "Bull Eun Eussell," WTote his description of the affair for Euroj^ean readers, after a leism-ely lunch at Centrevilie, and a stroll of perhaps a mile toward Stone Bridge, taking his departure with the earliest fugitives. It also happened that on the afternoon of the battle a considerable number of provision, baggage, and ammuni- tion wagons, together with some private vehicles of the non-combatants heretofore mentioned, had been sent down the Warrenton turnpike from Centrevilie, toward the stone bridge. When finallv the fii'st wave of fugitives brought unfavorable news from the front, these began a general movement in return, which unavoidably produced quick confusion and blockade ; and it was chiefly among these that the disgracefvd panic and flight, which has furnished the nearly universal theme of criticism of the battle, first broke out. Naturally the tide of disaster rose qiiick and high ; the retreating brigades, and nearer approach of can- nonade and musketiy, soon confirmed the worst fears of overwhelming defeat and pressing pursuit, and started a veritable scramble and stampede for safety. Ai-ms and clothing were thrown away by those on foot ; wagons were abandoned, and even ambulances with wounded soldiers left standing in the road, while the frightened teamstera rode away at headlong speed, on horses unhitched or cut out of their harness. It would seem that things had already come to this pass before the columns which were retreating around the long detour by way of Sudley Springs and Ford once more came in sight of the WaiTenton turnpike, at a point between Stone Bridge and Cub Bun. Cub Eun seems to have been THE RETREAT. 203 a difficult little stream, ijrovided with a " suspension bridge" of some kind where the turnpike crosses it. Radford's cav- alry had not only been hovering along and occasionally dash- ing in on the turnpike, but a rebel light battery succeeded in establishing itself where it commanded the " suspension bridge." When the retreating column from Sudley Ford came in sight, they found to their consternation that it was necessary to iim the gauntlet of this artillery fii-e. " The enemy opened fire," says Bumside's report, "upon the re- treating mass of men. Upon the bridge crossing Cub Run, a shot took effect upon the horses of a team that was cross- ing. The wagon was overiurned directly in the centre of the bridge, and the i^assage was completely obstructed. The enemy continued to play his ariilleiy upon the train, can'iages, ambulances, and artillery wagons that filled up the road, and these were reduced to ruin. The artillery could not possibly pass, and five pieces of the Rhode Island battery, which had been safely brought off the field, were here lost." The four pieces of Ar'nold's battery were also abandoned here from this cause. Four pieces of Carlisle's batteiy were apjjarently lost in the same neighborhood, though from a charge of Radford's cavalry. This " suspen- sion bridge " over Cub Run was distant some three miles from the main battle-field, and it was here that the enemy made his largest caj^ture of guns and wagons. It may ba imagined that at Confederate headc[uarters that night the measure of satisfaction was well-nigh lull. Yet that their rejoicing was tempered with a serious alloy of rebel danger and losses, is also clearly enough revealed in Jefferson Da\ds' telegraphic bulletins. " A terrible battle is ragmg," said his first. "We have won a glorious," though dear-bought victory," was the language of his second. In his third he repeated, "Night has closed upon a hard- 204 TirE OUTBREAK OF REBELLION fought field. Our forces have won a glorious ^'ictory." He forbore to add, what the oflScial reports and correspondence afterward developed, namely : that not only was the field "hard-fought" and the victorj^ "dear-bought," but they were by no means confident it was final. On the conti-ary, the rebel headquartei*s was in serious api^rehension lest McDowell should turn from Centre\ille and once more assail the Confedei-ate right flank at or below Blackburn's Ford. To meet this reported danger, Ewell and Holmes were that night ordered jjost-haste back to Union Mills. "You will not fail to remember," afterward wTote Jefferson Da\'is to Beauregard, "that, so far fi-om knowing the enemy was routed, a large part of om* forces was moved by you, in the night of the 21st, to repel a supposed attack u^^on our right, and the next day's operations did not fully reveal what lias since been reported of the enemy's panic." "When McDowell left the battle-field his intention and orders were to rally at Centreville. But, alTi^-ing there, he found the conditions less favorable than he anticipated. It had been designed that Blenker's brigade should, during the day, throw up intrenchnients ; this was not done, because the necessary tools did not get forward as expected. Next he found that DaWes and Bichardson had left their stations at Blackbiu'u's Ford and were falling back. " Great God ! Richardson," exclaimed IMcDowell, on meeting that officer, "why didn't you hold on to the position at Blackburn's Ford?" "Colonel Miles ordered me to retreat to Centre- \-ille, and I obeyed the order ; Colonel Miles is continually iuterfeiing with me, and he is drunk, and is not fit to com- mand," was the reply. The officer stood justified, for Mc- Dowell had ah-eady susi^ended Miles from command. The retrogi-ade movement was stopi)ed, the biigades were faced about and put in the best possible line of defence, with THE RETREAT. 205 orders to hold the position. Repairing again to Centreville, McDowell found still further discouragement in the loss of the thirteen guns at Cub Rim and the increased disorder among the trooj)s. When, toward nine o'clock — just about night-fall for that season — the last brigade reached Centre- ville, and the various commanders were called together, it was generally agreed that it was unwise to undertake to make a stand, as contemi)lated. " The condition of our artillery and its ammunition," says McDowell's report, " and the want of food for the men, who had generally abandoned or thrown away all that had been issued the day before, and the utter disorganization and consequent de- moralization of the mass of the army, seemed to all who were near enough to be consulted — division and brigade commanders and staff — -to admit of no alternative but to fall back." If these reasons might be questioned, there was still another absolutely conclusive. The enlistment of the thi'ee months men was exijiring. The Pennsylvania Fourth, which had insisted upon and received its discharge that very mornhig, while the army was advancing to battle, " moved to the rear to the sound of the enemy's cannon." "In the next few days," continues McDowell, " day by day I should have lost ten thousand of the best armed, drilled, officered, and disciplined troops in the army." The i^ractical logic of war is stern and swift. Even while the officers were deliberating, the disorganized fugitives, in a contagious and increasing panic, were already on the march. Toward ten o'clock Mc- Dowell began to distribute his orders to retire from Centre- ville ; and a little after midnight Richardson's and Blenker's brigades marched away from that village in a deliberate and orderly retreat, maintaining their organization as a steady and effective rear-guard till they once more reached the Potomac camps. CHAPTER XVn. CONCLUSION. The official reports show a loss to the Union side in the battle of Bull Run of 25 guns (the Confederates claim 28), 4S1 men killed, 1,011 men wounded, and 1,460 wounded and o';her Union soldiers sent as jirisoners to Eichmond. On the Confederate side the loss was 387 killed, 1,582 wounded," and a few prisoners taken.
